
Scottish First Division club Airdrie, who have debts approaching £3m, have 
been placed into full liquidation.

Administrators KPMG today pulled the plug after waiting more than two years 
for a buyer to come forward.

But KPMG did offer fans the slimmest lifeline for the future. 

The club effectively ceased to exist today, having already seen all its 
players leave, but liquidator Blair Nimmo revealed that the club's name is up 
for sale as an asset.

That means that if the Scottish Football League agree, a buyer could resurrect 
the club under the name of Airdrie FC.

The ground is also up for sale to the highest bidder, although the new club 
could play anywhere in its new guise.

But the club's First Division status no longer exists and the new era would be 
likely to start in the Third Division.

Liquidator Blair Nimmo said: "If a buyer is found for the original Airdrie FC 
name, it is conceivable that a 'new' Airdrie FC emerges.

"If so, as to whether the 'new' Airdrie FC remains in the league, or is 
required to seek readmission, is entirely a matter for the footballing 
authorities.

"The joint interim liquidators have today written to the SFL to advise them 
that the club is now heading towards full liquidation.

"It will then be for a buyer of the assets to liaise with the footballing 
authorities on the future footballing options."

KPMG pulled the plug on attempts to sell the club, which has debts approaching 
£3m, as a going concern.

No potential buyer put a concrete bid on the table before yesterday's 
deadline, bringing to an end a period of administration for the club that had 
lasted two years and three months.

The club's assets consist of its name, which is worth as much as anyone is 
prepared to pay, a shop in the town centre and the New Broomfield Stadium.

Nimmo said a valuation of the stadium, which is built on land owned by North 
Lanarkshire Council, had been made but would remain confidential.

Nimmo added: "Everyone involved with Airdrie is naturally very disappointed 
that no party has been able to drive through a deal to buy the club. "We have 
explored every possible avenue and mechanism for saving the club in its current 
form.

"However, we all need to recognise that the game in Scotland is facing severe 
financial problems. This is compounded by the particularly difficult financial 
and legal circumstances facing Airdrie.

"Sadly, as there is no-one willing and able to buy the club, we have no 
alternative but to market its assets for sale."

Former Scotland and Barcelona striker Steve Archibald was the first to try to 
take over the club and was granted preferred bidder status last season.

But he fell out with Nimmo and KPMG, who terminated his management agreement 
in January last year.

A consortium under the name of New Broomfield Management was subsequently 
granted preferred bidder status and appointed Ian McCall as manager.

McCall assembled a completely new team as Archibald's players were either sold 
off or left the club.

Amazingly, Airdrie mounted a promotion challenge under McCall before being 
pipped by Partick Thistle.

But following the final game of the season last week, McCall and his players 
left the club when their contracts expired.
 