
Locked out of their ground and at the mercy of an accountancy firm, things got 
worse for Airdrie yesterday when the Scottish Football Association refused 
permission to postpone today's Scottish Cup fourth-round tie against Peterhead, 
thus conceding a bye to the quarter-finals for the Third Division side.

The Diamonds do, however, remain in business as a club with offers welcomed to 
buy after their manager, Steve Archibald, failed to agree terms with the 
provisional liquidators KPMG.

KPMG challenged Archibald to prove he had the financial backing to complete a 
£2m buy-out that has been in the pipeline since he was awarded "preferred 
bidder" status in July. The liquidator, Blair Nimmo, stripped him of that 
yesterday and banned him from managing the team, who were locked out of the 
ground and have had to train in a Glasgow park.

The club did not, according to a KPMG statement, have the "necessary 
infrastructure" to allow today's game to proceed.

Nimmo said the decision to ban Archibald had been made because he owed the 
club £30,000. The former Scotland international responded by saying he has now 
washed his hands of the entire affair.

Just over a year after their heroics at Celtic Park led to the downfall of 
John Barnes and, ultimately, Kenny Dalglish, Inverness Caledonian Thistle will 
today seek to heap further humiliations on Premier League opposition, with 
Kilmarnock the intended victims.

Both home advantage and history are on their side. 16 years ago Inverness 
Thistle, a Highland League side in the days before their merger with Inverness 
Caledonian, trounced Kilmarnock 3-0 in the Cup.

And although Celtic may have had cause to thank Thistle in the long run, the 
Killie manager Bobby Williamson is in less charitable mood, and having been 
eliminated by the part-timers Alloa last year is in no mood for second helpings.

"The last time we travelled up there we came away with our tails between our 
legs and the same could happen again unless we approach this tie in the correct 
manner," he said.

Kilmarnock were Cup champions as recently as 1997, but luck has since deserted 
them in the competition, despite a good record in the CIS Insurance Cup, where 
next month they face Celtic in the final.

Williamson said: "There's no one reason for this and I don't believe in 
over-analysing things like this. These games are won or lost by the breaks you 
get on the day."

Aberdeen have ended speculation over their manager, Ebbe Skovdahl, by giving 
him a one-year extension to his existing contract until the end of the 2001-02 
season.
 