
For now, the Highlands can brand itself as the alternative capital of Scottish 
football. Just 10 months after Inverness Caledonian Thistle lifted the Scottish 
Cup, Ross County’s fairytale journey from the Highland League is complete. 
County, who hail from a town with population of little more than 5,000, laughed 
in the face of supposed status once again by defeatingHibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> to claim the League Cup. 
Scotland’s major knockout silverware can thereby be located three hours from 
Glasgow, in locations once completely snubbed by the professional game.

Any portrayal of County the club as small-time country bumpkins would be 
unfair. They have, after all, been a top-flight team since 2012 and eliminated 
Celtic in the semi-final of this competition. And yet, their journey to reach 
this position has been quite extraordinary, from the point of competing merely 
as a prominent – as opposed to dominant – team in the Highland League as 
recently as 1994.

Eighteen players and an impressive manager, Jim McIntyre, have etched their 
names into Scottish football folklore. Their status in Dingwall, a sleepy 
hamlet not particularly relevant for anything other than a football team, 
should last a lifetime.

McIntyre’s praise, legitimately, focused on the County chairman, Roy 
MacGregor. It has been his drive, determination and finance which has 
catapulted the club to the forefront of the game. MacGregor also displays an 
unwavering desire to listen to the views of paying customers which, all too 
sadly, is not widely replicated in Scotland.

“I am absolutely thrilled for Roy,” McIntyre said. “He wanted to make sure 
people from the Highlands had an opportunity to play professional football 
without having to leave. He deserves everything he gets, all the success, 
because he does so much not just for football but for the area. He tries to 
help people.”

In switching towards hard-nosed management speak, McIntyre was blunt when 
asked how his players will celebrate. “They won’t,” insisted the manager. The 
logic there is straightforward; County’s scrap for a top-six place in the 
Premier League means vital fixtures against St Johnstone and Inverness on 
Wednesday and Saturday. The champagne will stay on ice until Saturday night.

But what of Hibs? Their late capitulation here was typical and typically 
bruising for a support which has been brow-beaten by years of underachievement. 
Even more painful than that, surely, for those fans is the occasional glimpse 
of promise which is snatched away with an ominous familiarity.

The bigger picture for the Edinburgh club is an ongoing quest for promotion 
back to the top division. A play-off will inevitably be required for Hibs to 
achieve that goal, with Alan Stubbs’s key task to ensure there is no lingering 
hangover from their latest Hampden disappointment. Stubbs conceded his team 
were blunt here, with his forward pair of Jason Cummings and Anthony Stokes 
incapable of making significant impact.

And yet, Hibs were clearly the superior side during the opening half. Michael 
Gardyne had sent County in front after winning the break of the ball and 
rounding Mark Oxley – the outstanding Jackson Irvine had fed his fellow 
midfielder – before Liam Fontaine restored parity. Fontaine swivelled and shot 
with a level of composure which belied his status as a centre-back.

A taut second period was initially notable for a lucky escape for Marvin 
Bartley. The Hibs midfielder, inexplicably, was only cautioned after landing an 
elbow to the face of Brian Graham. The County striker subsequently had a goal 
rightly disallowed, having climbed upon Oxley before finding the net with a 
header.

Extra-time seemed inevitable before a surging Gardyne run and cross which left 
Fontaine in an almighty pickle. With Graham waiting behind him, the Hibs 
defender attempted in vain to clear; only succeeding in knocking the ball 
directly to the feet of Alex Schalk, who tapped in from close range.

“We contributed to our own downfall,” acknowledged Stubbs. “It is never nice 
to lose this way but that is cup final football. The players are really 
disappointed, of course they are, but there is so much still to play for. It 
would be wrong for me to say this was anything other than a big disappointment 
but it just wasn’t to be.”

Few neutral observers could reasonably have taken umbrage with that. County 
are a recurring inspiration.

Man of the match Jackson Irvine (Ross County)
 