
Alex Neil insists he will not quit Norwich after last night’s 2-1 Championship 
defeat byHuddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> was 
the seventh in their last nine league games.

Elias Kachunga’s first-half double gave Huddersfield a thoroughly deserved win.

Afterwards Neil, who was berated by the home crowd, said: “No, I won’t 
consider going. I will not be making a decision to leave this club. I have 
never quit at anything in my life. The only time you’ve failed is when you’ve 
quit in my book.”

Kachunga’s early header was cancelled out almost immediately by Jonny Howson 
but Huddersfield quickly recovered their composure and dominated the opening 
period, with Kachunga scoring again five minutes before the break for what 
proved the decider.

Newcastle United return to top of Championship with win over Wigan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/newcastle-united-wigan-athletic-championship-match-report>
Norwich, who had won their previous two home games without conceding, improved 
after the break but could find no way back as their stylish opponents saw out 
the game for a third straight victory.

Norwich, boosted by a hard-fought win over Aston Villa on Tuesday, were quick 
out of the blocks and should have taken the lead inside two minutes.

Jacob Murphy did well to steal possession on the right before picking out an 
unmarked Nelson Oliveira in the box – but the in-form Portuguese striker 
snatched at his shot and sent it well wide.

That was the prelude to two goals in 66 seconds, with Huddersfield getting 
their noses in front only to be pegged back from Norwich’s very next attack.

Huddersfield’s opener came from a well worked move instigated by Kasey Palmer, 
who swept the ball wide for Tom Smith to send in a cross that was headed home 
by Kachunga from what looked like an offside position.

Norwich’s response was immediate, with Robbie Brady doing well to get in a 
towering cross from near the corner flag and Howson guiding a superb header 
into the bottom corner.

From then on Huddersfield bossed possession and dominated the remainder of the 
first half. Rajiv van La Parra should have done better when he curled the ball 
wide from a good position.

Gianfranco Zola takes charge at Birmingham City after Rowett sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
The visitors should also have gone in front when a terrible lofted backpass 
from Graham Dorrans let in Nahki Wells but the striker delayed his shot and 
Norwich got back to block.

It was only a temporary reprieve, however, as Huddersfield deservedly went 2-1 
ahead on 40 minutes. Kachunga picked up the ball in the centre and made 
progress towards goal before playing a neat one-two with Smith and toe-poking 
the ball past the exposed John Ruddy.

Norwich had far more of the ball after the interval while the visitors rarely 
threatened to add to their tally. However, clear-cut chances for the home side 
were few.

The best of them came in injury time but Sébastien Bassong’s poorly directed 
header from an excellent position went wide, summing up Norwich’s night..

David Wagner, the Huddersfield manager, said he was proud as his side moved 
into third place in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>.
 