
McLaren, one of the biggest names in Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, are having an awful time – but 
they are hoping their fortunes will change in Sunday’s Spanish Grand Prix, when 
they will have upgrades to both their engine and their car.

They have not won a grand prix since Brazil in 2012 and this season has been 
dire. They have not only failed to win a championship point from the opening 
four races but have not yet made it through to Q3 in qualifying. During testing 
in Spain in February Eric Boullier, the racing director, earmarked this 
weekend’s race as the time when the team would start to move forward. And their 
improved performance in practiceon Friday pointed towards a brighter future.

What’s new?

Everything. They have even come to Spain with a new graphite-grey livery, 
changing the entire look of the car. They will be using new fuel and have been 
working intensely on the reliability of their Honda power unit. They have also 
looked at the drivability of the car since the last race in Bahrain, and 
tweaked its aerodynamics. The success of the tweaks and upgrades depends on the 
personnel, too. A number of appointments have been made to beef up the team in 
the past 18 months. The most important of these was the arrival, at the 
beginning of last year, of Eric Boullier as racing director, while another 
crucial figure is Peter Prodromou, the outstanding aerodynamicist from Red 
Bull. Crucially the team have changed their old school culture and there is now 
considerably more input from their engineers.

What has worked?

Their performance in practice on Friday, when Jenson Button was seventh and 
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> 11th, 
suggested they could even fight for points .

This improvement suggests the team are now beginning to benefit from the 
arrival of Boullier and Prodromou, who have established a more coherent 
leadership, and there is a more consistent approach to their aerodynamics.

Here the decision to retain Button, at the expense of the less experienced 
Kevin Magnussen, has worked because the British driver has been able to use his 
considerable nous to give vital feedback to the engineers over the course of 
the opening grands prix.

What didn’t work?

The car still looks off the pace when you look at the other big teams, who 
have also come here with some upgrades. The Honda engine has been the biggest 
single failure. The Japanese power unit has had a number of reliability 
problems, with electrical and turbo setbacks. The engine still appears less 
powerful than the others but, because of the reliability problem, it has been 
difficult to drive the car flat out. But is the car itself good enough? And 
does it have to change to make the power unit a better fit?

The McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> view

“We had a reasonable day today [in practice at Barcelona on Friday]. We’ve 
been pushing on all areas of the car. We have aerodynamic upgrades this weekend 
though there is still a huge amount of work to do on our systems. Some things 
at McLaren have stood the test of time over 50 years and other things need 
constantly reinventing. No business stands still. The sport is constantly 
changing and to stay at the top requires constant reassessment. The changes 
we’ve made in the last 18 months have had a very positive impact and ventilated 
the organisation. There is still work to do.”

Jonathan Neale, the team’s chief operations officer

What are their prospects now?

“The big shock was how far off the pace they were, initially in testing and 
then in the opening races. They started from a lower point than I expected. It 
surprises me that Alonso must have been told stories about how Honda were 
viewing things and that must have helped him in his decision to join them.

So you wonder how accurate they were with their forecasting. Leaving Mercedes 
was the right decision, though. Mercedes, understandably, were always going to 
look after their team first and customer teams second.

McLaren have made some good decisions on the people they have employed on the 
chassis side and they have strengthened their engineering base. It’s been a 
very disappointing beginning but they are convinced they will get there and I’m 
sure they will. But it will take time.”BBC F1 lead commentator Ben Edwards
 