
Ally McCoist has challenged the Rangers players to finish the Scottish League 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-one> season unbeaten 
after his side extended their unbeaten run to 30 games with a 2-1 victory over 
Brechin City at Glebe Park.

Nicky Clark notched the winner for the champions soon after coming on for the 
midfielder Ian Black, who was carried off on a stretcher midway through the 
second half. The midfielder Fraser Aird had opened the scoring in the 22nd 
minute by capitalising on a mistake by City full-back Jonny Brown.

Robert Thomson equalised for Brechin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> four minutes into the second 
half before Clark, the former Queen of the South player, arrived unmarked at 
the back post to head Jon Daly's cross past Graeme Smith from close range.

McCoist was pleased with the win but urged his side not to ease off as the 
season draws to a close.Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, 
54 times Scottish champions but relegated from the Premiership to the Third 
Division in 2012 after the financially troubled club reformed as a new company, 
have six League One games to play as well as the Ramsdens Cup final against 
Raith Rovers and a Scottish Cup semi-final against Dundee United.

"We have to perform at these places," McCoist told BT Sport 2. "We went about 
our business in the early stages of the game and we scored but we never had a 
top level of performance, to be frank.

"We can keep going undefeated in the league which is a fantastic achievement 
at any level." Rangers were Scottish League Three champions last season, 
winning 25 and losing three of their 36 games.

McCoist reserved special praise for Clark. "I don't think the game was the 
easiest but we kept the momentum going and got another three points so we're 
very pleased," McCoist said.

"[The wind] definitely helped us and as crazy as it may seem I think he 
[Clark] would have been better starting the game because of the wind, but he 
made a huge impact when he came on."

Clark scored the winner in the Gers' 4-3 win at the same stadium last October 
after coming off the bench.

Black was carried off after a challenge from the Brechin defender Graham Hay. 
McCoist said: "I was surprised he [Black] went for it to be honest because I 
couldn't see it ending in anything other than tears with the way the boy was 
coming out to block it.

"But he went for it and attempted the shot and that's what it was, just a 
block. I don't know whether he will need an X-ray, the doc's looking at him at 
the moment."

Brechin's injury crisis meant Ray McKinnon could name only five substitutes 
and a tough task was made more difficult when he had to replace the injured 
defenders Pau McLean and Jonny Brown in the first half.

He said: "The last time they came here they got away lightly and probably we 
never created enough chances to win the game. I didn't think we deserved to 
lose the game [yesterday] on the balance of play, but that is why they are 
champions.

"It is really tough, playing 18-year-olds at left-back and a 19-year-old at 
right-back, who is a winger, but I can't fault them, they were excellent."

McKinnon believes Rangers will lose their Scottish Cup semi-final to Dundee 
United, fourth in the Premiership at Ibrox, next month if they put in a similar 
performance to yesterday's. "If they play like that today, they will get beat, 
no doubt about it, because Dundee United are a really decent side going forward.

"They are young, energetic, and they have goalscorers in their team," he said.

"It is difficult for Rangers coming to places like this and raising their game 
week in, week out, I know that. But they will need to raise their game against 
Dundee United. They certainly have decent enough players, enough to win the 
game, but if they play like that against Dundee United, they will get beat.

"You can see what Dundee United can do in the Premiership, they are scoring 
goals for fun and there was a period when they scored four every week.

"It is up the other end – if Rangers are not switched on then it could be very 
difficult for them but they have a chance, they have a good team and if they 
raise their game … it will be a good semi-final." Rangers have won the Cup 33 
times, the last in 2009.
 