
Blackcurrants are a rare fresh treat. If you can find a punnet of these inky 
purple jewels on the supermarket shelves, you should snatch them quick, savour 
them, and give thanks for a lucky day. Because so many of these elusive 
currants meet their fate in the fruit squash factories, they’re only available 
in the shops in their purest state for a few short weeks, despite having a 
season that sprawls across July and August. If you have space in the garden for 
a blackcurrant bush (reasonably easy to nurture, and prolific once it starts 
yielding fruit), do it.

Whereas some fruits just sink into a mushy sweetness when cooked, 
blackcurrants become all the more intense, their flavour deepening and 
mellowing with heat. This leaves you free to play up that tartness in a rich 
purple curd, set it off against light flavours such as cream, almond or 
vanilla, or even descend into darkness with combinations of coffee, chocolate 
or spice. Enjoy them as many ways as you can while they last.

Whereas some fruits just sink into a mushy sweetness when cooked, 
blackcurrants become all the more intense

Espresso, vanilla and blackcurrant cheesecake

The dark, roasted flavours of coffee make a fine match for blackcurrant’s 
deeply fruity kick. The two have a natural affinity. Much of the nuance of a 
good coffee like that would be lost in the rich cheesecake below, which is why 
I’ve only suggested basic instant coffee, but still, the pairing works a charm, 
particularly alongside the vanilla-spiked creaminess of the cheesecake.

Because coffee can curdle the cheesecake batter, I’ve called for a couple of 
tablespoons of cornflour here to hold everything together. This has the side 
effect of making the cheesecake more tolerant to heat, too, which means it can 
be baked at a slightly higher temperature (I’d usually rouse it to life at a 
gentle 120C/235F/gas mark ¼) for a shorter time. It also does away with the 
need for any messy, accident-inviting water baths.

Serves 10
150g digestive biscuits
90g butter, melted
500g cream cheese
150g sour cream
175g caster sugar
2 tbsp cornflour
2 large eggs
2 tsp vanilla extract
1 tbsp instant coffee granules
150g blackcurrants
3-4 tbsp blackcurrant jam

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Roll the digestive biscuits 
between two sheets of clingfilm (or pulse in a food processor) until very 
finely crushed. Stir the digestive crumbs together with the melted butter then 
press into the base of a 20cm-diameter springform tin. Pack the base down under 
the back of a spoon. Bake for 10 minutes then remove from the oven, and turn 
the temperature down to 150C/300F/gas mark 2.

2 Beat the cream cheese and sour cream together in a large bowl. Stir the 
sugar and cornflour together before adding to the cream cheese mixture. Stir 
together, then add the eggs one at a time. Stir in the vanilla extract. Pour 
half of the cream cheese filling over the baked base. Dissolve the coffee 
granules in a tablespoon of water and stir this into the remaining cheesecake 
mixture. Pour gently over the plain vanilla mixture to layer it in the tin.

3 Bake for around an hour, until firmly set and slightly risen around the 
edges and barely set (with just a little jiggle) in the middle. Remove from the 
oven and immediately run a knife around the edge to loosen the cheesecake from 
the tin – this will help prevent cracking – then leave to gently cool to room 
temperature.

4 Warm the jam with a teaspoon of hot water and brush half of it over the top 
of the cheesecake. Spread with the fresh blackcurrants, then glaze with the 
remaining jam. Chill in the fridge for at least 2 hours prior to serving.

Blackcurrant fool cake

The perfect fool is a careful balancing act: the tartness of the fruit pitted 
against the smooth sweetness of the softly whipped cream. The best ones use 
fruits with a natural acidity to them, so stepping away from the so-so niceness 
of strawberries and towards gooseberries and rhubarb, yielding a dessert that 
can jump from sweet to mellow to milky to wincingly sharp all in one mouthful. 
Here, soft, syrup-stained almond sponge gives a more substantial twist on the 
fool.

Recipes for home-made cheesecake ice-cream | Ruby bakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/08/home-made-ice-cream-recipe-edible-bowls-ruby-tandoh>
Serves 8-10
175g unsalted butter, softened
175g caster sugar
3 large eggs
50g ground almonds
Zest of 1 lemon
175g plain flour
1½ tsp baking powder
½ tsp bicarbonate of soda
A generous pinch of salt

 For the syrup
150g blackcurrants
75g caster sugar
60ml water
Juice of ½ lemon
600ml double cream
3 tbsp caster sugar
100g blackcurrants
A few fresh mint leaves, torn

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Grease and line three 
20cm-diameter cake tins. (If you only have two tins, just reserve a third of 
your cake mixture and bake it afterwards – the wait won’t harm it).

2 Beat the butter with the sugar until light and fluffy, then whisk in the 
eggs one at a time, then the almonds and lemon zest. In a separate bowl, stir 
the flour, baking powder, bicarbonate of soda and salt together, then add this 
to the wet ingredients. Fold everything together until just about combined, 
then divide between the three tins.

3 Bake the cakes in the preheated oven for around 15 minutes, or until risen 
and golden. A small knife inserted into the centre of each cake should emerge 
clean. Leave the cake layers to cool before unmoulding.

4 While the cakes are baking and cooling, simmer the blackcurrants, caster 
sugar, water and lemon juice together for 3-5 minutes, then press through a 
fine sieve, collecting the juice and pulp while leaving the skins and stalks 
behind. Whisk the double cream and sugar together until thick enough to hold 
soft peaks.

5 Drizzle a couple of tablespoons of syrup over each sponge. Spread a third of 
the cream over one sponge, scatter a third of the blackcurrants, add some mint 
and another tablespoon of syrup. Stack the remaining cake layers the same way – 
cream, blackcurrants, mint and syrup. Serve immediately.

 * The article was amended on 17 August 2015 to remove a reference to thorns 
(blackcurrant bushes do not have any) and to the fruit being English 
(blackcurrants are grown throughout the UK).  