
If Colchester <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> United become 
the 18th giant felled by Altrincham in Sunday’s FA Cup second-round tie, Lee 
and Jordan Sinnott will cement the family name in the non-league club’s famous 
history in the competition.

Lee, Altrincham’s manager, and his son Jordan, a ball-playing midfielder, have 
already helped slay League One opposition this season, with a1-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/3879413> over Barnsley in the first 
round at Moss Lane.

Altrincham may be a part-time operation who started the weekend 18th in the 
Vanarama National League but no professional club wants to hear their name 
drawn as their next FA Cup opponent. Barnsley became league victim No17 thanks 
to a combination of the right attitude and a willingness to keep to the style 
demanded by the manager. This is the strategy Colchester, who are in transition 
after themanager Tony Humes departed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/colchester-part-company-manager-tony-humes-crewe>
 10 days ago, will have to negate on Sunday too.

As Sinnott Jr says: “You stick to your game-plan, you go about your business 
the way the gaffer tells you to, how he wants you to play. You always up your 
game, especially against a league team, and you need that bit of luck like I 
felt we had in the first round.”

The “gaffer” is Jordan’s father, of course. He signed for him in February 
after leaving Huddersfield Town, for whom he was a substitute in the league 
twice, while also making six loan appearances at Altrincham and 10 with Bury.

FA Cup final, like the Grand National, needs to be TV main event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/03/fa-cup-final-grand-national-main-event>
Both father and son are careful to keep their football relationship 
professional. Jordan had to win through a trial before Sinnott decided to take 
him to the Robins on a permanent basis.

“He treated me like any other player that was coming in and looking to sign 
for the club,” Sinnott Jr says. “I didn’t expect it or want it any other way.”

His father concurs: “He’s just another player. He wouldn’t be at this club if 
he couldn’t do a job because that’s on my head then – I’m very straight on the 
line in how I manage. Yes, he carries the same surname as the gaffer, but when 
he first came to the club I referred to him as No26 because it has to be that 
way. It’s harder for him because everyone judges him.”

There is, though, scope for banter. The 21-year-old Sinnott Jr shares the same 
moniker his father acquired during his playing days as a tough defender. “I 
joined Huddersfield when I was 15 and one of my coaches slaughtered me with my 
dad’s nickname – from that I got ‘Sinbad’,” he says. “My old man keeps 
hammering me, saying: ‘Get your own nickname’.”

Altrincham may be only eight points above the Conference relegation zone but 
their first-round victims, Barnsley, are bottom of League One, and Colchester 
only two points better off.

Sinnott Jr is taking nothing for granted, however.“It will be a tough game, 
with them being a league side, I think it’ll be very similar to Barnsley,” he 
says. “Their league form is not far off. We’ll be the underdogs again and 
hopefully we can cause another upset. I don’t see why not. If we play the ball 
like we can, getting it down, passing it and hopefully cause them a few 
problems, you never know with the Cup.Anything can happen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/03/fa-cup-final-grand-national-main-event>
, like it did in the last round.”

And as it did on the 16 previous occasions before then when Altrincham shocked 
league opponents. Tranmere were the first, in 1921-22. Then came Rochdale 
(65-66), Hartlepool (73-74), Scunthorpe (74-75), Crewe and Rotherham (79-80), 
Scunthorpe (80-81), Sheffield United and York (81-82), Rochdale (82-83), 
Blackpool (84-85 and 85-86), Birmingham (85-86), Lincoln (88-89), Chester 
(92-93), and Wigan (94-95).

It is a remarkable string of scalps. From 1979 to 1982 Altrincham reached the 
third round four times. In 1975 and 1979 third-round replays were forced with 
Everton and Tottenham Hotspur. Yet before last month’s win over Barnsley 21 
years had passed since their last giant-killing, when the Latics were knocked 
out with a 1-0 win, so the Sinnotts can be proud of helping the club to end the 
wait.

At Colchester the manager will again tap into this heritage. “Yes, but we 
won’t go overboard with it. The previous one [giantkilling] was in the mid-90s 
which shows how prolific the club was because they still hold the record for 
knocking out league clubs,” he says.

Sinnott amassed 613 appearances in all competitions in an 18-year professional 
career with Bradford, Huddersfield and Watford among others, and played all 90 
minutes of Watford’s 2-0FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
final defeat by Everton in 1984, though memories of that May day are hazy.

“You have snippets of it – snippets of the build-up, not so much the action,” 
Sinnott says. “I’ve seen a tape of the game – a couple of things stand out. 
When you walk up the tunnel of the old Wembley, it was quite a fair tunnel, and 
you couldn’t see the pitch until halfway. And when we walked out half an hour 
before I felt more nervous than I did for the actual game.”

He will, similarly, be encouraging his side to be brave against the U’s on 
Sunday. “It’s up to the players to make sure they go for it. Give it a go, in 
the right controlled manner. We’re not going to be like the Californian gold 
rush, try to score five or six goals. They’ve done it against Barnsley,” he 
says. “This club is no lover of reputations.”
 