
Seed dormancy sounds rather appealing right now. I’d like to wrap myself up in 
a warm coat and spend the next few months in stasis until spring arrives. If 
only that was what really happens. It may seem as if seeds are just lying in 
the soil waiting for the temperature to rise, but something else is going on.

Alys Fowler: help to feed the birds this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/alys-fowler-feed-birds-winter-berries-seeds>
For many seeds, dormancy is broken not by a rise in temperature but by a drop. 
It’s the cold of winter these seeds are after. The season’s cycle of frost, 
harsh winds and bitter rains slowly softens the tough seed coat, rolling it 
around in the soil, freezing and then thawing again, until the seed can take up 
water and germinate. This is known as stratification, or cold treatment. You 
can tell seeds that need a cold period before germinating because they have 
hard bony coats that are impervious to water.

Having such a tough shell ensures that germination occurs only when conditions 
are right. Weather fluctuates; you don’t want your seed jumping into 
germination just because autumn has a few cold nights and then a warm one. It’s 
not spring yet and those cold nights did not represent winter. So time and 
temperature are the keys necessary to unlock germination for many seeds. For 
others it may be light, smoke, certain chemicals or spending time in an 
animal’s gut.

Many domesticated plants have undergone numerous selection pressures, so 
dormancy isn’t such a big deal. Wild plants, however, are fiercely dedicated to 
their dormancy methods. Common plants that require stratification include 
apples, sloes, hawthorns, plums and acorns, but also smaller seed from 
herbaceous perennials such as aquilegia, lavender, sage, sedums, perennial 
sweet peas, wild rose and hops.

One way to break this dormancy is to leave it up to nature. This is not the 
fast route, but it’s a sure one. Sow seeds outside now in pots, cover with grit 
(mostly so that it’s easy to weed out any interlopers) and leave them to the 
elements. Be patient: signs of life should appear, if not this spring, then the 
following. You can also make a seed bed for stratification. Use a gritty 
compost mix, one part grit to three parts compost. Excess moisture can be a 
problem, so make sure it is free-draining.

Or cheat. You can use the fridge (and sometimes the freezer), placing the seed 
either on a damp sheet of kitchen towel or in damp vermiculite in a freezer bag 
(on which you can write all the details: seed source, date, temperature 
requirements etc). Most seed that requires a winter chill will need between two 
weeks and three months before dormancy is broken. Keep checking the seeds until 
you see signs of life. Once they germinate, take them out of the fridge, pot 
them up and keep them frost-free until you can put them outside.
 