
I have buried myself in my garden at times. Lost myself in the depths of rich 
loam, renewed myself in new growth, scattered parts of me like self-sown seeds. 
I am my garden.

So every time I come here to write about my garden, I am writing about myself. 
Between the beetroot seedlings and the apple prunings, there’s a little bit of 
me here and there.

I’d like to hope this doesn’t get in the way of any growth, but recently I’ve 
felt more and more at odds with this column and the place I call home, my 
garden. It turns out you can hide quite successfully under leaf mould, but the 
page isn’t quite such an easy place. If I’m rambling a little, it’s because I’m 
still trying to make sense of why I need to write this down, here of all places.

The good thing about the garden is that it doesn’t give a fig for my 
existential crises – it just gets on with being. While I was pondering the 
meaning of things, it filled all the blank spaces. It speaks its truth very 
plainly: “You’re not tending to this place, so we grew you some wild 
strawberries.” That’s pretty honest.

Here’s another truth: last year I came out. I fell in love with a woman. I 
went from whispering, “I am a lesbian”, to saying it out loud. Everything 
shifted, everything changed, yet the world stayed the same. The garden grew 
more wild strawberries.

I guess this has little to do with gardening or my passion for it. So why do I 
need to tell you this? Well, one thing passion has taught me is that it 
matters: when you find that thing you can be passionate about, that you can 
enthuse about, your world grows a little wider. It teaches you respect, because 
it helps you connect to people, to other things. It matters to me that who I am 
in this column is as honest and passionate as who I am out there in the soil.

Alys Fowler: how to grow garlic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/12/alys-fowler-how-to-plant-garlic>
Coming out later in life left me racked by guilt and slumps of shame, and 
there’s a kind of grief, too. My marriage had ended. But there’s also an 
internal peace I could barely have dreamed about before. Those are quite 
rolling emotions to run with – so extreme at times.

It took me a long time to come right back to the garden, to tend to all those 
wild strawberries. There have been moments when I’ve looked out on the garden 
and its wild, seemingly chaotic state felt like a metaphor for the inside of my 
head. But in kinder moments, when I wandered down into this storm of seedheads 
and tendrils, I found unexpected joys. A plant I was quite sure I’d killed a 
number of years ago was not only flourishing, but in flower. A vine that I was 
convinced would never do well was now upwardly marching and declaring its 
health. When I was ready to come back to all of this and I pulled up a blanket 
of strawberries, there it was, my good earth, rich, welcoming and ready to go 
again.
 