
The world’s a bit bonkers these days. You don’t need me to tell you that, but 
just in case you need further proof, I give you this sentence: “A typical 
yuccie loves succulents; a hipster would categorise them as a mainstream 
household plant.” Yuccies are apparently young, urban creatives and they love 
succulents. I am not sure the first part of the sentence is true, but the 
second part is: millennials do buy a lot of succulents, often in stylised, 
rather useless pots. Meanwhile, I am fast becoming middle-aged, and grumpy with 
it – which is why I feel the need to mutter darkly about useless pots and 
watering habits in houseplant shops.

Succulents have leaves that are pumped up, thick and fleshy, so they act as 
water reserves. They do this because they grow in desert or semi-desert 
conditions. Such habitats are bound by one common theme: the soil is poor and 
very free-draining, sometimes sandy, sometimes rocky. When it rains, the plant 
needs to be able to soak up water quickly, hence those leaves and stems that 
plump up, because the water isn’t going to stick around. Sitting such a plant 
in a tea cup, vintage metal pot or any other container without a hole is like 
taking something that likes water to run away and sitting it in a bog.

Faced with conditions they don’t like, the roots are forced to grow in the top 
few centimetres of soil, where conditions often get very hot, especially if 
sitting above a radiator or on a sunny windowsill. If this is the case, repot 
it into a container with a hole. If the plant is in a small pot, move it up a 
size. Most succulents are sold in tiny pots so they are often top heavy; they 
tend to dry out and topple over. Repotting to the next size up will give you 
both a little more space for watering.

Some succulents are winter-growing and others do so in the summer. Speck’s 
Exotica <https://www.specks-exotica.com/en/cultivation_data.html> is one of the 
best online guides to water succulents I’ve found: it’s nerdy, but good. In 
short, in our climate, it’s best not to water from now until February. There is 
little or no growth, and succulents are more than happy to rest right now. In 
February, start watering again, roughly every four weeks; or just allow the 
compost to dry out completely before watering again.

Related: Make space for grasses in your garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/17/ornamental-grass-alys-fowler>

Despite the fact that deserts tend to be bright, not all succulents like full 
sunlight. Many will be scorched by midday sun. The edges may crisp or the plant 
may turn a different colour, often yellowing. Move to a position that’s bright, 
but gets less direct sunlight.

The opposite effect is too little light. This is obvious, because the plant 
starts to strain towards the light source. The stems stretch, the leaf stalks 
lengthen, and often they’ll topple over and start to bend up again. It’s not 
that easy to get them back to being compact, other than starting again. But if 
their leaves easily fall or can be pulled off, there’s a good chance they’ll 
propagate. It seems improbable, but they’ve evolved to start life from falling 
leaves. Leave the leaf to callus over for a couple of days, then gently nudge 
it into a little compost, so it’s mostly sitting on the surface. Don’t water 
until you see signs of growth; baby leaves will appear at the base of the leaf.
 