
Next year, I resolve to tidy up less. And I wish the same for you, 
particularly in your garden, particularly at this moment. I recently went to a 
fantastic conference byThe Open Air Laboratories Network 
<https://www.opalexplorenature.org>, which encourages people to get in touch 
with nature by enabling them to explore and study their local environment 
through citizen science. It was inspiring and sobering: biodiversity is without 
doubt in decline.

I spoke to a butterfly conservationist about her work with farms, in the 
countryside and in her own garden. She told me that when she has to explain to 
people why her garden looks a mess, she says, “It’s for the butterflies”.

Butterflies and moths are some of the most magical things a garden can invite; 
all that poetry and dance caught up in their flight, the way they bask on 
flowers, slowly opening and closing their wings, inviting us to stop for a 
moment and take it all in. Can anything that encourages more butterflies and 
moths really be considered a mess?

And what that mess means is not touching your garden over winter. That 
butterfly conservationist, like many entomologists and biologists, will tell 
you that insects of all kinds need somewhere to hibernate. Nature’s response is 
old stems, dead leaves, spent seedheads, winter weeds, dying growth. Think of 
this stuff as a winter duvet that protects insects and their pupae and larvae, 
and that stops the precious top layer of soil being washed away by winter rains 
and harsh winds.

What I wish for is that we don’t touch our gardens until the frosts have 
passed and spring has come. Well, not quite: you can still prune apples and 
vines, and mulch as much as you like, provided the ground is not frozen – but 
please don’t dig or pull or cut back until winter is well and truly over. 
Instead of thinking that the garden needs to be tidied up over winter, think of 
it like Brigitte Bardot with fantastic bed hair, all tousled and teased and 
oh-so-seductive, because that’s what it should look like in winter. All the 
cutting back and removal of dead leaves and rotting growth can start in earnest 
come spring, so that new growth has room to flourish.

Alys Fowler: why seeds need a cold snap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/10/alys-fowler-seed-stratification>
And here’s another resolution: allow winter weeds (bittercress, chickweed, 
sowthistle and the like) to flower before you remove them, and pull them just 
as they are going to seed and not before. That’s because these are some of the 
best sources of nectar for emerging pollinators, and certainly a cleaner source 
than many spring bulbs grown with chemicals. These are reliable plants that 
will flower whatever the weather, and are all known to be rich in pollen and 
nectar. In moments when the garden is not in full flower, weeds should be 
recognised – cherished, even – for the work they do.

Every time I reach for my secateurs or hoe, I am going to try to stop first 
and ask myself: who am I doing this for? I want a garden full of life far more 
than I want other people’s praise. Next year, I am going to garden as though 
the insects are my biggest critic.
 