
The trees I love most have been pruned by wild things. Like the wrinkles on my 
favourite faces, they are moulded by experience. The wind is one of my 
favourite pruners; it whips its subjects, forcing them to lean into its fury. 
Rabbits and deer can be interesting formative pruners, too. Any multi-stemmed 
tree in the wild is that way because someone had a nibble. And poor soil, rocky 
spaces and water can do a sort of bonsai root pruning, stunting a tree into a 
fascinating shape.

Pruning a tree into a lollypop may be practical for streetscapes and 
amenities, but it’s not very imaginative. And although I’d be lying if I said I 
haven’t admired a well-clipped specimen, manipulating a tree into a fan, goblet 
or umbrella is mostly a testimony to control and order.

Style aside, what is the point of winter pruning of deciduous trees? It’s all 
about solid practicalities: the sap is not flowing, so energy is not lost. With 
no leaves on the tree, it’s easy to prune, because you can see the bare bones 
for structure. A tree’s shape can have a huge influence on how a garden feels. 
In the worst case, it dominates the space, its presence just too jarring or 
heavy.

To prune efficiently, you will need sharp tools. You can cut an awful lot with 
a good wood saw, though a curved pruning saw makes getting between limbs much 
easier. Sturdy secateurs will save your wrists if you’ve got a lot to do, and 
loppers will extend your reach. A ladder, too, may be necessary. If it’s not a 
solid A-frame, you’ll need someone at the bottom to hold it steady and remind 
you that standing on tiptoes on the platform that says “do not stand” is not 
ideal.

Related: Alys Fowler: help to feed the birds this winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/alys-fowler-feed-birds-winter-berries-seeds>

As for what to cut, anything diseased, dying or dead goes first. Branches that 
are crossing and rubbing are next. Big branches are heavy. Trying to hold one 
up and saw at the same time doesn’t work. Instead, remove the branch in 
sections to lessen the weight. When you get near the trunk, make a shallow 
undercut beneath the limb. This will stop the bark from tearing. Then saw close 
to the trunk, without cutting so flush that you shave the bark. The swollen 
section of branch closest to the trunk, known as the collar, will heal neatly 
given time. Cut too flush, and you remove this healing part; conversely, 
cutting too far away and leaving a stump is a waste of energy for the tree, and 
doesn’t look pretty.

Crown lifting is an invaluable way to reduce a tree’s presence without looking 
too heavy-handed. It involves taking off two or three lower branches to 
lengthen the trunk. It can dramatically improve a view, allowing a much-needed 
glimpse beyond. It can also lighten the area beneath the tree by a surprising 
amount.

You can prune nearly all deciduous trees, but a few resent that being done 
now. Walnuts and magnolias heal more quickly in summer; birch will bleed 
considerably, which can be unsightly; and plums are susceptible tosilverleaf 
disease <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?PID=245> and should be pruned 
from April to July instead.
 