
6:30pm on a Saturday night in a warehouse in Hackney, east London, and a girl 
has her head in a toilet bowl. Behind her, on the bed, a bloke is out cold; 
someone has wrapped him in gaffer tape. Perhaps it's a case of pre-loading. Not 
that they needed to pre-load; there's more alcohol here than at a wedding. A 
couple of cheerleaders with pigtails and sweatshirts bearing the names of 
American universities are sitting cross-legged on the ground talking intently, 
plastic cups of warm white wine in their manicured mitts. Across from them, a 
guy is being helped to suck beer through a hose.

You don't need to be a sorority chick to recognise the distinctive signs of a 
frat party getting under way. I do a mental checklist and locate the cliches. 
Space cake: check! Jocks: check! Beer bong and the requisite geek: check! Few 
British people, you suspect, will have seen the real thing, but anyone who grew 
up watching the films ofJohn Hughes  
<http://spectator.org/archives/2009/08/10/john-hughes-american-rebel>(Ferris 
Bueller's Day Off, Sixteen Candles) orPaul Weitz 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0919369/> (American Pie) will recognise the scene. 
In fact, anyone born in the last 50 years will recognise this American rite of 
passage: it's been a fixture of teen movies since the 1960s.
 'Man taped to wall? Check' ... Part of Fornieles's event 
This isn't, needless to say, quite the real thing. Striding through the 
carnage in a yellow Hawaiian shirt is our host for this evening,artist Ed 
Fornieles, a sculpture student at the Royal College of Art 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/its-show-time-meet-the-ambitious-young-galleristas-behind-britains-art-boom-765221.html>
. He has been filming scenes of teen debauchery all day for Animal House, a 
multimedia installation inspired by the 1978 movie of the same name 
<http://vimeo.com/9414851>. The artwork will consist of the footage shot 
earlier, photographs from tonight's four-hour performance – featuring 100 
willing participants let loose to party – and a sculpture made from the debris 
left behind.

I am one of 20 people in the unenviable position of being sober voyeurs, 
invited by the artist to witness proceedings. It's early in the evening, and 
already I feel about as awkward as the fake palm tree stuck to the ground next 
to me. The actors mill about chatting, some begin to grind against each other 
as the music gets louder, and occasionally one detaches from the crowd to 
perform: a pillow fight, some mucking-about with beer cans. Atmospherically it 
is about as flat as a two-day old diet Coke; I am squirming with embarrassment.

Fornieles claims he wants to capture that quixotic moment in young people's 
lives when they arrive at college – when they are away from home, often for the 
first time, their personalities not yet fully formed. What he found was that 
teenagers were only too keen to conform a stereotype created by American 
television and film, and then passed down through generations. "You are so 
impressionable at that age," he says, "ready for experimentation sexually and 
socially. I am interested in this stage in a person's life, which is played out 
again and again. Think of all these millions of American teenagers watching 
films about the American teenager which are based on real American teenagers 
who have been watching films about American teenagers."

So Fornieles decided to re-create a frat party in the hope of finding 
something real at the heart of it. The participants have been given profiles 
from Facebook to base their characters on for the performance, each one 
supposed to personify a particular college type, from stoner dude to math dork. 
They've worked hard on the costumes, and the alcohol is there to do the rest.

Two hours later, and the place is beginning to resemble, if not the euphoria, 
at least something of the anarchy of Animal House. The cheerleaders' makeup is 
running rivers down their cheeks, sweaty boys are spraying each other with 
fizzed-up cans of Bud, two girls are getting intimate in front of a jeering 
crowd, and in the corner a man is being taped to the wall in the shape of the 
crucifix. There is a heavy aroma of BO. Fornieles' fixed expression as he tries 
to stay on top of things is reminiscent of a nightclub owner off to sort out 
some argy-bargy in the queue. He is trailed by a couple of tearful girls and a 
tense-looking woman on a mobile phone.

I have had enough, however, and leave, picking my way through the inebriated 
stragglers, the memory of a man naked but for a pair of purple pants jigging on 
the dance floor seared into my brain. I wonder what Bluto, Otter and Boon would 
have thought of this jaded parody of their coming-of-age celebration. As 
performances go, I suppose it resembled the Fluxus happenings of the 1960s, 
where participants were encouraged to reach higher states of consciousness in 
front of an audience, except Maciunas and his followers sought to connect with 
people on an intimate level. I fear we were all far too knowing for that to 
happen here.
 