
There is a national culture of baking in the UK: of afternoon tea and baking 
shows, coffee shops and village fete bake-offs. We also have a bounty of 
homegrown produce, from fat russet apples to inky damsons, blackcurrants, 
gooseberries and flushed-pink forced rhubarb. But when it comes to bringing 
these strengths together, we fall flat. Besides the much-loved autumn crumble, 
a slick of strawberry jam in the middle of a Victoria sandwich or a lazy 
handful of currants in a fruit cake is as close as most of us come to seeing 
our 5-a-day in the things we bake.

So, this week, I’ve turned my sights to a country that really has mastered 
baking with fruit, taking a look at the best of the US’s fruit pies, cobblers, 
crumbles, crisps and buckles.

Peach raspberry cornmeal cobbler

The fruit that tends to work best in cakes, tarts and puddings are those that 
have a touch of acidity to take the edge off the sweetness – think green 
apples, blackberries, currants and damson plums. But peaches, with their 
fragrant, syrupy simplicity, have none of that attitude. A good, ripe peach is 
a beautiful thing, but it’ll collapse to sticky juice at little more than the 
squeeze of your fingers: put through the heat of an oven and faced with the 
richness of butter, sugar and eggs, they stand no chance.

Recipes for self-saucing chocolate pudding and bakewell tart | Ruby Bakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/12/one-bowl-baking-recipes-self-saucing-chocolate-pudding-ruby-tandoh>
In this take on a traditional peach cobbler, therefore, I have bolstered the 
peach with plenty of lemon and the tartness of a punnet of raspberries. The 
golden cornmeal crust helps to balance the slippery softness of the filling.

For a more autumnal variation, swap the peaches and raspberries for 600g cox 
or braeburn apples, peeled and cut into fat wedges, plus 400g rhubarb, in 5cm 
lengths. Increase the sugar to 125g and do away with the lemon juice. Bake as 
below.

Serves 8-10
1-1.25kg ripe peaches
5 tbsp caster sugar
4 tbsp cornflour
2 tsp ground ginger
Juice of 1 lemon
250g raspberries

 For the topping
150g plain flour
125g caster sugar
75g polenta
1 tsp baking powder
Zest of 1 lemon
60g butter
3 tbsp buttermilk
Extra caster sugar, to top

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Then prepare the peaches. I don’t 
bother with the hassle of peeling them (if they’re ripe and tender enough to 
taste good, they’re a nightmare to peel), but you can if you prefer. Cut into 
1cm segments, tugging out the stones as you go.

2 Stir together the caster sugar, cornflour and ground ginger. Heap the peach 
slices in a large mixing bowl and pour in the lemon juice, tossing the fruit to 
spread the juice through. Add the sugar and cornflour mixture and use your 
hands to softly turn the peach in its bowl, coating it. Add the peach mixture 
to a 21cm or 23cm square baking dish, alternating spoonfuls of peach with a 
scattering of raspberries. (If you just stir the raspberries straight into the 
peaches, you’ll crush them long before they even see the baking dish.)

3 Once the baking dish has been filled, make the cobbler topping. Stir 
together the flour, caster sugar, polenta, baking powder and lemon zest. Melt 
the butter over a low heat, then pour into the dry ingredients along with the 
buttermilk. Work everything together to get a dough that’s firm, but not dry. 
You should be able to squeeze it into rounds without it cracking and falling 
apart. Add a little extra flour or buttermilk as necessary to get it to the 
right consistency.

4 Make 9 patties from the polenta mix, pressing each between your palms to a 
thickness of around 1cm. Arrange these neatly on top of the fruit filling and 
sprinkle with 2 tbsp caster sugar.

5 Bake for 40-45 minutes, until the marigold-yellow peach mixture is mottled 
with bright raspberry juice, and those juices are bubbling up between the gaps 
of the cornmeal topping. Serve warm with ice-cream.

Brown butter blueberry buckle

A buckle is a cake filled with seasonal fruit and given a buttery crumble 
topping. In this one, I’ve stuck to all-American blueberry for the filling, but 
I’ve deepened the sponge with brown butter. This is made by simmering butter 
until it darkens a shade – the fatty blandness of normal butter is displaced 
and a mellower, nuttier flavour takes its place. It’s a great baking cheat to 
bear in mind if ever you want to play up autumnal, caramelised or nutty notes 
in your baking.

Serves 12
150g salted butter
150g caster sugar
2 large eggs
150g sour cream
1½ tsp vanilla extract
250g plain flour
3 tsp baking powder
½ tsp ground nutmeg
300g blueberries

 For the topping
75g plain flour
50g caster sugar
¼ tsp ground cinnamon

Ruby Tandoh’s school of rock cakes | Ruby bakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/29/rock-cake-recipe-apple-spice-cake-ruby-tandoh>
1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Grease a 20cm round spring-form 
cake tin and line the base with a circle of baking parchment.

2 Cube the butter and set it in a small, heavy pan over a medium heat. Let the 
butter melt, then watch it carefully as it simmers. Whisk the pan off the heat 
as soon as it begins to smell nutty and tiny flecks of brown begin to colour at 
the bottom of the pan. Decant the butter – including as much of the brown bits 
as possible – into a clean bowl to cool a little.

3 Combine ⅔ of the now just-warm butter with the sugar, eggs, sour cream and 
vanilla extract in a large mixing bowl. Whisk together until thick and smooth. 
Combine the flour, baking powder and ground nutmeg in a separate bowl, then add 
to the wet mixture and fold together for a glossy, yellow batter. Gently stir 
in the blueberries.

4 For the crumble topping, combine the flour, sugar and cinnamon, then pour in 
the reserved third of the brown butter. Rub everything together between your 
fingertips until it holds in small clumps.

5 Spoon the blueberry batter into the prepared cake tin and scatter the 
crumble clumps all over the top. Bake for around an hour, keeping the oven door 
firmly shut for the first 45 minutes. Thanks to the insulating layer of crumble 
topping, this cake rises incredibly well considering the amount of fruit 
weighing it down. The topping traps in a little of the steam and protects the 
surface from the direct heat of the oven, meaning it sets slower – and so rises 
more – than it might otherwise.

6 When the cake is cooked, a small knife inserted into the middle should 
emerge with little more than a crumb or two stuck to it. Serve while it’s still 
warm.
 