
Prehistoric America was not a disease-free utopia. Tuberculosis 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v514/n7523/abs/nature13591.html>, 
treponemal disease, Chagas disease, and many other pathogens were endemic to 
populations in different regions of the continent. But the“Columbian Exchange” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Columbian_Exchange> beginning in 1492 introduced 
new pathogens to American populations, including smallpox, measles, influenza, 
and yellow fever. This introduction had devastating consequences for tribes. In 
some places, death from infectious disease resulted in thedepopulation of 
entire regions 
<http://local.disia.unifi.it/livi/pubblicazioni/depopulation-of-hispanic-america.pdf>
, leading to the collapse of social, economic, and political institutions, and 
the loss of many traditional cultural practices and ways of life.

Understanding the dynamics of these pandemics is critically important in order 
to learn how they may have shaped the genetic diversity of contemporary Native 
American communities, potentially giving insights into the genetic 
underpinnings of diseases present in a higher frequency in some populations 
than elsewhere. More broadly, documenting the historical effects of the 
introduction of novel pathogens can give insights into the evolution of 
host-pathogen relationships. These insights are potentially useful for 
responding to future outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases.

Despite landmines, snakes and dodgy gin, Iraq is an archaeological paradise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/16/despite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise>
It has long been hypothesised that tens of thousands of years of separation 
and independent evolution from Old World populations rendered the indigenous 
inhabitants of the Americas immunologically vulnerable to their pathogens. The 
resulting outbreaks of disease - the so-called“virgin soil epidemics” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virgin_soil_epidemic> - following first exposure 
to these pathogens were therefore particularly devastating. But because many of 
these diseases leave no trace of infection in skeletons, it has been impossible 
to fully test this model using only osteological approaches.

However, our ability to recover DNA from past populations gives us a new, 
powerful way to document the evolutionary effects of these pandemics. For 
example,a recent study <http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms13175> by Lindo et 
al. (2016) investigated whether there had been changes in immunological genes 
in the Tsimshian people from the Northwest Coast of North America in response 
to the introduction of new diseases.

In partnership with the Tsimshian community, researchers compared DNA from 
contemporary and ancestral populations in the region. By modelling fluctuations 
in estimated population sizes over thousands of years, they confirmed that the 
population experienced a severe genetic bottleneck (57% decrease in effective 
population size) after European contact, about 175 years before present. This 
bottleneck would have coincided with historically documented smallpox epidemics 
within the Tsimshian community.

To assess whether there had been changes within immune system-related genes in 
the Tsimshian population in response to smallpox introduction, the researchers 
then scanned exomes (the subset of genomic regions which code for protein) from 
the ancient and contemporary populations. They found evidence for strong 
positive selection on the regulatory region of the human leucocyte antigen gene 
HLA-DQA1 in the ancient population. This strong positive selection would have 
maintained a specific DNA sequence motif in this region from generation to 
generation, regulating the expression of the HLA gene in a way particularly 
adaptive for the ancient environment.

However, contemporary Tsimshian descendants’ HLA genes look quite different 
from their ancestors. Simulations of different evolutionary scenarios suggested 
that a selection pressure shift in response to a changing pathogen landscape 
best fit the observed data. Without positive selection maintaining the same 
genetic motif in the HLA-DQA1 regulatory region, it is free to accumulate 
mutations which likely have changed the expression of this gene. So although 
ancient Tsimshian populations were adapted to specific pathogens present in 
their environment, the introduction of new pathogens by European settlers meant 
that what was adaptive for one environment was suddenly maladaptive. The 
resulting population collapse, recorded in both historical documentation and 
the genetic legacy of contemporary Tsimshian descendants, was one of the tragic 
consequences.

Infectious diseases were just one of the causes of the profound disruption to 
indigenous American populations following European contact. Warfare, forced 
relocations, slavery, suppression of traditional subsistence activities, and 
the dismantling of social structures and cultural practices all contributed 
substantially to depopulation. But by showing specifically how their evolution 
was impacted by changing environments, ancient DNA research offers the 
potential to yield new insights into the varied experiences and consequences of 
European contact in different Native American tribes.

Further reading

Lindo, J. et al. A time transect of exomes from a Native American population 
before and after European contact.Nat. Commun 7: 13175 doi: 10.1038/ncomms13175 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms13175> (2016).
 