
The former Liverpool defender Andrea Dossena has described being treated “like 
a terrorist” during hisrecent arrest on suspicion of shoplifting in Harrods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/08/former-liverpool-defender-andrea-dossena-harrods-arrest>
.

The 33-year-old Italian, who joined Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> in November 2014, was 
detained with his wife, Deborah, and young son, Romeo, at the Knightsbridge 
department store, but all charges were later dropped.

Describing the how the incident unfolded, Dossena told Corriere dello Sport: 
“When we got to the checkout and paid, I didn’t notice that there was also a 
pack of dried beef and a jar of honey in our bag. I don’t know how it happened, 
I’ve no idea.”

When the alarm sounded and staff called police, Dossena said they were 
handcuffed, “as you would do with a terrorist. I was obviously in disbelief, 
not only because of that gesture but because I didn’t know what was going on – 
I hadn’t realised the mistake we’d made.

“They asked to see our documents that prove our status as residents of London, 
and obviously I didn’t have them with me – I’d left them at home. So then they 
took us to the police station, where they held us until half past 10 at night, 
despite the needs of a two-and-a-half-year-old child. It’s absurd to treat a 
child this way.

“Two days later the police confirmed I had acted in good faith and the case 
was closed.”

Dossena said he would be taking legal action over the way the incident was 
reported, “to protect my image and my family. It’s all water under the bridge 
now, but when I stop to think I feel the media circus was completely unfair.

“There was no privacy, no respect. I found myself in the headlines – ‘Dossena 
the thief’. Like I’m going to steal a Rolex.”

He added, though, that the experience had not changed how he felt about life 
in England. “We chose to live in London, which is wonderful. We have a 
beautiful home, we have learned the language. Romeo goes to kindergarten and 
joined the football team. He’s right-footed, a champion.”
 