
Andrés Fernández sits cross-legged in the middle of his goal, arms 
outstretched, a ball in each hand and gently closes his eyes. Peace descends 
and he meditates.

The only noise breaking the silence is the gentle mechanical click-click as 
the photographer snaps away. And before you say: "bah, it wasjust a photo shoot 
<http://www.as.com/futbol/articulo/gracias-budismo-he-conocido-soy/ 
20120311dasdaiftb_30/Tes> – that doesn't flipping count", it wasn't just a 
photo shoot.

The Osasuna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> goalkeeper is a 
little bit different. He always has been: studying at Spain's Open University, 
a reader of science and political essays as well as literature, he has been 
even more different since his mum lent him her books on Buddhism.

Now, he says, he has found his inner peace; he has found himself, his place.

His place and his team's too. And it is some place. Fernández started this 
season as Osasuna's third-choice goalkeeper, behind Ricardo and the brilliantly 
named Asier Riesgo (Asier Risk), having come back from loan at Huesca where he 
was the Second Division's best goalkeeper. Now he is their first. But he 
conceded seven goals against Real Madrid. And he conceded eight against 
Barcelona. Things did not look good for him or for his side. Sure, they 
finished ninth last season but they could have gone down on the final day, and 
then 15 players departed. And if 13 players arrived, they were mostly 
cast-offs. Osasuna did not pay for any of them.

It is nothing new: Osasuna's president recalls a conversation with the 
sporting director of a German club a few summer's back. "So," he was asked, 
"how much have you spent on players?" "Nothing," replied the president. 
"Nothing?" asked the sporting director, laughing. He started shouting across 
the room at his own president: "Hey, boss," he said, "did you hear that? They 
haven't spent anything. Not a penny!" Look at the current squad and the total 
cost is a fraction over €4m.

Yet yesterday Fernández made two barely believable saves against Levante to 
help Osasuna to a 2-0 win. Which might not sound like much but it was a 2-0 win 
against a Levante side that were looking to claim a Champions League place and 
it was a 2-0 win that, as the Osasuna manager José Luis Mendilíbar put, it, 
"puts us on 43 points which means that we are safe". Again, that might not 
sound like much, but there are still nine games left – 27 points to go. And as 
Mendilíbar also put it, it means Osasuna can now think about something else. 
Something else like a European place.

This morning, Osasuna are sixth, with a three-point cushion over Espanyol in 
seventh.

They are just four points off Málaga, who are in a Champions League place. Not 
bad for a side that has been in he relegation zone at least one point in each 
of the last four seasons. Not bad for a side with no money. One of only four 
clubs, alongside Athletic Bilbao, Real Madrid and Barcelona, that was not 
forced to become a SAD (a sporting plc), Osasuna put good housekeeping above 
good players. Spanish football clubs owe €750m to the taxman; Osasuna are one 
of them (at €29m) but say that they do not owe a penny to any other clubs, 
which is unusual in Spain. They even have a parcel of land ready to exploit 
near the stadium – they just no that there's no point in trying to use it now.

In the meantime, caution rules. Reality. Not being a SAD means being bound by 
different rules; it means not risking anything financially. Good players are 
sold on as a matter of survival. Young players are thrown in and old players 
are brought in on the cheap or for free. This season Osasuna have given debuts 
to six youth team players. Six more. They are proud of the work they do at 
Tajonar. Yet even those players sometimes end up leaving: Osasuna cannot 
compete with the financial muscle of other teams. It is a constant (if 
exaggerated) bone of contention that Athletic Bilbao pick off their best youth 
teamers. Javi Martínez and David López both came through Tajonar and a few 
weeks ago, the Athletic Bilbao president sarcastically remarked: "Your ball 
boys are good." To which one of the Osasuna officials snapped: "Don't worry, 
they're kids in our youth system so you can take them any time you like."

One of those youth teamers was Raúl García. He helped Osasuna to a historic 
fourth place in 2005-06 and then at the end of the following season went to 
Atlético Madrid for €11m. This summer, unwanted by Atlético, he returned on 
loan. He has re-found himself and he has been a revelation. Working with his 
personal physio, he has been Osasuna's most important outfield player. This 
weekend he scored one and made the other: it summed him up. With seven goals he 
is Osasuna's top scorer; with seven assists he is their top provider too. In 
fact, he is the top assist provider in the whole of the league, outside Madrid 
and Barcelona.

Not that Fernández and García are alone. Osasuna's president reckons Osasuna 
are the bestteam in Spain. They are aggressive and tough. The way that Osasuna 
are supposed to be. When Valencia were due to play Stoke City, their coach Unai 
Emery tried to think of a Spanish equivalent: Osasuna were the nearest thing he 
could come up with and while there are significant differences – Stoke play 
deeper, for a start – you could see his point. As one insider puts it: "Míchel 
would never be a good coach for this club, nor would Pellegrini – this is an 
earthy club, a team of warriors: our coaches have to be people like Caparrós, 
Preciado, Camacho."

Like Mendilíbar. Mendilíbar is an entertainingly potty-mouthed coach who likes 
to make up insults and use them liberally – "membrane" is his latest. Players 
say they have never seen a man shout so much. He imposes intensity and 
aggression on his team. He talks about his team going out to die every game and 
havingbad grapes and bad milk: that's a touch of nastiness, to you and me. It 
is particularly effective at El Sadar, an old-style ground, packed with 
extremely noisy fans, where the stands are close to the pitch and the players 
are within reaching distance for those with a half-decent throwing arm. The 
stadium where Barcelona lost and Real Madrid go next week.

Mendilíbar sees little point in possession for its own sake – only two teams 
have completed fewer passes than Osasuna – and demands that his team get the 
ball forward quickly. Transitions are his obsession, the formula is simple: get 
it forward or out to the wing, cross, into the box, header. The second move is 
the first one they look for. Osasuna press a long way up the pitch, suffocating 
the opposition and their possession: Mendilíbar is famous for having the 
highest line in football – apart from Arjen Robben's hair – and for that 
occasionally being suicidal. The eight conceded against Barcelona and the seven 
against Madrid this season are not new: much the same happened when he was at 
Valladolid.

For the most part it works, though. Take away those two freak results this 
season and Osasuna have conceded only 26 – the same amount as Real Madrid. That 
makes the goals that they do score effective: they have drawn 13, more than 
anyone except Racing, who are in the relegation zone, but lost only six, better 
than anyone except Real Madrid or Barcelona. This weekend's match was only the 
third that they had won by more than one – and two of those have been against 
Levante. They are unbeaten in nine. In their last 18, an entire half of the 
season, they have lost just three – to Sevilla, Atlético and Racing.

Osasuna are only four points off a Champions League place; only four points 
from Málaga, the team that spent €58m more than they did. They are18 points off 
relegation. The team that were born to suffer, the team that make a virtue of 
it, are secure. Andres Fernández was sitting comfortably this morning. So were 
Osasuna.

Talking points

• Jiménez, Jiménez, que cojones tienes! Wow, Real Zaragoza might just get out 
of this, you know. Suddenly they are level on points with the other two teams 
in the relegation zone, Sporting and Racing, and just six points away from 
Granada. It is still a long shot but it is at least half-possible now. They won 
1-0 against Atlético with a 95th-minute penalty. (Olé to Cholo Simone, by the 
way, who said simply: "Yes, it was a penalty.") As for Atlético Madrid, They 
are now eighth, eight points off the final Champions League place, and were 
awful again. Imagine if that had happened under Gregorio Manzano. (Want a 
parallel? Dalglish/Hodgson?)

• That Champions League place is looking more and more like it's Málaga's. 
They won 2-1 at Espanyol and are now level with Valencia in third, who continue 
their collapse.

Emery is a goner. The only question is when. They were beaten 3-1 by Getafe – 
who, by the way, are quietly climbing. Luis García's side are the third best 
team in Spain over the last 18 games. Not that anyone seems to notice.

• Athletic. Marcelo Bielsa says his team are still running more than anyone 
else but something is going horribly wrong. Not least the injury to Llorente. 
They are now 10th, nine points off fourth place, five off a European slot.

Here's the score that matters: Messi 35 – 35 Ronaldo.

And here's the rest of them: Mallorca 0-2 Barcelona, Real Madrid 5-1 Real 
Sociedad, Getafe 3-1 Valencia, Zaragoza 1-0, Atlético Levante 0-2 Osasuna 
Espanyol 1-2 Málaga Athletic 1-1 Sporting Rayo 0-2 Villarreal Betis 1-1 Racing 
Granada-Sevilla,Monday night.

• Latest La Liga standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=29>
 