
Andy Carroll has warned Chelsea that there will be no 19th-century football 
fromWest Ham United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> when 
the forward’s side face off against the league leaders at Stamford Bridge on 
Boxing Day.

West Ham were battling against relegation when they held Chelsea to a 0-0 draw 
in the corresponding fixture last season, which led toJosé Mourinho accusing 
them of being overly negative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/29/chelsea-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
, but Carroll expects Sam Allardyce’s side to be far more expansive this time. 
A run of one defeat in 11 league games has resulted in West Ham rising to 
fourth, their highest position at Christmas since 1985, and Carroll believes 
they should not be fearful about visiting the leaders and then hosting Arsenal 
two days later.

“They’re tough games coming up but we have a good team as well and I’m sure 
they’re going to be just as worried about us as we are about them,” the striker 
said. “We’re playing great football and I think any team that we play against 
is going to be worried about us. We’ve got more than one attacking option – we 
play it on the floor, play it in the air, down the sides. Obviously we’re in 
the position that we are in the league and that’s well deserved.”

Carroll, who scored his third goal in three matches in Saturday’s 2-0 victory 
over Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/20/west-ham-united-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, puts West Ham’s transformation down to Allardyce’s managerial acumen.

“He’s brought in some great players,” Carroll said. “He’s changed the team 
around a lot, the players he’s brought in have settled in nicely and all the 
lads are buzzing about at the minute – and it comes from that really: the 
manager’s choice of players and how he wants to play now.

“Different tactics, different teams. He’s not the same every week. Obviously 
he wants a win but you’ve got to watch the teams, how they’re playing, how 
we’re going to break them down and win the game. He’s got loads of different 
ways of attacking, we’ve got loads of dimensions to go forward. We can do 
anything. That’s what our qualities are at the minute.”

Allardyce’s response to Mourinho’s criticism of his tactics at the time was to 
chuckle that he had outwitted theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> manager. “He [Allardyce] knows 
how to beat managers and their tactics,” Carroll said. “He knows what they are 
going to do against us. It’s just a game of chess, really, looking a move 
ahead.”

Carroll is adamant that West Ham’s revival can continue. “Of course there’s a 
belief,” he said. “Everyone’s flying at the minute. Everyone’s looking forward 
to every game coming. Every week we’re thinking: ‘There’s another three points, 
potentially.’ The next two games are going to be a lot harder and hopefully 
we’ll do the same.”

Carroll has now started six successive matches since returning from the ankle 
ligament injury that forced him to miss the first three months of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/24/west-ham-andy-carroll-ankle-surgery>
 and his performances have been encouraging.

“I’m pleased,” he said. “I knew as soon as I was back fully fit that I’d start 
scoring goals, creating chances for the team and playing well. I’ve had a lot 
of 90-minute games now. The first one was unexpected but I got through it fine 
and carried on getting through the games and feeling great.”

Against Leicester Carroll did well to regain his composure to give West Ham 
the lead shortly after squandering a chance from close range. “Great strikers 
don’t think about the one they’ve just missed,” he said. “They think about the 
next one coming – and that’s exactly what I did. It was a few minutes after 
when I got another chance and I put it away.”

Carroll said that he enjoys the tongue-in-cheek chants from West Ham’s fans 
about playing Barcelona next season. “Fans are great, aren’t they?” he said. 
“They gave us a big lift when they’re singing songs like that, you know. We’ve 
played a lot of good games, obviously the fans are excited and happy with the 
way we’re going, just as we are, and, like I say, everyone’s happy at the 
minute at the club.”
 