
Welcome back, then, Andy Carroll. It is probably safe to say it now, without 
fear of reactivating via the power of jinx the assorted twangs and strains that 
have restricted English football’s most peculiarly stirring, peculiarly 
specialised, peculiarly expensive striking talent. But Carroll does seem to be 
getting somewhere close to his prodigious physical peak – at least judging by 
hisperformance last weekend at Upton Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/07/west-ham-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
, during which Carroll scored two headed goals and did not so much outmuscle as 
traumatise the Swansea defence, appearing in the middle of those scattered 
white shirts as though catapulted in from some unforeseeable angle, like an 
Action Man hurled into the middle of a dolls’ tea party, boots popping off, 
legs flailing, grippy hands bringing down the lampshade, scattering the 
crockery.

There was also a reminder this week of probably the most notable thing about 
Carroll, as Gary Neville, who is these days pretty much incapable of saying 
anything routine or uninteresting about football, analysed his performance on 
Sky Sports. “These are great goals. We shouldn’t be ashamed of scoring goals 
like that,” Neville insisted, capturing in a single slightly jarring phrase the 
enduring appeal in English football of this kind of spectacular aerial power, 
the terrible transgressive beauty of the Carroll‑shaped universe.

This is not to belittle Carroll as a footballer or to suggest that his one 
genuinely outstanding skill is heading the ball. But the fact is, his one 
genuinely outstanding skill is heading the ball. Yes, he has a thumping 
left‑foot shot, and knits together an attack with great craft as a traditional 
beacon‑style centre-forward, wheeled into place among the defensive lines like 
a medieval siege tower.His overhead kick against West Brom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/02/west-bromwich-albion-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
 two weeks ago remains one of the moments of the season so far, Carroll 
flipping himself upside down with astonishing agility like a table footballer 
being spun on his rod.

But when it comes to heading Carroll is astonishingly good, one of the best 
three headers of a ball Kevin Keegan has ever seen, stretching back to the days 
before heading the ball became a kind of curse, an embarrassment, an outlaw 
gift. Against Newcastle in January Carroll sprinted 20 yards across the centre 
circle to head a goal-kick off the eyebrows of the opposition centre-half and 
out of play on the full, a piece of majestically pointless athleticism – 
football as interpreted through the eyes of a rearing drizzle-soaked Highland 
stag – that had half the ground on its feet, one hand raised to their flushed 
throats.

And really it is this disorientating quality that marks him out, the unspoken 
fear that simply by staring at him for too long we might become too excited, 
too entranced by that power, those shameless goals, the buried memory of 
English football as an essentially aerial pursuit, a triumphant bombardment.

Which is where Neville comes in again. There is currently an argument 
simmering away beneath the surface of English football, stoked by theFootball 
Association’s release last week of its glossily packed England DNA manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/04/fa-england-dna-elite-player-development>
. Never mind the self-conscious oddity of this, the fact that if anything 
defines the DNA of English football, 140 careless years down the line, it is 
not really caring much about the DNA of English football (analysis reveals: we 
do not like analysis). The fact is Neville is the only high-profile voice to 
have offered a sensible counter-commentary on any of this, suggesting in a 
newspaper article last year – and again, obliquely, in his appreciation of 
Carroll’s power – that English football already has a valid tone and texture, 
that qualities of physicality, organisation and energy also represent a 
coherent identity too valuable to be junked in favour of some clips on a memory 
stick, buzzwords about “intelligently dominating possession” and another 
mimesis of the latest overseas model.

It is clear enough what the FA is up to: here, finally is an attempt to 
provide an actual text, some more precise idea of how exactly we are supposed 
to play this game, the first since the discredited long-ball gospels produced 
in the 1970s and 1980s by Charles Hughes, high priest of direct football who 
“poisoned the wells” for generations to come. And yet surely the real point is 
there simply is no such thing as a footballing DNA, for the English or anybody 
else. What is a typically English player? Steve Bloomer, the first great 
English striker, was a pale, skinny finisher. Jimmy Greaves was a lean and 
frictionless craftsman. Even Alan Shearer, before his late career habit of 
spending most of his time wrestling his way backwards across the halfway line 
with his arms stretched out, like a man reaching for the mantelpiece after a 
power cut, was in his pomp a wonderfully complete, natural, modern 
centre-forward.

The fact is there are only two types of professional footballer: good ones and 
better ones. Just as reaching a tournament semi-final is not a matter of 
rediscovering the inner you, but of details and sound practice in high places. 
Nothing is undoable. The simple switch to small-sized pitches and goals is 
already helping to change how pre-academy kids learn to play. There is no 
top-down DNA here, only a first glimpse – from what I’ve seen at least – of a 
generation of alarmingly skilful, hearteningly tiny under-nines given a little 
more freedom to play as the game comes to them.

Which brings us back to Carroll who, in this light, still looks like the end 
of something. The fact is there will never be another all-out English target 
man bought or sold for such vast amounts of money (the still British record of 
£35m). Carroll is not polyvalent. The idea of him filling in on the wing or 
playing as a false 9 is a nonstarter. He is instead a fixed-gear colossus and 
perhaps – until the next revolution – English football’s last great striking 
yeti, the last of the big men. All things considered we should probably enjoy 
him while we can.
 