
Andy Carroll believes he has vindicated Sam Allardyce’s decision to sign him 
rather than Wilfried Bony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/05/sam-allardyce-andy-carroll-west-ham-wilfried-bony>
 last summer after his contribution to West Ham’s victory against Swansea City 
on Sunday. The striker scored two towering headers to drive his side to their 
third win in a week and third place in the Premier League.

Allardyce revealed last week that he had been tracking Bony’s prolific 
goalscoring for Dutch club Vitesse Arnhem in 2013 when the opportunity arose to 
sign the on-loan Carroll on a permanent basis, and said the club could not 
afford both. Asked whether his manager made the right decision, Carroll said: 
“[I haven’t] seen anything about it but he chose the right one, didn’t he?”

Carroll’s first league goals of the season were a well-timed reminder of his 
qualities and reinforced the return to fitness of the forwards Enner Valencia 
and Diafra Sakho, the club’s top scorer this term. Both summer recruits have 
impressed in Carroll’s absence – Sakho came off the bench against Swansea to 
score his eighth in all competitions – but Carroll said West Ham’s newfound 
strength in depth can only be positive.

“Both of them are great players as they have shown at the start of the 
season,” he said. “Both have got goals in them and Diafra has come off the 
bench and got one and could have had another. He is a fantastic signing.”

The 25-year-old Carroll has waited a long time after injury delayed his 
season’s start but said the pressure on his comeback had been eased by his 
team-mates’ success. “It is always easier when you have a big squad,” Carroll 
said. “You are not relying on one player. We have a big squad and all quality 
players that can come in. That is why the players who are not playing are 
disappointed.”

Carroll also had special praise for another new addition Alex Song. The 
midfielder arrived on a season-long loan from Barcelona in the summer and has 
not ruled out extending his stay in east London, having already cemented his 
place at the heart of the side.

“Every game he has played he has been fantastic,” Carroll said. “He is just so 
comfortable on the ball and slows the game to his own tempo. Even when we were 
one down we didn’t go gung-ho. He still held it for us and was our anchor 
really.”

Next up for West Ham is a visit to Sunderland and Carroll is wary of the 
threat carried by the club that his family support. “It is a tough game going 
up there. I think [my family] will all be cheering me, even though they are 
Sunderland fans.”
 