
Inside the Stade de France at the finish line of Euro 2016, Antoine Griezmann 
confronted the ogre of defeat in a major final for the second time in six 
weeks. Tolose a Champions League final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
 with your club, then aEuropean Championship with your country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 – both of which were knife-edge close encounters – in one summer is unusually 
cruel. Griezmann left the pitch in Paris after the defeat against Portugal and 
returned to the dressing room with his team-mates. “I was very sad but I did 
not cry,” he says. “I told myself, I must be determined and encourage the guys 
and comfort them. I wanted to show everyone my character, that I can be a 
leader of the team.”

In that action, rising high from the nadir, Griezmann proved that this compact 
forward possesses not only huge talent but also giant heart.

If considered wisdom puts Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi a level above 
anything else in the modern game, Griezmann is one of those who operate on the 
rung closest to them. “I want to eat at their table,” he says. “I want to get 
as close as possible to their level and win titles. My objective is to be among 
the best.”

With that in mind his desire has cranked up after a particularly intense 
period in his career. Griezmann admits it has taken time to recover from 
carrying so much mounting hope and expectation in the colours ofAtlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> and France during the 
climax to last season.

“There was a lot of emotion, a lot of tension, it can leave you very tired,” 
he says. “Two finals where we were so close to our target and close to getting 
the trophy. It just wasn’t the time. But I am not going to stop there. I will 
keep working to play in a final and win. In fact, I am more determined to win.”

Antoine Griezmann fires Atlético Madrid into final at Bayern’s expense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/bayern-munich-atletico-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
He took time out to relax and refresh himself, enjoying a well-earned holiday 
over the summer. It felt like nourishment for the footballing soul. He returned 
to Mâcon, his home city in Burgundy, and spent time with his parents. He also 
took a vacation with old friends, his girlfriend Erika and young daughter Mia. 
Before long his natural verve began to bubble again.

From day one of pre-season training with Atlético and having signed an 
extended contract during the close season, Griezmann has been raring to go.La 
Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> kicks off and Atléti 
host Alavés on Sunday evening. Griezmann expects his team to be heavily 
involved in the title chase again. In April, there was a three‑way sprint 
finish. Barcelona, Atlético and Real Madrid were separated by a mere point with 
five games to play.

At the time Diego Simeone’s dynamic side were also in the thick of the 
Champions League knockouts, slugging it out tosee off Barça 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/13/atletico-madrid-v-barcelona-champions-league-quarter-final-live>
 in the quarter-finals before delivering an unexpected uppercutto triumph 
against Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/bayern-munich-atletico-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
 in the semis. Griezmann – so bright and sharp with his darting 
counterattacking runs – scored decisive goals against both. In that same 
eventful month, he became a father for the first time.

Into May. One slip, as Atlético lost at Levante just after returning from 
Munich, was punishing as Barcelona pulled away in La Liga. Then came the 
Champions League final against their city rivals. The way Griezmann talks about 
the various experiences football has thrown at him recently, it is obvious the 
deepest sting came as Real Madrid beat them to another European crown. “The 
hardest one to take was the Champions League final,” he admits. “It was my 
first important final.”

Its impact was profound enough that the normally silly question as to whether 
he would rather win La Liga or the Champions League provokes a pointed answer. 
“Champions League. Without hesitation,” Griezmann replies. “Because I love it. 
I watch almost all the games when I can – quarter-finals, semi‑finals, final. 
It’s close to the heart of everyone here, the coach and the players. I watched 
it since I was small. I dreamed of playing in it. I always had a frisson when I 
heard the Champions League music. To play in that competition, to score a goal 
in it, is something special for me.”

Revisiting his childhood memories, one of the players he came across while 
watching avidly on television who made a big impact was David Beckham. “I liked 
him a lot. He was my idol. That’s why I wear a long-sleeved jersey and wear the 
No7.”

Griezmann has developed into one of Europe’s most impressive performers. His 
excellent goalscoring record, allied to an infectiously positive style, puts 
him in the mix among the most coveted attacking players. Along with Real’s 
Ronaldo and Gareth Bale, Griezmann makes up the three-man shortlist for Uefa’s 
award for best player in Europe. The result will be confirmed next week.

Griezmann’s efforts for France at Euro 2016, where he finished the 
competition’s top scorer with six goals, has enhanced a stature that was 
already on the rise with his consistently exciting forays with Atlético. It 
also speaks volumes about his mentality that just a few weeks after falling at 
the last withLes Bleus his focus on qualification for the World Cup in Russia 
is merged with club ambitions at the forefront of his mind.

The bid to improve drives him. He believes that staying at Atlético, certainly 
for the time being, gives him the best platform to do that. What makes him so 
happy there? “My team-mates, my coach, the outdoors life, my little family are 
very happy to be there,” he says.

“We live well. Personally, it is a club that can bring titles. I really have 
no desire to go to another club. I want to win titles with Atlético. It’s not a 
personal mission to win La Liga but I want it very badly. We have strong desire 
to win both La Liga and the Champions League and I am going to give my all to 
help my team to succeed. This season I hope we will be better more than ever.”

Part of his personal determination was formed by the challenge to make inroads 
in the professional game as a talented youngster who endured rejections on the 
basis of his size and slight frame. The opportunity came for him abroad, and he 
seized the chance given to him by Real Sociedad, leaving home in his youth. 
Like his good friend Paul Pogba, who also left France in his teens for an 
initial stint at Manchester United, he knows there is a different kind of 
growing up required, a different kind of resolve needed, to make it work in 
such circumstances.

“At the start it’s very, very hard, you shouldn’t go back to your parents, you 
just play football,” Griezmann says. “As I told my father, that’s how you learn 
how to be a professional. When I went to Spain it was for that – even if I had 
the blues from time to time, moments when I felt down. You have got to be 
really, really strong mentally.”

That is a quality he feels he and Pogba share. Griezmann was not surprised by 
the midfielder’s record movefrom Juventus back to Old Trafford this month. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
 “He loves that league. Manchester is the perfect club for him. With Mourinho 
they are making something new,” Griezmann observes. “I think the supporters in 
England won’t be disappointed. They can expect the spectacular from Paul. He 
deserves it. He works hard and has the talent to be such an important player.”

Might Griezmann one day be tempted by the Premier League? There certainly 
would not be a shortage of suitors if he came on the market. “Yes, why not? If 
I am out of contract with Atlético I would ask myself that question.”

For now, though, that question is obliterated by his commitment to Atlético. 
It feels like home to him, and to his family. His daughter is four months old 
and, naturally, fatherhood has lent perspective to this generally optimistic 
25-year-old. Becoming a parent has made him “re-evaulate my life” and he does 
his best to spend time with Mia every day.

Even though he might have experienced a double disappointment last summer, 
Griezmann has so much to look forward to. He wants to seize every moment, in 
football and beyond, with all his small yet very substantial might.
 