
The Cypriot village of Mosfiloti houses a shrine to Michel Platini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/michel-platini>. Part restaurant and part 
museum, the House of Platini is owned by Philippos Stavrou whose collection of 
10,000 photographs and 700 posters of the former France and Juventus playmaker 
turned Uefa president elevates hero worship to a whole new level. Stavrou's 
labour of love used to be regarded as charmingly eccentric by those compatriots 
who knew of its existence but now much of the Mediterranean island has good 
reason to laud the same idol.

Few of its inhabitants remain unaware that Platini's tweaking of the Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> qualifying format 
in 2009 helped Apoel Nicosia reach the group stage three years ago. This season 
they have become the first Cypriot team to enter the knockout phase but as Ivan 
Jovanovic's squad travel to Lyon on Tuesday their fans will give thanks for the 
fact that top-seeded countries must now face each other in the final qualifying 
round, thereby creating appreciably enhanced opportunities for advancement for 
those from lower-ranked leagues.

These days Apoel, an acronym for Athletic Football Club of Greeks of Nicosia, 
are so strong they would probably have qualified anyway but Platini's spot of 
social engineering almost certainly ensured their continued involvement two 
seasons ago. Significantly, the cash accrued during a run which saw them finish 
bottom of their group – despite draws at Chelsea and Atlético Madrid – enabled 
Jovanovic to conduct some subtle squad strengthening.

Lyon would certainly be unwise to underestimate a team which emerged from a 
group also containing Porto, Zenit St Petersburg and Shakhtar Donetsk and in so 
doing left Jovanovic proclaiming himself: "The happiest man in the world."

No one could accuse the 49-year-old Serb of buying success. Although once 
financially challenged, Apoel are estimated to have already made around £10m 
from their latest European adventure. Jovanovic's total annual budget, covering 
transfer fees and wages, is about £7m. Several leading European clubs barely 
blink before paying that sort of sum to a key player in a single year.

Aílton, Apoel's record signing and key striker, was lured from Copenhagen by 
Jovanovic for around £800,000 and is now one of six Brazilians in a squad 
domiciled in the world's only divided capital. While Nicosia's Green Line 
separates the self-proclaimed Turkish Republic of Northern Cyrpus from the rest 
of the island, international barriers do not exist at a club exuding a 
decidedly cosmopolitan ambience. Jovanovic's Brazilians are among 10 
nationalities contained in a dressing room also including four Portuguese 
players, a Paraguayan, an Argentinian, a Tunisian, a Macedonian, a Bosnian, a 
Spaniard, a Greek and 10 Cypriots.

"Everyone on our team is living a dream," said Aílton, who usually operates at 
the apex of Jovanovic's preferred 4-2-3-1 formation which features 
fast-breaking converted wingers at full-back. "Everyone believes very much in 
what we are doing and in ourselves. We really believe we can keep winning. We 
respect our opponents but this team plays without fear."

If the £350,000 a year Jovanovic's top earners command – and most Apoel 
players earn considerably less – may seem, in Champions League circles at 
least, peanuts, a combination of ultra-mean defending and rapid 
counterattacking dictate that an ensemble built around the midfield partnership 
of the one-time Chelsea midfielder Nuno Morais and ex-Benfica trainee Hélio 
Pinto rarely appear country cousins.

The club founded in a baklava-filled confectionery shop inside Nicosia's 
ancient Venetian walled heart in 1926 seems to be showing that, even in the 
absence of vast wads of cash, spirit, skill and soul can sometimes still 
prevail. It appears Apoel's nickname Thrylos, or legend, was not bestowed 
lightly. "Apoel has proved success can be achieved on a modest budget," said 
Costas Koutsokoumnis, the president of the Cyprus FA. "If you said what they've 
done was possible three years ago everyone would have said you were crazy but 
it's not always a matter of how much money you spend."

Jovanovic, an ex-professional footballer in the former Yugoslavia and Greece, 
has been at Apoel for four years now benefiting from an unusually – in Cypriot 
football circles at least – hands-off president in Fivos Erotokritou who 
professes to understand next to nothing about the game's tactical nuances and 
allows his manager full control of transfer policy.

On-field boldness is mirrored by off-pitch innovation. Erotokritou's vision 
has prompted the opening of an online Apoel shop which is seeing merchandise 
orders stream in from countries as far afield as Brazil and, perhaps more 
surprisingly, Ghana and Canada.

Jovanovic's splendidly odds-defying man-management is evidently capturing some 
unlikely imaginations. "We don't feel pressure, we feel motivation," said the 
Serb. "We're a small club but we have a big heart and good, hard-working, 
players with a great desire to achieve something really important."

Constantinos Charalambides first joined Apoel's academy at the age of eight. 
Twenty two years on he will captain the team against Lyon. "Apoel are a Greek 
Cypriot phenomenon," he said. "We have magical team spirit which comes 
naturally from the manager – and no inferiority complex."
 