
John Graham, who has died aged 92, was better known to Guardian crossword 
solvers as Araucaria. In the summer of 1958, on the strength of his success in 
winning the Observer's crossword setting competition two years running, he was 
taken on by the then Manchester Guardian as one of its small band of crossword 
setters.

The first clue in his first puzzle for the Manchester Guardian set the 
standard for what was to follow: "Establishment cut to the bone? (8,5)" for 
SKELETON STAFF. Until 1970, setters were anonymous but were then given noms de 
plume. Araucaria is the botanical name for the monkey puzzle tree. ("Monkey" 
was a term of endearment in the Graham family and echoed Desmond Morris's The 
Naked Ape.)

Graham was born in Oxford, the eldest of six children. His father, Eric, was 
dean of Oriel College, Oxford, later principal of Cuddesdon Theological College 
and then bishop of Brechin. His mother, Phyllis, who lived to be more than 100, 
was the daughter of a major-general. From the age of nine, Graham would share 
the Times crossword puzzle with his parents, three brothers and two sisters, 
and together they would engage in cryptic word play and in setting simple 
puzzles.

After St Edward's school, Oxford, Graham went to King's College, Cambridge, in 
1939 with a scholarship and passed part one of the classical tripos. Joining 
the RAF in 1942, he was sent for aircrew training to Rhodesia and failed his 
pilot's course, but passed out as an observer. He flew as a navigator/bomb 
aimer in some 30 sorties in Baltimores and Bostons in Italy, being mentioned in 
dispatches after baling out behind enemy lines and successfully hiding with an 
Italian family until rescued by the Americans.

He returned to King's in 1946 to read theology, went on to Ely Theological 
College and was ordained in the Church of England in 1948. After serving in 
East Dulwich as a curate and St Chad's College, Durham, in 1952 he married 
Ermesta and moved to Aldershot as senior curate and then, in succession, to 
Beaconsfield, Reading University and St Peter's, Eaton Square, in London. His 
final living was as rector of Houghton and Wyton in Cambridgeshire.

At this point his marriage broke down and in 1983 he married his second wife, 
Margaret. This then meant that he could no longer work as a priest (and was 
only able to resume the ministry when his first wife died). Until this point, 
setting crossword puzzles had been for him an agreeable pastime. Of necessity 
he now set about making them his main source of income, writing "piteous 
letters toJohn Perkin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2002/feb/14/pressandpublishing.guardianobituaries>
 [the crossword editor] asking him to find me more crossword work". Soon he was 
producing eight cryptic puzzles a month for the Guardian (including three bank 
holiday "specials" a year), and later also contributing six a month to the 
Financial Times, where he was Cinephile (an anagram of Chile pine, another name 
for the monkey puzzle tree), as well as puzzles to the Church Times, Homes and 
Antiques and other magazines, and to 1 Across, the monthly subscription 
magazine that he founded in 1984.

For many years he also set the Guardian's daily Quick crosswords. In the last 
20 years of his life he embraced new technology, eventually setting up his own 
website and finding himself to his astonishment overwhelmed by private requests 
for "bespoke" puzzles to mark some event or anniversary. The volume of his 
output, the speed at which he worked and his clarity of mind scarcely 
diminished and he remained a strikingly handsome man until the end.

In lesser hands, such an output might have led to plodding repetition, but the 
joy of Araucaria's crosswords was that they were always new-coined, witty, 
imaginative. Even into his 90s custom could not stale his infinite variety. 
This was largely due to his refusal to accept the strict Ximenean straitjacket 
conceived by AF Ritchie (Afrit in the Listener) and codified by DS Macnutt 
(Ximenes of the Observer), assisted by Alec Robins (Custos of the Guardian). 
Graham followed his own instincts and solvers largely accepted them because 
they led to such enjoyable results.

Afrit's central injunction for cluing was: "I need not mean what I say, but I 
must say what I mean." Araucaria had no quarrel with the rule, but insisted 
that it had to be applied flexibly. A clue must, of course, convey its meaning 
so that the solver had a fair chance of solving it and of knowing that the 
answer arrived at was correct. But he did not accept that, in conveying its 
meaning, it had to stick narrowly to the laws of grammar and syntax. For him, 
there had to be some sort of understanding between setter and solver about what 
was "fair" and, provided that this criterion was met, no other rules were 
needed.

Araucaria once articulated his difference with extreme Ximeneans thus. To clue 
the word CAIN (who killed Abel) his device might be to insert an "I" into 
"CAN", which has the slang meaning of "prison". His clue might be: "Having 
committed a murder, I am in prison." A Ximenean would object that the 
"definition" in the clue for Cain is unfair, because "Cain" is a noun and 
"Having committed a murder" is not; and, because here "I" is a letter of the 
alphabet and not a personal pronoun, it should be followed grammatically by 
"is" not "am". So a strict Ximenean would require some clue like: "Being guilty 
of murder, I must be put in prison." In Araucaria's view, Guardian solvers 
would find that his clue was fair – and better. Most of them were on his side.

Araucaria did not invent "themed" cryptic puzzles, but he greatly developed 
the art form. For Christmas 2000, the 250th anniversary of the death of Bach, 
he produced a grid full of more references to the composer than one would have 
thought humanly possible. But an Araucaria-themed puzzle might equally 
concentrate on the heroes of the struggle against apartheid in South Africa, 
Dickens novels, or the sea areas of the British shipping forecast. His 
unquestionable crossword invention, however, was the alphabetical jigsaw 
puzzle, where the clues are presented in alphabetical order of their solutions 
and the solver has to fit these into the grid "jigsaw-wise, wherever they will 
go".

Araucaria was, also, the master of the very long anagram. He was rightly proud 
of two in particular. First: "O hark the herald angels sing the boy's descent, 
which lifted up the world", producing WHILE SHEPHERDS WATCHED THEIR FLOCKS BY 
NIGHT, ALL SEATED ON THE GROUND; second: "Poetical scene with surprisingly 
chaste Lord Archer vegetating" for THE OLD VICARAGE, GRANTCHESTER.

For all his repute as the most admired and renowned crossword setter in the 
English language, Graham was an essentially shy and humble man. He derived huge 
happiness from his second marriage but, after Margaret died of a heart attack 
in 1993, had the strength to continue to pursue a full and active life, living 
alone but being very much part of the social and church activity of the village 
of Somersham in Cambridgeshire. He did many anonymous acts of kindness, 
stealthily giving away much of his not very large income.

His strongly held, but mildly expressed, political views were definitely of 
the left ("the Guardian is my paper, though I find it a bit conservative"). As 
an adult his paper was the old liberal News Chronicle before it was the 
Manchester Guardian. On principle he would never have set puzzles for a Murdoch 
paper. He expected little or nothing from Tony Blair's New Labour and even less 
from the present coalition, and was therefore not disappointed.

Typically, he decided to announce the fact that he was suffering from 
non-operable cancer in a puzzle set for the December 2012 issue of 1 Across, 
which was reprintedin the Guardian on 11 January 2013 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/2013/jan/11/crossword-araucaria-reveals-dying-cancer>
. The puzzle's rubric, once the puzzle was solved, read: "Araucaria has cancer 
of the oesophagus, which is being treated with palliative care."

The solutions to other clues included Macmillan nurse, stent, endoscopy and 
sunset. "It seemed the natural thing to do, somehow," he responded when asked 
why be had gone public in this way. He was quite overcome by the volume and 
warmth of the tributes that flowed in as a result of this singular puzzle.

He gave great entertainment to a great many readers for more than half a 
century and inspired a younger generation of crossword setters. Graham was made 
MBE in 2005 for his services to crosswords.

He is survived by his brothers Stephen and Martin, his sister Mary and 
stepdaughters Jane and Judith.

• John Graham ("Araucaria"), priest and crossword setter, born 16 February 
1921; died 26 November 2013

• John Perkin died in 2002

• This article was amended on 28 November 2013. The earlier version gave the 
wording of a clue as "Poetic scene with chaste Lord Archer, vegetating".
 