
Back when Armin Veh was coach of VfL Wolfsburg in the 2009-10 season, 
Süddeutsche Zeitung <http://www.sueddeutsche.de/>'s Claudio Catuogno revealed 
one of the main differences between him and his predecessor (and eventual 
successor) Felix Magath. "Magath used to sit on his desk and work obsessively 
until 10pm every day, Veh doesn't operate like that", he wrote. "It's 
impossible for him: he has to take out his dog at 10 every night, for 
starters." This wasn't really a very nice thing to write. Elsewhere, Catuogno 
might have expected a strong, angry rebuke, a ban from press conferences, maybe 
even a lawsuit. But none of the above materialised. There was no reaction at 
all, for a simple reason: what Catuogno wrote was the truth.

Veh, 52, is the opposite to the so-called "Konzepttrainer" who increasingly 
populate the Bundesliga – he believes in giving his team time and space. Too 
much training? Too many detailed instructions? Not for him. His hands-off 
approach has takenEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> back to the 
Bundesliga and into contention for fourth spot, even though he's still happier 
to talk about "the shitty 40 points" that guarantee survival.

On Sunday, his side pulled off a marvellous little trick, good enough for a 
future football trivia question. They lost 2-1 at home to Stuttgart – but still 
climbed up a spot, back into fourth. That feat came courtesy of Schalke 04, who 
managed to lose – in typical Schalke fashion, one must reluctantly add – 3-0 at 
Nürnberg despite dominating for large spells. The Royal Blues' goal-difference 
worsened to zero as a result while Frankfurt are still on +2 despite scoring a 
solitary goal in six games. Both clubs are on 39 points.

The table doesn't quite reflect how badly Eintracht have lost their way since 
the winter break. A brilliant first half of the season saw them outdo many 
bigger, wealthier clubs. Their football was great, the veteran Alex Meier 
didn't stop scoring Le Tissier-esque beauties, and the rest of the league 
gasped at the tremendous potential of players such as Sebastian Rode, Sebastian 
Jung and Takashi Inui. And Veh, after failing at Wolfsburg and Hamburg, was 
flavour of the month again.

Then the trouble started. Many clubs spent their winter break trying to lure 
one or two of the Sebastians away from the Commerzbank-Arena. Over in 
Gelsenkirchen, the Schalke sporting director, Horst Heldt, had a brainwave: why 
not make Veh the new Schalke coach next season. Heldt and Veh had worked 
successfully at Stuttgart, where the manager had ridden an unlikely wave of 
success all the way to theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> championship in 2007.

"Those who know about the [working] relationship between me and Armin Veh 
understand that we naturally think about working together again in the near 
future or at some other time," Heldt said on Sunday. "We never made a secret of 
that. But I can't confirm that this will happen automatically." Bild can, 
however. Their sports editor, Alfred Draxler, a man who knows more about the 
inner machinations at Schalke than half of the club's board, revealed that Veh 
will sign a contract at the Veltins-Arena. Frankfurt are not best pleased, of 
course. "It's about time that we heard a clear statement from Schalke," said 
their sporting director, Bruno Hübner, careful not too blame Veh for the 
impasse. The manager also professed himself annoyed by the perennial 
"Rumgeeiere" (dance on egg shells) but forgot to mention that he's been the one 
tangoing in the eagle's nest.

"Veh is in danger of ruining his reputation," wrote Frankfurter Rundschau. The 
local paper revealed that the club was working hard on securing all the 
transfer targets he has suggested (Freiburg's Jan Rosenthal has already said 
yes), and that there was a good chance that all key personnel would be kept on 
for next season, too. "By announcing his departure now, he would show himself 
up for stringing one club along while he had already agreed terms with 
another," Rundschau warned. Veh is out of contract at the end of the season but 
has refused to enter negotiations until those 40 points are in the bag. Chances 
are this issue will be resolved over the international break.

Frankfurt can't possibly wait another two weeks, especially since Veh's answer 
is likely to be negative. In any case, it looks like the game is up. Without 
Veh, it'll be a lot harder to convince wanted players to stay. The only 
realistic chance is to hope that Champions League qualification – unlikely, but 
not impossible – could dramatically alter the situation.

As for Schalke, plumping for Veh is an interesting choice. History suggests 
that his laid-back attitude works either really well or not at all. And even 
where it does work, it stops working as soon as negative results make it 
necessary to ring the changes. Schalke obviously fancy that kind of gamble, 
with that kind of manager. Heldt's back-up option is reportedly Roberto Di 
Matteo.

Talking Points

• Bayern might be universally known as FC Hollywood, but in Germany, their 
more common nick-name is "Dusel-Bayern" – lucky Bayern. The moniker looked 
particularly apt on Saturday night. After a fine solo effort from Mario Gómez, 
who made the most of only 16 touches in the whole match, Bayern's B team fell 
asleep to let Leverkusen back into the game. Simon Rolfes equalised after some 
non-existent marking from a free-kick. The home side threatened to take all 
three points at the BayArena but a wicked deflection of Philipp Wollscheid from 
a Bastian Schweinsteiger free-kick a few minutes from time saw Jupp Heynckes' 
men celebrate. Schweinsteiger put on a Leverkusen shirt and made a "binoculars" 
gesture. No one could blame him: Bayern are still 20 points clear and out of 
sight. Five more points from eight games will hand them the title; with a bit 
of Dusel they could even get their hands on the trophy in two weeks' time. Off 
the pitch, the mood was muted, however. The sporting director, Matthias Sammer, 
was busy aping Uli Hoeness warnings ("three weeks of shit") about a recent drop 
in performances, while Gómez made no attempt to disguise his annoyance with his 
role as a Mandzukic deputy. All that's needed now is a Champions League exit to 
Juventus to make this the most miserable, record-breaking championship winning 
season ever.

• It's no coincidence that Dortmund seem much happier with their lot. An 
emphatic 5-1 win over Freiburg secured their grip on second spot but that was 
only a happy sideline. The main story was the triumphant return of Nuri Sahin. 
Casual observers had a hard time keeping him and fellow central midfielder 
Ilkay Gundogan apart but TV replays suggest it was indeed Sahin who popped up 
with two fine strikes. "It's taken a bit of time," said Jürgen Klopp, "but one 
can't expect a conductor to lead the orchestra straight away after taking his 
cast off." It's an interesting take – did Brendan Rodgers really break Sahin's 
arms, metaphorically speaking? Robert Lewandowski also scored a brace.

• While Sahin pointed to the presence of his 18-month-old son Omer ("I had to 
perform well for him today"), the Freiburg coach, Christian Streich, bemoaned 
that his players were offered "like on the cattle market, with release clauses 
and huge sums" – an "incredible disquiet" had unnerved the whole squad, said 
the manager. That's the problem for a club like Freiburg: they can never win, 
even when they're winning.

• Still it could be worse. Like at Werder Bremen. At least Thomas Schaaf had 
an excellent explanation for the latest disappointment, an awful 2-2 draw at 
home to the bottom side, Greuther Fürth: it's all the players' fault. "It 
doesn't matter what formation and what tactics I employ if the players don't 
give it their all," grumbled the coach. "I'm very angry." One wonders how long 
the supporters, the board and the local media can be fobbed off with such 
transparent rhetoric. Werder slipped down to 14th and within six points of the 
relegation play-off spot.

• In said spot, Augsburg continue to exceed expectations. The coach Markus 
Weinzierl notched up another outstanding win, 1-0 to Hamburg, although his team 
were of course fortunate to meet HSV in one of those "we can make the Europa 
League" weeks, when the northerners reliably prove to themselves that they 
can't.

Results: Wolfsburg 1-1 Düsseldorf, Dortmund 5-1 Freiburg, Bremen 2-2 Fürth, 
Nürnberg 3-0 Schalke, Hoffenheim 0-0 Mainz, Hamburger SV 0-1 Augsburg, 
Leverkusen 1-2 Bayern, Frankfurt 1-2 Stuttgart, Gladbach 1-0 Hannover.
 