
Arsène Wenger has urged his Arsenal players to remain calm, particularly if 
the chance to complete aChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> escape beckons, as he 
suggested that Olympiakos could be undermined by a “fear factor”. They will 
qualify for the last 16 if they win by two clear goals or better Olympiakos’ 
3-2 win over them at the Emirates in September and Wenger said his players were 
ready to put into practice the lessons they had learned from previous European 
heartbreaks.

The club’s Champions League hopes – and their proud record of having made it 
to the second phase for each of the past 15 seasons – has come down to a head 
to head withOlympiakos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> at the 
Georgios Karaiskakis Stadium on Wednesday night and Wenger made particular 
reference to last season’s last-16 exit against Monaco.

Three-one down from the first leg at the Emirates, Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> were 2-0 up in the return tie 
with 11 minutes to go, and glory within reach. But they did not have the 
composure to take the decisive step. Wenger said that this had to change 
against Olympiakos.

Arsenal’s trip to Olympiakos has familiar feel but needs an unfamiliar ending 
| David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/08/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-preview>
“From the Monaco tie [last year], especially, we can learn from what happened 
to us,” Wenger said, when the recent near misses against the French club, 
Bayern Munich and Milan were mentioned. “Overall, the game we played in Monaco 
was very positive but maybe we rushed a little bit in the last 10 minutes . We 
played quite well and with the right patience until the last 10 minutes, until 
we rushed.”

Olympiakos have won every match that they have played this season – apart from 
their two Champions League group ties against Bayern – and their 4-3 victory at 
Panthrakikos on Saturday set a new domestic record for consecutive wins from 
the beginning of a season, breaking the club’s own mark from 1966-67.

It is now 12 out of 12 for Olympiakos in the Greek Super League and they are 
tantalisingly close to the last 16 in Europe’s elite competition. Wenger, 
though, suggested that if Arsenal could panic them, things might unravel.

“We play against a side that is, at the moment, qualified but they can lose 
what they have very quickly and that can create a fear factor,” Wenger said. 
“The best way for us to achieve the qualification is to believe in our quality.

“Our record [of 15 straight qualifications] is very important. There is 
nothing more to say than that – it is very important. We want to do well in 
Europe and the only way to do well is to do it tomorrow against Olympiakos. 
They are a good side but we know we can do it. The team will be highly focused. 
It is a big significance for us.”

Wenger’s squad has well-documented injury problems – the manager is currently 
without seven players, including Alexis Sánchez, Santi Cazorla and Francis 
Coquelin – and his major selection decision relates to Theo Walcott, and 
whether he is ready to start.

Walcott returned from a hamstring injury as a 64th-minute substitute in the 
home win over Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/arsenal-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
on Saturday but there is a difference between being fit and being fit to start. 
The signs here were that Walcott will again be used as a substitute.

Wenger insisted that if his players took care of their individual 
performances, the needed goals and result would follow and there was defiance 
to his words when he looked ahead to the possibilities if his team could 
qualify.

“Of course, we can be dangerous if we go through because we come from far,” 
Wenger said. “If you look at the numbers since the start of the Champions 
League group stage‚ we have played with 10 men in Zagreb, we scored an own goal 
at home to Olympiakos; every single game we were a bit unlucky.

“But if we get through, we will be dangerous, that is for sure. At the moment, 
we have two or three super-favourites and whoever gets through tonight or 
tomorrow will have to chase them.” 
 