
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> hailed his 
players’ “great resilience and mental strength” after Arsenal scored three 
times in the final 20 minutes at Bournemouth to complete a remarkable fightback 
and escape with a point at the end of a thrilling game. Trailing 3-0 and 
subjected to chants from their supporters mocking their performance as 
“embarrassing”, Arsenal turned the match on its head when Olivier Giroud headed 
an injury-time equaliser.

Olivier Giroud caps Arsenal’s fightback to earn point in Bournemouth thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
It felt like a point gained in the context of what had gone on earlier, yet 
will ultimately be viewed as two dropped when it comes to the title race.Arsenal
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> are eight points behind 
Chelsea, who also have a game in hand.

Wenger acknowledged his team “suffered defensively” on a night when Ryan 
Fraser, who scored Bournemouth’s third goal, tormented Héctor Bellerín. The 
Arsenal manager claimed Bellerín was carrying an injury and once again 
expressed his annoyance that his team had been asked to play twice in the space 
of two days whileBournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> 
had an additional 24 hours’ rest.

Arsenal lost Francis Coquelin with a hamstring injury in the first half and 
Wenger withdrew Laurent Koscielny in the second half because the defender was 
suffering with cramp. Bournemouth also inflicted plenty of damage, with the 
early goals from Charlie Daniels and Callum Wilson seeing the home team race 
into a deserved two-goal lead.

Alexis Sánchez pulled one back for Arsenal in the 70th minute, Lucas Pérez 
superbly volleyed in their second and Giroud, after Simon Francis had a little 
harshly received a straight red card for a challenge on Aaron Ramsey, scored 
the third.

“It was a physical test and a mental test for us,” Wenger said. “A physical 
test because we had problems to start to cope with the pace of Bournemouth. 
Defensively we had some problems. You have to acknowledge the quality of 
Bournemouth, congratulations to them. But also it’s too uneven to have only two 
days to play against a team that had more than three days rest and it took us a 
while to get back into the game.

“On top of that we were a bit unlucky as well, we conceded a penalty, and with 
70 minutes played we were 3-0 down, so it was a mental test. But we succeeded 
because we have a great resilience in the team and great mental strength, and 
that came out. In the end we were even frustrated not to win the game.”

Bournemouth caused Arsenal no end of problems for an hour, in particular 
through the pace of Wilson, Josh King and Fraser. “We suffered defensively in 
some positions but they scored four against Liverpool, so they can score goals, 
it’s a team who is dangerous,” Wenger said. “But defensively we had some 
weaknesses that were unusual.”

Giroud has scored in three successive games. “I said on Sunday that Giroud can 
score important goals, he has done that again,” Wenger said. “I also think 
Pérez scored an exceptional goal of pure class. But we have mixed feelings 
after a game like that. We wanted three points and we got one. But when you are 
3-0 down after 70 minutes you take a point.”

Eddie Howe was full of praise for his own players, describing them as 
“exceptional” and admitting they were devastated in the changing room 
afterwards. He described the decision of the referee, Michael Oliver, to send 
off Francis as “harsh” but felt the key moment in the match was 12 minutes 
earlier when Sánchez scored Arsenal’s first goal. “That changed the momentum of 
the game in a moment when really we looked quite comfortable,” the Bournemouth 
manager said.
 