
Arsène Wenger is adamant that his Arsenal side have “no reason to panic” 
despite the possibility of finishing second in the Champions League group stage 
for the fifth consecutive year following their2-2 draw against Paris 
Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/arsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report>
 at the Emirates Stadium.

Although qualification in the last 16 was already secured for the 14th 
successive season, with the 2-2 draw the Gunners missed the opportunity to 
claim the victory that would have taken them through as group winners. Despite 
their third draw in as many games, Wenger believes his side will convert those 
type of results into wins.

PSG and Lucas draw Arsenal’s sting to seize initiative in Group A
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/arsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report>
When asked if he would be glad when November is over, he replied: “No, I 
believe I have be careful of the choice of my words because if I say stuttering 
it comes back in the next press conference.

“I think there is a special spirit in the squad and the consistency of the 
results. We are unbeaten for 18 games and sometimes you go through a spell with 
such momentum, where you win a little bit less. It’s down to us to continue 
without losing a game but also to convert the draws into wins. But there is no 
reason to panic.

“Overall I believe that we were committed, for periods, dominant. But the 
start of the game was in favour of PSG because we let them play too 
comfortably, then in the last 20 minutes of the first half we pushed up and we 
came to make it 1-1. We had a strong start again in the second half where we 
were dominant until it was 2-1. After we dropped off and did not maintain the 
pressure and we paid for that.”

With an eye on Arsenal’s possible last‑16 opponents, Wenger is unsure if 
finishing second could be a bad omen, having been knocked out at that stage for 
the past six seasons.

“At the moment we are second but it’s not over,” Wenger said. “We have a 90% 
chance to finish second, but we wanted to finish first. At the moment we 
haven’t lost a game in this group. Overall we have done the job well. Will it 
be enough for us to finish first? I don’t know.

“Will it be good or bad for us? I think we have to wait for the draw because, 
if you look at all of the groups, you cannot really guess if it is good or bad.

“The advantage of finishing first is that you play the second leg at home. But 
for me, what is more disappointing is that we wanted to win the game and we 
didn’t win and that is disappointing.”

PSG remain top of Group A after the draw but Unai Emery believes his side have 
not secured top spot just yet. “We still have to play against Ludogorets, but 
we’re currently top and that’s important,” Emery said. “We deserved that in 
terms of the way the game went.

“We deserved a draw to secure top spot. Analyse the two games against Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and we do deserve it.”
 