
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> flirted with danger 
before coming from behind to win a hugely entertaining Cup tie, proving in the 
process that the game of two halves is a cliche that can occasionally be 
descriptive. They were well on top even before Olivier Giroud’s late winner but 
put in such a disjointed first half performance that the Championship side 
could easily have turned round two or three in front.

Perhaps Arsenal would still have come back, they seem quite good at recoveries 
these days, though it is the lapses in defensive concentration to keep going 
behind in the first place that must worry Arsène Wenger.

Preston gave a tremendous account of themselves in the first half, and hung on 
grittily to almost secure a replay in the second, though will forever wonder 
how Jordan Hugill and Callum Robinson missed inviting early chances to put the 
Gunners under real pressure.

Preston North End 1-2 Arsenal: FA Cup third round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/07/preston-north-end-v-arsenal-fa-cup-third-round-live>
Wenger admitted he had been angry at the interval. “We are in the Premier 
League and we were being dominated,” he said. “I didn’t want to go home and be 
out of theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tonight.” That 
has never happened to Wenger, who has yet to make a third round exit, but the 
most successful manager the Cup has seen knew this was an escape. “I would like 
to congratulate Preston for the way they played, they caused us many problems 
and we had to dig deep,” he said. “The only positive at half time was that we 
were only one goal down. I would also like to thank Olivier Giroud for another 
late comeback. He kept his focus when he wasn’t in the team, he showed me his 
qualities and that’s why I made him captain.”

The home side got off to an ideal start. The Preston manager, Simon Grayson, 
had given Aiden McGeady a huge billing in the buildup, talking of his quick 
feet and licence to run at opponents with the ball, and the Everton loanee lit 
up a foggy Deepdale after just seven minutes. Cutting inside to beat one 
defender then bamboozling Aaron Ramsey with a pirouette that brought a gasp of 
admiration from the crowd, McGeady looked up to find the Arsenal back line also 
admiring his footwork and lost no time in moving the ball inside Nacho Monreal 
for Robinson to open the scoring after Hugill’s attempt was blocked.

The same combination almost struck again midway through the first half, with 
McGeady opening up Arsenal through the middle then sending Paul Gallagher on an 
overlap only for Robinson to see a header stopped on the line from the eventual 
cross. Arsenal were in the sort of disarray that saw them gothree goals down to 
Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, and Preston really should have gone two up within half an hour after creating 
then spurning a marvellous opportunity in front of goal. This time it was 
Robinson teeing up Hugill for what ought to have been a simple tap-in with the 
Arsenal defence shredded and David Ospina hopelessly exposed, yet though 
Robinson put his ball across the six-yard line in exactly the right place he 
perhaps put a little too much pace on the pass and his partner was unable to 
reach it. Preston had all the time and space they needed to double their lead, 
though just lacked a little composure at a crucial moment.

Ben Pearson brought a save from Ospina with a fierce shot from distance before 
Arsenal even began to look like getting back into the game, Paul Huntington and 
Chris Maxwell combining to halt a Ramsey dribble in the area when the Welshman 
seemed more likely to score. A minute after that Giroud put too much weight on 
a cross that should have allowed Alex Iwobi to equalise. Preston had been 
warned, yet they still went close to a second goal before the interval when 
Gallagher’s lob over Ospina had to be cleared off the line by Monreal. The 
inexperienced Ainsley Maitland-Niles was having a tough time trying to mark 
McGeady but stuck to his task well, preventing one cross from the left before 
Preston put the ball in the net from Gallagher’s cross from the other flank, 
only to be recalled for a foul on the goalkeeper by Huntington.

Tom Ince hits winner as Derby fight back to shock West Bromwich Albion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/west-bromwich-albion-derby-county-fa-cup-match-report>
It was a lively Cup tie and any complaints about it being a little one-sided 
were answered when Arsenal equalised right at the start of the second half. 
Less than a minute had elapsed after the restart when Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain 
sent over a cross from the left that Preston never properly cleared, leaving 
Ramsey to make room for a shot and beat Maxwell with a rising drive from the 
edge of the area for his first goal of the season.

Arsenal were such a different proposition in the second half it was tempting 
to wonder what they had been playing at in the first. Suddenly Preston were 
struggling to get out of their own half and the visitors were moving the ball 
around with their usual pace and precision.

Gabriel was booked for an ugly foul on Hugill before his defensive partner 
Mustafi came close to putting Arsenal in front, meeting a corner at the near 
post but finding Maxwell equal to his effort. Giroud swept in a cross from an 
offside position as Arsenal stepped up their attempts to find a winner in the 
final 15 minutes.

When it finally arrived with only a minute of normal time to spare it was 
Giroud who provided it, clipping a shot inside Maxwell’s post from close range 
via a slight deflection after Lucas Pérez had set up the opportunity with a 
neat back-heel to keep the ball in play. Danny Welbeck was on the field at that 
point, making his first appearance in eight months as Arsenal sought to avoid a 
replay. He came through unscathed, even bringing a save from Maxwell with a 
rasping stoppage-time shot, and Arsenal will be as relieved about that as they 
were over Giroud’s late winner.

The manner of defeat was cruel on Preston, who have been sandbagged in the 
last minute in their last two home games. “We made Arsenal look very ordinary 
in the first half, but at the top level you have to take your chances,” Grayson 
said. We didn’t get the second goal when we were on top.”
 