
To Arsène Wenger, it remains one of the “craziest games” of his 20-year 
Arsenal career. When his team defeatedReading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> 7-5 at the Madejski Stadium in 
the League Cup four years ago, it was an occasion that tested the boundaries of 
credibility. It is possible that there might never be another game quite like 
it and, on this occasion, Wenger could content himself with victory against the 
same opponents, by the same margin and in the same competition but with rather 
lower levels of stress.

The Arsenal manager played his second string, as he had in the previous round 
at Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/nottingham-forest-arsenal-efl-cup-third-round-match-report>
, and it was Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain who made the difference.

Aleksandar Mitrovic double caps knockout Newcastle rout of Preston
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/newcastle-united-preston-north-end-efl-cup-match-report>
The winger scored both of the goals – the first, a vicious low shot after a 
Reading defensive breakdown; the second, a have-a-go hit that deflected in off 
Jordan Obita – and, all of a sudden,Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> are into the quarter-finals.

All of a sudden, Oxlade-Chamberlain has five goals in all competitions this 
season; it represents his best return over a campaign in an Arsenal shirt and 
he has given Wenger another nudge when he considers his selection for the 
Premier League.

Oxlade-Chamberlain has started only three league fixtures so far this season 
and he has spoken of how he might have to consider his future at the club if 
the situation does not improve. Happily for Wenger, it appears that he and Theo 
Walcott are inspiring each other to greater heights on the right flank – 
Walcott has started the season in fine form – and the Frenchman seemed to 
suggest that, at 23, Oxlade-Chamberlain was coming of age.

“Before, you felt he acted in front of goal like he didn’t deserve to score,” 
Wenger said. “Now, he has added some belief to his finishing and we have hope 
that every time he has the ball, something can happen. He has worked a lot 
mentally to be really focused. He is not a young player any more. At 23, you 
become a player who is a finished article.”

Jaap Stam, the Reading manager, enjoyed a few battles with Wenger when he was 
a Manchester United player. His debut for the club came in the Charity Shield 
defeat to a Nicolas Anelka-inspired Arsenal in 1998 and he was a part of the 
United team that edged the famous 1999 FA Cup semi-final.

There was to be no fairytale for him here and Reading never truly threatened 
to record a first victory over Arsenal at the 14th time of asking.

The visitors were neat and tidy, and they remained true to the passing 
principals that have marked Stam’s fledging managerial career.

He is from the Dutch school and, in his first managerial job, he has made it 
plain that he wants to build from the back and play along the ground.

Unfortunately for him, Oxlade-Chamberlain’s first goal was an illustration of 
what can happen when the best of intentions go wrong. Joey van den Berg came 
short for an Ali Al-Habsi goal-kick but it felt like a risk for the Reading 
goalkeeper to play it to him.

He did so, regardless, and Van Den Berg felt the pressure from the red shirts 
that surged towards him. He could do nothing more than flick the ball in the 
direction of Oxlade-Chamberlain, who collected it and darted into the area. 
Tyler Blackett did not get close enough to him and Oxlade‑Chamberlain fizzed a 
low shot into the far corner.

Reading failed to quicken the pulses of the vociferous travelling supporters 
too regularly in the first half and it was Wenger’s team who came to call the 
tune. Carl Jenkinson, playing his first game for Arsenal since May 2014, worked 
Habsi in the early running while Lucas Perez squared weakly towards Jeff 
Reine-Adelaide when clean through and Tennai Watson got back to challenge. 
There was also the moment when Ainsley Maitland-Niles curled narrowly off 
target.

Stam sent on Yann Kermorgant on 56 minutes and the striker’s first involvement 
was to leap and extend Emi Martínez with a firm header. But it was Arsenal’s 
substitute centre-forward, Olivier Giroud, who entered to a great ovation, who 
helped Arsenal to turn the screw.

Giroud drew a marvellous save out of Habsi with a header and, in the scramble 
that followed, Liam Moore cleared off the line.

Alex Iwobi would mess up a glorious chance after Habsi had denied 
Oxlade-Chamberlain and Iwobi also saw a blast tipped over the crossbar.

Arsenal were getting closer and they found the knockout punch after an 
unlikely run to the byline from the centre-half Rob Holding and a lay-off from 
Giroud. Oxlade-Chamberlain could argue that he had earned his break off Obita. 
Reading were denied a late consolation when Martínez made a fine double-save to 
deny Liam Kelly and Dom Samuel.
 