
The annus horribilis of the England defender and Notts County captain, Laura 
Bassett, was completed with what TV replays showed to be an extremely dubious 
sending-off decision asNotts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> went down to an Arsenal side 
inspired by two first-half goals by the midfielder Jordan Nobbs.

In July Bassett was the scorer of the unlucky own goal that handed Japan 
victory in England’s World Cup semi-final in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/01/womens-world-cup-heartbreaking-own-goal-kills-englands-dreams>
. Back on home soil a month later, the 32-year-old centre-back captained County 
in their1-0 FA Cup final defeat to Chelsea at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/01/chelsea-win-womens-fa-cup-final-with-1-0-win-over-notts-county>
.

And after 35 minutes of Sunday’s Continental Cup final at Rotherham United’s 
stadium the formerArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> player 
saw red for a challenge that sent the midfielder Vicky Losada tumbling but not 
before Bassett had clearly made contact with the ball.

“It was a strong challenge,” said the Notts manager, Rick Passmoor, “but 
Laura’s won the ball first and there were no studs showing with her trailing 
leg. The sending off decision changed the game completely.

Notts County justify rapid advancement with big crowds and a Wembley final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/31/notts-county-meadow-lane-wembley-womens-fa-cup>
“Laura’s down, she’s hugely disappointed. She’s a leader, a great character. 
She had a great World Cup despite that own goal; things haven’t gone right for 
her or us in our two Cup finals, but she’s a credit to our club and the women’s 
game.

“And I’m immensely proud of all the girls. They put in a superb effort and on 
another day we could have come out victorious, because we created a lot of 
chances and could have got some goals.”

Nine minutes before Bassett’s dismissal Nobbs had opened the scoring, and her 
second goal four minutes before half-time proved a big enough cushion against 
spirited 10-player opposition before the substitute Chioma Ubogagu completed 
the scoring in stoppage time.

The Arsenal manager, Pedro Martinez Losa, whose team’s victory brought the 
club its fourth Continental Cup triumph in five seasons and a 42nd trophy in 23 
years – but the first for the Spanish coach – said: “I won trophies in Spain 
and in America, but they say the last one is always the best and hopefully 
there will be more to come with Arsenal.

“It has been a tricky season for us because of injuries and today was a 
difficult match, but I am proud of the way we played and to end the season with 
a trophy is great for the players and the club.”

Losa’s side had been on the back foot for much of the early stages of the 
match as County, looking to make amends for their poor FA Cup final 
performance, started briskly but missed a couple of early chances.

At the other end the Spanish striker Natalia forced the goalkeeper Carly 
Telford into a good 20th-minute save before Nobbs broke the deadlock, the 
England midfielder racing clear down the right flank before drilling a 
narrow-angled shot just inside the near post.

The game’s key moment arrived when Bassett – with an incredulous look at the 
referee, Jane Simms, as she flashed her red card – was dismissed. The game was 
all but lost six minutes later as Nobbs hit a 25-yard drive into the roof of 
the net.

All but lost perhaps, but the 10 women of Notts produced a response that was 
deserving of goals. They went close either side of half-time, Rachel Williams 
heading against the crossbar seconds before the break and her strike partner 
Ellen White having a 48th-minute shot well saved by the Dutch goalkeeper Sari 
Van Veenendaal.

The Canadian midfielder Desiree Scott sent a 15-yard drive narrowly over the 
bar as Passmoor’s team continued to press, but their efforts came to naught and 
Arsenal’s to three when Ubogagu cut in from the left to roll the ball over the 
line for the final goal.
 