
Arsène Wenger was confident of signing the Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> attacking midfielder Mesut 
Ozil for €50m (£42.5m) to provide Arsenal's support with the statement buy they 
have craved. After a long summer in which the manager has expressed his 
confidence that a big name would arrive and the club's increased financial 
firepower would claim a prize, he raided Madrid for a player he has long 
admired.

The move stood almost to treble Arsenal's previous record outlay on a player 
and make Ozil the second most expensive signing in British football history, 
behind Fernando Torres, who joined Chelsea from Liverpool for £50m in 2011. The 
24-year-old agreed terms on a five-year contract, worth a basic £150,000 a 
week, with bonuses on top and he underwent hisArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> medical in Germany, where he was 
preparing with his national team for a World Cup qualifier against Austria on 
Friday.

The paperwork was being processed at 9pm and Arsenal did not envisage any 
last-minute hitches on a deal that they felt would rescue what has been a 
testing transfer window for them.

The club had previously looked to A-list strikers, namely Gonzalo Higuaín, 
Luis Suárez and Wayne Rooney, only to fail to entice any of them while a loan 
move for Chelsea's Demba Ba broke down close to the deadline. Arsenal suggested 
that Chelsea were reluctant to loan Ba to a Premier League rival but it is 
understood that the west London club called the deal off when an agreement 
could not be reached over the size of the loan fee.

To many onlookers Arsenal's priority had been a top-class centre-forward 
followed, in no particular order, by a defensive midfielder, a centre-half and 
a goalkeeper. A midfield playmaker had appeared to be further down the 
wish-list but the opportunity to sign an international like Ozil does not come 
around very often and Wenger authorised the move, even if the fee might have 
gone against his natural instincts.

Arsenal's record signing was Andrey Arshavin at £15m from Zenit St Petersburg 
in 2009. The attacking midfielder was released on 30 June on the expiry of his 
contract.

Wenger had said on Sunday night, after the 1-0 derby win over Tottenham 
Hotspur, that he was prepared to pay "a bit over the market, as long as it is 
not crazy" and he duly stretched himself. Ozil is the king of the assist – he 
has 72 over the past five seasons – while his technique and smooth passing 
style mark him out as a fans' favourite. At Gareth Bale's unveiling as a Real 
player on Monday afternoon, the crowd had chanted: "Don't sell Ozil."

Wenger's interest in Ozil dates to 2007, when the player was at Schalke. He 
moved to Werder Bremen in 2008 and made a significant impression upon the 
English conscience in 2009, at the European Under-21 Championship final, when 
he orchestrated Germany's 4-0 destruction of England in the final. Ozil starred 
for the senior Germany team at the 2010 World Cup and, although Wenger tried to 
sign him that summer, he moved to Real for €15m.

Ozil has had his reservations about the switch to Arsenal and only last 
Wednesday he said he would be staying at Real. "A lot has been written about 
other teams but I have the coach's confidence and I feel good," he said. "It's 
a pleasure and an honour to play for Real Madrid." When he joined Real, he had 
said that it was the one club a player could not refuse while he subsequently 
spoke of possibly ending his career at the Bernabéu.

Wenger, though, sought to talk him round and Ozil also worried that his 
chances in attacking midfield stood to be restricted at Real. The Spanish club 
have not only signed Bale this summer but also Isco from Málaga to supplement 
their existing options. Manchester United and Paris Saint-Germain had monitored 
Ozil's situation over the previous days but it was Arsenal who made the firm 
move.

Wenger had already signed the striker Yaya Sanogo and the former Arsenal 
midfielder Mathieu Flamini, both as free agents, and he added the goalkeeper 
Emiliano Viviano on a season-long loan from the Serie B clubPalermo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> on Monday. The 27-year-old, 
capped six times by Italy, spent last season on loan at Fiorentina, where he 
kept 11 clean sheets in 32 Serie A appearances. He has been signed to provide 
cover and competition for the first choice, Wojciech Szczesny.
 