
9.35pm GMT 

Full-time:

Arsenal are into the last 16 of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> after a patchy 
performance punctuated with two excellent goals.

9.34pm GMT 

89 min:

Herrera tries to deny Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> a 
clean sheet but his 25-yard drive skims wide.

9.32pm GMT 

87 min:

The verb that comes to mind here is 'to peter', as in 'to peter out'. Péter 
has a different meaning in French. "With regard to 83 mins," blurts Simon 
McMahon. "My old dad used to say, you can't fart against thunder. Which is what
Montpellier <https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> 
have found out to their cost tonight."

Updated at 9.34pm GMT

9.26pm GMT 

84 min:

Arsenal substitutions: Cazorla and Giroud off, Coquelin and Gervinho on.

9.25pm GMT 

83 min:

Deplagne booked for chopping down Cazorla. Arteata swings in the freekick from 
the left. Everyone misses it and it curls just wide. "Dissipates, Paul, steam 
dissipates," parps William Marzouk. "Like a fart in the wind." If you're lucky.

9.22pm GMT 

81 min:

Wonderful patient probing from Arsenal, before Podolski threads a ball through 
to Giroud, who has only the keeper to beat. But Jourden foils him!

Updated at 9.25pm GMT

9.21pm GMT 

79 min:

Montpellier substitution: Estrada off, Marveaux on.

9.20pm GMT 

78 min:

Schalke have taken the lead against Olympiakos, which means that if the scores 
stay the same, Schalke and Arsenal will be through to the next round with a 
group game to spare. "You've probably already forgotten you wrote it and don't 
care, but your comment about steam earlier [56 mins] wasn't actually wrong," 
interjects Mark Jelbert. "Steam is formed of water droplets not water vapour so 
it can evaporate."

9.18pm GMT 

76 min:

Managing proceedings well? Not you, Laurent Koscielny! Or should that be David 
Luiz? The Arsenal defender dawdles on the ball outside his own area and then 
gets a yellow card for clumping into the Montpellier player who nicked it off 
him.

9.17pm GMT 

75 min:

Arsenal have at times in the past been guilty of throwing leads away through 
reckless attacking; here they're managing proceedings well.

9.15pm GMT 

72 min:

Montpellier are dead. It's just a question now of how much dancing Arsenal 
want to do on their graves. Cazorla and Wilshere have done a little jig just 
now, but Jourden rose from the beyond to make an excellent save from the 
Spaniard.

9.13pm GMT 

70 min:

A lovely move by Arsenal concludes with Sagna spooning in a fine cross that 
Giroud just fails to reach.

9.10pm GMT 

68 min:

Montpellier changes: Cabella and Charbonnier off, Martin and Herrera on. 
Arsenal change: Oxlade-Chamberlain off, Ramsey on.

9.09pm GMT 

65 min:

More good work by Oxlade-Chamberlain, who cuts in from the right again and 
plays a smart ball to Podolski. The German fancies another spectacular effort, 
this time from 25 yards. It's diverted behind for a corner.

9.08pm GMT 

64 min:

Yellow card for Bedimo for hauling back Oxlade-Chamberlain, who's had an 
exciting game without quite reaching the level that Walcott has sown in recent 
weeks.

9.05pm GMT 

GOAL! Arsenal 2-0 Montpellier (Podolski 62')

If the first goal was good, that was an absolute belter! Oxlade-Chamberlain 
made a searing run in from the right before Giroud clipped a dainty pass into 
the path of Podolski, who met it with a superb volley top crash the ball into 
the net from 15 yards!

9.01pm GMT 

59 min:

Having said that (in the previous minute), Giroud has just been pulled back 
for offside when he was, in fact, on, and clean through.

9.01pm GMT 

58 min:

Prediction: Arsenal will get a penalty tonight. They're getting almost all of 
the little decisions so far and you get the impression if they appeal for 
something in the Montpellier box they will probably get it.

8.59pm GMT 

56 min:

The game is going through another of its lulls. Every time you think Arsenal 
are getting up a head of steam, it evaporates. Hold on, steam doesn't 
evaporate. Cabella saves me from trying to sort the metaphor out by giving me 
some proper action to describe: if a hopeful smash from 25 yards constitutes 
proper action. Easy save for Szczesny. 

Updated at 9.06pm GMT

8.55pm GMT 

54 min:

Koscielny shows impressive speed to scurry across and beat Mounier to a pass 
into the right-hand channel.

8.53pm GMT 

52 min:

Oops! A slip by Sagna allowed Mounir to romp free down the left and into the 
box. But the full-back recovers sufficiently to divert the cross out for a 
corner .

8.52pm GMT 

50 min:

Arsenal have cranked the tempo up now and look intent on finishing t his off 
early doors ...

8.51pm GMT 

GOAL! Arsenal 1-0 Montpellier (Wilshere 48')

That's a lovely goal! Podolski and Vermaelen combined well down the left 
before the Belgian hoisted a cross to the back post. Giroud laid it back with a 
dainty header and Wilshere, having surged from deep, finished beautifully, 
clipping it over the out-rushing keeper and into the net!

Updated at 9.10pm GMT

8.48pm GMT 

46 min:

No changes in personnel, and no noticeable changes in play since the 
resumption. And no change in WIlshere's general approach, as he clobbers into 
Belhanda to leave the schemer with a dead leg.

8.34pm GMT 

Half-time

Arsenal are better, not not enough to have opened the scoring. They came close 
when Koscielny hit the bar and Podolski slashed wide when clean through but 
mostly Arsenal have been unable to find a cutting final ball and their passing 
all over the pitch has been patchy. The flatness of their start seemed to buoy 
Montpellier, who don't quite have enough potency up front to suggest they could 
really shock Arsenal but you'd never know.

8.30pm GMT 

45 min:

Belhanda tries to end the half with a sucker punch, Belhanda cutting through 
the middle before having a ping from 25 yards. Three yards over it goes.

8.29pm GMT 

44 min:

Arsenal re-assert themselves, through the ubiquitous Cazorla. After some 
conjuring from him Oxlade-Chamberlain curled in a delicious cross from the 
right. But Congre just beat Giroud to it.

8.28pm GMT 

42 min:

Montpellier have come back into things in the last few minutes, enjoying a 
spell of possession and, when they lose it, winning it back quickly through 
pesky pressing.

8.25pm GMT 

39 min:

Good work by Sagna to win a corner, which Arteta takes (Cazrola and Wilshere 
both having messed up corners earlier). Arteta messes it up, allowing 
Montpellier to launch a rapid counter. Notorious hatchetman Cazorla decides to 
stamp out the danger with a cynical trip, copping a booking and giving 
Montpellier a freekick about 40 yards out, which is of no use to them.

8.22pm GMT 

37 min:

A miss! Arsenal are just lacking the final touch, otherwise they would be 
comfortably in front by now. Podolski did well a moment ago to dash in from the 
left and exchange passes with Cazorla. But then, as the keeper hared off his 
line to close him down, the German tonked just wide from 10 yards.

8.20pm GMT 

35 min:

Montpellier are struggling to get into the Arsenal half for any significant 
length of time now. Meanwhile, the latest Arsenal attack comes to an abrupt end 
as Congre crunches into Vermaelen with a splendid tackle.

8.19pm GMT 

33 min:

Arsenal are exerting serious pressure now, with the visitors having to strain 
to keep them at bay. WIlshere and Arteta were both within millemetres of 
playing decisive passes just now. 

8.17pm GMT 

30 min:

Koscielny injects a bit of urgency into proceedings with a barnstorming run 
from his own half to the edge of the Montpellier box. Eventually he is stopped 
but Yanga-Mbia then dithers on the ball and Podolski nicks it off him and fires 
just wide from 20 yards.

8.15pm GMT 

28 min:

It's all a bit scrappy from Arsenal so far, and some of their players - such 
as Wilshere and Podolski - have been guilty of wayward passes far too often 
already.

8.12pm GMT 

26 min:

A fien snapshot by Oxlade-Chamberlain at the edge of the box brings a decent 
save from Jourden.

8.11pm GMT 

24 min:

Giroud tries to give his old club a reminder of what they're missing ... but 
it is he who is missing, from the edge of the area and by about 15 yards.

8.09pm GMT 

22 min:

Belhanda tricks his way past Koscielny and bears down on the box ... but gets 
over-excited and tries a through-ball without checking that there was any there 
to receive it, which there wasn't.

8.06pm GMT 

19 min:

Arsenal are caught between being too passive when Montpellier have the ball 
and too eager when they themselves have it. Cazorla chips in with the latest 
example of the latter, dribbling past two opponents before attempting a killer 
pass ... that sails into touch.

Updated at 8.43pm GMT

8.02pm GMT 

16 min:

It's pandemonium in and around the Montpellier box as Oxlade-Chamberlain 
livens up some ponderous possession play with an anarchic run towards the area. 
He then slides it into Cazorla, who is upended by a defender but the ref waves 
play on and the ball bounces around a bit before Oxlade-Chamberlain tries to 
break through again. Montpellier, despite being all a-fluster, eventually 
smother the danger.

7.59pm GMT 

14 min:

Tanga-Mbiwa demonstrates one of the reasons why he has been deployed in 
midfield rather than his usual position in central defence, as he dissects the 
Arsenal rearguard with an astute pass. Mounier races after it ... but Szczesny 
surges off his line and just about beats him to it.

Updated at 7.59pm GMT

7.58pm GMT 

11 min:

Close! Koscielny rocks the bar with a powerful header. from a Vermaelen cross. 
As Montpellier try to scramble the ball back upfield, Arsenal win it back and 
then Mertesacker suddenly thinks he's on the dancefloor, jinking and jiving 
past two defenders before a third puts an end to his living dream at the edge 
of the area.

7.55pm GMT 

9 min:

Cazorla curls in the corner. Mertesacker jumps for it but Congre nods it 
behind.

7.55pm GMT 

8 min:

The home fans find their voices for the first time to express their approval 
for a decent Arsenal move that culminated in Oxlade-Chamberlain winning a 
corner. "Regarding the 'bane mask' in the caption: it's great to see some geeky 
references on an MBM," gushes Ryan Dunne. "Surely a more commonsensical 
exercise than those Soulmates adds in The Fiver (that said, I am currently 
single)."

7.52pm GMT 

5 min:

having detected Arsenal slovenliness, Montpellier are starting to fancy they 
could spring a surprise here and are stretching the home defence. Time for 
Wenger to start doing a rain dance in the sideline, for his players need a cold 
shower to wake them up.

7.51pm GMT 

3 min:

The atmosphere is flatter than a cat that has inadvertently tested the latest 
offering from Aveling & Porter. And Arsenal's start has been similarly 
downbeat. Montpellier have had little of the ball but almost woke the hosts up 
with their first attack, Cabella down the wing and putting in a cross that none 
of the defenders dealt with. They were lucky that no forward could get on the 
end of it.

7.46pm GMT 

1 min:

Uncharacteristically, Arteta hoofs it out of play within second of kick-off. 
That is a sure sign of complacency that will cost them this match, their place 
in the next round and Wenger his job. Ir am I reading too much into it?

7.45pm GMT 

There are some people on the pitch ...

... fortunately, they are the players so the match should be getting under way 
any minute now. Hands have been shaken, a coin tossed and token huddles 
performed: time to giddy up

7.18pm GMT 

Preamble:

Events at Stamford Bridge today gave another reminder of just what a cosy gig 
Arsene Wenger has and tonight's assignment should be pretty comfortable too. 
Montpellier have a clutch of nice players – Belhanda is a classy schemer and 
Yanga-Mbiwa is destined for big things – but are enduring a difficult season 
after last term's heroics are languishing like injured mice at the foot of the 
table in both France and the Champions League. Arsenal should make short of 
them. Like I'm making short work of this preamble. It's poetry, see, not rank 
laziness.

7.09pm GMT 

Teams:

Arsenal: Szzcesny; Sagna, Mertersacker, Koscielny, Vermaelen; Arteta, Cazorla, 
WIlshere; Ozlade-Chamberlain, Giroud, Podolski

Subs: Mannone, Ramsey, Coquelin, Arshavin, Jenkinson, Gervinho, Gibbs

Montpellier: Jourden; Deplagne, Congre, El Kaoutari, Bedimo; Cabella, 
Yanga-MBiwa, Belhanda, Estrade, Mounier; Charbonnier

Ref: F Aydinus (Turkey)

6.42pm GMT 

Evening

Paul will be here shortly. In the meantime, here's Amy Lawrence on Montpellier 
maverick Louis Nicollin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2012/nov/21/montpellier-louis-nicollin>
:

Imagine, if you possibly can, Malcolm Glazer sporting a mohawk haircut dyed 
red and white (or yellow and green for that matter). PictureRoman Abramovich 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/roman-abramovich?INTCMP=SRCH> making a public 
declaration that he will become a monk if his team brings success. Visualise
Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/sheikh-mansour?INTCMP=SRCH> joyously adding 
to his enormous collection of legendary football shirts. Try to conceive ofStan 
Kroenke <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/stan-kroenke?INTCMP=SRCH> 
publishing a comic book with a cartoon of himself on the front, to tell the 
story of his life in football.

In an era when the modern football owner is not renowned for dramatic 
gestures, Louis Nicollin stands out from the crowd. The larger than life 
president ofMontpellier 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/montpellier-football-team>-Herault SC has 
done all of the above, and much more, while driving his club forward over a 
period that encompasses four decades. Unyielding, outrageous, crude and 
famously explosive, it is safe to say that the experience of watching his team 
in theChampions League <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/championsleague> 
means more to him than it does to Glazer, Abramovich, Sheikh Mansour and 
Kroenke put together several times over. A local entrepreneur who made his 
fortune out of the family's business in waste collection, he says he had to 
pinch himself 20 times before believing the team he built was competing in such 
elevated company.

It is a pity that Montpellier, who travel to the Emirates on Wednesday, have 
not made more of an impression in their debut run in the competition because 
Nicollin's promise to check in to the nearest monastery if they managed to 
exceed all odds by winning Europe's most prestigious trophy was not announced 
lightly. "I will become a monk and as I have many fans who want me to become a 
monk, then so be it," he explained to Champions magazine.
 