
Atlético Madrid ended a run of three defeats and pulled three points clear at 
the top ofLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> with 
goals from Raúl García and Diego Costa setting them on the way to a 3-0 win at 
home toReal Valladolid.

Atlético came into the game at the Vicente Calderón stadium after resounding 
losses in both legs of their Copa del Rey semi-final against Real Madrid, 
either side of a surprise 2-0 La Liga reverse at promoted Almería. Their 
stumble on the south coast cost them first place. Barcelona, who were due to 
play Rayo Vallecano later on Saturday, and Real, who play Getafe on Sunday, can 
join them on 60 points from 24 matches if they win their games.

With a Champions League trip to Milan on Wednesday looming, Atlético needed a 
convincing performance to lift morale, and García gave them an ideal start in 
the third minute when he picked up Gabi's clever free-kick and scored with a 
first-time strike from the edge of the area.

A minute later García conjured a fine assist for Costa and the Brazil-born 
forward lifted the ball over the advancingValladolid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valladolid> goalkeeper Diego Mariño for 
his 21st league goal of the campaign.

Atlético played well within themselves for the rest of the match and the 
centre-back Diego Godin added a third in the 74th minute with a header from a 
Diego corner.

Bayern Munich, Arsenal's Champions League opponents on Wednesday, continued 
theirBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> march 
with a comfortable 4-0 win overFreiburg.

Dante headed Bayern into a 19th-minute lead and Xherdan Shaqiri scored with 
deflected shots in the 34th and 42nd. Claudio Pizarro completed the rout with 
two minutes remaining, as Bayern stretched their league record unbeaten run to 
46 games.

Hamburg slumped to their seventh consecutive defeat as Domi Kumbela scored a 
hat trick in the 4-2 win forEintracht Braunschweig.

Third-placed Borussia Dortmund defeated Frankfurt 4-0, Werder Bremen drew 1-1 
withBorussia Mönchengladbach, and Hoffenheim beat 10-man Stuttgart 4-1.
 