
Atlético Madrid’s new stadium will be sponsored by the Chinese property 
company Dalian Wanda Group and will be called the Wanda Metropolitano stadium, 
the club president Enrique Cerezo said on Friday.

Police confirm 83 potential suspects identified in football sexual abuse 
scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/police-confirm-83-potential-suspects-identified-in-child-sex-abuse-scandal>
Atlético will move from the Vicente Calderón, their home for the last 50 
years, to the new 67,000 capacity ground located to the north-east of the 
Spanish capital in August, 2017.

Wanda has had ties with Atlético since January 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/21/atletico-madrid-stake-chinese-conglomerate>
 when it acquired 20% of the club’s shares and began sponsoring the training 
ground.

“I am honoured to say we have reached an agreement with Wanda to name our new 
stadium. They are the best partners on our journey to keep working for a better 
future,” Cerezo told a news conference on Friday.

The new ground’s name is also a reference to the club’s first real stadium, 
the Metropolitano, where they played their first La Liga games and called home 
until moving to the Vicente Calderón in the south of the city in 1966.

“The fact Atlético thought of this second name is very exciting. It awakes a 
lot of sentiment for everyone who has Atlético in their blood,” added the 
striker Fernando Torres, who came through the club’s academy to become captain 
and returned in 2015. “Now soon I will be able to tell my grandfather that I 
played at the Metropolitano.”

The deal was signed on Friday in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> by representatives of Wanda and the 
club’s chief executive, Miguel Ángel Gil Marín, who hailed the move to the new 
stadium as another sign of Atlético’s growth.

Under the guidance of the charismatic coach, Diego Simeone, a former Atlético 
midfielder, the club have shed the tag of perennial underachievers to challenge 
Real Madrid and Barcelona as the top clubs in Spain.

Atlético broke Real’s and Barcelona’s 10-year stranglehold on the La Liga 
title in 2014 and have reached the Champions League final twice in the last 
three seasons.

“We are very excited by this deal. Atlético and Wanda are growing global 
brands that want to keep growing and reach even more places,” Gil Marín said.

“Wanda is a strategic partner and our change in stadium is not an isolated 
event. It’s a step forward to the future.”

Atlético also unveiled a modified badge which will be on their shirts next 
season.
 