
The attacking trio of Andy Keogh, Adam Taggart and Diego Castro led Perth Glory
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory> to their first A-League win 
in seven games on Thursday and coach Kenny Lowe hopes to see it continue.

Castro, last season’s Johnny Warren Medal winner, Keogh and Taggart had the 
potential coming into the new season of providing Glory with the firepower 
necessary to be genuine contenders.

Injuries to Castro and Taggart meant they have had limited time together but 
based on what they did in Thursday’s 2-1 win at home over the Wellington 
Phoenix, the fifth placed Glory could continue to rise up the table the more 
they play together.

David Squires on ... a true A-League hero: the ball boy who duped Tim Cahill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2017/jan/05/david-squires-on-a-true-a-league-hero-the-ball-boy-who-duped-tim-cahill>
Glory fell behind early with a Roy Krishna goal in the 11th minute but they 
responded on half-time with a long range bomb from captain Rostyn Griffiths. 
That sparked Perth into gear as the home side dominated the second half and it 
was Castro, Keogh and Taggart in attack who combined to create plenty of 
chances.

In the end a good ball from Castro put Keogh into space who delivered a 
pinpoint cross on his non-preferred left foot to Taggart who headed the goal 
that provided Perth with the match-winner.

It is that sort of work from the three that Lowe has been hoping to see all 
season and wants it to continue now that they are all on the pitch and healthy 
together. “That was fantastic and what a ball off Keogh. It was a great ball 
first from Cas to Keogh, and I don’t know where he got that from on his left 
foot but it was absolute quality,” Lowe said.

“Hopefully we can keep them out there, that’s only the fourth game they’ve 
played together and we’re into Round 14. Any side wants their good players on 
the pitch and fit and firing, and at the moment we seem to have those guys.”

Lowe is particularly impressed with the performances of Taggart with the 
Socceroos striker having overcome his calf injury to have five goals in six 
starts and nine appearances this season in just 492 minutes.

“He has scored five goals now and if you go from day one in his first game he 
scored,” Lowe said. “If you worked out goals per minute (one every 98.4 
minutes) with how long he’s been on the pitch, he would be right up there with 
anybody in the league.” Perth next plays on the road against the Newcastle Jets 
on Sunday 15 January.



 