
Formula One star Daniel Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daniel-ricciardo> has become the first 
Australian in five years to win a prestigious Laureus award, taking out the 
breakthrough of the year title in Shanghai on Wednesday.

The 25-year-old was honoured for his stellar debut season with Red Bull Racing 
in 2014, in which he claimed three grand prix victories plus five podium 
finishes. He was the only non-Mercedes driver to win a race and ended the year 
third in the overall driver’s championship.

Ricciardo is in Bahrain for Sunday’s grand prix and couldn’t be at Shanghai’s 
Grand Theatre, but in a video message said it was a privilege to earn the award.

“2014 is a year I’ll remember for a long time – it was definitely a 
breakthrough in my mind as well,” he said. “Standing on the top step of the 
podium a few times was icing on the cake.”

He was joined by another Australian on the winners list, as skateboarder 
Oliver Percovich received the Sport for Good award. Percovich in 2007 founded 
Skateistan – an organisation to help improve the lives youngsters in 
Afghanistan through skateboarding.

It has since built a school and indoor skate park in Kabul, and Mazar-e-Sharif 
and also funded construction of an indoor skate park in Phnom-Penh, Cambodia.

Not since 2010 has an Australian won a Laureus, when surfing queen Stephanie 
Gilmore was named action sportsperson of the year. Gilmore was again nominated 
for the award, but lost out to American skydiver Alan Eustace.

Only six other Australians have received the Cartier-crafted trophy, including 
Layne Beachley (2004), Cathy Freeman (2001) and Louise Sauvage (2000).

Tennis star Novak Djokovic was – for a second time – named world sportsman of 
the year, having first been bestowed the honour in 2011 following his first 
Wimbledon title.

“It has probably been my best year so far in my life,” said an absent 
Djokovic, who supplanted Rafael Nadal as world No1, got married and become a 
father in 2014.

The 27-year-old was voted ahead of beat MotoGP sensation Marc Marquez, world 
No1 golfer Rory McIlroy, football icon Cristiano Ronaldo, defendingFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> champion Lewis Hamilton and 
French pole vaulter Renaud Lavillenie.


Ethiopian athlete Genzebe Dibaba was named sportswoman of the year after 
breaking three world records in different events – the 1500m, 3000m and 
two-mile events – within two weeks last February.


The middle and long-distance runner is just the third person in history to 
achieve such a feat, along with Jesse Owens and Usain Bolt. “I am so happy - 
2014 was a great year for me ... I didn’t expect this,” the 24-year-old said.

Germany’s World Cup winning men’s football squad was named team of the year, 
having routed hosts Brazil 7-1 in the semi-finals before beating Argentina 1-0 
in extra-time for the country’s fourth title and first in 24 years.


South African rugby player Schalk Burger scored comeback of the year for 
earning his place back in the Springboks after spending time in intensive care 
with life-threatening meningitis.


Winners are chosen by the Laureus World Sports Academy, a panel made up of 50 
sporting greats including four Australians.
 