
The company responsible for Australia’s biggest CBD solar installation has 
invited public investment <https://events.miraqle.com/sydneyrenewable-offer/>, 
making it the first community renewables project in Australia with a public 
share offering.

Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> Renewable Power 
Company’s 520kW solar installation on top of the new International Convention 
Centre in Darling Harbour is the size of 12 tennis courts and will generate 
enough electricity to power about 100 homes each year.

Andy Cavanagh-Downs, the founding director of the project – which was set up 
and is run by a volunteer board – said he believed it was the first 
volunteer-run, for-profit company in Australia.

Cavanagh-Downs said the company’s founders wanted to find a way to involve the 
public directly in transitioning the economy away from fossil fuels.

“We’re clearly going to undergo a change as we move from a high-carbon to a 
low-carbon economy,” Cavanagh-Downs said. “Change can be awkward to deal with 
and the more you involve people in that process, the more that they’re part of 
it, the quicker and easier that change can come about.

“The other bit that we thought was attractive was – not everyone can put solar 
on their roofs.

Hostels to high-end: the Australian hotels embracing renewable energy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/14/hostels-to-high-end-the-australian-hotels-embracing-renewable-energy>
“This is a really good way for renters and apartment-dwellers to invest in 
solar.”

The group will sell 519 shares in the unlisted public company, raising almost 
$1.5m to repay the loan that was used to finance the project.

Most of the company’s revenue comes from an agreement with the managers of the 
International Convention Centre, who will buy all the electricity produced by 
the installation. The company will also sell the renewable energy certificates 
it gets through the federal renewable energy target.

Each share, which costs $2,750, is roughly equivalent to owning 1kw of 
capacity and the company is expecting to make investors a return by paying 
dividends of at least $35,000 after the first seven months of operation, 
amounting to about $105 per share after the first year. That figure should 
increase each year, since the power purchase agreement includes a price 
increase of 3% each year.

In addition, the company will divide up its capital each year, distributing it 
to investors, since it aims to wind up after 25 years.

The project faces risks from a range of factors, including the potential of 
reduced solar output from bad weather or new buildings nearby creating shade.

Cavanagh-Downs said the company had no immediate plans to raise capital for 
any further projects but the board was keen to share its experience with others 
who were interested in creating similar projects.
 