
Last week I had a surreal conversation with my hairdresser, a welcome 
variation on the usual "Have you got a holiday planned?" She was telling me of 
her love of Exmoor and how she'd like to move to the nearby coast. "Porlock's 
perfect," she said. "And I don't think it's got a hairdresser. So, I could be 
in there." She frowned. "Have you ever heard of Porlock?"

Into my mind flitted a file of Persons, dropping by to have highlights. I 
suppose most readers (though perhaps not most hairdressers) know how Coleridge, 
waking from what we take to be an opium-induced slumber, scribbled down some 
lines of the poem he'd been composing in his sleep, but was interrupted "by a 
person on business from Porlock"; when he returned to work, "Kubla Khan" had 
evaporated, he said, except for "some eight or ten scattered lines and images". 
Ever since this mishap in 1797, writers have grumbled about the crass 
interrupters who wreck their inspiration; they probably grumbled before, but 
they didn't have a name for the phenomenon. No one has ever identified the 
nature of the Person's business. Some believe it was Coleridge's dealer 
dropping by with his narcotics supplies, in which case it was doubly ungrateful 
of him to complain. Thomas de Quincey is said to have originated this theory, 
which I like very much; I came across it on the internet, which is the same as 
saying "I read it in the Beano."

Stevie Smith had Coleridge bang to rights: 

Coleridge received the Person from Porlock
And ever after called him a curse, 
Then why did he hurry to let him in?
He could have hid in the house.

She echoes my own idea of the matter. We all want interrupting, saving from 
ourselves, from the sentence, the paragraph, the chapter that's going nowhere: 
at least, going nowhere on that particular day. "Oh Person from Porlock come 
quickly / And bring my thoughts to an end." If Coleridge were alive now, he'd 
have rubbed his eyes and sprung to his desk to check his emails; having chucked 
out his spam, chortled over the ejokes sent on by old Wordsworth, and bashed 
out the replies to several footling inquiries about his availability to review 
the latest odes, he'd be well and truly free of that pesky poem going around in 
his head. If the problem is a whole novel that won't work but won't go away, 
the modern writer can take on a Project from Porlock. A film script is a good 
way of diverting yourself. You will have endless meetings with screeching 
optimists; they make such a change from publishers, who are always depressed. 
It's almost guaranteed to come to nothing, so you won't need another project 
from Porlock to save you from having to deliver the first draft; besides, while 
the film industry lawyers are poring over the small print of the contracts, you 
may well have solved your initial problem, or just grown old and died.

Why does a writer have to divert herself, pray for interruptions or devise 
them herself? Sometimes because you have promised a novel before it's ready to 
be written - which is to say, you're not ready to write it, though when you 
sign the contract you honestly think you are. You may know the characters, have 
the plot all worked out; you just don't know what it's about. There may be 
something else you have to do before you can push through the enterprise. It 
may be just a good deal of thinking. Or it may be that you need to write 
another, different book, which bridges the gap between where you are now and 
the self who is ready to keep her initial promise. That said, why is the act of 
writing, the moment-by-moment compression of the keys, so dreaded by so many 
writers? Why do they have to interpose opium, or alcohol, or some other 
stimulant or sedative, before they can perform their trade's basic function? 
You don't hear of accountants who can't open a spread-sheet, or farmers who 
take against fields.

The experienced writer says to the anguished novice: just do it; get 
something, anything, on to the screen or page, just establish a flow of words, 
and criticise them later. You give this advice but can't always take it. You 
dread setting off down any one narrative path, because you know your choice 
will make most of the others impossible. Select one, write it, and it begins to 
seem in some sense pre-ordained, natural, correct; the other options fade from 
memory. Fear of commitment lies behind the fear of writing. Writers, as 
generations of jealous spouses have learned to their cost, are not naturally 
monogamous. We don't want to choose; we want to keep open all the 
possibilities, fill a lifetime with fresh and less-than-final versions.

What is worst, what is most wretched, is being almost ready to write. A 
horrible day dawns when the prospect of writing hangs over you like a cloud 
from which you are afraid you might never emerge. You know you will do it, you 
know you will commit. You know that by the end of the day you will be wrung 
out, speechless, barely human. Recently I can't go into the dull walled garden 
of the flats where I live, because I've haunted it - I can see the spectre of 
myself walking round and round in the rain, last summer, trying to write the 
last pages of my novel: following my ghostly characters, Tudor lawyers walking 
arm-in-arm in the drizzle, talking about the trial of Thomas More. Like a 
dogged clerk I came after them with my notebook; when it started to rain hard, 
they went inside, and so did I, they brushing the raindrops from their velvet 
caps and I making my sick way back to the keyboard, conscious that these are 
the last pages, this is the last chance, if it's not right now it probably 
never will be. I admit that, by that stage, if a person had come between me and 
the last page, I'd simply have cut his head off.

The real puzzle about Coleridge's story is that "Kubla Khan" lacks nothing as 
it stands. So why did he need an excuse? We're all geniuses in our dreams, 
though it happened that Coleridge was one in waking life too. The reader can't 
see where the lost lines would fit, or what they would add. Was Samuel T paid 
by the word? Was he knuckling his forehead: 54 lines, call that a poem? There's 
a possibility always worth considering in cases of "writer's block": could it 
be that you've said all you have to say? It would be cruel to suggest this to a 
practitioner in the grip of the condition. But, unfortunately for writers, 
there's no intellectual equivalent of the sexual climax; they don't always know 
when they've finished.
 