
Hibernian's recent league struggles hardly register when set against their 
historic toils in the Scottish Cup. As no one at Easter Road needs reminding, 
1902 was the last year theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> was won by Hibs. Back then, 
the Marquess of Salisbury was shaping British politics and Ford's Model T car 
was still six years from invention.

There was, then, an understandable sense of trepidation in these parts ahead of
Ayr <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ayr> United's visit. That sentiment 
was only endorsed by Hibs' current Scottish Premier League form; they have not 
recorded a victory in six matches.

By full-time, home concern had only been justified. On account of a showing 
totally lacking in invention and drive, Hibs must make a journey to Somerset 
Park for a replay. Ayr, of Scotland's Second Division, were fully worth their 
second crack at glory. It took a stunning save from the goalkeeper Mark Brown, 
three minutes into time added on, to prevent Hibs from tumbling out of the cup.

This Hibs predicament should not be ignored for much longer, with eyes 
diverting towards the boardroom rather than the dugout. The club has been 
hailed as a fiscal success in recent times but the upshot of a lack of 
investment, and money spent in the wrong areas, is obvious on the field. Colin 
Calderwood has endured a torrid time since being appointed as manager; failure 
to defeat an Ayr team consisting largely of part-time players does not help his 
case.

The fact that 16 players are out of contract at the end of this season is 
viewed by some as playing into Calderwood's hands. All it appears to have 
created is a group of individuals who have their eyes fixed on their next move, 
rather than improving the team they are with now. Suffice to say Hibs have been 
a lot more confident of ending their Scottish Cup hoodoo at various spells over 
the past 109 years than they are just now.

Ayr, backed by a sizeable support, opened as the smarter side. Alan Trouten 
shot narrowly wide of the Hibs goal after seven minutes before his team-mate 
Scott McLaughlin did likewise from an even better position.

It took the hosts 35 minutes to kick into action. Derek Riordan was foiled by 
an offside flag and subsequently the Ayr goalkeeper David Crawford as he sought 
to inspire his lacklustre side.

If the travelling contingent was admirable, the vast expanses of empty seats 
elsewhere merely highlighted disillusion within the Hibs following. That was 
again demonstrated as the half-time whistle was met by a chorus of booing.

Local discontent did not exactly vanish after the interval. It was impossible 
to ignore the basic point that, were Ayr even slightly more competent, they 
would punish Hibs' inadequacy.

The lower league team duly passed up a glorious chance for an opener. The Hibs 
defender Steven Thicot sliced the ball across his own goal, leaving Ryan McCann 
an opportunity to score. McCann, though, also miskicked.

Moments later, McLaughlin came close again, this time with a 19-yard 
free-kick. When a teasing cross from the Ayr full-back Jonathan Tiffoney only 
narrowly evaded Mark Roberts, the total ineptitude of Hibs' display was clear.

Riordan almost scored against the run of play, even if he knew little about 
it. The former Celtic player deflected a fierce Liam Miller drive, which 
clipped the Ayr crossbar.

Riordan was blocked again by Crawford two minutes from time, with Andy Rodgers 
coming even closer at the other end. Green and white-clad punters who had 
remained in the stadium until the final whistle did so only to complain in 
vociferous fashion.
 