
Not only does absence make hearts grow fonder, it can apparently intensify 
rivalry. Even at their respective football peaks, Ayr United and Kilmarnock 
weren't accustomed to frequent competitive meetings. As Kilmarnock became 
champions of Scotland, in 1965, Ayr were forced to re-apply for membership of 
the league after finishing last but one in the Second Division. Ayr's 
supporters, that said, take great delight in highlighting a 1-0 victory over
Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> in the Ayrshire 
Cup final just days after that title had been secured.

Almost a decade later, it was Kilmarnock who toiled in a lower tier as Ayr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ayr> enjoyed their most heady days in the 
top flight. It is little wonder, then, that Saturday's League Cup semi-final 
between these old foes is billed as the most significant Ayrshire derby ever.

The fierce nature of this fixture may be lost on those beyond the towns and 
villages of Ayrshire whose inhabitants will descend on Hampden Park. Or anybody 
who has not previously attended an Ayrshire derby. The ferocity, not least of 
language emanating from stands and terraces, is quite something to behold.

These towns lie 13 miles apart. Geographically, it is roughly suggested that 
support is split around Symington; with those north of that village following 
Kilmarnock and fans further south opting for Ayr.

"I'm trying to be unbiased about it but I think the fixture tends to be a 
bigger attraction and means more to Ayr than to Kilmarnock," suggests Ronnie 
Hamilton, the youngest player to turn out for Kilmarnock in a Scottish league 
match and later the club chairman. "Kilmarnock are the bigger club, with the 
better pedigree. It always seems easier for Ayr to raise their game."

Such sentiment is hotly disputed by Duncan Carmichael, Ayr's club historian. 
"Kilmarnock had a huge win over Rangers in 1994 and their supporters were 
singing anti-Ayr songs in celebration," he says. "Ayr were struggling at the 
time. No matter the league gap between us, Kilmarnock's supporters will be 
singing anti-Ayr songs. They are as bothered, all right. Rangers and Celtic 
supporters, even the hot-headed ones, have an element of mutual respect after a 
derby. With Ayr and Kilmarnock, there is an awful lot less give and take."

Kilmarnock lie seventh in the SPL with their part-time opponents sitting 
second-bottom of the First Division. That roughly paints a picture of history – 
Kilmarnock as the more prominent and successful club – but Kenny Shiels's men 
must be wary of complacency, their erratic form aside.

Ayr have won the past four League Cup meetings between the teams and have 
bundled three SPL sides – Inverness, Hearts and St Mirren – out of this 
season's competition. In consecutive seasons, 1998 and 1999, Ayr also 
eliminated Kilmarnock from the Scottish Cup.

"They had won the cup in 1997 so those two wins meant we felt good about 
ourselves again," Carmichael says. "I would argue this is probably the biggest 
game in Ayr's history, even although it is far from the best Ayr team. If we 
win on Saturday, I'll hardly even care about the final. My unfulfilled ambition 
is to see an open top bus parade a cup through Ayr. This year, there is a 
probably a better case for having that parade after the semi-final than the 
final."

Hampden may be only around half-full for this tie, but such an attendance must 
be put in context. At least 15,000 Kilmarnock supporters are expected in 
Glasgow. Such numbers weren't even commonplace at Rugby Park almost 50 years 
ago, when the championship was claimed and Kilmarnock were a regular force in 
Europe.

Ayr's anticipated following of 8,000 compares favourably with their last two 
home crowds; 1,310 and 1,407. An inability to move from or redevelop their 
decrepit Somerset Park home has been a major hindrance to Ayr's plans for 
progress over the past two decades.

Those who advocate the present, tight set-up of the SPL should take an added 
interest in the semi-final. Fixtures such as an Ayrshire derby, clearly 
attractive and lucrative, have been lost amid an unwillingness to move towards 
league expansion.

"There are smaller numbers of fans than the Glasgow derby, but the rivalry is 
every bit as intense," says George Burley, the ex-Scotland manager and a native 
Ayrshireman. "You have to remember how football-orientated Ayrshire is. A lot 
of top international players have come from there."

For 90 minutes on Glasgow's south side, that wider picture will be totally 
irrelevant.
 