
 The street where I used to live is behind the Nollendorfplatz, about ten 
minutes' walk from my hotel. I knew that my old landlady (whom I shall call 
here as elsewhere, Frl. Schroeder) was still there; we had been corresponding, 
but I hadn't told her that I was coming to Berlin for fear of a last moment 
disappointment. Even before the war, this was a somewhat decayed and forbidding 
district; but when I saw it again I was really awestruck. The fronts of the 
buildings were pitted with shrapnel and eaten by rot and weather so that they 
had that curiously blurred sightless look you see on the face of the Sphinx.

Only a very young and frivolous foreigner, I thought, could have lived in such 
a place and found it amusing. Hadn't there been something youthfully heartless 
in my enjoyment of the spectacle of Berlin in the early Thirties, with its 
poverty, its political hatred and its despair? I felt extremely middle-aged 
now. The house next to ours had been hit; on the third floor, a handsome tiled 
stove still stood in the corner of a half-room which jutted out over the abyss. 
With reverent feet, I entered the deep, dank courtyard, whose floor the 
sunshine never strikes, and climbed the stairs, dark even in the daytime, to 
Frl. Schroeder's door. The Wagnerian scream she uttered on recognising me must 
have been heard all over the building.

She looked wonderful; better now, in her seventies than in her fifties, and 
considerably slimmer. And yet she had been through as bad a time as any average 
Berliner. Serious illness. Poverty, forcing her to move to this much smaller 
flat; where she nevertheless had to have one lodger in the only spare bedroom 
and another sleeping in the kitchen. Then the war and the last awful year of 
bombing, when she and the other tenants lived almost continuously in the 
cellar. 'There were forty or fifty of us down there. We used to hold each other 
in our arms and say at least we'd all die together. I can tell you, Herr 
Issyvoo, we prayed so much we got quite holy.'

And then, with the fall of Berlin, came the Russian soldiers, searching the 
houses for arms. Frl. Schroeder thought she had nothing to fear until, at the 
last moment, she discovered to her horror that an Italian lodger, who had run 
away, had left a sporting rifle in his room. Caught with it, she would 
certainly have been shot; probably the whole building would have been burned. 
So she and a woman friend took the rifle apart, hid the pieces under the 
clothes and set out for the canal, into which they planned to drop them. This 
they finally succeeded in doing, but only after a hair-raising encounter with 
some more Russians, who chased them with erotic intention.

'Every time I went out on the street, they'd be after me,' said Frl. 
Schroeder, not without a certain complacency. 'So I used to screw up my eyes - 
like this - and make a hump in my back and limp. You ought to have seen me, 
Herr Issyvoo! Even those Russians didn't want me any more. I looked like a 
regular old hag!' By the time she had finished her stories, we were both quite 
exhausted with laughing and crying, and had drunk a whole bottle of 
Liebfraumilch.

And what had happened to all those others, I asked; the lodgers and the mutual 
friends? Well, Bobby the bartender had been in the Army, on the Russian front, 
and come through without a scratch. (Here was his photograph in uniform, 
hugging the girl he afterwards married). Luis had been taken prisoner by the 
Americans, who had taught him English. After the war was over, the authorities 
at his POW camp had more or less allowed him and a number of others to escape 
and had later forwarded his mail, marked 'escaped', to his home address. Otto 
Nowak, the eternal spiv, had shown up recently at the flat, wanting to buy Frl. 
Schroeder's carpets.

'He hadn't changed one bit. He was very well dressed - quite the fine 
gentleman. There's a rich woman somewhere in the background, I shouldn't 
wonder. Oh, you can rely on him to look after himself! And he's as cheeky as 
ever. I soon sent him about his business.' As I listened to all this, I 
marvelled as one always does, at the individual's ability to be himself and to 
survive, amidst a huge undifferentiated military mess. This was Frl. 
Schroeder's History of World War II. And its only moral was: 'Somehow or other, 
life goes on in spite of everything'.
 