
A Foreign Office-backed initiative to monitor human rights abuses in Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> has been accused of failing to 
investigate allegations that opponents of the country’s government are being 
tortured into making confessions.

Bahrain paying for Royal Navy base despite human rights criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/bahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism>
In two cases it is alleged the confessions resulted in death sentences. The 
claim, made by several human rights groups, is potentially damaging to the 
kingdom as it seeks to improve its image on the world stage. Bahrain pledged to 
introduce reforms following reports that its security services carried out 
torture during the 2011 Arab spring.

One key measure was the appointment of an ombudsman to investigate claims of 
human rights abuses. But campaign groups say the watchdog is failing to 
investigate serious claims of mistreatment and torture, including that of 
Mohammed Ramadan, an opponent of the government who was sentenced to death for 
taking part in a bombing that killed a policeman.

In April, the Foreign Office minister Tobias Ellwood told parliament that the 
ombudsman, whose position is funded by the UK taxpayer, had confirmed to his 
officials that “there have been no allegations of mistreatment or torture” in 
relation to Ramadan’s case. But theObserver has seen evidence that in 2014 the 
ombudsman was sent a lengthy statement from the civil rights organisation 
Americans for Democracy and Human Rights (ADHR) in Bahrain, which alleged that 
Ramadan, a father of three who before his arrest regularly attended protests 
against the government, had been tortured.

Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 and the UN also raised concerns.

The ADHR said in an email: “The officers took Mohammed to another room and 
began torturing him. They beat, slapped and kicked him all over his body, 
focusing on his head and ears. They called him a traitor and accused him of 
killing an officer. When Mohammed denied these accusations, they beat him more 
violently. This torture continued for four days.”

It continued: “Mohammed finally agreed to confess because he wanted the 
torture to end. He said that he would sign or confess to anything but the 
officers refused to tell him what to say.”

Earlier this month Ellwood told parliament that an investigation into the 
torture allegations had now been launched.

The announcement came after the ombudsman explained that the torture 
allegations had been overlooked because they had been made in an email rather 
than through an official complaint form. “The ombudsman, Nawaf Mohammed 
al-Ma’awda, has issued a statement that addresses the full range of allegations 
and commits to undertake a full, independent investigation into the treatment 
of Mr Mohammed Ramadan,” Ellwood said.

The admission has triggered calls for the government to review its support for 
Bahrain, which insists that the allegations of torture made by Ramadan and 
another man on death row are untrue.

“The Foreign Office has been funding an incompetent ombudsman in Bahrain that 
has been caught red-handed lying to them about the existence of a torture 
complaint concerning Mohammed Ramadan,” saidSayed Alwadaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sayed-ahmed-alwadaei> of the Bahrain 
Institute for Rights and Democracy. “There now remains only one proportionate 
response to such deception and that is to sever all taxpayer funding to and 
support for the ombudsman before it inflicts further harm upon victims of human 
rights abuse in Bahrain.”

The row over the ombudsman’s role comes as the UK cultivates closer links with 
Bahrain which it has identified as a “priority market” for business interests. 
The British taxpayer has spent £2m in the last year funding 10 projects in 
Bahrain through its Conflict, Security and Stability fund. Bahrain, meanwhile, 
is picking up the lion’s share of the bill for the construction of a Royal Navy 
base, the Mina Salman support facility, which will include warehouses, a 
300-metre jetty, accommodation, sports pitch and helipad.

Calls to the press office in the Bahrain embassy in London went unanswered.

A spokeswoman for the Foreign Office said: “We have raised continuing concerns 
about Mohammed Ramadan with the government of Bahrain. We welcome the 
ombudsman’s commitment to a full, independent investigation into Mohammed 
Ramadan’s treatment.

“The British government consistently and unreservedly condemns torture and 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and it is a priority for 
us to combat it wherever and whenever it occurs.”
 