
More than 10 million viewers are expected to watch this year’s final of the 
Great British Bake Off, but, whoever wins, the event will be overshadowed by 
the BBC losing one of its most-loved shows.

After Wednesday night’s finale, Mary Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mary-berry> and Paul Hollywood will never 
again jointly decide which member of the public should win the coveted title, 
as the hit show will move from BBC1 to Channel 4 following two festive 
celebrity specials, with just one of the judges in tow.

Hollywood will form part of an otherwise all-new line-up on C4 after Berry, 
along with her two co-presenters, Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins, decided to 
“stay loyal” to the BBC” or refused to “follow the dough”.

The furore that followed the news that C4 had agreed to pay £25m a year to 
independent Love Productions for the next three years for the hit show 
highlighted how the nation had taken the BBC show to its heart.

It underlined how unusual it is – “unprecedented” according to one veteran TV 
producer – for a hit show at the height of its success on British television to 
be poached by another broadcaster.

There will be no tearful farewell at the end of Wednesday’s show, which was 
filmed months before the deal to move Bake Off to C4 was sealed. The closest we 
might get to a public send-off will be in trailers being produced for the BBC’s 
festive specials, filmed by Mel and Sue.

Few details are yet known about the C4 version of the show, such as who, if 
anyone, will judge entrants alongside Hollywood. At one point, last year’s 
winner,Nadiya Jamir Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/08/the-great-british-bake-off-final-nadiya-jamir-hussain-gbbo>
, was tipped for a new role on the show, but she too has been signed up by the 
BBC.

In a bid to recoup the £75m cost, C4 is expected to capitalise on the show’s 
commercial potential. The ad-supported state-owned broadcaster is to start bids 
to sponsor the show at up to £8m. Some analysts have even suggested the fate of 
baking contestants could be decided by a public phone vote.

The BBC is also staying tight-lipped on future plans for the three presenters. 
Although it will have to be extremely careful to avoid allegations of copycat 
programming, one insider said: “We have a long track record producing cooking 
shows and have a number of options on the table ... A huge number of indies 
have come up with ideas for a cooking show.”

“Time is on our side,” he added, possibly referring to the fact that the BBC 
can insist on a 12-month hiatus under the standard industry holdback clause.

Neither the BBC nor Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> 
have come out of this catfight well, which could cause future problems for both.

C4’s explanation that its business model demands a system of cross subsidy 
comes as the government is pondering its future, with privatisation still one 
of the options.

Another question being posed by the independent production sector, which 
provides all of C4’s programming, is whether the separation of commercial shows 
such as Bake Off from those that meet its regulatory obligations risks making 
second-class citizens of one or both.

As for the BBC, it still faces questions over how it has managed to lose a 
show it had turned into 2015’s most popular broadcast. Also, given the 
political pressure on the cash-strapped broadcaster, some ask whether it will 
be able to turn a factual entertainment programme into such a hit again.

Whether Candice Brown, Jane Beedle or Andrew Smyth wins the 2016 title, only 
one thing is clear. Their endeavours will be watched by millions, and again 
later this week, when, in a further sign that the television industry is eating 
itself, the families on Gogglebox will no doubt give their verdict too.

 