
Goals from Luis Suárez and Neymar earned Barcelona a 2-1 victory at Las Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> that moved them nine points 
clear at the top of La Liga.

The league’s leading marksman Suárez opened the scoring after six minutes, 
meeting Jordi Alba’s cross at the far post to net his 12th goal in seven 
matches in all competitions and take hisLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> tally for the season to 
25.

Las Palmas equalised four minutes later when the striker Willian José beat the 
offside trap to latch on to Jonathan Viera’s brilliant backheeled pass and 
steer the ball past Claudio Bravo.

Neymar restored Barça’s lead in the 39th minute when Lionel Messi’s shot was 
parried by the goalkeeper Javi Varas and the Brazilian netted the rebound.

Suárez told Spanish television: “To win titles you have to suffer, [this was] 
a match away from home suffering ... these matches are the ones that give you 
the league.

What matters is for the team to keep winning. I am here to add goals and 
assists.”

Suárez, after scoring his 41st goal of the season in all competitions, had a 
good chance to increase Barça’s lead early in the second half but Varas made a 
superb stop. Las Palmas almost levelled on the hour when Bravo saved a shot 
from Viera and José put the rebound into the side-netting.

Barça gradually took more control in the second half after an even first 45 
minutes but had to work hard to thwart the home side’s counterattacks. The 
substitute Sergio Araujo, a formerBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> B player, squandered three 
chances for Las Palmas near the end.

“We were up against the best team in the world. They thrive on possession and 
I think we were competitive but up front they make the difference,” said Las 
Palmas midfielder Roque Mesa.

Atlético Madrid can cut the gap to six points when they entertain Villarreal 
on Sunday. Third-placed Real Madrid, who are 10 points off the pace, travel to 
Málaga.
 