
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, playing without 
the injured Lionel Messi, needed Adriano's long-range strike to beat Málaga 1-0 
and maintain a perfect record through two rounds of the Spanish league.

Barcelona kept Bernd Schuster's team pushed back in their area early on at La 
Rosaleda Stadium but failed to take advantage of their chances until Adriano 
broke the deadlock in the 44th minute.

Gerard Piqué hit the crossbar for Barcelona in the 58th minute before the 
17-year-old Fabrice Olinga had the hosts' best chance with a shot against the 
post in the 68th.

Neymar went on as a substitute for the third straight game for Barcelona in 
the second half and shone with his dribbling, pace and a couple of shots that 
almost doubled the final margin.

"We struggled in the last few minutes but we have just begun a season with 
some changes and still have room to improve," said the Barcelona midfielder 
Cesc Fábregas.

Messi bruised a muscle in his left thigh during Wednesday's 1-1 draw at 
Atlético Madrid in the first leg of the Spanish Super Cup. Barcelona may still 
be without the Argentinian for Wednesday's return leg at Camp Nou. Atlético 
warmed up by thrashing Rayo Vallecano 5-0 on Sunday for their second victory in 
two rounds.

Fábregas was charged to lead Barcelona's attack in place of Messi and it took 
him 15 minutes to start causing havoc in Málaga's back line.Málaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> were disciplined in defence but 
in the first half could manage only a 28th-minute free-kick by Vitorino Antunes 
that the Barcelona goalkeeper, Victor Valdés, did well to block.

Next it was Caballero's turn to save Alexis Sánchez's point-blank header from 
a cross by Fábregas in the 37th but Adriano surprised the Málaga keeper with a 
blistering left-footed effort from outside the area, curling the ball so that 
Caballero could not get enough on the shot to keep it out.

Adriano was replaced by Dani Alves at half-time. The club said it was 
precautionary after the defender felt pain in his right leg.

Neymar, who scored Barcelona's goal at Atlético on Wednesday, replaced Pedro 
in the 63rd minute. The Brazil striker immediately showed his speed and ability 
to break down defenders one on one.
 