
Barcelona won their opening Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> game but that was no 
more than could be expected. Indeed, it was less than most expected and they 
could have got less still. In the very last minute German goalkeeper Marc-André 
ter Stegen, one of three players making his competitive debut for the club, 
made a save that secured a 1-0 victory over Cypriot side Apoel Nicosia. Gerard 
Piqué scored the only goal with a header from a free-kick midway through the 
first half.

Apoel restricted the Catalan side to few chances until a very late flurry and 
then almost took the victory from them. Satisfaction instead came from a fourth 
clean sheet of the season, the control exercised with a changed team, and 
debuts given to three players. For midfielder Sergi Samper, this was 
particularly special. He joinedBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> as a six-year-old; 13 years 
on, he played for the only side at the club left: the first team.

There was an unfamiliar look about the Barcelona starting XI, seven of whom 
began a game for the first time this season. Of the team that had started 
against Athletic Bilbao at the weekend, only Lionel Messi and the 19-year-old 
began here. There was a debut for Samper in place of the suspended Sergio 
Busquets and Ter Stegen played his first Barcelona game in goal. The feeling 
after a game in which he made no saves but was a commanding presence is that it 
will not be his last.

Xavi Hernández, by contrast, started his 142nd Champions League game, 
equalling Raúl as the man who has made the most European Cup appearances. It 
was, though, his first start of what will be a final season in which he will 
feature only occasionally.

If Barcelona were less familiar than normal, Apoel were less familiar still. 
John Arne Riise was not included, although their goalkeeper Urko Pardo had 
begun his career in Barcelona’s youth system playing for the B and C teams. 
There were also three Brazilians, an Argentinian, two Portuguese, including 
midfielder Tiago Gomes, at Blackpool last season, and Irish striker Cillian 
Sheridan. The former Celtic, Motherwell, Plymouth, St Johnstone and CSKA Sofia 
player began up front, having scored in the qualifying rounds against HJK 
Helsinki and Aalborg.

It was Vinicius who had the game’s first shot, in the opening minutes, and 
Tomas De Vincenti soon dived to head a dangerous left-sided cross that he could 
not quite reach. Ter Stegen was later quickly out of his goal to head away from 
the edge of his area but not much else was happening and this was a game that 
would be played out at the other end, albeit with little incision.

That Vinicius’s shot was Apoel’s last of the opening 45 minutes may not have 
surprised; that Barcelona did not take many more did. Apoel waited, a yellow 
wall between Barcelona and the goal, two lines of four close together and close 
to their area. The two forwards were rarely more than a few yards from them. 
Apoel were well-organised, smart, and quick to close the spaces that 
momentarily opened.

By the half-time whistle Barcelona had enjoyed only four shots on target. 
Pardo had saved twice from Messi, pushing away a 20-yard free-kick and another 
shot after the Argentinian dashed into the area. Neymar hit high and wide after 
another brief opening on the left. When the goal came, in the 28th minute, it 
arrived via a set-play. Messi curled the ball in from the right, bending 
goalwards, and Piqué headed in from the edge of the six-yard box. Barcelona’s 
last three goals had all been provided by Messi, a glimpse perhaps of a new 
role.

There were few glimpses of goal in a Camp Nou that was mostly quiet and far 
from full. The pattern continued; Barcelona carried the ball forward and Apoel 
waited for them, occasionally looking to sprint out on the break. Momentarily, 
one sprint following a Barcelona corner looked like paying off. But Mario 
Sérgio, racing up the right, could not find Vinicius, who was sprinting to join 
him on the other side. There was a warning there for Barcelona; this may not be 
done yet.

With 12 minutes to go another break should have ended with a better finish 
from De Vicente. And then Rafik Djebbour brought a save from Ter Stegen in the 
last minute. They had appeared comfortable throughout, and Djebbour’s shot was 
only their second on target, but the risk was there.

Before that Munir el Haddadi had headed in only to be ruled out for offside. 
It was the last thing he did: another 19-year-old striker, another debutant, 
replaced him. With three minutes left, Sandro Ramírez struck a shot just wide: 
it was the closest Barcelona had come in the whole of the second half, although 
Messi then slid in for one last try in the dying seconds.
 