
In 1872 a decision was taken that changed football forever, and that would 
have a major bearing on Wednesday'sChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> meeting between 
Barcelona and Ajax. The Scotland team, all of whom were drawn from the Queen's 
Park club, looked at the England side they were about to meet in the first ever 
football international and, realising their opponents were on average over a 
stone a man heavier than they were, resolved not to engage in the dribbling and 
charging game that had been prevalent until then, but to pass the ball and keep 
it away from the English. The tactic was a resounding success: Scotland had the 
better of a goalless draw and the possession game was born.

Passing slowly spread, but Queen's Park remained its epicentre, its players 
schooled in pass-and-move. Then, in 1901, the forward RS McColl – or Toffee Bob 
as he was known because of the chain of newsagents he ran with his brother – 
took the philosophy toNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> as he turned 
professional. Newcastle at the time were a direct side, but McColl soon 
persuaded them of the advantages of holding possession. One of the keenest 
converts was the wing-half Peter McWilliam who, in 1912, was appointed manager 
of Tottenham.

He promoted the same passing principles there, not only among the first team 
but almost among the reserves and the youth sides, even buying the non-league 
side Northfleet Town to use as a nursery side.

Although McWilliam left in 1927, when Middlesbrough made him the best-paid 
manager in the game, he returned in 1938 to reap the benefits of the philosophy 
he had instilled, inheriting a side that included Arthur Rowe, Bill Nicholson 
and Vic Buckingham.

All three would become exceptional managers in their own right. Rowe led Spurs 
to promotion and then the title while Nicholson took them to the double. 
Buckingham remains West Brom's longest-serving manager, and had a profound 
influence on Bobby Robson there. He left the Hawthorns for Ajax, returned to
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> with Sheffield Wednesday 
and then went back to Ajax in 1964. There he found players eager to put his 
pass-and-move ideas into practice. He gave a debut to Johan Cruyff and prepared 
the ground for Rinus Michels before moving to Fulham.

After a brief stint at Ethnikos, he took charge at Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> in 1970 and began to instil 
the ethos that Michels, succeeding him again, would bring to full fruition.

It was Michels, of course, who inspired Cruyff, and Cruyff who plucked Pep 
Guardiola from the youth team. Guardiola may say that the biggest influence on 
his tactical thinking was Louis van Gaal, but he is another figure who links 
the clubs, having coached both – as well as helping to shape the modern Bayern 
Munich. It's true that Cruyff despises him and affects to hate his style of 
football, but they are like two elderly Marxist theorists squabbling over 
doctrinal minutiae: Cruyff, Van Gaal and Guardiola are all born of the same 
philosophical line.

Gerardo Martino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/22/barcelona-gerardo-martino>, 
who will return to Argentina for his father's funeral after the game, is still 
feeling his way as Barcelona coach, but he too is of the same school, albeit 
the South American branch established byMarcelo Bielsa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/oct/13/marcelo-bielsa-athletic-bilbao>
, a huge admirer of Van Gaal, at Newell's Old Boys in the early nineties. He is 
not as idealistic as Bielsa, perhaps not even as idealistic as Guardiola and 
already, his more pragmatic nature has begun to emerge: he does not simply try 
to pass teams to death as his predecessors have; he is not, as Gerard Piqué put 
it in an interview in Gazzetta dello Sport last week, "a slave to tiki-taka".

"The idea of football hasn't changed, we simply are trying to have more 
options now," said Piqué. "If we're being pressed, hitting a few long balls 
isn't being negative. It gives us oxygen, it gives us an out ball and forces 
the opponents to adjust." The occasional long ball prevents an opponent blindly 
packing the centre, makes them wary of pushing too high for fear of a ball 
played in behind them. Barça's use of Neymar, similarly, stretches the play, as 
he stays wide left, cutting infield only occasionally – something that has the 
added advantage of keeping him out of the way of Lionel Messi, who tends to 
drift right.

Back-to-back 3-2 wins, over Valencia and Sevilla, have highlighted the 
defensive weaknesses that still exist, particularly from set plays and Martino 
– who, like Neymar, is approaching his first Champions League game – was 
critical of his team's thought processes on Saturday. "We try to get the 
players to make different decisions, to weigh up whether to attack more or 
less," he said on Monday. "We practise that in training sessions. The other day 
against Sevilla, in the last 15 minutes we shouldn't have put the match at 
risk. Everything needs a period of adaptation. We need to adapt now that this 
competition has started."

Ajax lie only fourth after six games of the Eredivisie season and probably 
represent a lesser challenge this season than they would have done last season. 
The creative midfielderChristian Eriksen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/15/tottenham-title-tilt-christian-eriksen>
 and the defender Toby Alderweireld have left, meaning increased responsibility 
for the 23-year-old South African Thulani Serero. There will be an expectation 
that Eriksen's compatriot Viktor Fischer, still only 19, takes on more of the 
creative burden, although he operates on the left rather than through the 
middle, while on the right Ajax have the former Barça prodigy Bojan Krkic, on 
loan from Roma. Frank de Boer, though, another who has played for both Barça 
and Ajax, remains as coach, ensuring continuity of philosophy.

But in a sense, as much as a match, this is a celebration of a way of playing. 
It's the Buckingham derby, the clash of two avatars of the principles that 
began their journey across Europe when Toffee Bob McColl left Glasgow in 1901.
 