
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> dearly missed 
Lionel Messi and Luis Suárez as the La Liga champions were held to a goalless 
draw at home to nine-man Málaga yesterday, missing the chance to go top of the 
table.

Messi was taken ill before the game while Suárez, joint-top scorer in La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> along with the 
Argentinian, was suspended. Andrés Iniesta was also injured and Luis Enrique’s 
side were incapable of prising open a Málaga side happy to sit back and soak up 
pressure.

Despite dominating possession Barça struggled to carve out many opportunities 
and on the rare occasion they created a chance theMálaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> goalkeeper Carlos Kameni was 
there to frustrate them, clawing away efforts from Gerard Piqué in either half 
and producing a sensational save to deny Neymar in injury time.

Málaga had the defender Diego Llorente dismissed in the 69th minute with a 
straight red card following a lunge on Neymar, but Barça still could not find a 
way through. Piqué had what looked a clear penalty appeal turned down after his 
shirt was tugged in the area by Mikel Villanueva.

“We’re disappointed, we didn’t expect them to sit back as much as they did, 
but that was up to their coach. The density of the opposition’s players was 
incredible,” Enrique said.

“It made no difference after the first sending-off because all their players 
were back. I liked the attitude of my players and the belief they and the 
supporters had.”

Neymar was one of few Barça players who looked capable of finding a winner but 
could not find many willing partners, with the stand-in striker Paco Alcácer 
producing an anonymous display and defender Piqué looking far more threatening 
in attack.

Málaga have proved difficult opponents for Barça recently at the Camp Nou, 
beating the champions 1-0 in February 2015 and losing only 1-0 last season.

They frustrated the Catalans again by employing a conservative 5-4-1 formation 
and defending deep for most of the game, although they created one clear-cut 
chance, the midfielder Juankar firing wide of the near post after rounding 
Barça goalkeeper Marc-André ter Stegen.

Málaga’s Juankar was shown a straight red card in stoppage time for dissent.

Earlier, Gabriel Mercado scored a controversial stoppage-time winner as 
Sevilla produced a sensational late turnaround to come from two goals down to 
win 3-2 at Deportivo La Coruna and provisionally go third. Reuters
 