
A below-par Barcelona escaped with a point after Real Sociedad were denied a 
clear winner in a 1-1 draw.

At a stadium where Barça last won in 2007 Luis Enrique’s men were thoroughly 
outplayed and the result leaves them six points behind the leaders, Real 
Madrid, before next weekend’sEl Clásico at the Camp Nou.

After Willian José opened the scoring, the largely anonymous Lionel Messi 
levelled with a glorious effort. But it was a goal that did not count that 
proved the main talking point as the substitute Juanmi was ruled offside when 
turning the ball in after Carlos Vela had struck a post, even though replays 
showed Gerard Piqué played him onside.

“It’s not often I can say this as a Barça player but we have to be pleased 
with the draw. Sometimes you can win a game while losing your style of play but 
when you don’t have the right attitude it’s more worrying,” Piqué told Movistar 
Plus.

“Almost nothing went right for us today. They outdid us in the quality of 
their play and in attitude. We barely existed in the first half and improved a 
bit in the second but it’s difficult to win the league playing like this.”

Atlético Madrid responded to their derby defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/atletico-madrid-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report-ronaldo>
 with a 3-0 victory overOsasuna as Diego Godin and Kevin Gameiro scored within 
two minutes of each other.

Diego Simeone’s side had been beaten 3-0 by Real, having lost to Sociedad 
seven days earlier, but they got back on track against their struggling hosts.

Atlético had their goalkeeper, Jan Oblak, to thank for not falling behind as 
he saved an early penalty from Roberto Torres. Godin then nodded in a Koke 
corner to break the deadlock and the former Sevilla striker Gameiro soon added 
a second after collecting Angel Correa’s scooped pass. The substitute Yannick 
Carrasco adding a third in stoppage time.

Villarreal were beaten at home in the league for the first time this season as 
Alaves pulled off a shock 2-0 success.

The Yellow Submarine had won five straight games on home soil but were undone 
by two goals in the opening 17 minutes. Ibai grabbed the first with a 
close-range finish after Deyverson’s header came back off a post before the 
Levante loanee Victor Camarasa added a second, poking home after shambolic
Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> defending.

The former Liverpool striker Iago Aspas took his tally for the season to 10 
with club and country asCelta Vigo extended their unbeaten run at home to eight 
games with a 3-1 win over bottom-of-the-tableGranada.

Aspas scored the first, his ninth in nine games, then set up Theo Bongonda to 
open his account for the season against a Granada team without a win all year.

They pulled one back when Artem Kravets seized on an error from Gustavo Cabral 
but the substitute Pape Cheikh Diop’s third ensured Celta’s fine run at 
Balaidos continued.
 