
Garden centres go through a metamorphosis at this time of year. Over a series 
of weeks, everything changes: shovels are pushed toward the margins of the 
store, bags of composts hide themselves in corners, and the few real plants 
that are left get lined up near a back fence, like mutinous soldiers waiting 
for a firing squad. The space is then filled with dancing Santas and scented 
candles. There are both real and imitation trees in mindboggling varieties; 
from fresh-cut Norway spruces to fibre optic trees which change colour and 
freakishly rotate. There are ornaments and flashing lights and roasting tins 
for a turkey dinner. Yesterday I stood, in a kind of hypnotic trance, watching 
a plastic reindeer sing Jingle Bells. I couldn’t take my eyes off it. In short, 
during Christmas, our garden centres rarely feel like garden centres. However, 
if you’re a plantoholic like myself, don’t despair, because now is the perfect 
time to buy bare-root plants.

Bare-root plants are plants which have been, unlike their container-grown 
cousins, grown in open ground. In the winter time, when the plants go dormant, 
nurseries dig them up and package them ready for transplant. Some nurseries 
will simply send you the roots and stems wrapped in plastic or burlap. Other 
nurseries pot up the plant, as the soil helps to keep the roots in better 
condition. Either way, you are buying the skeleton of the plant – the 
structural bits which really matter.

The problem with buying bare-root is that plants are obviously less exciting 
in their dormant state. Buying plants in December is like going on a date with 
someone who is wearing their dressing gown and slippers; you need to be able to 
see the potential. And this is where the internet and catalogues become a 
wonderful way to shop for plants. Online you can look at pictures of plants in 
their prime. In catalogues you can gape at glossy images of perennials in full 
flower, or lust after photos of delicious strawberries ripe for the picking. 
Wintertime, with its short days and long nights, is a time for dreaming. I 
recently ordered two rambling roses with the purpose of covering an unsightly 
fence. Online I could look at pictures of ramblers running over archways and 
trellises, bursting in creams and pinks in their midsummer glory. I could 
scroll through pages of choices and look at detailed descriptions of each 
plant. I could do the thing that all gardeners do best over the winter months – 
I could imagine.

Besides the fun of buying, there are a number of practical benefits when you 
order your plants bare-root. Often they’re cheaper. It takes a nursery far more 
time and effort to look after pot-grown plants then to dig a plant up from a 
field. In addition, when ordering plants you aren’t paying a courier to deliver 
a heavy pot of compost. Then there’s the fact that when you order bare-root 
plants you often have a much greater selection to pick from. Online or in 
catalogues, you can more easily shop around and come to an informed decision, 
instead of making an impulse purchase because a plant in full bloom batted its 
eyelashes at you. This all means that you’re more likely to choose, as they 
say, the right plant for the right place. Finally, bare-root plants are often 
easier to plant and, once established, grow more vigorously than their 
container grown counterparts. When you plant a bare-root specimen the roots 
spread out in every direction in a natural fibrous network. This is in stark 
contrast to container grown roots which circle around themselves in an ever 
tightening fist. A plant grown in a pot has also had to deal with extreme 
fluctuations in temperature and irregular watering, while a plant grown in an 
open field has grown steadily and strongly.

The downside of bare-root plants is their appearance. When your plants arrive 
you are often left looking at little more than a handful of twigs. Bare-root 
plants need to be put in the ground as soon as possible. Once removed from the 
soil, the danger is that the roots dry out and die. Dig a hole large enough to 
accommodate the entire root system, and make sure that the roots are covered 
with at least half an inch of soil. If you are not able to plant out, then pot 
up your plants in an appropriate sized container and remember to keep the roots 
damp, but not waterlogged. Remember, when planting bare-root time is of the 
essence.

Depending on what you’re after, there are hundreds of nurseries online and 
catalogues which supply plants bare-root. Some nurseries specialise in trees or 
hedging; in Britain we are spoiled for choice when it comes to the number to 
nurseries which offer bare-root plants.Crocus 
<http://www.crocus.co.uk/plants/_/roses/plcid.8/> has a good selection of 
roses, andUnwins <http://www.unwins.co.uk/search-results.html?fq=bare+root> has 
numerous perennials to choose from. If you want a few new fruit trees,Marshalls 
<http://www.marshalls-seeds.co.uk/fruit-trees-cid288.html> is a good place to 
start.Toby Buckland’s nursery <https://www.tobybuckland.com/bare-root> also 
specialises in bare root plants. Looking to establish a new hedge? Then 
bare-root is definitely the way to go; have a look atHedge Nursery 
<http://www.hedgenursery.co.uk/> to for inspiration. You have a world of 
bare-root options at your fingertips.

As for me, my bare-root roses have recently arrived. The handful of uninspired 
stems I now possess is far from exciting. However, buying bare-root is all 
about buying a plant’s potential. Gardeners, more than most, have a great 
capacity for optimism. We always think that next year the garden will be better 
than the last. The great thing about watching a garden mature is that we’re 
rarely wrong. My new roses are already in the ground, their roots growing and 
readying the plant for spring. I can’t wait to see them grow and bloom. In the 
meantime, I have another issue to deal with; I need to find a place for a 
singing reindeer.

 