
Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce> and the NSW 
government have considered stripping the charitable status of animal rights 
groups that trespass on farm land in attempts to expose animal mistreatment, 
new documents reveal.


The federal and NSW governments have been hosting a series of joint roundtable 
meetings with the animal industry to discuss farm trespass by animal rights 
activists.

A common and effective tactic to catch out mistreatment of animals by farm 
industry bodies is for activists to trespass on farm land and undertake 
surveillance of the farm. This footage can then be passed on to news 
organisation and broadcast more widely to distribute serious allegations of 
abuse. Similar tacticswere used to expose the greyhound racing scandal in NSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/new-south-wales-to-ban-greyhound-racing-from-next-year-after-cruelty-investigation>
.

Documents obtained under NSW access to information laws 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/333487447/NSW-farmers-intrusion-report> by 
state Greens MP Mehreen Faruqi reveal hostility to these animal rights groups 
and the federal and state government’s apparent support of farming groups to 
fight them. Faruqi said the documents showed the state and federal government 
were “hell bent on gagging any debate on animal welfare”.

The documents suggest that the joint governmental working group sees little 
legitimacy in the role of animal welfare and protest groups who obtain footage 
of wrongdoing and mistreatment of animals on farms.


The national plan states that “there are serious questions around the merits 
of this approach as an effective method of promoting good animal welfare and 
achieving improvements in those facilities which are truly substandard”.


At a roundtable meeting in August 2015, attended by Joyce, the NSW primary 
industries minister Niall Blair, NSW Police, the RSPCA and industry groups 
including NSW Farmers, the group discussed a range of options aimed at cracking 
down on animal rights activists.

In a section titled “findings from the roundtable” it cites as one of several 
tactics revoking tax benefits for animal rights groups. Some animal welfare 
groups are listed as charities which grants them certain tax benefits.

The report suggests that the government should consider stripping them of this 
charitable status if they are supporting animal rights activists who engage in 
trespass activities.

“Where there are organisations supporting animal activists in their 
activities, these organisations often derive significant taxation benefits from 
their recognition as charities, yet often appear to have other dominant 
purposes for existing,” the report states.

“For example, it may be possible to establish that the main purpose of the 
organisation is political rather than charitable and seek a determination as to 
whether this may be grounds to terminate its charitable status.”

The report later recommends seeking advice from the NSW department of justice 
on a raft of other civil and criminal laws that could be enlisted to support 
farmers and stymie activists.

Among the other options canvassed by the group are:

 * that the NSW government “review the adequacy of penalties” for inclosed 
lands trespass offences; 
 * encouraging farmers to engage in legal action, and providing “information 
packs to farmers on launching civil action” for intentional trespass and 
nuisance; 
 * making it easier to prosecute animal rights activists by altering how 
evidence can be gathered under covert listening devices laws and increase the 
statute of limitations for certain offences; 
 * asking police to train farmers in surveillance tactics to monitor potential 
animal rights activists. It states they will “work with industry and police to 
facilitate training on best practice on-farm surveillance methods”; 
 * suggested tactics for farmers also include ensuring that a “balanced story” 
is presented to the community to “disenfranchise the activists from their 
‘shock value’ tactics”. It recommends that they “humanise” trespass to “create 
a supportive united front to discredit tainted or biased information”. 
Faruqi said the revelations surrounding targetingcharitable status were a 
shocking attack on animal rights groups.

“These are the very groups that have helped expose horrific animal abuse in 
the live export trade, greyhound racing and other commercial industries – 
cruelty that would never have otherwise come to light,” she said.


“That ministers Joyce and Blair are even contemplating this radical step is 
outrageous. Instead of addressing community concerns about the treatment of 
animals and bringing an end to factory farm cruelty, the government wants to 
keep the public in the dark.

“Just last year we saw the NSW government pass ag-gag laws by stealth under 
the guise of biosecurity. Targeting the charity status of animal groups is 
undoubtedly phase two of the NSW government’s obsessive war against the animal 
protection movement.”

A spokeswoman for the deputy prime minister said the federal government was 
concerned about an escalation in illegal farm invasions.

“Animal cruelty is against the law and the Coalition government does not 
condone animal cruelty. Evidence of acts of animal cruelty should be provided 
to the relevant enforcement authority for proper investigation,” she said.

“Taxpayers would not support the concept of subsidising the operations of 
organisations that wilfully break the law through tax breaks.

“Animal welfare organisations that claim charitable tax status should be able 
to demonstrate the funds donated to them go to support bona fide charitable 
activities.”

Joyce is a strong proponent for defending farmers from intrusions by activists.

Comments attributed to Joyce in the action plan minutes state that “groups who 
wilfully break the law should be prosecuted”.

He continues: “There are established mechanisms to deal with animal welfare 
concerns, by reporting to competent authorities in respective states and 
territories, including the RSPCA and police. If laws are inadequate, there are 
open processes through the parliament to seek change to such laws. Vigilantism 
is not part of these legitimate processes.

“As minister, I am concerned to ensure that the voices of producers and 
industry are heard in the court of public opinion, to balance the ‘moral high 
ground’ so often captured unfairly by the activists in some sections of the 
community if industry remains silent.”

A spokeswoman for Niall Blair, the NSW minister for primary industries, said: 
“The NSW government is committed to ensuring that farmers who treat their 
animals in a lawful and responsible manner are permitted to carry out their 
business undisturbed by the unlawful actions of animal activists.”

Although the report claims that animal rights activists have not had an impact 
on public debate, there have been a succession of stories over the past 20 
years that have forced major changes to animal welfare practices.

In 1999 the ABC broadcast shocking footage 
<http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/stories/s23927.htm> depicting the possum slaughter 
process taking place at a Tasmanian meat processing known as Lenah Games Meat.

The footage was supplied to Animal Liberation Ltd who passed it on to the ABC. 

The meat processing plant went to court to prevent the ABC publishing the 
footage.The case led to a landmark high court decision 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/HCA/2001/63.html> in 
which the court declined to recognise a new action for breach of privacy, and 
was a major victory for animal rights groups that pass on covertly obtained 
footage to news organisations in order to publicise the treatment of animals.

The NSW government has introduced a range of measures to combat environmental 
protest groups over the last two years, particularly for animal rights groups.

They attracted considerable controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/05/ag-gag-laws-the-battle-for-animal-welfare-is-a-battle-over-information>
 for introduced what are known as “ag gag” laws to increase penalties and 
outlaw undercover activities by activists.

Contact Paul Farrell securely using the Signal messaging app 
<https://whispersystems.org/> on +61 457 262 172 or using the Guardian’s 
Securedrop server <https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>
 