
Barrow of the National League pulled off the upset of the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> second round when they came from 
behind to win 2-1 at League OneBristol Rovers. Byron Harrison scored twice to 
turn the tie round, swiftly cancelling out Rory Gaffney’s 10th-minute opener 
for the hosts before adding a second after 61 minutes.

FA Cup first round replays: Eastleigh shock Tim Sherwood’s Swindon Town
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/fa-cup-first-round-replays-eastleigh-tim-sherwood-swindon-town>
Cambridge United of League Two recorded a comprehensive victory over opponents 
from a division above, thrashingCoventry 4-0 at home with Luke Berry scoring 
all of the goals. The midfielder notched a first-half hat-trick – the middle 
one being a penalty – before adding his fourth towards the end.

Eastleigh of the National League secured a 3-3 draw at home to sixth-tier FC 
Halifax thanks to Mikael Mandron’s 90th-minute leveller. Mandron had opened the 
scoring before Jordan Sinnott, Scott Garner and Richard Peniket scored in quick 
succession after the interval to put the Shaymen 3-1 up. Scott Wilson 
subsequently pulled a goal back, with Mandron then ensuring both sides’ names 
will be in the hat for Monday’s third-round draw. Another non-league side 
involved are seventh-tierStourbridge, whose home tie against Northampton was 
postponed due to a frozen pitch.Braintree fought bravely at Millwall before 
losing 5-2. Michael Cheek gave the National League visitors an early lead, but 
Millwall replied swiftly through a Harry Smith double and Shane Ferguson’s 
effort before Jack Midson made it 3-2 10 minutes prior to the break. Smith then 
completed his hat-trick soon after the interval, and Aiden O’Brien added a 
strike at the death.

Woking, another National League club, had Charlie Carter sent off as they lost 
3-0 at home to Accrington.

Carter was dismissed shortly after Stanley went 1-0 up through Billy Kee, who 
then struck again with half-time near. John O’Sullivan added his name to the 
scoresheet in the second-half.

Elsewhere, Notts County snatched a replay against Peterborough as they battled 
back to seal a 2-2 draw at home.

Posh appeared to be cruising after early goals from Leonardo Da Silva Lopes 
and Gwion Edwards, but then Adam Campbell made it 2-1 and the visitors had Lee 
Angol sent off, with Louis Laing subsequently drawing the tie level in stoppage 
time.

Bolton advanced with a 3-2 win over Sheffield United at the Macron Stadium, 
where Gary Madine and Sammy Ameobi put the home side in charge.

Paul Coutts responded for the Blades and Josh Vela then netted Wanderers’ 
third, with Jack O’Connell’s effort soon after proving only a consolation.

The day’s other second-round tie saw Port Vale thump Hartlepool 4-0 at home. 
Vale were 3-0 ahead by half-time courtesy of efforts from Rigino Cicilia and 
Alex Jones either side of a Michael Woods own-goal, and Ryan Taylor scored a 
penalty early in the second half.
 