
Who cares about the finishing time in a title race that no one's ever really 
been too bothered to win? The biggest surprise of this midweek round of 
fixtures perhaps wasn't so muchBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> securing the (purely 
ceremonial) title of "Herbstmeister" (literally: autumn champions, even though 
it should be "winter champions", "end-of-calendar-year champions" or maybe 
let's-just-make-up-our-own-little-honour-sponsored-by-Arsène-Wenger-champions") 
in record-busting fashion with three games to go, but the fact that somebody in 
the DFL's stats basement had been keeping a record of these inconsequential 
efforts in the first place.

Granted, as non-achievements go, it's a pretty good one. An economy-mode 2-0 
win at SC Freiburg on Wednesday night took the Bavarians 10 points clear of the 
competition, so they'll be spending Christmas on top of theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> tree. They've only 
dropped five points so far, notching up 40 goals and conceding just five – 
these are record figures, too. But the painful memory of last season, when Jupp 
Heynckes men finished the year in first place before falling apart completely 
in January made for very muted celebrations.

"Herbstmeister? It buys us nothing," sniffed Thomas Müller, the scorer of 
Bayern's first goal from the penalty spot. "I'm still young, but have been 
around enough to know what can happen. Everyone was going on about us being
Herbstmeister and how we would be celebrating come next May when we were in 
Qatar (in the training camp) last year. You always need a second half of the 
season. We have to be careful [not too read too much into that]."

It's hard to argue with Bayern's numbers. But the manner of the win at the 
Breisgau was contentious, as Müller conceded. It shouldn't have been. Bayern 
were 1-0 up (Freiburg defender Oliver Sorg was penalised for handling the ball 
in the box) and the hosts a man down by the time 16 minutes were played after 
Fallou Diagne was sent off for a professional shirt-pull on Xerdan Shaqiri. 
With Saturday's clash against Dortmund in mind, Bayern stopped playing 
altogether after that. Their game descended into a purely bureaucratic exercise 
– all of the half-hearted effort went towards maintaining the status quo and 
possession became an end in itself.

Freiburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/freiburg>, by contrast, gave it 
a go. Bayern were almost lethargic enough to let them back into the match, but 
substitute Anatoliy Tymoshchuk killed off all hopes of a comeback with a deep, 
offside-trap eluding run past keeper Oliver Baumann 11 minutes from time.

SC coach Christian Streich, the man responsible for the side's incredible run 
in recent weeks, was conflicted in his emotions after the final whistle. The 
47-year-old went into word-association mode, making about seven different 
points in a sentence that seemed to stretch over a couple of minutes. "It's 
always [a] penalty against us, because we are small," he complained. "But we 
respect that. I say nothing, it's OK. Today, we fought like lions. It doesn't 
matter if people want us to go somewhere else. We'll see who'll go down, we'll 
see if we get relegated. Yellow card, red card – do you know what happened to 
us today?"

Streich was right in the sense that Bayern rode their luck when Javier 
Martínez saw a ball bounce on to his arm in not too dissimilar fashion to 
Sorg's, but wasn't punished. Still, this defeat wasn't a grave injustice, 
merely the expected outcome after the visitors' attempt to gamble with 
personnel – Bastian Schweinsteiger was rested for fears he'd pick up a fifth 
yellow card ahead of Dortmund's visit – and the amount of work they put in so 
nearly backfired.

"We're happy about the three points, but they way we won is debatable," said 
Müller. "It's strange, this wasn't the first time we had trouble against a 
decimated team. We have to think of something better for next time."

The inference was that Bayern struggle when complacency sets in. That 
particular problem has beset the Reds for the best part of four decades, of 
course, but the Freiburg win also underlined a key difference this season. 
Heynckes' superstar ensemble have played with a lot more determination and 
hunger than usual, even to the point of adding selfless pressing high up the 
pitch, Dortmund-style, to the mix. Going through the motions like Wednesday 
night has become the exception rather than the rule. And it has taken either 
special circumstances, like saving energy for the Dortmund game or the 
opposition being a man down, for them to lose their focus.

Maybe the record dash to the invisible Herbstmeisterschaft trophy is 
meaningful, after all. Previous Bayern teams would have been content to plant 
their fat behinds at the top of the table and lazily ride the wave of their 
superiority with dull, laboured Freiburg-type wins. This year, however, they 
play like a team in hurry, eager to wake up from their own personal nightmare 
of two years without honours* as quickly as possible.

*DFL Supercup excluded.

Talking points

• While Bayern have managed to become a little more like Dortmund, the 
champions' attempt to play bit like the old Bayern was less successful against 
Fortuna Düsseldorf on Tuesday night. Jürgen Klopp's rotation policy – Mats 
Hummels, Ilkay Gündogan and Mario Götze were all rested – looked like paying 
off when Jakub Blaszczykowski fired home a wonderful opener shortly before the 
break, but the subsequent substitutions of Marco Reus and the aforementioned 
goalscorer made Dortmund lose their way. "We had no clear idea, we were between 
seeing out the result and something else," said Klopp. But slowing down doesn't 
come naturally to the Black and Yellows. Urgency became absent altogether from 
their game, and Stefan Reisinger was allowed to nod in the equaliser with 12 
minutes to.

"We gambled and blew it," said defender Neven Subotic with a wry smile. It was 
telling that sporting director Michael Zorc only talked about a missed chance 
to put more daylight between Dortmund and other Champions League contenders 
like Schalke (3-1 losers at Hamburg) and Frankfurt (3-1 home defeat by Mainz). 
An 11-point gap behind Bayern has taken the sting out of Saturday's summit. 
Even a win at the Allianz Arena will probably not be enough for Klopp's men to 
defend their title this year.

• The Bundesliga is a serious business, but sometimes it's a kindergarden. 
Fortuna captain Andreas "Lumpi" Lambertz was hauled away from the cameras by 
general manager Wolf Werner during a Sky interview. Werner had taken exception 
to the channel's match commentary and told Lambertz that "we don't talk to them 
today, they've blasted us". Lambertz managed to stammer a bemused "why not?" 
before Werner frogmarched him into the changing room. "We demand more respect 
for our team," Werner declared the next day.

• Shawn Parker – the German Under-20 striker, not his namesake, the founder of 
Napster – was the star of the show in Frankfurt. The young Mainz forward scored 
a goal against Eintracht and set up one another in his first Bundesliga start. 
It was the kind of performance that had been coming from Thomas Tuchel's gang. 
Mainz have only been a bit of cutting edge away from going on a really fine 
run; in Parker and Ádám Szalai, they seem have to found a winning combination 
that can turn their often superior match strategies into tangible results. 
Mainz are only four points adrift of fifth-placed Frankfurt now.

• Bayer Leverkusen dished out a lesson in efficiency at Werder to become 
Bayern's closest pursuers. They won 4-1 in Bremen and climbed to second spot. 
But all talk of a title challenge was batted away. "We won't lose our heads," 
said Rudi Völler. "Bayern are doing their own thing up there, we're happy to 
consolidate our position," said Gonzalo Castro, one of the unsung heroes behind 
their strong performances.

• For 12 minutes and 12 seconds, supporters in every stadium protested 
silently against the adoption of new safety measure by the league. It was a 
spooky, unsettling experience, likened by some commentators to murmurs at a 
funeral – and a powerful demonstration of just how much atmosphere would be 
lost if hardliners and populist politicians are allowed to use a big, 
repressive hammer to crack the relatively small nut of fan misbehaviour.

Results: Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 1-1 Fortuna Düsseldorf, 
Eintracht Frankfurt 1-3 Mainz 05, Hamburg SV 3-1 Schalke 04, FC Nürnberg 4-2 
Hoffenheim, SC Freiburg 0-2 Bayern Munich, Werder Bremen 1-4 Bayer Leverkusen, 
Hannover 96 2-0 Greuther Fürth, VfB Stuttgart 2-1 FC Augsburg, Borussia 
Mönchengladbach 2-0 VfL Wolfsburg.

• Latest Bundesliga standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 