
A below-strength Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> side conceded a late 
equaliser to draw 1-1 at Freiburg on Tuesday and move one point clear at the 
top as their perfect start to the Bundesliga season ended.

The Freiburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/freiburg> substitute 
Nicolas Hoefler pounced at the far post to level the score in the 86th minute 
after Xherdan Shaqiri had fired the visitors ahead with a 33rd minute volley. 
There was more bad news for Bayern as Bastian Schweinsteiger limped off 12 
minutes from time with an ankle injury before Friday's Uefa Super Cup match 
against Chelsea in Prague.

The treble winners have 10 points from four games. Borussia Dortmund, Bayer 
Leverkusen and Mainz 05, who all have nine points, are in action at the 
weekend. Freiburg have two points.

"We played well, we attacked, but we didn't use our chances," said Bayern's 
coach, Pep Guardiola. "All players played well. In theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>, you can concede a 
late goal."

Guardiola made seven changes to the team that beat Nuremberg 2-0 on Saturday 
for a match moved forward because of the match with the Europa League winners, 
Chelsea.

The Bavarians still controlled possession but were clearly lacking any spark 
with Arjen Robben, Philipp Lahm and Franck Ribéry on the bench and Freiburg 
holding out well against them.

The visitors had to wait 33 minutes to take the lead when Shaqiri did well to 
control a cross from Thomas Müller at the far post and drill home a powerful 
volley from a tight angle.

Freiburg came agonisingly close to an equaliser on the hour when the 
20-year-old Charles-Elie Laprevotte curled a shot on to the post in his 
Bundesliga debut.

But the home side's endeavours were finally rewarded four minutes from time 
when Hoefler snatched an unexpected leveller with Bayern's central defenders 
caught napping.

"When you play Bayern you have to be incredibly mentally strong and that's 
what we were," the Freiburg coach, Christian Streif, said.
 