
Bayern Munich’s express start to the season finally ran out of steam on Friday 
with a goalless draw atEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> after 10 wins from 
their 10 previous Bundesliga games.

The champions lacked their usual punch and, despite dominating the match, did 
not often break past a disciplined backline, thereby failing to equal a 
European major league record for the best start to a season, held by Tottenham 
Hotspur with 11 straight wins in 1960.

“Every week we think it can’t get more defensive and then comes a team that 
plays even more defensive,” Bayern’s captain, Philipp Lahm, said. “I think 
Frankfurt played a 6-3-1 tonight. But if we had used our chances and scored, we 
would be sitting here saying how much fun it was.”

Indicative of Bayern’s frustrating evening was the yellow card for Lahm, who 
had not committed a single foul in his previous 24 consecutive league matches, 
in his 450th appearance for the club.

The Bavarians, on 31 points, extended their lead to eight above Borussia 
Dortmund, who travel to Werder Bremen on Saturday when Schalke 04, in third a 
further four points behind on 19, host promoted Ingolstadt.

Eintracht, who recovered from their ignominious German Cup second-round exit 
to the third-tier club Erzgebirge Aue on Tuesday, moved up to 11th on 13 points.

Bayern, who had won their previous six matches against Eintracht without 
conceding a goal, were more aggressive from the start and Arturo Vidal tested 
Lukas Hradecky with a looping header in the 11th minute.

Javi Martínez’s glancing header minutes later floated just wide as Bayern set 
a quick early pace and the home side frantically defended.

A double defensive blunder by the hosts at the start of the second half left 
Douglas Costa unmarked in front of goal but again Hradecky, at full stretch, 
got a leg to the ball to send the Brazilian’s low shot wide.

Eintracht grew in confidence and came close to scoring with an Alex Meier 
effort before the Bayern keeper, Manuel Neuer, almost handed a goal to Marc 
Stendera with a bad clearance.

Bayern gradually reclaimed control and had Eintracht on the backfoot for the 
final 20 minutes but could not make their dominance count. The league’s top 
scorer, Robert Lewandowski, marked tightly by Carlos Zambrano, fired wide in a 
one-on-one with Hradecky in the 80th minute with his biggest chance of the game.

The Poland striker did manage to get the ball into the net later but he was 
adjudged just offside.
 