
Defending Bundesliga champions Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> scored a 90th minute winner 
through Robert Lewandowski to edge past Hoffenheim 2-1 on Saturday, with Bayern 
reduced to 10 men following the second-half dismissal of defender Jerome 
Boateng.

Substitute Lewandowski tapped in after a superb run and cutback from Douglas 
Costa, who also set up their first goal, in the last minute with Hoffenheim 
having missed a 74th minute penalty to reclaim the lead.

Bayern were stunned after just nine seconds when David Alaba’s poor pass to 
Jerome Boateng was intercepted by forward Kevin Volland who slotted in to equal 
the league record for the fastest goal.

The Bavarians, who have never lost to Hoffenheim, gradually upped the tempo 
and Brazilian Costa floated in a low cross after a dizzying run down the left. 
Hoffenheim goalkeeper Oliver Baumann cleared but Thomas Müller scored with his 
thigh to level four minutes before the break.

Wolfsburg and Kevin De Bruyne may lament any move to Manchester City | Andy 
Brassell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/17/wolfsburg-kevin-de-bruyne-manchester-city-bundesliga>
Arturo Vidal rattled the crossbar with a fine long-range effort in the 66th 
minute and Baumann denied Lewandowski’s point blank effort as Bayern remained 
fully in control but struggled to make their dominance count.

A double booking for Boateng within two minutes, including one for a handball, 
gave the hosts a 74th minute penalty, but Eugen Polanski powered his shot onto 
the post.

Bayern came agonisingly close in the 88th minute but Baumann again denied a 
double effort from Lewandowski before Müller’s header scraped the post. The 
Poland striker was not finished, and scored the winner after another fine 
cutback from the quick Costa inside the box.

The Bavarians are on six points from two matches, as many as Bayer Leverkusen 
who beat Hanover 96 1-0 courtesy of Hakan Calhanoglu’s outstanding free kick. 
Wolfsburg, last season’s runners-up, needed a late equaliser from Nicklas 
Bendtner to draw 1-1 at Cologne, who had taken a 30th minute lead through Simon 
Zoller.

Wolfsburg’s attacking midfielder Kevin De Bruyne, a transfer target for 
Manchester City, put in a lacklustre performance but substitute Bendtner 
rescued Wolfsburg in the 83rd minute to lift them to four points.
 