
It has become common to describe the first goal in a game as a Türöffner, a 
door-opener. Few teams are more in need of said key intervention than Bayern, a 
side who truly come into their own once spaces open up in the opposition half. 
But on Saturday night at the Imtech Arena, it wasn't so much Bastian 
Schweinsteiger's stooped header before the break that made the real difference 
but the second goal, a truly wondrous strike from Thomas Müller. There's no 
obvious comparison in tool box terms but if Schweinsteiger opened the door, 
Müller knocked up an exquisitely-shaped chaise longue for the visitors to 
settle down and put their feet up for good in the 3-0 win at Hamburg. "It was 
important for us, it gave us the chance to take a deep breath," the 23-year-old 
said abouthis unlikely strike 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/thomas-muller-bayern-munich-v-hamburg/>.

Chances are people in Germany will see it again and again this season. It's a 
dead-cert for the Goal of the Month competition and will push Marco Reus's 
pile-driver against Greece at the Euros all the way for the Goal of the Year 
prize, too.

"I looked up and didn't see anyone for the cross, so I tried to have a go 
myself," he explained later, "and I had a good foot." The HSV keeper René Adler 
was anticipating a cross and admitted to getting his angles "all wrong" but 
then again, who could have expected Müller shooting past the goalie from just 
inside the touchline, on the turn? "Anatoliy Tymoshchuk scores similar goals in 
training but not while the ball is in play," Müller joked later. The 2-0 
ensured an ultimately comfortable evening for Bayern who mercifully slowed down 
after Toni Kroos had added a third. As reactions after defeats go, this was 
impressive stuff, Hamburg's glaring lack of quality notwithstanding. "They were 
one, maybe two levels ahead of us," said Adler. Asked about a perceived duel 
for the Germany gloves with Manuel Neuer, the 27-year-old came up with a 
knowing smile. "I lost that battle in glorious fashion," he offered.

Franck Ribéry's devastating performance saw the Frenchman hailed as the best 
Ribéry ever; he's indeed close to his 2007 level, perhaps even better. But this 
was Müller's win, really. After an indifferent season and hot-and-cold Euros, 
many expected the gangly and somewhat erratic attacking midfielder to fall 
victim of Bayern's push for more depth in the squad. With Swiss "magic cube" 
(Blick) Xerdan Shaqiri coming in and Toni Kroos all but immovable in the No10 
spot, Müller looked set for campaign as a bit-part player. And when (fairly 
spurious) rumours about interest from Arsenal surfaced in July, it's fair to 
assume that his departure would not have caused mass protests outside the 
club's HQ in Säbenerstrasse.

Instead, he has emerged as the club's most consistent midfielder, just ahead 
of the more cultured and technically impressive Kroos. Seven goals in the 
league have already equalled his tally for 2011-12. Müller has become the 
designated penalty-taker, too, after a series of misses from Arjen Robben, 
Schweinsteiger and Mario Mandzukic. And he is increasingly the spokesperson for 
the team as well. More interesting than the careful captain Philipp Lahm and 
much more open than the slightly curmudgeonly Schweinsteiger, Müller is (at 
last) a truly Bavarian voice, mixing humorous irreverence with healthy 
confidence. "For those who thought we'd slip up, it's bad luck," he said with a 
smile, "we can forget the debate about us having a November depression. Others 
drop points, we have a superb day. It'll be a nice evening for us."

Ironically, a team that was supposed to be less dependent on his 
improvisation, has turned into more of a Müller-team, as far as the work ethic 
and his very disciplined kind of positional indiscipline goes. "We are all one 
or two per cent more eager to win this season," he explained. As Jörg Kramer 
from Der Spiegel remarked on Sky on Sunday night, all of the attacking 
midfielders now follow the Müller template of popping up in the most unexpected 
of spaces.

"It's almost impossible to tell where exactly they are playing," Kramer noted, 
contrasting Müller's freedom to change sides from his nominal slot on the right 
with the "positional football" strait-jacket under Louis van Gaal. Müller, the 
son of a BMW engineer, once memorably described himself as "an interpreter of 
space" in a Süddeutsche Zeitung interview and it's obvious that his unusual, 
mostly instinctive playing style is best served with a brief to go on as many 
exploratory runs as possible.

It's yet to be determined whether Bayern's flexibility has come as a natural 
consequence of the players' willingness to cover more ground or as the result 
of Jupp Heynckes's new master plan. But as long Bayern combine individual 
talent with so much hard work, it doesn't really matter. With Ribéry in perfect 
shape, Kroos playing superbly well, and Mario Gomez and Robben still to come 
back to regular first-team action, Bayern are unlikely to be shifted from the 
summit this season. And the various superstars will have to continue to find 
space on the team-sheet next to the accidental whizz kid on Grissini legs from 
the village of Pähl – not the other way round.

Talking points

• "Maybe we're too good for this world," said Schalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> 04 sporting director, Horst 
Heldt, philosophically on Saturday. What he meant: the Royal Blues had 
neglected to kill off Hoffenheim in the Rhein-Neckar-Arena, an opponent that 
was "already dead on a plate," as Heldt put. Markus Babbel's team were indeed 
inferior throughout the 90 minutes but in the end, they won the game 3-2, 
thanks to a general lack of sharpness from the visitors in both boxes. Huub 
Stevens, who never needs a reason to be in a foul mood, even when everythingis 
rosy, was particular miffed about Sven Schipplock's last-minute winner, eight 
minutes after Atsuto Uchida had equalised for the second time. "You have to 
take the draw," grumbled Stevens, "instead I see my defenders running forward 
to chase a winner." Heldt added: "We were naive." A seven point-gap to leaders 
Bayern will spare him the "Bayern-hunter" headlines for the time being.

As preparations for Arsenal's visit on Tuesday night go, this defeat will not 
hurt that much either. Schalke, who might be without the centre-back Kyriakos 
Papadopoulos (head injury) again, will only concentrate harder on doing what 
they do best: getting results with impeccable organisation at the back and nigh 
stereotypical efficiency at the other end.

• The only goalless game of the weekend was perhaps the most entertaining and 
finely balanced.Stuttgart <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart> 
escaped with an unlikely draw that could have easily transformed into an even 
unlikelier win late on, but Vedad Ibisevic missed the Swabians' best chance at 
the home of the champions. "We have to get used to the fact that a draw feels 
like a defeat for us," said the dejected Borussia Dortmund coach, Jürgen Klopp.

A stray elbow from Raphael Holzhauser connected with the nose of Sebastian 
Kehl, sent the Black and Yellows captain into A&E and naturally divided 
opinion. The upshot was only a yellow card for the Austrian. Kehl will play 
away to Real Madrid with a face mask to protect his slightly fractured nose. 
Regardless of the result in the Spanish capital, though, one theory will 
continue to gain currency. This Dortmund squad still don't look ready to 
challenge in the two main competitions with the same intensity. To the 
detriment of theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>, all their best 
performances seem to come in Europe this season.

• Twenty decent opening minutes and yet another fine display from Alex Meier 
weren't enough forEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> to register a win 
against Greuther Fürth. The 1-1 draw on Friday night left Leverkusen as the 
biggest winners of the weekend behind Bayern. Bayer 04 were great going forward 
in the 3-2 win over Düsseldorf – Sidney Sam's opener was particularly handsome 
– but less assured at the back.

The game, however, will ultimately be remembered for the sort of problem 
you're more likely to encounter in the agony aunt pages of teenage magazines 
than on a Bundesliga pitch: Simon Rolfes only lasted 75 seconds after his 
introduction midway through the second half. The midfielder was sent off for a 
silly if not altogether terrible tackle on Adam Bodzek. Rudi Völler, the Bayer 
sporting director, pleaded for clemency but knew it was pointless. "We are 
Germans, we are German and bureaucratic," he said, quite rightly. Rolfes was 
suspended for one match after entering the record books with the second-fastest 
dismissal.

Results Frankfurt 1-1 Greuther Fürth, Dortmund 0-0 Stuttgart, Gladbach 1-1 
Freiburg, Hannover 2-0 Augsburg, Nürnberg 1-0 Wolfsburg, HSV 0-3 Bayern, 
Hoffenheim 3-2 Schalke, Leverkusen 3-2 Düsseldorf, Bremen 2-1 Mainz.

• Latest Bundesliga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 