
The Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
leadersBayer Leverkusen saw their 100% record end in an eventful 3-3 draw at 
home toWerder Bremen on Friday.

This was the first draw for Leverkusen in any competitive game this season, 
after they won their German Cup first round match as well as both legs of their 
Champions League play-off against Copenhagen along with two Bundesliga wins.

Leverkusen, with both the talented teenager Julian Brandt and the captain 
Simon Rolfes out injured, will rue their failure to make the game safe in the 
first half. After taking a 1-0 lead they hit the woodwork three times and 
wasted a bagful of other clear scoring chances.

“We should have been leading by a much higher score in the first half,” the 
Leverkusen coach, Roger Schmidt, said. “We wasted too many chances and were 
also a bit unlucky. We came back in the second half and even deserved to win 
but it was just not going to happen today.”

Bremen’s Sebastian Prödl drilled in the equaliser in the 85th minute after 
Leverkusen had come back from 2-1 down to lead 3-2.

Leverkusen, who visit Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> in 
their Champions League Group C opener next week, took a deserved lead through 
the Croatian teenager Tin Jedvaj, who scored the club’s 2,000th Bundesliga goal 
and his second of the season.

They did not manage to score again despite a constant wave of attacks with 
Emir Spahic, Levin Öztunali and Gonzalo Castro rattling the woodwork and the 
Bremen keeper Raphael Wolf making several point-blank saves.

Bremen struck with their first chance of the game on the stroke of half-time 
when Fin Bartels completed a quick break with a good finish.

“Leverkusen allowed us to stay in the game after they hit the post so many 
times,” the Bremen coach Robin Dutt admitted. “I am very satisfied with how my 
team has developed so far.”

With Leverkusen still dominating after the break, Bremen again struck against 
the run of play with the Argentinian Franco Di Santos scoring on the hour after 
yet another counterattack.

Hakan Calhanoglu’s superb curled free kick made it 2-2 before the South Korean 
Son Heung-min shook off his marker at the edge of the box with a quick turn and 
fired in on 73 minutes.

But Prödl spoiled Bremen’s hopes of a win with five minutes to go, scoring 
from close range with his shot bouncing in off the crossbar.

Leverkusen are on seven points from three matches with the champions Bayern 
Munich, who host VfB Stuttgart on Saturday, on four points from two. Last 
season’s runners-up Borussia Dortmund host Freiburg also on Saturday.

Leverkusen’s midweek opponents Monaco continued their terrible start to the 
Ligue 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> season, slumping 
to a 2-1 defeat atLyon.

The principality club, who finished runners-up last season but let Jámes 
Rodríguez and Radamel Falcao go during the summer, are fifth from bottom with 
four points from five games.Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>, 
who have also had a rough start to the season, are four places above Monaco on 
six points.

Leonardo Jardim’s team geared up for their Champions League tie in the worst 
possible fashion. Lyon went ahead on the half-hour when Nabil Fekir, set up by 
Steed Malbranque, beat the keeper Danijel Subasic from inside the box.

Lucas Ocampos levelled nine minutes later with a fine curling shot but Monaco 
generally lacked inspiration and Dimitar Berbatov missed a sitter on the stroke 
of half-time.

Corentin Tolisso grabbed the winner 17 minutes from full-time with his first 
Ligue 1 goal, a low shot after being set up by fellow midfielder Arnold Mvuemba.

On Saturday, the champions Paris St Germain can go top by winning at Stade 
Rennes.

In Spain Almeria and Cordoba are both still waiting for their first wins of 
the new Primera Division season after drawing 1-1 at the Estadio de los Juegos 
Mediterraneos.

Edgar gave Almeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/almeria> a 
12th-minute lead but Federico Cartabia equalised soon after for newly-promoted 
Cordoba and that proved to be the end of the scoring – although both sides went 
close to second-half winners.

Fernando Soriano glanced a header against the Cordoba crossbar with 16 minutes 
to go and then, in the final of four minutes of stoppage time, the visiting 
substitute Nabil Ghilas broke through only to be denied by a fine save from 
Ruben Martínez.

The result leaves both teams with two points from three games and sitting just 
above the relegation zone.
 