
“Happiness comes from within,” declare a thousand advice blogs and books, 
fridge magnets and Facebook memes. Or “withinwards” as my local yoga studio 
prefers to call it.

The idea that happiness comes from looking inwards rather than outwards has 
taken a deep hold in our collective psyche in recent years. We no longer see 
wellbeing as a facet of community or engaging with others but as an inner 
journey, a self-focused personal quest.

Most of the recent happiness trends, from self-help books to meditation, are 
designed to be carried out either completely alone, or with the explicit aim 
that each person stays locked in their own private emotional experience. In the 
United States this appetite for inner exploration has spawned a multi-billion 
dollar industry.

Americans spend around $1bn on self-help books each year, and $4bn on 
mindfulness products and therapies ($12m of this on mindful colouring books 
alone). A further $10bn a year is spent on yoga classes and accessories. There 
are now more than 1,000 options for happiness apps to help us find bliss deep 
within our smartphones. It all adds up to a strange kind of emotional 
individualism.

But this level of self-focus has come at the expense of outward engagement. 
Our narrative of wellbeing has become divorced from community, social justice 
or wider political responsibility.

Even the hugely popular mindfulness trend, which on the face of it advocates 
paying attention to the outside world, urges it in only its most apolitical 
form – a “non-judgmental awareness” of whatever is directly in front of us 
right this second, deliberately renouncing analysis, critical thinking or wider 
imaginative empathy.

Locked in this mindfuness bubble, we failed to notice a deep rage growing 
within society

But while we have been locked in this mindful-colouring, downward-dogging 
bubble, we failed to notice a profound disaffection and rage growing within 
society. Ignored for so long, this deep-seated discontent found its expression 
in a dangerous, misogynistic, racist demagogue. Many of us were blindsided by
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s recent 
victory. We were probably at a yoga class.

Even before this toxic election, according to the World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/en/>, the US was already, by a wide margin, the most 
anxious country on the planet. Now anxiety levels have skyrocketed. Suicide 
hotlines across the country have seen sharp increases in call numbers since the 
election. Therapists report widespread “Trump-anxiety” among their clients.

It would be tempting to see the solution to this outpouring of distress as yet 
more inner exploration. More mindfulness exercises and yoga classes and digital 
detoxes, in which we deliberately disengage from the news in service of our own 
mental health. But that somewhat solipsistic mentality was part of what got us 
here in the first place. What we urgently need now is not inner exploration, 
but outward engagement. Not “non-judgmental awareness” but critical thinking.

It would be easy to sell this as a self-help proposition in and of itself. 
Excessive self-focus has been shown by research to lead to unhappiness, 
anxiety, loneliness and depression, whereas its opposite, social connection, is 
overwhelmingly the single biggest source of human happiness. But this is far 
more important than a self-help mantra. For the sake of the future of the 
planet, now is the time not to journey “withinwards”, but for vigilance and 
action.

Ruth Whippman is the author of The Pursuit of Happiness (£9.99, Random House). 
To buy a copy for £8.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pursuit-of-happiness-434335.html>
 