
Hearts restored their eight-point advantage over Rangers in their quest for 
the second Champions League place yesterday, but were made to fight as hard as 
they have done at any stage this season for victory by a determinedLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> performance.

A strike from the substitute Roman Bednar three minutes from time edged this 
often tempestuous encounter, but the home side will feel aggrieved after 
contributing to a closely contested 90 minutes in which the teams were 
separated only by Hearts' ability to call on strength in reserve when it 
mattered most.

Much has been made of Vladimir Romanov's signing policy, which saw 11 players 
arrive at Tynecastle during the January transfer window to boost Hearts' first 
team squad to 35, but it is on afternoons like this that such abundance can and 
did prove decisive.

Hearts' head coach Graham Rix was without the core of his team, with the 
captain Steven Pressley suffering from a virus and the influential midfield duo 
of Paul Hartley and Julien Brellier suspended, butHearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> retained focus and the necessary 
desire after Rangers had applied pressure with victory at Falkirk on Saturday.

Perhaps the best insight into Rix's embarrassment of riches came afterwards 
from his opposite number, Livingston's manager John Robertson."We looked at 
Hearts' possible replacements for the three who were out, but there were about 
27 of them," he said, only partly in jest.

Livingston, who are seven points adrift at the bottom of the table, were more 
than equal to Rix's men during the opening half, but fell behind due to the 
kind of twist of fate which has plagued their troublesome season.

Bruno Aguiar, a former Benfica midfielder who was one of those January 
signings, hit a speculative shot from 18 yards which cannoned off the 
unfortunate Richard Brittain and looped over Roddy McKenzie for a fortuitous 
opening goal. Brittain's state of mind improved dramatically on the hour mark, 
though, as his free-kick from just five yards off the left touchline deceived 
everyone in the Hearts' area for a well-merited equaliser.

Craig Gordon then saved brilliantly at point-blank range from Allan Walker, a 
stop that was to prove pivotal as Hearts pushed in front thanks to a cute 
near-post header from Edgaras Jankauskas. The goal was Jankauskas's fourth goal 
in three games and the culmination of superb wing play by his Lithuanian 
compatriot, Deividas Cesnauskis. Yet Livingston's spirit did not wane despite 
their lowly league position, and the full-back Dave MacKay volleyed a stunning 
fourth goal of the afternoon past Gordon from the angle of the 18-yard area.

Bednar, who had been introduced 60 seconds before MacKay's goal, made an 
impact for positive reasons, having been sent off only 10 minutes after coming 
off the bench in the Scottish Cup win over Partick Thistle eight days earlier. 
The Czech striker's burst was perfectly timed to collect Martin Petras's long 
and quickly taken free-kick which pulled the Livingston defence badly out of 
position. Bednar supplied a typically powerful finish for the winner.

"We knew we had to win," admitted Rix. "That was the most important thing 
after results on Saturday. A lot of SPL sides would love to be able to put 
Roman Bednar on with 15 minutes to go; I think that speaks volumes for the 
strength of our squad."

Robertson, who can only dream of such a situation, refuses to recognise he is 
now staring relegation in the face despite his side being unable to return any 
form of tangible reward from arguably their best team performance of the season.

"Football can be a cruel game, and it was cruel to us today," said the 
Livingston manager, who is also Hearts' record scorer and a former Tynecastle 
manager. "But anyone who is honest can see that wasn't the performance of a 
Livingston team who are certain to be relegated."

Man of the match: Bruno Aguiar (Hearts)
 