
Liverpool entered the League Cup semi-finals for a record 17th time and 
17-year-old Ben Woodburn entered the record books. The Wales Under-19 
international eclipsed Michael Owen as the youngest goalscorer in Liverpool’s 
history to help seal a hard-fought victory for Jürgen Klopp’s side overLeeds 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>.

Next Generation 2016: 20 of the best talents at Premier League clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/oct/04/next-generation-2016-20-of-the-best-talents-at-premier-league-clubs>
Garry Monk’s Championship team pushed Liverpool close and created the better 
chances until Divock Origi punished hesitation by the goalkeeper, Marco 
Silvestri, to score his second goal in four days but the quarter-final belonged 
to Liverpool’s English-born Welsh international. Woodburn struck in front of 
the Kop with nine minutes remaining to put the quarter-final beyond Leeds and 
Owen into second place on the list of Liverpool’s youngest goalscorers. Owen 
was aged 17 years and 143 days when he opened his account against Wimbledon in 
May 1997. Woodburn beat the record by 98 days and, just in case anyone is not 
feeling old enough, the watching Steven Gerrard made hisLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> debut before the winger was 
born, 18 years ago to the day.

A small slice of history “made it much more enjoyable” according to Klopp but 
until Origi and Woodburn struck in the space of five minutes this had been a 
nervous, disconcerting night for a much-changed, injury-hit Liverpool side. In 
contrast to Klopp’s eight changes Monk made four to the Leeds team that beat 
Rotherham on Saturday and the benefits of a relatively settled side showed 
immediately. Leeds were quick in the tackle and unnerved Liverpool’s defence 
whenever they got forward in numbers.

“We asked them to play in a slightly different way tactically and they 
followed it to a tee,” the Leeds manager said. The only thing lacking was that 
we didn’t take one of our opportunities,” said Monk. “The only disappointment 
is that with more luck or composure in our finishing we might have had a better 
result.” Monk’s assessment was fair.

Jürgen Klopp vows to protect Liverpool record-breaker Ben Woodburn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-ben-woodburn-record>
After a period of silence for the 75 people who died in the plane crash in 
Colombia, including members of the Chapecoense football team, the game opened 
with an intensity befitting a cup quarter-final. Leeds posed the early threat, 
giving Liverpool’s three-man central midfield no time on the ball and looking 
for the first-time pass behind Lucas Leiva and Ragnar Klavan. The tactic almost 
produced an early lead when Stuart Dallas lofted a perfectly weighted chip over 
the Liverpool defence to Hadi Sacko. The striker, just onside, raced clear on 
goal but a combination of a slight touch from the recovering Alberto Moreno and 
a fine save from Simon Mignolet diverted Sacko’s low shot.

Mignolet also saved from Kemar Roofe before Liverpool created a meaningful 
attack. The hosts lacked their usual fluency in the final third, understandably 
given the changes and the absentees, but their threat increased as Trent 
Alexander-Arnold and Sadio Mané began to prosper down the right flank.

The young Liverpool midfielder Ovie Ejaria created his side’s first opening 
with a fine pass that picked out Georginio Wijnaldum’s run through a crowded 
Leeds defence. The Holland international steered his shot towards the top 
corner but Silvestri produced an excellent save on his return to the team in 
place of Rob Green. Liverpool’s best chance before the interval came from a 
rare lapse in the Leeds rearguard when Silvestri and Kyle Bartley left a 
backpass from Kalvin Phillips to each other. Emre Can nipped in to poke the 
ball beyond the Leeds keeper but just wide of the far post.

Leeds went close to breaking the deadlock when Roofe almost punished a mistake 
by Kevin Stewart in stunning style. In keeping with much of the tie Leeds were 
quicker to react when Stewart collected Alexander-Arnold’s pass outside his own 
penalty area and was instantly hassled off the ball by Phillips. It broke to 
Roofe who curled a first time shot over Mignolet and raised his arms in 
celebration, as did Monk, only to see it strike the inside of the far post and 
rebound to safety.

Hull beat Newcastle on penalties in EFL Cup despite Mbokani red card
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/hull-city-newcastle-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
Bartley headed wide from a Charlie Taylor corner and Roofe was denied again, 
this time by Mignolet, as the threat from Leeds intensified. But they were made 
to pay for the missed opportunities. Wijnaldum served Leeds notice when he 
struck the inside of a post after Mané sent him clear on the right of the box. 
With Liverpool’s next attack, the deadlock was broken. Silvestri was caught in 
two minds when Alexander-Arnold whipped a dangerous cross towards his near post 
and, with the keeper rooted to his line, Origi slid in behind Luke Ayling to 
convert at full stretch.

Liverpool’s second may have glossed over the margin of victory but Woodburn 
had no complaints. The teenager replaced Stewart with 23 minutes remaining and 
was given a moment to cherish when Origi and Wijnaldum combined inside the 
Leeds area to present him with a free shot from close range. The Wales youth 
international obliged with an emphatic finish into the roof of Silvestri’s net 
and the semi-finals beckoned once again for Liverpool.

Liverpool v Leeds United: EFL Cup quarter-final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/29/liverpool-v-leeds-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-live> 