
Gianluca Vialli, the first Italian to take charge of Watford, won 59 caps for 
his country and many of the greatest prizes in the sport before strolling 
straight into top-level management.Gianfranco Zola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/gianfranco-zola-resigns-watford-manager>
's broad grin and bewitching feet made him one of the most popular of all 
Premier League players and led to several high-profile coaching positions. And 
now there is Beppe Sannino, who might not be the first smartly dressed, 
shaven-headed Italian to patrol the touchline at Vicarage Road but has little 
in common with either of his predecessors but a mother tongue and an 
underemployed barber.

Vialli was one of five children born to a multimillionaire industrialist from 
the rich north of the country; Sannino was one of five children born to a 
painter and decorator from the deprived south. Vialli was raised in a 60-room 
mansion; Sannino slept on the kitchen floor. By the time Vialli stopped playing 
he was manager of Chelsea; when Sannino stopped playing he got a job as a 
hospital janitor. If they both reached the same destination, they trod very 
different paths.

"I was born in Naples, but when I was 12 my father moved to Turin to work in 
the Fiat factory," says Sannino, who is preparing his side to take on the 
free-scoring Manchester City in the FA Cup fourth round on Saturday. "In Italy 
there's a big difference between life in the north and the south. In Naples we 
had a nice house, but there was no work. In Turin there was work, but we 
couldn't afford a house. Our apartment was tiny, two rooms only, on the fifth 
floor of a tall block, and I slept in the kitchen with my brother. My father 
had always dreamed of working for Fiat, but he didn't like the factory and 
after a year he left, and went back to decorating. There was more work for 
painters in Turin than in Naples. My family is a modest family, a working 
family. It was not an easy life, but in that period I learned everything that 
has brought me here."

Sannino's promise as a footballer was evident from a young age, and like Zola 
he was an entertainer who preferred the No10 shirt. But in 13 years as a player 
he never once appeared in Italy's top two divisions, passing instead between 
teams in Serie C1, C2 and D. He tasted greatest success as part of a celebrated 
attacking trio at Vogherese, and it was to Voghera that he returned when his 
playing career ended.

"I didn't make a lot of money from football, and I had a wife and two children 
so I had to work," he says. "That's what led me to the hospital. I worked for 
five years in a psychiatric hospital, and for five years in a civic hospital. I 
was always cleaning, I cleaned toilets and bedrooms and all the wards: 
geriatric, neonatal, intensive care. My experience over those 10 years will 
stay with me for ever. Because you see everything in the hospital – birth and 
death, pain and joy. I saw people who were fans of Vogherese, who used to come 
and see me play, and sometimes I saw them suffer and die. This does big things 
to you, inside, that don't leave you.

"Every morning I'd start work at 6am, and at one o'clock I'd finish at the 
hospital, get in the car, and drive 100km to Monza or wherever to coach kids. 
Then I'd drive 100km back, have something to eat and collapse on the sofa. My 
son would say: 'Mummy, why is Dad always so sleepy?' And at 5am the next 
morning the alarm would ring again. But I always had a dream. Not to reachSerie 
A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>, that was too much, but 
to become a full-time, professional football coach, to have a salary and live 
an honest life."

After funding his coaching for a decade by the mopping of floors and the 
disinfecting of toilets, Sannino realised that relatively minor ambition, but 
genuine success remained elusive. Then in 2007, a few weeks after his 50th 
birthday, he led Lecco to promotion from Italy's fourth division, now known as 
the Lega Pro Seconda, and the following year repeated the feat with Pergocrema. 
Both achievements were swiftly followed by the sack, but his next job, at 
Varese, changed everything. They roared to successive promotions and lost in 
the Serie B play-offs when on the verge of a third. It was the kind of 
achievement that reshapes reputations. In 2011, at the age of 54, Sannino was 
given his first job in Serie A, leadingSiena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/siena> to 14th place and the Coppa Italia 
semi-finals in his first season.

"I have come to understand that life gives you a road, and you must walk down 
it," he says. "It is already written for us. We can't all be great players, and 
then straight away get a coaching job. Some of us have a short journey, and 
some have a very long journey, and we learn different things along the way. I 
spent three years in Serie A, a year in B, a decade in C, a decade coaching 
youth teams, but you don't necessarily need all of that to get here. I am happy 
to have had all these experiences. This is what I have been given.

"I understand that fans and players like to see the great stars of the game, 
and that is why so many top players, when they stop, immediately have the 
opportunity to become a coach. But I have become an example in Italy of the 
other way, an example for all the coaches that start with nothing. If you work 
hard, if you do a good job, you can get there. It's very difficult, but it can 
happen. I hope my story can be like a bright star, that everyone who wants to 
be a coach in Serie A can see it shining in the sky. It is possible. If I 
could, they can."

After six years of consistent success Sannino left Siena to join Palermo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> in the summer of 2012, and the 
run abruptly ended. He was sacked after only three games, reappointed less than 
six months later, and then resigned last summer to join Chievo, who sacked him 
last November after one victory in their 12 games. "I developed a system, a 
kind of 4-4-2, and everywhere I used this system and I had success," he says. 
"And then I got to Serie A, and learned a big lesson. Until then I knew that if 
I prepared my teams well, I could always win. In Serie A, I learned that other 
teams would always be better. The gap was too big."

As it happens the one victory Chievo achieved under his guidance came against 
Udinese, the Italian club owned by the family that also controlsWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford>. When Zola resigned in December, 
having followed last season's run to the play-off final with little but 
disappointment, Sannino was installed in three days. "The dream of every coach 
in Italy is to spend just one day working in England," he says. "When I got the 
call, I had no doubt. I accepted immediately, and I left. Since that call, I 
have forgotten about Italy. My career there does not matter. Here, nobody knows 
who I am. I come here, humble, quiet, but I want to show, on the pitch, who I 
really am."

Watford have not had a huge upturn in fortunes since the arrival of the 
Italian – they have drawn four out of six league games – but Sannino already 
professes himself besotted with the English game and cannot wait to take on 
Manchester City on Saturday. "It's beautiful. It's like a duel, every match, 
from the first minute to the last," he says. "In Italy, if you play a team from 
the bottom of the league you will probably win. Here you know you must fight. 
This is a beautiful thing. Here you have the FA Cup; in Italy we have the Coppa 
Italia. The difference is that in Italy, from the start you know how it will 
end. The best eight teams go straight into the last 16, and the strongest side 
always plays at home. Last year Wigan won the Cup and were relegated. This year 
Sheffield United, a team near the bottom of League One, beat Aston Villa, a 
team from the middle of the Premier League, away from home!

"In Italy it could never happen. It's just impossible. The spirit of English 
football is all there, in the FA Cup. It is very difficult for the small clubs 
to win, but they always have a chance."

If England really is the home of the underdog, Sannino and his brilliantly 
improbable CV might have landed in their perfect destination.
 