
I've been accused of neglecting non-English Shakespeare in this series. So let 
me say straight away that one of my favourite productions of Antony and 
Cleopatra is stillPeter Zadek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/aug/03/peter-zadek-obituary>'s 
Brechtian interpretation, which played in German at the 1994 Edinburgh 
festival. It viewed the lead characters critically: Gert Voss's Antony sported 
an Arab headdress over his khaki uniform and applied lip-salve before going 
into battle, treating war as a form of game. In the same vein, Eva Mattes's 
Cleopatra dressed for Actium in a pith-helmet and fetching black suit. Only in 
death did the characters acquire moral stature.

Over the years I've seen a number of more conventional productions that 
wrestled with the play's demands – its multiplicity of scenes and rhetorical 
richness.Richard Johnson and Janet Suzman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r-VWNul82w0> impressed as the lovers in an 
epic 1972 Trevor Nunn production. Alan Howard and Glenda Jackson never quite 
struck the expected sparks in a more intimate 1978 Peter Brook version. But 
I've seen some notable Cleopatras including Helen Mirren (never better than 
when she first played it for the National Youth Theatre in the 1960s), Dona 
Croll in an all-black cast for Talawa theatre company in 1991, and Mark Rylance 
who, in a 1999 production for Shakespeare's Globe, highlighted the play's 
comedy.

But easily the best production I've seen was Peter Hall's for the National 
Theatre in 1987. Without going as far as Zadek, he suggested that Antony and 
Cleo were a self-deceiving middle-aged couple seeking in love a reality greater 
than themselves. Judi Dench was abrilliantly volatile, capricious Cleopatra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wZ_xoXWhW5o>, Anthony Hopkins's Antony was a 
grizzled veteran for whom Egypt represented an escapist fantasy, and Michael 
Bryant's Enobarbus began the famous bargespeech in the casual tone of an old 
sweat before being carried off into an imaginative trance. One of the great 
modern Shakespeare productions.

• What are your favourite versions of Antony and Cleopatra? Let us know in the 
comments below
 