
If Martin O'Neill was seeking solace after the disappointment of European 
defeat thenLivingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> on 
current form provided the perfect opposition at Parkhead. The Almondvale team 
are a pale shadow of the side that did so well last season and they capitulated 
in the face of incessant Celtic pressure.

Like so many matches involving the Old Firm teams, once the first goal had 
gone in the result was never in doubt.

That was confirmed here and also at East End Park, where Claudio Caniggia's 
hat-trick was the highlight of a 6-0 win for Rangers over Dunfermline. Mikel 
Arteta, Fernando Ricksen and Barry Ferguson with a penalty completed the 
scoring there.

This one was effectively ended as a contest when Henrik Larsson headed home a 
Steve Guppy cross after 26 minutes. There was something of a Euro hangover 
about this display from the champions, but the victory would have provided 
something of a tonic although they managed to add only one more goal, somewhat 
fortuitously, 12 minutes later when a Marvin Andrews clearance bounced off Bobo 
Balde into the net.

The home team did create other opportunities notably through Larsson, Didier 
Agathe, Chris Sutton and the substitute Alan Thompson but the performance was 
never more than adequate and certainly never raised fans still disappointed at 
the midweek result out of their stupour.

"The crowd was a bit down and the players had to come through that but I 
sensed beforehand there was a desire about them and they did very well," 
insisted O'Neill, who discovered afterwards that his list of players on 
international duty this week had been added to by Bobo Balde's call-up to the 
Guinea squad.

Others who will be away include the Scot Paul Lambert and the Swede Johan 
Mjallby, who missed this game through injury but who will be fit for their 
national teams.

"The problem we have now is that Balde's game is next Sunday and I simply have 
to wait and see if he and the others get back intact before our next match at 
Motherwell on the Tuesday," O'Neill said.

After Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> had missed out on 
the Champions League in Basle, O'Neill must have sensed the likelihood of his 
team getting back on track for he made five changes to the midweek team and 
never looked like dropping even a point.

Livingston, who struggled through their midweek Uefa Cup tie by drawing 0-0 at 
home to Vaduz of Liechtenstein, created only four chances in the 90 minutes.

The first, after 35 minutes, was a Quino effort over; the second immediately 
after half- time a David Bingham header from a Lee Makel cross just wide; next 
was a Eugene Dadi scoop high when it seemed easier to score and last was a 
David Bingham chip just past after 76 minutes. Their captain Stuart Lovell was 
the game's only booking for a 15th-minute foul on Larsson.

"If Dadi had scored with his it might have ended different," said Livingston's 
manager Jim Leishman. "Unfortunately we got going too late and at the start 
defended far too deeply."

After the weekend league programme eyes now turn to international affairs with 
Scotland starting their European Championship campaign in the Faroe Islands on 
Saturday.

 Man of the match:  Steve Guppy (Celtic)
 