
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 

Physically seen live was Louis CK – I thought he was very good. He’s found a 
way of accessing a truth about subjects and making them hilariously funny as 
well.

The funniest book I’ve ever read

A Confederacy Of Dunces by John Kennedy Toole. Once you get into the 
characters, it becomes a sustained comic riff which lasts for the entirety of 
the novel. I don’t think I’ve ever read anything quite like it.

The funniest heckle I’ve ever had 

The things that throw me are the totally unexpected and non sequitur-type 
heckles. I was doing a show and I think I’d mentioned birds, but hadn’t 
referred to them for a long while. Then a woman just said quite clearly: “I saw 
four goldfinches in my garden.” There was nothing I could say to that.

The funniest person I know 

I’ve got an aunt, she’s very funny – Auntie Jean. She talks in an Alan 
Bennett-style monologue the whole time. Out of nowhere, she’ll just suddenly 
say, “Now, that Nicholas Witchell, he’s gone off the boil,” and it sounds like 
a line from an Alan Bennett play – but that’s how she talks.

The funniest word 

In Steptoe And Son, when old man Steptoe was annoyed about something, he would 
say “cobblers”. Me and a few friends, that’s become our go-to phrase for 
describing something a bit rubbish.

The funniest item of clothing I’ve ever owned 

I did have a mask of my own face; it was quite disturbing. When I did 
Sonisphere I was on before Slipknot, and I thought as a tribute I’d have a mask 
made. It looked totally bizarre, particularly when my son put it on and was 
running around like a mini me. Terrifying.

The funniest joke I’ve ever heard 

Simon Munnery does a character called Alan Parker: Urban Warrior, a Wolfie 
Smith, one-man-against-the-world type. He has some lines which resonate a long, 
long time after I’ve heard them. A great one went: “What doesn’t kill us makes 
us stronger. Frosties, par exemple.”

Bill Bailey is touring to 14 Sep <http://billbailey.co.uk/tour/>
 