
Growing up, I often heard my father's favourite joke. It was a quip that was 
useful on many occasions. It meant "Hurry up." Or it meant "Get to the point." 
Sometimes it was a joke in itself, an ode to good-natured impatience. The 
phrase was "Shut up and deal." I never knew the origin. I always assumed it 
came from my dad's real-estate business, or something a buddy told him once in 
a card game.

Years later, I embarked on a lengthy home-study programme of film classics. 
Any such journey leads rather quickly to the work of Billy Wilder, the great 
writer-director of such enduring films as Some Like it Hot, Sunset Boulevard 
and Double Indemnity. On this day I was watching Wilder's 1960 comedy-drama,The 
Apartment <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-apartment>. It was a potent 
martini of a movie, sad and hilarious, subversive and somehow sweet. And then 
came the last line, as the broken-hearted hero CC Baxter (Jack Lemmon) is 
finally reunited with the elevator girl he adores (Shirley MacLaine). Lemmon 
professes love, and with playful indifference, MacLaine whips out a deck of 
cards. "Shut up and deal," she says.

Such is the enduring effect of Billy Wilder. Through films like Sabrina, 
Stalag 17, The Seven Year Itch, Ace in the Hole, and the aforementioned Sunset 
Boulevard and Some Like it Hot, Wilder has infiltrated modern society and 
changed our sense of humour in ways we don't often realise. Whenever we see the 
iconic image of Marilyn Monroe, her white dress billowing above the subway 
grating, we are looking at a writing and directing invention of Billy Wilder. 
When Audrey Hepburn still pops up in every other issue of Vogue, wearing the 
stunning attire of Sabrina, it is again the lasting influence of Wilder. 
Whenever an actor jokes, "I'm ready for my close-up, Mr DeMille," they are 
quoting Wilder's Sunset Boulevard. And though he was born in Vienna, escaped 
Berlin in the 30s and came to Hollywood with only a partial mastery of the 
language, his clear-eyed portraits of American romance and opportunism have 
somehow survived as definitive snapshots of his adopted homeland. Though I'd 
never even known it,Billy Wilder <https://www.theguardian.com/film/billywilder> 
had scripted my family's best joke.

Over the past few years I have had the good fortune to make the acquaintance 
of Mr Wilder himself. I met him first as a director imploring him to act in 
Jerry Maguire (he said no, with relish), and later as an interviewer attempting 
Wilder's first book-length question-and-answer session (he said yes, after much 
cajoling).

Now 93 and still going strong, Wilder still reports to his office almost every 
day and follows current film-making with a passion. Spending time with Wilder 
is much like spending time with his films. His long-time wife Audrey is not 
unlike a Wilder character herself. It was Audrey, in fact, who came up with one 
of the great lines in Ace in the Hole, spoken by an unsentimental almost-widow: 
"Kneeling bags my nylons." The two live in Westwood, California, in a house 
filled with a stunningly eclectic mix of art that Wilder has collected over a 
lifetime. While Wilder never acquired art with an eye toward investment, it was 
a positively Wilderesque turn of events that some years ago he auctioned off 
part of his collection to the tune of $32.6m, more than he ever made in his 
entire career as a film director.

Our conversations for the book spanned several years. Wilder played the part 
of the reluctant but fastidiously accurate subject, and I assumed the role of 
director playing hookey from his own career. Together we discussed his every 
script and film, though the lesser-known failures in his body of work would 
often cause him physical distress to recall. But recall he did, sometimes just 
before throwing me out of his office. ("Please, no more about Kiss Me Stupid!")

There were many differences between us, from hair-length to musical tastes to 
my own problems with exact punctuality ("You are always five minutes late!"), 
not the best habit to indulge with the gentleman who is still complaining about 
Marilyn Monroe's lateness more than 40 years later. Wilder enjoyed jabbing me 
over those differences, though it was a mistake to arrive at his home wearing 
basketball shorts one day. Later, I learned he was somewhat horrified. He 
thought I had shown up in my underwear.

So yes, the differences kept him entertained, but the one subject that always 
united us was The Apartment. We would return to it again and again, as a symbol 
of film structure and a rare example of all the elements coming together to 
create a movie that was almost exactly what the director had intended. Since 
our book has been published, I've become well acquainted with the sometimes 
militant factions of Wilder loyalists. Some call Ace in the Hole and Sunset 
Boulevard the unfiltered brutal best of Wilder. Others select Some Like It Hot 
as the director's comic masterpiece, the one that made it all look easy. Some 
love the romantic concoctions of Sabrina and Love in the Afternoon best. Others 
choose the dark-horse Cagney comedy, One-Two-Three. There is much gunfire 
between these camps, but if you just look at the bigger picture, as Wilder 
does, the very fact that these films are still being discussed is "goddamn 
great." And I will happily take all the bullets necessary. When the smoke 
clears, The Apartment will still be my favourite.

There is controversy over the origins of The Apartment. As with any success, 
there are many who claim credit. Some have said the New York columnist Sydney 
Skolsky presented Wilder with a treatment of the idea. Others say the movie was 
influenced by a Hollywood scandal in which an agent, Jennings Lang, was caught 
(and shot in the groin) having a tryst in the apartment of an underling. Even 
Tony Curtis, in his autobiography, suggests authorship of the idea.

 Wilder rejects all these theories, and gives credit to an unlikely source - 
director David Lean. Seeing Lean's brilliant early film, Brief Encounter, about 
an adulterous affair conducted in the apartment of a third party, Wilder 
scribbled this idea in his notebook: "What about the poor schnook who has to 
crawl into the still-warm bed of the lovers?" Years would pass before Wilder 
felt he could slip this concept past film censors.

It was during the making of Some Like it Hot that Wilder first suggested to 
Jack Lemmon, his cross-dressing hero, that he had another picture in mind for 
him. Lemmon would play CC Baxter, named after Wilder's favourite assistant 
director, CC Coleman. Baxter was the quintessential button-down schnook, a 
little man in a big insurance company. At first unwittingly, then ambitiously, 
Baxter would loan out his apartment for the afternoon and evening trysts of his 
philandering higher-ups. Juggling appointments, unable to enter his own 
apartment even when suffering from a cold, Baxter would try but find it hard to 
conduct a budding romance of his own with the plucky elevator girl, Fran 
Kubelik.

Kubelik, a modern working girl, was a cutting-edge creation for 1960. Forty 
years later, the part still feels fresh. A sexually active loser-at-love with 
only fleeting moments of self-pity, it was not an easy part for Wilder to cast. 
When Marilyn Monroe, fresh from the rocky shoot on Some Like it Hot, sent out 
feelers to play Fran Kubelik, Wilder avoided the temptation. "It would not be 
real," he told me later. "Everybody in the whole company would be after the 
elevator girl." He settled on a young actress named Shirley MacLaine, then 
coming off a dramatic turn in Vincente Minnelli's Some Came Running. It was 
perfect for the story. On first look, you might miss her. On second look, you 
were infatuated. What lies beneath the cheery kid-sister demeanour of the 
elevator girl? The answer, as CC Baxter would soon find out, was plenty.

Even today, decades after winning three Oscars for the film, Wilder is still 
tweaking the story of The Apartment. He sometimes wonders if he should have 
given Jack Lemmon "a limp, or some physical deformity" to increase sympathy for 
the character. And he expresses surprise that audiences would root for MacLaine 
and Lemmon as lovers. But it is their very lack of traditional smouldering 
qualities that make the union of Baxter and Kubelik a celebration of romantic 
misfits everywhere. And when Lemmon discovers that he is actually assisting his 
boss, played by Fred MacMurray, in a secret affair with Kubelik herself, it is 
one of those moments where audiences weep and screenwriters drool. Wilder 
accomplishes this aching plot turn wordlessly, as MacLaine offers Lemmon her 
cracked compact mirror to check his look. The compact is the very same one that 
had been left behind in his apartment, the one Lemmon had unctuously returned 
to his boss for brownie points. The shot still delights Wilder, as it well 
should. "Three things are accomplished in that one moment," he points out. 
"Very nice."

The casting of Fred MacMurray as the no-good boss Sheldrake (a lucky charm 
name that appears in several of Wilder's films) is the kind of Wilder touch 
that still inspires me in my own casting process. The part originally belonged 
to actor Paul Douglas. When Douglas died just before filming, Wilder turned to 
MacMurray, an actor mostly known for lighter family fare. MacMurray complained, 
but took the part anyway, just as he did in joining the cast of Double 
Indemnity. In Wilder's films, comic actors often shoulder the drama. Dramatic 
actors, like Gloria Swanson in Sunset Boulevard, find themselves playing 
comedy. When the formula works, as it often did for Wilder, the whole film 
becomes more textured and unpredictable. In a movie like The Apartment, the 
only thing black-and-white is the colour of the film.

Wilder's celebrated collaborator IAL Diamond once aptly described Wilder's 
style as a blend of "the sweet and the sour". Perfected through previous 
pictures, that happy-sad quality reached a pinnacle in The Apartment. And 
though Wilder is famously adverse to self-conscious camerawork, anyone lucky 
enough to see The Apartment on a big screen will find themselves with enormous 
visual delights as well. Early sequences showing Jack Lemmon at work in the 
vast insurance company are as striking today as when the film was released. 
Making Jerry Maguire, I was the very epitome of a strident director, demanding 
a huge studio set filled with extras to create a similar effect in showing 
Maguire leaving his sports agency. Only later, interviewing Wilder, did I learn 
I could have saved a lot of money and set space. Wilder himself shot the scenes 
on a very small stage, utilising the tricks of visual perspective. Behind 
Lemmon, the desks get smaller and smaller and so do the actors. At the very 
back of the office, the co-workers are played by midgets.

Billy Wilder was at the peak of his directing powers negotiating the tricky 
mix of melancholy and humour. Shirley MacLaine recalls Wilder never sitting, 
often chain-smoking and pacing while directing. Every word mattered. (Diamond 
stood nearby, policing the exact delivery of each line.) Sometimes she would 
take a relieved breath after completing a long speech, only to find she'd left 
out an "and" or a "then". The takes continued until the dialogue was perfect.

This is not to say that Wilder couldn't swing with a good suggestion. 
MacLaine, who was then embroiled in a difficult love affair of her own, once 
casually sighed: "Why do people have to fall in love with other people anyway? 
Why couldn't they fall in love with a kangaroo?" Wilder rebuilt the entire set, 
and re-filmed a key scene to include the line. And again, when MacLaine shared 
the trials of learning how to play gin, lessons she was then getting from 
Sinatra and the Rat Pack, Wilder and Diamond wrote that into the script too. 
And so was born the gin game between Lemmon and MacLaine that continues 
throughout The Apartment.

When filming on The Apartment was completed, so exact was Wilder's execution 
that the entire movie was edited in a matter of days. "There was about five 
feet of unused film," Wilder remembers with only slight exaggeration. It was, 
he also recalls, one of the few occasions when he knew the power of the picture 
while filming. Reviews were not uniformly excellent, with some critics 
attacking the raciness of the film's subject matter, not to mention Lemmon's 
pimp-hero, but audiences responded quickly. The film was a hit, and the roll 
continued through Oscar night.

When Wilder was at the podium, accepting the Academy award for best director, 
playwright Moss Hart half-seriously whispered in his ear: "It's time to stop." 
But Wilder did not stop. Moments later, he was awarded the Oscar for best 
picture as well. And Wilder would go on to direct nine more films. He often 
discusses future ideas, though he wonders if his physical stamina could match 
his still-racing mind. He is, as he says with characteristic lack of 
pretension, a writer. But if you look hard enough around Wilder's apartment, 
you can spot his Oscars standing in a clump within the cabinet by his den. And 
the one out front, standing guard among the other statuettes, is his best 
picture award for The Apartment. He offers the film his highest compliment. "It 
worked."

Though our book is finished, our relationship continues. Just the other day, a 
small miracle happened when Wilder agreed to a rare on-camera interview for The 
Today Show. I sat beside him in the NBC studio that was once the home of Johnny 
Carson, and listened as the interviewer leaned forward and posed what was 
clearly an important question.

"We are doing a show on the Century's Great Thinkers," he said, "and I'd like 
you to comment on the next millennium. What would you like to say about the 
future?"

In our current world where anyone of even questionable importance feels a duty 
to offer lofty thoughts about The Next Thousand Years, Billy Wilder blinked 
suspiciously behind large glasses.

"Nothing," he said, slightly incredulous, as if to answer would condemn him to 
a prison filled with pretentious twits. "Nothing." I watched the frustrated 
interviewer with some sympathy. Wilder is, after all, not the easiest 
interview. Just as he has for some seventy years of film-making, today Wilder 
will leave the chest-beating to others.

The interviewer thumbed through his pages of questions. "What's next," Wilder 
asked, professionally pleasant, stealing a look at his watch. "How else can I 
help you?"

In other words, shut up and deal. 

Conversations with Billy Wilder by Cameron Crowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cameron-crowe> (Faber, #20) is published on 
Monday.

 Five great Billy Wilder movies

The Apartment 
 Lemmon lets his flat, loses his heart. 

 Double Indemnity 
 There's no insurance to cover the Barbara Stanwyck risk.

 Sunset Boulevard 
 Story of a dead man and a faded dame. 

 Ace In The Hole 
Kirk Douglas, low as a journo. 

 Some Like It Hot 
 Cross-dressing Curtis and Lemmon.
 