
There has certainly been a bit of banter around Blackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> and Fleetwood for this local 
derby: even Father Christmas asked me for two tickets so that was something 
new, that Santa Claus is a Fleetwood fan – me and the kids found out. He tried 
to get two tickets off me. I thought it should have been the other way round. I 
thought he'd have been giving the tickets out.

The tie has been on us now for a few weeks and we're determined to make sure 
that we enjoy it and make most of the occasion, which is the most important 
thing, because these events don't come round all the time.

There isn't actually that much spice between the clubs: we last played each 
other 31 years ago, also in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, when Blackpool won, so not much 
has happened between us. A lot of Blackpool fans come and watch us, and a lot 
of our fans watch them. Of course there are the diehards who support just one 
club, but the likes of myself and Craig Madden, the assistant manager, and 
other lads have played for Blackpool so there's connections there.

I played there under Sam Allardyce, Gary Megson and Nigel Worthington so I had 
some great times, very fond memories. But for the minute I'm all about 
Fleetwood and I'm desperate to win the tie. The best result is still for us to 
put them out. We'll be going into the game to try and win it, we won't be 
suffering an inferiority complex, we'll go to try and progress in the 
tournament.

But, also, you'd probably be lying if you say you won't be excited about this 
tie and will not be preparing for it differently to a game against a team in 
our league, because we've got to show respect to Blackpool, they are playing at 
a higher level than us.

Their players hold to a level of consistency to keep them competitive while 
trying to win a place back in the Premier League. But it doesn't daunt us, 
we're not afraid, we feel we've got players that will cause Blackpool problems, 
no doubt. But, certainly, we've got to pay special attention to players in the 
Blackpool team for us to try and get that result.

Ian Holloway will be taking it seriously – he's been to watch us play, that's 
him being professional. We've been to watch them play a couple of times as 
well, so we know everything there is to know about them.

Fleetwood are second in the Conference, the highest position in their history, 
and this is the furthest the club has been in the FA Cup. I believe we have the 
right structure, a great chairman, Andy Pilley, a good fan base, and we're 
full-time: so we have the set-up to do the toughest thing in football in 
England, and that's to win a prestigious place in the Football League. It's not 
going to be easy but we're going to be as competitive as the better teams in 
the division and hopefully get there.

The money from the Cup run will certainly not hurt, especially in the month of 
January – it gives me the opportunity to go to the chairman and ask if there is 
any chance of him sharing a few bob of it around, which he's never been 
backward about.

And the publicity and the attendances from the Cup run also help: the players 
have been terrific in creating some history for the club and these are great 
times.

Interview by Jamie Jackson
 