
The RheinEnergie Stadion was on fire on Saturday but not in a good way. Thick 
plumes of smoke engulfed the pitch by the time the frightened referee blew a 
premature whistle, ushering the players into the tunnel. Only the disconsolate 
keeper Michael Rensing and Lukas Podolski took their time coming off, while a 
few dozen police in riot gear sought to fight back a pitch invasion. In his 
wisdom, the stadium DJ blasted out local carnival classics over the loudspeaker 
in an attempt to drown out the protest. The disconnect between the cheerful 
sounds and the apocalyptic scenes was reminiscent of Clockwork Orange, the 
difference being that this violence was not directed at others. The black 
clouds from the smoke bombs were symbolic to the point of being naff:Köln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> imploded as a result of 
self-inflicted damage.

The Billy Goats are relegated after losing 4-1 to Bayern, it's their fifth 
drop in 15 years. For the Arsenal-bound Podolski, who had been sent off with 
predictable pathos before the match, it's the most unwanted of hat-tricks: the 
man they call Prinz has been relegated three times with Germany's most 
enduringly shambolic club. "He goes, the chaos stays," wrote Welt.

"It's so unnecessary, we had the type of players to stay up," said the 
caretaker manager Frank Schaefer, who will continue to work in a different 
capacity. He's right but only to a point: the players were perhaps decent 
enough but the team and the club certainly were not. "We have to admit that our 
performances on and off the pitch have been worthy of the second division," 
said CEO Claus Horstmann, a tad generously. "We were never able to install a 
proper, competent duo of manager and sporting director."

Instead, they had Stale Solbakken, the Norwegian manager who tried to get by 
with an experimental, radical zonal marking system (no doubling up, no 
defensive movement between the lines) all over the pitch but treated fitness as 
a mere afterthought. As a result Köln often defended decently enough and got by 
if and when the talismanic Podolski pounced but would usually fall apart with 
the first conceded goal. They conceded a whopping 75 goals in 34 games, enough 
to last other sides three whole seasons.

Solbakken was barely on speaking terms with sporting director, Volker Finke, 
by the winter break when Finke bought in the North Korean striker Chong Tese. 
The sporting director was fired in a last-ditch attempt to strengthen 
Solbakken's position but the club, as is so often the case, backed the wrong 
horse: the former Copenhagen coach limped on until Schaefer came in with four 
games to go. The 49-year-old inherited "the ruins of team: tactically broke, 
physically uncompetitive, completely at loggerheads with each other" according 
to Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger. Schaefer picked up one more point.

The squad, randomly put together by a myriad of people over the course of the 
last couple of years, didn't seem to understand the magnitude of the crisis. A 
tipsy Miso Brecko drove his car on to the tracks of a tram. An even tipsier 
Slawomir Peszko got into a late-night argument with a taxi driver and ended up 
in police custody. Kevin Pezzoni had his nose broken by an mysterious carnival 
reveller for reasons yet unknown.

Upstairs, there was the usual incompetence, only more of it than usual. In 
November, president Wolfgang Overath, a local legend who stood for the glory 
days but did little of use, resigned. Various factions fought for control in 
the ensuing months. A couple of weeks ago, a new board with the president, 
Werner Spinner, and the vice‑president, Harald "Toni" Schumacher, was 
eventually voted in but they find themselves in the second division, without a 
manager and in all likelihood with only half a team: Rensing, Sascha Riether, 
Pedro Geromel and Martin Lanig will have to be sold to ease the debt burden. 
"It's silly to believe that relegation will be panacea for redemption and 
restoration," wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung. "This is a relegation without a 
guaranteed return ticket."

Problems with the fan base exacerbate the existential crisis. The stadium 
skirmishes showed that the supporters have become blind with rage. Earlier in 
the season, a bus full of Gladbach supporters was chased down by brick-throwing 
hooligans on the autobahn; on Saturday, an angry, drunken mob came to the house 
of captain Geromel in the middle of the night and demanded to speak their 
minds. "What happened after the game is unacceptable," said Spinner, "the 
bleakness of this Black Sunday will be hard to stomach."

The German FA is looking into the crowd trouble. A game behind closed doors is 
a realistic possibility.

"This is the worst moment in my career," said a tearful Podolski. "With so 
many defeats and goals conceded, we didn't deserve to stay up." The extensive 
farewell festivities before the club's must-win game were a typical example of 
Colonia-ism, a slightly deranged, sentimental belief in their own eternal 
greatness, coupled with groundless heaps of optimism. "First they sing, then 
they lock arms and sway around, then they cry a bit and in the end, the team's 
supposed to play Bayern off the park," wrote Stadt-Anzeiger.

"Well, that didn't work. [The Podolski sending-off] showed the club in all its 
good-hearted but bottomless naivety." That naivety, a sense of "this can't 
happen to us, we are Köln" will have contributed to a sense of shock so keenly 
felt that a bit of mindless vandalism suddenly looked an appealing option. 
Total helplessness in the stands temporarily gave way to a bit of action — at 
least, they were doing something. Even if that particular something was 
football's equivalent of throwing a massive, hysterical tantrum.

"Farewell, Poldi," read a supporters' melancholic banner. "If we could, we'd 
leave, too."

Results



Köln 1‑4 Bayern

Dortmund 4‑0 Freiburg

The champions set a new points record in the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>, 81

Nürnberg 1‑4 Leverkusen

Bremen 2‑3 Schalke:

Klaas-Jan Huntelaar hunted down the "Torjägerkanone" the top scorer trophy, 
with 29 goals in the league. He's the first Dutchman to win the award and he 
promised to celebrate in style. "I'll take the whole team out on a night in New 
York at McDonald's," he said.

Augsburg 1–0 Hamburg

Augsburg's fairytale, the survival in the top-flight, came with a twist at the 
end: the manager, Jos Luhukay, jumped ship, citing "doubts about the future of 
the club". He doesn't get on with the president, Walther Seinsch, apparently. 
The Hamburg coach Thorsten Fink, meanwhile, called for his players to change 
their attitude following the club's worst-ever performance in the top flight. 
"If you want the most beautiful girl in the discotheque, you have to say: hey 
doll, I'm the greatest guy, you're coming with me," he said. "You have to 
really want something in order to achieve it." A good lesson, for all of us.

Stuttgart 3-2 Wolfsburg

Hannover 2-1 Kaiserslautern

Hertha 3-1 Hoffenheim

A timely bout of fighting spirit, one of the most idiotic red cards this side 
of JT's brave England for Ryan Babel and the end-of-season-can't-quite-be-arsed 
attitude of Hoffenheim helped Otto Rehhagel's man to reach the relegation 
play-off spot. They will come up against Fortuna Düsseldorf, Otto's former 
club. "Mr 100,000 Volt was extra low voltage compared to me," said the 
73-year-old who can yet end his career as a saviour.

Mainz 0-3 Mönchengladbach
 