
Boy Blue Entertainment <http://www.boyblueent.com/> is a hip-hop dance company 
founded in 2002 by the choreographer Kenrick Sandy and music producer Michael 
Asante. At the time, hip-hop dance was regarded as essentially a street and 
club style, but the pair saw beyond the peacocking and the freestyle dance 
battles to its potential as an expressive theatrical form. “With the growth of 
hip-hop there’s always been that element of competition,” Asante told me when I 
spoke to him and Sandy last week. “And competition is good. Go better, go 
harder. But hip-hop is also a human experience, a powerful medium that can take 
people to a new place.”

Boy Blue’s breakthrough came in 2007 with Pied Piper, an adrenaline-fuelled 
morality tale that won that year’s Olivier award for outstanding dance 
production. In 2008, ZooNation’sInto the Hoods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/apr/20/dance>, created by Kate Prince, 
became the first hip-hop dance show to open in the West End (it would go on to 
be the West End’s longest-running dance show ever). In 2012, Sandy 
choreographed a sequence involving hundreds of dancers for the Olympic Games 
opening ceremony, which was directed by Danny Boyle, and the following year Boy 
Blue createdEmancipation of Expressionism, which in 2016 was chosen as a GCSE 
dance set text, and is currently being filmed by Boyle. Sandy was awarded an 
MBE in the Queen’s New Year honours list.

What’s physical skill worth, asks Sandy, in a world of half-truths and 
incomprehensible signs

Between them, Boy Blue and ZooNation have ensured hip-hop’s place in the 
British theatrical mainstream. It’s a living form, constantly evolving. “New 
moves in breakdance come out of mistakes,” Sandy tells me. “You push an 
existing move further than it can go and you get something new, an innovation.”

Sandy and Asante’s new work, Blak Whyte Gray 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=20268>, is very fine 
indeed. There’s a spareness about it – a sense of intensely distilled feeling, 
of dance cut to its essence – that you only rarely encounter. Part 1,Whyte, 
presents us with three dancers in a square of light. Their faces are blank, 
their costumes are hung with straps suggesting some kind of institutional 
restraint, and they appear forcibly contained by the illuminated square. 
Movement flows through them in kinetic waves; the dancers’ joints lock and pop 
as if beyond their motor control. Technically speaking, this is an awesome 
display, but what is projected, overwhelmingly, is melancholy. The sense of 
things lost. The sense of a place whose dark horizons press ever inwards.
 Gemma Kay Hoddy, Ricardo Da Silva and Dickson Mbi in Whyte from Blak Whyte 
Gray. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Asante, who conceived Blak Whyte Gray, is concerned with the problem of 
identity in a world in which truth is at best relative and at worst wholly 
negotiable. “The theme is: what does it mean to be me? And how much of that is 
what I’ve been indoctrinated with?” Hip-hop, as presented by the Boy Blue team, 
is the perfect medium for negotiating such shifting ground. Asante’s shuddering 
electronic score chops up time, Sandy’s breakdance plays disturbing games with 
gravity, and all is rich and strange disequilibrium.

In Gray, African chants and crowd recordings reference Asante’s Ghanaian 
descent, and the stage fills with a high-velocity whirl of popping, breaking 
and krump. But once again we sense constraint. This hyperactivity isn’t 
freedom, it’s frenzy, and when Sandy freeze-frames his cast, their faces 
express the blank horror of figures from a Francis Bacon painting. Dancers 
enter on their backs, head first, propelled by feet and hands. Their progress 
is smooth and purposeful, but they are supine. The piece is all about such 
contradictions. Sandy takes the spectacular elements of hip-hop and infuses 
them with abjection. What’s physical skill worth, he asks, in a world of 
half-truths and incomprehensible signs.

With Blak, Asante and Sandy bring us into the light. A male figure – weak, 
staggering, barely alive – is surrounded by others in the eight-strong cast. We 
appear to be in a post-apocalyptic world. The dancers are survivors, and 
finally appear to be masters of their souls. What binds them, and what they’ve 
undergone, we don’t know. Patiently, they revive the faltering figure and drape 
him in a scarlet cloth.
 A scene from Blak from Blak Whyte Gray. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
All of this is cryptic, but my conversation with Asante may hold a clue. He 
had recently learned from his father, he told me, that while he was partly 
Ghanaian, he was also of Egyptian descent. This knowledge had opened up 
intriguing doors in his consciousness. His familial past, he realised, led back 
not only to the Ashanti empire of what is now Ghana, which was annexed and 
colonialised by Britain in the late 19th century, but to another part of Africa 
altogether. “Am I more connected to the Nile than I knew?” he wonders, and this 
cloaking of the survivor in kingly red seems to ask and answer the same 
question.

Hip-hop, for Asante, is a medium in which “I can journey past my limits. The 
kingdom is extending and extending. It’s a place of worship. Any culture can 
bring its essence into it.” Of courseBlak Whyte Gray is political. Of course it 
references colonialism and slavery. But its final emphasis is joyful, and in 
its linking of past and present, it releases the dancers from their symbolic, 
referential duties. There’s a cathartic moment, immediately recognised by the 
audience, following which the dancers are performing as themselves, for sheer 
elation. This awakening into the blazing present moment is, for Asante and 
Sandy, revolution. For us, it’s great dance theatre, too.

• Blak Whyte Gray is at the Barbican, London 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=20268> until 21 January
 