
Jimmy Phillips delivered a damning assessment of Bolton Wanderers’ relegation 
from the Championship after they were beaten 4-1 atDerby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty>, who boosted their play-off 
claims.

Bolton’s caretaker manager admitted his team had offered little as they were 
condemned to the third tier of English football for the first time since 1993.

They went into the game knowing only a victory would postpone the drop into 
League One but by half-time they were in a hopeless position after Derby scored 
twice in an embarrassingly one-sided 45 minutes. Johnny Russell fired in from 
25 yards in the 13th minute and then provided the cross that Tom Ince volleyed 
in at the back post in the 38th minute.

Derby could have scored more and it was no surprise when Jacob Butterfield 
made it three with a deflected 20-yard drive in the 69th minute. Zach Clough 
replied with a penalty four minutes later, the first goal Derby had conceded at 
home in 441 minutes, but they restored their three-goal cushion in the 77th 
minute when Russell punished more woeful defending despite missing his first 
attempt.

It was all too easy for Derby and Phillips said: “This has just confirmed the 
sort of season the club’s had. The only positive thing we can say is that we 
still have a football club because at one stage during the season that was 
looking very doubtful.

“Today was another very poor performance by the players and that’s something 
we will be working hard at on the training ground between now and the end of 
the season to make sure performances improve and they have more fight and 
desire in games.

“It’s one thing losing but there’s a manner in which you might not gain a 
victory and that’s been the hugely disappointing thing from my point of view.

“In four games, we’ve only scored penalties and in three of those games after 
half an hour we’ve given ourselves a mountain to climb – 2-0 down at Bristol 
[City], three at Reading and then today’s game.”

It was a totally different picture for Derby’s head coach, Darren Wassall, who 
was able to bring on the midfielder Will Hughes towards the end for his first 
appearance since he injured a knee on the opening day at Bolton.

Wassall said: “That was the icing on the cake, it was great to see him back, 
but I don’t want to take the attention away from the performance of the rest of 
the players because they were magnificent from start to finish.

“After beating Hull on Tuesday the message to the players was we have to do 
this all over again on Saturday and it’s going to be even harder because of the 
expectation.

“The most pleasing thing was from the very first minute our attitude, 
application, desire, passion and everything you need in football was there and 
that allowed the ability to come through.

“We have a motto that talent alone is not enough and the last two games have 
shown that because we’ve won the games through our character and determination 
and earned the right to play.”
 