
David Wheater’s focus on being a consummate professional for Bolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> means eschewing a 
favourite food: the Parmo.

FA Cup third round: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/fa-cup-third-round-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
This is the Middlesbrough native’s signature dish, which is formally known as 
chicken parmesan. It consists of a breaded cutlet of breast drenched in melted 
cheese and a béchamel-parmesan sauce. And, ahead of facing Sam Allardyce’s
Crystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> in 
Saturday’s FA Cup third-round tie at the Macron Stadium, Wheater admits to 
missing it.

“I love a Parmo because I’m a Middlesbrough lad and my family bring them down 
sometimes,” says the central defender. “It’s not healthy, though. It’s a big 
chicken breast, a load of sauce and melted cheese so it’s not really suitable 
for a footballer’s diet.”

Where once Wheater was a Premier League and England squad player, he is now in 
League One, following Bolton’s relegation from the Championship last year.

He became a regular in Gareth Southgate’s Middlesbrough side during the 
2007-08 season and was named as an England substitute by Fabio Capello for that 
summer’s friendlies against USA and Trinidad & Tobago. But he never made an 
England appearance and after joining Bolton in January 2011 when they were 
eighth in the Premier League, the following May misfortune struck.

During a 2-2 draw with West Bromwich Albion, Wheater snapped an anterior 
cruciate ligament, which ruled him out for close to a year. After recovering he 
suffered a cyst behind the knee and at the start of the 2014-15 term a slipped 
disc that misaligned his hips. This was all key in his subsequent career arc 
and, Wheater says, the virtually injury-free past two seasons are due to the 
insoles he now wears. “In the end I went to see a specialist and he got me 
those special insoles for my boots – just one little thing sorted everything 
out.”

Wheater endured dark days. “It was horrible sometimes – at our old training 
ground you looked out on the lads while you were injured. But you’re always 
confident you’ll come back,” he says. “I bust one of my boots in a game and I 
wore a different pair of boots in the next one and got injured without those 
insole things, so I wear them every day – for training, for matches.”

Faces behind the FA Cup third round: ‘At this level these are the days you 
live for’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/fa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers>
Under Phil Parkinson, Bolton are second in League One. The new manager took 
over in the summer and has a considerable pedigree in cup competitions. He 
guided Bradford City to the 2013 League Cup final and knocked José Mourinho’s 
Chelsea out of the 2015FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
with a memorable 4-2 victory at Stamford Bridge after the Bantams were 2-0 down.

Wheater says: “We’re doing very well – it shows in our position in the league 
and Phil Parkinson is the best manager I’ve played under. He’s so good at what 
he does. Sometimes managers are good at one thing and not the best at the 
other. But he’s great at man-management, training, he’s a top coach – he brings 
out the best in all the players.”

Bolton’s financial problems – HMRC served the club with a winding-up petition 
in December 2015 – meant at one stage that Wheater went five months before 
being paid. Now, though, there is renewed optimism. A return to the top flight, 
from which Bolton were relegated in May 2012, is the ambition. “Definitely, if 
you look at the stadium and our training ground, it’s set up for a Premier 
League team,” he says.

The 29-year-old knows Palace will be a difficult proposition. “It’s going to 
be a tough one but we’re going into the game confident we can get a result,” 
Wheater says. And he could yet be bolstered by a surprise sample of his 
favoured Teesside cuisine. “I’ve got a wife who could make a Parmo. But I’m on 
a health kick so I don’t think I’m going to get one unless its my family that 
does bring one. “Actually, they’re coming down on Friday night, so I might put 
a little request in.”
 