
Neil Lennon paised his players after Bolton staged a dramatic comeback to earn 
a well-deserved draw at Wolves.

The hosts looked to be heading to victory after a third-minute strike from the 
debutant Joe Mason and a 77th-minute goal from the substitute James Henry.

But the bottom club stunned hit back when Wellington Silva reduced the arrears 
in the 82nd minute before Stephen Dobbie’s free-kick was deflected home off 
Dean Moxey two minutes from time.

Bolton have cut the deficit between themselves and safety to four points and 
Lennon said: “It was an outstanding performance. I thought we dominated the 
game for long periods and I couldn’t believe that we went 2-0 down. We 
thoroughly deserved a point out of the game and I got everything that I wanted 
from the performance.

“It gives us a huge lift going into a big game against Rotherham. It was 
important that we got something from this game in hand and now we have to 
follow it up with hopefully a win at the weekend and, if we play as well as 
that and find that consistency, we will not be far away.

“They showed a lot of character and fight so I am very pleased. I have had a 
few false dawns with this group so I don’t want to count my chickens but if we 
can win at the weekend we are right back in it which is where we want to be. It 
is a point in the right direction.”

Mason, who was making his debut following his £3m move from Cardiff, broke the 
deadlock when he steered the ball into an empty net after pouncing on the loose 
ball when goalkeeper Ben Amos had beaten away Bjorn Sigurdarson’s shot.

Despite Bolton’s best effort, Henry looked to have ended their hopes when he 
curled a low drive just inside Amos’ far post. But Silva set the alarm bells 
ringing when he stooped to head home at the far post before Dobbie’s 25-yard 
free-kick was deflected past the stranded Wolves goalkeeper Carl Ikeme.

Kenny Jackett admitted the late collapse has left his side facing a massive 
task to make the play-offs. “We need a hell of a run and we know that and there 
are some very good sides ahead of us so we are looking at not a point gained 
tonight but two dropped.

“We didn’t have the ability to push high enough or at the right time to keep 
the ball. Bolton were in the ascendancy for too much of the game and I accept 
that.

“Having said that we were ahead early on and then we got a very good second 
goal. Being in that position you are working towards seeing that game through. 
We got the second goal at a very good time and then we need to manage the game 
through.

“When you get into that type of position you should be able to see it out. We 
are disappointed with their first goal as he got quite a simple header and that 
is frustrating.

“Generally we defended our box very well and although Bolton had some 
possession they didn’t have many chances and it looked like our back four was 
strong enough to see it through.”
 