
With bonfire night just around the corner, here are a couple of recipes to 
move the fireworks into the kitchen. Using a cook’s blowtorch is daunting 
stuff, and even though I’ve grown brave enough to use my mini blowtorch, I 
still wince at the rasp of that knife-like jet of blue flame, holding it at a 
nervous arm’s length. If you can hold your nerve though, you can master maybe 
the only dessert where the making itself is as showstopping as the tasting: 
melt, bubble, burnish and burn the thick sugar crust of a creme brulee.

Drink: warming tipples for Halloween, the Day of the Dead and Bonfire Night
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/29/mulled-cider-whisky-mac-toddy-for-halloween-bonfire-night>
Honey mascarpone creme brulee with forest fruits

I’ve used mascarpone here instead of the usual cream, perhaps making creme 
brulee a bit of a misnomer. The cheese, while every bit as rich as cream, has a 
very mild tang to it, which I think sits well with the sweetness of the honey.


Serves 6
250ml wholemilk
250g mascarpone
6 large egg yolks
6 tbsp runny honey
3 tbsp plain flour
2 tsp vanilla extract
4 tbsp demerara sugar
250g forest fruits, fresh or frozen

1 Preheat the oven to 150C/300F/gas mark 2. Put a kettle on to boil.

2 Gently heat the milk until it’s scalding hot. Meanwhile, beat the mascarpone 
until it’s perfectly lump-free, add the egg yolks and whisk until smooth. Add 
the honey, flour and vanilla extract and stir to combine. Pour in the hot milk 
in a thin stream, whisking all the while.

3 Divide the custard between 6 ovenproof ramekins and arrange them in a large 
oven dish or roasting tin. Pour boiling water into the oven dish until the 
water reaches around ⅔ of the way up the sides of the ramekins.

4 Bake for 35-40 minutes, until the custard has just about set, is firm around 
the outside and with barely a jiggle at the centre. Leave to cool to room 
temperature, then put them in the fridge to chill and set completely.

Baked custard recipes to prevent curdling calamities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/21/creme-caramel-banana-creme-brulee-recipes-ruby-tandoh>
5 Once the custard has cooled, sprinkle a couple of teaspoons of demerara 
sugar in a thick, even layer over the top of each ramekin. Use a blowtorch to 
blast them, moving the flame lightly over the sugar until it’s bubbling and 
caramelised all over. You’ll get the best flavour if you cook the sugar until 
it’s a rich amber colour all over, with very dark, almost black, patches in 
parts. It’s a fine balance to strike, though, because cook it for even a few 
seconds too long and the sugar will begin to smoke and burn. If you don’t have 
a blowtorch, put the sugar-topped custards under a preheated grill for 3-5 
minutes, checking them regularly.

6 Chill again in the fridge for at least 30 minutes before serving, 
particularly if you used the grill to caramelise their tops, as the heat will 
have loosened the consistency of the custard.

7 Meanwhile, heat the forest fruits in a saucepan until softened and beginning 
to release their juices, sweetening with a little sugar if you need to. Serve 
the creme brulees with the hot fruit.

I love burrowing down – first through the sugar crust, then the cream – to 
reach that shock of pink at the bottom

Raspberry creme brulee

There’s a layer of raspberry compote nestled underneath the rich vanilla 
custard in these puddings, balancing all of that cream and sugar with something 
a little fresher. I love burrowing down – first through the sugar crust and 
then the thick cream – to reach that shock of pink at the bottom of the dish.

You can use raspberry jam at a push if you can’t be bothered to make this easy 
compote, but it’ll be far sweeter and could push the creme brulee into 
decidedly sickly territory. Another option would be to use a couple of 
teaspoons of tart lemon curd, a few frozen blackcurrants (plucked from a bag of 
mixed frozen berries) or even just a couple of fresh raspberries, as they are.

Serves 4
125g fresh raspberries
3 tbsp caster sugar
1 tsp lemon juice
2 tsp cornflour
200ml double cream
100ml milk
4 egg yolks
50g caster sugar
2 tsp vanilla bean paste
4 tbsp caster sugar

1 Preheat the oven to 150C/300F/gas mark 2.

2 Combine the raspberries, caster sugar and lemon juice in a small pan and set 
over a low heat. Cook for a few minutes, crushing the berries under a spoon, 
until the fruit is tender and the mixture soupy. Press the raspberry mixture 
through a sieve to catch all the seeds, pushing through as much pulp as 
possible, then decant the strained mixture back into the pan. Whisk in the 
cornflour and cook, stirring continuously, for another couple of minutes, until 
the puree has become a little thicker. Divide between four ramekins and put 
them in the fridge to cool and set.

3 Meanwhile, prepare the custard. Heat the cream and milk together over a low 
heat. Whisk the egg yolks, sugar and vanilla bean paste together in a large 
bowl. Once the cream mixture is scalding hot, pour it into the egg yolks in a 
thin stream while you whisk.

4 Pour the custard over the chilled raspberry puree in the four ramekins and 
transfer them to an oven tray or roasting dish. Pour near-boiling water to ⅔ of 
the way up the outside of the ramekins. Bake the custards for around 35 
minutes, until set to a very slight wobble at their centres.

5 Once cooked, remove the ramekins from the water bath and leave to cool to 
room temperature before moving to the fridge to chill.

6 Once the custards are cold, get a mini blowtorch ready, or preheat the 
grill. Dredge caster sugar over the desserts and caramelise the tops as 
instructed in the honey mascarpone creme brulee recipe above. Return to the 
fridge for 30 minutes before eating.
 