
Aitor Karanka finds watching Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> a strangely familiar 
experience. When he analyses their shape, structure and default tactical 
responses, the Spaniard sees distinct shades of his own Middlesbrough side.

Middlesbrough close in on £6.5m signing of Aston Villa’s Rudy Gestede
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/middlesbrough-rudy-gestede-aston-villa>
Sometimes, as he sits in front of his TV screen studying United’s play, 
Karanka second-guesses José Mourinho’s substitutions or formational tweaks but 
this impressive knack should come as no surprise. Quite apart from having spent 
three years as the former Chelsea manager’s assistant at Real Madrid, he 
readily acknowledges the pair are soulmates in philosophy. This bond, something 
personal and professional, makes the prospect of their crossing managerial 
swords for the first time on Saturday at Old Trafford particularly intriguing.

“In terms of tactics, we’re similar to United,” Boro’s manager said. “They 
play with the same shape, they’re confident with the transitions. They have a 
reference player up front in Zlatan Ibrahimovic, albeit with different skills 
from our reference player, Álvaro Negredo.”

Karanka believes some of the similarities stem from the fact that he and 
Mourinho are control freaks. “My thinking was more or less the same before I 
met José because I, too, like to have everything organised in my life,” he 
said. “You want your team organised, so now when I analyse Manchester United, 
when they don’t have the ball it’s easy to compare them with us – but the 
better players you have the better you can play.”

The pair did not know each other before joining forces at Real Madrid. “We 
didn’t have a relationship,” said Karanka, a former Real centre-half and Spain 
Under-16 coach. “The only times I’d come across him was once when he was 
working at Barcelona and the second time when he was the coach at Porto and he 
said in a press conference that I should have been sent off.

“Then, [Real’s] Fernando Hierro called me to say José wanted to speak to me 
and José called; that was our first conversation but everything he promised me 
in that conversation happened in our three years together. He told me he didn’t 
want an assistant who always says ‘yes’. He wanted an assistant who gives him 
his point of view. The main thing you can say about José is that’s he’s honest; 
everything he said in that conversation was 100% true – although he did say 
he’d send me to face the press a few times and he actually sent me 89 times. 
José taught me the importance of honesty with players, even when you tell them 
something they don’t want to hear.”

Karanka had been recommended by three former Real team-mates. “Luís Figo, 
Clarence Seedorf and Predrag Mijatovic,” he recalled, smiling slightly before 
explaining that by their third year together Mourinho delegated the vast bulk 
of coaching duties to him.

This hands-off stance possibly helped him retain a certain mystique, although 
Karanka stressed the Portuguese coach watched the majority of the training 
sessions, reading the play with the sort of forensic insight that has become 
his hallmark, and is the basis for one of the Boro manager’s favourite Mourinho 
anecdotes.

“When we played against Manchester United in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/05/manchester-united-real-madrid-champions-league>
 José told me to change Benzema – for I don’t remember what player – but when I 
called Karim, Nani was sent off,” Karanka said. “Two seconds later, José looked 
at me and said: ‘No Karim, Luka Modric instead’ – and Luka Modric was the 
player who changed the game and won it for us. José didn’t need one minute to 
think about things, he just had two seconds but the moment he saw the red card, 
he saw the solution and changed his ideas on the pitch. When it comes to 
watching the game I don’t know how many steps forward he is from the rest.”

Not that a man who is no slouch when it comes to his own analysis regards his 
old boss – whose United players are on a five-game winning run – as quite 
invincible. “My ambition is to beat José on Saturday,” he said. “I hope, one 
day, I can manage in the Champions League and do something like him but I’m 
doing the steps at the moment.”

Although similarly intense to Mourinho, Karanka is much less overtly 
confrontational. While demanding, he refrains from indulging in the mind games 
that represent another of his mentor’s trademarks and seems altogether more 
down to earth and infinitely less self-centred.

In private, though, Boro’s manager sees an alternative and appealing Special 
One. “José’s different, well a little bit different, because it’s impossible to 
live for 24 hours with that pressure, that tension he puts into every single 
training session or game,” he said. “We’re really good friends but for 90 
minutes on Saturday, we can’t be friends. I’ll try to surprise him – but it’s 
difficult to surprise José; he’s the best.”
 