
Man-marking has generally died out in the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>, along with 
moustaches and mullets – at least the non-ironic ones. But in the confines of 
tabloid newspapers and the venerable Kicker magazine, the practice is still 
very much alive.

It might surprise the interested reader to find out that a sizable contingent 
of players in the German top flight continue to take a strong, 
verging-on-unhealthy, interest in the marks (1-6, in ascending order ofnicht gut
 <http://translate.google.com/#de/en/nicht%20gut>) awarded to them by reporters 
who spend, on average, 45-60 seconds on this exercise.

Politics are occasionally involved, of course – there used to be some players 
who could never be marked worse than a 4 – but the grades seem to matter 
because they are seen as real: unlike in other countries, the full spectrum, 
from 1 (very good) to 6 (lacking severely) is regularly applied. You want 
nuances? Half marks are allowed, too.

But those numbers are only part of the grading process. Equally, if not more 
prestigious, is a nomination for Kicker's "Elf des Tages" — the XI of the 
weekend. One big problem for the reporters is to come up with formations that 
vaguely resemble realistic line-ups in the face of too many outstanding 
attacking players. German editorial standards are stringent and uncompromising 
in that respect – you cannot play with two at the back, even if you arePep 
Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> or Thomas Schaaf.

On Monday, however, the colleagues at Kicker got it badly wrong. There were 
fiveBorussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 
players in the line-up. Five. It is a ludicrous number, so wrong that it verges 
on the offensive. It makes you wonder if stumbling upon it this morning forced 
Dortmund's CEO Hans-Joachim Watzke, a quiet, reserved man who shuns the 
limelight and hates giving interviews, to pick up the phone and demand 
satisfaction from the men in Nuremberg (where Kicker is based) in the strongest 
possible terms.

We do not know if he did get involved but he would have been right to: there 
should have been at least nine Dortmund players in the list. They were that 
good in the 6-2 win against Hamburger SV.

Granted, the centre-back Neven Subotic had a bit of nightmare and had to be 
substituted before the referee could send him off. In goal, Roman Weidenfeller 
lived through one of those uncomfortable evenings that most keepers will have 
experienced at some stage: hardly anything to save but the twoHamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> goals (Zhi Gin Lam's sensational 
corner-curler, Heiko Westermann's close-range header) were unstoppable.

Everybody else, however, had a good case for being included in the XI, since 
Dortmund did not just produce their best performance of the season but, quite 
possibly, the performance of the whole season. There was a moment in the second 
half, when one attacking move tore through the dozy Hamburg lines like a school 
of barracudas, that the Westfalenstadion seemed unable to contain its joy.

A few goals more, you feared, and the whole ground would have burst at the 
seams, spewing out bits of yellow like a popcorn machine in the cinema. "It's 
madness what the boys in attack played today, simply amazing," saidJürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp>.

Marco Reus, he added, deserved "to get to heaven" for leaving the ball to 
Robert Lewandowski before Dortmund's fourth goal.

Going forward, everyone was sensational – special mentions for Pierre-Emerick 
Aubameyang (1-0, 3-2) and Henrikh Mkhitaryan (2-0) – but Reus was out of this 
world; a raft of missed chances notwithstanding. His incredibly cool shot 
through Dennis Diekmeier's legs (5-2) capped off a superlative show from the 
24-year-old. "Our transition game was frightening," said Klopp and he was 
right, in more ways than one.

Dortmund have managed to integrate the new signings so well that they look 
like having been around for ever. The team's devilishly hard to learn – and 
even harder to stop – collective pressing and switching already works much 
better than anyone could have anticipated at this stage.

Five wins out of five have made this Borussia's best start to the league – 32 
shots on goal equalled their own record versus Bremen this season. Aubameyang's 
superhuman pace – Bild counted 51 high-tempo sprints and clocked a maximum 
speed of 35.1 kilometres an hour – has turbo-charged the whole attack.

Wednesday's Champions League game at Napoli will show if this is shaping up 
for a customary all-or-nothing season under Klopp or if the team can reach the 
next evolutionary level and perform consistently in both main competitions for 
once.

Self-critical appraisals from Weidenfeller – "we lacked focus in some 
situations, you can't award your opponent too many chances" – and Reus –"it 
makes you vomit if you lead 2-0 and then concede two goals out of nothing"– 
certainly suggest a new maturity and Klopp cleverly made use of the opportunity 
to demand more respect for Mats Hummels – the centre-back had been left out by 
Jogi Löw in the two recent World Cup qualifiers and subjected to some harsh 
criticism in the press.

"When mistakes are awarded names, it's not unlikely that a Dortmund player is 
involved," claimed Klopp, who was careful not too attack Löw too overtly. "We 
will talk about it in the next few weeks," replied the Germany manager, in a 
conciliatory mood.

In case you were wondering, only the goalkeeper René Adler was awarded a 
half-decent (3) grade by Kicker. Lam was marked 4.5, the rest were 5s, 5.5s and 
downright 6s.

Thorsten Fink's risible tactics – the HSV coach started with three at the 
back, then changed it to a 4-4-2 with a diamond in midfield, before settling on 
4-2-3-1 – were apparently not considered in the marking process. "The system 
wasn't too blame," insisted Fink. Impossible to say really, as there wasn't one.

Talking points 

• While Hamburg could console themselves with the fact that they won't have to 
play Dortmund again this calendar year, their northern neighboursWerder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen> had no excuses: they lost 
3-0 at home to an Eintracht Frankfurt team that had only done "all right", 
according to their manager Armin Veh.

Werder's cause was not helped by Franco Di Santo's brainless, head-high 
challenge on Bastian Oczipka – the former Wigan striker was sent off, Oczipka 
lost half a litre of blood – but the coach Robin Dutt felt the "motivational 
condition" had not been right to begin with.

The 48-year-old uses different syntax but the basic gist of his explanations – 
the players don't want it enough – have begun to echo Schaaf's. Next Saturday 
the Bundesliga's two increasingly glum northern lights meet in the derby. You 
would not put it past them both to find a way to lose.

• "Can't hide behind the manager" … "token performance" … "have to get out of 
our comfort zone" … "lack of emotion" … "14 titles … but that's not the real 
world"… Yes, it was time for another Matthias Sammer rant on Saturday.

Bayern had won 2-0 against Hannover without too much trouble but the Bayern 
sporting director saw fit to warn about complacency in the strongest terms. 
It's what he does.

It's hard to say whether the players still pay attention – "you can't do that 
too often, the effect wears off," said the president Uli Hoeness, the inventor 
of anti-cyclical criticism – but history is on Sammer's side.

He fired a similar broadside a year ago, when Bayern were flawless in the 
league, and who knows? Maybe having an annoying alarm clock that goes off 
prematurely is not such a bad thing after all. One possibly deliberate 
side-effect is to unite Pep Guardiola – "this wouldn't be possible in Spain" – 
and the team in their irritation with the former Germany international.

Hoeness, however, was not amused. "It doesn't give a good impression of FC 
Bayern – in Dortmund they are killing themselves laughing," he grumbled.

Results: Hertha BSC 0-1 Stuttgart, Werder Bremen 0-3 Eintracht Frankfurt, 
Bayern Munich 2-0 Hannover 96, Mainz 0-1 Schalke, Leverkusen 3-1 Wolfsburg 3-1, 
Dortmund 6-2 Hamburger SV, Augsburg 2-1 Freiburg, Hoffenheim 2-1 Gladbach, 
Braunschweig 1-1 Nürnberg.

Latest Bundesliga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 