
Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 
twice hit the woodwork as they beat Freiburg 3-1 to join Bayern Munich at the 
top of the Bundesliga.

Dortmund, who have now scored 14 goals in their last three league games, 
should have killed off the match long beforeFreiburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/freiburg> pulled a goal back on the hour 
to set up a nervous finale.

Paris Saint-Germain shocked by Toulouse in second defeat of season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/toulouse-paris-saint-germain-match-report>
However, strikes from Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Lukasz Piszczek and a 
stoppage time goal from Raphael Guerreiro allowed Dortmund to secure a fourth 
win in five league games and equal a club record of 24 home games without 
defeat.

Dortmund are tied on 12 points with Bayern Munich, who take on Hamburg SV on 
Saturday.

“After a weak opening 15 minutes, we played an outstanding first half where we 
should have led by more goals,” said Dortmund coach, Thomas Tuchel, whose team 
had scored five or more goals in their previous three matches in all 
competitions.

“It then became tight and we were nervous. But it’s great to have pulled it 
off, especially after three big wins in a row.”

With Dortmund hosting Real Madrid in the Champions League next week, he added: 
“This performance comes at just the right time.”

Aubameyang should have done better when he was sent through with a superb 
Matthias Ginter pass but the Gabon international’s clever chip sailed just wide 
of the post on 18 minutes.

Emre Mor came even closer when his effort bounced off the crossbar minutes 
later as Dortmund upped the pressure in a lopsided first half.

Their overwhelming dominance finally paid off on the stroke of halftime with 
Aubameyang sliding in to meet an Ousmane Dembélé cutback at the far post for 
his fifth goal this season.

Piszczek added a second eight minutes after the restart with Freiburg firmly 
boxed into their own half and enduring wave after wave of attacks.

But when Freiburg scored against the run of play, with Max Philipp cutting the 
deficit on the hour, Dortmund were kept on tenterhooks as Aubameyang again hit 
the woodwork.

Guerreiro eventually made sure of the three points with his stoppage-time goal.
 