
A bottle attack that injured an 11-year-old boy walking to the Old Firm match 
has been described as “abhorrent”.

The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> fan reportedly 
needed seven stitches to a cut on his head after a bottle was flung across the 
road as he walked to Hampden with his family for the Scottish League Cup 
semi-final against Celtic.

Police said officers and supporters “have had enough of this type of 
behaviour”, and vowed to find those responsible.

Celtic’s Moussa Dembélé leaves it late to defeat Rangers in Old Firm semi-final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/celtic-rangers-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-match-report>
The majority of the 50,000-capacity crowd were praised for their behaviour but 
there were 18 arrests around the ground for “minor public disorder”.

A 27-year-old man was arrested and detained in connection with an alleged 
sectarian breach of the peace, while a 17-year-old was arrested and detained 
for allegedly having a pyrotechnic device. A further 16 men, aged between 17 
and 68, were arrested for minor public order offences.

Video posted on social media showed a group of fans fighting near Queen’s Park 
before the match, whichCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> won 
1-0.

Ch supt Brian McInulty said: “While the majority of genuine football fans 
behaved well, from a crowd of 50,697, there were 18 arrests for minor public 
disorder including having had too much to drink.

“However, the incident involving the assault of the 11-year-old boy while he 
was walking to the game is completely unacceptable and understandably has 
shocked the communities of Glasgow. Let’s be clear – this was an attack on a 
young boy who could possibly be left with a scar. This is abhorrent, and the 
person or persons responsible need to be caught.

“A football game is not an excuse for violence, ever. My detective officers 
are continuing inquiries into the incident, and I would reiterate their appeals 
for information. Any genuine football fan would not take part in such mindless 
violence, particularly throwing a bottle into a crowd with the intention to 
deliberately hurt someone, that person ultimately being a child.

“As I had mentioned before, genuine football fans have had enough of this type 
of behaviour. We’ve had enough of this type of behaviour and it won’t be 
tolerated. I’d like to thank the majority of 50,697 football fans who behaved 
well and enjoyed the game.”
 