
The agony of a narrow defeat to their south coast rivals in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> is not a patch on what 
Portsmouth’s fans have been through in the past eight years. Yet after 
dominating large portions of this game, Paul Cook’s side will be kicking 
themselves for throwing away the chance of reaching the fifth round for the 
first time since winning the Cup in 2008.

Goals in the space of 12 minutes from the substitute Marc Pugh and Josh King 
turned the match on its head after Gary Roberts had put the side, 58 places 
belowBournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth>, in front 
just before half‑time.

Following the turmoil of administration and their freefall down the divisions 
at least the home supporters could depart feeling proud that their club can go 
toe-to-toe with the riches of the Premier League once more.

“There was a lot of focus on us from the national media and we wanted to make 
sure that by the time we finished the game that people spoke well about us as a 
football club,” said Cook. “The lads certainly didn’t disappoint.”

If it was not for Southampton, these two clubs would probably be bigger 
rivals, but separated by 50 miles and united by a mutual dislike of their 
nearer neighbours, thePortsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> supporters’ early taunts of 
“You’re just small town in Weymouth” were nothing more than good-natured banter.

Now building again slowly under fan ownership after years of decline since 
their triumph against Cardiff under Harry Redknapp, this was a big moment for 
the Fratton Park faithful. The old stadium was packed to welcome a Cherries 
team featuring 10 changes from theirdraw against Sunderland last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/23/sunderland-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
, with only the defender Adam Smith surviving.

That Eddie Howe could still include Lewis Grabban, recently signed for £8m, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/11/bournemouth-lewis-grabban-norwich>
 in his rejigged team was an illustration of the gulf that has grown between 
these sides. His Portsmouth counterpart had no such luxury, largely sticking 
with the same side that lost 1-0 at home to Oxford last week to leave them 
seven points adrift of the automatic promotion places in League Two.

On the evidence of much of the first half, the hosts looked more like the 
Premier League side. Mark McNulty, signed on loan from Sheffield United in 
November, caused plenty of problems for the former Portsmouth defender Sylvain 
Distin in the opening stages.

Having weathered the early storm, Bournemouth began to create chances of their 
own and Glenn Murray saw his flicked header from a free-kick slide just wide. 
The Paraguay international Juan Iturbe, a loan signing from Roma no less, must 
have thought he had scored after Portsmouth failed to clear a corner but 
somehow the goalkeeper, Ryan Fulton, himself on Liverpool’s books, diverted his 
powerful shot on to a post just before the half-hour mark.

The hosts regrouped and pushed the dangerous Bennett further forward. The plan 
worked. A superb move three minutes before the break allowed the forward to 
find space on the edge of the opposition penalty area and play in McNulty. His 
pass totally deceived the Bournemouth defence and Roberts had time take a touch 
before placing the ball past the stranded Adam Federici.

Bournemouth must have been grateful for a half-time breather but their hosts 
once again seized the initiative on the resumption, threatening to extend their 
lead on more than one occasion. Howe threw on Matt Ritchie and Pugh in a bid to 
rouse his team – “I just shut my eyes,” Cook later admitted – and it had the 
desired effect.

After a neat piece of footwork, Pugh was chopped down on the edge of the box 
by Davies and from the resulting free-kick by Eunan O’Kane King headed in.

Portsmouth continued to press forward in the hope of snatching the victory but 
Pugh’s winner, a scruffy header at the back post after Fulton had done well to 
save from Grabban, was a cruel blow.

“It was a tough game, we expected it and full credit to Portsmouth for the 
first half – they were very good,” said Howe whose club have reached the fifth 
round for only the fourth time.

“Would we really have wanted a replay? I think Eddie might have felt the 
same,” said Cook. Tuesday’s trip to Morecambe is much more important.
 