
Boy Blue Entertainment – the creative partnership of choreographer Kenrick 
Sandy and musician Michael Asante – have been a driving force in the remarkable 
growth of hip-hop dance theatre since the turn of the century. Their newest 
work, Blak Whyte Gray , is a significant step forward for them. Jettisoning 
some of the genre’s more accessible, and indeed sellable features – virtuoso 
spectacle, character-driven drama, upbeat music – they have opted for a more 
elemental focus on sound, movement and light.


The first section, entitled Whyte, signals this sparser style. Ricardo Da 
Silva, Gemma Kay Hoddy and Dickson Mbi wear tunics banded with buckles and 
ties, like straitjackets. Restraint, in fact, is the dominant quality of this 
trio. Drawing on robotics and body-popping, the dancers move like automata, 
galvanised by the jolts and buzzes of Asante’s score. At times their faces 
contort as if straining for expression, and while one or another will 
occasionally break away, they never get far: the dancers stay tightly 
clustered, walled in by Lee Curran’s starkly effective lighting.

 Restrained robotics … Ricardo Da Silva, Gemma Kay Hoddy and Dickson Mbi in 
Whyte. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The second section, Gray, for the full company of eight dancers, has its 
foundations in krumping, a full-bodied style which also stages a conflict 
between expression and restraint, but to heightened dramatic effect: barely 
contained emotions seem to rattle through the ribcage, exploding into outflung 
arms and forceful stamps. The mood, like the lighting, is dark and dangerous. 
Hooded figures enter sliding on the floor, as if keeping themselves under 
cover. The scene builds to a theatre of war in which the body becomes both 
weapon and battleground: ragged groups maraud across the stage, aiming their 
arms like snipers; arrhythmic footwork brings to mind both rifle fire and 
panicked flight; figures reach up from and fall back into amorphous masses of 
restless bodies.

 Marauding bodies … Gray from Blak Whyte Gray by Boy Blue Entertainment. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The final section, Blak, is more mysteriously personal. Dickson Mbi appears as 
an abject creature, struggling to get off the ground. Others prop him up, but 
he keeps falling, failing. When he does manage to stay up, he stays apart: the 
others club together, twitching to a two-beat rhythm while he wanders lost 
among them, accompanied by smudges of sound (this elemental closeness of music 
with action is a hallmark of the whole piece).

Then, in a remarkable solo, Mbi comes into his own, fluently melding the 
rhythmic precision of hip-hop with the poise of tai chi, the arc and uplift of 
ballet with the fall and flight of contemporary dance. This full-bodied 
synthesis seems to release the piece of its tensions. Colour finally comes to 
the lighting as the dancers, backed by a tequila sunset, come together in an 
informal group and dance for their own simple pleasure, finally explicitly 
drawing upon African dance forms.

 Fluent precision … Dickson Mbi in Blak from Blak Whyte Gray by Boy Blue 
Entertainment. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The work is a striking achievement for Boy Blue Entertainment – and suggests 
it may be time to drop that last word from their name. Far more formal and 
introspective than we’ve been used to, it is also more artful in incorporating 
silence, space and stillness into its sound and action.


If its gratifications are less immediate, that’s no loss: they are also more 
enduring, more deeply won.


 * At the Barbican, London, until 21 January 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=20268>. Box office: 
020-7638 8891.Then Home, Manchester, 9-11 February 
<http://homemcr.org/production/blak-whyte-gray-a-hip-hop-dance-triple-bill/> 
(0161-200 1500).  