
Sir Oliver Popplewell, the former judge who conducted the inquiry into the 
Bradford City disaster, has described as “highly suspicious”Stafford 
Heginbotham’s history of major fires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/bradford-fire-stafford-heginbotham-martin-fletcher>
 but insisted that a new investigation would clear the club’s then chairman of 
anything sinister. Popplewell also defended his 1985 inquiryafter the Guardian 
showed him documents 
<http://hillsborough.independent.gov.uk/repository/docs/SYP000097300001.pdf> 
detailing that West Yorkshire police considered it a “seat of the pants affair” 
with a “severe pruning” of witnesses.

The documents raise serious questions about the way the inquiry was conducted, 
with senior police officers from the West Yorkshire, Humberside and South 
Yorkshire forces concluding it used a “minimum number of witnesses” and there 
was a deliberate strategy in place to “save time”.

Other paperwork from a preliminary hearing chaired by Popplewell on 23 May 
1985, 12 days after the fire, shows the witness testimony was expected to run 
for 10 days. As it was, it lasted five. The hearing set out some of the ground 
rules for the inquiry, which started on 5 June, and these state that “rules of 
evidence would not be strictly complied with” and “hearsay would be acceptable 
to summarise evidence and save time”.

Popplewell, in a lengthy interview with the Guardian, rejected any criticism 
of his work and accused Andy Burnham, the shadow health secretary, of “climbing 
on a bandwagon” bycalling for a new inquiry during an election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/bradford-fire-andy-burnham-calls-for-fresh-investigation>
.

“If we had it for 100 days the evidence wouldn’t have been any different,” 
Popplewell said. “We had all the evidence that was available. Except these 
previous fires. We had nothing else and there wasn’t anything else. It was all 
looked into by the fire people. The actual public hearing took only five days 
but we went back to the Home Office and had more evidence and we produced our 
inquiry in July. If we had wanted to have an inquiry like the Saville inquiry 
[into the events of Bloody Sunday in Derry in 1972], which lasted five years, 
I’m sure we could have done but we didn’t see any need to.”

Bradford fire: Sir Oliver Popplewell defends 1985 inquiry – full interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/27/bradford-fire-inquiry-oliver-popplewell-interview>
The inquiry has come under scrutiny because of Martin Fletcher’s book about 
the tragedy that killed 56 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/bradford-fire-fifty-six-martin-fletcher-second-extract>
, including his brother, father, uncle and grandfather, when the timber stand 
at Valley Parade caught fire during a game against Lincoln City. Fletcher, who 
was 12 at the time and made it out of the inferno, believes the whole system 
was inadequate and asks why it was not made known to Popplewell that Valley 
Parade was the ninth major fire at business premises owned by or connected to 
Heginbotham, or that the then chairman had severe financial issues.

On 2 May 1989 there was a high-level meeting at the headquarters of Humberside 
police, involving its assistant chief constable, Allan Charlesworth, and Chief 
Inspector Brown of the West Yorkshire force. Charlesworth was formerly a 
superintendent in West Yorkshire and the meeting was set up because he and 
Brown had direct experience of theBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> fire and could advise South 
Yorkshire police, dealing with the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster, 
about the way Popplewell conducted his inquiry.

Superintendent David Nettleship’s two-page memo for South Yorkshire reports 
that: “Despite the circumstances, the Bradford inquiry only lasted for seven 
days, and both Mr Charlesworth and Chief Inspector Brown emphasise that the 
manner in which tribunals deal with evidence is entirely different to a court 
of law. Once a witness is able to verify a particular point, the inquiry then 
moves on to the next subject, with a result that there is a ‘severe pruning’ of 
witnesses in order to prevent duplicity [sic] and therefore save time.

“The Bradford tribunal was described as very much a ‘seat of the pants’ affair 
– quite informal and (to repeat) the minimum number of witnesses required to 
verify a specific point.” Nettleship, writing an account of the meeting for one 
of his chief superintendents, says the comments “confirm what we have already 
learned ourselves”.

Popplewell said it was “nonsense” to question his verdict that it was an 
accidental fire. “I’m quite satisfied we arrived at the right conclusion. This 
[publicity] all sparks from the previous fires and I can understand that 
because it is highly suspicious. But the truth is, when you analyse it there is 
absolutely nothing to it.” He added: “I may be proved quite wrong but I should 
be absolutely astonished.”

Heginbotham died in 1995. He received payouts totalling £27m in today’s terms, 
according to Fletcher’s book (Fifty Six – The Story of the Bradford Fire; 
Bloomsbury Sport) and the author’s mother, Susan, is quoted as saying she never 
believed what happened at Valley Parade was an accident. “I don’t think 
Stafford intended for people to die. But people did. All because he went back 
to the one thing he knew best that would get him out of trouble.”

Burnham has said the last inquiry was “completed with undue haste” while Matt 
Wrack, the general secretary of the Fire Brigades Union, and Nigel Adams, one 
of the country’s prominent experts in fire forensics, have said a new 
investigation should happen.

Suggestion that Bradford City fire was arson is nonsense | Letter from Sir 
Oliver Popplewell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/27/suggestion-bradford-city-fire-was-arson-is-nonsense-oliver-popplewell-letter>
Popplewell also believes an investigation is necessary and, in a pre-interview 
letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/27/suggestion-bradford-city-fire-was-arson-is-nonsense-oliver-popplewell-letter>
, he writes that nobody at the time alerted him to the possibility of there 
being anything sinister. “If we had known about the previous fires at his 
premises we would have asked the authorities for their views in order to 
satisfy speculation.” There was no evidence, he said, of arson. However, 
Popplewell also leaves himself to open allegations of being misinformed on 
several points. Among them, he initially calls Bradford’s ground “Villa Parade” 
and also repeatedly states that the fire was in the second half when it was 
actually five minutes before half-time.

Popplewell also states that Heginbotham “immediately put his hands up and 
said: ‘Look, I’m entirely responsible, or the club is entirely responsible, for 
this.’ He said: ‘It’s my fault.’”

Fletcher responded on Monday by saying that was patently untrue, pointing out 
that the police, the injured and relatives of the bereaved had to pursue a 
court case against Bradford to prove the club’s liability. “To suggest the man 
who defended his club in Leeds High Court until February 1987 and consistently 
denied any responsibility until then, somehow accepted liability from the 
outset is a clear nonsense.”
 