
Martin Fletcher’s book about the Bradford City fire has created worldwide 
headlines because of its revelation that therehad been at least eight previous 
fires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/bradford-fire-stafford-heginbotham-martin-fletcher>
 at business premises either owned or connected to the then chairman, Stafford 
Heginbotham. Fletcher, who was 12 at the time, escaped from the fire but his 
11-year-old brother was the youngest victim and his father, his uncle and his 
grandfather were among the 56 to die at Valley Parade on 11 May 1985. The author
has spent 15 years researching the fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/bradford-fire-martin-fletcher-stafford-heginbotham>
 and is critical of the inquiry led by the then high court judge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/bradford-fire-andy-burnham-calls-for-fresh-investigation>
, Sir Oliver Popplewell, which featured only five days of testimony. Popplewell 
describes Heginbotham’s fire history as highly suspicious but believes another 
investigation will show nothing sinister. He invitedDaniel Taylor to his London 
chambers.

Daniel Taylor The book shows this is the chairman’s ninth or 10th fire and I 
saw you quoted saying that merited an investigation.

Sir Oliver Popplewell Of course it should have been investigated but when you 
analyse it, if there had been anything sinister about it, eight or nine fires, 
the police would have investigated. Fire officers are very sceptical – I’ve 
been involved in a lot of fire insurance cases – if there had been anything 
sinister and, above all, Heginbotham’s insurers wouldn’t have insured the 
various buildings if they weren’t satisfied there was nothing in it. And there 
is nothing in it.

DT For it not to be part of the inquiry strikes me as remarkable. If that 
evidence was withheld.

OP It wasn’t ‘withheld’. No one told us about it. The police got all the 
evidence together. We don’t have the power to go around gathering evidence. The 
police did. No one suggested this. Nobody wrote in, neither the police nor the 
fire authorities nor the insurers.

DT It’s an incredible number.

OP I follow. It is incredible. But then you have to ask: ‘How did he set fire 
to the club? What did he set fire to?’ The place was absolutely jam-packed 
full. The biggest crowd they’ve had. The fire starts five minutes after 
half-time when the stand is full of 4,000 people. Now, if you are going to have 
a fire, you don’t do it when the place is packed.

DT To clarify, though, the author doesn’t ever point a finger directly like 
that.

OP No, but if you [the author] say it is not an accident …

DT What he says is: can any man in the world be that unlucky?

OP I follow that. It is a perfectly proper question. But the answer is: it’s 
contrary to all the evidence of the time and it doesn’t make any sense.

DT One of the things I heard you say … it got picked up everywhere because 
your voice is a very powerful voice and people obviously see you as the 
authority on this subject … you said on radio that it was a ‘good story’ but 
immediately falls down because the stand had no insurance value.

OP Yes.

DT That’s wrong, though.

OP It doesn’t have any insurance value.

DT It did.

OP Well, I don’t know why they paid out.

DT They did, though. The club received £500,000 in insurance.

OP From insurance? Football insurance? Or his owner, stand insurance? I’d like 
to know because it doesn’t make any sense. It had half an hour’s life. No 
insurance company is going to pay out on something that was going to have only 
half an hour’s life. Anyway, that’s a point. But the truth is there still 
wasn’t a single piece of evidence that suggested this was arson.

Bradford fire: Sir Oliver Popplewell says new inquiry would find nothing 
sinister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/27/bradford-fire-inquiry-oliver-popplewell>
DT Nigel Adams, one of the country’s leading fire investigators, has said that 
in 1985 fire forensics were pretty much non-existent and investigators were 
known as “dust kickers”. He says there has to be another look at this. When 
someone of that authority says it …

OP Well, we had fire experts at the time but there is nothing to look at now. 
There isn’t any material now.

DT He clearly thinks there is something to look at.

OP Well, I just don’t know … we had fire evidence from distinguished people. I 
had a chief fire officer as one of my assessors. We went to the Home Office and 
they had fire people there. It never occurred to anybody this was arson. There 
was not a single sign of anything indicating arson. Basically, most arsonists 
leave some clue, however small. They didn’t.

DT One of the author’s complaints is that the inquiry went too quickly. The 
inquiry (testimony) lasted as long as the John Terry court case, for example. 
Five days.

We had all the evidence that was available. Except these previous fires
Sir Oliver Popplewell 
OP If we had it for 100 days the evidence wouldn’t have been any different. We 
had all the evidence that was available. Except these previous fires. We had 
nothing else and there wasn’t anything else. It was all looked into by the fire 
people. The actual public hearing took only five days but we went back to the 
Home Office and had more evidence and we produced our inquiry in July. If we 
had wanted to have an inquiry like the Saville inquiry [into the Bloody Sunday 
shootings in Derry in 1972] which lasted five years, I’m sure we could have 
done but we didn’t see any need to.

Popplewell is shown a police document, dated 2 May 1989 
<http://hillsborough.independent.gov.uk/repository/docs/SYP000097300001.pdf>, 
after a meeting involving senior officers from the West Yorkshire, South 
Yorkshire and Humberside forces to discuss, post-Hillsborough, how the Bradford 
inquiry was conducted

DT It’s a memo from Superintendent Nettleship from South Yorkshire saying [it 
was agreed] there was a “severe pruning” of [witness] evidence.

OP What part did he play in Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford>?

DT The Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> tribunal is 
described as a seat-of-the-pants affair and quite informal.

OP Was he there? It was quite informal. It was a very serious matter and we 
wanted to make people feel at ease. But it was conducted perfectly properly and 
it was tested, the work. Witnesses were cross-examined.

DT So when he says there was a severe pruning …

OP Well, we cut out stuff that was irrelevant. There was a chap from some 
newspaper who said he had seen something thrown … a bomb thrown, a smoke-bomb.
 The then Bradford City chairman, Stafford Heginbotham, left, with Oliver 
Popplewell, at the time a high court judge, at Valley Parade in 1985. 
Photograph: Pa/PA Archive/Press Association Images 
DT Do you know that wasn’t a newspaper person who said that [first]? It was 
Stafford Heginbotham. He went on television while the fire was still going on 
in the background and it was him who sowed the seed that someone had thrown a 
smoke-bomb.

OP We had a journalist who came along.

Bradford fire: Labour’s Andy Burnham calls for fresh investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/bradford-fire-andy-burnham-calls-for-fresh-investigation>
DT I’m sure a journalist did say it afterwards but that was because the 
chairman had gone on television and said it.

OP The journalist said he saw it.

DT Actually saw it being thrown?

OP Yes, he said he saw it going through the air … it was rubbish.

DT Andy Burnham [the shadow health secretary] said he thought the inquiry had 
been conducted with undue haste.

Why do these politicians climb on a bandwagon? He wasn't there, he didn't 
listen to the evidence
Sir Oliver Popplewell 
OP How does he know about it? Why do these politicians climb on a bandwagon? 
He wasn’t there, he didn’t listen to the evidence. He’s just having a typical 
politician’s reaction. Sorry, I mustn’t say this … they want to get some 
publicity because he is in the middle of an election. He doesn’t know anything 
more about it than any other member of the public.

DT I would accept that more if it was another politician but is that entirely 
fair on Andy Burnham?

OP I don’t know him at all.

DT He played a huge part in making sure the truth came out about Hillsborough.

OP Well, fine, but all I say is: ‘What does he actually know about Bradford?’ 
I mean he may have read through all the papers but it doesn’t sound like it.

Taylor has brought Popplewell a copy of the book, passed on by the author

DT Did you say you had read this?

OP No, no, I wouldn’t dream of it

DT Will you be reading it?

OP No.

DT Do you not think you should do?

OP No, I don’t see any point. I’m quite satisfied we arrived at the right 
conclusion. This all sparks from the previous fires and I can understand that 
because it is highly suspicious. But the truth is, when you analyse it there is 
absolutely nothing to it.

DT In your letter to the Guardian you have written Fletcher’s book “comes to 
the conclusion that the fire was caused by arson” – but he doesn’t say that.

OP Well, he does say it. He doesn’t say it in so many terms. He says it wasn’t 
an accident and that Heginbotham set fire to it.

DT He really doesn’t say that.

The Story of the Bradford Fire: ‘could any man really be as unlucky as 
Stafford Heginbotham?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/the-story-of-the-bradford-fire-book-extract>
OP Well, what other conclusion are you asked to draw?

DT That’s why I would have thought you would have read the book in full. A 
newspaper serialisation of a 90,000-word book only gives you a certain amount …

OP It gave a sufficient picture to me that he was saying Heginbotham set fire 
to it.

DT What he asks is this is a ‘mountain of coincidence’ – do you know anyone in 
the world who has ever had two major fires, never mind nine?

OP I follow all that, I follow all that, but it doesn’t stand up when you 
analyse it (pause) … it sounds very suspicious.

DT It was never investigated, was it?

OP I’ve already explained. If the police at the time, and the fire 
authorities, and his insurers, were perfectly happy about these fires and there 
was nothing at the scene to indicate this was arson. Everything pointed to it 
happening in whatever row it was. Have you seen the video? It shows a small 
flame coming out through [the stand] as being the scene of the fire. Well, how 
did that happen? How do you put arson into that context? A bit of sense … how 
did Mr Heginbotham organise a little fire which could have been put out if 
someone had been alert enough with a fire extinguisher? It makes no sense, 
absolutely no sense at all. That’s why I say it’s nonsense.

DT Did you see the interview with a detective, Ray Falconer [in the Bradford 
Telegraph & Argus], who said he had gone to speak personally to a man [from 
Australia] who said it was his cigarette that started it?

OP I saw that somewhere but we didn’t have that evidence. I’m fairly sure we 
didn’t. I mean, if that is right, it is even more conclusive.

DT The Bradford Telegraph and Argus described him as a ‘top detective’. He was 
actually one of the detectives involved in one of the gravest miscarriages of 
justices in the country, the Carol Wilkinson murder in Bradford, where someone 
was locked up for 20 years for a murder he didn’t commit.

OP Oh, right.

DT The book says one of the key-holders was told about the fire and told to 
unlock the doors at 3.30pm, which isbefore the fire happened. That leaves the 
question: how was someone told before it happened and told to unlock the doors?

OP The doors were locked. Whether they were all locked we don’t know, because 
some people undoubtedly got out. It doesn’t mean anything.

DT It strikes me as incredibly strange.

(no reply)

DT No?

(no reply)

DT The book also says three of the four doors were unlocked yet the policy at 
Bradford at that time, in keeping with the rest of football, was that gates 
weren’t unlocked until, say, 10 minutes before the end. There is an entire 
chapter about this unanswered question of why on this day, never before, were 
they unlocked at that time?

OP Part of the problem at Bradford was the doors went on to the roadway and 
people used to walk in. But what happened on previous occasions I’ve no idea. 
Nobody suggested anything untoward that day. No steward came forward. No member 
of the public came forward. I mean, they interviewed hundreds of witnesses and 
nothing suspicious was thrown up.

DT There’s also a great focus in the book [from the inquiry] about a lot of 
people commenting during the first half about a very strong, acrid plastic 
smell. There were people on their hands and knees trying to find out what it 
was. Someone asked a guy who was smoking a pipe what he was smoking. The author 
says it was left. In his words, it was ignored.

OP None of that evidence was presented.

DT But it’s a great piece of the testimony. It forms part of the [inquiry] 
papers.

OP Not to my knowledge, it doesn’t. I don’t remember any suggestion of there 
being any smell. My recollection may be quite wrong because it is 30 years ago 
but I don’t remember a suggestion of there being a smell. The first 
notification anybody ever had of this fire starting was a small wisp of smoke 
coming up, which you can see on the video.

I don’t remember any suggestion of there being any smell. My recollection may 
be quite wrong because it is 30 years ago
Sir Oliver Popplewell 
DT If you do read the book, several people are quoted as saying there was [the 
smell of burning plastic].

OP Material before the tribunal?

DT It’s in the tribunal.

OP In the tribunal?

DT The author went to the archive offices to get every piece of testimony. 
It’s another of the unanswered questions.

OP I simply don’t remember it.

DT What did you make of how Valley Parade was looked after?

OP It was no better no worse than other football grounds. I mean, football 
grounds in those days were a disgrace. They weren’t user-friendly. Stewards 
weren’t trained. They were all made of wood, there were no fire precautions, 
there were no exit signs. There hadn’t been any new grounds built, I think, 
since Wembley in 1927. They were old-fashioned and very dangerous, but that’s 
how they were.

DT Bradford did receive a lot of official fire warnings.

OP Oh absolutely. Yes, yes, there’s no doubt about that. They then had a civil 
case, which was settled [against them] and the football club paid two thirds 
[the council paid the other third]. They were, in one sense, a fire hazard 
waiting to happen. There was paper under there that had been there forever.

DT One newspaper they found in the ruins was dated 1968.

OP And I expect it had actually been there since the place was built. Wooden 
stands were an absolute nightmare. The way the stewards were organised … they 
didn’t realise they [the grounds] were dangerous but they were.

DT Stafford Heginbotham has a lot of character witnesses, people who will 
speak on his behalf.

OP I know nothing about his finances … he immediately put his hands up and 
said: ‘Look, I’m entirely responsible, or the club is entirely responsible, for 
this.’ I think he’d done a lot of good work putting the club together 
previously because there had been a lot of internal problems …

DT Sorry to interrupt but did he put his hands up and say ‘I am entirely 
responsible’?

OP He said: ‘It’s my fault.’
 Sir Oliver Popplewell said he did not intend to read Bradford fire survivor 
Martin Fletcher’s book. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
DT Having looked through thousands upon thousands of words, I haven’t seen 
that anywhere.

OP He accepted responsibility; it was made clear at the inquiry that he was 
accepting responsibility.

DT Are you surprised there was never a prosecution?

OP No, because the truth is it was no better no worse than any other ground. 
The truth is the local authority had told them to do something about it and 
hadn’t pursued it. It was an accident waiting to happen but it was an accident.

DT The thing that has made everyone stand back a little bit is that question: 
can any man be so unlucky? Even his son has said if there was a plume of smoke 
in Bradford that people would say, ‘That’s Stafford’s gaff’.

OP I can understand.

DT I spoke to one man [long-time Bradford supporter Patsy Hollinger] who said 
Heginbotham’s nickname was ‘Central Heating’. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/18/bradford-fire-horrors-lies-silence-martin-fletcher-family>
 A phrase at the company where Martin Fletcher’s mother worked was if Stafford 
has a problem it ‘gets torched’ and there’s a fireman quoted in the book who 
says that when they were on fire strike they knew the first fire would be 
Stafford Heginbotham’s.

OP Well, it’s surprising that all these people remained totally silent for 30 
years. The truth is if there had been anything sinister he would never have got 
any insurance.

DT What would be your advice to the author?

All praise to him for doing a lot of very good investigation. I just think the 
conclusion is wrong
Sir Oliver Popplewell 
OP I don’t have any. All praise to him for getting over the emotion and doing 
a lot of very good investigation. I just think the conclusion is wrong. I know 
he doesn’t say ‘Heginbotham set fire to it’ but that’s the conclusion.

DT A few years ago you said Hillsborough families should just …

OP Move on.

DT Yes, but they didn’t and, as we stand now, we know they were right. 
Everything has come out now that has given them justice. They didn’t take your 
advice and found justice.

OP I don’t want to get involved in Hillsborough because last time it caused so 
much upset in Liverpool.

DT But what I’m saying is you’re telling Martin Fletcher pretty much the same 
thing – ‘move on’.

OP I’m not. I’m not. Not unreasonably, if someone suggests the integrity of 
the inquiry was totally invalid, I am entitled to say what I think about the 
conclusion. Good luck to him but I think I’m entitled to say what I think of it.

DT He makes the point you were in your third year as a high court judge and, 
by your own admission, had never been to a football match. Do you accept his 
view it could have gone to someone with more experience?

OP The football part of it is irrelevant in one sense. We all have to try 
cases about which we know not very much. I know a good deal about sport 
generally and I’ve tried a lot of fire cases. I don’t know how one gets 
selected for these things but, if you’re asked to do it, you do it.

Before the interview Popplewell had sent a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/27/suggestion-bradford-city-fire-was-arson-is-nonsense-oliver-popplewell-letter>

DT Your letter to the Guardian calls Bradford’s ground ‘Villa Parade’

OP Valley Parade – I’ve corrected it since …

DT The letter also says – and I think you said the same earlier when talking 
to me – that the fire started after half-time.

OP Yes.

DT But it didn’t. It started at 3.40pm and took hold at 3.42pm.

OP I thought they had just got into the second half … actually, at half-time.

DT I don’t mean to sound impudent but it was 3.40pm. Your commenting [on 
Fletcher’s book] and your voice, as I said earlier, carries great power … but 
just basic facts. I’m not sure Mr Heginbotham ever said ‘this is all my fault’ 
either.

OP Yes, he did. At the inquiry he put his hand up and said: ‘I accept 
responsibility.’

DT Well, on this point, it wasn’t after half-time.

OP It wasn’t before half-time.

DT It was.

OP Well, I am surprised, but there we are. If that’s [correct] … I will change 
it to ‘at or about half-time’.

DT My point was, I would have expected you to know that automatically.

OP Oh, come on.

DT It’s a pretty major fact, surely.

OP No, why?

DT I just thought you would know the timings of when it was.

OP Well, it’s just my mistaken recollection. I thought it was just after 
half-time. It was always that there was only another 40 minutes to play before 
the thing was being pulled down.

DT The criticism, have you been stung by it?

Suggestion that Bradford City fire was arson is nonsense | Letter from Sir 
Oliver Popplewell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/27/suggestion-bradford-city-fire-was-arson-is-nonsense-oliver-popplewell-letter>
OP I don’t mind somebody saying ‘I don’t agree’ but to suggest we were 
hopeless and attack the integrity of the inquiry I do resent. I’m used to being 
criticised. There are slings and arrows, which one takes normally. But nobody 
has explained how Heginbotham arranged the fire at the time that he did. What 
is the explanation? What is the suggestion – that someone deliberately threw a 
match down?

DT In today’s age would an inquiry like this last a lot longer?

OP It all depends on the evidence. You can have an inquiry like the Saville 
inquiry that goes on for five years. It all depends what you are investigating. 
The public evidence took a comparatively short time but we then did some more. 
It never occurred to us we were unduly hasty. We obviously wanted to get on 
with it, partly because the people of Bradford needed to be assured how this 
happened and secondly to try to prevent it happening again.

DT You say there should be an investigation into Heginbotham’s other fires.

OP Only because of the speculation.

DT Have you contacted anyone about this?

OP No … people have been asking me: ‘Do you think it is sensible?’ Of course 
it is sensible because it will put people’s minds at rest. Frankly, if nobody 
thought, during that period of eight or nine fires, that there was anything 
sinister I don’t suppose they will find anything now. They may do. I may be 
proved quite wrong but I should be absolutely astonished.
 