
It was not a bad Friday for Bradford City and was followed by a good Saturday 
as they beat Millwall 1-0 at Valley Parade. In the scramble forLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> play-off positions 
they pulled away from Coventry, Port Vale and Southend, overtook Barnsley, all 
of whom had played the previous day, and rose to sixth place, a point behind 
Millwall, scoring the only league goal of an unusual day as Easter clashed with 
international games.

Football League managers left high and dry by need for instant results | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/mar/25/football-league-manager-sackings-lma-report>
The goal was itself unusual in conditions that would have tested even the 
unmistakable Johan Cruyff – a bobbly, hard pitch and strong, gusty wind 
accompanied by rain. In the 79th minute City’s central defender Nathan Clarke 
was trotting for the left touchline to deliver a long throw when James Meredith 
took it short to him. Collecting himself as well as the ball, Clarke heaved a 
diagonal cross into the goalmouth where Steve Davies headed in.

Phil Parkinson, City’s manager, was able to laugh afterwards. “I obviously 
wanted Nathan to take it but Mezza threw it at him like an Exocet. I was 
moaning and next thing the ball’s in the back of the net. The players are 
obviously a lot more intelligent than I am.” Parkinson underplayed himself. He 
had changed his strikers four minutes beforehand. It was Davies’ fourth goal in 
six games as a second-half substitute.

Millwall’s Neil Harris felt there was nothing between the teams, conceding, 
“We didn’t do enough to win but neither didBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford>.” He may have had a point but 
the Bantams had three.

Millwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> had gone six games 
away without defeat and lost only once in 13 overall. Both sides have come 
steadily into the play-off reckoning from the lower half of the table in 
mid-October and both had a case for postponing Saturday’s match because of 
international claims. Bradford were denied the chance because youth loan 
signings do not count, though they managed to get Clarke’s centre-back partner, 
Reece Burke, released. One of Millwall’s was their reserve goalkeeper David 
Forde and they reasoned that in their current vein of form it was a good time 
to play.

The upshot was a match of unfamiliar central midfields, in which Tom Thorpe, 
newly loaned from Rotherham, won instant fans in front of City’s back four 
alongside Billy Knott, who stood in and up to be counted against opponents 
whose minds were better focused after two early bookings. Knott, Kyel Reid on 
the left outside him and the Lions’ Ben Thompson tried to play the game on 
terrestrial terms but mostly the safety of the skies was the preferred option.

With 17 managerial changes in the division this season these sides stated the 
case for stick rather than twist. Harris had too little time a year ago to 
avert Millwall’s relegation but, as the club’s top scorer, he is enjoying the 
licence he can expect. IncidentallySoccerbase says he did five seasons in the 
1930s at Swansea <http://www.soccerbase.com/managers/manager.sd?manager_id=979>
. Before City fans sing, “There’s only one Phil Parkinson,” they should know 
there is another right now, 85 miles away at Nantwich Town.

Their very own brought City out of League Two in his second season and, deep 
into his fifth, he is now the fifth longest-serving of 92. The club fell from 
Premier League in 2001 to League Two in 2007 via two administrations but a fine 
stadium and astute ticketing have restored stability and retained an impressive 
fanbase. Foul weather could not deter the largest home contingent of the 
season, 18,127, eager to propel them back to the second tier. Recent talk of a 
German takeover has receded in the realisation that at the business end of the 
season the best business is done on the field. After scoring they ludicrously 
staggered over the line in panicky retreat. At Crewe on Monday, and so on, they 
will need their earlier stern composure.
 