


Environmentalists and indigenous rights campaigners have attacked efforts by 
the Brazilian government to roll back laws protecting the environment and 
indigenous territories, warning the moves could have disastrous consequences 
and even threaten the country’s ability to meet its commitments under the Paris 
climate deal.

The two initiatives include a bill that critics say would dismantle 
environmental licensing laws and a draft government decree campaigners say 
threatens existing and future indigenous territories. Coming after a recently 
announced 29% jump in Amazon deforestation, they have caused widespread alarm.

The moves represent “the most worrying regressions of our recent history”, 
said Mauricio Guetta, a lawyer for Socio-Environmental Institute, a Brazilian 
non-governmental group.

“If approved, they will certainly make it impossible for Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> to meet its commitments under the 
Paris agreement,” he said.

In ratifying the Paris agreement, Brazil committed to cut 37% of its 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/13/brazil-ratifies-paris-agreement-with-pledge-to-sharply-reduce-emissions>
 and end illegal deforestation by 2030.

The bill to overhaul Brazil’s rigorous environmental licensing laws has been 
stalled for more than a decade. But an amended version is now being guided by 
Mauro Pereira, a congressman from PresidentMichel Temer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/michel-temer>’s centrist Brazilian 
Democratic Movement party.

It proposes replacing standard environmental licensing procedures established 
by central government with a quicker, more flexible system in which different 
Brazilian states can decide which licences projects should have. Some companies 
can even supply their own licences. And in some cases the licence is exempted – 
including some agricultural activities, temporary works and electricity 
transmission lines.

Mauro Pereira said some licences took up to a decade to clear and that Brazil 
is losing business to neighbouring countries that have faster procedures.

“Our country needs clear laws, and laws that value the environment and value 
people,” Pereira said.

Samarco dam collapse: one year on from Brazil's worst environmental disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/15/samarco-dam-collapse-brazil-worst-environmental-disaster-bhp-billiton-vale-mining>
About 250 organizations and individuals, including non-government groups and 
environmental prosecutors, disagreed. They have signed a letter condemning the 
bill, arguing it could increase the risk of environmental disasters like one 
causedwhen a tailings dam burst in Mariana, flooding the Brazilian countryside 
with millions of litres of mining waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/13/brazils-slow-motion-environmental-catastrophe-unfolds>
.

Suely Araújo, president of Brazil’s government environment agency, Ibama, said 
the proposal to let states and cities decide their own environmental licensing 
could lead to an “environmental war” as states competed to attract industries 
by offering looser licensing.

“The danger is very real and very bad for environmental protection,” Araújo 
said.

Brazil’s environment minister, José Sarney Filho, has also attacked the bill. 
His ministry is one of 13 that have almost finished a detailed proposal to 
reform licensing laws which has the support of Ibama and environmentalists.

An open letter by Sarney Filho to Temer’s chief of staff, Eliseu Padilho, 
attacked Pereira’s bill and defended the detailed new blueprint his ministry 
helped draw up.

“The environmental regression of this measure would be immense,” Sarney Filho 
said in the letter, noting that 52% of Brazil’s greenhouse gas emissions came 
from agriculture and the use of land and forests.

Pereira said that those attacking proposals to let states and cities handle 
their own licensing were insulting the capability of those working in local 
government.

“They want to say that only they are intelligent and only they know,” he said. 
“We have intelligent and cultured people in all the states and cities. Minister 
Sarney Filho and his team have to respect all these people.”

Opposition lawmakers said the new threat shows how vulnerable the government 
of Michel Temer is to pressure from a powerful block of pro-agribusiness 
lawmakers –the so-called ruralista bloc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/24/brazil-agriculture-katia-abreu-climate-change>
 – whose support he needs to pass unpopular austerity measures.

With Brazil in the third year of a debilitating recession, Temer made economic 
recovery the principle aim of the government he formed when the leftist 
president Dilma Rousseff was suspended for an impeachment trial. Temer was 
Rousseff’s vice-president. She has since been ousted and has denounced him as a 
traitor and her impeachment as a coup d’état.

“It is a weak government and the ruralista block is very strong,” said 
Edmílson Rodrigues, a lawmaker from the leftist Socialism and Freedom party 
whose manoeuvres helped stop the environmental licensing bill from passing a 
crucial finance committee vote last week.

'We're going to resist': Brazil's indigenous groups fight to keep their land 
in face of new law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/23/brazils-indigenous-groups-battle-land-law-change>
These are not the only measures that Brazil’s conservative congress is trying 
to approve.

The ruralista bloc also has its eye on the country’s indigenous reserves.

A constitutional amendment to transfer control over their demarcation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/23/brazils-indigenous-groups-battle-land-law-change>
 from the executive to the legislature is poised for a vote in the lower house. 
And campaigners say a draft decree apparently drawn up by the justice ministry 
and published by local media threatens both new and existing indigenous 
reserves.

The draft decree stipulates that only areas occupied by indigenous groups in 
1988, when Brazil’s constitution was signed, would be eligible to become new 
reserves – ruling out anywhere indigenous people had been expelled from. 
Indigenous groups claiming lands already occupied could be compensated in other 
ways instead.

Mineral or water resources on indigenous reserves could be exploited with 
indigenous peoples sharing in mining income – though this would need congress’s 
approval – and communications networks, roads and “strategic energy 
alternatives” installed in existing indigenous lands without even consulting 
the communities involved or the government agency responsible.
 