
In this space last month, I asked how far it should be possible in a good day 
for the average punter to crack the Guardian cryptic crossword, without 
recourse to reference books.

There is no average answer to the question. Inevitably, some people have a 
larger working vocabulary than others. Some also have more magpie minds and are 
the sort who do well at Trivial Pursuit or on University Challenge. The 
intention, though, is that our cryptic puzzles should offer a fair day's sport 
to the average, well-read Guardian reader without the need for reference books 
- except Chambers and Collins for the occasional check.

The Saturday prize puzzles and, in particular, the bank holiday specials, do 
assume that the punter who wants to complete the whole journey, rather than the 
one who just wants to enjoy a stroll for part of the way, has access to 
reference sources to help with the answers, for at least some of the clues.

Typically helpful, I suppose, would be the Oxford Dictionary of Quotations (or 
the Penguin Dictionary of Quotations for some more modern entries), Brewer's 
Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, the Cassell Dictionary of Slang, the Penguin 
Dictionary of British History, the Everyman Dictionary of Fictional Characters, 
Chambers Biographical Dictionary, the National Trust Handbook, Grove's 
Dictionary of Music and Musicians and a good UK road atlas.

This does not in any way mean that the prize crosswords can only be 
successfully completed by those with elephantine memories or some or all of the 
above reference books. As a general rule, words and proper nouns will appear in 
either Chambers or Collins. The books listed may just make it easier to get 
there.

The only exceptions to this general rule would be neologisms that seem to have 
taken root, like Ukip and blog, or people who have achieved a sufficient degree 
of celebrity status but had not made it into the last edition of Collins, like 
Posh Spice and David Beckham. It might reasonably be objected that the 
celebrity rating of Radio 4's Fi Glover is not yet high enough to justify her 
making it into a recent Enigmatist Saturday prize puzzle (No 23,101, published 
on March 27), but his "fig-lover" clue was difficult to resist.

All these reference books, of course, take up shelf space. And they get 
overtaken by new editions. But there is one reference tool that takes up no 
shelf space and never dates: the web. In fact, there you can get the full 
Oxford English Dictionary and the whole of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 
neither of which will ever again be published in all those volumes. Over half 
of all UK households now have internet access and the proportion of those who 
go to work at an office must now be near to 100 per cent - though I would not 
for a moment suggest that people ever do Guardian crosswords at their 
workstations.

 The power of Google to instantly discover information is awesome. The only 
limitation is the fact or name involved needs to have been recorded digitally 
on a website that Google can search for you, so there is a bias in favour of 
recent times.

 For example, you can instantly get the CV of most B-list American or British 
academics, because they now all tend to have their personal websites. But 
sporting giants of yesteryear may not show up, unless they have had a book 
written about them or unless reference has been made to them in the digital 
part of some publication's archive.

 There is no doubt that some internet-savvy compilers, like Araucaria and 
Paul, use the web from time to time when searching for an idea. Since, whether 
we like it or not, the web as a source of information is becoming more useful 
and comprehensive every day, should we not accept it as a legitimising source 
for crossword clues and solutions?

My Warwickshire pub correspondent from last month is clearly moving in this 
direction. Of Araucaria's Easter Saturday special (No 23,113, published on 
April 10) he wrote: "I read Iolanthe over Easter. I was damned if I was going 
to read Emily Brontë, and for the first time I used Google. It was the first 
time I used the internet in relation to a crossword, and the first time I used 
Google, so I learnt something in the process - as so often happens."

 He has clearly seen the future - and it works. I encourage all and sundry to 
make whatever profitable use they can of the internet. But, for the time being 
at least, I remain a belt-and-braces man: I don't care how either compiler or 
solver gets there, but I do value the extra bit of comfort provided by a 
trusted old reference book.

·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 