
Sometimes football is blissfully simple. Celtic’s resource, on and off the 
field, is vastly superior to any other club in Scotland’s top flight. One 
second-half move at Tynecastle demonstrated that; Leigh Griffiths feeding Scott 
Sinclair to allow the debutant to mark hisCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> arrival with the winning goal 
against Heart of Midlothian. If Griffiths is well known as one of Scotland’s 
blue-chip players. Sinclair has been brought north with the clear aim of 
becoming one. So far, so good.

Celtic complete signing of Scott Sinclair from Aston Villa for £3m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/celtic-scott-sinclair-aston-villa>
Sinclair’s move to Celtic had been so widely trailed – the club had four bids 
rejected by Aston Villa beforea deal was concluded for the 27-year-old over the 
weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/celtic-scott-sinclair-aston-villa>
 – that he would not have been short of status even before this key Edinburgh 
intervention. That the former Manchester City man provided it justified the 
deep desire of Brendan Rodgers to coax Sinclair north, both in a bid to 
kickstart the player’s career and afford Celtic extra quality in wide attacking 
areas. Sinclair notched his first goal since 28 October 2015, sending the 
Celtic support into such raptures that a few of them ended up in handcuffs, 
having taken their celebrations on to the field of play.

“No one has really seen the best of Scott and I think people have maybe 
forgotten how good he is,” Rodgers said.

“This is a guy who scored a hat-trick in a play‑off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/30/reading-swansea-city-championship-play-off-final>
 under huge pressure in front of 90,000 people. He scored 27 goals for me in 
one season at Swansea when we were promoted. I had him at Chelsea when he was 
16. I looked to get him here because I think he can have a huge impact … He is 
still young, fresh and super fast.

“He scored an outstanding goal. He showed that huge determination to join in 
the play that you see from top players. I couldn’t have asked any more from 
him; Scott only had three hours sleep on Friday before travelling up here.”

For Rodgers, this marked a winning start to his maiden Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> campaign. Celtic 
have gone since 1997 without being defeated on their opening domestic day. 
There have been far more free-flowing and dominant performances than this 
during the intervening 19 years, with Hearts unfortunate not to take a point 
from a gripping if attritional clash.

Perhaps even an element of the home support, who have been on something of a 
downer since a wounding European exit to opposition from Malta, were surprised 
by how tight this fixture proved to be.

Rodgers is due credit. With the match seemingly destined for a draw, he 
withdrew one of his centre-backs, Eoghan O’Connell, with Tom Rogic replacing 
him. That switch to 3-5-2 not only highlighted Rodgers’s unwillingness to 
accept a point, it was sufficient to outsmart the hosts.

“How the players adapted to that change was terrific,” Rodgers said. The 
winner arrived from a brisk counterattack, Griffiths scampering down the left 
flank before laying the ball on a plate for Sinclair.

An early Celtic lead had arrived via the boot of James Forrest, who 
capitalised on dismal Hearts defending to curl the ball beyond Jack Hamilton.
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> claimed the goal should 
not have stood, with Stuart Armstrong in an offside position in front of 
Hamilton when Forrest took aim.

If Hearts were unlucky to be behind at that juncture, they enjoyed fortune of 
their own before half-time. Fortune triggered by the antics of Jamie Walker, 
that is. Walker clearly was not fouled by Kieran Tierney inside the visiting 
penalty area but threw himself to the ground as if an infringement had 
occurred, the actions sufficient to deceive the referee, John Beaton.

The main official endured an erratic afternoon – flashing 11 yellow cards in 
what was hardly a dirty game – but sympathy towards him was merited in this 
instance.

Walker readily dusted himself down before slotting a spot-kick low to Craig 
Gordon’s left. Later, Rodgers defended Beaton but the Celtic captain, Scott 
Brown, was less measured. “It was a dive, cheat, what else can you say?” Brown 
said. “The wee guy has conned the ref.” The Celtic player made his thoughts 
clear in person to Walker as the pair completed post-game media duties.

Rodgers took an alternative tone. “I am not going to kill the referee,” the 
Northern Irishman said. “He made a mistake; he admitted that and apologised.”

Walker insisted that he “felt contact so went down”. Thankfully, at least, 
this incident was not ultimately decisive.

Hearts believed that they had another penalty due in the second period as Kolo 
Touré clashed with Robbie Muirhead. Before that, Moussa Dembélé came within a 
brilliant John Souttar block of edging Rodgers’s men back in front. It took 
Sinclair’s arrival, with assistance from Griffiths, to breach that maroon 
resistance.
 