
John Egan’s late goal rescued a point for Brentford and denied Aston Villa a 
first win in fiveChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> matches. It looked as if 
Jonathan Kodjia’s first goal for Villa would earn them all three points but 
Roberto Di Matteo’s side had to settle for only one after Egan struck in the 
88th minute to make it 1-1.

Newcastle flying high as Jonjo Shelvey scores twice in mauling of QPR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/qpr-newcastle-championship-match-report>
Kodjia, who joined Villa last month from Bristol City, began to repay his £11m 
transfer fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/bristol-city-jonathan-kodjia-aston-villa-championship-record-fee>
, which could rise to as much as £15m, with a superb goal in only his second 
appearance.

Following an impressive debut against Nottingham Forest on Sunday Di Matteo 
said it would not be long before the French striker got off the mark and he was 
proved right after 19 minutes on Wednesday night, as he sent a lovely left-foot 
shot into the top corner of the net. It brought the majority of a subdued Villa 
Park to its feet, although there was one Villa fan who would not have been so 
impressed.

Brentford’s manager, Dean Smith, is a boyhood Villa supporter who earned his 
match-day ticket during the club’s heyday of the early 1980s cleaning seats in 
the Holte End with his father, who was a steward at the stadium, and it was not 
the start he was looking for from his team.

Smith’s side might have been behind in the fifth minute but the Brentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> goalkeeper Dan Bentley blocked 
Kodjia’s shot at his near post after he had been set free down the right side 
of the penalty area by Rudy Gestede.

Kodjia’s superb effort from that side of the box found the far corner of the 
net to put Villa ahead and two minutes later Gestede had the chance to double 
the lead but he shot straight at Bentley.

Di Matteo’s side were dominant and Gestede sent a header wide after getting on 
the end of a driven cross from Ross McCormack. However, Brentford were almost 
allowed a way back into the game in the closing stages of the first half when a 
mistake from the Villa captain, Tommy Elphick, let Scott Hogan in down the 
right side of the box but he shot straight at the home keeper, Pierluigi 
Gollini.

Then, in first-half injury time, a sliding block by Aly Cissokho repelled a 
goalbound Nico Yennaris shot before Josh Clarke sent the rebound over the 
crossbar. Chances became few and far between until just after the midway-point 
of the second half when Kodjia was within a whisker of a second goal but he 
could not get a telling touch on Jordan Ayew’s cross while Ayew curled an 
effort over the bar shortly afterwards.

Kodjia showed good strength to ride a couple of challenges on the edge of the 
area before testing Bentley with a curling shot but a second goal for him, or 
Villa, was not forthcoming. Instead there was a sting in the tail. The 
substitute Sullay Kaikai sent a deep cross to the far post where Egan hit a low 
shot into the net with the aid of a deflection.

It was the cue for boos from some home fans, reminiscent of last season, and 
it could have been worse had Gollini not pushed away Ryan Woods’ 25-yard shot 
in added time.

In the night’s other Championship gameJon Taylor secured a point for 10-man 
Rotherham as he sealed a brace in a thrilling 2-2 draw with Nottingham Forest 
at the Asseal Stadium.

The Millers led at half-time through the former Peterborough man, but Forest 
hit back after the break with a header from Matt Mills and a brilliant 
Apostolos Vellios overhead kick, which put them on the verge of victory. But 
Taylor drove home his second of the match five minutes form time to deny the 
visitors the chance to move into the play-off zone.
 