
In many respects, now is the best time to be a woman: we’ve got the vote, 
we’ve got marriage rights and we got rid of Page 3. Although don’t say that to 
the Sun, or they’ll bring it back again. It was an editorial decision.

So how are we using our freedom and opportunity and money? Well, we are hoping 
to cater to everyone’s tastes by slicing ourselves up like a Solihull Toby 
Carvery on pension day. We stick things on and tuck other bits in; get hair 
extensions and have other hair removed. We lie under lamps to be darker, and 
bleach ourselves to be lighter. We enhance our breasts, then reduce them again 
because they give us backache.

Bridget Christie: 'Feminists never have sex and hate men opening doors for 
them, even into other dimensions'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/22/bridget-christie-feminists-sex-men-book-extract>
We freeze our foreheads and fill our lips. Once, we removed our ribs, then put 
them back in again because fashions changed. We broke and bound our feet and 
painted our faces with mercury. Now we vajazzle our montes pubis and, if we 
work in musical theatre and have hairy hands, we hajazzle our hands too. And we 
can’t stop. We’ll carry on until we become the human equivalent of a Fuzzy-Felt 
board. And until all that remains of our true selves is our low self-esteem.

Surveys and polls consistently prove that women would rather lose weight than 
achieve any other goal in life. Forty thousand women had cosmetic surgery in 
2011. This figure does not include “lunchtime” procedures, such as Botox.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> had 90% of cosmetic procedures 
in 2011. The most popular are breast augmentation, eyelids and face/neck lifts. 
A third of women would have surgery to change their body shape. Half of women 
aged 16 to 21 would consider cosmetic surgery.

Demand for cosmetic vaginal surgery has increased fivefold in the past 10 
years; almost all women referred for this have genitalia that fit within a 
normal/expected range of size.

I’m not judging those women. It is their vagina and they can do whatever they 
like with it, but I’m just going to offer up my alternative to surgery. I 
organised a naming ceremony for it. No one came. I burned some geranium oil and 
we shared a ham and tomato sandwich. I’ve felt much better about Brian ever 
since, and every man I’ve shown Brian to since that naming ceremony (mainly 
comedy critics and awards panel judges and bookers and promoters and comedy 
photographers and agents and TV commissioners who work in comedy) has felt 
better about it too.

Labial surgery is like pollarding a tree. All the birds’ nests have gone, and 
the plastic carrier bags, and the wood pigeons. They go from being the trees of 
life to barren sticks. Leave them alone.

Thirty per cent of female students aged 18 to 65 would be prepared to die 
younger for a “perfect” body; 10% were willing to trade between two and five 
years of life. And 1.6 million people in the UK are estimated to currently 
suffer from some form of eating disorder; 89% of these are female.

Now those are the facts. But look. I’ve got two webbed toes on my right foot. 
Not fully webbed, just half webbed. It’s a family thing. I’m from a family of 
ducks. And we’re all very proud of our webbed feet. And yet, with these feet, I 
have managed to live a full and varied life. I even managed to have two 
children. Well, ducklings. I call them children. In many ways, not just 
psychologically, I’m damaged goods. And yet here I am, writing this (not with 
my toes, though. I am using my unwebbed fingers).

The only thing I’ve had done is gum surgery. But that was because I was mugged 
and got my teeth knocked out (by a man! So we can add teeth-smashing to the 
list as well), so they needed a bit of straightening out. It wasn’t because I’d 
succumbed to the relentless bombardment of unrealistic images of women’s gums 
in the media.

And I’m a mum now. My body doesn’t need to be perfect, it just needs to work. 
As long as I can pick up my children, throw them into a bin and run away really 
quickly, that’s all that matters. And I can’t do that with enormous 
mattress-filled breasts, bound feet or convalescing labia.

If we don’t start valuing ourselves as more than just a commodity, and stop 
basing all our happiness and success on how we look, all the progress we’ve 
made will be a complete waste of time. What’s the point in holding up a mirror 
to female oppression if we can’t even look in it ourselves?

• Extracted from A Book For Her by Bridget Christie (Century, £14.99, out on 2 
July). To order a copy for £11.99, go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call the 
Guardian Bookshop on 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. 
Phone orders min p&p of £1.99. Copyright © Bridget Christie 2015.
 