
Chris Hughton said his Brighton side had been masters of their own downfall as 
they missed the chance to climb into theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> automatic promotion spots 
thanks to a 4-1 defeat at Cardiff. The Seagulls could have moved into the top 
two with Middlesbrough and Hull not in league action, but they were well beaten 
by a Cardiff side who boosted their play-off aspirations.

The game was effectively over once Peter Whittingham, Anthony Pilkington and 
Lex Immers had capitalised on defensive errors to give the Bluebirds a 3-0 lead 
inside half an hour. Dale Stephens pulled a goal back for Brighton but 
Whittingham sealed the win from the penalty spot with 24 minutes to play, and 
Hughton felt a lot of the damage was self-inflicted.

“It is very simple, if you concede three goals in that manner it is very 
difficult to win any football match, particularly at this level and away from 
home against a side as good as Cardiff,” said Hughton. “We never allowed 
ourselves to get into the game. At 3-1 we had two good chances but I cannot say 
we deserved anything. The damage was self-inflicted, the penalty can happen at 
any stage but the damage was already done. We conceded three poor goals in that 
crucial period and that is nothing to do with form, formations or tactics. It 
is about defending well and we did not. It was a good opportunity for us and we 
did not take it.”

Whittingham fired Cardiff into a 16th-minute lead when his forward run lost 
Steve Sidwell and Matt Connolly provided the through ball. Three minutes later 
the lead doubled as David Stockdale’s poor clearance was worked to Pilkington, 
who cut inside his man to fire through the Brighton keeper’s hands. Immers made 
it three when a loose ball ran across the visitors’ penalty area and there 
appeared no way back for Hughton’s men.

Stephens glanced home a Jiri Skalak cross to pull one back, but Connor 
Goldson’s clumsy tackle on Pilkington allowed Whittingham to score his second 
and ensure Cardiff scored four in a game for the first time since December 2012.

“That is a big boost for us and I have told the players I still feel there is 
plenty of improvement to come,” said Russell Slade, their manager. “I say that 
because we have new partnerships out there. Stuart O’Keefe and Joe Ralls have 
not played together that often in midfield, Anthony Pilkington has been up 
front and we have added new faces to the equation in Tom Lawrence and Lex 
Immers.

“It is a new team, a young team in certain areas and we are maturing. It was a 
real mature performance. We committed forward when we had to and we were 
resilient when we had to be. We were tactically disciplined against a side who 
are king of the counter-attack. If you leave yourself open they can hurt you, 
the balance was key to this game and we had that.” 
 