
Brighton and Hove Albion secured their sixth win in seven league games to 
maintain their five-point lead at the top of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, with a goal in each half 
from Tomer Hemed and Dale Stephens sinking the bottom side, Rotherham United, 
at the Amex Stadium.

The substitute Jonson Clarke-Harris pulled a late goal back for the visitors 
who have now lost five of their seven matches in the Championship. Brighton, 
who survived six minutes of added time, were good value for their victory 
before a crowd of 21,397.

The Brighton manager, Chris Hughton, recalled the former Sheffield United 
midfielder Jamie Murphy for the suspended Kazenga LuaLua and he just failed to 
get on the end of a dangerous cross from Bruno in only the third minute.

Middlesbrough’s Christian Stuani scores twice to sink Brentford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/middlesbrough-christian-stuani-brentford>
The Seagulls started well and the Israel international midfielder Beram Kayal 
put a near post header wide from a corner by Stephens.

Murphy shot wide of the keeper Lee Camp’s right-hand post before the striker 
Sam Baldock tried his luck with an angled shot that flew narrowly over, after
Rotherham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> switched off 
following a quick throw-in.

The defender Lewis Buxton then came to the Millers’ rescue with an important 
clearance after Bruno crossed dangerously to the far post on being set up by 
Stephens.

Murphy was just off target midway through the half with a left-foot shot that 
flew wide after Stephens put him clear.

The breakthrough came in the 26th minute, however, when Brighton’s Israel 
international striker Hemed hit his fifth goal of the season from close range. 
A pinpoint cross from Murphy set Hemed up inside the six-yard area and his 
left-footed finish went in off the underside of the bar.

Camp dived full length to parry a goalbound shot from Solly March as the hosts 
continued to dominate. Hemed finished the half strongly and, after having a 
header saved by Camp, he put an acrobatic effort over after more good work from 
Murphy.

A mistake by Uwe Hünemeier gave the Rotherham midfielder Chris Maguire a clear 
sight of goal just after the break, but he wastefully put the ball over 
left-footed.

Rotherham were at last seeking to get further up the field with striker Danny 
Ward having come on in place of Aidan White. But their chances of taking 
something from the game received a huge blow when Stephens doubled Albion’s 
lead after 67 minutes.

The former Charlton Athletic man found the bottom left-hand corner with a 
first-time shot from 20 yards following a surging run by Gaetan Bong.

The substitute Clarke-Harris promptly reduced the deficit four minutes later 
by heading in a Maguire free-kick.

But Brighton, ever a threat in front of goal, threatened when Bruno had a 
25-yard drive tipped over by Camp before the Millers keeper held an effort from 
the substitute Bobby Zamora, and the leaders held on for victory.
 