
Brighton extended their unbeaten run in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> to 15 games by defeating 
Blackburn 3-2 to go top, though the Seagulls manager, Chris Hughton, admits 
Newcastle United, the previous leaders, remain the team to catch.

Shane Duffy scored past the Blackburn goalkeeper, Jason Steele, for the fourth 
time this year in the league, though the previous three had come when he was a 
Blackburn defender in the form of own goals, before Dale Stephens and the 
substitute Glenn Murray scored in the second period.

Stourbridge reach FA Cup third round for first time with Northampton win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/stourbridge-reach-fa-cup-third-round-for-first-time-with-northampton-win>
Sam Gallagher’s double kept the hosts in touch, yet Hughton’s side never 
looked troubled as they moved above Newcastle before the Magpies’ visit to 
Wigan on Wednesday.

While Hughton’s side have pieced together an impressive sequence that extends 
back to their last league defeat on 10 September, he agrees with those who 
believe the north-east club seem destined for an instant return to the Premier 
League.

“I can understand it and I would probably say the same thing about Newcastle,” 
the former Magpies manager said. “It’s because of the squad they’ve got, I’ve 
not seen a squad as strong as what they’ve got. I’m reasonably sure if we or 
anybody can stay close to them, they will put themselves in a very good 
position.”

Newcastle can regain the lead with a win at Wigan on Wednesday night. 

Leeds United are up to fifth after beating third-placed Reading 2-0 at Elland 
Road thanks to Chris Wood’s 19th-minute strike and an injury-time penalty from 
Souleymane Doukara. “We are at a stage of the season where it is important to 
grind, stick in and get the three points,” Garry Monk, the Leeds manager, said.

“We were the most dangerous team by far, had the best chances. We let them 
have possession but we knew it was where it couldn’t hurt us. We try and set 
the standard high and if you want to be a good team you are going to get 
disappointments. The best teams react straight away and we have been very 
consistent with that. They are a very good team and we limited them to pretty 
much nothing.”

Sheffield Wednesday are back in the play-off places after an Angus MacDonald 
own goal and a Sam Hutchinson effort gave them a 2-0 win against their 
Yorkshire rivalsBarnsley, who had Adam Hammill and the manager, Paul 
Heckingbottom, sent off late on.

Carlos Carvalhal, the Wednesday manager, said: “Let me give congratulations to 
my players, the way they played the game – they did a fantastic job. Second, 
let me tell you thisBarnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> 
team is a very tough team to play against. They’re special away; they’re very, 
very dangerous.

“The more respect that I can talk about Barnsley is that this is one of the 
first times that I’ve changed the system – we played differently today because 
we must control them and block them. It was important to block them because 
they play with two attackers. I think we prepared very well. I’m happy my team 
understands the moments of the game very well.”

The Owls are above Birmingham City on goal difference after City’s 2-1 home 
win againstIpswich Town. Their manager, Mick McCarthy, was highly critical of 
the referee. The visitors fell behind to Clayton Donaldson’s 43rd-minute 
penalty before Michael Morrison added a second shortly after the break.

Ipswich did pull a goal back with 20 minutes to go through Adam Webster, and 
McCarthy felt his side were denied an legitimate equaliser by the officials to 
further sour his mood after only three wins in 14 league games. “Birmingham’s 
second goal was a disgrace,” he said.

“The penalty also came from a corner and I thought we had a perfectly 
legitimate goal late in the game. The referee gave a foul against Christophe 
Berra who appeared to back into Ryan Shotton who had not jumped. But this is 
typical of what has been happening this season. We didn’t play badly and 
deserved something from the match.”

Norwich City remain on the coat-tails of the top six after Nelson Oliveira’s 
goal gave them a 1-0 home win againstAston Villa, who have lost back-to-back 
away matches.

Steve Bruce accused his Villa side of “not putting their boots on”. The 
visitors barely registered a shot on goal and their manager said: “I can accept 
getting beat, what I can’t accept is players not putting their boots on, not 
turning up. We did not do enough with the ball or without it and we got exactly 
what we deserved from the game – nothing.”

David Wagner hailed Huddersfield Town’s “fighting spirit” as they battled to 
see offBurton Albion 1-0. Nahki Wells’s 85th-minute header, after Christopher 
Schindler had headed a set-piece back across the penalty area, secured three 
points at the end of a less-than-convincing performance from the 
promotion-chasing Yorkshire side.

“We can be very happy about the three points,” Wagner said. “We told ourselves 
before the game that we had to show different attitudes maybe today against 
Burton. We knew that fighting spirit and working attitude would be very 
important today and this is what they have shown.

“The offensive performance was not our best today but this was not the most 
important thing.”

Dean Smith, the Brentford manager, admitted there was a large slice of good 
fortune about the Maxime Colin goal that settled an open match at Ashton Gate, 
whereBristol City were beaten 1-0. The midfielder claimed the 69th-minute 
strike, deflecting a Romaine Sawyers shot from outside the box to wrong-foot 
City’s substitute goalkeeper, Ivan Lucic.

“I think the ball went in off Maxime’s backside,” Smith said, with a smile. 
“Sometimes you need a bit of luck to record victories in the Championship and 
he will want the goal, even though it was a fantastic strike by Romaine. It was 
a tough night for us. The game was end to end with chances for both sides. A 
draw would have been a fair result, but we managed to get over the line.”

A half-time speech by Neil Warnock inspired Cardiff City to a late 2-1 win 
against their relegation rivals Wolverhampton Wanderers. Second-half goals from 
Matt Connolly and Anthony Pilkington completed the turnaround to lift the 
Bluebirds out of the Championship drop zone.

They trailed at the break after Ben Amos’s mistake gifted Wolves the lead in 
the second minute, the Cardiff goalkeeper failing to beat away Matt Doherty’s 
ferocious drive from distance. But a delighted Warnock said: “We felt a bit 
sorry for ourselves with the goal. We were behind because of a goalkeeping 
error.

“It took us 10, 15 minutes after that where we could’ve lost the game. I just 
said to them ‘stop feeling sorry for yourselves, they are there to be beaten 
and if we play in the second-half, we can win the game’. That was the message.”

At Craven Cottage Fulham fought back from a goal down to win 2-1. Joe Newell 
gave bottom-of-the-tableRotherham a surprise lead, but Stefan Johansen and 
Floyd Ayite struck either side of half-time forFulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham>, for whom Chris Martin also had a 
penalty saved by Lewis Price.
 