
Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> and Brighton shared 
the spoils in an enthralling match which ended with what was he home side’s 
first 0-0 draw in 60 games, though Albion had their goalkeeper, David 
Stockdale, to thank for their point after two full-length saves in the second 
half of an end-to-end game that was a credit to both sides.

He kept out Jake Bidwell’s flying header from an Alan Judge cross to the far 
post after 78 minutes and then pulled off another fine save five minutes later. 
Judge was the man thwarted that time, his neat turn and curling drive from the 
edge of the box being denied by the goalkeeper’s fingertips. However the Bees 
substitute Philipp Hofmann should have won it late on but he headed straight at 
Stockdale even though he had time to bring the ball down and pick his spot.

“I thought we made them look average at times,” said Brentford’s head coach, 
Dean Smith. “We played with a good attitude, intensity and quality, and but for 
the keeper it might have ended differently.

“We can take a lot of confidence from our performances over the last five 
games,” he added. “I have been really pleased with the levels we have hit and 
feel confident for the coming months.”

Brighton showed why they have drawn six of their past seven away games with a 
defensive display of resolve, constantly looking to play on the break. But it 
was the London club who looked the more likely to take the points despite a 
cat-and-mouse first half of few clear-cut chances.

Lasse Vibe fired over the bar seven minutes in and Ryan Woods saw a 
grasscutter fizz straight into the relieved goalkeeper’s hands as both 
midfields restricted their opponents to long-range efforts.

John Swift sent a speculative effort just wide as both teams successfully 
mastered a swirling wind to turn in some fine passing football.

The game opened up after the interval and a goal looked more and more likely. 
Judge, a constant threat in the Brentford midfield, and Rajiv van La Parra 
tormented Nico Yennaris down the left flank.

Brighton’s only real clear-cut chance came on 53 minutes when Tomer Hemed fed 
Jamie Murphy wide on the left but he skied his first-time effort over the bar 
when he had more time. “We had to dig deep because Brentford are a good team,” 
said the Brighton manager, Chris Hughton. “When we have needed David Stockdale 
he has been there and produced for us.”

Hughton also admitted part of the philosophy was to ensure his side did not 
lose for a second game in a row following a calamitous 3-0 home loss at the 
hands of Middlesbrough. “That was a part of the thinking,” he added, “but we 
played two up front so we came here to win the game.”

Brighton survived a penalty shout on 67 minutes when Vibe was felled by Dale 
Stephens, but the referee evened things up late in the second half when he 
waved away Albion protests after James Tarkowski tangled with Elvis Manu in the 
area.
 