
Coach John Aloisi says Brisbane haven’t received a single offer for Jamie 
Maclaren despite a British report claiming Stoke City have “tabled a bid” for 
the striker.

Recent conjecture about Maclaren’s future took another twist this week when UK 
website eyefootball.com named the 23-year-old Socceroo as one of three players 
on Stoke manager Mark Hughes’ radar for the January transfer window.

Western Sydney Wanderers release Kerem Bulut from A-League contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/wanderers-release-kerem-bulut-a-league-contract>
Though the report claims the English Premier League club have been tracking 
Maclaren for six months, his agent Paddy Dominguez said it was news to him.

And Aloisi denied any formal bid had been made for his off-contract star.

“There haven’t been any offers at all for Jamie Maclaren or any other 
players,” Aloisi said.

“We know everyone is going to be talking about Jamie Maclaren and interested 
in him. There’s always speculation.

“He knows as a striker there’ll be people talking about him all the time, good 
or bad.”

Contract negotiations have been ongoing since Dominguez described the Roar’s 
initial offer as “disgusting” and “highly disrespectful”.

Maclaren has been linked to fellow A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> side Western Sydney, who could 
stump up marquee money for the competition’s highest-scoring Australian player 
last season.

Europe is another option, but either way Brisbane need to decide whether to 
gain a lucrative transfer fee in January or keep him for their title push and 
risk seeing him leave for free.

“Jamie’s been focused in his football,” Aloisi said.

“Even though he didn’t score last week (against Western Sydney) he looked 
really sharp, and I’m expecting him to cause Sydney FC problems again.”

Maclaren, who has six goals from 11 appearances this season and a league-high 
23 shots on target, will be a key weapon against the Sky Blues at Allianz 
Stadium on Friday night.

He’s netted three times in his last three games against Graham Arnold’s 
leaders, including a brace in the last trip to Allianz in January.

While Sydney remain undefeated, the third-placed Roar have been beaten just 
once, and Aloisi reminded Arnold it was his side who snapped the Sky Blues’ 
six-game winning streak in last month’s 1-1 draw at Suncorp Stadium.

“We didn’t have a good first half against them last time, but we tweaked 
things at halftime and in the second half we ran all over them,” Aloisi said.

“They remember that, they know that.

“We stopped their winning streak, now we believe we can stop their unbeaten 
run.”



 