
One down, one to go. It has been 20 years since a team last completed the 
lower league double of Football League Trophy and third tier title, butBristol 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> are halfway there after 
claiming the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy, for a record third time, with a 
comfortable victory over Walsall at Wembley.

“It would be nice,” said the City manager, Steve Cotterill, of the prospect. 
“We started off the season saying we want to win the league and we haven’t hid 
from that. I think the league form was kept going by our form in the JPT and 
the FA Cup, and now we’ve ended up winning the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy at 
Wembley, hopefully that can push us on to finish the season off.

“The thing the boys have experienced today is that 30 or 40 minutes of 
euphoria at the final whistle. If you could bottle it you’d want a bit of it 
every day. It’s fantastic. You can’t beat it.”

The achievement is, perhaps surprisingly, something of a rarity. The only 
other team to combine a Football League Trophy win with the third division 
title were Birmingham City in 1994-95, back when the competition was sponsored 
by windscreens rather than paint.

That game was decided by Paul Tait’s golden goal winner in extra time and 
either marred or enlivened, depending on your point of view, by the 
goalscorer’s infamous “shit on the Villa” T-shirt.But here there was nothing to 
take any of the shine from Cotterill’s successful side.

At times they threatened to run amok and that they did not is testament to 
Walsall’s spirit and determination on the club’s first trip to Wembley in their 
127-year history. Yet Dean Smith’s side were always second best to a team who 
since the turn of the year have set about proving that they are the best team 
in the bottom two divisions.

City came into this fixture on the back of six wins and a draw in their 
previous seven league games, a run that has seen them turn a narrow two-point 
lead at the top into a 10-point cushion, and it showed. If this remains the 
best day of Bristol City’s season something will have gone terribly wrong in 
the run-in.

This win also offers an element of catharsis for a club who have only just 
recovered from their last trip to the national stadium. That ended ina 1-0 
defeat to a Dean Windass goal for Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/may/24/championship.bristolcity2> in 
the 2008 Championship play-off final and sparked a downward trajectory only 
arrested by the arrival of Cotterill midway through last season.

Clever recruitment has been key to righting the sinking ship and it was two of 
Cotterill’s summer signings who stole the show here. Mark Little, who won this 
trophy with Peterborough last season, was a constant threat from right 
wing-back (with the emphasis very much on wing) before scoring City’s second 
and Luke Freeman – a budget David Silva, all left peg and dangerous scurry – 
orchestrated affairs from his position just behind the front two.

The latter almost opened the scoring with a spin and fizzing 25-yard drive 
after only six minutes as City threatened to overwhelm their opponents, and it 
was no surprise when they opened the scoring on the quarter-hour. Marlon Pack 
swung in a corner, Aden Flint towered highest, as he generally does at 6ft 6in, 
and nodded home his 10th goal of the season from close range.

Kieran Agard and Aaron Wilbraham then wasted opportunities to increase the 
City advantage but as the half wore on aWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> side who initially froze with 
stage fright – the attendance of 72,315 was the third biggest in Europe this 
weekend behind only El Clásico and Bayern Munich – began to thaw.

Three minutes before the break Andy Taylor, a player with his own Wembley 
demons to exorcise having missed a crucial penalty here in the 2012 League One 
play-off final shootout when with Sheffield United, sent a dipping volley 
narrowly over the bar.

The Saddlers, though, began the second half as they had begun the first and 
within three minutes City had doubled their lead. Freeman jinked free on the 
left, whipped in a low cross, and Little bundled home at the second attempt, 
the two best players on the pitch combining to put the game out of Walsall’s 
reach.

There might have been a grandstand finish had Jordan Cook’s overhit cross not 
pinged back off inside of the post just before the hour but City were largely 
left unruffled. “We didn’t really perform to anywhere near our level, that’s 
the disappointing part,” said Smith. “Maybe there were a few nerves, I don’t 
know. We’re normally very good on the ball and today our use of the ball wasn’t 
quite good enough. Sometimes that happens.”

Man of the match Luke Freeman (Bristol City)
 