
Belief is the managers' catchword of the moment – belief and its supposed 
consequence, consistency.Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> and Bury were both 
understandably after it at the Memorial Stadium on Saturday, lying 20th and 
22nd in League Two, and John Ward and Ronnie Jepson were joshingly happy 
afterwards with a point apiece.

"We are three games undefeated," said Rovers' Ward beforehand, "and, if you 
can put a little run together, it tends to give the players that bit of added 
belief." Jepson, asked to stay until January having stepped up from assistant 
after Kevin Blackwell's dismissal last month, said: "My primary concern is not 
me and the job but getting the players to believe in themselves."

They can believe in fairy godmothers at least, as JD Sports will be the 
Shakers' main sponsor from next season. "Hopefully it shows we're on the up," 
Jepson said, commending the club's movers but aware that JD does not expect to 
back a Conference team. The down side is that Gigg Lane, home since 1885, is to 
be called the JD Stadium – a shame to make Shakers pale.

Rovers are trying to break new ground altogether. Having lost historic 
Eastville to greyhounds, camped in Bath and gone from tenants to equal partners 
then owners as the rugby club hit financial trouble (not an exclusive football 
malaise), they have planning permission for a stadium at the University of the 
West of England but have run into a protest group opposing sale of the Memorial 
Stadium to a supermarket. The rugby club are going to City's Ashton Gate anyway 
but, as was said on Saturday: "Nothing happens here easily." A judicial review 
is scheduled for January.

Plenty happened quickly on the field, perhaps too quickly for Rovers' good. 
They, too, could believe in magic when Shaun Beeley, head spinning from Eliot 
Richards' run, brought him down and John-Joe O'Toole converted the 
fourth-minute penalty. Bury's response was impressive. They simply turned off 
The Gas with a burst of electricity. Danny Hylton wasted Danny Mayor's inviting 
cross but then, with a brilliant backheel down the right touchline, sent Tom 
Soares clear, only for Shaun Harrad, three yards out, to scoop the centre over 
a gaping goal.

By half-time, though, Bury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury> were 
level and Beeley and Hylton were feeling better, Beeley crossing and Hylton 
forcing in. As Ward said later: "We got a lovely start but then we were on the 
back foot as they took the game to us. They were very strong and knocked us 
about a bit."

It was Matt Harrold, though, Rovers' centre-forward, who saw off his marker, 
Richard Hinds, early on with "a big lump on his head" as Jepson put it. "Matt 
came over at the end and admitted he caught Richard, albeit unintentionally, 
and I have no problem with that. These things happen in football." Managers 
lower down the ladder are mostly good role models for those in the Premier 
League. Harrold, meanwhile, looked the part to be back on the pitch on Sunday, 
hoisted above a lineout against Rotherham Titans.

Rovers had increasing territorial domination after the interval, with Michael 
Smith a driving force from right-back, and Chris Beardsley lively. Brian 
Jensen, Bury's keeper, needed two goes to gather a diving header by Tom Parkes, 
captain and centre-back, but Bury could set two headers against that, Harrad's 
on to the bar and Hylton's poorly over it.

"When we start hitting the back of the net we'll fly up the table," said 
Jepson. "We've tried really hard; that sounds a bit schoolboy," said Ward, "but 
I can't grumble. You can be as happy as you want or the most miserable person 
in the world and I've no time for miserable people." He has the knack of being 
a force of goodwill, raising morale wherever he has been – East (Colchester), 
West and North (Carlisle) but not yet South. He has even given both Bristols a 
lift, each currently just above the relegation belt but at least a division 
below where they should be.

Both clubs play in the FA Cup on Tuesday in a spell of five games in 15 days, 
with victory putting them one match short of a potentially lucrative 
third-round tie. Bury, facing Cambridge United, top of the Conference so only 
three places below them, are grateful to have five loanees available. Rovers' 
excellent programme indicated each with increasing numbers of daggers, though 
Daniel Nardiello, like Hylton from Rotherham, signed too late for what would 
have been six. None was drawn on a field that seemed almost to impose the 
generous spirit of amateur rugby.
 