
A Gas explosion is rocking not only the city of Bristol but League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>. Late last month 
Rovers changed hands, bought by a Jordanian banker, Wael al-Qadi. On Saturday 
the team beat Mansfield Town 1-0 at the Memorial Stadium, a fourth win in 12 
days, to go fourth above Portsmouth and within three points of Oxford United 
and Plymouth Argyle, all of whom lost. “The supporters have had hell here for a 
long time,” said their manager, Darrell Clarke, “and I’m pleased if I’ve sent 
them home happy and they are getting excited.”

The hell has been personal, too. Two years ago he was given eight games to 
save them from relegation. On the last day, having won at Wycombe Wanderers the 
previous weekend, they needed a point to make other results, including 
Wycombe’s, irrelevant. Rovers, at home to Mansfield, lost 1-0 and went down. 
Clarke, a son ofMansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> who 
started a lower League career there, admitted to being haunted ever since. 
Colin Daniel, who scored the fateful goal, was booed when he came on as a 
substitute on Saturday. Six minutes later, just beyond the hour, Matty Taylor 
scored the goal that may have laid the ghost.

This is Clarke’s first League post after a successful spell with Salisbury 
City, then understudying John Ward at Rovers. A big turnover of players brought 
them straight back from the Conference through the play-offs. Saturday marked 
his 100th match and 50th victory and Taylor’s 20th goal in 40 appearances this 
season. The striker was one of last season’s intake, bought from Forest Green 
Rovers and scorer against them in both play-off legs. Shortly after his goal 
here, his fifth in four games after a lean spell, he met a through-ball with a 
flying backheeled volley pass to a team-mate. That is what confidence does. But 
as a team, of course, Rovers “are keeping their feet on the ground”.

Mansfield were obstinate opponents, strong in defence but venturing little in 
attack to support Matt Green (11 goals), who was superbly contained by Tom 
Lockyer. They tried to sign Oliver McBurnie, a Swansea striker, on loan but 
Rovers beat them there, too. Mansfield have not beaten a top-12 side all season 
yet, even after this third defeat running, they are in the top half themselves 
and looking to join the play-off scramble.

Neither side fired a shot in anger until the fourth official was fetching his 
board for first-half added time. Clarke said it “wasn’t a great game on the 
eye” and told his men “to be better with the ball”. They had made little 
penetration except down the left, prompted by Lee Brown and carried on by 
Cristian Montaño, and those two had a part in the goal, the ball reaching 
Montaño from Brown’s blocked shot and Taylor tapping in the cross.

Until the closing minutes, when Mansfield’s midfield shield, Lee Collins, 
surged forward for a shot that Steve Mildenhall palmed upwards and saw plop on 
to the roof of his net, the Stags seemed distracted, maybe mystified by 
Friday’s FA ruling that a team-mate, Adi Yussuf, a substitute at Plymouth last 
month, had been banned for five games and fined £700 under Rule E3 for peeing 
behind a stand “in or around the 30th and 53rd minute”. Apart from Yussuf being 
directed there by Argyle staff the timing points to a lack of witnesses. No 
judge would accept “30 slash 53”.

If Mansfield are feeling penny foolish, Rovers look pound wise. Qadi, a 
football man playing like a fan into his forties, has come, seen and conquered 
with more than a chequebook. “It’s not all about throwing cash,” he said. “It 
is about growing the club organically, step by step.” The ground move to a 
university site is back on the cards, “with a capacity of 21,700 or more”. 
Saturday’s 7,847 was 1,500 up on two years ago. “The progress is there for all 
to see,” said Clarke. Steve Hamer, formerly at Swansea, is a reassuring 
presence as chairman.

“On Jordan’s bank the baptist’s cry announces that the Lord is nigh,” says the 
Advent hymn. And the spirit is wholly behind Clarke. “They’re an honest bunch 
of lads doing me proud,” he said. “We’re in a challenging position.”
 