
Formula One has development and innovation at its heart, pushing boundaries is 
its lifeblood and yet at the sharp end, behind the wheel, change has been an 
awfully long time coming: 22 years to be precise. But at Silverstone on Friday 
the boys’ club finally opened its doors again, when Susie Wolff took to the 
track in her Williams for the first practice session of theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>. Perhaps it is fitting 
that it was at Silverstone, a real drivers’ circuit, that for the first time in 
a generation there was a woman among them.

Giovanna Amati was the last female driver to take part in an F1 race weekend, 
entering three qualifying sessions for Brabham in 1992 but failing to make the 
start for any race. Indeed, it was the Italian Lella Lombardi who was the last 
woman to compete in an actual race, back at the Austrian GP in 1976, and she 
remains the only one to have scored world championship points – half of one – 
at the Spanish GP, which ended prematurely under red flags in 1975.

Interest, then, for Wolff’s drive was high. Appointed as the Williams 
development driver in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/apr/11/susie-wolff-joins-williams-driver>
 , her run in the practice session was highly anticipated by fans and driver, 
who had been building towards this moment for several years. But terrible 
disappointment was to follow.Wolff managed only four laps before an engine 
failure brought her car to a halt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/04/susie-wolff-debut-british-grand-prix-silverstone-williams>
 .

It was “a massive disappointment”, she said. “Such a good buildup, so much 
hard work, so much preparation to get ready for today. That’s racing, I’ve 
known from over the years that it can be massive ups and massive downs.”

Which is an honest assessment from a woman who does know racing. Now 31, she 
began karting in her teens and by 2003 was competing in Formula Renault UK when 
she was chosen as the British Racing Drivers Club rising star of the year. A 
year later she finished fifth in the championship, two places behind Paul Di 
Resta, scoring three podiums in the process.

But it was what followed that forged her, seven years racing for Mercedes in 
the ferocious white heat of the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters (DTM), a tin-top 
touring car series of high speed and high competitiveness. A period she 
believes was crucial as part of her development towards F1, until Williams 
stepped forward. “Sometimes in life you just need a chance and I got that at
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>,” she said. “You just 
need that chance and it is up to you to grab it.”

That she had the chance to grab it has, of course, been questioned. She is 
married to the Mercedes F1’s head of motorsport, Toto Wolff, who is also a 
Williams shareholder and the volume of interest here has certainly highlighted 
the publicity value of putting a woman behind the wheel.

Wolff, who completed 55 laps on her way to the fifth fastest time of the day 
at the test in Barcelona earlier this season, is unequivocal that she is making 
it on her own terms. “When I joined Mercedes for DTM, you have to come in and 
earn your respect but every young driver has to do that, if you keep your head 
down work hard and prove your worth you’re accepted,” she said. “You can’t 
expect to go on the grid unless you show you’re good enough, and I am well 
aware that there are many talented drivers fighting to be there, so for me it’s 
about taking each step of the way and doing a good job.”

She remains concerned, however, at the lack of motor racing role models for 
girls, in F1 in particular, although from a broader perspective perhaps the 
situation is improving. Sauber’s Monisha Kaltenborn, the only female team 
principal in F1, signed the highly rated Simona de Silvestro as an “affiliated 
driver” this year with a view to a drive in 2015.

Michela Cerruti (who won last weekend at Imola in the Auto GP series) will 
race for the former F1 driver Jarno Trulli’s Trulli GP team in the Formula E 
championship,a series in which Katherine Legge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/18/motorsports> , who tested an F1 
car for Minardi in 2005, will also compete. While on the pit wall,Leena Gade 
completed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/apr/28/leena-gade-female-motorsport-engineer>
 a hat-trick ofLe Mans wins this year when she race-engineered her Audi to its 
third victory in four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/15/audi-andre-lotterer-benoit-treluyer-marcel-fassler-le-mans>
. None of which will ease any of the disappointment that she has faced this 
weekend, as her husband acknowledged. “I know how hard she works,” he said. “I 
looked at the screens and I saw her stopping. I could see in her eyes that she 
was completely gutted.”

But it is, as she noted, just part of racing and she will, as does the sport, 
move on. “I will keep going as long as I can see the path and the opportunity 
to achieve,” she said. A path which will fortunately not require such as long a 
wait as last time. She will drive the first practice session for Williams at 
Hockenheim in two weeks time.

Williams suffered further in first practice when Felipe Massa went wide on the 
exit of Stowe and crashed after seven laps, while Mercedes’ Nico Rosberg headed 
the session in front of team-mate Lewis Hamilton. The British driver then took 
top spot in second practice ahead of Rosberg but more importantly he lost 
valuable track time when his engine shut down after only 14 laps. Making the 
most of the final session on Saturday morning will be key for Hamilton if he is 
to wrest back pole position bragging rights from Rosberg.
 