
In the true spirit of Basil Fawlty, Silverstone conveys the distinct 
impression that it could run a fantastic grand prix if it wasn't for pesky 
customers getting in the way. Whatever takes place on this wonderful circuit on 
Sunday afternoon, the 2012British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> will be remembered for 
the shambles that enveloped it and for the expressions on the faces of its fans 
– who looked more like refugees than followers of the most glamorous of all 
sports.

To spend six hours trapped in traffic, only to be turned away on arrival, 
which happened to many, is the sort of bitter experience that can lead to a 
fresh clamour for the return of the stocks for those responsible. Or even 
worse. Those who did make it through saw hardly any practice anyway.

The sadness is that Silverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone>
, which has done so much to foster goodwill in recent years, has now undone so 
much. We should not forget the £40m facelift that has transformed the track. In 
the last year the organisers have also spent £1m on a new traffic scheme and 
put in a mile of drains.

But you are unlikely to be talking about such advancements when you are 
gridlocked on the A43, with steamed up windows and petrol and patience running 
low.

Bernie Ecclestone was in the paddock here early on Saturdaymorning, prowling 
the motor-homes and wielding a stick much longer than his own 63 inches. Well, 
metaphorically at least. For theFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> boss who once described 
Silverstone as "a country fair masquerading as a world-class event" has fresh 
ammunition now.

The British Grand Prix is safe for the moment, but if, at some future date, it 
is taken off the schedule and replaced by yet another white elephant of an 
empty circuit in some far-flung desert, it will be days such as these that will 
be cited.

It is Silverstone's embarrassment to be book-ended by Wimbledon, with its 
brilliant Centre Court roof, and the Olympic Games. The British Grand Prix is 
also a world-class event but organising a spectacle for 125,000 people in the 
middle of the country, with no public transport, requires a degree of foresight 
that we have not seen here.

Race organisers should not take all the blame, of course. The weekend's deluge 
was extraordinary. Yet where were the police? Watching the tennis? The roads 
around the Northamptonshire circuit should be better signposted and there 
should be more stewards on hand to manage the traffic. But why did Silverstone 
sell tickets when there was insufficient hard-standing parking? Why wasn't park 
and ride used more extensively? Ah well, it was very wet. Wrong sort of rain, 
or wrong sort of grass, probably.

One thing: At Goodwood, for the Festival of Speed last weekend, there was 
plenty of corrugated iron put down to help with parking and to deal with the 
downpours that left paddocks sodden. Why wasn't it done here?

There was, eventually, an apology from Silverstone on Friday. But the 
statement did not arrive until nine at night, instead of the afternoon. It 
pleaded with race fans to stay away. After this weekend many of them will never 
return.
 