
It is hard to know quite how McLaren will view their home grand prix as the 
dust and drizzle settles after a thrilling race at Silverstone. Their car and 
its Honda power unit has been way off the pace all season and they hadqualified 
17th and 18th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/04/lewis-hamilton-pole-position-f1-british-silverstone>
 on the grid, ahead of only the two Manor cars, and in the race Jenson Button 
was knocked out on lap one by his team-mate Fernando Alonso. Yet, Alonso did 
finish in the points,albeit with only one, in 10th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/lewis-hamilton-wins-british-f1-gp-nico-rosberg>
. That this is only the second time the team have scored this season yet still 
might be seen as a positive is indicative of how a once mighty marque are now 
struggling.

The great days of the team’s partnership with Honda in the 1980s, of Ayrton 
Senna and Alain Prost, of winning 15 of 16 races in 1988, could not seem 
further away and at the moment there seems little hope of improvement on the 
horizon. The racing director, Eric Boullier, made it clear this weekend that 
the idea of Honda, who began developing their engine two years after the other 
manufacturers, having long-term goals for success was incompatible with his 
team’s need to start winning now.

Lewis Hamilton wins British F1 GP from Nico Rosberg at damp Silverstone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/lewis-hamilton-wins-british-f1-gp-nico-rosberg>
It is a need beyond simple prestige and perhaps becoming urgent. They have had 
no title sponsor since the deal with Vodafone ended in 2013 and face a salary 
bill for Button and Alonso understood to amount to about £33m. As one of the 
long-term members of the sport they benefit from its arcane financial payout 
system butMcLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> could still face 
a loss of revenue of about £30m from most probably finishing in ninth place, 
their lowest position for 35 years. “Companies are interested in joining us but 
some people in their organisations may question the results we are lacking and 
I don’t think we can wait for very long any more,” noted Boullier earlier in 
the race weekend.

This is the fifth race Button has failed to finish this year – indeed, in 
Bahrain his car was not able even to start – although it was pure bad luck. 
Alonso was spun when the two Lotus cars came together at turn three and he 
clumped Button, causing his engine to turn off. The British driver has been 
stoic all season, insisting that developing a works engine with Honda is the 
only way to catch Mercedes, but he was not happy. “I am disappointed, 
obviously,” he said. “In front of your home crowd you want to put on a good 
show and I wasn’t able to do that, and that is a shame.” He also made note of 
one of motor racing’s great truisms: that it is easier to stay out of trouble 
if you have clear air. “These things happen when you are so far back, so we 
need to qualify better. It is more likely to happen when you are starting 18th 
than starting on the front row,” he said.

His team-mate’s position in the points was really down to retirements – of 
which there were seven – and the rain rather than raw speed. In the dry, on the 
hard tyre, he was consistently around two seconds off the lead and Alonso 
admitted it had been “a difficult race” and that his team had been “off the 
pace”. “It’s not the best of results but 10th position helps to motivate 
everyone,” he said. Again, tellingly, that is not a phrase one would expect 
from a pedaller at McLaren.

Known to be hard to work with when things are not going his way, the Spaniard, 
for the moment, is calm. How long that lasts is uncertain. It cannot have 
helped that the weekend also featured moments of inefficiency that will have 
driven the chief executive, Ron Dennis, to distraction, including fitting 
Button’s tyre to Alonso’s car during qualifying and an overlong pitstop to 
change a nose during the race. Even the clockwork efficiency of the team looks 
shaken under the current circumstances.

Williams thwarted by weather in British Grand Prix but future looks brighter | 
Giles Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/05/williams-silverstone-british-grand-prix-f1-felipe-massa>
However disappointed Button might be at such a short run in what may be his 
finalBritish Grand Prix <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>, 
he was sticking with the line he has held all season. Earlier in the weekend he 
had pointed out the difficulties in developing an engine he described as both 
“aggressive” and “extreme” and after the race he was still looking forward. “I 
am still racing a Formula One car,” he said. “You are optimistic every time you 
get in the car that it is going to improve . We have had a couple of really bad 
races but I am still optimistic that it is going to improve.”

It is a stance he has resolutely stuck to across nine races now and one, no 
doubt, he is increasingly tired of repeating. McLaren need to start putting 
some flesh on what are becoming mightily tired bones.
 