
Grey skies of gloom caused by falling attendances have been hovering over some 
of this season’sFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
races, but at Silverstone this weekend the sun could not have shone brighter as 
the circuit bucked the trend.

Those looking to portray a sport struggling for popularity – viewing figures 
are down in the UK because of the shift to pay-per-view TV – will need to 
excise this year’sBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> from their arguments. 
The last race in Austria dropped from a 90,000 race-day attendance in 2014 to 
just 55,000 this year. Contrast that with Silverstone, which is enjoying record 
numbers, with Friday’s practice attracting 85,000 alone. A further 140,000 
people have tickets for Sunday’s race, 20,000 up on last year and 350,000 are 
expected over the three days. Only Wimbledon attracts more spectators and that 
is counted over the full two weeks. It is a success story that can certainly be 
attributed to clever management but also to the unique place motor sport 
occupies in this country.

Patrick Allen, who took over as Silverstone’s managing director in January and 
immediately set about instituting a new business plan, targeting volume over 
high prices, said: “The key driver was that the price point was too high. We 
decided to put the customer and the core fans at the heart of this business and 
lose some of theSilverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> 
arrogance. We had an offer of a £99 race ticket and £120 ticket for the weekend 
and the response to that has been phenomenal. We raised the threshold at which 
you can bring your family, so bringing under-11s for free, where previously it 
was under two, that has allowed families to enjoy the event.”

It was successful enough to ensure the circuit has made a profit and to be 
able to make this year’s offer price of £120 as the starting price for next 
year’s race.

None of which really fits in with Bernie Ecclestone’s desire to target the 
sport at high earners, which has not been part of Allen’s business model at 
all. “When you get it right and you understand what the fans really want and 
what they can afford then they support you,” he said. “If you are focused on a 
very high-end product, then your volume drops significantly.”

There is, of course, the Lewis Hamilton factor – having a British two-times 
world champion has drawn the home fans back to the circuit. But there is more 
to it than that. The British Grand Prix has always enjoyed popular support. 
Back in 2004 when Michael Schumacher was winning his 10th race from 11 starts 
and on his way to a fifth consecutive championship, the grandstands were full, 
with 100,000 people in attendance.

British fans, as Jenson Button acknowledged  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/02/jenson-button-british-grand-prix>
on Friday, just love their motor racing, whoever is out in front. Paul 
Sutcliffe of the British Motorsports Marshals Club, whose members will be 
trackside at Silverstone on Sunday, believes it is down to having: “a great 
history of british drivers and manufacturers”. He added: “As a nation the UK is 
big in motor sport, people love it. We recently had 40,000 at Oulton Park for 
the British Touring Cars.”

Another British world champion, Damon Hill, was president of the British 
Racing Drivers’ Club, which owns the circuit, and was in charge when it signed 
a 17-year deal to host the British Grand Prix in 2009. Hill has long championed 
the British fans. “They are stalwart,” he said. “And the race is a big part of 
the British sporting social calendar. Everybody comes here and looks forward to 
big attendances, knowledgeable crowds and supportive, intelligent and 
enthusiastic fans, who like the annual pilgrimage.”

Few would disagree with him. Spend any time trackside at Silverstone and there 
is clearly partisanship but that is outweighed by an overwhelming desire just 
to see great racing. And that is the next biggest concern for Allen, who 
despite the circuit’s success is among those to criticise the current state of 
Formula One.

“The key thing is to start looking at the product. I get given a product to 
sell. If the product isn’t right that makes it difficult,” he said. “It’s too 
predictable, it’s too technical. I am not a Luddite but we have lost some of 
the soul of motor racing to the technical gurus and I don’t think fans want to 
see a guy staring at a data screen. They want to see their heroes on track 
racing flat out from flag to flag. Not being told to lift and coast, not to 
settle for second place and just bring the car home.”

Clearly there are elements of F1 that urgently need fixing, but the popularity 
of the British Grand Prix is most definitely not one of them.

Damon Hill: more powers for F1 drivers can restore sport’s human touch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/damon-hill-f1-drivers-voice>  