
After the incessant plaudits for the forward-thinking, superlative state of 
German football over the recent weeks, it was almost refreshing to see the
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> sign off 
with a defiantly back-to-basics, madcap Saturday high on tears, comedy 
defending and drama.

First stop: the battle for fourth-spot at the Mage Solar Stadium. Freiburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/freiburg>, known as the sunniest city in 
Germany, incredibly found themselves with a chance to gatecrash the fat-cat 
party. Christian Streich's merry men came pretty close to embarking on this 
flight of fantasy, too, but at the end of 90 nervous minutes, Schalke smuggled 
three points to make it on to Uefa's standby list.

"It's like a trophy for us, the mental strength of my team is fantastic" the 
manager Jens Keller didn't say. The 42-year-old will be allowed to stay in the 
job for next season after neither Bild's attempts to push Stefan Effenberg on 
to the Royal Blues nor Rafael Benítez's come-and-get-me pleas proved successful.

Streich, who was a more realistic candidate for the Veltins-Arena job, will 
stick around in the Breisgau a little longer, even if his "whole attack is 
gone", as the 47-year-old lamented. Johannes Flum, Jan Rosenthal (both 
Frankfurt), Max Kruse (Gladbach) and Daniel Claigiuri (VfL Wolfsburg) are all 
off to pasturesnew and purpler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:EUR_500_obverse_(2002_issue).jpg>.

"It's OK for Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> to be in 
the Champions League, we don't really belong there," Streich said with 
characteristic honesty. "But today, they weren't the better side. We were." He 
had a point. Freiburg gave it their all and put in a performance that was 
excellent in all relevant criteria (tactics, spirit, work-rate) apart from 
scoring goals.

Schalke were just that little bit more refined in the final third. Julian 
Draxler had settled the visitors' nerves with a fine goal after 20 minutes. 
Jonathan Schmid equalised after the break but parity lasted only three minutes. 
Jermaine Jones mishit a shot. Immanuel Höhn tried to clear the ball, but 
blasted it on to Julian Schuster, from whose knee it bounced into the net. It's 
exactly the kind of end-of-season-review-bloopers-reel goal you'd have expected 
Schalke, the masters of disaster, to score … at the other end.

Freiburg at least have the consolation of Europa League football, in itself an 
extraordinary achievement. Streich, however, was careful not to herald a new 
dawn for the Bundesliga's most lovable (read: inoffensive) club. "Everything is 
possible next season, in terms of moving up or down," warned the 47-year-old. 
"Maybe we'll make it to the Champions League, maybe we'll get relegated after 
rebuilding the team. Oh well."

For Schalke, Saturday's win constituted a satisfactory end to a very difficult 
season. They fired "manager of the century" Huub Stevens, fought off suitors 
for Klaas-Jan Huntelaar and Draxler, and even poached the Dortmund centre-back 
Felipe Santana for a reported bargain €1m. (The Greek defender Kyriakos 
Papadopoulos might be sold for a more Premier League-compatible fee of €15m to 
Liverpool.)

Now, all that's left to is to sit back and watch the Champions League final. 
It's a bit of a lose-lose situation, admittedly, and working out who they'd 
least like to win the trophy might prove complicated. "Even Schalke supporters 
want us to win, the whole Ruhr area is rooting for us, I believe," the Borussia 
midfielder Ilkay Gündogan said last week. S04's manager Clemens Tönnies will be 
in the Bayern camp, however, for purely financial reasons. "I've got my fingers 
crossed — if they win, the till will be ringing for us too," he said. Schalke 
are believed to be in line for an extra €1m in transfer fees for Manuel Neuer 
if Bayern win the European Cup.

Truth be told, the Royal Blues' fourth-spot triumph was overshadowed by events 
at Dortmund, where everything did not go according to plan. The dethroned 
champions hosted TSG Hoffenheim and were widely expected to consign the 
billionaire's boys club — they are bankrolled by the software tycoon Dietmar 
Hopp — to the 2. Bundesliga.

Much to the joy of the Black and Yellow supporters who detest all that TSG 
stand for, Robert Lewandowski squeezed in the opener after only six minutes. 
Dortmund had plenty of chances to double the lead and nothing suggested that 
the Westfalenstadion was in for an extraordinary finish. Then Mats Hummels 
kicked Kevin Volland while attempting to clear the ball in the box with 13 
minutes to go. The Dortmund defender twisted an ankle in the process ("He's got 
a realistic chance to make the final," said the team doctor); Sejad Salihovic 
converted from the spot.

Five minutes later, Salihovic was taking another pen, after the goalkeeper 
Roman Weidenfeller had Weidenfeller'ed Sven Schipplock and been sent off. Kevin 
Großkreutz took the gloves but Salihovic left him no chance, blasting the 
spot-kick under the bar. There was still time for a bit of controversy. Marcel 
Schmelzer seemed to have scored an equaliser but after much deliberation the 
referee Dr Jochen Drees rightfully chalked off the goal – Lewandowski had 
interfered from an offside position.

"The whole season has been as chaotic as this game today, we have an 
unbelievable chance now," said the TSG captain Andreas Beck after the final 
whistle. Hoffenheim [16th] can save themselves in two play-off games against 
1.FC Kaiserslautern, who finished third in the second tier.

Fortuna Düsseldorf could not believe their bad luck. They had spent the entire 
season outside the relegation places. But a 3-0 defeat at Hannover, coupled 
with Dortmund's surprising inability to at least draw at home to Hoffe saw them 
drop to 17th – and straight back down to the second division. "Where words fail 
you, tears are sometimes the best form of communication," sniffed the 
midfielder Axel Bellinghausen rather poetically. "It's a horribly brutal 
scenario," said Jens Langeneke, who along with some team-mates and the coach 
Norbert Meier – "I've never gone down, believe me, it doesn't feel good" – had 
been misinformed about Schmelzer's supposed equaliser for Dortmund.

Düsseldorf's misfortune was Augsburg's joy. Their 3-1 win over Fürth capped 
off a fantastic second half of the season to keep them in the top flight. "We 
can all be proud, this is sensational," said the coach Markus Weinzierl. The 
Bavarians had finished 2012 with only nine points on the board but for once the 
proverbial "mechanisms of the business" didn't set in. Augsburg kept faith in 
the 38-year-old Weinzierl, who turned things around with nothing more than hard 
work and the loan-signing of Ji Dong-won from Sunderland. Coming through the 
"second season" unscathed is a triumph on par with Freiburg and Frankfurt's 
Europa League qualification and testament to the Bundesliga's continued 
unpredictability. The record-breaking Bayern (and Dortmund) might be in danger 
of outgrowing the league but behind them it's still like Studio 54's infamous 
basement: everything goes.

Talking points

There was nothing to play for at the Borussia Park, but Jupp Heynckes' 
Bundesliga farewell in his hometown turned into a very moving occasion. Fans 
from both sides cheered the 68-year-old ahead of Bayern's 4-3 win over 
Gladbach. "This is where I started my career as a player, as a coach," said 
Heynckes, struggling to retain his composure.

Then the emotions got the better of him. "I want to thank the supporters from 
the heart for this farewell," he said, by now in tears. "They showed me that 
this is my home." The journalists in the press room applauded him.

On Sunday, the record-breaking manager – Bayern won the title 25 points clear 
of Dortmund – invited his squad to dinner at his farm. "The team were curious 
how I lived – and they wanted to see my [German] shepherd dog Cando, of 
course," explained Heynckes.

Thomas Schaaf's goodbye after 14 years at Werder Bremen was a lot more 
discreet. The 52-year-old had been relieved of his duties after the 1-1 draw 
with Frankfurt last week; taking charge for one final time away to Nürnberg 
didn't appeal to him. There were plenty of supportive banners in the stands and 
the players wore "Thank you, Thomas" T-shirts, but everyone knows that the club 
was in dire need of some fresh impetus. "We need a restart, Werder must shape 
the future, not the past," said the sporting director Thomas Eichin. He will 
have his hands full. Werder must find a new coach, clear out a bunch of well 
paid trouble-makers and save more money after missing out on Europe for the 
second year running.

Results: Borussia Mönchengladbach 3-4 Bayern Munich, Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 1-2 TSG Hoffenheim, SC 
Freiburg 1-2 Schalke 04, FC Augsburg 3-1 Greuther Fürth, 1. FC Nürnberg 3-2 
Werder Bremen, Hannover 96 3-0 Fortuna Düsseldorf, Hamburger SV 0-1 Bayer 
Leverkusen, VfB Stuttgart 2-2 Mainz 05, Eintracht Frankfurt 2-2 VfL Wolfsburg.
 