
Robert Lewandowski scored twice as Borussia Dortmund closed the gap to three 
points on theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> leaders, Bayern 
Munich, with a 5-0 thrashing ofCologne.

Shinji Kagawa and Marcel Schmelzer scored to put the home side in charge 
before Lewandowski netted his first a minute before half-time. Lewandowski got 
his second five minutes after the break and Sebastian Kehl completed the 
scoring after 66 minutes.

Hoffenheim's first Bundesliga goal in more than a month saw them claim the 
three points against stutteringBorussia Mönchengladbach. Vedad Ibisevic struck 
the game's only goal – his first goal in more than half a year – in the 56th 
minute to end Hoffenheim's barren run in front of net, which had seen them go 
goalless since beating Wolfsburg on 17 September. The victory lifted Hoffenheim 
on to 16 points while Gladbach, who had started the weekend in second spot, 
remained on 17 points after their third game without a win.

Itay Shechter's second-half header secured a second straight league victory for
Kaiserslautern as they defeated Freiburg 1-0. Shechter netted the game's only 
goal in the 75th minute. Christian Tiffert could have doubled Kaiserslautern's 
advantage two minutes later but saw his penalty saved by the Freiburg 
goalkeeper Oliver Baumann. The result moved the hosts on to 11 points in the 
standings and left the visitors in the relegation zone.

Nürnberg twice took the lead at home to Stuttgart but had to settle for a 
point from a 2-2 draw. The home side went ahead after nine minutes through 
Timmy Simons but Zdravko Kuzmanovic levelled on the hour from the penalty spot. 
Philipp Wollscheid put Nürnberg ahead again 10 minutes later only for Francisco 
Rodríguez to complete the scoring with six minutes to go.

Hamburg's new coach, Thorsten Fink, was given an idea of the size of the task 
he has accepted as his side had to cancel out an early deficit to earn a point 
againstWolfsburg in his first match in charge. Mladen Petric equalised for the 
home side in the 56th minute after Mario Mandzukic had given the Wolves a 
second-minute lead in the north German derby.

Mainz's recent struggles continued as they played out a goalless draw with 
Hertha Berlin. Mainz started the season with back-to-back victories in the 
Bundesliga but since then have failed to record a win in eight matches, leaving 
them just above the relegation zone on nine points.
 