
Restaurant chains Burger King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burger-king> and Tim Hortons plan to 
switch to chickens that are raised without antibiotics considered “critically 
important” to human medicine, their owner said on Wednesday.


Restaurant Brands International Inc, which owns both chains, said it aimed to 
make the change in US stores in 2017 and inCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> in 2018.

 An estimated 70% of antibiotics that are important in fighting human 
infections and ensuring the safety of invasive procedures such as surgeries are 
sold for use in meat and dairy production.

Burger King and KFC called out for lagging behind on antibiotic-free meat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/20/burger-king-kfc-mcdonalds-antibiotic-free-meat>
 Concern has been growing among scientists, public health experts, consumers 
and shareholders that the overuse of such drugs is contributing to rising 
numbers of life-threatening human infections from antibiotic-resistant 
“superbugs”.

Restaurant Brands said: “We believe that it is important to reduce the use of 
antibiotics important for human medicine in order to preserve the effectiveness 
of antibiotics in both veterinary and human medicine.”

 The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that each year at 
least 2 million people in the US are infected with drug-resistant bacteria and 
that 23,000 die as a direct result.

 Officials with health advocacy group As You Sow said they had been working 
with Restaurant Brands on its antibiotics policy for more than a year. In 
February, the group withdrew a shareholder proposal calling on the company to 
develop a stricter policy after Restaurant Brands agreed to address the issue 
before the end of 2016.

 Austin Wilson, environmental health program manager for As You Sow, said the 
company’s new plan represented progress. Still, he said it was “disappointing, 
since it is weaker than the standards set in the last year or two by Tyson, 
McDonald’s and Wendy’s”.

 McDonald’s has already removed all antibiotics important to human medicine 
from its US chicken supply chain, and Wendy’s said in August it would quit 
using chickens raised with antibiotics important to human health by 2017.

Tyson Foods, the biggest US chicken processor, has said it intends to stop 
using all antibiotics important to human medicine to raise its chickens in 2017.

 Restaurant Brands is eliminating only those drugs that are “the most critical 
in human medicine” from its supply, Wilson said.

 Yum Brands’ KFC stands out as the last major chicken chain yet to make a move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/20/burger-king-kfc-mcdonalds-antibiotic-free-meat>
 on curbing antibiotic use. KFC has far more restaurants than any other 
fast-food chicken chain and is second in sales behind Chick-fil-A, which has 
committed to finishing its switch to chicken raised without any antibiotics by 
the end of 2019.

 As You Sow has filed a shareholder proposal requesting that Yum phase out 
harmful antibiotics from its meat supply in a bid to prompt changes at KFC.
 