
Burnley’s Andre Gray was named Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> player of the year at the 
Football League Awards in Manchester on Sunday night.

The 24-year-old, the Clarets’ £6m record signing last summer, has scored 24 
goals combined this season for Brentford and his current club to spearhead 
Burnley’s title charge.

Gray was named on a shortlist alongside Fulham’s Ross McCormack and his former 
Bees team-mate Alan Judge for an award that is voted for by other Championship 
managers.

Aston Villa fans fury over Joleon Lescott’s ‘relegation a relief’ comment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/joleon-lescott-aston-villa-relief-relegation>
“It was an honour to get nominated; to win the award is great as well,” said 
Gray.

Two years ago the striker was playing non-league football with Luton but has 
enjoyed a rise similar to that of other former non-league stars such as the 
Premier League’s Jamie Vardy, Charlie Austin and Danny Ings.

And it was the career trajectories of Austin and Ings, former Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> strikers themselves, in 
particular that convinced him to move to Turf Moor last summer.

“That was a big reason why I joined Burnley. You look at the likes of Charlie 
Austin and Danny Ings and what they’ve gone on to do,” Gray added. “To see what 
Jamie Vardy has done is a massive inspiration and it shows that anything is 
possible.”

Gillingham’s Bradley Dack won the League One gong and Oxford’s Kemar Roofe 
scooped the League Two award while Leeds’ Lewis Cook was named the young player 
of the year, succeeding the 2015 winner, Dele Alli, as well as Gareth Bale and 
Nathaniel Clyne in winning that accolade.

“The people that have won previously have been outstanding and gone on to have 
fantastic careers,” Cook said. “Dele’s flown by in a year and I want to try and 
replicate that.”

Gray, Dack, Roofe and Judge were all named in the team of the season, 
alongside Northampton’s Adam Smith, Brighton’s Bruno, the Middlesbrough pair, 
Daniel Ayala and George Friend, Wigan’s Craig Morgan, Burnley’s Joey Barton and 
Swindon’s Nicky Ajose.

The Sir Tom Finney Award, which reflects an outstanding career throughout the 
divisions, was given to the former Bolton and Preston striker Kevin Davies, who 
made over 800 appearances in 22 seasons as a player.

“I’m very proud. It’s nice to be recognised by the Football League for what 
I’ve achieved in those 22 years,” he said. “It started in the Football League 
and it ended there with Preston. With it being Sir Tom Finney, and finishing my 
career with Preston, it’s fitting.”
 