
Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> saw their advantage at 
the top of the Championship trimmed to a single point following a goalless home 
draw with Cardiff.

They extended their unbeaten run in the league to 17 games but will be looking 
nervously over their shoulders afterMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/middlesbrough-huddersfield-championship-match-report>
 and Brighton won.

Sean Dyche’s side could have ended the night level on points with 
second-placed Boro had Kenneth Zohore’s 87th-minute try gone in rather than hit 
the crossbar, though Cardiff were indebted to two terrific stoppage-time saves 
from David Marshall.

Gastón Ramírez inspires Middlesbrough to win over Huddersfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/middlesbrough-huddersfield-championship-match-report>
There was a minute’s applause before the kick-off for the former Burnley 
midfielder Ian Britton, who passed away recently and whose goal in 1987 
prevented Burnley from slipping out of the Football League.

Twenty-nine years on their supporters are looking at the Premier League, with 
a second promotion in three seasons on the cards thanks to an unbeaten run in 
the league that stretches to Boxing Day.

However, play-off chasing Cardiff were certainly not intimidated in the first 
half and might have led had Tom Lawrence squared for Anthony Pilkington rather 
than opting to go alone.

After Sean Morrison’s block halted George Boyd’s progress in the box, Burnley 
did ask questions of Marshall before the break and he was equal to efforts from 
Andre Gray and then Boyd on the stroke of half-time.

With Middlesbrough and Brighton winning, the tension around Turf Moor was 
understandable and it was only heightened when Scott Malone’s low cross 
narrowly evaded Pilkington.

Stuart O’Keefe then scuffed an attempt harmlessly at Tom Heaton before the 
groans that greeted a misplaced pass from Boyd gave further indication of how 
uneasy the home fans were feeling.

Dyche, who had named an unchanged XI for a fourth successive fixture, turned 
to his bench in the 67th minute to introduce Matthew Taylor at the same time as 
Cardiff withdrew the injured Pilkington.

Burnley continued to struggle to break down Cardiff, though, with Sam Vokes 
nodding Joey Barton’s cross over from just outside the six-yard box in their 
first real attempt of the half.

Gray, with 23 goals to his credit already this term, had been kept quiet by 
Morrison, yet it was a surprise to see Dyche withdraw him for Ashley Barnes 
with 15 minutes remaining as Burnley sought a winner.

That nearly arrived courtesy of Matt Lowton’s low cross, yet Wales 
international Vokes was unable to pip Marshall to the delivery at the near post.

And it was Cardiff who almost snatched a late winner, first through Lex 
Immers, whose shot was blocked by Ward, and then through Zohore. The chance 
appeared to have gone for the Dane after he got behind the defence and 
hesitated but he lifted a half-volley that dropped on to the top of Heaton’s 
crossbar.

Marshall then made sure Cardiff would return to Wales with something by 
pushing Vokes’ header from Taylor’s free-kick wide before making an even better 
save to get down and stop Barnes’ near-post flick from the resulting corner 
creeping home.
 