
Burnley broke their transfer record for the second time this summer when they 
signed theDerby County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty> 
midfielder Jeff Hendrick for £10.5m. But an attempt to sign the Poland winger 
Kamil Grosicki in a £7m deal from Rennes collapsed.

Burnley’s manager, Sean Dyche, has been chasing Hendrick for a couple of 
months and landed him for a fee that exceeded the £8m paid for the Belgium 
midfielder Steven Defour a fortnight ago.

Hendrick, a 24-year-old Republic of Ireland international, has agreed a 
three-year deal asBurnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> 
strengthened in anticipation of another probable struggle against relegation. 
Hull City were also interested in the player who impressed at Euro 2016, 
starting all four of the Republic of Ireland’s matches. Burnley’s initial 
approaches were rebuffed but they eventually met Derby’s asking price and, 
after a medical in Manchester, the player went straight out to rejoin his 
international team-mates for the game against Oman.

Premier League is draining talent from Spain but not catching the very best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/premier-league-spain-la-liga-transfer-window-signings>
“It’s a little weird signing for a club and not being able to meet everyone 
for over a week but I am really looking forward to getting back training with 
the lads,” Hendrick said. “The Premier League was a big draw for me, it’s where 
I aspire to be after the summer I’ve had. Burnley did so well last season going 
unbeaten for five months and knowing how much they wanted me this summer was a 
real positive for me.

“I knew there had been a number of bids and I was sitting there waiting for 
one to be accepted. I would have preferred it to have happened a little earlier 
to give me a chance to get to know my new team-mates but mainly I am just 
thankful I can join up with Ireland knowing my future is settled.”

Dyche said: “After a protracted process we have landed a main target of ours 
and we welcome Jeff to the club. He is someone who can add to our strength in 
midfield but he is a player who is still learning and developing, and we think 
he is someone who can work for us now and in the future.”

Dublin-born Hendrick, who has made almost 200 Championship appearances, will 
wear the No13 shirt at his new club.

It appeared a deal for Grosicki, who also featured at the European 
Championship, playing in all five of Poland’s matches, would go through before 
the deadline but complications meant the 28-year-old winger will remain at the 
Ligue 1 club.
 