
The Brewers are wobbling if not reeling. Four games ago Burton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion> were six points clear of 
Wigan Athletic on top of League One. Now, after a 1-0 defeat by Scunthorpe 
United at Glanford Park, they are four behind. Not since September 2013 have 
they had a worse four-match haul than two points. Instead of cantering to a 
second promotion running they are looking anxiously over their shoulders at a 
galloping pack who thought they were competing only for the play-offs.

Nigel Clough, their manager, called the first half “nice and solid, so we’re 
quite happy at half-time”. He was quite unhappy at the end. “You can dominate 
games for 90 minutes or whatever but one corner, if you don’t concentrate, you 
lose two balls as we did and concede. That’s what costs you the game.” The Iron 
centre-back David Mirfin won the heads-up and the midfielder Neal Bishop hooked 
the ball in on the hour.

Burton had hardly dominated and the hook was in keeping with a match of fierce 
marking which led to much first-time clearing, often over the shoulder and 
under pressure. It was competitive rather than creative, sloppy as a crowded 
bar, with lines slurred, passes slewed and precious possession spilled.

If Clough blamed “the way we started the second half”, Graham Alexander, 
Scunthorpe’s even newer manager, may take credit. He told his team at half-time 
“to get the ball forward faster and wider” to stretch a defence which, 
marshalled by John Mousinho, was keeping 18-goal Paddy Madden quiet.

That redirection may have taken its toll on Burton’s concentration. As Madden 
pulled the defence wide, the second striker, Tom Hopper, threatened more 
through the middle and Alexander was eager afterwards to praise the team 
effort. “They will do that every game,” he said. “It shows they care for the 
club. I thought the second half was superb and there’s three or four lads 
holding their legs there at the end.”

In added time Madden, after clearing a header off his own line, escaped again 
for a cross that led to a bullet from Stephen Dawson and a save by Jon 
McLaughlin’s feet to match a flying one by Joe Anyon to deny Calum Butcher. At 
last the game had escaped its shackles.

Alexander has history in confounding Burton. Two seasons ago, in his first 
managerial post, he took Fleetwood out of League Two for the first time, 
beating Burton in the play-offs and forcing them to wait a year to reach the 
same unprecedented level. After finishing 10th inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> last May he was sacked 
after two wins in the first 10 games this season, when they lay 20th. In four 
games now he has lifted The Iron from 13th to ninth. In 31 Steven Pressley has 
taken Fleetwood to 19th.

Alexander made more than 1,000 appearances in English football, with the first 
200-plus for Scunthorpe. If he is back where he began, so in another sense is 
Clough, who started out as a manager with Burton in 1998 and left them so far 
ahead in the Conference in January 2009 that they could hardly fail to get into 
the League for the first time. Since then further shrewd appointments have 
secured their place, with Gary Rowett andJimmy Floyd Hasselbaink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/05/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-novice-manager-burton-albion>
, likewise first-time managers in the British game, so successful that they have
moved on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-education-key-qpr>
 to Birmingham and Queens Park Rangers in the past 18 months.

Hasselbaink left Burton top, with 40 points from 20 games. Clough kept up that 
strike rate until four games ago and was looking forward to pitting his wits 
against the others in the Championship. But, while retaining the division’s 
best defence, they are suddenly anxious in front of goal and Clough, who was 
never that nor a chip off the old block as manager, looked lost for inspiration.

Meanwhile The Iron know their role in a community with real anxiety over the 
future of steel. (If it cannot make railway lines, there may be more buses to 
Doncaster.) The club are keeping up spirits and hope to move from Glanford Park 
in 2017 – to The New Showground perhaps. At all events on Saturday evening it 
was truly sunny in Scunny.
 