
The Burton Albion <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion> 
manager, Gary Rowett, felt his side had triumphed against the odds after they 
sank Southend United in a dramatic play-off semi-final at Roots Hall.

The Brewers secured a trip to Wembley thanks to a second-half goal from Adam 
McGurk, which secured a 2-2 draw on the day and a 3-2 aggregate success, after 
the hosts had fought back from being a goal down on the day and two overall.

"We have lost five or six players to injury and suspension, and yesterday the 
team bus broke down before we set off," Rowett said. "I couldn't tell you the 
things we have had to deal with over the last two weeks. But sometimes out of 
adversity comes triumph and we have used that as much as we could.

"The players deserve a shot at Wembley and I'm really pleased for them. The 
lads are bouncing around drinking champagne but I'm exhausted!"

McGurk's goal separated the sides after the first leg and Burton doubled their 
advantage early on through a header from Marcus Holness.

Phil Brown's Southend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> hit back 
through Ryan Leonard's stunning overhead kick and Anthony Straker's header to 
level the tie.

But in the 69th minute, Southend failed to deal with a Chris Hussey free-kick 
and the ball ricocheted to the feet of McGurk, who was able to turn and score 
his 12th goal of the season.

"It was an amazing game," said Rowett, whose side face Fleetwood a week on 
Monday for a place in League One. "We had a slender lead and to score early on 
was fantastic, but to then concede two goals, I had to remind the players at 
half-time to be a bit more ambitious. We steadied the ship and then the goal 
went in and we had a few scary moments at the end.

"To show the character we did sums up our season. We haven't got the quality 
of some teams in this division, but we have as much heart as any team."

A disappointed Brown missed out on a return to Wembley, where he enjoyed his 
finest moment by guiding Hull to the Premier League via the play-offs in 2008.

His mood at the end was in stark contrast to his bullish programme notes, in 
which he wrote: "Today is our day. See you all at Wembley next week."

"That's life," Brown said afterwards. "It's not arrogance, there were two 
teams fighting to play at Wembley and it was a rallying cry, and the fans 
didn't half turn up.

"We are bemoaning our fortune in front of goal but next year we'll be stronger 
for it. Whoever invented the play-offs was not a manager, that's for certain."
 