
5.00pm BST 

Well done Fleetwood Town

Cruel, cruel loss for Burton after such a good first-half performance by Dean 
Lyness, but Fleetwood walk up the Wembley stairs to lift the play-off trophy.

Happy days for all at the club and especially chairman Andy Pilley, who can't 
have imagined he'd take them to League One to play Sheffield United, Coventry 
City et al when he took over in 2003 with the team in the North West Counties 
league.

That's all from me - thanks for your emails and enjoy the rest of your bank 
holiday.


4.55pm BST 

Sarcevic is being interviewed on the pitch and says he is "over the moon to 
have done it for the boys" but admits to a stroke of good fortune for the goal.


It's the third successive promotion for the former City player - two for 
Chester, and now this for Fleetwood. Lucky charm?

4.55pm BST 

Graham Alexander goes wild on the touch line, Dean Lyness looks distraught on 
the pitch.

It was a horrible error by the Burton goalkeeper, but Fleetwood deserved it, 
they created the better chances.


But it's play-off misery for Burton again after losing in the semi-finals last 
season, they fail in the final this time.

4.52pm BST 

Full time: Burton Albion 0-1 Fleetwood Town

Fleetwood Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town> are 
promoted to League One!


4.51pm BST 

90 + 4: And who gets their head on it - Jon Parkin of course, and the ball is 
cleared.

Seconds from the final whistle...


4.51pm BST 

90 + 4: The last minute of the game, Burton hoof it forward, Kee has it on the 
edge of the area, Palmer looks like he might sneak through, but Pond is there 
again. Another corner... The keeper is forward.


4.50pm BST 

90 + 2: McFadzean has the ball 40 yards out. He shoots. It goes wide. Just two 
more minutes for Fleetwood to hold on.


Burton manager Gary Rowett paces on the touch line as the Fleetwood Town fans 
celebrate.


4.49pm BST 

90 + 1: And Maxwell clears, Nathan Pond breaks clear, could this be a 
fairytale ending?

No. Pond loses it and Burton break forward again with Pond out of position. 
Burton don't manage to get it into the box again, and Fleetwood hoof it clear.


4.48pm BST 

90 + 1: Fleetwood have to hold for just a few more minutes. Most of Burton's 
pressure is coming down the right through Ismail, his pace is worrying the 
defence and they have another corner.


The keeper isn't coming forward...


4.47pm BST 

89 min: Hussey swings it to the far post, but 14,007 fans watch as the Burton 
player heads it out for Fleetwood goal kick.


4.46pm BST 

89 min: Ismail is putting pressure on Fleetwood down the right, and he wins a 
corner.


Burton's last chance?


4.45pm BST 

87 min: Burton try to work it down the right with Ismail plays a sloppy pass 
into the box which is easily cleared.

From the keeper's long kick Jon Parkin holds the ball up in the right hand 
corner - and three Burton defenders are unable to dispossess him as Fleetwood 
win the throw in.


The clock is ticking down. 


4.42pm BST 

84 min: Jon Parkin still has it. Some nice touches of the ball are helping 
Fleetwood to keep calm as they edge close to victory.

He was also under the ball when Sarcevic swung it in to score - someone his 
size is bound to be a distraction for the defenders and poor Dean Lyness.


4.40pm BST 

82 min: Burton are looking devoid of ideas, putting hopeful balls into the box 
which are easily cleared by Fleetwood.

McGurk nearly gets on the end of one, though, as he forces Maxwell into 
fumbling the ball, but the Fleetwood keeper gets down to grasp the loose ball.


4.37pm BST 

79 min: Can Burton come back into it? Forced to make three substitutions due 
to injury, luck certainly doesn't seem to be on their side. But if it ends like 
this how cruel for Dean Lyness who kept them in the game with some fine saves 
in the first half.


McGurk is still plugging away, dropping deep to get involved in play, but the 
Fleetwood back line is standing firm, Pond and Roberts looking impressively 
solid.


Updated at 4.38pm BST

4.36pm BST 

78 min: And Bell is forced off, Palmer coming on for Burton. 


Updated at 4.36pm BST

4.35pm BST 

75 min: What a howler from Burton goalkeeper Dean Lyness. 


Sarcevic swings in free kick from 35 yards out towards the head of Jon Parkin 
and the Fleetwood defenders, but Lyness comes off his line to try and punch it 
clear and it swings over everybody, over the Burton keeper and into the back of 
the net, Sarcevic taking all the plaudits.
 Nathan Pond jumps in front of Burton goalkeeper Dean Lyness as Andoni 
Sarcevic's free kick drifts in to give Fleetwood the lead. Photograph: Mike 
Hewitt/Getty Images 
Updated at 4.57pm BST

4.35pm BST 

Goal! Burton Albion 0-1 Fleetwood Town (Sarcevic, 75)

What a howler!


4.32pm BST 

74 min: Ismail makes an immediate impact, speeding down the right, and wins a 
corner.


Fleetwood make a substitution before it can be taken, Jon Parkin replacing 
Matty Blair to a chorus of Beeeeeeeeeeeast.

The corner comes in and Maxwell gets a hand on it to clear it. Fleetwood break 
but it comes to nothing.


4.31pm BST 

73 min: Alex MacDonald makes way for Zeli Ismail for Burton - MacDonald 
suffering from a hamstring injury. Bell is struggling on with his dodgy looking 
knee.


But more exciting, Jon Parkin is stripping off. The Beeeeeeeast. 


4.28pm BST 

70 min: Burton nearly got lucky there. MacDonald hit a hopeful shot from 30 
yards, but it deflects off a Fleetwood defender's heel and nearly dips under 
the bar with Maxwell struggling to get back. Burton corner.

It's hit low in front of the goalkeeper but Cansdell-Sheriff can't quite get 
his head on it at the near post. He was totally unmarked. Lucky escape for 
Fleetwood.


4.26pm BST 

68 min: Bell is limping. He's already got strapping on his knee and he's not 
looking comfortable in the Burton midfield. That would be a big, big blow for 
Burton's hope - and two substitutions used up before extra-time.


Rowett's also got to consider Cansdell-Sheriff's fitness - can he risk making 
a third sub with him still on the pitch given his achilles injury problems?


4.22pm BST 

64 min: Xander Diamond is coming off the bench for Burton to replace Marcus 
Holness. Diamond was on his way to Northampton before injuries and suspensions 
struck and Gary Rowett told Diamond he had to stay.

Holness apparently suffering from a hamstring injury. He's played well, a blow 
for Albion.


4.19pm BST 

62 min: Sarcevic gifts the ball to Kee in midfield and the Burton striker 
feeds McFadzean on the left who heads into the Fleetwood area. He's caught by 
two defenders but manages to win a corner. From there the ball drops to the 
edge of the area, where Weir takes a hopeful swing at the ball and it goes a 
mile over.


4.16pm BST 

58 min: The game has opened up a bit now. Sarcevic takes the ball from the 
left touch line and runs it in towards the box before hitting a shot past the 
left hand post.

Neither side is having much luck with their shooting so far. 


4.15pm BST 

57 min: Poor defending from Fleetwood, a long hopeful ball into the box should 
be easily cleared by one of Roberts or Pond, but neither takes responsibility 
and Kee steals in. He's crunched between the Fleetwood pair and can only shoot 
well over.


4.14pm BST 

56 min: Burton managing to keep the ball for a decent spell, and the full-back 
Hussey gets a bit of space 25 yards out to try a shot. It doesn't trouble 
Maxwell in the Fleetwood goal.


4.12pm BST 

54 min: Kee works the ball into the Fleetwood area before the laying the ball 
across to Bell on the edge of the area. He hits it low and straight into the 
grateful arms of Maxwell. Better from Burton.


4.09pm BST 

52 min: Iain Hume is making a nuisance of himself up top, but the Fleetwood 
striker hasn't quite got the nous to damage Burton when he gets the ball in 
dangerous areas.


Will Graham Alexander consider introducing the Beast?


4.07pm BST 

49 min: Burton are trying to pass the ball now, rather than just lump it 
forward, but just as McFadzean looks to have some space down the left he 
miscontrols and it's a goal kick for Fleetwood. It's the right idea from Burton 
though, they need some time with the ball to ease the pressure.


4.05pm BST 

47 min: Fleetwood picking up where they left off, Blair wins a corner from the 
right, which Morris plays into the box, but it's hoofed clear by Burton, with 
Lyness stranded out of his goal.


4.04pm BST 

46 min: Ohhhh. That could have been a goal. 


Iain Hume wins a header from a hopeful lofted free-kick into the Burton area, 
the ball drops to Ball, and he tries a cheeky chip, but Lyness gathers it high.


4.03pm BST 

Peeeeep! The second half is under way.

Can Burton get more involved in the game? Fleetwood kick off, going from left 
to right.


4.02pm BST 

Refresh the page for look at Marcus Holness's mighty facial hair (39 min)


3.57pm BST 

It's all gone wrong for James Ward since I moved off the tennis - take a look 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/26/maris-sharapova-v-ksenia-pervak-french-open-first-round-live>
 if you're interested in that sort of thing


3.48pm BST 

Half-time: It's 0-0, but Fleetwood have certainly had the better of the play. 
They've tried to pass it much more than Burton and have had numerous chances, 
but Dean Lyness in the Burton goal has so far repelled their best efforts - the 
best of which were the two at around the second minute of play.


For Burton, Adam McGurk has looked most likely, but their long ball game has 
too often cut the player out of the play as he lurks between the lines waiting 
to pounce.


3.45pm BST 

44 min: And it's poor, two touches for Fleetwood tee it up for Sarcevic, but 
by the time he hits it a Burton player is on top of him and it's clear. A real 
waste.


3.44pm BST 

42 min: Fleetwood pass it nicely out from the back, Taylor collecting the ball 
on the left hand side, and the left-back swings in a low cross, which Holness 
steers out of play for a corner.


Sarcevic takes it short to Morris, who gives it back to Sarcevic, and he runs 
all the way to the centre, before he's fouled, and Fleetwood have a free-kick 
in a good position, left of centre, about 25 yards out.


3.40pm BST 

39 min: Thats a mighty fine beard Holness is sporting, and he's defending well 
too, cutting out the danger with some intelligent interceptions.

 Respect the beard - Marcus Holness of Burton. Photograph: Jordan 
Mansfield/Getty Images 
Updated at 4.01pm BST

3.38pm BST 

37 min: Nathan Pond takes part in some passing at the back for Fleetwood - 
he's risen through the divisions with the club, and was a delivery driver on 
£100-a-week when he first joined them in the North West Counties league.


3.36pm BST 

35 min: Weak penalty appeal from Josh Morris. 


He exchanges some nice passes with Ball and works his way into the box, but 
Holness comes across and knocks him over as he clears the ball. It was shoulder 
to shoulder - Morris should just get up and carry on with the game, but he's on 
the pitch waving his arms about as the referee points for a goal kick.


3.34pm BST 

33 min: Josh Morris makes a fantastic run for Fleetwood, and the ball's 
running loose in the Burton box - nobody can get a hold of it, until Sarcevic 
has it, he twists and turns but can't get the shot off and Burton clear.


3.34pm BST 

31 min: Applause from both sets of fans for BBC Radio Derby presenter Colin 
Bloomfield, 31 years old and fighting cancer.


3.30pm BST 

29 min: A strong spell of pressure from Fleetwood, as they work the ball out 
wide, swinging crosses in from both sides, with Burton's defenders getting 
their heads on the end of everything to clear the danger, but they can't get 
hold of the ball.

Finally Roberts works the ball low into the box to Ball, he's about 15 yards 
out on the right hand side of the box, but he can't sort his feet out in time 
and shoots high and wide past the far post. A good chance.


3.28pm BST 

Kiran Kulkarni has been in touch: "I am quite amazed to see Guardian bringing 
this MBM coverage ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-off. Is it 
because football a sort of religion in UK or because nothing exciting happening 
there at the moment?"

No, nothing happening here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/26/boris-johnson-eurosceptic-success-peasants-revolt-european-elections>
. Do do do. Move along.

3.25pm BST 

24 min: Poor play from Roberts deep in his own half and Kee nicks the ball. he 
feeds it to Weir on the edge of the Fleetwood box and he fires it straight down 
Maxwell's throat. He holds the ball well and the danger passes.


3.23pm BST 

22 min: A nice bit of passing football from Burton, half way inside the 
Fleetwood half Kee and Weir exchange passes before Weir feeds McGurk 25 yards 
out, he looks up and takes a hopeful low shot which sails wide past Maxwell's 
left-hand post.


3.22pm BST 

21 min: Another corner for Fleetwood, as Taylor works the ball down the right. 

Morris takes it, Lyness comes and misses but just as it looks as though a 
Fleetwood player may be able to turn and fire towards goal it bounces up and 
hits his hand. Free-kick Burton.


3.20pm BST 

19 min: McGurk has half a chance, he's fed the ball down the right, with only 
Roberts in front of him, but the Burton striker takes aim at goal, trying to 
curl one in from the left corner of the box. It's high and wide.


3.17pm BST 

16 min: Two penalty shouts for Fleetwood, Weir tackles Blair first, cleanly, 
but Fleetwood fans are screaming. And then Ball gathers the ball in the box and 
Cansdell-Sheriff goes in for a challenge. Ball is down and appealing, but it 
doesn't look like there was any contact to me.

Good decisions from the referee. 


3.16pm BST 

James Roberts writes: 'Fleetwood keeper Chris Maxwell is one to look out for. 
He played twice at Wembley last season for Wrexham, and a few years ago was 
tipped by Barney Ronay as a possible wildcard for the 2012 Olympic team'

So he was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/mar/24/olympics-2012-football-englandfootballteam>
 - not had much to do so far today, apart from fumble a corner.


3.15pm BST 

13 min: David Ball races into the box, but Shane Cansdell-Sheriff, who hasn't 
trained all week due to injury, races across the box to tackle and give 
Fleetwood a chance from a corner. It's cleared for a second corner which Nathan 
Pond managers to get a head on, he can't keep it down though and it's over and 
out for a Burton goalkick.


3.12pm BST 

11 min: Billy Kee gathers the ball and turns Fleetwood captain Mark Roberts 
about 30 yards out. Roberts clatters him from behind and Burton have a 
free-kick.

MacDonald fires it in low and it's cleared with ease. Wasteful. 


Updated at 3.12pm BST

3.11pm BST 

9 min: Alex MacDonald gathers the ball on the halfway line, and head down, 
sprints towards the Fleetwood area, he fires in a low cross which is cleared 
for a corner.

Maxwell makes a hash of gathering it, but Fleetwood manage to clear the ball. 


3.09pm BST 

8 min: Phil Edwards gets very lucky there, Matty Blair nicks the ball from the 
Burton defender and heads straight for the goal, fortunately Marcus Holness is 
aware of the danger and gets back to block the cross. It goes out for a corner, 
but Burton clear it easily.


3.08pm BST 

7 min: The game's descended into a series of hopeful long ball from each team 
as they both struggle to compose themselves on the big stage.

Fleetwood look the likliest to make something happen, Ball showing some nice 
touches up front, and his support from Sarcevic and Josh Morris showing greater 
composure on the ball.

They lose possession as Charlie Taylor loops a cross in to the box which 
Lyness gathers calmly.


3.05pm BST 

4 min: McGurk is lurking dangerously between Fleetwood's defence and midfield. 
He wins a freekick near the centre circle, which is launched long, but to no 
avail.


3.04pm BST 

2 min: Lovely bit of play from Fleetwood, they work the ball forward and David 
Ball takes the ball from Iain Hume's mishit shot. He turns and fires towards 
Dean Lyness, who saves well. Corner to Fleetwood.

From there another glorious Fleetwood chance, but Lyness again gets a good 
hand on the header and the danger is cleared. Two good chances.


3.02pm BST 

1min: Burton immediately hoof the ball out of play down their left, but win a 
freekick from Fleetwood's throw.


Adam McGurk lofts it into the box which Billy Kee gets on the end of, but it's 
easy for Chris Maxwell in the Fleetwood goal.


3.01pm BST 

Peeeeep! 

The music cuts off abruptly, and they're off at Wembley, Burton kicking off 
from left to right.


2.57pm BST 

Ian Ridley (once of this parish), representative of Prostate Cancer UK, 
official charity of theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league>, is out with the usual 
suits to shake hands. I take it he's not doing a match report for today's game 
then ...

And then the national anthem. After Ukip's 'triumph' last night I can't say I 
have much affection for that right now. Neither do the crowd it seems, most 
standing around giggling and chatting as it blasts out through Wembley's 
appalling PA system.


2.54pm BST 

The teams are coming out. Burton in yellow and black, Fleetwood in red and 
white.

Billy Kee is present and correct for Burton. apparently if he scores he's 
going to put Wembley into his baby's name. Let's hope he's not on target today, 
for the young mite's sake.


2.51pm BST 

Ad watch

Leo Messi hawking the exclusive 'football razor' in advance of the World Cup. 
What on earth is that? For shaving hairy (foot)balls?

Oh no, it's just painted a fetching shade of ubiquitous yellow and green.


2.47pm BST 

Before Parkin makes his bow Antoni Sarcevic is apparently the man to watch for 
Fleetwood, playing in the hole behind strikers David Ball and Iain Hume (of 
Championship Manager 3 fame, he used to guarantee me 30 goals a season).


Sarcevic came through the City youth ranks and has impressed with his silky 
control and good passing.

Anyone else I should be looking out for today? Email or tweet me with your 
tips, musings, funny cat videos etc


2.44pm BST 

When Andy Pilley took over at Fleetwood in 2003 there was an average crowd of 
just 80 - now they stand on the verge of League One promotion. Who needs Roman 
Abramovich?

From the ninth tier to the Conference in just six seasons is truly impressive 
stuff, who's to say how high Fleetwood could rise if they win this game - it 
would be their sixth promotion in 10 years.


2.39pm BST 

This from Jacob Steinberg has me excited.

There's been some discussion on Twitter about whether the use of the word 
'beast' to describe black players is racist. I'll steer clear of that, but just 
to say, in my mind, there's only one true Beast.

Step forward Jon Parkin. 

Jacob Steinberg (@JacobSteinberg) 
Big Jon Parkin on the bench for Fleetwood Town this afternoon.
 <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg/statuses/470915810639482880> May 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg/statuses/470915810639482880>  Beeeeeeast! 
Photograph: Adam Holt/Action Images 
2.36pm BST 

Fleetwood woe

Fleetwood haven't reached Wembley since 1985 and a defeat to Halesowen in the 
FA Vase final.

Graham Alexander has done good work since taking over in December 2012, and 
they go into the game as slight favourites after a fourth placed finish in the 
league, can they prove the bookies right?


2.31pm BST 

The teams are in!

Burton Albion 


4-4-2: Lyness, Edwards, Holness, Cansdell-Sherriff, Hussey, MacDonald, Bell, 
Weir, McFadzean, Kee, McGurk. Subs: Hall, Gray, Diamond, Palmer, Alexander, 
Knowles, Ismail.

Fleetwood Town

 4-1-2-1-2: Maxwell, McLaughlin, Roberts, Pond, Taylor, Goodall, Blair, 
Morris, Sarcevic, Ball, Hume. Subs: Lucas, Murdoch, Evans, Schumacher, Parkin, 
Matt, Jordan.

2.29pm BST 

Advantage Burton?

Burton, of course, get to train at the St George's Park - the England training 
centre. Housed there is a full size replica of the Wembley pitch which they've 
been able to train on.


Will that hand Gary Rowett's sidea crucial edge as both side's line up on an 
unusually large pitch?


2.25pm BST 

Hello there


After Yaya Touré's petulance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/20/yaya-toure-leaving-manchester-city-agenthttp://>
 andCristiano Ronaldo's posturing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/24/champions-league-final-real-madrid-atletico-madrid-live>
 it's rather nice that the football season proper will finish with this 
play-off final between two teams never to have reached the giddy heights of 
League One.

Neither side has been in the Football League for long, both in their second 
season in League Two.

Burton are coming off three straight games with Southend - two play-off legs 
and the last league game of the season, so I imagine they'll just be relieved 
to face some different opposition, but striker Billy Kee has something else on 
his mind altogether.

He rushed back from London to his home yesterday as his wife went into labour. 
The latest is she's still in labour, but he's starting the game anyway. 
Remarkable scenes.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkffacxfA7G4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkffacxfA7G4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkffacxfA7G4&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkffacxfA7G4&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkffacxfA7G4>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkffacxfA7G4&media=>
close  Baby, baby, baby. Ohhh... Sorry. 
What's going through Billy Kee's head? He lines up for Burton, while his wife 
is in labour.


12.52pm BST 

Toby will be here from around 2.30pm.

In the mean time read Jacob Steinberg's match preview:

You have to go back to 1987 for the last time Burton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion> were at Wembley. “The FA 
Trophy final,” recalls David Broome, who covers the club for the Burton Mail. 
“They drew 0-0 against Kidderminster at Wembley and then lost the replay 2-1 at 
West Brom.” Burton have waited 27 years to scratch that itch.

Fleetwood Town, Burton’s opponents in Monday afternoon’s League Two play-off 
final, can trump that sense of longing by two years. Their last appearance at 
Wembley was in the FA Vase final against Halesowen Town in 1985. “And we lost,” 
says David Mitchell, a feature writer for Fleetwood’s programme...

Click here to read more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/25/fleetwood-town-burton-albion-play-off-league-two-wembley>
.


Updated at 1.54pm BST
 