
Dad never told me he loved me. He was a military man and a chief of police and 
didn’t display his feelings. If I was in the room when one of my movies came 
on, he’d get up and walk out. At the end of his life he did finally tell me he 
was proud of me and I thought: “Yep, I’ll take that.”

I’ve always regretted posing naked for Cosmopolitan. People didn’t get that I 
had such a conceited look because I was sending myself up. It was just before
Deliverance <https://www.theguardian.com/film/deliverance> was released and it 
ruined the film’s Oscar chances.

Dumping a helicopter full of horse shit on the National Enquirer made me feel 
great. They’d been writing crap about me for years so I thought it was only 
fitting. One Christmas Eve my pilot and I loaded my helicopter with manure from 
my ranch, flew over the building and watched it cascade down their giant 
Christmas tree.

Being called a sex symbol has always made me cringe. When you have that label 
your IQ drops way down in people’s eyes. I thought someday I’d be so old it 
wouldn’t worry me. But it still follows me round.

There were rumours I had Aids in the 80s after I broke my jaw on a film and 
lost loads of weight. I was treated like a leper in Hollywood and it was the 
worst time of my life. I sure found out who my real friends were and I wasn’t 
surprised by those who turned out to be real arses.

My biggest regret is not staying with Dinah Shore 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dinah_Shore>, the love of my life. We were 
soulmates, but my career was on fire and my ego was out of control. I was 
stupid and I didn’t think it would work because of the age gap and I was wrong. 
To this day it makes me sad. I’ve never found anyone like her.

Marlon Brando <https://www.theguardian.com/film/marlonbrando> was an 
unbelievable arsehole.He hated me because of my resemblance to a younger him. 
When we met at a party he was rude and accused me of capitalising on looking 
like him. So I promised him I wouldn’t get fat.

I’d love to have become Bette Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bettedavis>’s fifth husband. We were great 
pals and there was a mutual romantic attraction. We were at a function once 
when a guy asked her if I was her new conquest in front of me. She slapped him 
so hard the whole room went silent.

There’s been an element of self-sabotage in my career. I turned down Bond, and 
Jack Nicholson’s role inTerms of Endearment. Boogie Nights revived my career, 
but I tried really hard not to do it. But as long as the laughter continues 
it’s great with me.

The image of me as a womanising tough guy has dogged me all my life and hurt 
me a lot. And I still haven’t figured out what makes women tick.

I was terrified that my friend Donald Trump would ask me to be part of his 
presidential campaign. I’d have said no. I’m afraid now that he’s president we 
could get involved in a war very quickly. There’s a part of him that is so much 
fun and so sweet, but he’s doing what I used to do – having a good time being 
arrogant. And he has so many hangers-on.

Speeding is something I’ve done all my life. I just got a ticket yesterday. I 
still like really fast cars, unless I’m with a beautiful lady, then I prefer 
something very slow and quiet.

But Enough About Me by Burt Reynolds with Jon Winokur is out now in paperback 
from Blink Publishing at £8.99. To order a copy for £7.37, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/but-enough-about-me.html>
 