
It is not just the six miles but Bury and Rochdale, through their managers, 
are almost too close for combat. David Flitcroft and Keith Hill played and 
managed together atRochdale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale>, 
with Hill the senior partner. They talk, if not meet, every week and know each 
other’s football backwards. Flicker is godfather to Hilly’s son. On Saturday 
they did meet, at Gigg Lane in League One’s top half. It ended love-all, like 
their only other match in managerial opposition.

That was in 2014 in League Two, before Hill led Dale up for the second time in 
five seasons. Between times he and Flitcroft went to Barnsley without 
distinction, coming back separately to their current posts. But their 
friendship was forged as firmly as “Hillcroft” in Rochdale’s annals. The club 
had been in the fourth tier for 36 years in 2010. North of Manchester Hill and 
Flitcroft were as famous as Clough and Taylor at Forest and their achievement 
hardly less.

Bury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury>, in the second tier in 1999, 
have spent most of this century in the fourth and financial trouble but rescue 
from a winding-up order in 2013, followed by Flitcroft’s appointment, has them 
looking up again, fourth in the table to Rochdale’s 10th and beaten only once 
this season. The Shakers have found a mover in their new owner, Stewart Day.

Football League: your thoughts | Ian McCourt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/oct/17/football-league-your-thoughts>
The derby with a difference, local and almost loving, was nonetheless fought 
with more than friendly fire but few scoring chances. Just south of Bury is 
Besses o’ th’ Barn but the visitors were no Jessies o’ th’ Dale. Four yellow 
cards to two were neither here nor there but the first, after half an hour and 
in front of the dugouts, was significant. Bury’s Danny Pugh clattered Matthew 
Lund. Before the card was out Lund had embraced Pugh. With due respect neither 
manager tried to have a say.

Flitcroft referred to Andy Woolmer’s “safe way of refereeing” later, not 
critically but suggesting that after “a couple of meaty tackles” his caution 
had “broken the game up a bit”, imposing “a lack of tempo and fluidity. The 
important thing in our learning curve is to turn these situations into three 
points,” he added. In their promotion rush last spring they won 13 of their 
last 16 games to go from eighth to third.

Hill was no less philosophical, talking of a “moral responsibility to look 
after the club’s interests as well as my own” with regard to enhancing his 
squad. “Everything in football is marginal and at present we seem to lack 
confidence when composure is needed; and when we make mistakes, they are all 
critical.”

Mistakes were not punished here but Peter Vincenti, with seven goals in Dale’s 
previous eight league games, scuffed his shot to an early cross and later, in 
front of their 1,572 fans at the cemetery end, failed to bury a second golden 
chance when his diving header was met by Rob Lainton’s diving parry, a feather 
in the cap the keeper was oddly not wearing in face of the sinking sun. Between 
times Vincenti saw through the helter-skelter as Danny Mayor did for Bury on 
the left. His late pinpoint cross looked a gift for another seven-goal man but 
Josh Lillis beat away Leon Clarke’s header as he did shots by Clarke and Tom 
Soares earlier.

Bury forbore to call on Danny Rose (threatening a bunch besides those at Spurs 
and Oxford while Dale have one by any other name, Michael), heartened by their 
season’s best home support, 4,898. Following Sepp Blatter’s redefinition of 
gentlemen in his agreement with Michel Platini it was good to see new guardians 
of the game sticking up for the old code. Football will surely be better off in 
the hands of Shakers than sheikhs.
 