
Someone had to be first to go down and it turned out to be Bury. Bottom of 
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> at 
kick-off, they had to avoid defeat by Oldham Athletic. At 3pm the heavens 
opened on Gigg Lane. "They were crying for Bury Football Club," said the 
manager, Kevin Blackwell, after losing 1-0.

It was the end of a shocking week for Bury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury>. On Tuesday they announced 
"critical financial trouble" and said they needed £1m of external investment in 
a fortnight. Twice this season they have taken PFA loans to pay players, paying 
also the consequence in a transfer embargo. They want local people to join a 
consortium and invest £100,000 each, with a guaranteed payback. David 
Manchester, a director, said after the match: "We have some very interested 
parties. It's mega. In 10 days we should have something concrete." He said 
Blackwell "had come with his ankles tied". So apparently had some of the 
players.

Nine are under contract for next season and Blackwell said: "We have to bring 
in 20 to stand a chance." Managers ritually ask players to dig deep. Blackwell 
went further: "Everybody has to dig deep." Forever Bury, a fans' group, saw it 
like this: 100,000 new members paying £10 to join. Home support on Saturday was 
2,485.

The club could have taken a bit more if they had not locked out 500-odd Oldham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> fans responding to the 
pay-on-the-gate option. The away allocation was 2,100, the declared figure 
2,073, with obvious room for more than 27 there and swaths of Bury's own areas 
unoccupied. Beggars do not have to be losers.

In truth the writing has been on Gigg Lane's walls since August. Richie 
Barker, who completed Alan Knill's work by taking Bury out of League Two in 
2011, left for Crawley four days before the season began. Bury did not get a 
league win until 23 October, their 14th attempt and Blackwell's sixth. After 
his second he called his players "garbage". Most are still there despite the 
January window and recycling collections every two or four weeks. On Saturday 
injuries and suspensions left him only four men on the bench.

As a team they were a sorry lot, whole-hearted and half-cocked. Blackwell had 
said he wanted to give fans "something to hang their hats on" through the week. 
His team looked to reach for the highest peg in the sky, drilled only in the 
punt; Blackwell was a goalkeeper. It took Oldham a while to find a way through 
their resolve. In the end two striking substitutes did it, Kirk Millar chasing 
and crossing and Matt Smith heading in as he had against Liverpool and Everton 
in Oldham's Cup run. They needed the win to assist their own escape from the 
drop. On Tuesday their new manager, Lee Johnson, takes on his father Gary's 
Yeovil and Bury could help them by beating Scunthorpe United.

That Cup run yielded the sum Bury seek. When they were in administration in 
2001 Neville Neville, father of Gary and Phil and then a director – his wife, 
Jill, is general manager now – rescued them with a Save Our Shakers appeal. Now 
there are other movers. And Phil, looking for a game after Everton, could get 
one as player-manager. Gigg Lane has staged more league gamesthan any ground 
bar Deepdale and Turf Moor. It may be buried but not dead.
 