
Newcastle Jets <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastle-jets> are 
planning to trade their way into the A-League finals, with coach Mark Jones 
confirming the club will be active participants in the transfer window.


But there could be player losses to come during January’s open market, as 
rival clubs eye the Jets’ top talent.


Monday night’s 4-2 loss to Melbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> showcased both the 
potential and the shortcomings of the Jets.


Record-breaker Besart Berisha plays like his life depends on it, because it 
does | JP Howcroft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/record-breaker-besart-berisha-plays-like-his-life-depends-on-it-because-it-does>
Up front, they continued to find the back of the net, scoring twice and coming 
close to adding to that tally.


Down back, it was a different story.


The Jets failed to deal with Victory’s attacking movement, with Jones lashing 
their second-half defending.


The first-year coach said the club would be “100 per cent” involved in player 
movement.


“There are probably a couple of positions we can strengthen and I’d like to 
strengthen not only the attack but the defence,” he said.


“We’ve got room for at least two. We’ve cleared the way for at least two and 
maybe more.”


Without mentioning names, Jones also confirmed players could be leaving the 
Hunter.


“There’s obviously interest from overseas and other clubs in some of our 
players,” he said.


“We’d be prepared to maybe let somebody else go if we can find the right 
replacement.”


In Geelong, the Jets weren’t helped by a series of 50-50 calls from referee 
Chris Beath that didn’t go their way.


A first-half penalty for handball was awarded to Melbourne Victory after Fahid 
Ben Khalfallah’s cross struck John Koutroumbis’s shoulder.


In the second half, a dinked ball from short-range clearly struck Carl 
Valeri’s outstretched hand but Victory didn’t pay a similar price.


Jones said it was a game-changer.


“Referees are going to make mistakes and unfortunately it has completely 
affected a game. It’s not debatable. One was a pen and one wasn’t,” he said.


Despite the loss, Jones said he would continue to direct his sides to take on 
rivals and is remaining upbeat.


“You saw tonight we can play football that’s worthy of us being the top six,” 
he said.


“We’ll score goals and we’ll score goals against the best sides in the league. 
We just need to defensively tighten things up.”
 