
Stadium: Stadio Sant'Elia, 1970, capacity 23,486

The Stadio Sant'Elia lies in the beautiful setting of Sardinia and must be one 
of the most picturesque venues in Italy. The stadium was built in 1970 
following Cagliari's first and last Scudetto triumph and has been recorded to 
have held 70,000. The ground went through major refurbishing for Italia 90, 
when the capacity was reduced to 39,905. English fans might recognise this 
stadium, as Bobby Robson's team played their World Cup group games in the 
ground.

In the last 20 years the club has bounced between Italy's top two divisions 
and the attendances have dropped. A controversial move was made to erect two 
new stands over the running track in the north and south ends of the stadium so 
the fans had a better view. This decreased the capacity to 23,486 and 
effectively created a stadium within a stadium, which certainly gives it a 
strange appearance.

The atmosphere in the Stadio Sant'Elia can be quite laid back for the Italian 
game, although theCagliari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> 
Ultras – especially the Sconvolts 87 – can produce some excellent choreographed 
displays when rival clubs visit. The form of the team has a profound effect on 
the feeling in the stadium, although as an island people the volume can be 
cranked up when necessary.

The stadium was closed in 2012 due to safety concerns, which took Cagliari to 
the equally unsafeStadio Is Arenas 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stadio_Is_Arenas> and eventually led to the 
farcical games in Trieste last season. Renovations are now taking place that 
will make the Stadio Sant'Elia Cagliari's home once more.

They are playing at the Stadio Sant'Elia at present but attendances are low, 
often around 9,000. The debate about the ground still rolls on, with appeals 
and court cases about how it should be developed. All Sardinians are hoping 
this will be resolved soon and they can watch their football in a beautiful 
environment again.
 Cagliari concede a goal to Livorno in front of a sparse crowd at the Stadio 
Sant'Elia on 16 February 2014. Photograph: Enrico Locci/Getty Images 
The Ultras

Key Ultra Groups: Sconvolts and I Furiosi (The Furious)

Other fan groups: Fossa Ultras, Commando Ultras Supporters Young, Cagliari 
Ultras Curva Nord, Eagles, Crazy Boys, Brigata S. Elia, Panthers, Rebels,I 
Miserabili (the Wretches), I Weltschmerz (the World Weariness), Bunker Skin, 
Vecchie Facce (Old Faces).

In John Foot's book, Calcio: a history of Italian football 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Calcio-History-Football-John-Foot/dp/0007175752>, 
there is a striking vignette of a funeral procession being led by Cagliari fans 
following their Serie A triumph in 1970.

The Cagliaritani are carrying little coffins through their narrow cobbled 
streets mourningLa Vecchia Signora (The Old Lady). After beating them to the 
title the fans have decided to bury Juventus. It is a typical example of how 
Italians often mix Calcio with religious sentiments and it also demonstrates the
Cagliaritani's sardonicism, a word entirely appropriate due to its definition 
and etymology; the Greeks believed eating a plant from Sardinia caused facial 
convulsions resembling those of sardonic laughter.

Cagliari is the biggest club on the island of Sardinia. Their ground Lo Stadio 
Comunale Sant'Elia has only recently started to host games again due to its 
decrepit state, however, in the late 1980s its Curva Nord was renowned for 
being one of the most colourful and vibrant in Italy, producing spectacular 
choreographies with witty and innovative banners.

This was partly inspired by the birth of Cagliari's most famous Ultra groups, 
theSconvolts in 1987 and I Furiosi in 1989. The Sconvolts, whose name comes 
from the wordsconvolto, which means shocked or deranged, were formed as a 
subgroup of both the Cagliari Ultras Curva Nord and Eagles 1985.I Furiosi on 
the other hand was formed by ex-members of theSconvolts and a number of other 
small groups.

The Ultras of Cagliari are an unorthodox bunch and they differentiate 
themselves as "duro e puro" ("tough and pure"). It is an aphorism which suits 
them. Unlike many Italian Ultras they were renowned not for their violent 
nature, but for their dedication and passion, especially duringla trasferta 
(the away day). This was largely down to geography. For many the ferry was the 
only viable option and we are not talking about Dover to Calais. Cagliari to 
Rome takes 13 hours and that doesn't include travel on the mainland. Despite 
the long and gruelling journeys, the Ultras relishedla trasferta and their 
stalwart support forI Rossoblu has earned them respect all over Italy.

Yet, in what is becoming a recurring theme, deep underlying divisions existed 
between their principal groups. This was born from a difference in mentality 
and ideology. While theSconvolts remained apolitical, I Furiosi held right-wing 
sympathies and this meant they had their own twinnings and rivalries. Until 
2012, the Sconvolts only recognised true ties with Foggia, whereasI Furiosi had 
friendships with the Veronese, Interisti and Wild Kaos Atalanta.

I Furiosi also developed a famous rivalry with the Milanisti after they 
managed to steal astriscione (banner) at one of Cagliari's home games. Losing a 
striscione to a rival is shameful; it is the modern day equivalent of losing 
the king's colours in battle. This shame was compounded when the Milan Ultras 
proceeded to reveal this banner at the next game between the two sides. One 
account even reports a grown man crying with despair at the sight of it.

The incurable differences between the Cagliaritani meant they occupied 
different positions on the Curva Nord and in 2003 this conflict reached its 
peak. The Sconvolts travelled to their game against Verona with the sole aim of 
revenge. It was meticulously planned. They travelled in small groups so not to 
attract attention from the police. Arriving in the city they gathered behind 
the Curva Sud of the Stadio Bentegodi (the realm of the Verona Ultras) and they 
waited with iron bars, sticks and smoke grenades.

All hell broke loose, a bar was wrecked, fights raged with the Veronese, two 
police were hospitalised and 33Sconvolts were arrested. In the aftermath of the 
fight, the Veronese posted the following on a fan forum "It was a fair fight, 
without the use of knifes… Honour and respect to theSconvolts." 

The tranquil reputation that followed the Cagliaritani had vanished. But here 
comes the truly shocking part. This vendetta was a consequence of events that 
had occurred in Cagliari five months earlier. At the corresponding home 
fixture, members ofI Furiosi had teamed up with Verona Ultras and attacked the 
Sconvolts. It was the gravest of insults and one the Sconvolts could not 
ignore. TheFuriosi disbanded later that year and while the exact reasons are 
hard to ascertain, it was certainly connected to this incident.

Today the Sconvolts remain famous across Italy. Although their numbers have 
dwindled due to a large proportion of their recent home games being played in 
Trieste (666 miles away), their old adage of "pochi ma buoni" ("few but good") 
is truer now than ever.

They remain passionate and loyal and their slogan "Essere ultras esserlo nella 
mente" )Being Ultras is a state of mind") is famous nationwide. This is 
encapsulated in a quote by a member of theSconvolts: "Nobody in their right 
mind would leave their family on a Saturday to travel to Trieste to watch the 
last game of the season with nothing riding on it. It's the purest of passion 
with no logic"

Classic player: Enzo Francescoli
 Enzo Francescoli playing for Uruguay against West Germany in the 1986 World 
Cup in Mexico. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
When Ariel Ortega had his testimonial for River Plate in 2012, he invited many 
of the legends that had worn the famous white and red shirt. Ortega's show was 
stolen by 50-year-old Enzo Francescoli, who scored four goals – including a 
spectacular bicycle kick.

The Uruguayan, who is of Italian descent, was one of the most talented players 
to emerge from South America in the 1980s. Nicknamed "Ill Principe", his 
official position was attacking midfield, but like so many of the great 
players, it was sometimes impossible to pin down where he actually played.

His fluidity and superb movement made him idolised by many. One aspiring 
player who watched him avidly during the 1989-90 season in Marseille was 
Zinadine Zidane. The Uruguayan had so much influence on the French World Cup 
winner that he not only waxed lyrical about his hero in later years but he also 
named his son Enzo.

Francescoli arrived in Sardinia in 1990 after signing for Cagliari after 
Italia 90.Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> was the 
world's best league by some distance and the creative South American only added 
to its riches. In three seasons with Cagliari, Francescoli played 98 times and 
scored 17 goals. Francescoli and fellow Uruguayans Marcelo Tejera and José 
Herrera helped Cagliari finish sixth in the 1992-93 season and qualify for the 
Uefa Cup.

He led by example during this period and flourished in the division, 
showcasing some mesmerising ability. His skill level was second to none and his 
quick burst of speed matched with his incredible calmness saw him glide past 
defenders with considerable ease.

His finishing was immaculate and although his first thought was always to set 
up a team-mate his ability to strike from distance or one-on-one with the 
keeper was exemplary. He had a knack of hitting the ball early when approaching 
an oncoming keeper that would catch him at his weakest point and ultimately 
result in a goal. His set pieces also seemed to have tranquillity about them. 
He seemed to have the ability to stroke the ball into the net as though he was 
putting a brush to canvas, even from 35 yards out.

Seeing Francescoli at this time was quite simply a pleasure and although he 
moved to Torino for a season in 1993, he really made his mark in Sardinia. 
Serie A had some of the best defenders ever seen in world football at this time 
and too many of them had sleepless nights thanks toIll Principe. When Calcio 
ruled the world, Zidane was watching Francescoli in awe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3a5RPHaJaKM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3a5RPHaJaKM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3a5RPHaJaKM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra>
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 