
The crowd roared with delight. As Victor Ibarbo wheeled away to celebrate 
scoring Cagliari's opening goal against Sampdoria, the home fans danced, hugged 
and held their scarves aloft. For a few seconds they cheered, too, before the 
ringleaders led them seamlessly into a series of sharply co-ordinated chants.

Ibarbo, though, barely heard a peep. For a while he was celebrating with his 
team-mates on the pitch at Cagliari's Is Arenas stadium, the fans in question 
were not inside the ground at all. Instead the group – roughly 100 strong – had 
congregated in a street outside, listening to the game on portable radios. A 
line of police officers in riot gear stood between them and the nearest 
entrance.

For Cagliari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari>, it is becoming a 
familiar routine. This was the third time they had played behind closed doors 
this season – and the second in as many home games. Their match against Roma in 
September would also have been played under such circumstances, had Cagliari's 
president Massimo Cellino not invited the team's fans to defy an official 
ruling and show up anyway. As a result that fixture had to be abandoned 
altogether.

This is not how it was supposed to be. When Cellino moved Cagliari to the Is 
Arenas last summer, it was intended as a quick and easy solution to the team's 
problems at their previous home. For years he had been attempting to persuade 
local authorities of the necessity for upgrades to the communally-owned and 
increasingly run-down Stadio Sant'Elia. Finally, Cellino's patience had 
snapped, and he had instead opted to relocate altogether.

The Is Arenas, situated in the neighbouring suburb or Quartu Sant'Elena, was 
overseen by a different city council altogether, and this one Cellino found 
altogether more amenable. The stadium's existing structure was far too small 
for a top-flight team, but plans were drawn up to erect four temporary stands 
over the running track. Made out of steel and prefab materials, they weren't 
much to look at, but they were quick to put up and increased the venue's 
capacity to 16,500.

Or at least they did in theory. In practice, when the stadium finally did open 
to supporters for the first time in late September, only 5,000 or so season 
ticket holders were allowed in to watch Cagliari's home game against Pescara. 
That remained the case right through to mid-November, as the club worked to 
resolve enduring safety concerns. The police had expressed concerns over 
stadium layout, and specifically how crowds could be managed both inside and 
out.

The rest of the stadium was opened up over the next few months, but even then 
it was clear that not all issues had been resolved. Cagliari's game against 
Juventus in December was moved at short notice to Parma – almost 400 miles 
away. Nevertheless, the decision to play last month's match against Torino 
behind closed doors came as a shock to fans. A fortnight earlier 15,000 had 
watched Cagliari's draw with Milan at the Is Arenas.

Cellino had been arrested in the interim, on charges of embezzlement and false 
representation. It was alleged that a large sum of public money – reported in 
the newspapers at close to €750,000 – had been diverted away from its intended 
use to instead be spent on the construction of the Is Arenas. The Mayor of 
Quartu Sant'Elena, Mauro Contini, was also arrested, as was the public works 
assessor Stefano Lilliu.

All three have maintained their innocence, but neither Contini nor Lilliu has 
been quite as well-supported as the Cagliari owner. While Cellino was being 
held at Buoncammino prison, a group of Cagliari fans set up a vigil outside – 
singing his name and displaying messages of support. The players dedicated 
subsequent wins over Pescara and Torino to their incarcerated employer.

The authorities were keen to move Cellino from prison to house arrest, yet he 
resisted – saying he would rather wait to walk out free and fully vindicated. 
The cynics wondered whether there might be another factor at play. Those two 
victories had, after all, increased the buffer between Cagliari and the 
relegation zone from four points to 10.

Cellino is a famously superstitious man. In September 2011 he published a 
statement on Cagliari's official website imploring fans to wear the "unlucky" 
colour purple to a game against Novara in 2011 in order to cancel out the 
effects of playing on the 17th of the month – 17 being an equally "unlucky" 
number to his mind.

If superstition was a factor in Cellino's thinking on this occasion, too, then 
he might consider it to have been fully justified. One day after he was moved 
out of Buoncammino prison last weekend, Cagliari lost 3-0 to Bologna.

Placing Cellino under house arrest, though, was easier said than done. The 
owner's primary residence is in Miami, so he was instead moved to a private 
residential area at a criminal rehabilitation facility in Villamassargia, just 
outside Cagliari. That lasted for all of a week, Cellino's lawyers decrying the 
conditions as "similar to a concentration camp".

Instead, their client has now been relocated to his football club's training 
centre in Assemini. There Cellino has the luxury of several rooms at what is 
considered one of the best practice facilities in Italy. Although barred from 
communicating with the outside world outside of his heavily restricted visiting 
hours, Cellino does have a television. He will doubtless be aware of the 
protest march his players led through the city on Saturday.

A thousand fans, former players and members of club staff joined their 
procession through Cagliari, demanding the reopening of the Is Arenas. 
Cagliari's captain, Daniele Conti, and goalkeeper, Michael Agazzi, led the way, 
carrying a banner with the simple message: "Open the doors." Daniele Dessena 
and Davide Astori took turns to shout similar slogans through a megaphone.

The march came to an end in piazza Yenne but the protest continued through the 
weekend. A few hours later, on Saturday evening the entire Cagliari board 
resigned – defining the action as a show of support for the fans. On Sunday the 
team's players warmed up for their game against Sampdoria in T-shirts 
describing themselves as "sons of a lesser God".

Whether such actions will have any bearing on the future reopening of the 
stadium remains to be seen. In the meantime all that can be said is that the 
siege mentality built up around the club in these recent weeks certainly does 
not seem to be doing them any harm on the field.

Sampdoria ought to have represented stiff opposition this Sunday. After a 
miserable start to the campaign, the club's fortunes had been transformed by 
the appointment of Delio Rossi shortly before the winter break. Since the turn 
of the year, Samp had collected 18 points from nine games – conceding just 
three goals.

Ibarbo would double that figure in a single afternoon. Having opened the 
scoring after 18 minutes, the Colombian forward extended his team's advantage 
early in the second half, crashing the ball into the roof of the net from six 
yards after being left unmarked at a corner. In the 72nd minute he completed 
his hat-trick with a close-range header. Samp's only goal arrived in injury 
time, from a Maxi López penalty.

Cagliari will hope this game represents a breakthrough moment for Ibarbo, 
whose movement and explosiveness make him a handful to defend against but who 
had previously scored just once in 23 appearances this season. Although still 
young at 22 years old, his profligacy in front of goal had been a source of 
growing concern.

Neither Ibarbo nor his coaches made any comment after the game, the entire 
team having been placed into a press silence. The players spoke eloquently 
enough with their actions, though, running around the back of the stands at 
full-time in order to thank those fans who had cheered them on from outside the 
stadium.Andrea Cossu even scaled the fence to embrace one or two of them 
<http://www.unionesarda.it/Articoli/Articolo/307292>.

If Cagliari's supporters are not allowed into Is Arenas to see their team, 
then it seems that this team is prepared to come out of the stadium in order to 
see their fans.

Results and talking points

• Joining Ibarbo in the unlikely hat-trick scorers' club on Sunday was Parma's 
Amauri. The oft-mocked forward earned fresh opprobrium during the week after 
suggesting that he had not given up hope of representing Italy at the 2014 
World Cup. To call that a long-shot would be to deal in gross understatement, 
but the player nevertheless deserves credit for dominating a Torino defence 
that had hitherto been one of the best in the division.

• Juventus took another large stride towards retaining their Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> title, increasing their 
lead at the top of the division to nine points with a 1-0 victory over Catania 
on the same afternoon that Napoli lost 2-0 away to Chievo. It was hardly a 
resounding win for the champions, snatched by the substitute Emanuele in 
second-half injury time, but they won't mind one bit. The manager Antonio Conte 
insisted he would continue to take this season one game at a time, but with 10 
games to go it is hard to envisage any other team claiming the Scudetto.

• The one less positive note for Juventus came from the stands, where a 
section of the crowd sang racist chants against Mario Balotelli before 
insisting once again that "there are no black Italians". The club has already 
been fined for such incidents this season, and although sanctions have not yet 
been decided there is a possibility the club could be forced to play their next 
fixture at a neutral site or behind closed doors as punishment.

• Napoli, meanwhile, are at risk of not only falling out of the Scudetto race 
but also losing their grip on second. Their lead over third-placed Milan is 
down to just two points after the Rossoneri beat Genoa on Friday, and it is 
hard to look past the form of Edinson Cavani when seeking an explanation for 
such a drastic turn of fortunes.

The striker is without a goal in eight games across all competitions, and his 
team is without a win in the last seven of those. Indeed, they have scored just 
two goals in that time. On Sunday Cavani missed a penalty early in the 
second-half which might have brought his team back into contention. It has been 
suggested that the player's poor form may be related to the fact that his wife, 
Maria Soledad, is presently back home in Uruguay, where she recently gave birth 
to their second son. Cavani has not seen her in weeks, and will likely not meet 
his newborn child until the international break in two weeks' time.

• As for Milan, their enjoyment of Friday's 2-0 victory was tempered only by 
an injury to Giampaolo Pazzini, who will miss Tuesday's Champions League 
last-16 second leg against Barcelona after suffering a deep bruise and 
micro-fracture in his right leg. The striker scored a tremendous goal to open 
the scoring shortly after picking up his injury, but the wisdom of his 
inclusion in the starting XI must be questioned. Mario Balotelli was freshly 
back from injury, and cup-tied for the game at the Camp Nou. As it was, the 
former Manchester City player replaced Pazzini after 25 minutes, and went on to 
score his team's second goal.

• Those are still better problems to have than the ones presently being faced 
by both Inter and Lazio. The Nerazzurri lost 1-0 at home to Bologna, and have 
collected just four points from their last four league games. Injuries and a 
misguided transfer policy have played a big role, but so has the manager Andrea 
Stramaccioni's excessive tactical tinkering. On Sunday alone his team seemed to 
rotate through several different formations in the space of a single half. 
Lazio also lost at home on Sunday evening, 2-0 to Fiorentina, and have won just 
one of their last eight league games.

• Worthy of recognition, despite his team's performance, was Javier Zanetti's 
600th Serie A appearance. Gazzetta dello Sport named him as Inter's man of the 
match, though that was faint praise. "He gets this award by process of 
elimination," wrote Andrea Elefante. "He was the only one who didn't hurt his 
own team."

• Inter's supporters voiced their feelings about the club's recent transfer 
moves with a banner in the Curva Nord which read: "Why don't you give us a 
trial, too? You might find someone good. And at least they'd be an Inter fan."

• Lazio's fans, meanwhile, directed their ire at Michel Platini, following 
Uefa's decision that the team must play two European home games behind closed 
doors as a punishment for racist chants. "Heysel, 29-05-85," read the banner on 
display at the Stadio Olimpico this weekend. "You had the strength to carry on 
playing … the courage to celebrate in front of 39 dead. Platini, you pig, we 
won't take moral lessons from you."

• Palermo's fourth managerial change of the season should arrive sometime on 
Monday, when Gian Piero Gasperini is expected to lose the job for the second 
time this season. His most likely successor is thought to be Giuseppe Sannino – 
the man he replaced in first instance all the way back in September.

Results: Atalanta 2-1 Pescara, Cagliari 3-1 Sampdoria, Chievo 2-0 Napoli, 
Genoa 0-2 Milan, Inter 0-1 Bologna, Juventus 1-0 Catania, Lazio 0-2 Fiorentina, 
Palermo 1-2 Siena, Parma 4-1 Torino, Udinese 1-1 Roma.

The Latest Serie A table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=13>.
 