
British bike racing fans are a patient lot and their craving for a local hero 
capable of winning a motorcycling grand prix now runs to more than two 
dispiriting decades. Breaking that duck still seems like something of a long 
shot but in Cal Crutchlow the thousands who will flock toSilverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> for Sunday's MotoGP will travel 
with optimism renewed after the 27-year-old rider from Coventry urged his Tech 
3 Yamaha on to the front-row grid.

It was some feat considering the championship leader Marc Márquez will start 
on pole position after setting a lap record in bright sunshine at the 
Northamptonshire circuit.

The Repsol Honda rider – in his rookie season in bike racing's blue-riband 
class and one of a trio of Spaniards dominating the sport – set a new fastest 
lap of 2min 0.691sec after a fierce tussle with his countryman Jorge Lorenzo. 
The factory Yamaha rider was the first to break Casey Stoner's lap record in 
the final qualifying session before Márquez bested his time. Márquez, just to 
underline his credentials as the hard-riding successor to the Australian who 
retired at the end of last season, is aiming for a fifthMotoGP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/motogp> race win in succession.

Crutchlow, meanwhile, certainly makes life difficult for himself when it comes 
to his home race. On Saturday he took two tumbles during the first practice 
session but walked away from both accidents, suffering only a badly swollen arm.

Caught out by colder than expected tyre temperatures despite the sunshine he 
wrecked his first-choice bike and then also fell from his back-up machine. 
However, that was not too badly damaged and he was able to set the third best 
time in the final qualifying session.

The Silverstone hoodoo is something he will be anxious to shake off. For the 
past two seasons Crutchlow's race has ended in an ambulance ride to A&E. On 
Saturday he fared better, and praised the team he will be leaving at the end of 
the season for a ride with Ducati. "The team did a fantastic job to build me at 
least one bike," he said.

Not since Barry Sheene's world championship of 1977 has Britain had a world 
champion in bike racing's version of Formula One.

In the interim there has been little for British bike fans to cheer aside from 
Carl Fogerty's dominance of World Superbikes, also on a Ducati.

Crutchlow will hope his move to the Italian bike maker will echo the Blackburn 
rider's success, but Ducati have struggled since Stoner switched to Honda in 
2011 and even the multi-world title-winning Valentino Rossi failed to revive 
their fortunes.

Rossi returned to the factory Yamaha team at the start of the season after two 
fruitless terms on the bright red bikes. Now owned by Audi, Ducati's days are 
far from over, however, and Crutchlow appears to have made a canny decision to 
leave the Yamaha team that always runs second-best to their factory cohorts.

At Silverstone on Sunday there is other British interest. Crutchlow's 
team-mate Bradley Smith was 10th quickest in qualifying and will start his home 
MotoGP race from the fourth row.

A more serious contender is Scott Redding, who leads the Moto2 championship by 
21 points, and will start from second on the grid. Redding, who will leave the 
Marc VDS team at the end of the season to step up to MotoGP with Gresini Honda, 
was 0.039 slower than Takaaki Nakagami.

Germany's Stefan Bradl starts fourth on the LCR Honda ahead of the Spaniard 
Dani Pedrosa, Márquez's team-mate, with Yamaha's Rossi completing the second 
row. The Italian Andrea Dovizioso, who makes his 100th MotoGP start, will line 
up in seventh place.Márquez is the first rookie to win four in a row in the top 
category. If the 20-year-old Spaniard wins, he will be only the seventh rider 
in the 65-year history of grand prix racing to take five successive victories 
in the leading class, as well as the youngest.

Moto GP Round 12, Hertz British Grand Prix, Silverstone
Qualifying:

 1 M Márquez (Sp) Honda 2min 00.691sec; 2 J Lorenzo (Sp) Yamaha 2:00.819; 3 C 
Crutchlow (GB) Yamaha 2:01.425;4 S Bradl (Ger) Honda 2:01.558; 5 D Pedrosa (Sp) 
Honda 2:01.624;6 V Rossi (It) Yamaha 2:02.109; 7 A Dovizioso (It) Ducati 
2:02.123;8 A Bautista (Sp) Honda 2:02.252; 9 N Hayden (US) Ducati 2:02.289; 10 
B Smith (GB) Yamaha 2:02.409;11 C Edwards (US) FTR-Kawasaki 2:04.03.
 