
Scotland's Bells Cup is making itself comfortable in the trophy cupboard at 
Inverness Caley Thistle this morning after a 2-0 win over Second Division
Airdrie United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/airdrie> yesterday.

The Highlands side marked their tenth birthday with an inspired performance 
from second-half substitute Steve Hislop to break the stalemate at McDiarmid 
Park.

Hislop's pinpoint cross for David Bingham put Caley one up with 11 minutes to 
go and looked like it would be enough to send a deflated Airdrie - who were 
looking for their fourth Bells Cup title - home empty handed.

But in the final minute Hislop decided one wasn't enough and went on a weaving 
run through the Airdrie defence and slotted home from 16 yards.

Before Hislop's introduction the game had been a fairly even, if scrappy, 
encounter with the difference in status all but invisible. Airdrie defended 
well against a Caley side full of ideas and, despite spending most of the first 
half in their own area, could have scored themselves just before half-time from 
a scissor-kicked effort from Jerome Vareille.

With a slow start to the second half, Airdrie could have been forgiven for 
thinking they were heading towards extra time to find a way through and take 
the cup home. But Hislop, whose place was given to Paul Ritchie, was determined 
to prove himself when he came on just before the hour and the change to Caley 
was instant.

Barry Wilson soon found himself one-on-one with Airdrie's Mark McGeown but 
waited too long and the goalkeeper blocked the shot. But Caley fans didn't have 
to wait long for something to celebrate as Hislop broke down the right and 
floated a cross into the penalty area.

Bingham, who used to play at McDiarmid Park in his days at St Johnstone, 
climbed between two defenders to fire a powerful header home from six yards.

Airdrie, plainly devastated by the late goal, all but left the pitch as the 
last ten minutes ticked by. And in the final minute Hislop confirmed his status 
as the tournament's top scorer, capping a 30-yard run - and the final - with a 
goal from just inside the area.

"I said to Steve to go out and prove me wrong just as he was going on and I'm 
happy that he did that by having a hand in two excellent goals," Caley manager 
John Robertson said after the match.

"I'm delighted to win the competition and hopefully we can use this result as 
a springboard for the league."

United manager Sandy Stewart was full of praise for his side which worked hard 
to make sure they didn't look like lower-division opposition. He said called it 
a performance to be proud of, but that will prove little consolation to his 
shattered players.

"I'm obviously disappointed because when you get into a cup final you 
desperately want to win it.

"I thought we were the better side in the first half after taking 15 minutes 
to settle and I don't think you would've noticed who were the second division 
side.

"But, when you get on top in a game you have to take your chances. 

"I'm happy with the way we played because all you can ask is for the players 
to give you 100% and I think they did that."
 