
One has to wonder what the reception to this performance would have been were 
David Moyes still in charge ofManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. Louis van Gaal may 
have been all jokes before this engrossing FA Cup tie but the mood had 
certainly turned by full-time here following a terribly ponderous display whose 
result is an unwanted replay at Old Trafford.

United were slow and sluggish and, despite dominating the tie, lacked the 
creativity in midfield to unpick a team who are 12th in League Two. Conditions 
were admittedly tough, the wind swirling and the crowd on top of the pitch, yet 
Van Gaal’s men should have expected such challenges beforehand and been 
prepared to face opponents content on having numbers behind the ball.

Ángel Di María and Radamel Falcao both played in the previous round at Yeovil 
Town, a game of similar type. Adnan Januzaj could not seize on a first start 
since November. Instead it was Ryan Donaldson, a former England Under-19 
international whose last club was Gateshead, who shone in the first half.

The service to Falcao was limited throughout and the one clear chance he had, 
following a ball from Michael Carrick, forced a fine save from Chris Dunn. Di 
María, meanwhile, made little impact during the tie, sending one shot sailing 
over a stand in the first half.

That said, this was Cambridge’s night. Richard Money’s side edged the opening 
45 minutes but were on the back foot for the entire second half. The two 
centre-halves, Josh Coulson and Michael Nelson, were immense and the 
goalkeeper, Dunn, produced an excellent save to deny Falcao.

This was the kind of night where United needed fortitude as well as finesse. 
The 75 league places between the two sides were not reflected in a first half 
when Cambridge had their opponents flustered, often Marcos Rojo the only 
defender who appeared unmoved by the surroundings while his colleagues 
squandered possession.

The rafters at the Abbey Stadium were shaking for the entirety of the match. 
It was an evening when ticketless supporters desperate for entry slipped in 
through the gates, evading the hapless security guards and surging into the 
yellow and black swaths to the sanctuary of anonymity.

Manchester United were in town but Money’s side were certainly not overawed by 
the prospect. From the early nutmeg attempt from Donaldson on Daley Blind – he 
pulled off the feat 15 minutes later at the second try – to Sullay Kaikai’s 
jinking run into the penalty area, it was evident from an early stage that Van 
Gaal’s men were in for a tough evening.

Cambridge played with admirable poise and spirit during a first half where 
they could, and possibly should, have taken the lead. The pressure increased 
late on but they stood tall.

In the bowels of the ground, in a room decked out in paraphernalia from 
pre-season foreign tours at Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund among other 
clubs, read the message: “We want players who are Tough, Determined, 
Disciplined and Committed.” They delivered those qualities in spades against 
the millionaires of the Premier League, containing the white wave admirably and 
often appearing dangerous on the counter.

Pictures of John Ruddy, the England and Norwich City goalkeeper, dominate the 
interior of Cambridge’s stadium, the club’s most notable recent graduate who 
they believe epitomises the attributes of discipline and commitment that are so 
celebrated here.

Despite having only 28% possession in the first half, Cambridge left the field 
the more satisfied team. Coulson could have given his side the lead but 
Manchester United’s malaise early in games is a current trend – they have 
scored only one first-half goal in the last six matches.

Not even the introduction of Robin van Persie and Ander Herrera could provide 
a telling piece of quality. Van Persie fired over in the 70th minute, as the 
yellow and black wall was breached, but the pressure was too little too late 
for the visitors.

Cambridge, with a lucrative replay in sight, did everything to hang on, even 
testing David de Gea from a late corner. It was an uncomfortable night that 
Manchester United will not remember fondly but one that will live long in the 
memory of all Cambridge fans.
 