
For all the talk of inhospitable dressing rooms, freezing conditions and long 
balls, Manchester United’s biggest obstacle at the Abbey Stadium was Cambridge 
United’s excellent organisation.

For the vast majority of this goalless draw Cambridge’s defensive shape was 
textbook. Richard Money had a simple but effective approach: he ordered his 
players to remain compact in two banks of four but, rather than defending deep, 
the League Two side played a reasonably high line in the first half, ensuring 
they were not forced to withstand prolonged spells of pressure. Chris Dunn in 
goal swept from his line whenManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> played long balls over 
the top.

Crucially however, Cambridge’s midfielders got back into position quickly. The 
home side’s defensive transitions were excellent: whenever they lost 
possession, the Manchester United player on the ball was put under pressure 
quickly, and the wingers shuttled back to protect the defence. United’s passing 
moves were slowed because of the pressure and then they found penetrative balls 
impossible. The central midfielders Tom Champion and Liam Hughes remained in 
deep positions, denying passes into the feet of Radamel Falcao and James 
Wilson, while the Norwich loanee Cameron McGeehan generally stopped Michael 
Carrick influencing the game.

The right-winger Ryan Donaldson was guilty of ball-watching a couple of times 
and allowing Daley Blind to sprint past him on the overlap but the left-sided 
Sullay Kaikai defended diligently. Both offered a threat on the break, too: 
Marouane Fellaini was constantly supporting Antonio Valencia against Kaikai, 
and was booked when tripping the winger to halt a counter-attack, while 
Donaldson impressed with his ability to cross with both feet, repeatedly 
whipping the ball in early.

Cambridge’s only regret was not making more of their set-pieces: Tom Elliott, 
Liam Hughes and, most notably, Josh Coulson had good opportunities, with 
Cambridge packing the six-yard box and putting heavy pressure on David De Gea.

Louis van Gaal started with a midfield diamond, despite saying that system 
often made the coaching team “twitch our ass on the bench” earlier in the week. 
Manchester United’s build-up play was dreadfully slow: Cambridge allowed their 
centre-backs time on the ball, and some of Phil Jones and Marcos Rojo’s forward 
passing was remarkably wayward. To help speed up the distribution, Carrick 
often dropped back between the centre-backs to find space away from McGeehan, 
so United appeared as if they were playing with the three-man defence Van Gaal 
has generally preferred throughout this season.

Eventually Cambridge tired and their midfield organisation was less impressive 
after the break. Carrick escaped McGeehan’s attentions to play a curled 
through-ball for Falcao, whose shot forced Dunn into a fine save, then Ángel Di 
María found space between the lines to chip forward for substitute Robin van 
Persie, who blazed over. Manchester United would not have produced those 
chances in the first half because Cambridge denied them space so effectively.

This was a tremendous example of the FA Cup’s enduring appeal and yet there 
was no “magic” about Cambridge’s performance. This was simply about hard work, 
good preparation and intelligent organisation.
 