
Louis van Gaal selected Wayne Rooney and Robin van Persie for this game, so he 
was clearly taking the FA Cup seriously. He also gave Marouane Fellaini a 
marauding role up front and brought in Juan Mata for Adnan Januzaj, clearly 
unwilling to take any chances against relatively unknown League Two quantities.
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> did 
have a good look at Cambridge in the first game at the Abbey Stadium but the 
whole prospect of taking on lower league opposition in knockout games is a 
potential pratfall for Van Gaal, all too aware that the Cup represents a 
short-cut to silverware that he is in no position to snub.

Most other observers felt Cambridge might be hard-pressed to keep the clean 
sheet at Old Trafford that they managed at home, and so it proved. Like the 
contestants who know their limits on Who Wants to Be a Millionaire – just about 
the only instant riches routine which Richard Money did not get round to 
mentioning in expressing his gratitude for this lucrative draw – Cambridge had 
to be content with pocketing the loot. About £1m from their Old Trafford trip, 
closer to £2m from the whole Cup run. They deserved their good fortune. Whether 
the same could be said of the bulk of the crowd is another matter.

The kick-off had been delayed by 20 minutes partly to accommodate Cambridge 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cambridge-united> supporters’ coaches 
stuck in congested traffic on the approaches to the stadium. At the scheduled 
kick-off time it looked as if quite a number of Manchester United fans had been 
held up too. That is to say, at 7.45pm Old Trafford was around a quarter full, 
which in the old days, before the advent of the unpopular automatic ticketing 
scheme, might have been all a replay such as this would attract. It is ironic, 
though perhaps not completely unfair, that all Money’s vivid comparisons to 
winning the lottery or dropping a fortune in Las Vegas are partly because 
United have found a way of milking their supporters so relentlessly. Didn’t 
fancy the replay? Not all that impressed with the original fourth-round 
performance?

No matter, that will be an additional admission fee on top of the season 
ticket price, please, whether or not you turn up.

But that is the crazy world of football finance. Manchester United are a 
mega-successful money-making machine, currently trying to pretend that being 
excited about the FA Cup does not hide two seasons of underachievement on the 
field. Cambridge United were planning to spend some of theirFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> windfall on new urinals for the 
dressing rooms, until a few local businessmen caught sight of the state of the 
dressing rooms and were shamed into offering to install them for nothing.

Still, a night out is a night out, and when the visiting fans finally made it 
to the ground they soon began to enjoy themselves. They support their local 
team and all that. They would have enjoyed themselves even more had Tom Elliott 
scored in the first minute, after a Daley Blind mistake suggested the home side 
were prepared to be as generous as Cambridge-based plumbers, but though 
presented with a clear opportunity in front of goal and a surprising amount of 
time the forward could only strike the foot of an upright.

At least that confounded Van Gaal’s pre-match theory, which was that Cambridge 
would play with one man up front and 10 behind the ball and try to keep the 
game scoreless for as long as possible. Not only did Cambridge play with two 
up; they almost took the lead. That seemed to embolden the travelling support 
even more, and the Cambridge fans began to chant “What a waste of money” when 
Ángel di María had the temerity to bang the turf in pain and frustration after 
Cameron McGeehan had trampled over his ankle. It briefly looked as if the 
Argentinian might have to go off and, when he recovered to carry on playing 
instead, he was greeted by boos, so it was almost inevitable that the former 
Real Madrid player would play some part in the visitors’ downfall.

It took a laboured home side 25 minutes to make anything resembling a 
breakthrough, but when they did Di Maria was indeed involved, though it was an 
astute pass from the promising Paddy McNair to find Mata in midfield that began 
the move. Mata instinctively moved the ball out to the left where he knew Di 
María would not only be available but accelerating, then moved in on goal to be 
around when the cross was knocked down by Fellaini.

When Robin van Persie picked out Marcos Rojo to head a second goal from the 
six-yard line seven minutes later the contest was as good as over. The only 
remaining interest, for a few thousand fans packed into a corner of the ground, 
was whether Cambridge would be able to deliver on the terrace boast that they 
were going to score at Old Trafford. Ryan Donaldson went close towards the end 
of the first half, McGeehan right at the end, but that was as good as it got.

“Three-nil was about par for the course but it would have been nice to score a 
goal for the fans,” Money admitted. The manager generously withdrew Luke 
Chadwick early in the second half so the winger could enjoy even more generous 
applause from his former home crowd, though the Cambridge terrace contingent 
remained sceptical. “We forgot that you were here” was their parting shot.
 