
We all know that getting a decent amount of high-quality sleep is extremely 
important to your quality of life.Sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sleep> disorders can lead to fatigue, 
anxiety, depression and poor daytime performance in both physical and mental 
tasks. Drugs can help, but they can also have negative effects on your daily 
life. Fortunately help is at hand. Psychologists have found that simply playing 
relaxing music at bedtime can alleviate sleep disorders for many people. 
Relaxing music reduces the amount of the stress hormone noradrenaline in your 
system, reducing your level of vigilance and arousal and allowing you to sleep 
better.

Psychologist Laszlo Harmat gathered together 94 students with sleeping 
problems. One group was given relaxing classical music to listen to at bedtime, 
a second group was supplied with an audiobook, and the third received nothing. 
Those with the music or audiobooks were asked to play them every night for 45 
minutes just before they went to bed.

After three weeks, 30 of the 35 students in the music-listening group were 
transformed into good sleepers. Listening to audiobooks helped far fewer 
people: only nine out of 30 became good sleepers. The students were also rated 
as to how depressed they were before and after the test. The depressive 
symptoms of the music-listening group decreased substantially, but the 
audiobooks didn’t have the same effect.

Music can also help older people sleep better. In 2003 researchers Hui-Ling 
Lai and Marion Good carried out a similar study on a group of people aged 
between 60 and 83 years old who had sleeping problems, and once again the 
bedtime music worked its magic. Half of the music-listening group became good 
sleepers.

If you want to try relaxing bedtime music for yourself, you’ll find that 
plenty of the most relaxing classical/ jazz/blues albums are readily available 
and, of course, you can easily make your own playlists. It’s important to get 
the volume right: too low and it’s irritating, too loud and you can’t sleep. 
And make sure that the final piece is one that fades out, otherwise you’ll be 
woken by the sudden silence. One of our natural reflexes is to go on guard if 
it suddenly gets quiet.

Why We Love Music: from Mozart to Metallica – The Emotional Power of Beautiful 
Sounds by John Powell is published by John Murray (£16.99, or £13.69 from 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/395153/>)
 