
Kit Symons boosted his chances of becoming the permanent manager at Craven 
Cottage asFulham beat Doncaster Rovers 2-1 in the Capital One Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/capital-one-cup>.

Symons has been placed in caretaker charge as the Cottagers attempt to get 
themselves out of the mess Felix Magath left them in. First-half goals from 
Bryan Ruiz and Dan Burn were enough to secure only a second win of the season 
for the Championship’s bottom club – the first also coming in this competition 
– and send them into round four.

They still had to survive a second-half scare, though, as James Coppinger 
pulled one back before substitute Theo Robinson missed a late penalty.

Ruiz struck the first blow when he latched on to Hugo Rodallega’s knock-down 
and drove in a first-time shot from 15 yards. The centre-half Burn, standing in 
as captain for Scott Parker, grabbed Fulham’s second in the 31st minute when he 
took his 6ft 7in frame to the far post and nodded in Ross McCormack’s cross.

The visitors deservedly pulled one back on the hour when their captain, 
Coppinger, jinked his way into the box and thumped an angled drive past Marcus 
Bettinelli. And they were handed the chance to equalise 12 minutes from time 
when Tim Hoogland handled Robinson’s header in the area and the referee, Kevin 
Friend, pointed to the spot.

But the luck which has deserted Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> all season was with them for a 
change as Bettinelli guessed correctly, diving to his left to keep out 
Robinson’s low shot.

Cardiff City were humbled at home by Bournemouth, going down 3-0 to make it 
five games without a win for the managerless club. All three goals came inside 
33 minutes, as Charlie Daniels’ effort separated two from Dan Gosling.

League Two’s Shrewsbury followed up their second-round win over Leicester with 
another impressive result, this time turning over in-form Championship side
Norwich. James Collins was the scorer, netting 10 minutes into the second half.

Manchester United’s conquerors in the previous round, MK Dons, continued to 
impress in the competition. Benik Afobe scored twice against the Red Devils and 
repeated the feat againstBradford City to seal a 2-0 win.

Derby saw off their Championship rivals Reading 2-0, Johnny Russell opening 
the scoring in the 67th minute before an Alex Pearce own-goal.

Sheffield United got the better of their fellow League One representatives 
Leyton Orient, Michael Higdon securing a 1-0 victory with a goal in the second 
minute at Brisbane Road.
 