
Kemar Roofe’s exceptional long-range strike helped Oxford produce a shock at 
Brentfordwhere Michael Appleton’s men produced a performance the winning side 
of 1986 would have been proud of to prevail 4-0.

Accrington Stanley 2-2 Hull City (Hull win 4-3 on pens: score at 90min 0-0 | 
Capital One Cup match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/11/accrington-stanley-hull-city-capital-one-cup-match-report>
The Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> manager Marinus 
Dijkhuizen’s decision to make 11 changes was ruthlessly exploited by 
fourth-tier United, with Liam Sercombe, Danny Hylton, Roofe and Jon Mullins 
securing a comprehensive victory.

“It was an embarrassing performance from my team,” said Dijkhuizen. “After 12 
minutes it was nil-three and game over. It was a long night for me but also for 
the crowd especially, and for my players. There were a lot of lessons tonight 
for me and for the players. That’s a good thing. The bad thing is we played 
awful.”

A manic opening 12 minutes settled this first-round clash, with Sercombe 
taking aim from the edge of the box and firing home a low, right-footed shot to 
start an embarrassing night for the Bees.

That fifth-minute effort was followed by a comical second as Jack Bonham’s 
clearance deflected in off Hylton, before Roofe sent the 903 visiting fans into 
raptures – taking aim from 40 yards after the Bees back-up goalkeeper strayed 
off his line.

Ryan Taylor had chances to make it worse in a one-sided first half – a pattern 
which continued after the interval, when clever, unselfish team play allowed 
Mullins to convert and wrap up a great United win.

Tom Bradshaw powered Walsall into the second round in dramatic fashion as he 
crashed home a stoppage-time penalty to seal his hat-trick and beatNottingham 
Forest4-3 at the City Ground, with the beaten manager Dougie Freedman admitting 
after the game that he had “finally reached the end of his tether” with some of 
his players.

“I am bitterly disappointed,” said Freedman, whose side lost their opening 
league fixture at Brighton on Friday. “We fought very hard towards the end and 
got back in the game and looked the stronger team but unfortunately we gave the 
penalty away, which I had no arguments with.

“There is a lack of individual desire at the moment to keep the ball out of 
the back of the net and it has cost us once again. It is very difficult concede 
four goals and win a match. There has got to be changes in personnel, simple as 
that.”

Bradshaw had Walsall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> 2-0 up 
inside 14 minutes, but Tyler Walker reduced the deficit on his first start for 
Forest. Romaine Sawyers fired the League One side 3-1 ahead and – despite the 
Forest substitute Michail Antonio’s brilliant late double – up stepped Bradshaw 
to send the Saddlers through.

Forest had been 3-1 down with 10 minutes to play, only for Antonio’s superb 
run and wonderful finish to bring them back into the game – “You will never see 
another goal like that in 10 years,” said Freedman – and the substitute’s 
cheeky backheel in injury-time drew them level. But the hosts pressed on and 
Kelvin Wilson was penalised for a foul on Bradshaw late on and he stepped up 
and sent Dorus de Vries the wrong way from the spot.

Burnley, despite making just four changes to the side that started their 
league campaign with a 1-1 draw at Leeds on Saturday, were disappointing in a 
1-0 defeat toPort Vale. Byron Moore scored the only goal in the 82nd minute, 
the referee’s assistant deciding the ball had just crossed the line before 
being cleared.

“Credit to them because they worked hard to get the result. I felt we did a 
lot of things well, but we didn’t have that edge in the top third of the pitch 
and have conceded towards the end,” said theBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> manager, Sean Dyche. “Vale had 
hardly created a chance, but they’ve scored a scruffy one and it’s proved 
enough for them. The team I put out should have been good enough to win a 
football match. No disrespect to anyone or the competition, but we know what 
prize we want this season and cup runs aren’t our priority.”

Burton Albion, who beat both Wigan and QPR in last season’s competition, 
scored a deflected 87th-minute winner to addBolton to their list of recent 
conquests.

Wanderers would have had a half-time lead had Gary Madine converted the simple 
headed chance he was presented with when Remi Matthews’s save from Liam 
Feeney’s free-kick looped up to him.

However, from just four yards out, the former Sheffield Wednesday striker, who 
was denied a first Bolton goal at the weekend by the woodwork, planted his 
attempt on to the top of the crossbar, with the ball kissing the bar again 
before being cleared.

Aside from a deflected Lucas Akins try over the top, Burton did not threaten 
until Ben Amos rushed out to repel Crystal Palace loanee Jerome Binnom-Williams 
early in the second period.

The home side dominated for much of the second half, but Madine scooped well 
over the top following a mazy Mark Davies run, Neil Danns’ free-kick was pushed 
out and Zach Clough’s wayward effort hit the corner flag.

At the other end John Mousinho drove straight at Amos, and Feeney and Dorian 
Dervite did likewise when up against Matthews at the other end, before the 
Brewers finally found the net with three minutes remaining.

Palmer fired an effort at the Wanderers goal from the edge of the box and a 
big deflection caused the ball to divert beyond Amos as he lay stranded on the 
ground.

The night’s other Championship casualties were Blackburn, who lost 2-1 at home 
toShrewsbury with all the goals coming in the opening 32 minutes, Huddersfield, 
who took a 35th-minute lead at home toNotts County only for Liam Noble to score 
two long-range goals to secure victory, andBristol City, beaten 3-1 at Luton, 
for whom the summer recruit Jack Marriott, a free transfer from Ipswich, scored 
twice on his full debut.
 