
What should have been the 19th victory of Mika Hakkinen's formula one career 
dramatically turned into the 47th of Michael Schumacher's when theFerrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> driver emerged victorious from the 
battle of the walking wounded in the Spanish grand prix here yesterday.

As Hakkinen's McLaren-Mercedes rolled to a standstill enveloped spectacularly 
in smoke and flame after a clutch failure less than half a mile from the 
finishing line, Schumacher's Ferrari, hobbled by severe tyre vibrations, surged 
past to take the chequered flag.

"I have to say I feel very sorry for Mika," said Schumacher, who now leads the 
championship by eight points from David Coulthard, who finished fifth after a 
fraught and dramatic afternoon.

"I think we had both done a very good race, very entertaining up to the last 
pit stop. Then he jumped me because he did a better last section and I was a 
bit in traffic and having a bit of a problem on top of that.

"Seeing him retiring on the last lap, with five corners or whatever to go 
before the finish, was shocking. It's not the way you like to win a race, 
honestly. It's happened to me and now it has happened to Mika, but that's the 
way it goes sometimes."

Into second and third places came the former Indianapolis 500 winners Juan 
Pablo Montoya and Jacques Villeneuve, in Williams-BMW and BAR-Honda 
respectively, with Jarno Trulli bringing his Jordan-Honda home fourth ahead of 
Coulthard's McLaren-Mercedes.

The race turned out to be a damage-limitation exercise for the Scot after he 
stalled his McLaren just before accelerating away on the parade lap. At a 
stroke he traded a strong third-place qualifying position for a lowly place at 
the back of the grid, the rules barring anybody who fails to get away before 
the parade lap from regaining his original starting position.

Things went from bad to worse when he knocked his car's nose section off 
against the back of Enrique Bernoldi's Arrows and had to come in for a 
replacement to be fitted at the end of the opening lap. He restarted last, but 
plugged away to wind up an eventual fifth, increasing his championship tally by 
two points.

Hakkinen had been 40 seconds ahead of his Ferrari rival, and on course to take 
his first win since last September's Belgian grand prix, when a misfiring 
engine alerted his pit crew to potential problems a couple of laps from the 
finish.

The clutch had started to slip, allowing the Mercedes engine to "flutter" 
against its electronic rev-limiter, and the Finn was keeping his fingers 
crossed that it would last those final 2.9 miles.

Yet with two corners to go, belching smoke, the clutch finally flew apart and 
Hakkinen's gallant race was run. Schumacher, unable to believe his luck, limped 
by to score his third win from five races this year.

Montoya's second place meant his first visit to the victory podium in only his 
fifth formula one race. On a day when his team-mate, the San Marino grand prix 
winner Ralf Schumacher, spun off the road, the Colombian driver saved the day 
for the BMW-Williams team with a strong showing.

Similarly Villeneuve posted his first podium finish for the BAR team only 
8.8sec behind the Williams. Neither of the former Indycar drivers used all the 
permissible electronic aids during the course of the race in the interests of 
mechanical reliability. Their conservatism certainly paid off.

Eddie Irvine had another disappointment when his Jaguar R2 succumbed to engine 
failure with 17 laps to go, possibly with his first championship points on the 
horizon.

After battling gamely with Olivier Panis's BAR-Honda in the opening stages, 
Irvine was warned over the radio that he had an oil leak with about 25 laps to 
go.

Rather than retire the car, the team instructed him to press on with their 
fingers crossed. Their audacity was not to be rewarded. "I used less [engine] 
revs in the hope that the oil problem would go away," said Irvine, "but it was 
no surprise when it stopped. A shame, because the car was pretty good."

His retirement rounded off a troubled day for Jaguar as their new recruit 
Pedro de la Rosa spun off early on after colliding with Heinz-Harald Frentzen's 
Jordan which also went no further.

The afternoon ended with Hakkinen being given a lift back to the pits on the 
sidepod of Coulthard's sister car. The Scot later reported that the Finn was 
leaning into the cockpit, fiddling with the buttons on the centre of the 
steering wheel.

"I thought, if he activates the launch control mechanism, this is going to be 
a lot of fun for both of us," said Coulthard later. After a day like that, it 
was reassuring that the two McLaren drivers retained their sense of humour.
 