
On the day he pledged to write off half of the club’s debt of £140m, the 
Cardiff City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> owner, Vincent 
Tan, has urged his players to provide their fans with more entertainment by 
taking more shots.

The Malaysian businessman, who took over the club in 2010, plans to convert 
£68m of the money he is owed into equity while writing off another £10m.With 
debts having stood at £174m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/26/cardiff-city-annual-losses-12m-174m-debt-vincent-tan>
 when Cardiff were relegated from the Premier League in May 2014, Tan said he 
has already written off almost £20m and hopes to wipe out the debt totally by 
2021.

Tan visited the club’s training ground on Thursday to give some advice to 
Russell Slade’s side, who are ninth in the Championship and five points behind 
the play-off position.

“I gave them a pep talk and said they have got to start shooting,” he told 
Wales Online 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/sport/football/ugly-men-only-beautiful-wives-10876440>
. “Have you seen ugly men walking around with a very beautiful wife? Well 
that’s because they’ve asked 30, 40, 50 times before getting a ‘yes’.

“On the other hand, you’ll see a handsome man ask once, get a ‘no’ in response 
and that’s it. So the more you try, the more success you’ll have. We need a lot 
more goal attempts, we’ll score more and win games. Not only that, the fans 
will love it, too.”

Tan, who is worth an estimated $1.2bn, has made similar demands of his players 
before. The former defender Danny Gabbidon revealed last month the owner had 
called a meeting of the club’s defenders to tell them to shoot from the halfway 
line.

This time Tan reserved his ire for the team’s more attacking players, with the 
exception of Peter Whittingham. “What’s the point of passing, passing, passing 
and hoping to get in the box that way. Unless you’re Lionel Messi looking for a 
tap in, it’s not going to work,” he said.

“I watch every Cardiff match and I told them: ‘You guys have no confidence. 
Peter Whittingham is capable of shooting and scoring score goals from 30 yards, 
so have a go’.

“Yet they get the ball and it seems to be like a hot potato. Pass it to 
somebody else straight away. You must see that, because I do. The law of 
averages says the more you shoot, the more you’ll score. If you shoot 30 times 
you’ll get three goals, 40 times will be four goals, 50 times and you’ll get 
five goals.

“Don’t respond by saying I know nothing about football. I’ve learned an awful 
lot, I see players regularly scoring in the Premier League from distance and we 
have to do that.”

Tan also delivered his backing to Slade, who has come under pressure from some 
fans in recent weeks.

“I gave Russell a chance based on a recommendation. He was an honest man, 
based on what the club needed. I was looking for an honest, trustworthy 
manager,’’ he said. “I am convinced that with this group we can get promoted.”
 