
The Cardiff City manager Russell Slade is to take on a new role as head of 
football at theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> 
club as the Bluebirds begin the search for a new manager.

Slade was appointed Cardiff manager in October 2014 and will be in charge for 
the final time at home to Birmingham on Saturday. The announcement was made in 
a club statement when it was confirmed that Slade will report directly to the 
club’s chief executive, Ken Choo, in his new role.

Neil Warnock: ‘I do enjoy the blood and guts ... it’s my cup of tea’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/neil-warnock-rotherham-championship-manager>
Cardiff’s Malaysian owner, Vincent Tan, said: “I’d like to thank Russell for 
his efforts since his appointment here in October 2014. Since then, we have 
seen stabilisation and progression, both on and off the field. Crucially, he is 
a man who I have been able to trust. Russell’s contribution has been 
significant, and I’m pleased that he’s accepted this new position to stay at 
the football club. He will help us as we look towards the future and begin 
shaping our squad for the new season.

“I also feel that he can help us create additional synergy between Cardiff City
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> and our sister clubs.”

Cardiff have partnerships with the Bosnian side FK Sarajevo and Belgium’s KV 
Kortrijk, both owned by Tan who also has a minority stake in MLS expansion side 
Los Angeles FC. The striker Kenneth Zohore is on loan at Cardiff from Kortrijk.

Slade, who had previously managed Brighton, Grimsby and Yeovil among others, 
left Leyton Orient to succeed Ole Gunnar Solskjaer at Cardiff.

The 55-year-old had to dramatically reduce the playing budget following 
Cardiff’s relegation from the Premier League the previous season, and the 
Bluebirds finished 11th in the Championship.

Slade’s brand of football was often criticised by supporters for being dour 
and crowd numbers at the Cardiff City Stadium had fallen away for much of this 
season.

But Cardiff were in the running for a play-off spot until last weekend’s 3-0 
defeat at Sheffield Wednesday condemned them to another season in the 
Championship.

“I’d like to express my sincerest of thanks to Vincent Tan for giving me the 
opportunity to join this football club back in 2014,” said Slade. “I feel that 
we’ve made progress on and off the field during this time, achieving stability 
and giving the club solid ground on which to move forward.

“I’m therefore very pleased to accept the new position of head of football, 
which allows me to play my part in our future.”
 