
Neil Warnock made a dream start to life at Cardiff as his side saw off Bristol 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> 2-1 in a heated EFL 
Championship Severnside derby clash.

Peter Whittingham and the debutant Sol Bamba got the goals as the Bluebirds 
picked up only their third win of the season to climb out of the relegation 
zone.

Lee Tomlin got a goal back for the visitors but it was not enough as they 
missed the chance to climb to second in the table.

Warnock handed debuts to new signings Bamba and Junior Hoilett, as well as to 
Joe Bennett, who had struggled for fitness following his summer arrival from 
Aston Villa.

Unsurprisingly his side came flying out of the blocks, pressing the ball in 
packs and working hard to disrupt the visitors passing game.

They survived one early scare as the referee waved away a Bristol City penalty 
appeal as Tomlin went to deck following a surge into the area.

As the tempo of a frantic start began to wane, it was the Robins who looked 
the more assured side. Tomlin was finding pockets of space to operate in, with 
Luke Freeman and Jamie Paterson also looking lively.

Freeman drove a shot wide from the edge of the area from a smart Tomlin pass, 
but their momentum was rapidly halted by the contentious penalty award.

Neil Warnock excited at prospect of attempting record eighth promotion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/neil-warnock-eighth-promotion-15th-club-cardiff-city>
Craig Noone appeared to be offside as he raced on to a Joe Ralls pass, only 
for the flag to stay down and Joe Bryan to trip the Cardiff winger after being 
nutmegged just inside his own box.

The head coach, Lee Johnson, was furious but he could only watch as 
Whittingham stepped up to dispatch the spot-kick. It was the first time a 
Cardiff player had scored on home turf all season.

The goal knocked Bristol City out of their stride and Cardiff surged forward 
with a renewed belief and were aggrieved when Hordur Magnusson appeared to foul 
Hoilett as he prepared to send Noone in on goal.

Cardiff’s captain, Sean Morrison, headed a Whittingham corner over and 
Magnusson survived another Cardiff penalty claim as Noone’s header across goal 
seemed to strike his hand.

It left Johnson needing at the break to find a way to turn the contest round.

There were encouraging signs on the resumption. Paterson was worked free down 
the right-hand side but he was unable to pick out Tammy Abraham as the striker 
waited at the far post.

But they were fortunate to escape at the other end as Ralls volleyed a Noone 
cross wide when unmarked, and it prompted Johnson to send on Bobby Reid and 
Aaron Wilbraham for Marlon Pack and Jamie Paterson.

Reid quickly made inroads down the flank but twice failed to deliver from 
encouraging positions as the visitors’ frustrations increased.

The game looked beyond them when Bamba turned in a rebound from close range 
after Rickie Lambert struck the bar in the 67th minute.

But Tomlin responded with a fine low drive and tempers briefly flared as Aron 
Gunnarsson chose to confront the midfielder as he celebrated.

But it was not enough to spoil Warnock’s night as Reid missed a late sitter to 
seal a share of the points.
 