
Dean Holdsworth is likely to walk into Bolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> in a shirt and tie next 
week. Neil Lennon, the club’s manager, might well ask him if he fancies 
bringing his playing boots with him instead.

Holdsworth is heading the Sport Shield Investment Group’s attempt to buy the 
stricken club from Eddie Davies, and sources confirmed on Saturday that they 
will be announced as the preferred bidder in the next 48 hours. That, finally, 
may offer Bolton’s fans some comfort because precious little else at the club 
is giving them cause for cheer at present, least of all this loss toCardiff City
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> that was as full of heart 
as it was missed chances.

Football League and FA Cup second round: your thoughts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/dec/05/football-league-and-fa-cup-second-round-your-thoughts>
Bolton, for so long a belts-and-braces Premier League success story, are 
desperate for a new owner. With administration and the 12-point fine that would 
follow looming, life has rarely looked bleaker.

This defeat, courtesy of Anthony Pilkington’s late volley, will not have 
helped matters but morale cannot sink much lower.

Players went unpaid in November, 300 staff members are concerned about their 
long-term future and the current owner has written off the £175m of debt in a 
bid to attract new buyers.

Holdsworth is already a popular enough cult figure with Bolton’s fans after 
his six muscular years leading the line for the club between 1997 and 2003, and 
while a return to Bolton would not exactly be prodigal son territory, it would 
not be far off.

“I don’t think a resolution is far away in terms of the club being taken 
over,” Lennon said. “It’s paramount that the future of the club is safeguarded. 
I know nothing about the interested parties. It’s disappointing the way things 
have gone on and off the field, but we still believe we can pull ourselves out 
of this.”

With Holdsworth watching, Tony Watt gave Cardiff the lead after 13 minutes 
with an assured low finish, before Gary Madine hit a superb 25-yard equaliser 
four minutes later.

Bolton are cursed by the tendency of only waking up once they go a goal down, 
but they were the better side in the opening 45 minutes, flooding midfield 
while Madine and Shola Ameobi continually harassed the Cardiff back four.

A lack of assurance in front of goal helped neither side, particularly Bolton, 
who somehow managed to miss three glorious chances in 10 seconds during the 
dying throes of the first half. A Darren Pratley effort was deflected on to the 
bar, Liam Feeney’s rebound effort was well saved by David Marshall and Ameobi 
missed from close range.

“I’m scratching my head again wondering how we lost the game,” Lennon said. 
“The bottom line is that if you miss simple chances – and I mean simple chances 
– then you are going to give yourself a problem.” He was spot on.

Bolton were sluggish after the break and after 53 minutes Scott Malone ran 
through on goal and beat the onrushing Amos thanks to a lucky rebound straight 
back into his path.

For once this season, Bolton refused to capitulate. Dorian Dervite’s 
persistence with 20 minutes left paid off when he thrashed the ball past 
Marshall from close range.

That seemed to be enough, but nothing has gone to plan for Bolton this season. 
With 11 minutes remaining, Pilkington’s left-foot volley comfortably beat Amos 
to seal an impressive victory for Cardiff, a late red card for Bolton’s José 
Manuel Casado merely twisting the knife into the home side.

“It’s been a while since we won away from home and it was important we came 
here positive,” said Russell Slade, the Cardiff manager.

What Bolton would do for a win on the road. What Bolton would do for 
positives. What Bolton would do for Holdsworth – on or off the pitch.
 