
Carlos Tevez is the latest high-profile international player to join the 
Chinese Super League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chinese-super-league>
 with Shanghai Shenhua confirming the signing of the Argentina striker from his 
boyhood club Boca Juniors on Thursday.

“Shanghai Greenland Shenhua FC reached a transfer agreement with Argentina 
Club Atletico Boca Juniors. Carlos Alberto Tevez is officially joined Shanghai 
Shenhua,” the club said in a statement on their website.

Although no financial details of the deal were released, reports have 
suggested that the Chinese club paid €84m (£71.6m) for Tevez, who returned to 
Argentina last year after spells in England and Italy.

Oscar will get to count Chinese cash but he will pay a heavy price | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/oscar-china-chelsea> 
That hefty price tag would make Tevez the world’s sixth most expensive player, 
behind Paul Pogba, Gareth Bale, Cristiano Ronaldo, Gonzalo Higuaín and Neymar.

Tevez is also in line to become the sport’s highest paid player with the 
striker reportedly earning around £615,000 per week on a two-year contract with 
Shanghai Shenhua.

The 32-year-old is the second big-money arrival in China’s biggest city in 
less than a week afterthe Brazilian midfielder Oscar joined local rivals 
Shanghai SIPG from Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/oscar-china-chelsea> in a 
deal believed to be worth £52m.

Graziano Pellè, Ezequiel Lavezzi and Jackson Martínez are all recent arrivals 
in China, while the Shanghai SIPG manager André Villas-Boas is also on a 
lucrative contract after replacing Sven Goran-Eriksson.

Tevez, who played for West Ham United, Manchester United, Manchester City and 
Juventus during a decade in Europe after leaving Boca for Brazil’s Corinthians 
in 2005, ended his second spell with the Argentinian club on a high.

Having helped the club win the league title last year, Tevez starred in a 4-2 
win over arch-rivals River Plate in the superclasíco this month, a victory that 
lifted Boca into first place in the championship.

Tevez will team up with other high-profile internationals at the club, 
including the Senegalese striker Demba Ba, the Nigerian forward Obafemi Martins 
and the Colombian midfielder Fredy Guarín.

Despite a highly-successful club career, Tevez has failed to light up the 
international stage, having scored 13 goals in 76 appearances for Argentina. He 
did, however, play a pivotal role in the country winning gold at the 2004 
Olympic Games in Athens.

Boca Juniors offered Tevez their best wishes in a statement announcing his 
departure, which included the message: “Good luck Carlitos. You will always be 
in our hearts.”

Shanghai Shenhua, who appointed Gus Poyet as manager last month, finished 
fourth in the 2016 Chinese Super League, which ran from March to the end of 
October, 16 points behind champions Guangzhou Evergrande.
 