
Deepdale sounded like home from home for flooded Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> United, whose Brunton Park has 
been more fit for porpoise than purpose. But Preston’s pitch was perfect and 
the Blues thanked them for it by putting three goals past Notts County, one for 
each of the carp caught in their home goalmouth when the waters subsided.

The 3-0 victory took them up a place to fifth in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>, above their next 
opponents, Accrington, on Boxing Day, which is only a few miles farther than 
Saturday’s home fixture at 90 miles remove. They do not expect to play at 
Brunton Park before the end of January and even that is likely to be determined 
by off-field facilities rather than the pitch, both of which were hit 10 years 
ago as well, before storms had names.

Carlisle united: community rallies round flood-hit football club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/carlisle-united-community-rallies-round-flood-hit-football-club>
Carlisle were truly away at Welling United in the FA Cup when Desmond struck. 
A 5-0 win was followed by Welling giving the day’s fundraising proceeds to the 
Cumbria Flood Appeal and, as Carlisle’s chairman, Andrew Jenkins, wrote 
glowingly in Saturday’s programme: “Not only that but they put pizzas on the 
coach for the players after the game.” Unlike Fifa’s football family this is 
one worth belonging to and the spirit that adversity can foster continued back 
in Carlisle where players helped with the clear-up and the community returned 
the service at the stadium.

“The people of Carlisle have been fantastic,” the manager, Keith Curle, said. 
“We’re determined to repay that by focusing fully on the job of getting results 
on the field and getting people back on their feet off it. Everyone, including 
myself, acknowledges a responsibility. The unity is growing.”

In his 15 months at the club this had not always been obvious. Last season he 
took them from bottom to 20th. His stock with fans was not high. Last month, as 
Carlisle settled into the division’s top half, his contract was extended to 
June 2018. He has continued to justify it, with one defeat in eight league 
games now, and more than 3,000 fans, nearly 75% of their average and some 
taking advantage of free coach travel, filled the Sir Tom Finney stand with 
raucous support.

Celebration came early. Inside seven minutes County were slow to clear their 
lines, Jason Kennedy’s thrusting run into the area ended in a foul and Danny 
Grainger, the captain, whose left foot had already shown its potency with 
crosses, converted the penalty. In the 45th minute Charlie Wyke flicked on a 
long throw by Mark Ellis and Jabo Ibehre knocked in unopposed from close range. 
Between times Graham Burke, who had conceded the penalty, hit a Carlisle post 
and Jon Stead’s header demanded a full-stretch tip away by Mark Gillespie. A 
fortnight previously the goalkeeper, ill for the Welling match, had been 
rescued from the upper floor of one of the club’s players’ houses. Shots then 
could literally have floated over the bar.

Around the hour Ibehre struck again from close range, his 12th league goal, as 
County’s defence looked in need of sandbags. Maybe the side were weighed down 
by their shirt numbers, averaging over 23. The only consolation for their 269 
fans, lost in a 6,000-stand, was that their trip had been cut by 60 miles each 
way. They are Nottinghamshire’s third club at present, behind Mansfield. When 
Curle was manager they were comfortable in League One and went for a record 22 
away games unbeaten.

Preston were fine hosts. Volunteer stewards were smiling at their escape from 
Christmas shopping. The needless peripheries of hype were absent and there were 
no ballboys for the visiting manager to blame. Carlisle lost 6-1 there on their 
last visit in April 2014, before the sides went their separate ways. In their 
current crest-of-wave form they do not want to miss games and, though they have 
found no ground for their home match with Hartlepool on 28 December, they are 
looking to build further fortresses at Blackburn and Blackpool. As they left 
for home an urban tub of narcissi was in full bloom outside Deepdale and rain 
was lashing again.
 