
Carlos Tevez scored twice to help Juventus move five points clear at the top of
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> with a 4-0 home 
win overVerona.

Goals from Paul Pogba and Tevez inside the first 10 minutes put Juve in 
control, though they had to wait until the second half for Roberto Pereyra to 
add the third before Tevez completed the job.

Gonzalo Higuaín’s first-half goal gave Napoli a 1-0 victory over Lazio at the 
Stadio Olimpico to secure his side’s second victory in three league matches.

Victory for Rafael Benítez’s side meant they leapfrogged their opponents into 
third place, eight points behind Roma, who drew 1-1 at Palermo on Saturday.

In fourth Sampdoria kept pace with a 2-0 win at the bottom side Parma thanks 
to goals from Gonzalo Bergessio and Eder who ran the show at the Stadio Ennio 
Tardini.

The substitute Khouma Babacar scored a last-gasp winner as sixth-placed 
Fiorentina defeated Chievo 2-1 in Verona for their eighth win of the campaign.

It appeared Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> would 
have to settle for a draw at the Marc’ Antonio Bentegodi stadium after Sergio 
Pellissier’s 72nd-minute goal cancelled out Gonzalo Rodríguez’s first-half 
opener but Babacar had other ideas and headed home Joaquín’s cross seconds from 
the end.

Atalanta upset the odds to beat Milan 1-0 at the San Siro for what was only 
their fourth win of the Serie A season to leave the hosts with only one win in 
10 matches.

Both teams had come into the game struggling for form but it was the visitors 
who battled harder for the points and Germán Denis’s first-half goal settled 
things in their favour to end a run of three league draws.

Cagliari left it late to claim a point from their trip to Udinese as they 
snatched a 2-2 draw. João Pedro gave Gianfranco Zola’s men the lead but two 
goals in two minutes from Allan and Thomas Heurtaux gave Udinese the lead 
before Danilo Avelar scored a penalty in stoppage time to earnCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> a point.

A last-gasp penalty from Ioannis Fetfatzidis denied Sassuolo victory as Genoa 
came from behind three times to earn a precious point from a 3-3 draw.

Domenico Berardi struck his second of the day in the 69th minute to put 
Sassuolo 3-2 up but the visitors shot themselves in the foot when Francesco 
Magnanelli brought down Genoa’s Juraj Kucka in the penalty box seconds from the 
end. Fetfatzidis scored the resulting spot-kick.

The substitute Maxi López scored his first goal for Torino three minutes from 
time to give his new club a 3-2 win atCesena, Toro’s first on the road since 24 
September.
 