
Hull City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> kept their faint 
hopes of automatic promotion to the Premier League alive as Robert Snodgrass’ 
last-gasp free-kick helped them to beat Wolves 2-1 at the KC Stadium.

The Tigers lie eight points behind Brighton in the second automatic promotion 
place with five games remaining.

Hull took an early lead through Adama Diomandé’s opportunist goal but Dave 
Edwards’ close-range header brought the teams level before the hosts won it in 
injury time.

Hull had come into the game with only one win in their previous eight 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> games and the 
manager, Steve Bruce, made five changes from the side that drew 2-2 at 
Huddersfield.

With Wolves placed in mid-table, Kenny Jackett also shuffled his pack with 
four changes from a side which drew 0-0 at home to Blackburn.

The game was only five minutes old when Hull took the lead through Diomandé. A 
long kick from Allan McGregor was headed on by Ahmed Elmohamady and, when 
Dominic Iorfa mis-kicked his clearance, Carl Ikeme failed to gather the ball 
under pressure from Abel Hernández and Diomandé, who was presented with an open 
goal and had the simple task of steering the ball home from 12 yards.

Diomandé had scored as a substitute against Huddersfield and repaid the faith 
shown in him by being handed a start with the opening goal.

Hull went close again as Sam Clucas fired just wide with his right foot after 
Jake Livermore and Elmohamady had blocked attempted clearances.

The visitors nearly hit back when Jack Price headed narrowly over from a 
Jeremy Helan cross and, as they came more into the game, they were rewarded 
with an equaliser.

Wolves were level with 19 minutes gone as they made the most of being given 
the ball by Alex Bruce.

Bjorn Sigurdarson found Helan in space on the left and his cross was headed in 
from six yards by the unmarked Wolves captain, Edwards.

Hull had faded after a good start and tried to reclaim the advantage with 10 
minutes to go before half-time but Hernández saw his shot blocked before Clucas 
fired wide from the rebound.

Both sides tried to take control of the second half but the closest of the 
early chances saw Moses Odubajo volley over from outside the area from a Clucas 
corner.

As the home side became increasingly nervous and passes missed their targets, 
it was Wolves who looked the more likely to grab a winner.

With 15 minutes to go Hernández curled a low shot from the edge of the area 
and, despite the effort taking a deflection, Ikeme got down to his left to turn 
the ball away.

Wolves caught Hull on the break and the home side nearly paid the price as 
Sigurdarson’s shot forced McGregor to tip over.

Jake Livermore, Hernández and Sone Aluko all wasted late chances before the 
substitute Snodgrass’ free-kick in extra-time clattered the bar before hitting 
Ikeme and crossing the line.
 