
The "marvellous geology" of the white cliffs of Dover has been celebrated by 
the poet laureateCarol Ann Duffy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/carol-ann-duffy> in a poem published for the 
first time by the Guardian. The poem was commissioned by the National Trust to 
mark the success of a public appeal to buy one of the last stretches of the 
famous landmark that was still in private ownership.

Duffy describes the towering chalk cliffs as "a glittering breastplate", and 
references literary antecedents such as Edgar in Shakespeare's King Lear, who 
describes the "dreadful trade" of the samphire pickers clinging to the cliff 
face, and Matthew Arnold, who wrote of "the eternal note of sadness" sounded by 
the waves and shingle inDover Beach 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/172844>.

The National Trust appeal raised £1.2m in just 133 days after more than 16,000 
donations from organisations and individuals. The target was reached ahead of 
the December deadline, with a major donation from the Dover harbour board, 
which is overlooked by the 1.35km stretch of the cliffs.Julian Baggini was 
appointed as the cliffs' first philosopher-in-residence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/aug/20/white-cliffs-of-dover-philosopher> 
last summer as part of the appeal.

The success is a parting triumph for the trust's director, Dame Fiona 
Reynolds, who leaves her post this week after 11 years to become the first 
female master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge.

The cliffs have been the first view of England for travellers arriving by boat 
by the narrow Channel crossing, from the Bronze Age Britons who builtthe Dover 
boat <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dover_Bronze_Age_Boat> 3,500 years ago to 
Caesar and his galleys and second world war troops evacuated from the Dunkirk 
beaches. The cliffs are also home to a wealth of rare plants and wildlife.

The trust now owns more than 7km of the coast between the South Foreland 
lighthouse and the visitor centre on Langdon Cliffs. The appeal was supported 
by celebrities including Dame Judi Dench, the singer Joss Stone, and Dame Vera 
Lynn, whose 1941 recording of (There'll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of 
Dover – written by two Americans who had never actually seen the cliffs and who 
ignored the fact that there are squawking seagulls and croaking ravens but no 
blue birds – became her greatest hit.

• This article was amended on 7 November 2012. The original referred to the 
Fool's, rather than Edgar's speech about the samphire picker in Shakespeare's 
King Lear. This has been corrected.

White Cliffs

Worth their salt, England's white cliffs; 
a glittering breastplate 
Caesar saw from his ship; 
the sea's gift to the land, 
where samphire-pickers hung from 
their long ropes, 
gathering, under a gull-glad sky, 
in Shakespeare's mind's eye; 
astonishing 
in Arnold's glimmering verse; 
marvellous geology, geography; 
to time, deference; war, defence; 
first view or last of here, home, 
in painting, poem, play, in song; 
something fair and strong implied in 
chalk, 
what we might wish ourselves.

© Carol Ann Duffy 2012
 