
The family of Indigenous woman Ms Dhu hope that a song written about her death 
in custody will draw international attention to their campaign for justice.

The song, produced by Cat Empire vocalist Felix Riebl in conjunction with the 
Marliya singers from the Gondwana Indigenous Children’s Choir, will be released 
officially on Wednesday but has been shared with Guardian Australia.

It tells the story of Dhu’s 45 hours in custody at South Hedland police station
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/weve-got-to-put-our-story-out-there-ms-dhus-family-prepare-for-verdict-on-death-in-custody>
, Western Australia, before her death from septicemia and pneumonia on 4 
August, 2014.

The 22-year-old Yamatji woman whose name is not used for cultural reasons, had 
been arrested and ordered to serve four days in custody to “cut out” unpaid 
fines worth $3,622.

Ms Dhu endured 'inhumane treatment' by police before death in custody – coroner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/ms-dhu-endured-inhumane-treatment-by-police-before-death-in-custody-coroner>
Her death was attributed at inquest to a severe infection in the bone of a rib 
broken in a domestic violence incident, which spread to form a large abscess 
and eventually entered her bloodstream.

A coronial inquest into her death last month found some of the police charged 
with her careacted in an “unprofessional and inhumane manner,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/ms-dhu-endured-inhumane-treatment-by-police-before-death-in-custody-coroner>
 and that the care provided by some hospital staff who saw her less than 24 
hours before she died was “unsatisfactory”.

CCTV footage of her treatment in custody, also released last month following a 
long campaign by her family, showed Dhu being dropped by one police officer and 
then dragged and carried from her cell.

Riebl said he was working with Marliya Indigenous singers in the Pilbara in 
2014 when he first heard of Dhu’s death. “It got to me more because I was 
working with young Indigenous singers over there and having such a joyful time 
with them that the proximate tragedy of her death just really shocked me,” he 
said.

“It’s just devastating. It’s one of the most devastating stories that I have 
ever seen.”

Riebl contacted Gerry Georgatos, an activist who works with Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander families, about turning it into a song. Georgatos in 
turn connected Riebl to Dhu’s family, who gave him permission to work on the 
song.

Ms Dhu: how an Aboriginal death in custody unfolded – Behind the Lines podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/dec/22/ms-dhu-how-an-aboriginal-death-in-custody-unfolded-behind-the-lines-podcast>
The first person they showed was Dhu’s uncle, Shaun Harris. “That’s actually 
helped me get through some rallies and stuff for the last six months – just 
having a quick listen to that on the train on the way,” Harris told Guardian 
Australia. “I fell in love with it straight away.”

Riebl said he intended this to be a protest song to help the family’s campaign 
for justice, which is now focused on the dual tasks of ensuring the coroner’s 
recommendations are implemented and attempting to get some civil redress for 
Dhu’s death.

He also wanted to convey his disbelief at how she was treated. “First of all 
it’s disbelief and after that it’s hurt and anger that this person was let down 
every step of the way,” he said, adding: “It’s disbelief in that I didn’t think 
it would have happened to a non-Indigenous woman.”

It’s part of a broader project called Spinifex Gum, which will feature 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists Briggs and Emma Donovan, as well 
as Peter Garrett.

Dhu’s grandmother, Carol Roe, said she had only heard part of the song but 
hoped it would draw more attention to her granddaughter’s story. “They see the 
footage and they hear the song and maybe something is going to be done now,” 
she said.

Roe said she was unhappy with the coroner’s findings because they did not find 
anyone was at fault for Dhu’s death. Instead the coroner recommended 
sought-after changes such as the introduction of a custody notification system 
and an end to the practice of jailing for fines.

“We never got no justice, I never got no justice,” she said. “Our Aboriginal 
kids, my granddaughter paid the biggest price.”
 