
Caterham are desperately trying to raise £2.35m with a crowd-funding project 
to avoid going the same way as Marussia, who have ceased trading and made over 
200 staff redundant.

On the day Marussia finally went under, Caterham were still hoping to make it 
to the grid for the final race in Abu Dhabi on 23 November. Finbarr O’Connell, 
the administrator and interim Caterham team principal, said: “We are working 
nonstop to get the team back racing, initially in Abu Dhabi, but hopefully that 
will be just a stepping stone to get it back racing on a permanent basis, under 
new ownership. In order to achieve that one of our most useful, innovative and 
effective options right now is crowd-funding.”

The falling of the curtain on Marussia will dismay everyone in the paddock. 
This small, well-run team were the most popular inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> since joining as Virgin in 2010. 
However, like most teams they were hit by an inability to agree on a cost cap 
against a background of rising prices and falling sponsorship and attendances.

The great shame for Marussia, who are a best-ever ninth in the championship, 
is that they were in line for a payment of £27m at the end of the season; their 
debts are £31m.

Last month the team were hit by disaster when their driver Jules Bianchi was 
injured at the Japanese Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/20/fia-accident-panel-jules-bianchi-crash-japan-grand-prix>
. He remains in a critical but stable condition. Their Russian backer, Andrey 
Cheglakov, pulled out after the race in Sochi.

Bernie Ecclestone, Formula One’s chief executive, will have talks with the 
existing smaller teams this weekend to establish a survival plan. Before the 
most recent race in Austin last Sunday, Force India, Sauber and Lotus – worried 
by the demise of Marussia and Caterham – discussed boycotting the race because 
of the lack of a coherent strategy on the part of the F1 owners, CVC Capital 
Partners.

Sauber’s team principal, Monisha Kaltenborn, said: “The dialogue is ongoing 
and now we’ll sit together here and see how it goes. Naturally it was important 
to get into this dialogue but it’s equally important to have actions taking 
place, not just talking. The fact [CVC] are in a dialogue with us says they see 
the issue and they have to find a solution to this.”

Asked how confident she was, she replied: “The signals are good but one thing 
is talking, one thing is then taking actions, which have to be done very 
quickly. So there is this dialogue but something definitely has to be done 
within this season.”
 