
This was to prove an Old Firm oddity. That is, an end-result which both teams 
– secretly of course – would probably have accepted before a ball was kicked.

This fixture was never about who would book a place in the League Cup final in 
mid-March. The resumption of hostilities between Celtic andRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> after almost three years made 
the game notable, not only in Glasgow but on a global scale.

Thankfully, such interest surrounds the overall Old Firm spectacle rather than 
the basic level of football on show. And basic is being kind. This was a dire 
match which could only really be deemed satisfactory byCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> on the isolated basis of victory. 
Bragging rights are not particularly valid when dealing with feeble opponents.

Rangers, dysfunctional off the field and horribly lacking in viable strategy 
on it, lag miles behind Celtic, as was apparent during a first period which 
Ronny Deila’s team completely dominated. After the interval, Celtic did little 
more than go through the motions themselves. If Deila was content with a 2-0 
success, fair enough, but the Norwegian could have boosted his status in the 
eyes of the Celtic support by presiding over a team which went for Rangers’ 
throat. “It can’t be better,” said the Norwegian of his emotion. “We did a very 
good job. There was an unbelievable atmosphere and the players were 
unbelievably focused. They performed very well. I am proud of the boys.”

This seemed clear overstatement from a manager who might not fully understand 
his working environment. After such a quick start Celtic failed to really press 
home their advantage in terms of talent, fitness and attitude. In Deila’s 
defence, they did not really have to with Craig Gordon, the Celtic goalkeeper, 
not forced into a single save during the semi-final. For a supposedly 
competitive derby match, that is a quite incredible scenario.

The revitalised Leigh Griffiths claimed the opening goal, the striker meeting 
Stefan Johansen’s fine cross to head home at close range. The second belonged 
to Kris Commons, who latched on to a loose ball 22 yards out and shot high past 
Steve Simonsen.

The Rangers goalkeeper, who got a hand to the effort, might be disappointed. 
Commons later delivered positive news to the Celtic support with the admission 
that the bizarre impasse between himself and the club over a new contract is 
now close to being resolved.

The overall sense at 31 minutes was that a rout would ensue. It did not, owing 
partly to a ludicrous refereeing decision – Griffiths was clean through on goal 
when play was hauled back for an earlier foul – a smart Simonsen save from 
Johansen and a glaring miss from Virgil van Dijk.

Celtic’s approach was also open to debate. “We did what we had to do. We did 
our job,” said their captain, Scott Brown. The second half proved a non-event, 
with Simonsen not tested at all.

“That is for you to decide,” replied the Rangers caretaker manager, Kenny 
McDowell, when asked to quantify Celtic’s footballing superiority over his 
club. “I thought we competed well. We set up to keep things tight early in the 
game so losing a goal early-on put a spanner in the works. It unsettled a few 
people.”

There was mitigation for the standard of football on offer. The dreadful state 
of the Hampden playing surface. Deila was quick to acknowledge as much and 
rightly so. For a national stadium, it continually disappoints.

“We are a passing team and it was impossible to pass the ball on that pitch,” 
Deila said. “That is not how a semi-final should be. It is not good enough, in 
my opinion. If you are going to develop Scottish football you need pitches you 
can play football on.”

Deila had withdrawn the lively Griffiths, replacing him with the on-loan 
Manchester City forward John Guidetti. That represented an act of mercy towards 
Rangers; following a prolific scoring run, Guidetti has gone off the boil. The 
clamour for Celtic to make the Swede’s contract a permanent one has, 
understandably, died down.

The response of the Rangers support to what unfolded was loud defiance. They 
did not leave the ground, and nor was there audible criticism of their team. In 
many ways that is admirable but the occasional choice of verse was not.

The Billy Boys, Famine Song and No Pope of Rome were bellowed out by the 
blue-and-white masses in what proved a disappointing throwback to the times 
when Rangers attracted attention for all the wrong reasons. Those embattled and 
embittered fans do not care about that as, history tells us, the same is the 
case with Scotland’s policing and football authorities. Offensive songs are 
treated by officialdom as a footnote, with varying degrees of unacceptable 
conduct from both halves of the Old Firm followings reacted to by the immediate 
pointing of fingers towards the other side.

By full-time, Celtic’s supporters were treated to fist-pumping by Deila and a 
lap of honour. Even that seemed very contrived – the culmination an occasion 
which merely endorsed the disparity between two teams while offering little 
insight as to how strong Celtic actually are. Thankfully for anybody who enjoys 
genuine sporting contests, Dundee United should provide a sterner test in the 
final.

Celtic 2-0 Rangers: Scottish League Cup semi-final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/feb/01/celtic-v-rangers-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-live>
Man of the match Kris Commons (Celtic)
 