
Brendan Rodgers is within 90 minutes of scratching a professional itch. A 
criticism of the Celtic manager has been the failure to claim a major domestic 
honour during his previous spells in England. This success over Rangers and the 
scheduling nuances of theScottish League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> means Rodgers could 
end that wait before November is out, with Aberdeen lying in wait upon Celtic’s 
Hampden Park return.

Rodgers barely needs endorsement of his early months in charge but tangible 
reward always helps. This derby tonic arrived just days after the wounding 
Champions Leaguedefeat to Borussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/celtic-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
 and, it must be noted, at a venue where Celtic have endured several horror 
shows in recent times. The final should be worthy of high-profile status; 
Celtic and Aberdeen, for now, look the best two teams in Scotland.

Scottish roundup: Sean Welsh’s strike not enough to earn Partick win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/inverness-kilmarnock-partick-ross-county-scottish-premiership>
“It has been a great start,” said Rodgers of his Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> baptism. “You can see this team’s 
mentality, their spirit and their skill. There is a huge desire to succeed here 
and the team is performing at the top level. But in order to put a stamp on 
that, you want to win trophies. In order to win those trophies, we have to get 
to cup finals.”

In other words: so far, so good. This semi-final was always likely to be 
played in context of what came so closely before.Celtic’s 5-1 hammering of 
Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 in September meant analysis of what chasm may exist between the Glasgow clubs 
would overshadow the ins and outs of a marquee occasion. Rangers were so 
appallingly open in that league game that they were hardly going to replicate 
Ajax of 1970 next time around, even if they had the resource to consider as 
much.

Celtic may have required the 87th-minute intervention of Moussa Dembélé, a 
player for whom adulation grows and grows, to breach Rangers’ resistance but 
they were always the more menacing side. In Dembélé, Rodgers also had one of 
several players in green and white who seemed the more likely matchwinners. The 
French striker combined brilliantly with Leigh Griffiths, then flicked home the 
decisive goal.

This flow of play, in part, shouldn’t be taken as a criticism of Rangers, who 
were defensively organised to a far greater extent than the last time the teams 
met. However, there is a recurring question mark over potency. In nine league 
matches,Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> have scored only 
11 times; the same record as Motherwell and Hamilton Academical. Their 
attacking threat here was negligible to the point where it was legitimate to 
question the validity of what spending the Ibrox club have bestowed on forward 
players.

Dembélé cost a third of the transfer fee Rangers handed to Preston North End 
for Joe Garner, a forward introduced with 20 minutes to play here and may as 
well still be running around the Hampden pitch now whilst looking to make some 
kind of positive impact.

N’Golo Kanté’s solo strike seals Chelsea’s rout of Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/chelsea-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
“The gap [to Celtic] is a lot more narrow than people think,” insisted Mark 
Warburton, the Rangers manager. This sentiment was curious; after beating 
Celtic in last season’s Scottish Cup semi-final, Warburton pointed towards the 
same gulf he is now denying. In the meantime, Celtic have undoubtedly improved, 
with scepticism over whether Rangers have done likewise.

Whereas historically Old Firm fixtures may have been overshadowed by bouts of 
madness either on or off the field, the match was played in a fine competitive 
spirit amid which football sporadically broke out. Of four yellow cards, only 
one was for a poor tackle.

Another booking marked a key moment in the first half, the Rangers winger 
Barrie McKay rightly penalised for toppling far too easily when little more 
than breathed upon by Jozo Simunovic inside Celtic’s penalty area. Dembélé was 
lucky to escape a caution for similar theatrics, having thrown himself to the 
turf between two Rangers defenders.

More positive was an excellent Matt Gilks save from Scott Sinclair after 
Dembélé had played him through on goal. Aside from that, plus a comedy moment 
as Gilks and Jason Holt combined to afford Tom Rogic an opportunity he didn’t 
seem to believe, Rangers’ policy of containment was successful.

The game’s controversial moment – there is always one – arrived four minutes 
after the interval. Only the referee, Craig Thomson, could explain what he 
deemed wrong with a Erik Sviatchenko header which found the back of Rangers’ 
net. Sviatchenko had tangled with Clint Hill but apportioning blame at all, not 
least to the Celtic player, was harsh to the point of being unfathomable.

Perhaps roused by their lucky escape, Rangers carved out the chance which they 
later rued. For all Holt wasted it, Simunovic is due praise for a timely block.

Celtic pushed and pressed to an increasing degree as the clock ticked down. 
Griffiths, a rather handy substitute to call upon, scampered away from Wallace 
before feeding the player he now has a decent claim to play alongside from the 
start of games. Celtic’s celebrations emphasised their earlier frustrations. 
“We got the reward we thoroughly deserved,” said Rodgers. It would have been 
nonsensical to quibble.
 