
Celtic survived an Aberdeen fightback to win 3-2 at Parkhead and clinch their 
fifth successive Premiership title. There had been little doubt Celticwould 
secure the championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/30/hearts-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 given the nine-point and 35-goal advantage over Aberdeen heading into the 
first of their final three games.

Celtic have major rebuilding to be done after Ronny Deila’s departure | Ewan 
Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/20/celtic-ronny-deila-new-manager-david-moyes-roy-keane-scottish-football>
Ronny Deila insisted Celtic’s title should be given appropriate respect. He 
said: “Why not? Of course it should be. It is a title. You have to fight 
against the teams in the league and you can’t say this is not more worthy than 
the others. It is a very disrespectful thing to say about the other teams as 
well. You see in other leagues that small teams win but now we have five in a 
row and should be very proud of it and hopefully it will be more next season.

“We were consistent in the results, we haven’t lost in the league since 
February – even though we have felt it was going to be relegation this year. 
The demands are high and it is important to enjoy it and the fans showed that 
today, they were happy to get that title. It was good to beatAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> and show we are the best team 
in the country. We controlled the game, played very well in the first 60 
minutes then got a little bit edgy in the end, but got over the line.”

The match started well for Deila’s side as the forward Patrick Roberts, on 
loan from Manchester City and player of the month for April, scored with a 
couple of cracking first-half strikes before the right-back Mikael Lustig added 
a third just after the break.

The visitors looked down and out, but goals from the former Celtic player 
Niall McGinn and the defender Andrew Considine changed the game’s complexion. 
But the home side saw the game out, if not convincingly,to confirm their 
manager’s leaving present 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/20/celtic-confirm-under-fire-manager-ronny-deila-will-leave-at-end-of-season>
.

Deila departs after the last game against Motherwell next Sunday with his 
second successive title success although in many ways the game encapsulated the 
fragility ofCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> during his 
tenure.

There was solemnity before the match when members of the Hillsborough Justice 
Campaign were welcomed to the stadium to the sound of applause and they watched 
Roberts show his talent, after an early miss from McGinn.

There was plenty for the 19-year-old to do when he turned inside from the 
right, but he escaped the attentions of Graeme Shinnie before unleashing a 
left-footed drive from 25 yards that flew high past the Aberdeen goalkeeper 
Adam Collin.

In the 20th minute the Celtic striker Leigh Griffiths slipped the ball past 
Shinnie and Considine into the path of Roberts and he was again unerring in his 
execution, curling the ball past Collin and into the far corner.

Celtic looked confident and purposeful as Aberdeen played around the fringes 
of the game without threatening, a Jonny Hayes free-kick from distance was 
easily saved by the home goalkeeper Craig Gordon.

To add to Aberdeen’s woes, their lone striker Simon Church went off with an 
injury before the break to be replaced by Mark Reynolds, with Kenny McLean 
moved from midfield into attack amid the reshuffle.

Efe Ambrose replaced the stand-in captain Charlie Mulgrew for the start of the 
second half and there were only four minutes played when Callum McGregor cut 
the ball back for Lustig to knock in from eight yards.

There was a scare in the 54th minute when Ambrose’s attempted clearance was 
charged down by Hayes who raced in on goal but his shot was saved by Gordon, to 
the substitute’s relief.

However, the Celtic defence looked rattled and conceded minutes later when 
Hayes set up McGinn to slide his shot under Gordon.

Aberdeen were right back in the game after Considine rose in a packed six-yard 
box to head in a McGinn free-kick. The atmosphere inside the ground change 
completely. As Celtic responded, Collin saved from Griffiths before the 
Aberdeen defender Shay Logan missed the target with a header from another 
whipped-in McGinn free-kick.

The final stages were fraught for the Parkhead side, with every ball into 
their box fraying further the nerves of their fans, but Aberdeen ran out of 
steam, leaving Celtic to celebrate a victory, and a title win, that should have 
been so much easier.
 