
Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> in effect clinched their 
fifth successive Premiership title with a convincing 3-1 win over Hearts at 
Tynecastle. Colin Kazim-Richards opened the scoring for the visitors in the 
17th minute only for the Hearts half-time substitute Abiola Dauda to cancel it 
out in the 56th minute with an equally fine strike. However, 10 minutes later 
Patrick Roberts, the on-loan winger from Manchester City, capitalised on slack 
play by the Hearts defence to restore Celtic’s lead before striker Leigh 
Griffiths made it 3-1 win with his 39th goal of the season.

At the end of the day, with three games left, Celtic were nine points ahead of 
second-placed Aberdeen, who beat Motherwell 4-1, but the Parkhead club have a 
goal difference advantage of 35, which makes them surely uncatchable.

The Celtic manager, Ronny Deila, leaves at the end of the season with two 
league titles on his CV and although the campaign has been one of struggle for 
the Norwegian, he celebrated at the end of the match with the travelling fans 
who had enjoyed a fine performance from their side againstHearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts>, whose third place and European 
spot was already secured.

The game started at a frantic pace. Callum McGregor, in for Tom Rogic, had the 
ball in the net in the 12th minute after the Hearts keeper Neil Alexander 
fumbled a Roberts shot but was ruled offside – controversially, as television 
replays revealed.

Alexander then made good saves from Roberts and Griffiths as the visitors 
imposed control and there was no surprise when they took the lead after another 
swift move. McGregor played a reverse pass to Mikael Lustig inside the Hearts 
box and when the full-back’s cross arrived at the back post, Kazim-Richards 
controlled the ball on his chest and drilled the ball past Alexander at the 
near post for his first league goal.

The Celtic goalkeeper, Craig Gordon, denied the forwards Jamie Walker and then 
Juanma as the Edinburgh side came back, although the flag was up for the 
latter’s drive from 12 yards.

However,Celtic remained on top. In the 39th minute Alexander came to Hearts’ 
rescue when Griffiths took advantage of a ricochet off Nir Bitton to break 
clear from the halfway line, the Jambos keeper blocking the shot for a corner 
which came to nothing.

Callum Paterson and Dauda replaced Blazej Augustyn and Don Cowie for the start 
of the second half and the changes made an immediate difference. Within two 
minutes the former Tynecastle keeper Gordon had made a fine save from Arnaud 
Djoum’s drive from the edge of the area and, although the corner proved 
fruitless, the home side began playing with more belief and purpose.

The equaliser came when Dauda latched on to a Walker pass, brushed off the 
challenge of Bitton on his way into the area before firing low past Gordon.

Celtic steeled themselves and came back and when Roberts nipped in to take the 
ball off John Souttar, who struggled with Perry Kitchen’s short pass, the 
forward found himself through against Alexander and he confidently knocked it 
between the keeper’s legs.

Roberts was soon replaced by Rogic and Celtic returned to the dominance they 
had enjoyed in the first half.

With four minutes remaining Griffiths turned inside Souttar and drove low past 
Alexander to confirm the three points and undoubtedly the title, the Scotland 
striker enjoying the cheers from the away fans as he was immediately replaced 
by Stuart Armstrong to see out the final minutes.

Deila will leave the club at the end of the season but the Norwegian was keen 
to stress he still has the support of the dressing room. “You always ask me: 
‘Have you lost the dressing room?’ I know I never did and today shows that,” 
Deila said.
 