
Neil Lennon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/neil-lennon> wants his 
Celtic side to perform with "a little more zest" against St Mirren in Paisley 
on Sunday.

The Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> leaders hope to 
extend their unbeaten league run to 20 games against the Buddies and are 
odds-on to retain their title this season. However, Celtic's past three matches 
have been won by a single goal and the Parkhead manager noticed a flatness in 
the second half of their match at home to Partick Thistle on Wednesday, when a 
Joe Ledley goal was the difference.

The Northern Irishman is looking for one big effort from his players before 
they fly out to Turkey for a winter break – albeit they are scheduled to play 
two games in the Antalya Cup, a tournament that also involves Galatasaray, 
Trabzonspor and the Dutch champions, Ajax, whomCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> faced in their Champions League 
group.

"There was definitely a tiredness creeping into the team in the second half 
against Partick," Lennon said. "I just want us to play with a little more zest.

"We have had a heavy schedule of games recently, but we have had an extra day 
[more than St Mirren] to recover from the Thistle game. So hopefully we will 
see a wee bit more energy in the team; that is what I am looking for."

The champions are 11 points clear of Motherwell with a game in hand. However, 
Lennon does not believe the ninth-placed Saints, whose form has been 
indifferent this season, will be the expected pushover. "They like to play 
football but they will play with a bit of intensity, so I expect it to be a 
harum-scarum type of game," Lennon said.

"They beat Dundee United 4-1 and I know they lost to Kilmarnock on Thursday, 
but by all accounts they deserved something out of the game. AndSt Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> have give us some really tough 
games at their place.

"The season before last we won 2-0 but they caused us all sorts of problems 
and we had to rely on Fraser Forster to make some really good saves.

"They beat us in the semi-final of the League Cup last year, so it is going to 
be as tough a game as we have had in quite a while."

Meanwhile, the Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> captain, 
Lee McCulloch, admits he sometimes finds himself in the unfamiliar position of 
calming someone down, when he plays alongside Bilel Mohsni. But McCulloch 
believes his central defensive partner's fiery nature is more of an asset than 
a liability.

Mohsni was shown a second yellow card after the final whistle of the Scottish 
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-one> leaders' 
1-0 win at Airdrie on Thursday for acting aggressively towards the Diamonds 
manager, Gary Bollan; the former Southend player had been booked earlier for an 
off-the-ball clash with Airdrie's striker Jim Lister.

McCulloch told his club's official website: "Out of all the people in the 
world, I have to calm him down.

"I can get a wee bit fiery myself, but you have to take the sensible approach 
when you see big Bilel getting a wee bit uptight or agitated. I pull him to the 
side and, to be fair, he does listen. He's brilliant that way and he really is 
a model pro.

"It's just about managing his fieriness but you don't want to take it all away 
from him because you lose a bit of the player. But he's a pleasure to work with 
and he's a gentleman of a guy."

Mohsni is suspended for Rangers' League One game against Stenhousemuir at 
Ochilview on Sunday.

McCulloch said: "Bilel and I have been lucky enough to get a few clean sheets 
this season and some of the goals that have been scored against us have been 
unbelievable finishes.

"One was an overhead kick and another was from outside the box right into the 
opposite top corner.

"Goals like that you can't do anything about.

"So I think we've been doing well and he'll be a big loss but we have a couple 
of players who can come in at centre-half with big Emílson [Cribari] and Seb 
Faure as well.

"So Bilel will be missed but we have more than enough cover."

Rangers beat Stenhousemuir 8-0 at Ibrox in the league but needed a solitary 
Jon Daly goal to win at Ochilview in a cup tie.

McCulloch said: "It's a game we are looking forward to but it's always hard 
going to Ochilview.

"We had the Ramsdens Cup semi-final up there and they made it really difficult 
for us. It was a pretty open game and the pitch isn't the best. It's like 
concrete and it is fast so passing needs to be accurate, sharp and you need to 
try and get the ball down and play.

"Hopefully we can get an early goal and go on from there but it's just all 
about trying to get the three points to keep the gap above Dunfermline."

Lewis MacLeod (calf) and Steven Smith (ankle) face fitness tests, David 
Templeton (thigh) will miss out again, but striker Nicky Clark is expected to 
shake off a knock.
 