
Leigh Griffiths scored in a third consecutive game as Celtic restored their 
11-point lead at the top of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with an ultimately 
nervy home win.

The 26-year-old striker, who had scored against Partick and Hamilton after 
regaining his starting position, registered his 12th goal of the season with a 
stunning free-kick seconds before the interval.

The Celtic midfielder Nir Bitton curled in number two for the dominant home 
side in the 56th minute but theDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> striker Marcus Haber reduced the 
deficit in the 68th minute to make the final stages less comfortable than it 
should have been for the champions.

Brendan Rodgers’s side have gone 20 games unbeaten domestically – they have 
dropped two points in the league – and have two games in hand over 
second-placed Rangers, yet on this occasion Paul Hartley will believe his 
visiting side might have snatched a point late on.

Rodgers, trying to manage a hectic fixture list that has Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> playing nine games this month, 
was forced into one change with the captain, Scott Brown, suspended so his 
fellow midfielder Stuart Armstrong taking the armband. Rodgers made five 
changes in total with Ryan Christie making his second league start of the 
season and Cristian Gamboa, Emilio Izaguirre, Bitton and Gary Mackay-Steven 
also coming into the side.

The in-form Griffiths was preferred to Moussa Dembélé, who was a substitute, 
while winger Scott Sinclair was also on the bench after recovering from a 
hamstring complaint.

Griffiths almost broke the deadlock in the 10th minute when he played a 
one-two with Bitton following a well-worked corner with Christie that put him 
in behind a wall of defenders, before sending a left-footed shot crashing off 
the post.

With Dundee camped at the edge of their own penalty area, Scott Bain then 
pushed away a 25-yard from Armstrong before Tom Rogic missed a great chance 
when slipped through by Christie, lifting the ball high over the bar from eight 
yards out.

Dundee offered little going forward. Their midfielder Tom Hateley blasted a 
shot over the bar from 25 yards in the 25th minute before Kevin Holt narrowly 
missed the target with a decent drive.

It looked like Dundee would go in at the break with their goal yet to be 
breached but Darren O’Dea clattered through Rogic 25 yards from goal, 
collecting a booking from Bobby Madden for his trouble, and Griffiths curled 
the free-kick past Bain.

Rogic had limped off and failed to appear after the break, his place taken by 
Callum McGregor who joined his team-mates in the second-half assault on the 
Dundee goal.

After the Taysiders repelled another attack when Christie was again 
influential, the ball broke out to Bitton who studiously curled a right-footed 
shot from outside the area into the net for his first goal of the season.

The visitors had little option but to open out and they came close in the 67th 
minute when Haber headed a Hateley corner off the post, with Craig Wighton’s 
close-range shot on the follow-up cleared off the line by Armstrong.

The champions did not heed the warning and soon afterwards the Canada striker 
Haber took a pass from substitute Mark O’Hara, turned inside Gamboa and his 
deflected shot from 12 yards ended up beating the Celtic goalkeeper Craig 
Gordon.

After Griffiths screwed a shot wide of the target he was replaced by Dembélé – 
Sinclair was already on for Mackay-Steven – as Rodgers looked to ease any 
nerves with another goal.

In the final stages every Dundee attack brought a sharp intake of breath from 
the home support and in the 87th minute Faissal El Bakhtaoui, just on for 
Hateley, broke through the Celtic defence but blazed his shot over the bar and 
with that the opportunity to grab an unlikely point was gone.
 