
The Celtic manager, Brendan Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brendan-rodgers>, defended his backroom 
staff after critical remarks from the Motherwell manager, Mark McGhee, 
following Celtic’s dramatic win.

Rodgers was unhappy that the Scotland assistant manager had tried to interfere 
with the visitors’ shooting practice before a pulsatingScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> match that had the 
home side leading at the interval thanks to a Louis Moult double.

In a frenzied second half, substitute Callum McGregor reduced the deficit 
before Patrick Roberts levelled to spark a crazy couple of minutes when the
Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> substitute Lionel 
Ainsworth restored the hosts’ lead only for Stuart Armstrong to equalise again.

The final twist came in the 90th minute when Tom Rogic drove in the winner to 
keep the leaders unbeaten domestically this term and there was no love lost 
between McGhee and theCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> 
assistant manager, Chris Davies, at the final whistle.

McGhee was first into the media room saying: “Brendan was as good as gold, 
dignified in victory and dignified in defeat. There are no problems with 
Brendan. Some of the other staff are not really Celtic-quality in terms of 
their behaviour.”

“I don’t know his name actually [Davies] - you have told me his name. He 
wasn’t shaking hands with me. He seemed for some reason to be angry that they 
won. Explain that to me?”

However, when Rodgers emerged to be told of McGhee’s remarks, he said: “I 
think that is very unfair, especially as he comes up into our warm-up before 
the game to ask our players to warm up in a different area. He shouldn’t be 
doing that.

“I don’t think that is very befitting of an assistant manager of a national 
team and manager of Motherwell.”

Rodgers made one enforced change to his side with defender Kolo Touré coming 
in for the first time since October, replacing the ill Erik Sviatchenko, and 
the 35-year-old was at fault for both first-half goals.

In the third minute a searching pass from Well’s former Celtic defender 
Stephen McManus found Moult in acres of space to raced past a switched‑off 
Touré and the 24-year-old finished exquisitely as he lifted it over the 
helpless Craig Gordon. It was the first domestic goal Celtic had conceded since
the 6-1 win over Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/celtic-kilmarnock-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 in September.

The home side now had something to hold on to – claret and amber shirts 
blocked a series of efforts from the visitors – yet when they did occasionally 
venture forward they did so with confidence. In the 26th minute Moult latched 
on to a Chris Cadden cross and watched his flick from eight yards go past the 
far post by inches.

Three minutes later the Celtic left-back Emilio Izaguirre, who had been booked 
for a foul on Cadden, was replaced by McGregor and as Motherwell retreated 
again, the energetic midfielder Armstrong flashed a drive from 25 yards just 
wide.

Motherwell stunned the champions again 10 minutes before the interval. Moult 
escaped the attention of Touré at the back post to volley in a cross from Ross 
MacLean, who had gone in hard on Mikael Lustig and emerged with the ball when 
he could easily have been penalised. The referee, Kevin Clancy, was having to 
work hard to keep control of an increasingly tetchy game.

Moult’s goal was the former Stoke forward’s 10th of the season but three 
minutes after the break nerves began to show when McGregor ended a sustained 
spell of pressure by taking a return pass from Armstrong, firing a left-foot 
drive from 14 yards low past Samson. The home keeper then saved a powerful 
drive from Rogic as Celtic laid siege to his goal with Roberts and James 
Forrest missing the target with efforts.

Tottenham Hotspur v Swansea, FA Cup second round and more – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/03/tottenham-hotspur-v-swansea-fa-cup-second-round-and-more-live>
In the 65th minute Samson punched a curling shot from Rogic clear to safety 
before saving a less impressive strike from Moussa Dembélé, but he had no 
chance when Armstrong stood a cross up for Roberts to head in to the net.

That was the cue for astonishing couple of minutes. Ainsworth, on two minutes 
earlier for Cadden, volleyed in a cross from Steven Hammell before Armstrong 
levelled again with a drive from 14 yards to leave everyone breathless.

Celtic push for the winner in the closing stages and it was no real surprise 
when it came in the final minute, Rogic finding space expertly before rifling 
past Samson.
 