
Ronny Deila won his first trophy as Celtic manager, with goals in each half 
from Kris Commons and James Forrest bringing League Cup success against aDundee 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> side which played 
the last 35 minutes with 10 men. The captain Sean Dillon’s deserved dismissal 
for a dangerous late challenge on Emilio Izaguirre helped Deila stay on course 
for a domestic treble in his debut season.

The Norwegian’s side were well worthy of their victory, albeit that Dillon’s 
rush of blood was particularly ill-judged after two of his team-mates had been 
shown red cards in the previous weekend’s Scottish Cup tie between the sides. 
Somehow they must now muster the enthusiasm to meet each other twice again in 
the next six days.

The long-time Hoops supporter Rod Stewart presented the trophy to Celtic’s 
captain, Scott Brown, who must have been a relieved man to end the week on a 
high note after being photographed in unflattering poses in Edinburgh just four 
nights before the final. He might have given away a first-half penalty for a 
push on Ryan Dow, but the referee Bobby Madden waved away United’s claims.

“It’s a great feeling,” Deila said. “It’s the first trophy we can win so it’s 
good to get that start at a big club likeCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>. It gives us an appetite for this 
and we want more. It’s a dream to do the treble. It’s so tough to do it, but 
it’s possible. On Wednesday we have to do it again – the players should enjoy 
the moment tonight but there’s not going to be any nightlife.” Asked if he was 
referring to anybody in particular after Brown’s midweek indiscretions, he 
replied: “I think you know.”

Ironically, having lost the second goal after Dillon was sent off, United were 
also without their captain when Celtic, who had two great opportunities to take 
the lead in the opening 10 minutes, took the lead just before the half-hour. 
From a United perspective it was a calamity. Dillon had limped off injured two 
minutes earlier following a challenge on Virgil van Dijk, but their manager 
Jackie McNamara took the gamble of waiting to see how he responded to treatment.

Then, when United themselves had the chance to put pressure on Celtic, Paul 
Dixon wasted a dangerous free-kick, aiming the ball straight into the arms of 
the Celtic goalkeeper Craig Gordon. From his clearance United conceded at the 
other end; Anthony Stokes fed Commons and although Radoslav Cierzniak made a 
terrific save from his deflected shot, the rebound fell at the feet of the 
midfielder, who scored at the second attempt.

Some eight minutes after he had left the field Dillon returned with stitches 
in his wound, but Commons, twice, came close to extending Celtic’s lead while 
United were incensed that a penalty did not follow Brown’s clumsy challenge on 
Dow. “I was about to make the change because it was taking too long and it 
proved costly for us,” McNamara admitted of losing the goal when Dillon was off 
the pitch. “I don’t have a magic wand unfortunately and we played long periods 
of the game a man down.”

United’s afternoon deteriorated sharply when Dillon, having missed eight 
minutes of the first half, lasted just 10 in the second. His dangerous late 
challenge on Izaguirre left Madden with no option but to brandish a straight 
red. Celtic wasted a number of chances against the 10 men before the substitute 
Forrest, set up by Stefan Johansen and John Guidetti, placed a shot past 
Cierzniak from 20 yards. The same player should have made it three when he was 
brought down in the box by Dixon, but, brushing aside Guidetti’s claim to take 
it, he struck his penalty straight at Cierzniak.

“I don’t like to see two players arguing [over the penalty] like that,” Deila 
said. “It’s just stupid. It’s not the team spirit I want.”
 