
A significant run of games for Celtic has started in positive fashion for 
Ronny Deila. With matches against Aberdeen and Molde looming,Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> progressed to the last four of 
the League Cup with success over a Hearts team who should rue their 
overcaution. The fact this was a forgettable match will matter little to Deila, 
who still has a domestic treble in his sights.

Celtic’s preparations suffered late disruption, their captain, Scott Brown, 
incurring an injury in the warm-up and having to be replaced by James Forrest. 
One of the visiting substitutes, Gary Mackay-Steven, was also hurt at the same 
point, forcing him to sit out proceedings entirely. Emilio Izaguirre, who 
required stitches after a training ground altercation with Nadir Ciftci on 
Tuesday, returned as Celtic’s left-back.

The opening period was tepid, a notable aspect in itself for a fixture which 
commonly lacks nothing in bite. Hearts’ approach was clear; to allow Celtic to 
dominate possession before using the pace available on both flanks to attack 
where possible. The aim was to frustrate Deila and his players.

Celtic duly enjoyed plenty of the ball but created little. A series of corners 
offered their finest opportunities, while Hearts’ Osman Sow went close to 
breaking the deadlock at the opposite end. Celtic’s finest spell of football 
came in the dying moments of the half but no one was on hand to convert an 
excellent low cross from Forrest.

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> had the ball in the net 
shortly after the hour mark, only for Sow to be flagged offside. It was a 
warning the cup holders appeared to heed.

Celtic’s play had been enhanced by the arrival of Tom Rogic, who replaced 
Forrest. It was another midfielder, Stefan Johansen, who created the chance 
that sent Deila’s team ahead. Johansen beat Morgaro Gomis to the ball before 
feeding Leigh Griffiths, who still had work to do; the striker bamboozled the 
Hearts back line before offering a fine, curling finish.

Griffiths was involved as the lead was doubled. He hit the byline before 
providing a low cross, which Rogic flicked home. Hearts’ response arrived too 
late, Arnaud Djoum finding the net with a header.
 