
Kris Commons’s header with 15 minutes to go helped Celtic regain some pride in 
their doomedEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> campaign but once 
again they were made to pay for another calamitous mistake.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, who travelled to Turkey 
for the first time and were already guaranteed to finish bottom of Group A 
after taking two points from five games, held their own in the first half, with 
Nadir Ciftci missing a good chance, until a howler by Craig Gordon allowed 
Lazar Markovic to score and they were playing catch-up once more.

However the game changed in the 67th minute when Diego, booked early in the 
first-half after an altercation with Celtic’s Stefan Johansen, was shown a 
straight red card for a kick at the Norwegian.

Eight minutes later Commons headed in a Mikael Lustig cross for their point 
which offered some hope for next season’s campaign, with Fenerbahce going into 
this year’s knockout stages with Molde.

“I am enjoying the job and there are a lot of domestic things we want to 
achieve and be ready for next year,” Ronny Deila, the Celtic manager, said. 
“It’s a good result, they are a good team. We were well organised and didn’t 
concede many chances. It’s the small things we have to improve on.

“On the ball and better playing in behind [the opposition]. In defence we need 
to pressure better and keep concentration for 90 minutes. That’s what’s 
important in Europe.”

The manager made two changes from the win over Inverness, with the midfielder 
Tom Rogic on the bench and the injured Leigh Griffiths dropping out altogether. 
Scott Allan, a summer signing from Hibernian, was given his first start while 
the Turkish striker Ciftci was up front for his first in almost two months.

In the fourth minute Gordon did well to tip a powerful angled-drive from 
Fenerbahce midfielder Mehmet Topal on to the post before the visitors scrambled 
the ball clear. Celtic grew into the game, though, and had a great chance in 
the 24th minute when Nir Bitton released Ciftci through the middle with a fine 
pass but the striker’s hesitation allowed defender Abdoulaye Ba to get in a 
saving tackle.

Gordon then spilled a long-distance effort from Diego but made amends by 
knocking Souza’s angled-shot from the loose ball over the bar for a corner.

However, six minutes from the interval Gordon, Celtic’s Scotland goalkeeper, 
raced from his goal to cut out a long, hopeful pass from Gokhan Gonul to 
Markovic and let the ball go through his legs and the winger, on loan from 
Liverpool, slid the ball in from a tight angle.

The goal stunned Celtic, although they came close with seconds of the first 
half remaining when Lustig’s hooked shot from 16 yards was deflected past for a 
corner, which was headed past by Jozo Simunovic.

Fenerbahce took control early in the second half but after the sending off 
Commons who, two minutes after replacing Allan and back after four games with a 
hamstring injury, headed in from eight yards.

Celtic duly went looking for the win but had to settle for the draw against 
the 10 men, which, not for the first time, was scant rewards for overall 
efforts. “It’s been a tough campaign and we’ve done pretty well against the 
bigger names in the group,” Gordon said. “We’ve not been that far away. We 
certainly haven’t had much luck but can’t have too many complaints that we’re 
not through to the next round.”
 