
The latest evidence of increased pressure at Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> has come from the assistant 
manager Mark Venus, who today admitted that supporters had been correct to boo 
the team from the field following Saturday's draw with Falkirk.

The most notable discord yet towards Tony Mowbray and his players was heard 
immediately after the 1-1 draw with the Premier League's bottom side, a result 
that left Celtic, who have dropped 19 points in as many SPL games, nine points 
adrift of Rangers.

"I think if you draw with the bottom of the league team at home, let's be 
honest, I think I'd be booing as well," Venus said. "Irrespective of how you've 
played, irrespective of how hard you've tried and irrespective of what didn't 
and did go wrong, if you draw with the bottom of the league team I think you've 
got every right to boo."

Such words will offer little solace to Mowbray, who declined to preview 
tomorrow'sScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> 
fourth-round trip to Greenock Morton.

Venus's subsequent response of "I don't know, basically" when asked if he 
thought the Celtic support are generally behind the management team was hardly 
encouraging either. "We'd like to improve in both boxes, or at both ends of the 
pitch," he added. "We emphasise that to the players and that's an open fact. I 
think it's something we need to improve on."

He did back up the theory of the Celtic full-back Andreas Hinkel, that 
refereeing decisions have contributed at least in part to their troubles. "I 
think if you stop the bus halfway through the season and we've lost 19 points 
then I think there have been some strange refereeing decisions along the way," 
Venus said. "That's no excuse for us, I'm just saying we've had some strange 
decisions. I agree with what he [Hinkel] said about the strange decisions."

Morton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morton> may be toiling at the 
lower end of the First Division, but tomorrow night remains a potentially 
hazardous occasion at the ramshackle Cappielow. Celtic's followers remain 
haunted by the cup defeat to Inverness Caledonian Thistle a decade ago, which 
marked the end of John Barnes's stay at Parkhead.

Mowbray's reign is an improvement on that of the former Liverpool player yet 
in direct opposition to a relatively weak Rangers side, he is badly in need of 
an upturn in fortune. Venus, whether through an attempt at humour or not, 
offered a peculiar answer when asked if the tie has banana skin connotations.

"I don't know what a banana skin is; I think it's something that's left after 
you have a banana, isn't it?" he said. "The bottom line is that I think it is a 
difficult game. A really difficult game against a team that is going to be 
fired up. We've obviously got a few injuries to contend with that you'd suggest 
might weaken our options. So I think it's going to be a tough tie."

Walter Smith has refused to read too much into Rangers' emphatic advantage at 
the summit of the Premier League after moving nine points clear. An 
unconvincing win at Hamilton on Saturday was enough for the Scottish champions 
to extend their lead thanks to the Celtic result later in the day.

But Smith was quick to point out Rangers were trailing their rivals by seven 
points this time last year and ended up winning on the final day of the season. 
"I don't think we are that far out in front in the league," said the Rangers 
manager. "It's a good headline to say you are nine points in front but Celtic 
still have a game in hand so we would look at it as being six points in front.

"At this stage last season Celtic were seven points in front of us, so it 
doesn't mean much at this stage. We have each other to play on two occasions, 
never mind the rest of the games. It's nice to be in that position but I don't 
think it means a great deal at this stage of the season."
 