
Brendan Rodgers hailed Scott Sinclair after the Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> attacker joined the Hoops hero 
Jimmy McGrory in the record books with his goal at Inverness. The 27-year-old 
scored for the fifth successive Premiership game with a curling shot from the 
edge of the box after Tom Rogic’s opener for the visitors had been cancelled 
out by Billy King.

Sinclair, who joined from Aston Villa in the summer, became the first Celtic 
player to achieve that feat since McGrory, who played for the club between 1922 
and 1937 and later went on to manage them, in the 1934-35 season. The 
substitute Alex Fisher’s first goal for Inverness in the 89th minute led to a 
share of the points.

Rodgers said: “If he ends up like Jimmy he will be all right – he will be in 
the Celtic Musical [a current show about the club]. You can see he is quality. 
His ability to take the ball up the field quickly is there and he has a hunger 
to score goals. It was a wonderful finish.

“He is 27, not so many miles on the clock, but you see his speed and natural 
finishing ability and he will be disappointed he hasn’t scored more today. He 
is enjoying his life in Scotland, loves playing for Celtic and will be a player 
who will go and be a great servant for the club.”

Sinclair said: “I wasn’t aware of it until someone told be after the game. It 
is a good achievement, but you want to come off scoring goals and winning games 
really. I just got into every game looking to create and score goals, but the 
main thing is getting three points.”

Inverness can put their point, which lifts them off the bottom of the table, 
down mostly to a man-of-the-match performance from the goalkeeper Owain Fôn 
Williams, while Celtic moved three points clear of Hearts at the top with a 
game in hand. Rodgers added: “I thought we deserved the three points, but give 
credit to Inverness, they kept going. We were disappointed to concede so late.

“He [Fon Williams] deserved it, he made some great saves and at 2-1 you need 
that third goal.”

The biggest talking point of the game came at 1-1 in the first half when the 
Inverness midfielder Ross Draper went to ground inside the Celtic area after a 
challenge by the back-tracking Erik Sviatchenko. The referee Don Robertson 
ignored what appeared to be a good penalty claim.

The Inverness manager, Richie Foran, thought the challenge was outside the 
box, but claimed the official still should have taken action. Foran said: “I 
think it is outside the box, it is a clear free-kick which leads to a clear 
sending-off. It changes the whole outlook of the game, down to 10 men and gives 
us a boost and it is a disappointing decision. I think that’s when you need 
brave referees.”
 