
Gary Mackay-Steven claims talk of winning the treble does not do Celtic any 
favours as they prepare for their League Cup semi-final againstRoss County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> at Hampden Park on Sunday.

The Parkhead club won the league and League Cup double under Ronny Deila last 
season, losing out to Inverness in the Scottish Cup semi-final at the national 
stadium.

John McGinn scores the winner to steer superior Hibs past St Johnstone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/hibernian-st-johnstone-scottish-league-cup-match-report>
As anticipation of a domestic treble begins to build again with the Hoops one 
step away from the chance of the first piece of silverware available, the 
25-year-old midfielder insists delivery of all three major trophies is more 
difficult than the chatter suggests.

“It is easy saying we should win it but it is another thing actually doing 
it,” he said. “The treble is such a hard thing to do. We came close last year 
but I don’t think it does us any favours talking about it.

Gary Mackay-Steven scores two as assured Celtic beat St Johnstone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/23/celtic-st-johnstone-scottish-premiership-match-report>
“At the start of the season you want to win every competition you are involved 
in. It is coming to the latter stages and this is where trophies get decided so 
it is definitely what we want to do but we will take it one game at a time

“You have to be prepared every single game and there are no easy games, 
especially in this stage of the competition. We have a semi-final on Sunday and 
that is a massive game but Ross County will be tough.”

Mackay-Steven, who signed along with fellow midfielder Stuart Armstrong from 
Dundee United on transfer deadline day a year ago, pinpointed the Staggies 
midfielder Michael Gardyne as the main threat to the Hoops.

“They have been great,” Mackay-Steven said. “I know Michael Gardyne and a few 
of their boys. Michael has been in great form for them, he has become their 
all-time top scorer which is a great achievement for him. Having played with 
him at Dundee United I know what he is capable of. He will be a big threat to 
us but they have a few others as well and they have looked good all season.

“It won’t be an easy game. Our minds will have to be right and we will need to 
put in a performance if we are going to get to the final.”
 