
Ronny Deila, the departing Celtic manager, watched his players struggle for a 
point in a 1-1 home draw withRoss County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> and urged them to have fun in 
the remaining four games of the season.

Deila announced last week that he would be leaving at the end of the season 
but instead of quelling increasing dissatisfaction among theCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fans, several banners in a 
half-full stadium expressed disgruntlement with the board and the players.

In an almost silent Celtic Park, the striker Leigh Griffiths fired in his 38th 
goal of the season midway through the first half to give the home side the lead 
but the Ross County midfielder Stewart Murdoch levelled in the 64th minute for 
a deserved point.

Celtic are nine points ahead of Aberdeen with four games remaining in the 
season and could win their fifth successive title this weekend.

Deila acknowledged the lack of atmosphere at the game but called for unity as 
he looks for Celtic to finish the season in style, starting with the trip to 
Tynecastle on Saturday.

The Norwegian said: “Everything that had gone on this week had affected the 
occasion. You can see that in some of the confidence of the boys but this is 
the circumstances now. I can also understand the fans, but it doesn’t help them.

“It is not easy to play under but it is something we have to deal with. We 
wanted a better performance than today and I am sure we will get that. I don’t 
think anything else more will come out this week and we can focus on Saturday.

“Now we have to stick together, work really hard, have fun in the last four 
games, get the best out of each other – we know we have a lot of quality to get 
over the line and also in a good way.”

The Dundee United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> manager, 
Mixu Paatelainen, meanwhile, admitted that he and his players deserved 
criticism from protesting fans after a 3-1 home defeat by Hamilton left them 
staring relegation in the face.

United failed to capitalise on their nearest rival Kilmarnock’s early defeat 
at Inverness and failed to test Michael McGovern at all during an abject 
first-half display.

Grant Gillespie fired Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> 
ahead from 20 yards inside 12 minutes and Carlton Morris scored twice on the 
rebound after the interval as McGovern kept United out until Simon Murray 
scored a late consolation.

United remain eight points adrift at the foot of the Premiership with four 
games left and could be relegated against Dundee.

Some fans clapped United players off the pitch but about 200 gathered outside 
the main entrance at Tannadice to protest. Their anger was mostly directed at 
the chairman, Stephen Thompson, but Paatelainen accepted any that came the way 
of the playing and coaching staff.

When asked whether United’s fate was done and dusted, he said: “Very, very 
close to that, absolutely. Of course mathematically it’s still possible but we 
are not stupid. Our supporters are out there in numbers protesting, not happy 
with the situation, and I totally understand that, totally agree with that, and 
totally accept that.

“We deserve all that because it was so poor. It’s been a long season, it’s 
been long-suffering for the supporters, and for the players as well. I cannot 
understand why and how so many simply don’t respond in the manner that we need 
to.”
 