
Neil Lennon's first game as Celtic's caretaker manager saw Kilmarnock trounced 
3-1 in a one-sided Scottish Premier League clash at Parkhead.

A Robbie Keane double and a Scott Brown strike took the Hoops back to within 
10 points of leaders Rangers, having played two games more than their rivals.

The home side took the lead when Keane found his way into the box and 
delicately chipped the ball over Cammy Bell for his 10th goal since arriving on 
loan. In the second half, Keane settled the destination of the points when he 
took a Brown pass, turned inside Frazer Wright and drilled the ball past Bell 
from 12 yards.

Four minutes later, Brown made it 3-0 when he turned McGeady's cross-cum-shot 
past Bell from eight yards, with the visitors' defence in tatters. Killie 
captain Craig Bryson scored a consolation goal for the Ayrshire men, who were 
outplayed from the first whistle to last.

Dundee United followed up their Scottish Cup triumph over Rangers in midweek 
with a 3-0 victory overMotherwell. United emphatically recovered from Paul 
Dixon's early dismissal to consolidate third place and end Motherwell's 
12-match unbeaten run in the league.

Peter Houston's side never looked back after edging ahead in the 38th minute, 
when David Goodwillie claimed the final touch to a Andy Webster header. Prince 
Buaben soon capitalised on a rare error from John Ruddy and Danny Swanson broke 
away midway through the second half to finish off Motherwell's uninspired 
comeback attempts.

Hibernian  fought back from a goal down to win 3-1 at Falkirk. The home side 
took a deserved lead through Mark Stewart in the 19th minute but poor defending 
from the home side helped John Hughes's team storm back to claim a 3-1 lead by 
half time.

Derek Riordan curled in a free-kick, before Anthony Stokes and Sol Bamba 
netted to leave the bottom-placed Bairns facing a uphill task in the second 
half. As an entertaining game unfolded, Steven Pressley's side threatened once 
more. Stewart cut in from the right and Graham Stack had to beat away his 
fierce drive. The wind refused to ease up, making play difficult, and it was 
Hibs' defence who appeared the more unsure in the conditions. But after being 
second-best, the hosts claimed a 34th-minute lead. AsFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> struggled to clear, a Colin Nish 
shot broke back to Stokes and he wrong-footed Robert Olejnik with the aid of a 
deflection off Tam Scobbie.

Three minutes from half-time, Olejnik had to be alert to palm away a David 
Wotherspoon effort before Hibs took advantage of more poor Falkirk defending to 
score a third. A John Rankin cross was headed on by Nish and Bamba was well 
placed to head home from four yards at the back post.

Hamilton beat St Johnstone 1-0 at New Douglas Park. James Wesolowski's second 
goal for the club was enough to seal Accies second win in four days and take 
them 11 points clear of rock-bottom Falkirk.

Ten-man Aberdeen ended their dismal run of form with a tense 2-1 victory over 
St Mirren at Pittodrie.

The Dons had gone into the match on the back of a dreadful 11-match winless 
sequence but goals from Zander Diamond and Sone Aluko gave them a two-goal 
lead. Steven Robb pulled a goal back for the Buddies with 11 minutes remaining 
before Aberdeen's Steve MacLean was sent-off for a second booking to set up a 
nervy finish, but the Reds managed to hang on for a welcome victory.
 