
John Guidetti claimed Rangers or any other semi-final opponent will be “going 
down” if they are drawn againstCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> in their Hampden Park semi-final.

The 22-year-old Swede, on loan from Manchester City, took his tally to eight 
goals in eight games for Celtic with two wonderful free-kicks and a penalty in 
their 6-0 quarter-final rout ofPartick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick>.

The substitute Leigh Griffiths scored two and the left-back Emilio Izaguirre 
also notched his first club goal for four years as Celtic ran riot against a 
side who played the second half with 10 men after the midfielder Stuart 
Bannigan was shown a straight red card for a needless challenge on Guidetti 
just before the interval.

The win set up a possibility of what would be the first Old Firm meeting in 
almost three years in the semi-final, Rangers having clinched their last-four 
place with a 1-0 win over St Johnstone at Ibrox on Tuesday. Aberdeen and Dundee 
United will also be in Saturday’s draw.

“Of course it would be a fantastic game to be a part of,” Guidetti said of a 
possible Old Firm semi-final. “Whatever happens, happens. Come Hampden Park, 11 
people standing in front of us, they are going down. Hampden Park will be 
amazing, no matter who we play. I am excited about every game for Celtic.

“This is a game [the Old Firm] I woke up when I was a small kid to watch. It 
is fantastic, very spicy and you see that it means a lot. The atmosphere is 
amazing, you can hear it through the television.

“But we need to stay focused. There are four good teams left in the cup and 
this club deserves trophies so hopefully we can do this.”

The manager Ronny Deila, delighted with the form of Guidetti and the rest of 
his side’s performance, tip-toed around the possibility of an Old Firm game.

He said: “For me it is about winning trophies and we are now two wins away 
from getting the first one.

“So I am looking forward to the semi-final, who we meet doesn’t bother me. We 
just have to win.

“What you remember when your career is finished is titles and that’s why I’m 
here – to win trophies and make sure Celtic is successful. To do that we have 
to meet whatever team is in front of us.”

The Partick Thistle manager, Alan Archibald, meanwhile, admitted that 
Bannigan’s red card was the correct decision and he was not best pleased with 
him.

He said: “It probably is nowadays [a red]. I think the reaction of the Celtic 
players made it look like that as well. I don’t think that helps either.

“I’m disappointed as I felt he didn’t have to make the challenge. I think he 
wins the ball but it is probably the manner he goes in.

“He’s disappointed, he’s sitting with his head in his hands at half-time. He 
can’t blame excitement playing against Celtic. He’s a professional footballer 
and was probably having a good game up to that point. It’s just a rush of 
blood, I think.”
 