
The ease with which Celtic claimed their 100th major honour led onlookers to 
ask whether any of the previous 99 had been won in more straightforward 
circumstances.Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen>, who 
have finished second in the top flight’s last two seasons, were swatted aside 
in the League Cup final and Celtic cruised to victory without one of their most 
influential players, the injured Scott Sinclair.

Brendan Rodgers refused to discuss personal significance in the aftermath of 
this procession towards the Northern Irishman’s maiden managerial trophy.

“For the players it is something to show for the great work they’ve been 
doing,” Rodgers said. “On the first day we came in we talked about the plan, 
how we wanted to go forward, what that vision was. We talked about how we 
needed to improve the team tactically on the field. But, of course, you have to 
then have something to show for it.

“The players on the podium today have something to show for it. It’s great for 
the confidence and sets us up really well going on into the season.”

That naturally means the setting of sights on trophy No101. “It is a winning 
club,” Rodgers said. “That is what the history of this great club has been 
based upon. So it marks a milestone, that century of trophies over the course 
of history.

“Now we have got to look to the next one, to start off the next century of 
trophies. That will be important for us and the club. For now it is a great 
night for theCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> supporters to 
celebrate. They must have enjoyed the performance. But we push for the next 
one.”

Aberdeen’s contribution to the final started with bullish pre-match sentiment 
and ended with an impressive flag display from their fans in the lead-up to 
kick-off. During 90 minutes they failed to lay a glove on Rodgers’s men.

Tom Rogic endorsed Celtic’s superiority with a wonderful, curled finish from 
the angle of the penalty area. The Australian was handed far too much space by 
the Aberdeen defence than ever looked sensible but still displayed a level of 
composure which illustrated improvement under the guidance of Rodgers.

James Forrest fired home No2 having been allowed to burst towards goal from 
midfield. Only when Forrest was on the verge of shooting did Aberdeen’s 
defenders deem the winger worthy of attention; too little, too late.

Aberdeen’s only decent spell arrived at the opening to the second half. It was 
punctured by a rash tackle from Anthony O’Connor on Forrest. Cue a penalty, 
Moussa Dembélé’s 17th domestic goal of the season and the heading for the exits 
of scores of Aberdeen supporters.

“Teams will beat them, but Celtic will have to have a poor game for teams to 
beat them,” the Aberdeen manager, Derek McInnes, said. “Celtic are a team who 
have a lot of answers and firepower. Without Sinclair, who has been every bit 
as good as any of them this season, they have still managed to win the game.

“You only have to look at their bench to see how strong they are. They will 
get stronger again; I spoke to Brendan and he will want to get two or three in 
in January to improve it.”

Aberdeen 0-3 Celtic: Scottish League Cup final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/27/aberdeen-v-celtic-scottish-league-cup-final-live> 