
It appeared to be all over before the fat lady had even gargled. Celtic's 
penchant for demoralising the opposition quickly was evident within a quarter 
of an hour of kick-off yesterday, butLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> conspired to give the 
opposition a fright of sorts when they made inroads into Celtic's four-goal 
lead.

Four goals to the good after 31 minutes, Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> looked ready to turn it into a 
rout. But for the intervention of Burton O'Brien they might well have done so.

O'Brien's contribution of two goals, one either side of half-time, inspired 
Livingston to the extent that they actually managed to make a game of it, due 
in no small part to a variety of injury problems suffered by the champions.

"I thought a few of the challenges had an element of raw meat about them," 
Martin O'Neill said afterwards. "I thought that was a pretty aggressive 
Livingston side and it was getting a bit heated.

"We had to dig in. It's a good time to play us at the moment because we have 
relatively few fit, but it was a great effort by the team. I thought we were 
magnificent today. The first half was absolutely scintillating."

Stilian Petrov, the Bulgarian captain, squeezed the trigger as early as the 
second minute, sliding the ball past Roddy McKenzie after Jackie McNamara had 
played him in. Henri Camara ran on to John Hartson's pass for the second and 
then set up Hartson for the third five minutes later.

Livingston were ripped apart by the fourth goal. No fewer than seven players 
were involved in its construction but it was principally through the efforts of 
Petrov and Hart son that Chris Sutton was able to burst through and pick his 
spot.

"The goals were as good as you will see anywhere," O'Neill said. 

It seemed inevitable that Celtic would go on to score a barrel load. But they 
lost momentum with a series of injuries - Camara went off in the 33rd minute 
after a hefty tackle by Emmanuel Dorado and Stephen McManus gashed his knee - 
and O'Brien changed the complexion of the game with two superbly executed solo 
efforts.

Stanislav Varga strained a hamstring and Hartson needed stitches in a head 
wound, but Celtic survived. The length of their injury list - "I have never 
seen anything like it," McNamara said - will test even their resources against 
Aberdeen on Wednesday.

 Man of the match:  Chris Sutton (Celtic)
 