
Environmental legal challenges face being hit by the “chilling effect” of new 
government rules that remove a cap on claimants’ costs, according to 
campaigners, lawyers and politicians.

They warn that the changes could deter organisations and individuals 
challenging projects such as fracking wells, HS2 and theHeathrow third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/heathrow-third-runway> for fear of 
racking up huge court costs.

The costs to complainants bringing environmental judicial reviews, which 
account for less than 1% of all judicial reviews, have been capped since 2013.

Individuals and organisations who bring such cases currently pay no more than 
£5,000 and £10,000 respectively of defendants’ costs, in addition to their own 
costs. Underthe Ministry of Justice’s plans published on Thursday 
<https://consult.justice.gov.uk/digital-communications/costs-protection-in-environmental-claims/>
, there will be no fixed cost, and the costs could go up or down, depending on 
the claimant’s finances.

The government argues that the changes would still allow valid challenges and 
checks on public authorities, but deter ones without merit.

But groups involved in supporting and bringing such judicial reviews warned 
the move would put off valid future cases.

Jamie Beagent, a partner at law firm Leigh Day, said: “These proposals will 
create a climate of fear and uncertainty amongst those wishing to challenge 
projects imposed upon them and their environment.”

Caroline Lucas, Green party MP, said: “We know that high and uncertain costs 
have a chilling effect on the ability of ordinary citizens and civil society to 
hold the government to account on these issues. In this context, these 
proposals represent a huge threat to environmental justice and we will fight 
them every step of the way.”

One such environmental judicial review will be heard next week in the Royal 
Courts. Friends of the Earth and an anti-fracking group argue that North 
Yorkshire county council’s decision earlier this year to approve planning 
permission for a fracking site at Kirby Misperton is unlawful.

The government’s defeat in the high court earlier this month over air quality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/diesel-vehicles-face-charges-after-uk-government-loses-air-pollution-case>
, which could now see dirty diesel cars charged to enter cities across the 
country, began with an environmental judicial review. The MoJ said that there 
were 293 such cases between April 2013 and May 2015.

The changes come at the same time as the green light has been given to a slew 
of big and environmentally controversial infrastructure projects, from an 
expanded Heathrow and HS2 toa trio of shale gas sites which are likely to be 
drilled next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/15/east-midlands-site-gets-green-light-for-shale-gas-exploration>
.

Campaigners fear the proposals could have a significant impact on everyone 
from individuals to residents groups and large environmental NGOs.

Naima Siddiqi, director of regulatory affairs at Friends of the Earth, said: 
“This change in law would make it harder for anybody who wants to challenge 
controversial development like fracking or incinerators near their home. The 
government can fix all this by reversing their plans.”

Gillian Lobo, a lawyer for ClientEarth which brought the air pollution case, 
called the changes regressive. “These new plans make it even harder for people 
to bring environmental cases, by increasing uncertainty around costs and making 
the procedure ever more complex,” she said.


An MoJ spokesperson said: “We want a justice system that works for everyone. 
The cost of bringing environmental challenges must not be prohibitively 
expensive, especially to those with limited means.

“Our proposals will also deter unmeritorious claims, which are expensive and 
delay vital infrastructure projects.”
 