
Charlie Austin scored both QPR’s goals as Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s men 
battled from two goals down to earn a creditable 2-2 draw against unbeaten
Brighton at Loftus Road and afterwards said he has told Rangers he will see the 
season out there and become a free agent in the summer.

All four goals came in an action-packed second half, with Dale Stephens’ 
overhead-kick and Rajiv van La Parra’s long-range shot having put Albion in 
command.

Austin pulled a goal back and Brighton were reduced to 10 men on 84 minutes 
when Lewis Dunk was shown a second yellow card for a reckless challenge on 
Alejandro Faurlin, whose corner three minutes later was headed in for the 
equaliser – Austin’s 10th goal of the season. Hasselbaink’s men came close to a 
dramatic victory during stoppage-time when the winger Matt Phillips saw a 
long-range effort hit the outside of a post.

The result meant Albion were replaced at the top by Middlesbrough, who 
defeated Burnley 1-0, on goal difference.

A hat-trick from Tom Ince helped Derby keep pace with the leaders following a 
4-0 win overBristol City at the iPro Stadium.

After both sides went close by hitting the woodwork, Ince (42) put the Rams 
ahead just before the interval and made it 2-0 on 63 minutes with a deflected 
effort before completing his treble on 71 minutes when he converted Darren 
Bent’s cross. Johnny Russell (74) headed in a fourth to put Derby above Hull, 
who host Reading on Wednesday.

Ipswich won 2-1 at managerless Fulham to keep themselves in the play-off hunt. 
Town were 1-0 up almost straight from kick off as Freddie Sears drove the ball 
in from the edge of the area after a surging run.

However, Fulham, under the guidance of their senior coach Stuart Gray, 
equalised after 14 minutes through a long-range free-kick from Ross McCormack.

Ipswich regained the lead just before the hour when Brett Pitman converted 
Sears’ cross, and that proved to be enough to take the points back to Suffolk.

Kenwyne Jones scored a last-gasp winner as Cardiff managed to avoid the 
ignominy of failing to turn a two-goal lead into a win for the third home game 
in the row as they edgedBrentford 3-2.

The Bluebirds had been cruising when Tony Watt tapped in his second goal for 
the club in the 20th minute as the Bees defence failed to clear a Craig Noone 
shot, and the Scottish striker then teed up Jones for the second.

However, the captain Jake Bidwell pulled one back for the visitors and 
Cardiff’s nerves told as Jon Swift slotted an equaliser with four minutes to 
go. But Jones slid home Fabio’s cross in stoppage time, to the relief of the 
home support.

Preston and Birmingham shared the spoils in an entertaining 1-1 draw at 
Deepdale as Michael Morrison scuppered North End’s hopes of another clean sheet.

Simon Grayson’s men claimed a first-half lead through the loanee Adam Reach’s 
cross-cum-shot and spent the second period fending off wave after wave of 
attacks.

North End were bidding for a ninth shut-out in 11 games and their 13th of the 
season, and a series of saves from the impressive on-loan goalkeeper Jordan 
Pickford looked like delivering it.

But Morrison’s near-post header from a 67th-minute corner brought Blues level 
and Demarai Gray should have then won it when he raced through but dragged his 
shot wide in stoppage time.

Huddersfield eased to a 2-0 success over Rotherham. They had lost their last 
four home games but there was little danger of a fifth in this Yorkshire derby 
and they won it routinely through goals from Mustapha Carayol and Ismael Miller.

Carayol sent in a 25-yard screamer in the first half and the game was made 
safe in the final 20 minutes when Miller raced clear. It gave David Wagner a 
first home success and his Hudersfield side some breathing space above the drop 
zone.

Carl Baker and Nicky Maynard struck the goals as MK Dons lifted themselves out 
of the relegation zone with a 2-1 victory overSheffield Wednesday. Baker gave 
the Dons a first-half lead and Maynard made it 2-0 at the start of the second 
half, a strike that proved decisive with Wednesday only able to pull one goal 
back through the substitute Gary Hooper late-on.

It was a performance from the Dons that belied their lowly position as they 
earned their first victory in six matches against an Owls side who could have 
gone into a play-off position had they won.

Charlton joined crisis-hit Bolton in the relegation zone after they shared a 
draw at The Valley.

Ademola Lookman, 18, gave Charlton a two-goal lead within the opening 
half-hour, but the advantage was surrendered before half-time as Emile Heskey, 
with his first goal for almost a year, and Josh Vela, with a 25-yard deflected 
shot, responded for the bottom-placed visitors.

It was a decent fightback from Bolton, whose players have yet to receive their 
wages for November after the club were last week served with a winding-up 
petition by HM Revenue and Customs over an unpaid tax bill.
 