
Hull City 4-0 Bristol City

Steve Bruce hopes Hull can hit their stride as they moved within four points 
of second. After scoring three goals in nine matches, Curtis Davies and Robert 
Snodgrass laid the foundations before Mo Diamé and Sone Aluko added gloss. 
Bruce said: “There’s been nothing really wrong with the performances. Once we 
scored then there was a calmness about us.” Lee Johnson believes 19th-place
Bristol City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> have a long way 
to go before feeling safe. “You think you’re getting there then get beat quite 
convincingly by a top-six side and you see the work to be done.”

Fulham 2-1 MK Dons

Slavisa Jokanovic said his Fulham side must not relax despite a first win 
since February pulling them four points clear of the drop zone and opponents MK 
Dons. He said: “It’s the end of the run without any wins, in front of us are 
seven cup finals. We are not safe.” The Fulham strikers Ross McCormack and 
Moussa Dembélé scored either side of Josh Murphy forMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons>, who had an Alex Revell effort 
ruled out for offside. The visitors’ manager Karl Robinson said: “The officials 
cost us, his goal was onside - they know that, they understand that and they 
know they made an error.”

Charlton Athletic 2-1 Birmingham City

Charlton manager José Riga was eager to focus on a rare success for his side 
on the pitch, rather than its plight off it, after putting a dent in 
Birmingham’s play-off hopes. Jorge Teixeira scored in the fourth minute of 
added time to win a game where home fans threw hundreds of sponge footballs on 
to the pitch in protest against owner Roland Duchâtelet. Riga said: “There are 
two stories from today and I want only to be involved in the sporting one. We 
knew that all of Birmingham’s games are very close, but we deserved the win.”

And the rest

Cardiff closed the gap on sixth-placed Derby to two points with a 2-1 home 
win. Bruno Ecuele Manga put Cardiff ahead in front of a club-record crowd and 
Stuart O’Keefe scored the winner after Chris Martin’s equaliser.Brentford eased 
their relegation woes and deepened the gloom aroundNottingham Forest with a 3-0 
win at the City Ground. Lasse Vibe, Nico Yennaris and Sergi Canos scored, while 
Forest had Eric Lichaj sent off.Preston retain faint hopes of a play-off place 
after winning 2-1 atBlackburn, with Joe Garner and Jordan Hugill securing the 
win after Elliott Ward put Blackburn ahead. Fernando Forestieri scored the only 
goal asSheffield Wednesday won at Huddersfield. Visitors Reading hammered 
another nail in bottom-clubBolton’s coffin with Ola John’s late winner, while 
Wolves and Ipswich played out a 0-0 draw.
 