
Bayern Munich’s perfect start to the season under coach Carlo Ancelotti came 
to an end as Yannick Carrasco’s first-half goal gaveAtlético Madrid a 1-0 home 
victory in theirChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> Group D game on 
Wednesday.

Bayern were aiming to make it nine wins in a row in all competitions, but were 
derailed by an Atlético side that took a deserved 35th-minute lead and remain 
unbeaten this season.

Celtic end Manchester City’s winning run with thrilling Champions League draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
Atlético, who beat Bayern in the semi-finals of last season’s competition, 
seized the initiative when Xabi Alonso gave the ball away in midfield, allowing 
the Spaniards to counter.

Antoine Griezmann sent Carrasco through on goal and the Belgian winger struck 
a low left-footed shot past a helpless Bayern goalkeeper Manuel Neuer and in 
off the post.

Atlético could have made it 2-0 with six minutes remaining, but Griezmann 
drove his penalty against the crossbar, after Arturo Vidal fouled Filipe Luis 
in the area.

The result put Atlético top of the group on six points from two games, three 
clear of Bayern in second.PSV Eindhoven and Rostov, who drew 2-2 in Russia, are 
level on one point.

Gonzalo Higuaín was a distant memory as Napoli produced a rousing display to 
beat last season’s quarter-finalistsBenfica 4-2. Midfielder Marek Hamsik headed 
Napoli in front after 21 minutes before a devastating spell of three goals in 
eight minutes early in the second half left the Portuguese champions reeling.

Dries Mertens curled in a free kick in the 51st minute, Arkadiusz Milik swept 
home a penalty and Mertens struck again just before the hour.

Benfica enjoyed a later flurry with Goncalo Guedes and Eduardo Salvio making 
the scoreline more respectable. In the other match in Group B,Besiktas were 
held to a 1-1 draw byDynamo Kyiv.

Edinson Cavani scored twice in the second half to give Paris St-Germain a 3-1 
win over resilientLudogorets at the ground where they made their European 
football debut 34 years ago.

It was no more than PSG, who were beaten 1-0 at the Vasil Levski stadium by 
another Bulgarian side – Lokomotiv Sofia – in the now defunct Cup Winners Cup 
in 1982, deserved after dominating throughout with Cavani running the show.
 