
Burnley 1-0 Blackburn Rovers

Burnley’s manager, Sean Dyche, believes his team’s ability to win ugly will be 
a crucial asset in their promotion push after they beat Blackburn Rovers to 
move top of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/mar/05/football-league-your-thoughts-charlton-rotherham>
. Andre Gray’s 16th-minute penalty, after Shane Duffy had fouled George Boyd, 
proved to be decisive as Burnley extended their unbeaten run in the 
Championship to 12 games. “That’s my sixth Lancashire derby and I’ve not seen a 
decent one yet,” said Dyche. “They’ve always been tight affairs and we thought 
it might be that type of game again. It was cagey but obviously I’m delighted 
we came out on top.” Elliott Bennett came closest to equalising for Blackburn 
by forcing Tom Heaton into two good saves. The Rovers manager, Paul Lambert, 
said: “I thought we should have won. I’m sitting here totally relaxed because I 
thought we played a right good game.”

Reading 2-2 Fulham

The Reading manager, Brian McDermott, will shuffle his team against 
Huddersfield on Tuesday before the home FA Cup quarter-final with Crystal 
Palace on Friday. The Wales winger Hal Robson-Kanu (below), scorer of both 
goals against Fulham, is a certain non-starter at the John Smith’s Stadium 
after being replaced at half-time. “Hal has got a knock on his achilles,” 
McDermott said. “I’m not sure he’ll be right for Tuesday but, hopefully, for 
Friday. In the next two games, I’ll be doing what is best for this football 
club. We’ve got some good players who will play atHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> and give themselves the 
opportunity to put themselves forward.” Fulham went ahead through Moussa 
Dembélé but needed a Ross McCormack penalty to earn a point. “We opened the 
game very well but, after they scored their goals, we showed some character to 
come back to score the equaliser,” said the Fulham manager, Slavisa Jokanovic.

Football League: your thoughts | Niall McVeigh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/mar/05/football-league-your-thoughts-charlton-rotherham>
Derby County 2-0 Huddersfield Town

Derby County’s head coach, Darren Wassall, revealed how a recent pep talk with 
Chris Martin put the Scotland striker back on track. Martin scored for the 
third time in four games before teeing up Johnny Russell for the second to 
inspire the home win over Huddersfield. “That’s three in four games for him so 
it’s good to see him back amongst the goals,” said Wassall. “We believe in 
Chris Martin but we did have a long chat and say we wanted him firing on all 
cylinders because he’s a great asset to the club.” Huddersfield’s manager, 
David Wagner, was encouraged by his team’s display after Jamie Paterson and 
Tommy Smith missed good chances. “We had no complaints with the squad, they 
tried everything and worked unbelievably hard,” he said. “Derby had to produce 
one of their best performances to be able to beat us and so we can leave with 
our head up.”

Round-up

A double by Callum Harriott dragged Charlton off the foot of the table after a 
2-1 victory at strugglingBrentford, who have now lost five of their last six 
matches. ■Ipswich moved to within a point of the play-offs after Ben Pringle 
struck in a 1-0 triumph overNottingham Forest. ■ Dean Lewington’s first goal of 
the season and a late Ben Reeves penalty boostedMK Dons’ survival hopes in a 
2-0 home win againstQPR. ■ The Preston manager, Simon Grayson, had Chris 
Kirkland to thank for keeping a clean sheet in the 0-0 draw withBrighton on his 
league debut after filling in for Anders Lindegaard at short notice. ■ Matt 
Derbyshire sealed a 1-0 win forRotherham in their Yorkshire derby at Sheffield 
Wednesday, much to the delight of his manager, Neil Warnock. “You don’t 
overcome your rivals every week, so it is special,” he said. ■ AndCardiff 
boosted their play-off chances with a 2-0 win atBristol City. Lex Immers and 
Stuart O’Keefe were on target at Ashton Gate.
 