
The Porto substitute Jackson Martínez scored twice in the final moments of his 
side’s game atShakhtar Donetsk to rescue a dramatic draw, and preserve their 
unbeaten record this season. Alex Teixeira had given Shakhtar the lead shortly 
and they seemed on course for victory when Luiz Adriano added a second. But 
Martínez halved the deficit with an 89th-minute penalty after Yaroslav Rakitsky 
handled a cross from Adrián López, and scored again from close range following 
Cristian Tello’s pass in the final moments of stoppage time to secure a 2-2 
draw.

“I do not want to talk much,” the Shakhtar coach, Mircea Lucescu, said 
afterwards. “There was a great deal of euphoria and joy at the end of the game 
and then we conceded two goals … It is very hard.” The match attracted a full 
house of 34,000 despite being played in Lviv, over 1,000km from Dontesk, which 
is held by pro-Russian rebels.

Elsewhere in Group H Bate Borisov beat Athletic Bilbao 2-1. Denis Polyakov 
headed in at the far post after the ball was sent across the goalmouth by 
Nikolai Signevich in the 19th minute, and the roles were reversed when 
Karnitski scored from Signevich’s pass in the 41st minute, with his shot 
wrong-footing goalkeeper Gorka Iraizoz who lost his balance. Aritz Aduriz 
pulled one back for Bilbao on the counter-attack from a pass by Iker Munaian 
just before half-time.

In Group F Ajax were held 1-1 by Apoel Nicosia, with both goals coming in the 
space of three first-half minutes. Ajax opened the scoring in the 28th minute 
through Danish forward Lucas Andersen, only for Apoel’s Brazilian midfielder 
Gustavo Manduca to level from the penalty spot three minutes later. The draw 
extended Ajax’s winless away streak in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> to eight games and gave 
the Cypriot team its first point in this season’s competition.

Schalke and Maribor drew 1-1 at the Veltins-Arena, Damjan Bohar putting 
Maribor in front from Mitja Viler’s cross in the first half only for Klaas-Jan 
Huntelaar to equalise with a cool finish from just outside the box after Mitja 
Viler’s disastrous back-pass. “We started well but then we conceded a stupid 
counter-attack goal,” said Huntelaar, whose side dominated much of the match as 
Maribor sat back and attacked occasionally on the break. “We made it difficult 
for ourselves. We were slow and careless and made too many mistakes.”

Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> had chances to seal 
victory, but Maribor’s goalkeeper Jasmin Handanovic made two saves from Julian 
Draxler, and Kevin-Prince Boateng’s volley sailed wide.

Both teams are now two points behind Chelsea in Group G. “We should have used 
our chances,” Schalke coach Jens Keller said. “We played well early in the 
game. We showed will power and we tried our best, there is nothing to reproach 
my players. We conceded a stupid goal and once they went ahead it was 
difficult. Maribor defended very deep.”
 