
BIRMINGHAM 2-1 BRENTFORD

Gary Rowett insisted he is not downhearted at the prospect of losing winger 
Demarai Gray, who is in talks with Leicester. “If it goes through I wish him 
all the best. He is an ambitious young player but we’ve had two games without 
him and done well. The club have done all the right things and now we’ll have 
funds to strengthen. We can now move the team in a different direction.”
Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> manager Dean Smith 
said: “It was a compliment to us how deep Birmingham played. They frustrated 
their own supporters in the first half and they scored against the run of play.”

BOLTON 0-2 HUDDERSFIELD

David Wagner played down praise from Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> fans after the win 
completed an unbeaten holiday programme with the away supporters singing: 
“‘David Wagner is better than Klopp”. Wagner said: “I think the fans are in 
euphoria. If you are euphoric then sometimes you say something you normally 
don’t say.”Neil Lennon admitted his Bolton side showed their fragility. 
“Huddersfield got the break with the goal and we seem to sag psychologically. 
Zach Clough had two good chances to equalise but scoring has been a problem all 
season.”

CARDIFF 1-0 BLACKBURN

Russell Slade said he expects Kenwyne Jones’s Cardiff exit to be completed 
quickly after the striker missed the win over Blackburn to hold talks with a 
club in Dubai. In Jones’s absence Joe Mason grabbed the only goal of the game 
to break a three-match winless run for his side. “Kenwyne was on a huge wage 
here so it is a financial decision. Hopefully it may allow us some room to do 
some January business.”Paul Lambert said: “We should have had a stonewall 
penalty. I don’t know how the referee missed it. But I’m not going to complain 
about it and get into trouble.”

And the rest

Sean Dyche felt Burnley were the better team in a hard-fought 0-0 draw against 
Ipswich. “It was tight. They make it hard, the ball comes forwards virtually 
any time it’s near their back line and we dealt with that very well. We did 
well with all the first balls, second contact, the ugly side of the game.”■ 
Charltoninterim manager Karel Fraeye praised his players after they battled 
back to draw 1-1 withNottingham Forest. “The team showed fight and desire from 
the first until the last.”■ MK Dons manager Karl Robinson refused to blame 
Antony Kay after the defender’s late own goal denied his side their first away 
win since the opening day in a 1-1 draw atLeeds. “Let’s not talk about it. It’s 
human error and we can accept that.”■ Preston manager Simon Grayson denied he 
had to issue a half-time rollicking as they came from behind to beat struggling 
Rotherham 2-1. “There was no hair dryer. The players are honest enough to know 
that we weren’t good enough and they knew what we needed to do.”■ And Reading 
manager Brian McDermott praised striker Matej Vydra for winning possession to 
create the goal that gave his side a 1-0 win over strugglingBristol City. 
“Matej worked his socks off.”
 