
Birmingham 1-2 Sheffield Wednesday

Gary Hooper fired Wednesday into the play-off zone with two second-half goals 
at St Andrew’s, earning high praise from the coachLee Bullen. “His first was 
fantastic. Some of the one-touch play on a difficult pitch was sublime. To go 
and get the second a few minutes later made us ecstatic. He has been a great 
signing for us.”Gary Rowett said he had been left frustrated. “In the second 
half we had a great chance when [Clayton] Donaldson missed from close range. I 
was disappointed – another goal at that point might have deflated Wednesday and 
put it out of their reach.”

David Nugent earns Middlesbrough point against Blackburn Rovers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/06/middlesbrough-blackburn-rovers-championship-match-report>
Bolton 2-1 Rotherham

Neil Lennon believes Bolton are building the momentum they need to pull off a 
great escape after Kaiyne Woolery scored his first career goal to win it in 
injury time. “It’s a really important win and it keeps us in touch now with 
some difficult games to come. That’s seven points from nine and that’s as much 
as anyone can have expected under the circumstances. We may fail and we may 
succeed but we have a fight on.”Neil Redfearn said: “We were the best side but 
if you miss gilt-edged chances, it always leaves you open. We should have had a 
point at least.”

Leeds 0-1 Nottingham Forest

Steve Evans rued the lack of an offside flag after seeing Nélson Oliveira end 
Leeds’ six-match unbeaten sequence. “Give credit to Forest. They had one chance 
and took it - but the goal was a fraction offside so I’m frustrated. Overall 
the fans have every right to be disappointed – our problem is that some players 
are not good enough and the fans recognise that.”Dougie Freedman said: “There 
were really encouraging signs again out there that we are all getting behind 
each other. We have learned from our mistakes and now you are seeing a very 
complete team.”

Round-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/feb/06/football-league-your-thoughts>

Cardiff had 15 shots, five on target, but ended up with a 0-0 home draw against
MK Dons. Stand-in managerial duo Wade Elliott and John Pemberton handed over a 
winningBristol City side to new manager Lee Johnson, who takes over tomorrow – 
overseeing a 1-0 victory atCharlton. ■ Derby are still without a win since 
Boxing Day after a 1-1 draw atFulham. “Under normal circumstances, if the 
performances and results had been better, this might have been seen as a very 
valuable point,” said Paul Clement. “But as it is, it’s not what we wanted.”■ 
Alan Browne headed a dramatic late winner to givePreston a 2-1 victory over 
Huddersfield. ■ New QPR signing Nasser El Khayati set up their winner in a 1-0 
home victory overIpswich. ■ And Reading ground out a 0-0 home draw against 
Wolves.
 