
Bobby Zamora climbed off the bench to score the winning goal in a 2-1 victory 
forBrighton & Hove Albion for the second time in four days as Albion came from 
behind to beatBristol City.

The 34-year-old striker’s contribution on Saturday was his first goal since 
returning to the club and gave Brighton a late win at Leeds. He repeated the 
trick on Tuesday night as Chris Hughton’s team maintained their unbeaten start 
and four-point lead .

Derrick Williams volleyed City ahead after 17 minutes but Sam Baldock scored 
against his former club to levelled things up early in the second half. Zamora, 
on as a 76th-minute substitute for Tomer Hemed, was on target just five minutes 
after his introduction, beating goalkeeper Frank Fielding with a low shot from 
15 yards out.

Birmingham City are up to second in the standings after winning 1-0 at Bolton 
Wanderers. Defender Paul Robinson followed up the goal at the weekend which 
ended his eight-year drought in league football with the winner against his 
former club as the Blues recorded a fourth straight success.

Middlesbrough, Reading and Burnley were all four points behind Brighton before 
kick-off but all three dropped points. George Friend’s 86th-minute own goal 
meant Boro were beaten 1-0 atCardiff while Reading and Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> both drew 1-1 at Rotherham United
 andNottingham Forest respectively.

Nick Blackman’s superb strike put Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> in front at the New York Stadium 
but Danny Collins equalised to ensure Neil Redfearn got a point from his first 
home game as Millers manager.

Matt Taylor marked his first league start of the season with a last-minute 
leveller for Burnley after Eric Lichaj had given Forest a 73rd-minute lead. 
Henri Lansbury, a transfer target for the Clarets in the summer, was 
controversially sent off shortly after his side went ahead following a foul on 
Ben Mee.

Paul Gallagher’s double and another goal from Daniel Johnson saw Preston climb 
out of the bottom three with a 3-0 win atCharlton, who are now in the 
relegation places.

It was also 3-0 at the KC Stadium where Hull beat Ipswich thanks to goals from 
Alex Bruce, Chuba Akpom and David Meyler. The Tigers are now unbeaten in six 
league games and up to fourth in the table.

Nahki Wells and Jamie Paterson were on the scoresheet as Huddersfield won 2-0 
at home againstMK Dons while it finished goalless at Loftus Road between QPR and
Sheffield Wednesday.
 