
"This is the Champions League, not the Chumpions League!"

So bawled the exasperated commentator reflecting on the zany finale in St 
Petersburg for the benefit of the English television audience. As this 
seesawing game lurched towards the finish, a memorable climax was produced 
thanks to two moments of comedy goalkeeping. First Yuri Zhevnov produced a 
classic howler to gift Benfica a late equaliser. Then down the other end Artur 
fumbled to provide an even later matchwinner for Zenit. Once all the blushing 
had subsided, the two teams could reflect upon an entertaining affair which 
sets up the second leg beautifully. Benfica have two away goals to their 
credit. Zenit have the advantage of a win to protect, and the encouragement of 
having earned a goalless draw in Portugal during the group stages (they emerged 
unscathed from a trip to Porto).

Luciano Spalletti described it as "a very emotional and passionate game. My 
players won this with their hearts, although they showed a lot of quality as 
well." True enough. The former Roma coach has done a spectacular job since he 
moved to Russia, winning the title in his inaugural season, adding the cup, and 
taking Zenit into theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> knockout phase for the 
first time. He is already considered the most successful foreign coach in the 
history of Russian football. Although Zenit still have a big task ahead of them 
in Lisbon, they are capable of achieving it.

And Spalletti showed that those inside San Siro were not the only elated 
Italians on Wednesday night.

Talking of champs and chumps …

Arsenal's seasonal crumble is on the cards. It speaks volumes that the main 
sentiment as their beleaguered team head to Sunderland in the FA Cup, and then 
host Tottenham in the Premier League, is unremitting pessimism. It is not like 
they haven't been here before. Tumbling out of competitions in quick succession 
is a foible that happens with worrying regularity. Even the famous Invincibles 
of 2004 crashed out of the Champions League and FA Cup in a matter of days.

If that mauling at the Serie A champions, Milan, is the prelude to another 
calamitous collapse, the Arsenal hierarchy really has no excuse to put their 
heads in the sand and, when they come up for air, mutter something about 
sustainable business models. This is an unsustainable football model.Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have lost seven of their last 17 
games, and this is not even their first blip of a campaign blighted by 
desperate lows.

So is there any reason for optimism? They could dig out a tape of Deportivo La 
Coruña's 2004 vintage, a side that produced one of the greatest of all European 
comebacks having been trounced at San Siro. Trailing 4-1 from the first leg, 
they won 4-0 at the Riazor to floor Milan. "The game turned out exactly the way 
I dreamed," said the coach, Javier Irureta, afterwards, and even that was an 
understatement.

I know, I know. Rearrange the words "straws", "clutching" and "at". But that 
is all Arsenal have to hang on to now.

For an apparently ageing side, Milan don't half have some zip

A friend who lives in Milan had not been too positive about Massimiliano 
Allegri's team before their meeting with Arsenal. TheRossoneri were, he 
reckoned, worryingly old and slow – a criticism that has in fairness been 
levelled at them for some time now. That stereotype was demolished by a 
performance that displayed unrelenting energy, zest, and spontaneity. Italian 
worries that traditional English pace might expose them were laughed out of 
town once Kevin-Prince Boateng, Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Robinho went on the 
rampage, while Theo Walcott did his invisible man routine.

Although Arsenal's first XI was exactly three years younger than Milan's, 
Allegri's team were hardly full of pensioners. The coach does have some old 
heads at his disposal but notably Alessandro Nesta was on the bench, while 
Clarence Seedorf and Massimo Ambrosini played only bit parts. Once Seedorf had 
made his early departure, the only outfield player that might be considered a 
veteran was 34-year-old Mark van Bommel. The bulk of the team was in the 
mid-late 20s age bracket, normally the peak age for a footballer. Allegri has 
been clever in the way he has quietly evolved a more youthful, invigorated team 
while keeping the wise old heads around to lend their experience.

Most people can't see beyond a Spanish winner this season, but Milan's 
excellence shows they are capable of having a say in this competition.

Barça's pass masters outdo Alexis Sánchez

Barcelona's young Chilean had every reason to feel chuffed by his contribution 
to an impressive statement of intent at Bayer Leverkusen. He scored two 
expertly taken goals to give his team a handsome first-leg advantage, and 
earned the praise of his manager. "Alexis is putting in a lot of work and is 
scoring a lot. He opens up the pitch for us and his movement is great," 
enthused Pep Guardiola. "I'm very happy for him. He's a very humble guy." 
Sánchez, who hails from Tocopilla, a town in the north of Chile with a 
population that's about a quarter of the capacity of the Camp Nou, was born 
into a family of fishermen, and his father left them soon after to work in a 
mine.

He has added something to Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> this season, and he was 
deserving of the headlines this week. But, typically of this team, the most 
beautiful thing about both of his goals was not his input, but the assist. 
First Lionel Messi, then Cesc Fábregas, delivered breathtaking passes to give 
Sánchez something to chase. Those sublime touches are worth watching again and 
again.

The garden may not be entirely rosy back in La Liga, but Barça will not give 
up their European crown without a flourish.

Apoel need another miracle

As the Cypriot underdogs headed home after a 1-0 defeat in Lyon the glass was 
at the exact point where half empty meets half full. On the downside, they 
struggled as Lyon exerted their authority with a dominant performance – they 
created 15 chances to Apoel's one. The upshot is that they only lost by a 
narrow scoreline, one they feel they can overturn at their own ground.

The Lyon coach, Rémi Garde, senses that this advantage is precarious. "We 
would have liked to score more goals. Hopefully we won't regret that in the 
second leg," he mused.

Apoel are not unfamiliar with this kind of challenge. They experienced it 
before this Champions League odyssey really took off. They had been beaten 1-0 
away by Wisla Krakow in the qualifiers, but recovered to win 3-1 in Nicosia, a 
moment that left a profound impression on the coach, Ivan Jovanovic. The Serb 
has worked more than enough miracles already during this campaign and sooner or 
later the magic touch will presumably wear off, but one thing is certain. His 
players are not short of faith.

"It will be a different story in Nicosia," suggested the defender William 
Boaventura. "Lyon are a very good team. They get to this stage every year and 
of course people expect them to beat us. But we're not going to give them the 
victory without a fight. We always tend to struggle away then we win at home. I 
really believe we can turn this tie around at home."
 