
Brighton got the result they were probably hoping for at Turf Moor where 
Burnley and Middlesbrough drew, and they moved level on 84 points with the 
Lancashire club after a comprehensive 4-0 home win againstQPR.

Boro are top with 86 and all three have three more games to play, with the 
finale for Brighton being a trip to Teesside to take on Aitor Karanka’s side on 
7 May.

Anthony Knockaert and Jiri Skalak scored quick-fire goals either side of 
half-time to put Albion in the driving seat before a Connor Goldson header and 
another Knockaert effort ensured a fifth win in six games for the south-coast 
club.

Hull and Derby guaranteed themselves play-off spots with away victories.

The Tigers fell behind to an early Jake Cooper header at Reading but goals 
from Abel Hernández and Andrew Robertson saw them win 2-1.

Derby edged a topsy-turvy game at Bristol City 3-2. Johnny Russell put the 
Rams ahead but goals from Jonathan Kodjia and Bobby Reid turned the game on its 
head before half-time. Craig Bryson equalised for the visitors before a Tom 
Ince effort sealed victory for Darren Wassall’s side.

Sheffield Wednesday stay sixth after a 0-0 draw with MK Dons, who remain nine 
points from safety behind a handful of teams with three matches left.

Cardiff could still catch the Owls but their 2-1 defeat at Brentford was a big 
blow to their hopes. Scott Hogan’s late double did the damage for the Bluebirds 
although Kenneth Zohore replied two minutes from the end.

Goals from Sol Bamba and Toumani Diagouraga saw Leeds beat Wolves 2-1 at 
Elland Road. George Saville pulled one back for the visitors.

Greg Cunningham’s late effort earned Preston a point at Birmingham where it 
finished 2-2. Clayton Donaldson’s double had Blues in control before Alan 
Browne halved the deficit and Cunningham levelled.

Ipswich needed an injury-time goal from Jonas Knudsen to salvage a 1-1 draw at 
home toFulham, who had led through Moussa Dembélé’s 66th-minute goal.

It was also 1-1 at the City Ground as Dexter Blackstock and Danny Graham got 
on the scoresheet in a draw betweenNottingham Forest and Blackburn.

Nahki Wells cancelled out Greg Halford’s opener for Rotherham as Huddersfield 
earned a 1-1 draw at the New York Stadium to ensure theirChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> status.
 