
Bristol City staged a dramatic fightback to claim their first point of the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> season in a 
2-2 draw againstLeeds at Ashton Gate.

Leeds had seemed on course for their first win of the campaign after taking a 
two-goal lead inside 52 minutes through Mirco Antenucci and Chris Wood.

But City scored through the substitute Kieran Agard in the 89th-minute before 
Aden Flint capped a grandstand finish when he bundled home the equaliser deep 
into stoppage time after the Leeds goalkeeper Marco Silvestri had failed to 
hold Marlon Pack’s header.

City played some decent football at times but were again let down by their 
shyness in front of goal and it is easy to see why they are willing to break 
their transfer record for the purchase of Brentford striker Andre Gray for 
around £9m.

Their manager, Steve Cotterill, cut a frustrated figure as his side were 
denied by a combination of faulty finishing and good goalkeeping from the 
Italian Silvestri.

It looked as if they would be punished for a third successive league game 
after Antenucci had profited from a slick Leeds counter-attack six minutes 
before the break.

Wood slipped in Antenucci and the Italian fell over Ben Hamer’s outstretched 
arm as the City goalkeeper came rushing out.

Hamer was booked for his part in the incident and Antenucci composed himself 
to send the goalkeeper the wrong way from the spot for his second goal of the 
season.

At 1-0 down, Jonathan Kodjia wasted a great chance to equalise after Silvestri 
could only parry Aaron Wilbraham’s effort and it was a miss that would come to 
haunt City within seven minutes of the restart.

Leeds launched another swift raid and this time Antenucci turned provider for 
Wood to score a first Leeds goal since his summer move from Leicester as he 
rifled a powerful shot past his former Foxes team-mate Hamer.

City fans were angry the game had been allowed to continue with Wilbraham down 
injured and their mood was not brightened by the sight of Bamba being booked 
for the original challenge after the goal celebrations had died down.

The Robins had started in positive fashion as they sought to get the weekend’s 
4-2 home defeat to Brentford out of their system.

Wilbraham was foiled by Bamba’s brave defending at the near post and Callum 
Robinson fired over as the Leeds goal came under mounting pressure.

But Leeds slowly edged their way into the contest and Wood saw his effort 
deflected wide before Tom Adeyemi headed over Kalvin Phillips’ cross. Flint 
rose superbly to power a header goalwards and Leeds were only spared by Stuart 
Dallas’ sentry duty on the post, but the centre-back would have the final word.

Modou Sougou rescued a point for Sheffield Wednesday with a 90th-minute 
equaliser to earn a 1-1 draw at home toReading. Danny Williams had opened the 
scoring early in the second half but the visitors were denied maximum reward 
from their trip to South Yorkshire.

With the clock counting down, Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> looked set to take all three 
points after largely keeping the home side at bay, until Sougou struck 
following a lapse from the goalkeeper Jonathan Bond, who failed to deal 
effectively with a ball pumped into the area.

Wednesday’s head coach, Carlos Carvalhal, handed a debut in goal to the summer 
recruit Lewis Price, who replaced the injured Keiren Westwood and they made a 
positive start to the game with Marco Matias trying a volley which took a 
deflection wide.

Reading’s Oliver Norwood took a long-range free-kick which cleared the bar but 
they soon posed another attacking threat but Chris Gunter put an effort over.

Wednesday were forced to make a change in the late stages of the first half 
when the captain Glenn Loovens limped off and was replaced by Vincent Sasso.

As the visitors continued to press, Williams fired in a shot which took a 
deflection wide.

Wednesday survived a scare soon after the re-start when Price failed to hold 
on to Orlando Sa’s firm drive and Hal Robson-Kanu – under pressure from Tom 
Lees – failed to hit the target from the rebound.

The respite was only temporary, however, as Williams put Reading in front in 
the 49th minute, firing past Price from inside the area after receiving the 
ball from the lively Sa.

Price was called into action to save Norwood’s free-kick as Reading went in 
search of a second goal.

Sougou, brought on in the 57th minute, found Matias in a promising position 
with a good ball from the right, but the forward failed to make a good 
connection and Bond gathered the ball easily.

It looked like being a fruitless night for the Owls, who failed to find the 
potency in attack that saw them win their first two home fixtures of the 
season, scoring six goals in the process.

But Sougou ensured that their unbeaten record at Hillsborough remained intact 
when he pounced in the area after Bond spilled a deep cross from Rhoys Wiggins 
and found the net with a first-time shot.

The goal provided much relief for Wednesday, who had failed to force Bond into 
making a serious save, and their fans went home reasonably happy.

Sone Aluko scored an 86th-minute winner as Hull City maintained their unbeaten 
start to the season with a 2-1 victory overFulham at the KC Stadium.

The spoils looked set to be shared after the former Hull favourite Tom 
Cairney’s second-half goal had cancelled out Ahmed Elmohamady’s 34th-minute 
opener.

But City, who dominated the first half, rallied from the setback and 
deservedly claimed the win after Aluko netted from close range with four 
minutes remaining.

The Cottagers were thrashed 6-0 on their last visit to the KC Stadium in 
December 2013, and although they were able to avoid a similar humbling they now 
have one point from their opening three games, with Hull on seven.

Hull brought David Meyler, Aluko and Abel Hernández back into their first XI 
and it was the latter who almost made an impact inside the first 30 seconds. 
The Uruguayan, who was returning from a three-match suspension for punching the 
Manchester United defender Phil Jones last season, raced on to Tom 
Huddlestone’s headed through-ball which was only just cut out byFulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> goalkeeper Marcus Bettinelli.

Hull continued to soldier forward although a compact Fulham defence initially 
meant chances were few and far between, with Kit Symons’ men showing little 
inclination to attack.

From a corner, the unmarked Curtis Davies saw a rasping half-volley skim the 
top of the crossbar to rouse the crowd, while Hull, through their full-backs 
Moses Odubajo and Andy Robertson, were creating chances from both flanks.

Indeed it was Robertson who provided the assist for the 34th-minute opener, 
with the left-back collecting the ball from a short corner and providing the 
cross for Elmohamady to send a towering header at the back post past a 
despairing Bettinelli.

Another Robertson-Elmohamady combination resulted in the ball being deflected 
just wide and Hull ended the half in firm command as only a fingertip save from 
Bettinelli prevented a Hernández flick from doubling the home side’s lead.

It was the Fulham keeper’s last contribution of the night, though, as a clash 
with Matt Smith in the build-up saw him carried off on a stretcher to be 
replaced by Andy Lonergan shortly before half-time.

The visitors were a different proposition early in the second half and were 
only denied a leveller when Robertson’s last-ditch interception stopped Ross 
McCormack getting on the end of Jazz Richards’ cut-back.

From the resulting corner, Shaun Hutchinson sent a header whistling over the 
bar at the near post before Fulham’s persistence paid off in the 69th minute – 
although they were grateful for another error from McGregor.

The Scotland goalkeeper, whose gaffe at Wolves on Sunday was widely 
highlighted, spilled a cross under pressure, and although Hull rode the first 
wave of attack they failed to clear their lines properly and were out of 
position when Cairney sent a lovely left-footed shot into the top corner from 
just outside the area.

McGregor made amends with a diving save from McCormack’s 30-yard free-kick, 
which proved a crucial stop as Hull, following a surge of pressure in the 
latter stages, claimed all three points.

Nikica Jelavic’s header bobbled kindly into the path of Aluko and he calmly 
slotted home to give Hull a second home win of the season.
 