
George Boyd’s volley soon after half-time proved decisive as in-form Burnley 
claimed a fourth successive league win with a 2-1 victory overMK Dons at Turf 
Moor. Dominant for large spells of the match, the Clarets’ only disappointment 
will be that they did not win by more in the end. Goals from Sam Vokes and Boyd 
were enough to secure the victory – Carl Baker’s header late in the first half 
gave the away side parity for no more than five minutes.

The win lifted Burnley up to third, as Hull City ended Cardiff City’s unbeaten 
start to the Championship season by securing a 2-0 win at theCardiff City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> Stadium.

Mohamed Diamé, making just his sixth appearance since December, grabbed the 
opener in the eighth minute, firing home when the Cardiff defence failed to 
deal with Sone Aluko’s cross.

Abel Hernández then sealed the win with 10 minutes to go, controlling Diamé’s 
lovely pass to fire low into the net to give the visitors their first away win 
of the campaign and move them above their hosts in the table. The leaders,
Brighton & Hove Albion, won 2-1 at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/brighton-and-hove-albion-rotherham-championship-match-report>
 toRotherham United, while Middlesbrough are up to second thanks to a 3-1 home 
win againstBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/middlesbrough-christian-stuani-brentford>
.

Cardiff had chances to level through Kenwyne Jones and Kagisho Dikgacoi, but 
were left frustrated as they had a trio of penalty appeals turned down.

Dexter Blackstock has taken on the goalscoring mantle for Nottingham Forest 
and responded with the only goal in an impressive 1-0 away win to inflict
Birmingham City’s first defeat of the season.

Blackstock, the Antigua and Barbuda international, had generally been kept in 
check but in the 54th minute popped up to notch the vital goal to give Forest 
their second win in four days.

Clayton Donaldson’s goalscoring form, however, deserted him after his 
hat-trick at the weekend and went a long way to explain Birmingham’s defeat.

Tommy Smith headed his second goal of the season as Ipswich Town recovered from
their thrashing at Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/11/reading-ipswich-town-championship-match-report>
 to inflict onLeeds United their first defeat of the season.

The central defender stole in to head home the only goal of the game in the 
32nd minute as Ipswich responded to Friday’s 5-1 defeat in fine style.

Mick McCarthy’s side defended doggedly and broke swiftly on occasions to keep 
Leeds on their toes, while it proved a disappointing night for Uwe Rösler’s 
side, who had drawn five and won one of their previous five league games this 
season.

Leeds have now failed to win in their past nine home matches, their last 
Elland Road victory coming in March against Ipswich.

Huddersfield Town defeated Charlton Athletic 2-1 at The Valley for their first 
victory of the season – and the first as a manager for Chris Powell at his 
former club.

The result lifted the visitors out of the Championship’s bottom three to 
secure a satisfying night for Powell, the former Charlton manager, who was 
sacked by the club owner, Roland Duchatelet, in March 2014 little over two 
months after he had taken charge.

Harry Bunn and Emyr Huws put the visitors two goals to the good within 34 
minutes and, although Charlton pulled one back through Naby Sarr five minutes 
before the break, they could not force an equaliser. Charlton fell to 12th in 
the table.

Derby County secured their second consecutive Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> victory with a 1-0 success 
over 10-manReading. Derby had got their first league win, after a sluggish 
start to the campaign under their new head coach Paul Clement, when beating 
Preston 2-1 away on Saturday.

An even first half ended controversially when Orlando Sá, Reading’s Portuguese 
striker, was sent off for appearing to head-butt the Derby defender Jason 
Shackell.

They struggled to make their extra man count but they clinched the three 
points – and ended Reading’s seven-match unbeaten run – when Tom Ince calmly 
slotted home midway through the second half.

Aaron Wilbraham’s late header rescued a point for Bristol City as they 
snatched a 1-1 draw againstPreston North End, in a game between two of the clubs
promoted last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/preston-north-end-swindon-town-league-one-play-off-final-match-report>
 from League One.

Neil Kilkenny’s brilliant second-half strike looked to have given Preston 
their first league win in five games before Wilbraham struck to equalise at 
Deepdale.

The draw ends a run of three straight league defeats for Preston and also 
makes it three games without a win forBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity>.

Fernando Forestieri missed the game’s best chance as Sheffield Wednesday were 
frustrated away toBolton in a goalless draw.

The 25-year-old Italian, a £3m signing by Wednesday from Watford last month, 
shot over from inside the six-yard box shortly after half-time, from Atdhe 
Nuhiu’s pass, as the best chance of an uninspiring game went begging.

Bolton have scored just three league goals this season, and looked short of 
ideas in the final third as they struggled to test Wednesday’s 19-year-old 
goalkeeper, Joe Wildsmith. Wednesday are 18th, with Bolton one place above them.
 