
Already-qualified Borussia Dortmund crushed Legia Warsaw 8-4 – a record for 
the most goals in aChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> match – helped by a 
Marco Reus hat-trick.

Dortmund scored five times in 15 minutes with Shinji Kagawa grabbing two goals 
while Reus, back after six months out injured, completed the scoring in 
stoppage time. They had gone behind early on to an Aleksandar Prijovic goal but 
that sparked a remarkable rush of seven goals in 15 first-half minutes that 
gave the home side a 5-2 interval lead.

Pochettino gamble falls flat in Monaco and Spurs crash out after five games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-tottenham-hotspur-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
Dortmund are top of Group F on 13 points, two ahead of Real Madrid, who beat 
Sporting 2-1 away, before the two sides meet in Spain in December to decide who 
takes top spot in the section. Real had to rely on a later Karim Benzema goal 
to see off their opponents, after an Adrien Silva penalty 10 minutes from time 
had equalised Raphaël Varane’s first-half strike.

Juventus qualified for the knockout stage after Leonardo Bonucci and Mario 
Mandzukic scored late goals to give them a stormy 3-1 win atSevilla, who played 
the second half with 10 men.

Nicolás Pareja gave the hosts a ninth-minute lead but they had Franco Vázquez 
sent off in the 36th minute for two bookings and Claudio Marchisio equalised in 
first-half stoppage time with a controversial penalty awarded by the English 
referee Mark Clattenburg.

The Sevilla coach, Jorge Sampaoli, was also dismissed for persistent dissent 
and watched the final half-hour of the match among the home supporters.

Bonucci fired Juventus in front in the 85th minute and Mandzukic completed 
their win in stoppage time. Juventus moved top of Group H with 11 points from 
five games, one ahead of Sevilla.

In the other Group H fixture, Lyon edged past bottom-placed Dinamo Zagreb to 
keep their hopes of qualifying alive. Alexandre Lacazette scored a 72nd minute 
goal in the Croatian capital to give them a 1-0 victory and ensure a 2-0 home 
win over Sevilla on the final matchday would mean they reach the last 16.

Porto missed their chance to put pressure on Leicester City at the top of 
Group G after they were held to a goalless away draw byCopenhagen. They sit two 
points ahead of the Danish side in second place going into the final round of 
matches, meaning both can still go through.

In the day’s early game, Bayer Leverkusen were held to a 1-1 draw at CSKA 
Moscow but the Tottenham’s defeat in Monaco means the Bundesliga side are 
guaranteed to go through in second place.

Kevin Volland gave them a 16th minute lead and later struck a post but Natcho 
equalised for the Russians 14 minutes from time. CSKA can qualify for the 
Europa League if they defeat Tottenham at Wembley in their final game.Guardian 
sport and agencies
 