
Hull City moved to the top of the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> on goal difference after 
second-half efforts from Andy Robertson and Sam Clucas secured a 2-0 win over
Brentford at Griffin Park.

Steve Bruce’s side had withstood heavy pressure in the first half before 
Robertson opened the scoring in the 67th minute. Clucas added the second with 
four minutes left to wrap up Hull’s fourth away league win of the season.

Bruce said afterwards: “Being top of the league has its own expectations. We 
are a big scalp as the bloke behind kept reminding me, but we are living up to 
it.”

While Hull were winning the overnight leaders, Brighton, were being held to a 
0-0 draw at Hillsborough bySheffield Wednesday, who extended their unbeaten run 
to 11 matches.

Burnley took advantage to go above Brighton, who slipped to third, after Andre 
Gray hit two goals in a 3-1 home win againstFulham. Gray, who scored twice in 
the 2-1 win over Huddersfield on Saturday, gaveBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> the lead with header after 18 
minutes and struck again before the interval. Ross McCormack reduced the 
deficit in the 51st minute, but Matt Taylor completed Burnley’s victory in 
added time.

Andreas Weimann was on target for Derby County as they beat QPR 1-0 at home to 
stay in touch with the leaders. QPR’s James Perch was sent off in the last 
minute for a second bookable offence.

Alex Mowatt ended Leeds United’s eight-month wait for a home win when he 
curled in the only goal of the game againstCardiff City in the 63rd minute. It 
was also head coach Steve Evans’ first victory since taking charge in October 
and he admitted: “At the end of the game I was quite an emotional man, I was 
welling up.”

There was little to excite the crowd at St Andrew’s save for a 54th-minute 
header by theBlackburn Rovers’ defender Shane Duffy which hit the bar as the 
game withBirmingham City ended in a goalless draw.

Bristol City clinched only their third league win of the season by beating 
Wolverhampton Wanderers 1-0 at Ashton Gate thanks to a Jonathan Kodjia header 
just before half-time.

City’s manager, Steve Cotterill, praised Kodjia for a “brilliant” performance 
and added: “We have been giving Jonathan a bit of stick over his heading, so 
fair play to him. It was a superb cross, but not the sort of goal I expect him 
to score. But he is doing a great job for us.”

Ainsley Maitland-Niles, the teenage forward on loan from Arsenal, struck his 
first senior goal to giveIpswich Town the lead against struggling Bolton 
Wanderers before being forced off injured before the interval. Brett Pitman 
made it 2-0 to Ipswich midway through the second half and Bolton remain in the 
bottom three.

MK Dons ended a three-game losing run thanks to Dean Bowditch’s 29th minute 
goal in a 1-0 home win againstCharlton, while Nottingham Forest’s run of 
matches without a win extended to eight after Eoin Doyle’s second-minute goal 
was enough to earnPreston victory at Deepdale.

Ola John fired a late equaliser to rescue a point for Reading in a 2-2 home 
draw againstHuddersfield. Oliver Norwood’s 15th minute free-kick cancelled out 
Jamie Paterson’s opener for Huddersfield after just 64 seconds and although 
Nahki Wells (26) restored the visitors’ lead, John struck for Reading in the 
84th minute.
 