
Bristol City 6-0 Bolton Wanderers


Lee Johnson praised the character of his Bristol City team at the end of a 
difficult week but warned there was no scope to relax. The Robins opened up a 
six-point cushion to the bottom three after this thumping victory over 
rock-bottom Bolton, after some negative publicity involving defender Luke 
Ayling at the Cheltenham Festival. Johnson said: “The dressing room was quiet 
before the game and I didn’t know quite what to make of it. Thankfully, it 
proved the calm before the storm. The players were desperate to show the good 
side ofBristol City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> after 
the week we had been through and they deserve huge credit. I am chuffed for 
them.”

Burnley 1-1 Wolves


Burnley’s Sean Dyche insists he is nowhere close to hitting the panic button 
despite seeing Wolves snatch a late draw at Turf Moor. The Clarets looked set 
to be heading for a seventh-straightChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> win before Danny Batth 
earned Wolves a share of the spoils in injury time. “It was a really close game 
and credit to Wolves, their game plan worked quite well,” Dyche said. “People 
need to remember that despite our position, nobody comes here just to lay down 
and roll over. Nothing ever comes easy for us here or when we’re playing away 
from home. That’s something that we all have to learn in life.”

Sheffield Wednesday 3-0 Charlton


Carlos Carvalhal knew Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> had to play the 
waiting game against Charlton. For 45 minutes the Owls were frustrated by the 
struggling Addicks but it was a different story after the break as Wednesday 
strengthened their grip on a play-off place. Carvalhal said: “The team for 
moments in the first half lacked confidence but never lost control or 
organisation. We knew Charlton couldn’t press all the time and when we had more 
time and space we started playing very well. We are the second or third best 
attack in the division and I am very happy about this because we promised our 
fans good attacking football.”

And the rest


MK Dons slipped into the relegation places after losing 2-1 to Brighton, who 
moved into the second automatic promotion slot. ■ Neil Warnock’sRotherham moved 
out of the relegation zone with an impressive 1-0 win atIpswich, thanks to Leon 
Best’s goal. ■Blackburn won 1-0 at Brentford, their first away win in nine 
matches. ■Fulham’s winless streak extended to six games after an entertaining 
1-1 draw away toBirmingham. ■ Eoin Doyle scored an injury-time equaliser as 
Preston scrambled a draw against QPR. ■ Cardiff maintained their push for the 
play-offs, Lex Immers earning them a point in a 1-1 draw atReading.
 