
Charlton's march to the League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> title suffered a 
setback as goals from Anthony Wordsworth and Steven Gillespie gaveColchester a 
surprise 2-0 win at The Valley. Chris Powell's side went into the game on the 
back of a 10-match unbeaten run and without a loss at home all season, but 
Wordsworth's opening goal after five minutes was a prelude to worse things for 
the hosts and Gillespie's 73rd-minute second sealed their fate.

But the Addicks' 13-point lead at the top remains intact after second-placed 
Sheffield United suffered a 3-2 defeat at struggling Walsall. The Blades twice 
battled back from behind, with Lee Williamson equalising Sam Mantom's 
55th-minute opener and Ched Evans cancelling out Jonathan Macken's second, only 
for Alex Nicholls's 81st-minute header to clinch it for the Saddlers.

Sheffield Wednesday took full advantage as they marked Dave Jones's first 
match in charge with an emphatic 4-1 win overBury which moved them to within a 
point of their city rivals. Michail Antonio opened the scoring in the 11th 
minute and second-half goals from Gary Madine, Ryan Lowe and Antonio again 
sealed Wednesday's win. Steven Schumacher hit a late consolation.

Huddersfield stay fourth after Alan Lee's 75th-minute winner at home to 
Hartlepool, but fifth-placed MK Dons slipped up in a 1-0 home defeat by Yeovil. 
Gary Williams scored for Yeovil in the 40th minute and the visitors hung on 
despite having Dean Parrett sent off in the 44th minute. Dean Bowditch missed a 
second-half penalty for the Dons.

John Welsh hit a last-minute equaliser to grab Tranmere a 1-1 home draw with 
Notts County, who had led through an early Damion Stewart header.

County's draw helped Carlisle move to within a point of the play-off zone with 
a 2-1 win overRochdale. Jon-Paul McGovern opened the scoring before Jason 
Kennedy equalised for Dale. Francois Zoko hit the 76th-minute winner.

Wycombe boosted their survival hopes with a 4-2 win over Leyton Orient. Stuart 
Beavon, Paul Hayes, Matt Bloomfield and Ben Strevens scored for the hosts 
inside the opening 39 minutes, before Orient staged a minor comeback after the 
interval through Matthew Spring and Marc Laird.

Saido Berahino's double gave Brentford a 2-0 win over Exeter, who had David 
Noble sent off.

Late goals from David Mirfin and Garry Thompson gave Scunthorpe a 2-1 win at 
Oldham, for whom Filipe Morais had scored a 78th-minute equaliser.

Chesterfield's goalless draw at Preston was enough to move the Spireites off 
the bottom.
 