
Thibaut Courtois will open talks over a renewed contract at Chelsea after his 
head coach,Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte>, 
described the Belgium international as “one of the best in the world” and 
compared him favourably to Gianluigi Buffon.

The Premier League leaders, who hope to register a 13th successive victory 
againstStoke City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> on Saturday 
to at the very least maintain their six-point advantage at the top, are to 
offer Courtois improved terms in excess of £150,000 a week in a bid to deflect 
long-standing interest from Real Madrid. His current deal runs until 2019 
though Chelsea, who had quoted Real a prohibitive valuation of £73m around 18 
months ago, are aware the Spanish club still covet a player to whom they sent a 
message of support when he damaged the meniscus in a knee last season.

Chelsea v Stoke City: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/chelsea-stoke-city-match-preview>
Conte did not seem surprised when that tactic was mentioned on Friday, and 
suggested he might consider doing the same to any Real player who suffered a 
similar long-term injury, but was adamant Courtois should be rewarded for his 
excellent form this season.

“Look, Thibaut is a Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> 
player and I want him to stay here,” the Italian said. “And I think he’s very 
happy to stay here. I see him with this club for many years. I want this, the 
club wants this. I don’t see any problem.

“He has great potential to continue to do great things, to reach great 
targets. [A new contract is] a club decision. But, in my opinion, yes, I think 
that a goalkeeper like Thibaut deserves to stay at Chelsea for many years and 
become a type of player to stay and write the story of this club, to become a 
legend at this club.”

The 24-year-old Belgian has made no secret of his desire to return to Madrid, 
where he spent three years on loan at Atlético from Chelsea, at some stage in 
his career but is currently settled at the south-west London club. His progress 
is being overseen by Conte’s goalkeeping coach, Gianluca Spinelli, following 
the departure of Christophe Lollichon – with whom he had endured a fractious 
working relationship – over the summer, and his form has been resurgent. The 
leaders have kept 10 clean sheets in their 12-game winning run, with Courtois 
outstanding in particular in recent victories over Sunderlandand Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
.

Conte played alongside Buffon at Juventus, and later coached him at the club 
and with the national side. “Their stories, their histories, are similar,” he 
said. “Gigi Buffon started his career young at Parma [at 17] and it was the 
same for Thibaut, who started to play early [at 16 for Genk]. I hope for 
Thibaut to repeat the same career as Gigi Buffon. Buffon, for me, is one of the 
best goalkeepers of all time. I was with him at Juventus before as team-mates, 
and then as his coach, in the national team also. Buffon is a legend for 
football, and I hope Thibaut has the same career as Gigi.

“For me Thibaut, already, is one of the best – if not the best – goalkeepers 
in the world. He’s working really well and is a fantastic goalkeeper. This 
season he’s playing very well, and you can see that he’s not only very good 
with his hands but also with his feet. He’s a complete goalkeeper. A modern 
goalkeeper. A fantastic goalkeeper at the top.”

Conte has moved to speak with Courtois’ compatriot, Michy Batshuayi, this week 
after opting against offering the Belgium striker his first Premier League 
start in the absence of the suspended Diego Costa in the match against 
Bournemouth on Boxing Day.

Batshuayi, a £33.2m arrival from Marseille last summer, was instead granted 
only a few minutes of the contest after replacing Eden Hazard with the home 
side 3-0 up. He will remain among the substitutes, with Costa restored to the 
lineup against Stoke.

Premier League club-by-club guide to the January transfer window
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/premier-league-club-by-club-guide-to-transfer-window>
Asked if he had taken time to explain to Batshuayi why he had not been 
selected on Monday, Conte said: “Yes, but usually when I talk with my players I 
prefer to keep it a secret what is said in the conversation. For Michy, I think 
that he’s working very well, he’s improving a lot, and I’m sure that in the 
future, he will have his chance to play.”

West Ham United have indicated a desire to take the 23-year-old on loan next 
month, though Chelsea have no intention of letting the player leave mid-season. 
“And he wants to stay,” Conte said. “He’s a young player. We are talking about 
a player who is 23. He’s starting his path in football. He has great talent, 
great potential, and I think it’s very important for him as a footballer to 
complete this season [here]. He wants to stay, and I’m happy for this.

“But it’s not easy to play in this league. And it’s important to adapt to this 
league in physical and tactical situations. We are working a lot with him and 
also the other players to improve this situation. For me, it’s important to see 
great attitude and behaviour in each training session. That’s the most 
important thing. The rest, I repeat, he will have his chance to play in the 
future.”

Conte is hopeful the club are active in the mid-winter transfer window, but 
implied the signing of a striker to act as back-up to Costa is not a priority. 
“We are talking about finding the right solution in the right roles to improve 
the squad,” he said. “It won’t be easy [to buy in January], but we are trying. 
We are trying to do something.”
 