
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are considering making 
a formal bid of about £13m for St Etienne's Kurt Zouma next month as they seek 
to deflect interest from Arsenal, Manchester City and Monaco in the highly 
regarded teenage centre-half.

Zouma, a France junior and under-21 international, had featured heavily for St 
Etienne <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stetienne> over the last two 
seasons but is currently in the middle of a 10-match domestic ban after his 
tackle on Thomas Guerbert during a goalless draw with Sochaux last month left 
his opponent with a broken leg. That will keep the 19-year-old out of action 
until well into the new year, although it has not dissuaded his suitors from 
the pursuit.

Arsenal and City have been monitoring his progress and were expected to bid 
for his services at the end of the current campaign, with representatives from 
Monaco having reportedly already met the defender's agent. Chelsea's instinct 
would have been to wait until next summer too but, aware that others have 
declared an interest, they are expected to bring forward an offer in the hope 
he can be prised early from the Ligue 1 club.

Zouma, who would be eligible for the Champions League this term, described his 
clash with Guerbert as "an unintentional accident" and apologised to his 
wounded opponent in the dressing room after the tackle. Yet the teenager's 
football reputation remains intact, with the France manager Didier Deschamps 
earlier this year earmarking him as a future captain of Les Bleus.

It remains to be seen what immediate impact, if any, his arrival might have on 
the likes of David Luiz or, indeed, John Terry whose contract expires next 
summer. José Mourinho has already indicated he expects both Terry and Ashley 
Cole to sign new deals at Stamford Bridge, even if no talks have, as yet, taken 
place.

The Chelsea manager has also stated publicly that he did not expect any major 
business in the January transfer window, although moves by rivals could yet 
force his club's hierarchy to act sooner rather than later.
 