
Pounding hooves came early to Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> and its Festival. One look at 
the going at Whaddon Road – firm to threadbare – persuaded both sides, the 
Robins and Mansfield, that the only way was aerial and the match was soon 
locked in first-time hoists and bouts of midfield head tennis, from which it 
seldom escaped. A 1-1 draw seemed to satisfy both clubs.

They had further excuse. Cheltenham were 23rd in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>. If Mansfield had not 
won three of their previous four games, they would have been equally anxious. 
They were only a point ahead when Russell Milton, head of academy coaching, 
became Cheltenham’s third manager of the season in mid-February. Adam Murray, 
with only a dozen more games in charge of Mansfield, said: “If we’re in the 
League at the end of the season, I’ll relax.” They came back to it in 2013 
after five Conference years.

Milton and Cheltenham must feel the same, though the manager was a picture of 
relaxation despite “probably seeing it as two points lost because we were ahead 
and lost the momentum in the game. When you’re on top for 15 minutes you’ve got 
to shut up shop. Clean sheets give you a platform to work on.”

Five in 35 games show what he means. Four were in their first six games after 
which they lay second. The other was a week ago, when they beat Tranmere (Micky 
Adams, 770 more games in management) 2-0. Rovers are now 23rd after a fourth 
defeat running, with Cheltenham 22nd. “Moving out of the relegation zone puts a 
bit of a brighter spark on things,” Milton said.

His very presence has done that. If the club got rid of Mark Yates with 
reluctance – after five years but finally four successive league defeats – they 
released Paul Buckle with relief after one win in 12 and a home FA Cup defeat 
by non-league Dover. Milton instantly raised spirits. Wes Burns, on loan from 
Bristol City, said: “The camp’s been a lot more positive. It’s miles happier 
than it was. People are coming into training with smiles on their faces. It’s a 
massive thing to have that good atmosphere.”

Burns put smiles on faces when, just after half-time, Mansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> switched off at a long throw 
and he fired in unchallenged. Billy Kee’s equaliser 21 minutes later followed a 
similar aberration in Cheltenham’s defence.

Though born in Folkestone, the manager’s name is practically a passport to 
Gloucestershire, where Jack Russell and Arthur Milton are revered. He also has 
a long history with Cheltenham, coming there by way of Arsenal, Hong Kong 
(where he played with Sócrates) and Dover before six midfield seasons with 
Cheltenham in which Steve Cotterill led them into the Football League for the 
first time in 1999.

Along the way to the manager’s seat he has run a coaching school with links to 
Arsenal, taken a degree in sports science, lectured at the University of 
Gloucestershire and commentated on Cheltenham’s matches for BBC local radio. 
All fans worth their scarf have thought at some time they could do better than 
the manager. Not many get the chance to try. Perhaps Alan Green should be 
allowed to referee a match with Martin Atkinson commentating.

Milton said beforehand: “From moment one I have said there is enough in our 
dressing room to get us out of our situation.” The question is whether they are 
familiar enough with each other on the field. While Troy Brown stood out in 
their defence, ushering one attack to safety after the ball had hit bar and 
post before forcing a finger-tip save from Mansfield’s Lenny Pidgeley, the 
attack was disjointed, with five of the front six arriving since the start of 
February. Just before those incidents Pidgeley had sliced a clearance close to 
his own goal. The Robins’ future may lie in the lottery of the pitch but 
Milton, rounded and refreshing, is determined to make the positives.
 