
Roman Abramovich was all smiles from his lofty perch at Stamford Bridge. The 
Chelsea owner has long wanted to see some sort of returnfrom the club’s Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/17/jose-mourinho-ruben-loftus-cheek-chelsea-academy-title-west-bromwich-albion>
 in which he has invested heavily and here, at last, was something to cheer.

Chelsea were 1-0 up against a game Scunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scunthorpe> United team but they were not 
safe and the League One minnows had complained bitterly at the non-award of a 
penalty on 53 minutes for a trip by Ramires on Kevin van Veen.

Football: Behind the scenes at the Chelsea Academy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2010/nov/13/chelsea-academy-in-pictures>
Enter Ruben Loftus-Cheek. The 19-year-old midfielder, the only recent Stamford 
Bridge youth product in Guus Hiddink’s match-day squad, had come on as a 
half-time substitute. And in the 68th minute he made his mark to make sure
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> would be in the draw for 
the FA Cup fourth round.

His first goal in professional football was a poacher’s finish, guided home 
low with his left foot following César Azpilicueta’s cut-back, after decent 
Chelsea approach work, and how Abramovich enjoyed it. It remains a source of 
frustration inside the club’s Academy that the pathway to the first team 
appears as little more than a mirage and, as such, Loftus-Cheek carries great 
responsibility. He handled it here.

Scunthorpe, too, handled the occasion. After being overrun for the first 
quarter of the game, having shown Chelsea too much respect, they found a way 
into the tie on the back of their whole-hearted commitment. And if the referee, 
Craig Pawson, had seen Ramires’s challenge on Van Veen in another way, they 
might have fashioned a different ending.

Ramires had tracked the Scunthorpe attacker to the very edge of the Chelsea 
area and he clipped his standing foot. Down went Van Veen and he appeared to 
make the most of it, but there was contact. Pawson was unmoved. Scunthorpe were 
incensed. “It was a nailed-on penalty,” Mark Robins, the Scunthorpe manager, 
said.

Chelsea had been dumped out of this competition at this venue by League One 
opposition last season –Bradford City’s 4-2 win left its scars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/chelsea-bradford-city-fa-cup-fourth-round>
 – but at full-time they could play the role of the magnanimous big brother. 
John Terry, the non-playing Chelsea captain, invited the Scunthorpe players 
into the home dressing room for the exchange of both shirts and compliments.

“We had a good celebration in our locker room,” Hiddink said. “They made us 
shiver during the game. It was their final, a big day for them and it was for 
us, too, because we wanted to go into the next round.”

Hiddink won the FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> during 
his previous caretaker spell at Chelsea in 2009 and the competition seems like 
the club’s best chance of silverware this time . They made a strong start here, 
with Diego Costa giving them the lead, but they did not have it all their own 
way despite Hiddink fielding a strong starting XI.

Robins had strung five across midfield and initially his team struggled to 
escape their half. But they stabilised after the first quarter of the game and 
even after Loftus-Cheek’s goal they refused to lie down.

Van Veen banged a free-kick just past the near post, Neal Bishop saw a shot 
blocked by Willian and, when Robins’ team had recycled the play, the right-back 
Jordan Clarke exploded a drive from the corner of the area that Asmir Begovic 
turned on to the woodwork. With the last kick of the tie Bishop stabbed a shot 
wide.

Costa’s eighth goal of the season – and his fourth in three games since José 
Mourinho’s sacking – came when he deftly volleyed home from Branislav 
Ivanovic’s cross. Luke Daniels, the Scunthorpe goalkeeper, saved from Cesc 
Fàbregas and Pedro before the midway point of the first half. Oscar also curled 
narrowly wide.

Scunthorpe showed plenty of fight, not least Bishop and the captain, Stephen 
Dawson. Bishop kicked Fàbregas from behind on the half-hour and when the 
Chelsea man turned round to remonstrate, the Scunthorpe midfielder pushed him 
in the chest. Bishop had another shoving match in the second half with Costa.

Scunthorpe enjoyed a fistful of what-if moments before the interval. Dawson 
had a ferocious shot repelled by Cahill’s head – “Gary is very British,” 
Hiddink said – while Luke Williams, the lone striker, quickened the pulses of 
the travelling supporters.

He worked Begovic from outside the area and, when he capitalised on a Cahill 
error to streak away into the area, Kurt Zouma came across to make a 
full-blooded slide challenge. Van Veen’s dangerous cross in the 45th minute 
also had just too much on it for Bishop.

Loftus-Cheek, such an imposing physical presence, played as the No10 in place 
of Oscar – who had a slight toe injury – and he was guilty of catching Bishop 
with a lunge shortly after he came on.

But it was another clumsy challenge that made for one of the loudest talking 
points.

With each replay Scunthorpe fans were more and more convinced that Pawson 
ought to have penalised Ramires. Bishop and Dawson continued to mix it in 
midfield but it was Loftus-Cheek who put the tie beyond them and their team.

Man of the match Diego Costa (Chelsea)
 