
Southend United glimpsed the summit on Saturday. In the fifth minute of the 
minimum four added they ledCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> 1-0 at Roots Hall. Then 
Anthony Straker, in a cluster of jumpers to a deep cross, handled the ball and 
Matt Richards converted the penalty. Southend stayed third in League Two. "With 
25 seconds to go we were top," said their manager, Phil Brown. "With 15 we were 
third again." If they had lost, they would have been seventh.

The summit is relative for both Brown and Southend. Seven seasons ago the club 
had a season in the Championship, finishing 21st, a place behind Brown's Hull 
City.Brown then took Hull to their inaugural first-tier experience as Southend 
faded into the fourth. They came together in March. After two seasons in the 
Premier League, when sun-tan and celebrity may have gone to his head, Brown 
suffered a chastening dismissal at Preston, nearly became first-team coach at 
Hartlepool and decided the only way wasSouthend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend>.

The club's hope, as he replaced Paul Sturrock with seven games to go, was to 
turn eighth place into promotion but they fell away to 11th. At the start of 
November they were 13th and would have completed a perfect month if they had 
held out for a fifth successive win – and that overlooks another in the FA Cup, 
which takes them on Saturday to Chesterfield, a place above them inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>.

The new Brown took disappointment well. "Had we won, it would have been a 
steal," he admitted. "We didn't get the ball down or get any rhythm. Cheltenham 
are no mugs and we didn't treat them as such but they seemed to have two extra 
men in the first half." Crucially they had Jermaine McGlashan, a flying, 
darting winger who set up enough chances for the Robins to think it was 
Christmas but for Daniel Bentley in goal. If Kevan Hurst had not forced the 
ball home shortly before the interval, following a cross from the captain, John 
White, the Southend players might have been kept on the pitch at half-time.

In truth both sides seemed to have extra men in a clash of flexible 4-5-1s 
that led to every recipient with a man on, sequences of aerial aimlessness and 
rushed passes to players who might have been there on another day. For Southend 
Luke Prosser and Robert Kiernan grew in authority at the heart of defence, 
Michael Timlin always tried to use the ball wisely and Ben Coker showed a rare 
turn of overlapping speed from left-back that was largely disregarded in the 
prevailing haste.

In the end the steal was Cheltenham's, extending to seven their unbeaten 
league run, though with only two wins. A slow start to the season after two 
near misses in the play-offs has seen them clutching at draws – eight in 19 
games. Southend, with three, know a win and defeat are better but Brown, under 
the circumstances, was happy – and happier still to reach the end of Movember. 
"Fortunately this can come off," he said, tugging at his tache's chin 
extensions. Exit water vole down tunnel.

His reinvention looks promising. Preston were second in League One until the 
three strikers who had helped him there were all injured and they slipped from 
second place to five points off the play-offs just as Peter Ridsdale arrived as 
chairman in 2011, flexing muscles, ditching Brown within eight days and saying: 
"With the territory come the big calls to make the right decisions." Previous 
big calls saw him move ingloriously from Leeds through Barnsley and Cardiff to 
Plymouth. Preston remain in League One.

Brown now has to reinvent Southend to join them. Talk of a grand new future at 
Fossetts Farm has run for the entire millennium but they stay at Roots Hall 
with a transfer ban that prevents them buying even turnips. In July the 
chairman, Ron Martin, was talking again of a deal being signed with the council 
"this month". Sadly there are no great sheikhs in Essex.
 