
Carlo Ancelotti watched Ashley Cole play his first minutes of the pre-season 
forChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and then told José 
Mourinho, the Real Madrid manager, that the left-back was not for sale at any 
price and he would not welcome an approach from the Bernabéu club for the 
player.

Cole has three years to run on his Stamford Bridge contract and he is happy 
with his football in west London but it is off the field where his problems 
lie. He feels hounded by the paparazzi in England and unable to live a normal 
life, having been installed as public enemy No1 in some quarters following his 
separation from his pop star wife, Cheryl.

Cole's misery has not gone unnoticed at Real where Mourinho, who has 
maintained a friendship with him and still sends him text messages, is keen to 
find a new left-back to solve what has been the club's problem position. 
Although there has not yet been any approach, Mourinho could be prepared to 
offer Cole an escape route from his troubles and an exciting new challenge.

Ancelotti, the Chelsea manager, had a fractious relationship with Mourinho 
when the pair where in charge of the rival Milan clubs and his message, in the 
wake of this friendly defeat in Frankfurt, left no room for grey areas. The 
Italian even appeared faintly amused as he said that he could keep repeating it 
for as long as anybody was prepared to listen.

"I'm not interested in the relationship my player has with other coaches," 
Ancelotti said. "It's normal that Mourinho has a good relationship with Ashley 
Cole but nothing has changed in our position. He is a Chelsea player and will 
remain a Chelsea player. There's no way he will leave. Everyone can forget that 
Ashley Cole will leave this club. There is no price. We believe that he's the 
best left-back in the world and because of this, he will stay at this club."

Chelsea arrived in Germany yesterday and this was the first opportunity of the 
pre-season for Ancelotti to play many of his established stars, chief among 
them the club's England World Cup contingent of John Terry, Cole and Frank 
Lampard. There was a quiet debut for the new midfield signing Yossi Benayoun.

Terry and Cole played the first 45 minutes, with the former culpable in part 
for the concession of the opening goal when, having started to shepherd the 
ball back to the goalkeeper Henrique Hilário, he decided at the last minute and 
under little pressure to pass it back to him. Hilário, who endured a 
nightmarish afternoon, was taken by surprise and when he tried to dribble away 
from Patrick Ochs he was tackled by the Eintracht midfielder. The Chelsea 
defender Jeffrey Bruma and Ioannis Amanatidis challenged for the loose ball but 
it broke to Ochs and he lifted it into the empty net.

Cole could be pleased with his performance while Lampard, one of eight 
half-time substitutes, scored the equaliser, after a characteristic burst into 
the area. Eintracht's winning goal came after Nemanja Matic grabbed a handful 
of Marco Russ's shirt inside the penalty area. Halil Altintop smashed the 
resulting kick home.

Hilário was a worry from the moment he miscued his first clearance and with 
every subsequent slice or shank, so his confidence appeared to ebb. From his 
fourth poor clearance in the 33rd minute Eintracht almost scored again through 
Theofanis Gekas, only for Hilário to save with his feet. He was also bailed out 
by Ricardo Carvalho in the 85th minute after having a clearance charged down.

In the wake of the third‑choice goalkeeper Ross Turnbull's errors in the 
defeat to Ajax in Amsterdam last Friday, Ancelotti has to hope that Petr Cech, 
his No1, can continue his swift recovery from a torn calf muscle. Ancelotti 
believes that he will be fit for the opening Premier League fixture at home to 
West Bromwich Albion on Saturday week and possibly the Community Shield against 
Manchester United next Sunday.

"We had some problems with goalkeepers but it can happen at this moment of the 
season," Ancelotti said. "We have to maintain trust in these goalkeepers. For 
other players, it was the first game [of pre-season] and they problems. They 
are not fit."

Deco has not travelled with the Chelsea squad – the midfielder has been 
heavily linked with a return to Fluminese in his native Brazil – but Ancelotti 
said that he had stayed in London to recuperate from an unspecified injury, 
together with Cech, Alex and José Bosingwa. Didier Drogba, who has undergone 
minor groin surgery, is here in Germany and Ancelotti said that he could play 
against Hamburg on Wednesday. "Drogba has improved very quickly. When we get 
back to London, Alex can train with us. We have to wait for Bosingwa."

The game was played on a dreadful surface – the Eintracht manager, Michael 
Skibbe,was moved to apologise for its condition; an American football 
tournament played on it in recent days has taken a heavy toll – and Ancelotti 
was also unhappy that the controversial World Cup ball, the Adidas Jabulani, 
was used. "It was difficult to play because the pitch was not good," he said. 
"And we're not used to this ball. It's very difficult to play with."
 