
Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> have 
apologised after a raffle for a place at the club’s pre-season training camp 
which sold only four tickets was won by a “falsified” entry.

Ashley Carson, the club’s director and company secretary, promised a “full 
review of communications and marketing procedures” and that disciplinary action 
“will be taken”, after a keen-eyed supporter spotted that the winner possibly 
did not exist.

The puzzling state of affairs occurred despite the League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> club having stated 
that the competition had been won by Surrey-based James Higgins. The club had 
even sent him a “get well soon” message, in a press release issued earlier this 
month, because Mr Higgins was apparently too ill to attend the training camp in 
Hungary.

Carson said that action was being taken after “a recent unsuccessful 
supporters’ competition and subsequent misleading outcome of the activity”.

Chesterfield sponsor pulls out in wake of Ched Evans signing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/24/ched-evans-sponsor-withdraws-chesterfield-retrial>
In a statement, he said: “I have discovered that a winning entry was not 
legitimate and the information supplied to the club’s communications department 
had clearly been falsified with regards to the winner of a place at the 
pre-season training camp.

“Fortunately, no supporters have been affected financially or inconvenienced. 
However, the club has a zero-tolerance approach to such misleading activities 
and we remain committed to supporting our supporters on every level, which 
includes transparency and clear communications.”

Carson, who was personally tipped off by a supporter who had “concerns” about 
the competition,for which tickets cost £20 
<http://www.chesterfield-fc.co.uk/news/article/win-places-on-pre-season-trip-3118611.aspx>
, added: “Chesterfield Football Club apologises unreservedly to the four 
supporters who entered the competition and we can assure all supporters that 
following the internal review, disciplinary action will be taken.”

An earlier press release posted on the club’s site on 14 July read: “Spare a 
thought for Surrey-based Spireite James Higgins, who won the raffle for a 
couple of places on the club’s pre-season training camp in Hungary.

“James was due to fly out with the party last weekend, but illness prevented 
him from travelling. It was hoped that he and a friend would be able to travel 
a few days later in time to watch Wednesday’s practice match against Limassol, 
but he failed to recover in time.

“James, who is naturally very disappointed to have missed out on the trip, 
will be invited to a game during the forthcoming season as a guest of the club 
and be treated to hospitality.

“As a gesture of goodwill, all those who entered the raffle are entitled to a 
refund. Please contact the club to make the necessary arrangements.”

The striker Ched Evans, who signed for the club in June, played no part in a 
friendly match on Tuesday against Matlock Town due to a knee injury.
 