
The defiant spirit that caused the inception of FC United of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fc-united-of-manchester> burned brightly 
on an evening when their football did not. In 2005 the club was born from the 
disgruntlement of some Manchester United followers at the Malcolm Glazer buyout.

On Monday night the emotion fuelled the “Unhappy Mondays” stance taken against 
the switch from Saturday for the tie to be broadcast on television.

A team featuring plasterers and mechanics were roared on by a support 
brandishing a banner reading “I Don’t Like Mondays” and chanting “Fuck BT 
Sport” while others showed dissent by remaining outside until the second half.

Within seven minutes United were rocked. Sylvan Ebanks-Blake, who played twice 
for Manchester United and scored once, pulled the ball back to Gboly Ariyibi 
and the American beat David Carnell to giveChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> the lead.

FC’s 3-1 reverse to Telford last Tuesday was a sixth consecutive defeat in the 
Conference North. As the programme stated, this is a “club record” and what 
occurred next did little to suggest United might come back from the deficit.

The visiting left-back, Dan Jones, scooted along his flank and pinged in a 
cross that Lee Novak met with his right boot to beat Carnell.

To the home fans’ credit their singing continued and enough bonhomie remained 
for those behind Tommy Lee’s goal to inform the main stand of where they might 
go, as there is a friendly rivalry between the two sections.

There was, though, something more edgy about a “Fuck the FA” banner, one more 
sign of the unhappiness at the game being moved. Yet Karl Marginson, the 
manager of FC United since their founding, offered a more balanced view. Before 
kick-off he said: “On the footballing side it does have pros and cons – most of 
the lads will have been working during the day but on the other hand it had 
given them an extra couple to prepare following Telford.”

The start of the second half meant those involved in the protest outside 
Broadhurst Park would enter, if they adhered to their plan. Before the game 
around 100 fans had voiced their disquiet at the FA, before refusing to enter, 
instead intending to listen to the opening half on the radio.

Marginson made his own move, replacing Craig Lindfield, a left-sided attacker, 
with the striker Rory Patterson, and Greg Daniels with Rory Fallon, also a 
forward.

There was almost an instant dividend when Sam Sheridan swept a diagonal pass 
left to right to find Patterson. The Northern Irishman took aim but then missed.

Rai Simons made it 3-0 before Ollie Banks, a former FC player, sealed victory 
with two minutes left. There was a late consolation from Luke Ashworth but it 
is Dean Saunders’ Chesterfield who play Walsall in the next round.

United, though, are about the bigger picture. “It’s not just a football club. 
It’s more about the belief we can make a difference,” said Marginson. “What 
goes out on the pitch, that’s a showcase. But the amount of people this club’s 
affected, we see numerous instances where we are able to give people a vision 
they can believe in.”

Marginson’s belief is that FC United will be going strong on their 20th 
anniversary.

“Hopefully the rent won’t cause any problems,” he said. “I’ll be looking [in 
the next 10 years] to hopefully strengthen our youth team and academy so we can 
start producing our own players. That’s going to make us sustainable for the 
long term.”
 