
Reaper, Viper, Scorpion and Satan are not words you normally find among the 
comfy and cosy plant variety names in seed catalogues, but the world of chilli 
growers is often a little different. Amid all this oozing bravado, those with 
sensitive palates (and stomachs) might be forgiven for thinking the only thing 
this crop has going for it is pure fire power.

Yet chillies actually contain a raft of other deliciously fruity, sweet and 
aromatic flavour chemicals that offer up so much more than mind-numbing heat. 
There are loads of varieties out there that contain very little or no pungency 
at all and are eaten by the plateful, far more like a mild pepper than a spice. 
If you think you don’t like chillies because of fire factor, I implore you to 
give these a go, and late winter is a great time to start sowing them.

Chillies are a group of closely related species that are given their spicy 
kick by a chemical calledcapsaicin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capsaicin>. 
However, many varieties contain mutations that block the production of this 
pungent chemical, sometimes almost completely, giving all the flavour but none 
of the fire.

A classic (and fantastically tasty) example of this is Trinidad Perfume, a 
habanero type variety that provides all the knockout aroma of these normally 
searing-hot varieties, but is – as if by magic – as sweet and mild as a bell 
pepper. In fact, even regular peppers are also just varieties of chilli whose 
genetic mutations block the production of capsaicin. As with all habanero types 
the exotic Trinidadian needs warmth to fruit well, so always grow indoors (a 
greenhouse or by a large, sunny living room window.)

A more familiar example of a low-spice chilli would be Padrón peppers from 
northern Spain that kick out massive crops of richly savoury, bullet-shaped 
fruit. Traditionally, they are eaten seared in a hot pan and served doused in 
salt and olive oil. Curiously, however, about one in 10 of these normally sweet 
fruit can pack a bit of heat, especially in larger or more mature fruit, so be 
warned – it can be a game of Spanish roulette.

The most reliable mild chilli for growing outdoors for me is the Banana 
pepper, which has waxy, yellow fruit and all the citrus floral hints of the 
closely related Hungarian Hot Wax, just without the bite-back. Apple Crisp is 
so ridiculously mild-mannered it can be eaten like – well – an apple, with 
super dense walls of crunchy flesh. Amazing in salads.

Finally, Thai Green Curry is a variety with the deepest, darkest green fruit, 
traditionally used to add colour and depth to curries, but without a trace of 
heat – other chillies are added for that. But that’s another article…

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 