
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is on track to generate more 
than a quarter of its electricity from wind power by 2030, and the figure could 
rise to nearly a third with power sector reforms, a new study has found.

Within 14 years, more new generating capacity – mostly clean energy – will 
come online in China than currently exists in the whole of the US, further 
cementing the country’s image as a burgeoning green giant.

Valerie Karplus, a co-author of the study published in the journal Nature 
Energy <http://www.nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nenergy.2016.86> and 
assistant professor at MIT, said that Beijing wanted to increase its wind 
capacity by a factor of between three and five before 2030.

“China is now the world’s wind energy leader by a fairly large margin,” she 
said.

The country’s 145GW of installed wind capacity last year eclipsed both Europe 
and the US, even if not all of it is yet grid-connected. By 2030, renewables 
are slated to generate a fifth of China’s primary energy needs.

But the green giant narrative sits uneasily with the reality that China, the 
world’s largest greenhouse gas emitter, still produces more than 70% of its 
electricity from coal.

It is also a pique to Europe’s clean energy industry and policymakers who made 
much of the gains in the global green energy race over the first half of the 
decade.

Oliver Joy, a spokesman for the trade body WindEurope, said: “Europe’s 
leadership in renewables may be consigned to the history books if we don’t 
implement long-term policies. If we do that, Europe could also get a quarter of 
its power from wind alone by 2030. It is telling that global investment in 
renewables reached record levels last year and yet Europe saw a 21% decline.”

Investment in China’s renewable supplies may be less of an immediate priority 
than integrating the country’s variable wind capacity, due to an outdated 
transmission system hooked on inflexible and predictable energy flows.

At present, local economic incentives favour inflexible suppliers, partly 
because of an annualised system of must-run quotas for coal that spread across 
much of the country. These entitle operators to contractual guarantees and 
prevent amendments that reflect marginal price variations.

Nick Mabey, the chief executive of the E3G thinktank, said: “China’s 
inflexible coal power stations means that it wastes 40% of the clean wind power 
it generates in some regions. Tapping into China’s abundant and affordable wind 
resources will require radical power system modernisation and tackling powerful 
coal interests.”

The Nature Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> paper 
analyses future energy generation and distribution. “With more extensive 
reforms leading China to transition to spot markets and allowing electricity 
providers to reflect the marginal costs of wind generation, China’s clean 
energy potential could be further increased,” Karplus said.

Building windfarms close to “load centres” where electricity can be easily 
transferred and used would also make more sense than concentrating them in 
wind-rich but geographically isolated territories, she added.

With tweaks to coal unit scheduling, wind power could be procured as soon as 
it becomes available, allowing decisions on a much tighter timescale than 
currently happens, the report says.
 