
The 2001 world Championship will be won - or, more likely, lost - by a 
computer. The message from last Sunday's Spanish Grand Prix, the first to be 
run under revised rules, is that the new technology will prove more of a 
hindrance than a help in the short term.

The complexities of traction control, launch control and fully automatic 
gearboxes are such that softwear specialists sitting behind desks, rather than 
sportsmen sitting behind the wheel, will decide the title. The message seems to 
be: look after the megabytes in the hard disks and the performers in the 
hardhats will take care of themselves.

On the evidence of a catalogue of disasters in Barcelona, the end result might 
be determined by mechanical failures initiated by systems which ought to be 
improving performance rather than wrecking it. The fifth round of the 
championship turned out to be a race for the lame, Michael Schumacher taking 
victory on the final lap as he nursed his Ferrari past the smoking remains of 
Mika Hakkinen's McLaren-Mercedes.

Neither team can confirm or deny that their various woes were associated with 
the hazards of venturing 200 racing miles into unfamiliar technical territory. 
Schumacher was forced to slow by a vibration which came from a tyre turning on 
its rim. This sort of thing has happened before although, significantly 
perhaps, not on the first two sets of tyres used by Schumacher as he led the 
race before his second and final pit stop.

Ferrari has sent wheels and tyres back to Bridgestone for analysis in Japan. 
It remains to be seen if the effects of improved traction out of the corners 
contributed to the rubber shifting slightly on the rim and putting the wheel 
out of balance.

Schumacher was lucky to have almost a minute in hand over Juan Pablo Montoya's 
Williams-BMW, but nothing would match the good fortune associated with finding 
the parked McLaren less than a mile from home. It is difficult to say whether 
or not Schumacher would have beaten Hakkinen had the vibration problem not 
intervened - Ferrari technical director Ross Brawn says it was too close to 
call - but McLaren appeared to have marginally the better pitstop strategy, one 
which allowed Hakkinen to take the lead at a crucial moment. All of which, of 
course, made his late retirement even more difficult to bear.

The engine manufacturers had warned that the effects of eliminating wheelspin 
through traction control could have a dire effect on the rest of the car. With 
800 bhp looking for continual release, the consequences of abruptly cutting 
that power, even for a nanosecond, could send vibrations through the 
transmission, all the way back to the gearbox - and ultimately to the list of 
retirements.

Another branch of electronic wizardry almost denied David Coulthard from 
putting that to the test when the launch control refused to operate properly as 
he prepared to commence the final parade lap before the start.

Despite the rather gauche suggestion by McLaren boss Ron Dennis that the 
Scotsman had failed to engage his brain, the more tactful answer seems to be 
that there was fault on both sides but that, ultimately, the system should have 
coped with a misunderstanding which saw the driver fail to apply the required 
amount of revs.

The irony is that, a first corner collision notwithstanding, Coulthard's car 
performed faultlessly thereafter and he picked up an extra championship point 
thanks to his team-mate's heartbreaking demise. On the other hand, had 
Schumacher not received the last-lap bonus and remained in second place, his 
lead over Coulthard would be five points instead of eight as they go to Austria 
for the sixth round next weekend.

Peering through the smokescreen created - literally, in Hakkinen's case - by 
these supposed advances in motor racing science, it was easy to see that the 
old firm of McLaren and Ferrari had remained at the front. The one 
disappointment was a failure by Williams-BMW to follow on from their win two 
weeks before in Italy. Dr Mario Theissen, BMW's motorsport director, explained 
that each race is a separate entity; while they got their sums absolutely right 
in Imola, the mathematics might not add up elsewhere.

Even so, a significant signal from Barcelona was that Michelin, the Williams 
tyre supplier, are some way behind Bridgestone (who support Ferrari and 
McLaren) despite the Spanish circuit being the first venue used this year on 
which the French tyre company has extensive testing knowledge.

It's true that the unseasonably low temperatures did not help Michelin. In 
which case, old-fashioned weather in the Austrian mountains may hinder their 
runners next weekend. Provided modern technology doesn't have its say first, of 
course.

Drivers championship

1 M Schumacher  (Ferrari) 36 

2 D Coulthard  (McLaren) 28 

3 R Barrichello  (Ferrari) 14 

4 R Schumacher  (Williams) 10 

5 N Heidfeld  (Sauber) 8 

6 J Trulli  (Jordan) 7 

7= JP Montoya  (Williams) 6 

H-H Frentzen  (Jordan) 6

9= J Villeneuve  (BAR) 4 

M Hakkinen  (McLaren) 4

11 O Panis  (BAR) 3 

12= K Raikkonen  (Sauber) 1 

G Fisichella  (Williams) 1 

Next race: 13 May, Austria
 