
Christian Horner is one of the few people in these parts not preoccupied by 
Sunday’s title tussle between Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg. Instead, the Red 
Bull principal wants to celebrate the performances of Max Verstappen and Daniel 
Ricciardo this season and few could blame him: Ricciardo will finish third in 
the drivers’ championship and the sensational Verstappen,who wowed everyone in 
the last race in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/14/max-verstappen-brazilian-grand-prix-felipe-massa>
, could be fourth.

Horner says he has never seen a driver as good as Verstappen at his age. “He 
surprises us continually,” he says. “From his first race in the car to his 
performance in the last race in Brazil, he’s been absolutely fantastic.

“For a driver so young, at 19, it’s truly impressive in his third year of car 
racing. He’s only going to get better as his experience increases, better and 
stronger. He’s the most exciting talent inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> at the moment, the one everyone 
is talking about.”

Old paddock sweats always say that the great drivers have more time than the 
others, that only part of their brains are taken up with the little matter of 
driving. They have the time to look around them, take in their surroundings and 
what other drivers are up to. This is what most impresses Horner.

“It’s all about his spare capacity in the car. He never sounds ruffled. Even 
when he had that half-spin in Brazil, at 180mph, he came over the radio and he 
sounded so calm. He was certainly a lot calmer than the rest of us.

“That is what marks him out. Even when he’s racing hard with other drivers he 
always seems to have that extra sense around him. All the signs are very 
positive for a very bright future.

“People will talk about the Brazil race for a long time. What he did in 
Barcelona was quite phenomenal. And then there is Silverstone and Japan … he’s 
driven some fantastic races this year.”

It says something for Ricciardo that he has been the more consistent performer 
forRed Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> this year. There were 
some early signs that the Australian might have been ruffled by the arrival of 
the prodigy from Toro Rosso but he appears to have got over that.

Horner says: “For me, Daniel is the driver of the season. He had some luck go 
against him early in the year but he’s delivered some fantastic races. His 
qualifying has been impeccable and some of his passing moves and general racing 
has been tremendous.”

Red Bull have already achieved their primary ambition, which was to finish 
ahead of Ferrari in second place. Now Horner is already looking forward to next 
season, when faster cars are likely to improve what has been a rather 
predictable show in recent years.

“We’ve got two real racers in the team and as long as we can provide a car 
which closes the gap further next year, we can avoid the serial winning that 
we’ve seen over the past three years.

“The new regulations will have a significant effect. The cars will be a lot 
quicker, four or five seconds faster at most circuits, and they will be a lot 
more spectacular. It will certainly sort the men out from the boys. You will 
probably see a different differential between team-mates. Hopefully it will all 
mix it up a bit. Things have become a little stagnated over the past couple of 
years and this is a chance to shuffle things around. And inevitably there will 
be a lot of development through the year.”

Horner is critical of how easy passing has become since the introduction of 
DRS. “Overtaking shouldn’t be a free pass on a straight by hitting a button.”

He does not feel that Rosberg would be a lucky champion if he wins the title 
on Sunday. “Nico has put together a very good campaign,” he says. “But Lewis 
has a much easier job. He’s just got to go for it, whereas Nico has got a much 
more of a balancing act.”
 