
I was delighted to read Prebendary Neil Richardson’s letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/23/putting-the-christmas-spirit-in-perspective>
 (24 December) about the exclusion of programmes that were genuinely about 
Christmas from your “festive 40” listing. I had been thinking along very 
similar lines myself. Perhaps I could go a little further. Here at All Saints 
church in Kingston-upon-Thames, a busy, seven-days-a-week town-centre church, 
we have just enjoyed huge congregations at our four main Christmas services. 
The same will have been true of thousands of other churches of all Christian 
denominations throughout the country. Of course, we know very well that most of 
the people who have come to church during the last couple of weeks, people of 
all ages and of various ethnicities, will not be with us Sunday by Sunday – 
although many will be. But the fact is that they were there willingly and 
apparently gladly too, not under compulsion. It is clear to me that we are 
meeting a need – arguably an instinct that is deeply embedded in the national 
DNA – to go church at special times. Christian Britain is emphatically not 
dead. It may be different from the way it was in previous eras, but there is 
life and vitality in abundance in our churches, which by their very existence 
are making an invaluable contribution to the country’s precious reservoir of 
social and cultural capital. It would be good to see more of this acknowledged 
in the pages of the Guardian, rather than the weary but all too familiar 
journalistic tropes of “emptying pews”. There’s really so much more going on 
than that.
John Dewhurst
Churchwarden, All Saints Church, Kingston-upon-Thames

• Re your report (Pope says Christmas has been ‘taken hostage by materialism’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/25/pope-calls-for-peace-in-worlds-conflict-areas-in-christmas-day-message>
, 26 December), who exactly is the hostage-taker? Pope Francis conveniently 
forgets that it was Christians who took pagans’ midwinter festival hostage. 
After centuries under Christmas’s yoke, people are free once more to celebrate 
the lengthening days and the promise of spring in, yes, a material way. In 
return, Christmas has not been taken hostage: the church is still free to 
celebrate Jesus’s birth, but it does nobody any favours in our increasingly 
divided world to set that spiritual celebration against the materialist 
instinct to bring light and laughter, food and drink, into the darkest days of 
our northern winter.
Rev Geoff Anderson
Sheffield
 