
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen

Billy Connolly’s incontinence pants routine from his Audience With Billy 
Connolly. It was the first one I absolutely died laughing at. It’s about a 
young lad putting these incontinence trousers on, tying them at the bottom on 
each leg like plus fours and “going down the discotheque”. And then he talks 
about the guy dancing and filling his pants with piss – it’s just incredibly 
funny.

The funniest person I know

My mate Jason Cook. He’s a standup comedian and wrote Hebburn, the sitcom I 
was in. A lot of the things he says that make me laugh I would never tell any 
other human being on earth.

The funniest thing that shouldn’t be funny

People falling over and really hurting themselves – like knocking all their 
teeth out.

The funniest sketch I’ve ever seen 

Fry and Laurie do this sketch where Hugh Laurie plays a man talking to a 
policeman and Stephen Fry plays the policeman. Stephen Fry says, “What’s your 
name?” and Hugh Laurie’s got a little bit of wood and he drops the wood on the 
table, and the noise the wood makes is his surname. It’s so stupid and so 
simple – one of those ones where you see it, and you go how did they even think 
of that?

The funniest film I’ve ever seen

Shaun Of The Dead. I do like zombie films anyway, but it’s just hilarious and 
quotable. They created the rom-zom-com; there was never a romantic zombie 
comedy before.

The funniest joke I’ve ever heard

It’s by Gary Delaney and the joke is: “I read a story in the newspaper the 
other day about the worst man in Britain: apparently he’s a racist and a 
paedophile. I thought, well, at least some of the kids are safe.”

The funniest book I’ve ever read 

Without a doubt, the Alan Partridge autobiography, I, Partridge: We Need To 
Talk About Alan. It’s a piece of art, every single sentence is a joke. It’s not 
just the funniest book – it’s the funniest anything that’s ever been created.

Swiftcover Presents Chris Ramsey’s Comedy Hotspots is at the Hippodrome, WC2, 
Wed. You can apply for free ticketshere <http://www.swiftcover.uk/swiftgigs/>
 