
Fulham ended a run of six home league matches without a win as they thrashed 
promotion-chasingHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield>.

Chris Martin, Tomas Kalas and Lucas Piazon gave Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> a 3-0 half-time lead. Martin, 
with a penalty, and Kevin McDonald added further strikes against the 
shellshocked Yorkshire club, but the star performer was Sone Aluko, who created 
three of the goals with his pace, skill and persistence.

The Fulham manager, Slavisa Jokanovic, was delighted that his team had finally 
won in front of their own supporters. He said: “We have shown we can play good 
football and keep clean sheets and that we can be more competitive.

“But the job is not done,” Jokanovic added. “We need to build on our 
confidence and philosophy. We are in a learning process and beginning to build 
some kind of identity.”

The Cottagers were ahead after only eight minutes. Stefan Johansen sent a high 
free-kick from the left to the far post, where the central defender Ragnar 
Sigurdsson had escaped his marker. He nodded the ball back for Martin – also 
unmarked – to drive the ball low past the right hand of Danny Ward.

Huddersfield missed several good chances to hit back through a dangerous Aaron 
Mooy cross and a Tommy Smith header at the far post which went wide. The 
visitors were left to rue those wasted opportunities when Fulham doubled their 
lead after 35 minutes. Huddersfield’s central defender Christopher Schindler 
missed his header from Scott Malone’s cross and then Chris Löwe, who was 
standing behind Schindler, could only miscue the ball to Kalas, who struck home 
his first goal since joining Fulham on loan from Chelsea.

It was then 3-0 four minutes before the break. Aluko charged down the left and 
produced the most inviting of crosses that Piazon nodded past Ward.

Harry Bunn passed up a chance to reduce the arrears in the last minute of the 
first half when he headed Kasey Palmer’s cross wide under very little pressure. 
Palmer, lucky to avoid a red card for a wild first-half challenge on Ryan 
Fredericks, then brought an excellent save from David Button in the first 
minute of the second half.

However, Fulham went further ahead in the 63rd minute when Schindler brought 
down Aluko and Martin sent the penalty low past Ward’s right hand.

Three minutes later it was 5-0 as Aluko cut in from the right and found 
McDonald, who shot low into the net.

It was then nearly six for the home side but the substitute Tim Ream headed 
over from a yard out.

The Huddersfield manager, David Wagner, wrote off his side’s third defeat in 
four games as a bad day at the office. “I can leave this game very quickly 
behind us,” Wagner said.

“We don’t have to speak about any tactical problems because we had so many 
individual mistakes that you couldn’t get anything against any opponent. We 
lacked concentration and focus in easy situations.”
 