
Brighton & Hove Albion recorded their biggest win of the season on Saturday 
with their5-0 thrashing of Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/brighton-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
. For Alex Neil, the result was the worst of his managerial career. Both teams 
ended the day in the same position they began it, Brighton second in the 
Championship andNorwich fourth, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/12/norwich-city-alex-neil-relegation-premier-league-championship>
 but it is tempting to think the match will prove significant for both teams as 
the season goes on.

For Brighton the result was vindication. The Seagulls missed automatic 
promotion on the final day of last season beforelosing against Sheffield 
Wednesday in the play-off semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/brighton-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-second-leg>
. But instead of licking their wounds, Chris Hughton’s side have simply 
continued where they left off, building from a sound defensive base to keep 
eking out the wins.

With Shane Duffy brought in from Blackburn to form a towering defensive 
partnership with Lewis Dunk, Brighton have kept seven clean sheets in their 
last nine league games. At the other end of the pitch the return of Glenn 
Murray, on loan from Bournemouth, has given Brighton a real cutting edge. This 
is especially true at home where Murray has scored all nine of his goals this 
season. Resilient and calm, Brighton embody the virtues of their manager. 
Speaking after the match there was not a jot of hubris from Hughton, despite 
such an impressive statement being made against his former club. He described 
the result as a big win but followed it with the word “unusual”. The message 
was that his team needed to put this result behind them as soon as possible. 
Next weekend they are at Bristol City.

Murray hits hat-trick as Chris Hughton makes point with Norwich thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/brighton-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
“One thing I know about this division is that you cannot dwell or get carried 
away, you cannot,” Hughton said. “There are so many teams that can beat you. If 
you want to be at a high level your focus has to continue to be high. This is a 
big, big win and we should enjoy it, but come Monday morning all our thoughts 
and efforts will be on next week.”

Neil’s post-match test was more difficult. He had to show the result hurt 
without suggesting the wheels might be coming off his Norwich side, who have 
lost four of their last seven matches. The result, he admitted, was the “worst 
of my career”, but he claimed the match had been even until Murray scored his 
and Brighton’s second in the 60th minute.

“The game up until the second goal was like any other tight game at the top of 
the Championship,” Neil said. “A week and a half ago we were top of the league 
and everyone was talking about how we were one of the favourites to win the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. Now there’s 
been a few bad results and a humiliating result today and things change. 
There’s not much I can do apart from get back into work and try to get things 
right.”

The Scot is a forthright speaker and had given the local Brighton media 
pre-match ammunition when he described Albion as “old-fashioned” and “quite 
direct”. In truth, the remarks were part of a positive assessment of his 
opponents but it is tempting to see such an accidental indiscretion as an 
example of the 35-year-old’s inexperience.

Football League your thoughts: Derby extend home run as Newcastle win again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/29/football-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check>
Naivety was apparent in his side, too. It might be an odd quality to ascribe 
to a team that contained six current internationals, but the dominant 
characteristic of Norwich’s performance was the frequency with which they made 
elementary unforced errors. The opening goal came about after the goalkeeper, 
Michael McGovern, took a terrible touch instead of simply clearing his lines. 
Murray closed him down, barged him off the ball and finished coolly. The fourth 
goal came after the centre-half Ryan Bennett attempted a clearance which simply 
squirmed off his foot. Murray took advantage again and fired a shot straight 
through McGovern. The fifth was the worst of the lot, though, as Bennett’s 
partner, Timm Klose, decided to charge up the pitch through a crowd of players, 
pirouetting on the ball as he went. His audacity was met by a sound tackle and 
within seconds Anthony Knockaert’s deft dink hit the net.

Hughton’s safety-first approach never won over the Norwich faithful despite it 
keeping them in the Premier League. Neil has put the emphasis on offence and 
would rather win a match 3-2 than 1-0. It is in this context that Norwich’s 
errors can be understood as a desperate attempt to play positively at all 
costs. But it certainly seems that a dose of pragmatism might sometimes be a 
better option.

The Carrow Road club stick with their managers. They sacked Hughton with only 
five games remaining of the 2013-14 season that ended in relegation and they 
will probably back Neil. But an inability to keep clean sheets – only one so 
far this season – is putting real pressure on the team. Meanwhile Chris 
Hughton’s old‑fashioned virtues keep Brighton moving forwards.

Talking points

In reinforcing his point that the Championship does not allow for complacency, 
Chris Hughton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chris-hughton> reeled off 
teams he thought would push his Brighton side for promotion. The list included 
Newcastle United, Aston Villa, Derby County, Birmingham City and Huddersfield 
Town. Perhaps another candidate should be Slavisa Jokanovic’s Fulham, who 
played David Wagner’s early season leaders this weekend and claimed their own 
5-0 victory.

Fulham began the season well, taking 11 points from 15 in August, including an 
opening-day victory against Newcastle. But September was as bad as August was 
good, with no wins and a 4-0 home defeat at the hands of Bristol City. In the 
past month the ship has been steadied. A 4-2 away win at Barnsley at the start 
of October has sparked a distinct upturn in form. The Cottagers came back from 
2-0 down to draw withNorwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity>, lost unfortunately against 
Aston Villa away and have now laid down a marker against the pacesetters.

As was the case with his Watford side, who won promotion in 2015, Jokanovic 
has crafted a blend of steel and style. Kevin McDonald and Stefan Johansen, a 
summer signing from Celtic, provide a powerful base for the creative talents of 
Sone Aluko and Lucas Piazon to play. But it is the return to form of Chris 
Martin that has led to the Cottagers climbing the table. His loan move from 
Derby was one of the summer’s stranger transfers as, on his day, the 
27-year-old is one of the best strikers in the division. He scored a brace on 
Saturday, his second in three games.

The usual disclaimers apply, but Fulham have a capable squad and room for 
growth. “The job is not done,” Jokanovic said after the rout on Saturday. “We 
need to build on our confidence and philosophy. But we are in a learning 
process and beginning to build some kind of identity.”

• Last week they parted company with Karl Robinson after six years, and now MK 
Dons are looking for a new manager. Sitting just above the League One 
relegation spots with 16 points, the Dons lost 2-1 at Sheffield United on 
Saturday. The result was no great surprise as the fourth-placed Blades extended 
their unbeaten run to 11 matches. But it seems unlikely that caretaker Richie 
Barker is a serious candidate for the job full time.

More likely appears a continuation of the Dons’ reputation for giving young 
managers their break. Robinson got the job at 29 years of age and followed 
Roberto Di Matteo and Paul Ince in starting his career at the club. Now rumours 
suggest that Ryan Giggs might be considered for the role.

The hottest managerial property who has never managed, Giggs missed out on the 
Swansea job to Bob Bradley this month and recently ruled himself out of the 
vacancy at the Championship strugglers Wigan Athletic. But reports suggest the 
Dons owner Pete Winkelman wants to ascertain Giggs’s availability before making 
any decisions on his next manager. Another, equally intriguing, name mentioned 
in dispatches is that of Paul Mitchell, the former head of recruitment at 
Southampton and Tottenham Hotspur. Mitchell turned out 59 times for the Dons 
midfield during a four-year spell at the club.

• In League Two, Plymouth Argyle are sitting pretty. Top of the table with 35 
points from 15 matches, the Pilgrims are unbeaten since the second game of the 
season, an away reverse against their nearest challengers Carlisle. Before 
Saturday’s match against Colchester, the striker Jordan Slew revealed what he 
thought was the secret to their success and the answer was simple: fitness. 
“We’re a strong team who are very fit and I think most other teams can’t handle 
that,” Slew told the Plymouth Herald. “That’s the beauty of it. We know that, 
come the last 20 minutes, we’ll be stronger and that we can get a goal any 
time. So we’re a very dangerous team right now and a lot of other teams in the 
division will fear us.”

Slew’s views are borne out by statistics. Before Saturday Argyle had scored 
seven goals in the last 20 minutes of matches, nearly a third of their total in 
the league. And on Saturday they did it again. With the match level at 1-1 and 
three minutes remaining on the clock, Ryan Donaldson had the energy to charge 
down Colchester keeper Sam Walker whose clearance smashed into the midfielder 
and looped back into the net. Plymouth held on to claim all three points. “The 
closer I got to him I thought ’this might hit me’,” Donaldson said of his goal 
afterwards. But he went on to confess: “Where it hit me I don’t know.”
 