
The dilemma I have had a chronic (and, to me, embarrassing) illness for 16 
years. I used to have a job and a normal married life. I was sociable and 
outgoing. But the stress of living with this problem became too much. I haven’t 
worked in four years and my life has shrunk to almost nothing. I have gained 
weight. I am miserable. My husband is finding it hard to deal with me. Our kids 
are quite happy but we are struggling to communicate. I find myself very angry 
with him. We have three dogs that annoy me. I am exhausted. I am waiting for a 
bladder removal operation, but I’m petrified. I understand that eating well and 
exercising will help, but frankly I cannot be bothered.

Mariella replies I’m not surprised. Punishing yourself further has become 
second nature. One of many frustrating things about the human psyche is our 
natural tendency, when we’re feeling low, to drag ourselves down further still. 
As you know, the best thing you could be doing right now is getting regular 
exercise – even if it’s just simply a head-clearing, misery-lifting, power walk 
every day – and trying to increase your strength in body and mind in order to 
better recuperate from your impending operation.

Instead, you’re treating your body like your mortal enemy, wreaking terrible 
vengeance on it for a condition that has bogged you down for 16 years. This is 
no time for getting locked into combat with the very entity you most need on 
your side. If one part of your body isn’t doing its job properly, it’s hardly 
sensible to put increased strain on all the rest. It’s a bit like picking out 
your weakest employee and loading them up with extra responsibility. You need 
to befriend your body, nourish it and show it some gratitude for supporting you 
along the way. Instead, you seem hellbent on proving that the whole apparatus 
isn’t fit for purpose and your excuse: “I cannot be bothered”? We both know 
that’s not acceptable.

You say you can't be bothered. We both know that's not acceptable

I know from personal experience that entrenched dietary habits are incredibly 
hard to change. But the benefits of taking control of your health can’t be 
exaggerated. Deep below the layers of despair lies a healthy, vital you, just 
dying to emerge into the daylight. A mere four days of determined, healthy 
eating and you’ll already begin to enjoy a renewed sense of vitality and the 
potent pleasure of a shrinking stomach. More importantly, the mental strength 
you’ll derive from taking control of your destiny will reap benefits for you in 
every single area of your life. Rather than allowing yourself to sink into a 
morass of dysfunction and self-sabotage, which is fundamentally what your 
weight gain is, you’ll be back at the helm, driving full speed towards a better 
future.

The way you’re feeling right now is as predictable as it is preventable. In 
times of trouble, physical or emotional, it seems altogether simpler to give up 
the struggle, weep at our fate and make a den for ourselves in nihilistic 
negativity. In your case, what better way to compound the misery and 
embarrassment of a debilitating condition than to gain weight, eschew exercise 
and increase the acrimony and conflict in your daily life? That’ll really shove 
your sense of self-worth down to subterranean levels. Rather than trying to put 
the brakes on, you’ve decided to freefall into the abyss.

I know it’s not helpful when you’re fully focused on your own misfortune, but 
casting a glance further afield can be a salutary lesson in the appreciation of 
your own good fortune. Some of the happiest, healthiest people I know are those 
whose attention lies beyond the boundaries of their own daily life.

Here you are with an illness for which there is help (if not as readily as it 
perhaps should have been), two ostensibly happy children and a husband who, 
despite your war of attrition, is still at your side and sounds like he, too, 
needs some moral support. He and the three dogs may come with burdensome, 
irritating responsibilities, but they’re present in your life by your own 
choice. It’s easy to cower in fear rather than summon the courage to confront 
our problems but, in the long term, only the latter leads to a fulfilling life.

Quite seriously, you need to get off your bottom, choose a suitable and 
medically approved diet and get those dogs out of your hair and into the great 
wide open. A brisk walk will exhaust your annoying canines, fill your body with 
oxygen and your head full of new ideas. Then you need a job, even if it’s 
part-time, to thrust you back out into the world again. The future is as bright 
as you determine to make it and “I can’t be bothered” is the poorest of 
excuses. You may not thank me now for what may seem obvious and unachievable 
recommendations, but if you take action as I suggest, I bet you will later. Get 
back to me.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 