
Melbourne City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-city> and Perth 
Glory have fought out a memorable 3-3 draw but coaches John van’ t Schip and 
Kenny Lowe both felt the match officials had a night to forget.

The fiery encounter was a thrilling display of attacking soccer played at a 
breakneck pace, but it was marred by some controversial decisions.

City were awarded three penalties by referee Shaun Evans, with striker Bruno 
Fornaroli only able to convert one thanks to a brace of stunning saves by Glory 
custodian Liam Reddy.

Brendon Santalab faces three-match A-League ban after North tussle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/santalab-faces-three-match-a-league-ban>
The second penalty save came deep in injury time with the score 3-3 after Dino 
Djulbic fouled Fernando Brandan off the ball.

Djulbic was initially sent off over the incident and a spot kick awarded but 
then the match was held up for several minutes as Evans consulted with the 
fourth official before showing Brandan a red card for instigating the clash.

Perth left back Marc Warren was responsible for the other two penalties after 
he twice brought down Bruce Kamau, whose pace proved a handful all night for 
Glory.

“I’m surprised ... the referee was very inconsistent,” van ’t Schip said.

“I think it was after 16 minutes that (Warren) got a yellow and after that he 
had five or six more fouls that he made ... but didn’t get a second yellow.

“I really don’t understand why.

“It’s very frustrating but it’s something that we can’t control, 
unfortunately.”

The controversial calls made by the Evans only added to a night of high drama 
at AAMI Park where 11,269 fans were treated to a late Christmas present.

City went ahead three times, Tim Cahill scored the first goal of the contest 
with a trademark header before Fornaroli deftly found the top corner in traffic 
then converted a penalty, only to be pegged back three times by the feisty 
visitors.

Diego Castro scored two goals for Glory in his return from a hamstring injury 
and Chris Harold beat City keeper Dean Bouzanis at his near post with a 
brilliant close-range shot in the 64th minute to end the scoring.

Glory coach Kenny Lowe was pleased to come away from the encounter with a 
point but couldn’t understand why the injury-time penalty stood after Brandan 
was sent off for instigating the clash.

“If the Melbourne boy has fouled first then I don’t see how it can be a 
penalty ... that was the information that we were receiving,” Lowe said.

“I don’t know how the fourth official, who stood next to me, can actually tell 
the ref what went on in the box when he’s only 15 metres away.”

Van ‘t Schip was also keen to defend his captain Fornaroli after missing not 
one but two penalties in a match.

“It’s part of football ... he normally doesn’t have a problem with it but 
today he did,” van ‘t Schip said.


“Bruno took a lot of penalties last year (and scored), so it’s part of 
football.”


The decision to stick with skipper Fornaroli from the penalty spot is even 
harder to understand given Socceroos superstar Tim Cahill is City’s other 
designated penalty taker.


“We have two, it’s Bruno and Tim, and they’re the ones that make that decision 
on the pitch,” van ‘t Schip said.


“They were talking so they made a decision about what to do ... I’ll have to 
find out what they exactly said, but it’s always easy after.


“(But) if you look at the scoreline it wasn’t the best moment to miss them.


“The first one was to go 3-1 up and instead of that it was 2-2, then the last 
one was for winning the game.”


The result leaves City in fourth spot after 12 games, 11 points adrift of 
leaders Sydney FC.
 