
The controversy surrounding Millwall’s stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/millwall-the-den-development-compulsory-purchase-renewal>
 has taken another significant turn with the news that three local Conservative 
associations have written to the secretary of state for local government, Sajid 
Javid, and the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, urging both men to step in and 
review the entire development.

Lewisham council’s compulsory purchase order of land around the Den is due to 
be heard on Wednesday night. With reservations on all sides of the political 
divide about the scheme which would see the land being given to a developer 
with historic links to the Labour council, Lewisham’s three Conservative 
associations have urged the government to act on a scheme described as “fraught 
with problems from the start”.

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, has already called on Lewisham 
council to reconsider plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/millwall-having-to-move-heartbreaking-lib-dem-leader>
 that could, according to Millwall’s chief executive, Steve Kavanagh, lead to 
the club having to leave the area after more than a hundred years. The 
Conservative call for action focuses on the details of the proposed development.

As Millwall’s crisis shows, football is about far more than just sport | Tim 
Farron
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/millwall-football-den-compulsory-purchase>
Ross Archer, chairman of Lewisham Deptford Conservatives, one of the areas 
affected by the development, said: “This scheme has not felt right from the 
start … If Lewisham residents are to have any confidence in the decision on the 
development aroundMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> it 
needs to be taken out of the council’s hands. I hope the secretary of state or 
mayor of London calls this decision in.”

Concerns are also raised about the small amount of affordable and social 
housing planned by developer, Renewal, and the fact the proposed new Surrey 
Canal Road overground station will no longer be paid for by the developer, as 
originally proposed, with the costs to be met by the taxpayer.

The letter to the secretary of state concludes: “Our major concern is that 
this will negatively impact Millwall and the club have warned that this 
development could lead to them leaving the borough and their local community. 
Millwall is a much-valued community asset in its own right, but also supports 
numerous local voluntary schemes. We are all concerned that throughout this 
process Lewisham council have not been transparent, have constantly been 
obstructive to Millwall and have ignored many local concerns. We believe that 
for the local population to have trust in the decision regarding the New 
Bermondsey Development it must be taken out of Lewisham council’s control.”

In a statement last week Lewisham council denied that its plans would endanger 
Millwall’s operations in any way: “Lewisham council is in fact very supportive 
of the area’s local football club,” it read. “The club is at the heart of its 
policy for the redevelopment of the New Bermondsey site and the council has 
consistently said that Millwall’s ability to operate the stadium must and will 
be protected. There is no proposal to acquire any part of the stadium which 
will remain in the council’s freehold ownership with Millwall retaining a long 
leasehold interest.”
 