
Salford City will be dreaming of a giant-killing against Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> when they make their debut 
in the first round of the FA Cup.

The Evo-Stik League Northern Premier side are owned by Manchester United’s 
Class of 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/20/manchester-united-class-of-92-documentary>
 – Gary and Phil Neville, Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes and Nicky Butt – who were 
all Wembley winners in their playing careers.

And the famous five will be preparing for another big Cup day when League Two 
club Notts County visit Moor Lane on the weekend of 6-9 November for a tie 
which should attract the television cameras.

Gary Neville and Ryan Giggs: a striking partnership changing the face of 
Manchester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/25/gary-neville-ryan-giggs-striking-partnership-manchester-developers>
“I’m delighted for everybody at the club for all the work that’s been put in,” 
Salford’s former United striker Danny Webber said. “It was important we got a 
league club and it will be great for the lads to pit their wits against a 
league club to see where we stand. It’s exciting for everybody at Salford.”

Salford’s neighbours FC United of Manchester also have an attractive tie, at 
home to the 1997 semi-finalists Chesterfield, while Altrincham could enhance 
their Cup reputation against Barnsley of League One.

Wigan, FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> winners in 2013, 
make the short trip to Bury while the 2008 winners, Portsmouth, are at home to 
Macclesfield.

Didcot, 15th in Division One South & West of the Evo-Stik Southern League and 
the lowest-ranked side left in the competition, will welcome Exeter, who were 
beaten by non-league Warrington at the same stage of the competition last 
season.

AFC Fylde, of the Vanarama National League North, head to Millwall, Brackley 
Town host Newport and Aldershot welcome League One Bradford City, who shocked 
Chelsea last season with a 4-2 fourth-round victory at Stamford Bridge.

“It’s a tough draw but we’ll be ready for it and give them the utmost 
respect,” said the Bradford manager, Phil Parkinson.

Coventry, winners in 1987, will entertain their former landlords, Northampton, 
while the 1953 Cup winners, Blackpool, visit Barnet and AFC Wimbledon will be 
at home to the National League leaders Forest Green Rovers.

First-round ties will take place on 6-8 November.

Draw in full

Burton Albion v Peterborough

Port Vale v Maidenhead

Barnet v Blackpool

Bristol Rovers v Chesham United

Cambridge Utd v Basingstoke

Mansfield v Oldham

Altrincham v Barnsley

Crewe Alexandra v Eastleigh

Northwich Victoria or Chorley v Boreham Wood

Coventry v Northampton

Brackley v Newport County

Grimsby v St Albans City

Hartlepool United v Havant & Waterlooville or Cheltenham Town

Salford City v Notts County

Dover v Stourbridge

Stevenage v Gillingham

Millwall v AFC Fylde

Aldershot v Bradford City

Walsall v Fleetwood

Bury v Wigan

Portsmouth v Macclesfield

Sheffield United v Worcester City

Barwell or AFC Rushden and Diamonds v Grays or Welling

Halifax or Guiseley v Wycombe

Crawley v Luton

Doncaster v Stalybridge Celtic or North Ferriby United

Didcot v Exeter

Dagenham & Redbridge v Morecambe

Leyton Orient v Staines Town

Gainsborough Trinity v Shrewsbury

Maidstone v Yeovil

Braintree v Oxford United

Whitehawk v Tranmere or Lincoln

Accrington v York

Scunthorpe v Southend

AFC Wimbledon v Forest Green Rovers

Plymouth v Carlisle

FC United of Manchester v Chesterfield

Rochdale v Swindon

Wealdstone v Colchester
 