
Claudio Ranieri denied inciting Leicester City fans to express their 
disapproval of the referee, Craig Pawson, during his team’schaotic 2-2 draw at 
Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/stoke-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. The Italian said that all his words and gestures – to the referee and the 
travelling fans – were intended to defuse rather than inflame a volatile 
atmosphere following the first-half dismissal of Leicesterhis striker Jamie 
Vardy and a controversial penalty decision given against Danny Simpson.

Jamie Vardy in red card controversy as 10-man Leicester battle back to draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/stoke-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Ranieri is normally a model of tact when it comes to referees, refusing to 
discuss their performance on the grounds that their jobs are exceptionally 
difficult, but at half-time he walked towards Pawson in the centre circle and 
appeared unusually angry before being ushered away by his goalkeeper, Kasper 
Schmeichel.

As Ranieri and the officials made their way towards the tunnel, near where the 
Leicester fans were located, Ranieri gestured to them, some of whom seemingly 
interpreted his hand movements as an invitation to offer their own view of 
Pawson. Stewards raised their arms to shield the referee, with suggestions that 
at least one coin was thrown.

“I just wanted to show to our fans, our players, to ‘keep going, stay with 
us’,” said Ranieri, insisting that he was pointing at the pitch rather than the 
referee.

Ranieri also seemed irate when, in the 28th minute, Vardy was sent off for 
raising both feet off the ground as he jumped into a challenge on Mame Biram 
Diouf while tangling with Glen Johnson but the manager was diplomatic. “Every 
decision could be different. We must respect the referee every time,” he said

Leicester are certain to be fined, at least, after six of their players were 
shown yellow cards on top of Vardy’s red. Ranieri said that his team lost his 
cool but praised them for regaining their composure at half-time and fighting 
back from 2-0 down to gain a draw thanks to goals by Leonardo Ulloa and Daniel 
Amartey.

“The match changed after Jamie was sent off, my players were so nervous,” he 
said. “After the penalty we lost our calm, our shape, everything. But 
fortunately in the dressing room we started to think what was best for the 
match. I want to say thank you to my players, to our fans.”
 