
Christmas looms, and as always I shall be giving books, hoping to receive 
books in return. Sometimes the books given and the books received threaten to 
be the same ones, but the situation is headed off by a constant exchange of 
information about what is brewing. Watch a big family getting ready forChristmas
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, and you get a lot of 
tips about how to fight a war.

Intelligence is the key factor. The key to a relevant intelligence operation 
is to make sure everybody else gets to learn your secret desires. The 
embarrassment of being given something you’ve already got can be headed off by 
discreetly spilling that you’ve already got it.

Nobody need give me Damon Hill’s brilliant autobiography, Watching The Wheels 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/watching-the-wheels.html>, because I’ve 
already been given it, by the author himself. Indeed, I’m already halfway 
through it: a voracious rate of reading for someone who can hardly drag his 
feet from hall to kitchen. But the book breathes speed, and speed is catching.

Before Damon started driving fast cars, he drove fast motorcycles, and I have 
no doubt that, when very young, he drove a fast pram, but he has left that bit 
out. Boasting is not in his nature, but going very quickly is. There was a 
magic fortnight, which I treasure in my memory, whenI trailed him around 
central Europe, pointing a movie camera at him 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b8016cc9d>: a situation he has 
loathed since his early days in that F1 pram. After a grand prix in the magic 
central European country of Whateverstan, he installed me like a piece of 
frightened luggage in the front passenger seat of a fast saloon and headed 
under police motorcycle escort towards the airport, where a private jet was 
waiting to take us to a sponsorship appointment in the country next door.

Clive James: ‘I was seconded to the SAS only briefly, during the hunt for 
Saddam Hussein’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/19/clive-james-my-time-in-the-sas>
The jet, when we reached it, seemed slower than the car. But the really 
impressive bit was the calm dedication with which he carried out his sponsorial 
duties. It was a lesson in how a true pro gives as much effort to the homework 
as to the work. In his new book, he has done that again, still engaged in 
making mental sense of the life he has led since his father failed to come home.

It was the only thing, apart from the privilege of being surrounded by our 
beautiful families, that the racing driver and I had in common. He was always 
doing about 200mph on a slow day, and my own idea of a speed thrill was to turn 
up the gas on a power mower. But in recent years I have come to see that I was 
at the shoulder of a thoughtful man when we went sliding and squealing on the 
cobbles of Whateverstan.
 