
Rory Bremner says the coalition government has been “almost a comedy no-go 
area” because of the lack of regular political comedy series on TV.

“Nobody has been tracking them regularly week in week out,” he said following 
a panel discussion at Ad Week Europe.

“When Spitting Image was around people knew who Kenneth Baker, Norman Fowler 
and Leon Britain were. They essentially found out who they were because they 
were on Spitting Image each week.”

“That’s one of the facets of the disconnect between the public and the 
politicians, because they don’t know who half of them are they don’t really 
follow it and it hasn’t been made part of their agenda by comedy programmes 
talking about it.”

Bremner contributed to Spitting Image, which finished its final series in 
1996. His last regular political comedy series was Bremner, Bird and Fortune, 
which aired its final full run in 2008. The show was followed by three one-off 
mini-series culminating in an election-themed show broadcast in the run up to 
that year’s vote.

The impressionist and comedian said the forthcoming election was the most 
fascinating he’d followed because politicians were increasingly unable to keep 
up with how the electorate was changing.

“Politics now is grassroots – it’s petitions and groups like 38 Degrees and 
it’s Avaaz, and that’s what’s engaging everyone on social media.

“I don’t think Westminster gets it. Westminster didn’t get the Scottish 
referendum at all and there’s a danger it’s not getting what’s going on around 
the country.”

He said the proposed debates would help his half-hour BBC2 post-election shows,
Rory Bremner’s Election Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/24/charlie-brooker-bbc-general-election-jack-dee-rory-bremner>
, as they were focusing people’s minds on the theatrical aspects of the 
election.

“It will concentrate the public’s minds as much as anything else. It’s 
television and it’s theatre and therefore it’ll be one of the big set pieces of 
the election so naturally people will remember the debates just as they 
remembered the [Scottish] referendum debates.

“We’ll watch that very carefully ands we’ll do bits about it I’m sure.”
 