
Cockpit warning lights informing drivers of incidents ahead may be introduced 
to formula one cars next season, in an effort to reduce the number of trackside 
officials at each event following the death of a marshal during Sunday's 
Australian grand prix.

Fifty-two-year-old Graham Beveridge, from Queensland, suffered chest and 
abdominal injuries when he was struck by a loose wheel after Jacques 
Villeneuve's BAR-Honda collided with Ralf Schumacher's Williams-BMW at 160mph. 
Though Villeneuve walked away from the accident, one of his wheels sped through 
a gap in the perimeter wall in what the race director Ron Walker called a "one 
in a billion accident". The gap was necessary to allow marshals quick access to 
the track, for example if a car was in flames.

Police yesterday interviewed Villeneuve and Ralf Schumacher about the 
fifth-lap accident, and Villeneuve's car was impounded by the Victoria state 
coroner Graeme Johnston as part of his investigation. Race stewards 
investigating the crash decided it was a "race incident" and that action would 
not be pursued against either driver.

The sport's governing body, the FIA, yesterday launched its own inquiry into 
the incident, in which 13 spectators were also injured. Its president, Max 
Mosley, is expected to hurry along the introduction of the cockpit lights 
technology, which has been in development for the past two years. This would 
drastically reduce the number of officials required at each grand prix next 
season, by removing the need for volunteer officials to wave the sport's 
traditional warning flags.

Beveridge was the second marshal to die at a grand prix in six months, after 
an identical fatality during the Italian event at Monza last year. Paolo 
Ghislimberti, 33, was killed by a flying wheel after a five-car crash.

In Melbourne, seven spectators suffered minor injuries from flying debris and 
were treated at a first aid centre at the track. Six more were treated at the 
scene.

"The first thing we knew there was a loud bang and then a cloud of white 
dust," said one spectator, Andrew Maggiore. "Villeneuve's car disintegrated and 
bits of carbon fibre sprayed through the wire in the fence. It was like being 
showered by shrapnel."

Responding to the accident, the FIA's director of communications, Francesco 
Longanesi, revealed that the governing body "has already put forward to the 
World Motorsport Council, for the session on March 21, the proposal from the 
circuit and safety commission to raise all the fencing at all the formula one 
world championships by one metre. This would not have saved the poor marshal in 
this instance, because the height of the fencing had nothing to do with it, but 
it shows how not only car safety but also trackside safety is subject to 
constant study."

Longanesi added: "The fact that the marshals have a certain degree of exposure 
is due to their function, because they are there to signal and to help. If you 
put a fire marshal completely far away from where an accident may happen, and 
he's in the position where his possible intervention would not be quick enough, 
it is not worth having him there."

Workers dismantling the temporary Albert Park street circuit yesterday laid a 
large wreath at the spot where Beveridge died. Walker said the dead man's 
family would be looked after, regardless of what the insurance cover was.

"We'll be asking the teams to donate their uniforms and helmets to be 
auctioned, so we'll be doing everything we can to assist the family," he said.

Meanwhile, according to the BMW-Williams team's technical director Patrick 
Head, Ralf Schumacher's telemetry has revealed the German did not brake any 
earlier when Villeneuve ran into the back of him than on the three previous 
laps.

The Canadian briefly went to hospital on Sunday night for a check-up, 
complaining his back and neck had started to seize up. He left after just a 
routine check.
 