
“Some days it’s hard being a manager.” So said Barnsley’s Lee Johnson and they 
were the winners at Colchester United. Wayne Brown, in his second game as the 
home team’s caretaker, may as well learn from the start – and clearly is. “We 
gave ourselves a mountain to climb after that first half,” he said, slipping 
into managerial lingo. Barnsley led 2-0 at half-time, 3-0 by the hour and ended 
up hanging on at 3-2 from the 70th minute. The victory lifted them off the 
bottom ofLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
and a point and place above Colchester.

These are two of the youngest sides in the Football League and Johnson, at 34, 
one of the youngest managers. Son of Gary, now at Cheltenham but celebrated at 
Yeovil, he left Oldham, where he had begun at 31, in ninth last February for 
what he saw as a step up at Barnsley in 16th. They ended 11th but a run of 
eight defeats from early October made it look a step down. Subsequently beating 
Oldham and reaching the Football League Trophy northern final entitled Johnson 
to talk last week of “growing confidence”.Colchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester>, in a run of five defeats, 
may have added to it.

Said & Done: Captain Fiasco; Luis Suárez; and the Dalai Lama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/13/said-and-done-football-family-phillip-chiyangwa>
Tony Humes, who had them eighth at the end of September, paid for the slump 
but Brown, a former Colchester player, paid him tribute. “He brought me into 
this club and gave me the chance to apply myself as a coach [with the 
under-18s],” he said, noting his “importance in the club’s progression” and how 
“his door was always open”. His teams reflected it. They had conceded 49 goals 
in 20 games before Saturday, 14 more than any other League One club, while 
scoring more than Burton at the top.

Robbie Cowling, owner and chairman, is keen to make an internal appointment 
and said last week that Brown was “in the box seat” while acknowledging, “It’s 
a bit of a poisoned chalice at the moment.” Cowling is joint-founder and 
manager of JobServe, specialists in online recruitment. He is averaging almost 
a manager a year at Colchester.

Brown has made no bones about wanting the job but at half-time he looked more 
like the footman trudging behind; and narcotics might have filled the chalice. 
Passes ran into touch, through-balls, hit as if the gale was against, hastened 
over the goalline and free-kicks were conceded at almost one a minute until 
Conor Hourihane scored in the 18th after the second skirmish in Colchester’s 
goalmouth. Barnsley’s second goal was sweetly created by Ivan Toney’s initial 
control and slip to Sam Winnall, who found Adam Hammill in oceans of space 
behind the right-back Richard Brindley. Colchester draw loyal, not large 
support but, as the players went in search of a better potion, the boos of 
3,000 were blown over the north stand they do not need or bother to staff.

“We had a game plan and it didn’t work,” Brown said after they had come within 
scrambled inches of a draw. “We have to show more belief on the ball.” He had 
another, which nearly did. He took off Joe Edwards, the diligent defensive one 
in a 4-1-4-1, and switched to 4-4-2 with Chris Porter, almost two in himself, 
alongside the hapless Marvin Sordell, who once went from Watford to Bolton for 
£3m. In 90 seconds Tom Eastman had hit the bar with a header.

Play did not fully swing until Toney’s easy header had made it 3-0. Only then 
did Colchester turn on the turbos. In three minutes George Moncur, superb 
throughout, swept in his eighth league goal of the season and Porter followed. 
Brown said: “It’s something to work on. We got bodies around him up front.” 
Johnson acknowledged: “We needed to stop the supply to him but we dropped 
deeper.” Hammill’s return and the arrival of Newcastle’s Toney on loan have 
sharpened his hand and may, as he hoped, “get that love back in the room”.

He followed his opening remark with: “One moment you are thinking of the 
Sunday roast and then …” He tailed off, rather like his side, butBarnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> look the likelier to enjoy 
their turkey.
 