
Held on the wild mountain roads of Sicily between 1906 and 1973, the Targa 
Florio ranked just behind the 24 Hours of Le Mans and the Mille Miglia among 
the classic events of the sports car calendar. In 1964, Colin Davis, who has 
died aged 79, became one of only seven British racing drivers – the others were 
Cyril Snipe, Stirling Moss, Peter Collins, Graham Hill, Vic Elford and Brian 
Redman – to win the trophy that was originally awarded by the Sicilian wine 
grower and automobile enthusiast Vincenzo Florio.

The moustachioed, pipe-smoking Davis was not as well known as he deserved to 
be, thanks to an early decision to spend most of his career living and racing 
in Italy, and to retire from the sport in his 30s, dismayed by the frequency of 
fatal accidents on the track.

As the son of SCH "Sammy" Davis, a sports editor of Autocar magazine and one 
of the most prominent British drivers of the 1920s, Colin was born into the 
sport. His father was one of the famous Bentley Boys, a friend and associate of 
the engineer and designer WO Bentley, and winner at Le Mans in 1927, at the 
wheel of a car that had been almost crippled by an accident early in the race. 
It was no surprise that Colin would follow in his wheeltracks, particularly 
after Sammy bought him his first car, a V12 Lagonda.

Born in Marylebone, London, Colin worked in the advertising business but was 
barely out of his teens when he made his competitive debut at the wheel of a 
500cc Cooper-Norton, taking second and third places in his first races at 
Silverstone. Moss and Collins had already moved on from the tiny Formula Three 
cars to bigger and better things, but over the next four seasons Davis's rivals 
would include Stuart Lewis-Evans andKen Tyrrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/aug/27/guardianobituaries.formulaone>.

In 1957 he moved to Italy, then the centre of motor racing, where he 
established a relationship with the Maserati brothers, who had sold their 
Modena-based team and moved back to their home town of Bologna, where they 
manufactured small sports cars under the name of OSCA (Officine Specializzate 
Costruzioni Automobili). But it was in a Maserati 250F, borrowed from the 
English driver Horace Gould, that he competed in the non-championshipFormula One
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> Modena Grand Prix that year.

A year later he made a mark when he and Alejandro de Tomaso, the Argentinian 
driver and businessman, drove an OSCA sports car to second place in the 12 
Hours of Messina and won the coveted Index of Performance award – calculated on 
speed and fuel consumption – at Le Mans after finishing 11th overall in a 750cc 
model.

In 1959 he was entered in a Cooper-Maserati by the Scuderia Centro Sud for the 
Formula One French and Italian grands prix, retiring at Reims and finishing 
11th at Monza in an outclassed car. Sports car racing became his speciality, 
along with the new single-seater Formula Junior, a category designed to replace 
Formula Three. His FJ successes came in Fiat-engined OSCA and Taraschi cars, a 
win in the Naples GP of 1959 in a Taraschi preceding a remarkable run in the 
summer of 1960, when within the space of a few weeks he and the OSCA won the 
Monza Lottery GP, the Circuit of Salerno and the Messina GP, followed in 
October by the Coppa d'Oro di Sicilia in Syracuse, giving him victory in the 
all-comers Italian championship ahead of such future F1 stars as Denis Hulme, 
Lorenzo Bandini and Giancarlo Baghetti.

The Targa Florio win, in which he shared the wheel of a Porsche 904 GTS with 
Antonio Pucci, came in the absence of the Ferrari team and after the failure of 
a trio ofCarroll Shelby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/13/carroll-shelby>'s powerful new 
AC Cobras. There was a second place in the same event a year later, this time 
in a Porsche 908 co-driven by Gerhard Mitter. In 1966 he achieved his best 
overall result at Le Mans, finishing fourth with Jo Siffert in a two-litre 
Porsche 906 Carrera behind three seven-litre Ford GT40s.

A neat, stylish driver and a quiet, unassuming man, Davis made infrequent 
trips to British circuits, on one occasion to race a Ferrari 250 GTO at Brands 
Hatch. He was seen in a Formula One car only once on home ground, finishing 
seventh amid a high-class field in the International 2,000 Guineas race at 
Mallory Park in 1962, driving a Lotus 18-Climax entered by Giovanni Volpi's 
Scuderia SSS Republica di Venezia.

After his retirement from racing he moved to Cape Town, where he worked as a 
radio broadcaster. He is survived by his wife, Eva, and their daughter, 
Francesca.

• Colin Charles Houghton Davis, racing driver, born 29 July 1933; died 19 
December 2012
 