
Colin Calderwood's miserable start as Hibernian manager continued when a 
brilliant piece of forward play from the Ayr veteran Mark Roberts sent the 
Edinburgh side crashing out of theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>.

The 35-year-old's impressive footwork and perfect finish in the 19th minute 
decided the fourth-round replay and leftHibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> fans with little to look 
forward to for the rest of the campaign other than retaining their Premier 
League status.

Hibs found the Ayr <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ayr> goalkeeper, 
David Crawford, in excellent shot-stopping form but they struggled to 
consistently create chances and are now without victory in nine games. 
Calderwood had left out the five midfielders who started Saturday's 3-0 home 
defeat by Celtic with Colin Nish and Darryl Duffy introduced up front and Derek 
Riordan moving to left midfield.

But the winning formula continues to elude the Hibs manager, who has tasted 
victory in just two out of 15 games since being brought in to an arrest a slump 
that stretches back almost a year.

Calderwood began his early football education as a schoolboy with Ayr but he 
was taunted with chants of "you're getting sacked in the morning" by some of 
the home fans, who formed the vast majority of the 3,826 crowd.

The second division leaders matched Hibs from the start, creating the first 
chance when Chris Smith blazed well over after a corner. The visitors soon 
responded with Kevin McBride's weak effort cleared off the line by Eddie Malone 
after a mix-up between the defender and Crawford.

Roberts, playing as a lone striker, threaded Andy Rodgers in down the inside 
right channel and the Ayr man appeared to be held by Paul Hanlon before 
recovering to stab a shot past Brown but beyond the far post.

The same two players combined for the goal after Hibs were caught on the break 
following a long spell of possession. Rodgers returned the ball to Roberts who 
took it down just inside the box, but there appeared to be limited danger as 
Ian Murray and Hanlon blocked his way to goal.

However, the former Kilmarnock striker moved the ball from foot to foot until 
he had time and space to shoot, and guided the ball into the bottom corner.

Hibs had an instant chance to level when Duffy's inside ball found John 
Rankin, who charged into the area unchallenged but saw his shot blocked by the 
foot of Crawford. Ayr sat back but Hibs rarely got past the organised home 
defence and the SPL side only created one more clear chance before the break.

The hosts were caught square and Duffy burst towards goal with Crawford rooted 
to his line. But the Ayr goalkeeper parried Duffy's angled effort and the home 
defence blocked Riordan's follow-up.

The underdogs started the second half brightly but the right-back Jonathan 
Tiffoney almost gifted Hibs a 57th-minute equaliser when he tried and failed to 
take the ball round Riordan inside the box after Nish had won a long free-kick 
in the air.

Riordan immediately curled the ball towards the far corner but Crawford threw 
himself to his left to push wide. Ayr soon had another narrow escape when 
Willie Easton nodded Hanlon's header off the line following a corner.

Ayr responded and both Roberts and Rodgers came close to converting Tiffoney's 
low cross. Merouane Zemmama replaced Duffy in the 65th minute to take up a 
position just behind the front two, which now featured Riordan.

Miller soon saw a shot deflected just wide after a lay-off from Nish, whose 
header from the resulting corner was parried wide by Crawford. But Hibs failed 
to keep up the pressure and Brown almost spilled Scott McLaughlin's free-kick 
at the other end.

The home players appeared to find extra energy as they chased every ball 
before inevitably being pegged back in the final 10 minutes.

But Crawford held Riordan's powerful strike and the home defence charged down 
every other effort on goal before the final whistle sparked a pitch invasion 
from the jubilant home fans.
 