
Derek McInnes said he has a dream of taking St Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> to the Scottish Cup final 
after Collin Samuel's first-half goal beat Brechin City at McDiarmid Park.

The Irn-Bru Second Division side had held Saints to a 2-2 draw in the first 
game at Glebe Park but Samuel's angled-drive after 37 minutes ended hopes of a 
shock in the quarter-final replay.

McInnes's men will take on either Motherwell or Dundee United in the Hampden 
semi-final on 16 April for the right to face Celtic or Aberdeen in the final.

After four unsuccessful semi-final appearances in the past four years the St 
Johnstone manager believes he can go all the way this season.

"Right from the outset I had a real belief," he said. "Maybe that's me 
dreaming but I believe in the players and I believe we can be successful. We 
need to step it up and go into the semi-final in good shape and we look forward 
to it. I think we have to believe.

"In the cup game at Tynecastle Hearts were flying and no one outside our 
dressing room gave us a chance and it was a big result for us. I thought if the 
draw was kind to us it could be our year. I know we can't win the league but we 
can win a cup. I firmly believe that.

"I have lost two semi-finals here as a player and two as a manager and all of 
them to the eventual winners. But we are in a semi-final again, 90 minutes away 
from making the next step."

McInnes added: "I thought we were excellent from first minute to last."

The one downside for Saints was Peter MacDonald's late booking for a foul on 
Gerry McLauchlan which means he is banned for the semi-final. McInnes said: "It 
is a very harsh booking. The ball came out of the air and he was just following 
it.

"These boys don't get to the semi-finals very often and for him to miss out on 
a semi-final because of that is very disappointing."

The Brechin <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> manager, Jim Weir, 
who got a testimonial as a St Johnstone player and whose wife still works at 
the Perth club, is hoping to follow his former club all the way to the final.

"I was delighted with the effort of our players," he said. "You have to give 
the players credit for coming to an SPL ground and only losing by the odd goal. 
I wish St Johnstone well and, if there is any club I would want to win the cup, 
it is them because they had a big part to play in my football career."
 