
We are obsessed with ourselves. We study our history, our psychology, our 
philosophy,our gods. Much of our knowledge revolves around humankind itself, as 
if we were the most important thing in the universe. But I like physics because 
it opens a window through which we can see further. It gives me the sense of 
fresh air entering the house.

What we see out there through the window is constantly surprising us. In the 
course of the centuries we have come to realise just how many wrong ideas we’ve 
had. We thought the earth was flat and that it was the still centre of our 
world. That the universe was small, and unchanging. We believed that we were a 
breed apart, without kinship to the other animals. We have learned of the 
existence of quarks, black holes, particles of light, waves of space, and of 
the extraordinary molecular structures in every cell of our bodies.

The human race is like a growing child who discovers with amazement that the 
world consists not just of their bedroom and playground, but that it is vast, 
and that there are a thousand things to discover, and innumerable ideas quite 
different from those with which they began. The universe is multiform and 
boundless, and we continue to stumble upon new aspects of it. The more we 
learn, the more we are amazed by the world’s variety.

Science demolishes existing ideas to reveal new regions of reality and 
construct more effective images of the world

But the more we discover, the more we understand that what we don’t yet know 
is greater than what we know. The more powerful our telescopes, the stranger 
and more unexpected are the heavens we see. The closer we look at the minute 
detail of matter, the more we discover of its profound structure. Today we have 
already begun to glimpse something beyond the Big Bang. We have learned that 
space is curved, but already foresee that this same space is woven from 
vibrating quantum grains.

Our knowledge of the elementary grammar of the world continues to grow. If we 
put together what we have learned during the 20th century, the clues point to 
something profoundly different from what we were taught at school. An 
elementary structure is emerging, generated by a swarm of quantum events, where 
time and space do not exist.

In a famous myth related by Plato in the seventh book of The Republic, some 
men are chained at the bottom of a dark cave and see only shadows cast upon a 
wall by a fire behind them. They think that this is reality. One of them frees 
himself, leaves the cave and discovers the light of the sun and the wider 
world. At first the light, to which his eyes are unaccustomed, stuns and 
confuses him. But eventually he can see and returns excitedly to his companions 
to tell them what he has seen. They find it hard to believe.

We are all in the depths of a cave, chained by our ignorance, our prejudices, 
and our weak senses reveal only shadows. If we try to see further, we are 
confused: we are unaccustomed. But we try. This is science. Scientific thinking 
explores and redraws the world, gradually offering us better and better images 
of it, teaching us to think in ever more effective ways. Its strength is its 
capacity to demolish preconceived ideas, to reveal new regions of reality, and 
to construct new, more effective images of the world. This adventure rests upon 
the entirety of past knowledge, but at its heart is change.

The incompleteness and the uncertainty of our knowledge, our precariousness, 
suspended over the abyss of what we don’t know, does not render life 
meaningless: it makes it interesting and precious.

Carlo Rovelli’s book Reality is Not What it Seems: The Journey to Quantum 
Gravity <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/reality-is-not-what-it-seems.html> is 
out now(Allen Lane, £16.99). To order a copy for £13.93, go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/reality-is-not-what-it-seems.html>
 