
Substitute David Carney’s controversial 77th-minute goal gave Sydney FC all 
three points in an entertaining A-League encounter with theCentral Coast 
Mariners <https://www.theguardian.com/football/central-coast-mariners>, from 
which the undefeated Sky Blues emerged 3-2 winners.

Carney, who had replaced Berni Ibini on 68 minutes, popped up with a near-post 
finish to settle a contest the Mariners had managed to keep alive against the 
odds. Replays later showed Carney was in an offside position.

James Troisi stars as in-form Melbourne Victory overcome Adelaide United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/newcastle-striker-morten-nordstrand-pops-up-late-to-upset-brisbane-roar>
Sydney were seemingly cruising towards their 11th win of the season after 
marquee striker Bôbo struck either side of the break, the first a wonderful 
volleyed effort and the second a simple finish after Miloš Ninković had laid 
the chance on a plate.

But a miscued defensive header from Filip Hološko at a Mariners set piece on 
66 minutes changed the course of the game; the ball skewed back into the box 
off the Slovak’s forehead, presenting Roy O’Donovan with the opportunity to nod 
home from close range.

The Mariners passed a glorious chance to get back onto level terms six minutes 
later when Sydney defender Rhyan Grant bundled over Connor Pain in the box and 
Fábio Ferreira’s woeful spot kick was sent sailing well over the bar.

But an equaliser did arrive soon enough, with Scott Galloway following up a 
parried O’Donovan effort on goal to get his side back in the game at 2-2.


Yet, as celebrations were just dying down in the stands, Carney settled the 
match with his contentious effort, sparking angry scenes on the sidelines as 
Paul Okon berated fourth official Chris Beath.

The Mariners coach’s remonstrations came to nought, and Sydney held on to 
extend their lead at the top of theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> ladder to seven points, 
although they will be without Josh Brillante for next week’s Sydney derby after 
the defender picked up his fifth yellow card of the season.

It also appears likely Graham Arnold will be without Seb Ryall, who was 
replaced by Brillante after the stand-in captain limped off with a hamstring 
injury early in the first half.
 