
Russell Slade blasted the referee David Coote after his error gifted 
Birmingham the penalty from which they earned a 1-0 victory over Cardiff. The 
official pointed to the spot in the final minute of the first half after Matt 
Connolly blocked James Vaughan’s shot with his face, and Paul Caddis duly 
scored the winner.

It ended Cardiff’s four-match unbeaten run and denied them a chance to move 
into theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> 
play-offs spots, and Slade admitted he had to be stopped from properly 
confronting Coote in the tunnel at half-time.

“I would have liked to have got extremely close,” the Cardiff manager said. 
““I did have words with him at half time and told him he got it wrong. With 
technology we knew pretty quickly he made a huge mistake. I’m not quite sure 
why – there were no players obstructing his view, he had a fantastic view of 
the situation.”

And Coote would have been grateful that Slade could not speak to him straight 
after the game ended either. “The rules are I have to wait a little bit before 
I go in – a cooling-off period they call that,” Slade said, “but I did have 
words with him at half-time.”

Sammy Ameobi wasted Cardiff’s best chance, in a second half they dominated, 
and Jonathan Spector turned Tony Watt’s cross onto his own post.

“We’re all very hurt because we care,” said Slade. “The result means something 
to us. It’s just so disappointing when a huge error gifted Birmingham an 
opportunity to score the first goal.”

The penalty was Birmingham’s first home goal in 432 minutes and lifted Blues 
above Cardiff into seventh, a point behind the top six.

“At the time I couldn’t see it, the lad had his arm up so it was very 
difficult to tell whether it hit his arm,” said Gary Rowett. “I saw it 
afterwards and it’s hit him clear in the face, the only thing the referee could 
potentially see was his arm is up next to his head so he maybe thinks there’s 
contact. You have to be 100% sure in that situation and he can’t have been.

“But for us not to play as well tonight, perhaps get a bit of fortunate and 
take the three points I can’t be unhappy with that. I would take a poor 
performance and three points. It was always going to be a big week for us.”
 