
Lewisham council’s plan to compulsorily purchase Millwall FC’s land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/millwall-the-den-lewisham-council-property-developers>
 around The Den and sell it to mystery offshore-owned developers took a further 
unlikely twist in courtroom five of the Employment Appeal Tribunal.

The council, represented by a QC and instructing solicitors, successfully 
argued behind closed doors that the hearing should be postponed until January. 
The reason for the delay is the unavailability of one of the directors of the 
developers, Renewal, who would have given evidence.

The hearing relates to a freedom of information request for an unredacted copy 
of a 2013 PricewaterhouseCoopers due diligence report. This report was the 
basis for Lewisham’s decision to give Renewal first, and only, rights on what 
has become a £1bn regeneration of the area around The Den, backed by public 
money from the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and accelerated planning powers.

Millwall given new hope in land battle as disquiet grows over property deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/millwall-the-den-lewisham-council-property-developers>
The delay will draw further exasperation among supporters of Millwall’s case, 
not least at the cost to Lewisham taxpayers of retaining a leading public law 
QC simply in order to conceal information about the identity of a private 
offshore property developer. Lewisham is facing £85m budget cuts that will 
bring “severe suffering” to vulnerable families, according to its own cabinet. 
Against this the cost of retaining Anya Proops QC, Lewisham’s chosen silk, 
could be anything up to £1,000 an hour, even without a supporting legal team.

Mickey Simpson of the Millwall AMS supporters’ group <http://the-ams.co.uk/> 
said: “It’s outrageous that public money is being spent on this when it could 
be sorted out by cooperation with the club. Everyone just needs to get round 
the table together. We are fed up with secrecy. We all know the regeneration 
has to happen but this is a crazy way for Lewisham council to go about it.”

Eyebrows will also be raised at Renewal’s inability to proceed with a court 
hearing because of the unavailability of one director. Renewal intends to 
manage a huge urban regeneration project. The company has repeatedly denied it 
intends to “cut and run”, selling its interest for a quick profit as soon as 
the CPO of parts of The Den is complete.

However, Lewisham council has already been forced to cancel its own scrutiny 
meeting after the emergence in the Guardian of a document that appears to 
suggest one of Renewal’s parent companies has looked into selling its interest. 
Two months later the council is still “investigating the veracity” of this 
document.

The delay will add to the concerns of football supporters and residents and 
create further unrest among backbench Labour councillors, who have passed a 
motion condemning the CPO.Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> are still keen to advance their 
own scheme for developing the area, which would contain more affordable housing 
and safeguard the future of Bermondsey’s outstanding community asset.

The identity of the owners of Lewisham’s chosen developers is still unknown; 
as is the full extent of the family-owned company’s ability to carry out the 
development of Millwall’s land and surrounding areas.

The Guardian has revealed that one of Renewal’s founding directors was Dave 
Sullivan, the previous Labour mayor. Renewal’s current chief executive, Mushtaq 
Malik, is also a former senior Lewisham officer, who has worked with Lewisham’s 
current chief executive, Barry Quirk, best known locally for earning more 
pro-rata than the prime minister in return for a three-day week at the council.
 