
The actor Coral Atkins, who has died aged 80, found fame on television in the 
1970s in A Family at War, which ran for 52 episodes and attracted audiences of 
more than 20 million. Her character, Sheila Ashton, was the downtrodden and 
neglected wife of a womanising RAF sergeant, David (played by Colin Campbell), 
and a heroine of the semi-autobiographical series created by John Finch.

The ITV drama (1970-72) followed a lower-middle-class Liverpool family from 
1938 to 1945, their emotional conflicts running parallel to the greater events 
taking place across Europe and then the world. Atkins found herself showered 
with flowers, receiving stacks of fan mail and forever being stopped in the 
streets by people shouting out to “our Sheila”.

However, she turned her back on fame after a life-changing event. In the 
summer of 1970, she had opened a fete at a children’s home outside Manchester. 
When the ceremonials were over, she heard screaming. “I found her in the 
kitchen, a girl of four or five,” recalled Atkins. “She was clawing at the 
walls, her eyes were wild, she was just gone, completely gone.” Staff simply 
ignored the child and, when Atkins showed concern and cuddled the girl, she was 
told by the establishment’s matron that it was a mistake to get emotionally 
involved.

This experience led her to set up her own home for disturbed children. She 
rented Crossways, a 20-room thatched property in the Berkshire hamlet of Hoe 
Benham, renovated it and jumped hurdles to ensure that facilities met legal 
standards. She received great help and advice on tackling bureaucracy from a 
former Conservative MP, Godfrey Nicholson, who also introduced her to a 
distinguished psychiatrist, and she finally opened her doors in 1972. Nine 
years later, she qualified as a psychotherapist.

In between, Atkins suffered a nervous breakdown, underwent therapy herself and 
discovered that her desire to help children emanated from her own traumatic 
wartime experiences, when at the age of three she was evacuated to an isolated 
farm in Wiltshire with her elder sister, Sylvia.

She recalled feeling abandoned by their parents and being neglected and beaten 
by the person in whose care they had been put. “I became convinced that I was 
Red Riding Hood and this woman was going to eat me,” she said. As a result, 
Atkins was unable to see the colour red until her therapy sessions. Her 1990 
autobiography, Seeing Red, was turned into a TV drama of the same title, 
starring Sarah Lancashire, 10 years later.

In 1985, Atkins opened a second children’s home, in Putney, south-west London. 
Five years later, both homes and their children were merged into one at Gyde 
House, in Painswick, Gloucestershire. Over 26 years, she cared for 37 children.

Atkins was born in Kingston-upon-Thames, south-west London, the daughter of 
Lilian (nee Millson), who later wrote poetry and children’s stories, and Eric 
Atkins, an electrician, who painted and exhibited at the Royal Academy. The 
family lived in Tooting, south London, and, after Atkins’s wartime evacuation, 
moved to the Berkshire village of Bucklebury, and then nearby Kingsclere, 
Hampshire.

Educated at Shaw House school, Newbury, Atkins started studying art at 
Winchester college but abandoned the course on discovering that she did not 
possess her father’s creative flair. Aged 17, she decided on a career in acting 
and joined Armstrong Productions, a travelling repertory company. Further rep 
experience followed in Guildford, and the West End beckoned with the John 
Osborne play Inadmissible Evidence (Wyndham’s theatre, 1965).

After making her TV debut with a one-off role in Emergency – Ward 10 (1960), 
Atkins had bit parts in popular series, as well as theAlun Owen 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/12/08/obituaries/alun-owen-actor-and-writer-69.html>
 play The Hard Knock (1962), playing a tough Liverpool girl, andJack Rosenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/may/31/guardianobituaries.broadcasting>
’s The Night Before the Morning After (1966).

When A Family at War ended, she concentrated on running her children’s homes, 
but there were occasional small roles on screen, in programmes such as Callan 
(1972) and The Sweeney (1975). There was a more substantial part in Flesh and 
Blood, another Finch family drama – this time set in the writer’s native 
Yorkshire – in which she played Ruth Turner during its first series (1980). 
Later, in 1993, came a short run in the soap opera Emmerdale as Ruth Jameson, a 
former girlfriend of Frank Tate (Norman Bowler) visiting his Holiday Village.

In 1997, Atkins suffered a punctured lung and broken leg and ribs in a head-on 
car crash, and a year later her children’s home closed under financial 
pressures. She then spent five years working as a psychotherapist.

Atkins’s 1960 marriage to the actor Jeremy Young ended in divorce. She had a 
six-year relationship with the director Peter Whitehead, with whom she had a 
son, Harry, who survives her, as does Keith Skinner, her partner of the past 16 
years.

• Coral Rosemary Atkins, actor and psychotherapist, born 13 September 1936; 
died 2 December 2016
 