
New regulations for medical practitioners who perform cosmetic procedures fail 
to close a loophole that allows GPs to perform invasive cosmetic surgeries such 
as liposuction and facelifts.

On Monday the Medical Board of Australia issued regulations for medical 
practitioners following wide consultation with the industry and the public 
about how to protect people undergoing cosmetic procedures.

In the aggressive world of cosmetic surgery, patients can't afford to be naive 
| Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/25/in-the-aggressive-world-of-cosmetic-surgery-patients-cant-afford-to-be-naive>
The cosmetic industry has been only lightly regulated. While plastic surgeons 
must undergo extensive medical education and training to become accredited 
after obtaining their medical degree, cosmetic surgeons need only to have 
completed a basic medical degree to perform some surgeries.

The new regulations 
<http://www.medicalboard.gov.au/News/2016-05-09-media-statement.aspx>, which 
will take effect from October, prescribe a seven-day cooling off period for 
adults before major procedures. For anyone under 18 there will be a three-month 
cooling-off period before major procedures, with a mandatory evaluation by a 
registered psychologist, general practitioner or psychiatrist, and a seven-day 
cooling off period before minor procedures.

Treating medical practitioners will have to take “explicit responsibility for 
postoperative care and for making sure there are emergency facilities when they 
are using sedation, anaesthesia or analgesia”.

The vice president of the Australian Society of Plastic Surgeons, Dr Gazi 
Hussain, welcomed those requirements. But he said it did not change the fact 
that any doctor with a basic medical qualification could perform some 
potentially dangerous and invasive cosmetic operations.

“In our submission to the Medical Board we specifically requested there be a 
requirement for basic training in cosmetic surgery, and we would always 
recommend someone has training from the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons 
given the lack of regulation,” he said.

Medical doctors might be capable of making incisions and performing some 
surgeries, he said, but they might lack the training to respond if something 
went wrong. When procedures were carried out in non-licensed medical 
facilities, there were no specialists, such as anaesthetists or emergency 
doctors, on hand to respond. It is not illegal to conduct surgical procedures 
in an unaccredited facility, such as an office space, Hussain said.

“I’ve seen patients who have had branches of their facial nerves cut and I 
have had to try to repair or improve that; I’ve seen patients with breast 
implants who then come to emergency departments with infections, and I’ve had 
patients with tummy tucks falling apart,” Hussain said.

“Mostly it had been done by non-plastic surgeons.”

There have been calls for tougher regulations for plastic surgeons as well, 
and the new regulations will also apply to them. When complications from both 
cosmetic and plastic surgery occur, it can be difficult for patients to know if 
they are suffering a statistically unfortunate but genuine complication, or are 
a victim of malpractice.

Research by Marie Bismark, a doctor and lawyer, found that of nearly 10,000 
Australian medico-legal cases resolved over a six-year period, 16% involved 
cosmetic procedures. Plastic surgeons, orthopaedic surgeons, vascular surgeons 
and dermatologists experienced disproportionately high rates of consent 
disputes, with patients feeling they were not given enough information to give 
informed consent,her study found. 
<http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1748-6815(12)00270-7>

As well as the cooling-off period, the new regulations contain explicit 
guidance on patient assessment and informed consent, and require doctors to 
provide clear information to consumers about costs, risks and possible 
complications.

Sara Pascoe: ‘Boob jobs are viewed as a decorative tweak, but these women are 
self-harming’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/10/sara-pascoe-boob-jobs-self-harm-animal-cosmetic-surgery>
“Our previous research found a large number of complaints each year from 
patients who feel they were presured to undergo more extensive cosmetic and 
surgical procedures than they wanted, and some made complaints they felt pushed 
into making a decision rather than being given an opportunity to go away and 
think about their options,” Bismark said.

“There were some concerns that benefits of some procedures were being oversold 
and that patients didn’t fully understand the risks or that it might not go as 
they believed.”

The chairwoman of the Medical Board of Australia, Dr Joanna Flynn, said 
cosmetic surgery was very broad and difficult to define, which hampered 
regulation. It included everything from non-surgical laser hair removal and 
Botox through to breast augmentation and other invasive procedures.

“These guidelines haven’t gone into the issue of specific qualifications, but 
not all the harm is done by those with less training,” she said.

“There was consideration about whether cosmetic surgery should be recognised 
as a speciality in its own right which would require certain specialisation, 
and that needs to happen before the Medical Board can implement a need for 
specific qualifications. But it didn’t meet the test requirements for making it 
a speciality, and that’s largely because it’s such a diverse field encompassing 
relatively minor to major procedures.”
 