
Patients would be allowed to undergo cosmetic surgery only after a mandatory 
cooling-off period, under draft guidelines proposed by the Medical Board of 
Australia.

While adults would be subject to a seven-day cooling-off period between 
consulting their practitioner and undergoing the procedure, those under 18 
would have to wait three months, and would also undergo a mandatory assessment 
by a registered psychologist or psychiatrist.

Currently there are no consistent guidelines for patients or medical 
practitioners in relation to a reasonable minimum time between a consultation 
and a cosmetic procedure being performed.

“This means that a consumer can proceed with a major, irreversible elective 
procedure without fully appreciating the risks, the likelihood of 
complications, the variable outcomes and the cost,” the board’sconsultation 
paper <http://www.medicalboard.gov.au/News/2015-03-17-media-release.aspx> said. 

“[There is] a common perception by consumers that cosmetic procedures are ‘low 
risk’ yet will ‘transform their lives’, and yet there can be significant impact 
on the consumer when things go wrong.”

Procedures considered “cosmetic” include everything from laser hair removal 
and anti-wrinkle injections, to breast augmentation and liposuction.

A report from the now defunct health quality and complaints commission, which 
analysed 245 complaints about cosmetic surgical and medical procedures from 
2006 to 2012, found many of those believed the standard of the procedure was 
below or significantly different from what they had expected.

The board’s chair, Dr Joanna Flynn, said the aim of the guidelines was to keep 
the public safe, without imposing an unreasonable regulatory burden on 
practitioners.

“In lots of ways cosmetic procedures are different from other medical 
procedures,” Flynn said.

“We are looking for the best way to manage risk to patients without limiting 
or making judgments about consumer choices.

Under the proposed guidelines, patients would have to be well-informed before 
consenting to a procedure and be given clear information about risks and 
possible complications.

Face-to-face consultations before prescribing prescription-only cosmetic 
injectables, including the anti-wrinkle drug Botox, would also be required, and 
there would also be limits on where cosmetic procedures could be performed.

There have long been calls from consumer health advocates to strengthen 
regulations governing the cosmetic surgery industry, with procedures advertised 
as everything from medical procedures to beauty treatments, which can misguide 
people about their risk.

Cosmetic procedures can also be performed by practitioners with widely varied 
qualifications and training, including plastic surgeons, general surgeons, ear, 
nose and throat, head and neck surgeons, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, 
dermatologists, ophthalmologists and general practitioners.

For this reason, the number of medical practitioners providing cosmetic 
medical and surgical procedures in Australia is not known; cosmetic surgery is 
not a medical speciality recognised by the Australian health workforce 
ministerial council.

The president of the Australian Society of Plastic Surgeons, Dr Tony Kane, 
said the draft guidelines were consistent with measures the society had been 
calling for.

“Our number one priority is patient safety, and the society has long been 
concerned that there is a general view in the community that cosmetic surgery 
is trivial surgery,” he said.

“This is not the case. Any invasive, surgical procedure – whether it be 
cardiac or cosmetic – involves a potential risk and should be taken very 
seriously.

“We have been concerned by the lack of regulation of cosmetic procedures, 
including regulation about equipment and sterilising as well as accreditation 
of premises and the qualifications of the practitioners.”


In its submissions paper 
<https://www.chf.org.au/pdfs/chf/Informed-Consent-Issues-Paper.pdf>, the 
consumers health forum identified informed patient consent before undergoing 
cosmetic procedures as a key area of concern.

“Cosmetic surgery is the subject of a disproportionate number of complaints 
stemming from informed consent issues, largely due to the perceived failure of 
clinicians to communicate the likely outcomes of the procedure and the expected 
side effects,” the forum said.

“This suggests that there is significant scope for improvement in informed 
consent processes in this area.”

Submissions to the Medical Board of Australia about the draft proposals are 
open until the end of May.

Do you know more? melissa.davey@theguardian.com 
 