
Plans to move MPs and peers out of parliament for six years of repairs to the 
Palace of Westminster could end up costing more than £4bn, as a report on the 
restoration works put no firm price tag on the project.


Tina Stowell, who co-leads the joint committee on the Palace of Westminster, 
said the restoration and repair works were essential to mitigate the risk of 
parliament burning down or suffering a catastrophic systems failure.

However, the committee said it was unable to calculate the cost of its 
preferred option of moving MPs and peers away from the site, while work on 
removing asbestos, rewiring, replacing plumbing and many other repairs were 
carried out.

It backed a 2014 study by Deloitte which estimated the “full decant” option to 
cost between £3.5bn and £3.9bn depending on the extent of improvements to 
facilities and amenities for MPs and peers.

But Stowell said these numbers were not set in stone, and a budget would have 
to be agreed by the Treasury and approved by both Houses of Parliament.

“What these numbers do not represent is a budget for this project. They are 
high-level estimates of the broad options. We have interrogated them very 
carefully and satisfied ourselves that we can rely on them to compare the 
different options. What they are not is the budget that parliament is being 
asked to sign off,” she said.

Speaking after the publication of the report, Stowell acknowledged the 
proposals were likely to encounter some resistance given the size of the bill 
for the repairs. The works would mean MPs would have to move to the Department 
of Health building on Whitehall and peers would shift to the Queen Elizabeth 
Conference centre across Parliament Square.


“It is a hard sell, I absolutely accept that. It is a big decision. It is lots 
of money. But it is also an opportunity to preserve something that is really 
important to us as a nation and our identity,” she said.

Downing Street sources said Theresa May had not yet made a firm decision on 
whether to support the committee’s recommendations but stressed that she 
recognised the importance of the Palace of Westminster, which is designated a 
Unesco world heritage site.

A spokeswoman for the prime minister said May had not yet seen the report but 
would consider its findings carefully. “The prime minister’s view is that we 
should carefully consider the proposals; we’ll want to hear views from MPs 
before deciding a direction,” she said.

The committee said undertaking the works was essential because the Palace of 
Westminster faced “an impending crisis which we cannot responsibly ignore” – 
such as a major fire or a succession of failures making parliament 
uninhabitable.

However, the report has already come under attack from the SNP for failing to 
consider the options of moving parliament to another city.

Alex Salmond, the former SNP leader and first minister, who is now an MP, said 
the restoration report lacked credibility.

“It does not put all options on the table,” he said. “It does not consider a 
new-build parliament when it must scrutinise all possible options – and it is 
based on figures which were proposed in 2014.

“The UK government will effectively be asking taxpayers to pay a Westminster 
premium to crowbar a modern parliament into a Victorian building at a time of 
austerity when Tory policy is hitting some of the poorest in society, and 
political uncertainty when this UK government has no plan for the UK outside 
the European Union.”

The plans were defended by Chris Bryant, the Labour MP and spokesman for the 
joint committee, who said the works were necessary and far from being a vanity 
project for MPs, many of whom would be gone by the time the works were 
completed.

It is going to be “one of the biggest construction projects for 10 to 15 
years”, he said, noting the difficulty of moving the whole of government to 
another city along with parliament.

“All the evidence points to having to move out of the whole palace 
simultaneously. That is the lowest risk, most cost-effective and quickest 
option,” he said.

As well as MPs and peers moving out, space will have to be found for political 
journalists, known as the lobby, who report on the activities of parliament and 
government.

Consideration will also have to be given to where special ceremonies are 
carried out such as the state opening of parliament and “lying in state” if a 
senior member of the royal family were to die during the period of the works.

The report recommends that new delivery and sponsor bodies should be set up to 
ensure the project is carried out on time and within budget in a similar model 
to the Olympics.

A number of backbench MPs stated their opposition to the move for different 
reasons in written evidence to the committee.

John Redwood, a Conservative MP and former cabinet minister, said: “I believe 
that the recommendation to move parliament offsite for the duration of the 
works is a wholly unacceptable and disproportionate proposal.

“In my view, there are sufficient access routes to key areas of the palace to 
allow for other sections of the building to be sealed off, while the works take 
place.”

Others parliamentarians made suggestions for improvements, such as having 
enclosed dining areas in courtyards and a better quality of toilets.

Jesse Norman, a Tory MP and now a business minister, said: “For example, the 
courtyards should be glassed over, allowing natural light to shine through, and 
the new space used productively. Among other things, there is a severe lack of 
public spaces in the palace – that is why the Portcullis House atrium is so 
valuable.”

MPs and peers will consider the report and vote on its findings, in the 
culmination of a process that began more than a decade ago as it became 
increasingly clear that patching up the palace would not be sufficient.

If the proposals get the go-ahead, parliamentarians would not leave until 
after the 2020 general election, and a detailed budget is not expected to be 
drawn up until 2018, by which time some parliamentarians fear the cost is 
likely to rise further.


The Westminster estate includes a hotchpotch of buildings from different eras, 
from the 900-year-old Westminster Hall, to the modern Portcullis House, with 
its vast glass atrium, which opened in 2001 and would be unaffected by the 
repairs programme.
 