
David Coulthard, benefitting from the quick thinking of his McLaren team and a 
clever choice of race set-up, drove one of the best races of his career 
yesterday to win an incident-filled Brazilian grand prix in Sao Paulo.

The decisive moment came on lap 50 of the 71-lap race, after the Scot had 
opted for "intermediate" rain tyres when a thunderstorm briefly doused the 
circuit. PursuingMichael Schumacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-schumacher> down the curved pit 
straight, Coulthard took the lead with an inspired dive down the inside as the 
two men ran either side of Tarso Marques's Minardi. From then on, nothing stood 
between him and his 10th grand prix victory - bringing to an end Schumacher's 
run of six consecutive wins.

The other star of the race was the Colombian Juan Pablo Montoya, who confirmed 
his status as the most exciting new formula one driver to emerge in a decade 
yesterday by romping away into the early lead of the race, having elbowed his 
way ahead of Michael Schumacher's Ferrari in a dazzling display of car control 
in only his third outing for the BMW-Williams team.

But just as it seemed he had gained the upper hand over the three times world 
champion, Montoya was shunted dramatically out of the race when Jos 
Verstappen's Arrows, which the Colombian had just lapped, slammed into the back 
of his Williams. The two cars pirouetted to a halt, but Montoya was cheered to 
the echo as he walked back to the pits, leaving Schumacher to fend off an 
increasingly determined Coulthard.

Before the race, the Scot had opted for a "compromise" chassis setting which 
enabled him to make better use of the intermediate tyres than Michael 
Schumacher, whose car was on full dry settings. The German, who like Coulthard 
put on the Bridgestone intermediates during his second pitstop - having used 
them to such good effect a fortnight ago when he won the Malaysian grand prix - 
now found them working against him.

As a result, spectators were treated to the uncharacteristic sight of 
Schumacher half-spinning and then sliding off the circuit as he struggled to 
keep touch with the McLaren, eventually dropping to second place some 16.1sec 
behind Coulthard at the chequered flag. The result strengthened Coulthard's 
credibility as a serious world championship contender with 20 points, only six 
behind Schumacher.

On a day when mere survival was difficult on the treacherous track surface, 
the German Nick Heidfeld drove magnificently to take his Sauber-Ferrari across 
the line in third place, ahead of Olivier Panis's BAR-Honda. Jarno Trulli's 
Jordan-Honda and Giancarlo Fisichella's Benetton-Renault completed the top 
half-dozen.

Even before the cars had taken their place on the starting grid, a collective 
groan had come from the passionately enthusiastic crowd as their hero Rubens 
Barrichello rolled to a standstill when his Ferrari's oil pressure plummeted on 
his first lap out of the pits.

This was the latest in a long line of frustrations for the Sao Paulo driver, 
who had suffered an engine failure on Friday and then grappled with understeer 
throughout qualifying, and was only able to claim a disappointing sixth on the 
starting grid.

In sweltering temperatures of around 35C (95F), Barrichello jogged back to the 
pits where he slumped exhausted on the floor while the Ferrari mechanics busied 
themselves changing the settings on Michael Schumacher's spare car, so the 
local hero could take up his position for the start.

The task of changing pedal settings, adjusting his seat harness and fitting 
him into the car meant it was touch and go whether Barrichello would manage to 
get out on to the circuit before the pit lane exit closed 15 minutes prior to 
the start. In the event he made it with 26 seconds to spare, but it had been an 
uncomfortably close call.

If this was a shaky moment for the Ferrari team, nothing compared with the 
crushing disappointment waiting for the McLaren-Mercedes team when Mika 
Hakkinen stalled on the grid. As Michael Schumacher led away from pole 
position, the pack scattered in all directions to avoid the stationary McLaren, 
and the dejected Finn climbed from the cockpit and walked back to his pit as 
the safety car was brought out to slow the field.

At the end of the second lap the car was withdrawn again and, as a first rain 
shower doused the circuit, Montoya seized his chance to lunge down the inside 
of Schumacher going into the first turn.

Not in the least intimidated by Schumacher's celebrity status, the Colombian 
ruthlessly banged wheels with the Ferrari team leader as he forced his way 
ahead. On the same lap the hapless Barrichello's bruising weekend ended when he 
slammed into the back of Ralf Schumacher's Williams-BMW under-braking at the 
end of the long straight beyond the pits. The Ferrari's right-front wheel was 
ripped off in the impact, but the Brazilian was unhurt.

The characteristics of Montoya's Michelin tyres meant he was expecting to lose 
grip after the first couple of laps, but if he could only hang on ahead then 
the grip would return after half a dozen or so laps.

Thereafter the Colombian drove with unflustered confidence and maturity, 
revelling in the prodigious acceleration of his powerful BMW engine to 
out-accelerate Michael Schumacher time and again as they climbed the long hill 
up to the start-finish line.

On this rare occasion Schumacher seemed to have no answers, but then came the 
collision and the end of Montoya's dream. Not for long, one suspects.

 Summary of incidents 

 Lap 1 Mika Hakkinen's McLaren stalls on grid and fails to start, bringing out 
safety car.

 Lap 3 Juan Pablo Montoya's Williams overtakes Michael Schumacher into first 
corner. Rubens Barrichello drives into back of Ralf Schumacher.

 Lap 38 Jos Verstappen allows leader Montoya past, then shunts him from 
behind. Verstappen careers into gravel trap, Montoya out.

 Lap 47 Michael Schumacher spins in deluge but stays in front. 

 Lap 50 Coulthard overtakes Schumacher as they pass either side of backmarker. 

 Lap 53 Schumacher off again into gravel trap but retains second place. 
Coulthard holds on for victory.
 