
Falkirk booked their place in the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final with a smash-and-grab 
win over Hibernian.

The dominant Easter Road side hit the post just before the break through 
Fraser Fyvie and again in the second half through Scott Allan asFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> rarely threatened. However, Hibs 
were stunned in the 74th minute when Craig Sibbald headed in a Blair Alston 
cross to set up a meeting on 30 May with either Inverness or Celtic.

It was sweet revenge for Falkirk, who lost a seven-goal thriller to Hibs at 
the same stage of the competition two years ago, and they will be looking to 
take the cup back to the town for the first time since 1957.

Sibbald told PLZ Soccer: “We wanted to get payback for 2013 so I’m delighted. 
I don’t know how to feel after that, I’m just buzzing. “When the goal went in I 
didn’t know what to do. I had goose bumps.

“We knew weren’t going to get many chances so I’m glad I put that one away. 
Blair put it right on my head.

For their part, Hibs, last winners of the trophy in 1902, will wonder if that 
curse will ever be broken after a semi-final they had bossed for long spells.

Both managers were forced into changes for the all-Championship tie. The Hibs 
midfielder Scott Robertson replaced the cup-tied Martin Boyle while the Falkirk 
manager, Peter Houston, had John Baird and Mark Kerr cup-tied and his top 
scorer, Rory Loy, had failed to recover from an ankle injury. His captain, 
David McCracken, returned to the defence with striker Taylor Morgan given a 
start.

Falkirk went into the game undefeated in three league games against Hibs this 
season, drawing two and winning one, but found themselves under pressure from 
the first whistle.

Indeed, Houston’s side were lucky to escape going behind after six minutes 
when Dylan McGeouch’s fine cross from the right was directed toward his own 
goal by the foot of the stretching McCracken. The Falkirk goalkeeper, Jamie 
MacDonald, chested it straight to the falling Farid El Alagui, but, while flat 
on the ground, the former Falkirk striker headed straight into the arms of the 
grateful MacDonald.

Falkirk hit back immediately when Will Vaulks’s long-range drive was deflected 
past the post as Hibs withstood a brief spell of pressure and McCracken headed 
a Sibbald corner just past the near post. The tempo then subsided, as if both 
teams had surprised themselves with their early boldness.

Hibs were the slicker but their final ball was lacking and so was their luck. 
Two minutes from the break, after El Alagui had hit the side-netting, Fyvie’s 
low drive from around 30 yards beat MacDonald. However, the ball bounced off 
the post and back to the keeper.

Houston replaced David Smith with Botti Biabi for the start of the second half 
but, in the 47th minute, it was Alston who forced Mark Oxley to push his 
25-yard shot round the post for a corner, which came to nothing.

Hibs then dominated. In the 64th minute, as they pinned Falkirk back in their 
box again, McGeouch got his legs tangled trying to execute a volley before 
Lewis Stevenson skied his close-range shot high over the bar.

Allan brilliantly weaved his way into the penalty area before driving against 
the bar, with El Alagui heading his corner over moments later.

Hibs were then stunned when Falkirk took the lead. Alston went past Robertson 
down the right to whip in a delightful cross and Sibbald escaped the attention 
of McGeouch to power a header past Oxley.

Hibs threw everything forward in search of a leveller. A Paul Hanlon tackle 
prevented Biabi getting his shot away on the counter – Falkirk cries for a 
penalty were dismissed by John Beaton – before MacDonald made a crucial save 
from El Alagui at his near post.

Falkirk then held out for the three minutes of added time to spark scenes of 
joy among players and fans at the final whistle.
 