
If Nick Powell does, as expected, swap Gresty Road for the Premier League in 
the coming weeks then he will depart Crewe having handed them quite a parting 
gift. The teenager's stunning strike in the first half set Alexandra on their 
way to victory over Cheltenham in theLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-off final on 
Sunday, ending three years for the club in the Football's League's basement.

They will almost certainly have to cope at the higher level, though, without 
the star of this campaign. The Manchester United manager, Sir Alex Ferguson, 
checked personally on Powell when Alex faced Aldershot this month and a deal 
worth up to £4m is widely anticipated. He still has plenty to learn - he was 
only just old enough to enjoy his man-of-the-match champagne having celebrated 
his 18th birthday in March - but there is no mistaking his talent.

It took only 15 minutes at Wembley for the forward to serve notice of his 
abilities. Receiving Kelvin Mellor's pass on the edge of the area, he produced 
a calm, controlled flick across his body and a thumping half-volley on the turn 
into the top corner to give Crewe the lead. It was a quite wonderful effort.

"I've said all season he's a huge talent," said the Crewe manager, Steve 
Davis. "He's a special player who produces special things on big occasions. I 
think he can go to the Premier League. We've not had any solid offers but I 
think it's going to come. In the next week you'll see something develop."

Powell was one of nine academy graduates in a typically youthful Alexandra 
starting XI, many of whom have played together at various age groups since 
childhood. Though Dario Gradi moved out of the manager's seat in the autumn, 
this is a side that displays unmistakable Dario DNA. Davis faces a fight to 
keep it together for the challenges ahead in League One.

"We know that clubs are interested in some of our players - that's a fact,"
said Davis. "We have to take stock of that and see what happens in the
summer. We'll try to improve the squad with the players we bring in.
Finances don't allow us to buy players that have played in the Championship or 
at the top end of League One so we'll just go with the young lads and
see how they do and hopefully add some quality players." 

It is an astonishing turnaround for a club who lost their first four league 
games of the season and were placed perilously when Davis took the helm in 
November. "The chairman said: 'Get us out of the bottom six. Just get us 
safe,'" Davis recalled. The recovery was by no means instant but their unbeaten 
run now stretches to a club record 19 games.

Cheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> - whose otherwise 
successful season was scuppered by a miserable run in March - dominated after 
Powell's opener. Jeff Goulding pinged a 30-yard effort off the bar and they 
were denied by two goalline clearances just before half-time, but in the second 
half after Marlon Pack had curled a drive just wide and Kaid Mohamed had shot 
weakly at Steve Phillips when clean through, the wind ebbed from their sails. 
By the time Byron Moore made it 2-0 with eight minutes to go, Mark Yates's side 
were a spent force. "They've been brilliant," he said of his players. "Today 
was just one step too far."

Man of the match Nick Powell (Crewe Alexandra)
 