



Crewe Alexandra football club announced it will launch an independent 
investigation into how it has dealt with child sex abuse allegations concerning 
a former youth team coach.


The development came a day after the Guardian revealed Crewe had been warned 
that convicted child abuser Barry Bennell had sexually abused one of his junior 
footballers, but had allowed him to stay at the club for a number of years. 
Four ex-players have so far made allegations of sexual abuse against Bennell, 
including Andy Woodward, 43, whose account of how he had suffered has prompted 
a string of footballers to come forward with similar claims.


A statement released by Crewe on Saturday, 10 days after the Guardian first 
published Woodward’s testimony, said they were “determined a thorough 
investigation” should be launched at the earliest opportunity. It added that 
the Cheshire club “believes an independent review, to be conducted via the 
appointment of external legal counsel, is the correct way forward in the 
circumstances”.

Crewe’s announcement followed a warning from a senior police chief that a 
large number of alleged victims of child sex abuse in football have yet to 
break their silence and that the growing scandal could also engulf other 
British sports.

Crewe were warned about Barry Bennell but he stayed on, says former board 
member
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/crewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member>
Simon Bailey, the chief constable of Norfolk Constabulary and the National 
Police Chiefs’ Council lead for child protection, said on Saturday that a 
“significant” number of victims were likely to emerge, and warned that other 
sports’ governing bodies may start reporting similarly shocking claims.

His comments came as Operation Hydrant, which investigates allegations of 
historical child sex abuse within institutions or by people of public 
prominence, also attempted to calculate the scale of the alleged abuse. The 
national inquiry into child sexual abuse has already contacted all forces in 
England and Wales asking them to forward details urgently of any allegations 
they have recently received.

Scotland Yard and the Northumberland, Cheshire and Hampshire forces have 
launched separate investigations into historical child sex abuse allegations.


Elsewhere, the quest to track down further alleged victims of Bennell and 
other paedophiles in the sport continued on Saturday. The Football Association 
has contacted each county FA in England and Wales, asking them to forward any 
information to a special hotline.


The England captain, Wayne Rooney, has also urged anyone who may have been 
abused to seek help, while former Wales international Robbie Savage, who played 
for Crewe between 1994 and 1997, speculated that there could be hundreds of 
victims of sexual abuse in football.

Bailey said: “I suspect … we will see a significant increase in the numbers 
that are currently reporting allegations of abuse to us. We are receiving 
reports of abuse in all sorts of different institutions.I am not in the least 
bit surprised that we are now seeing the lid lifted on exploitation within the 
world of football, and I suspect there will be other sporting governing bodies 
… who will come forward and who will identify the fact that they have similar 
problems.”

Some of the claims have come from children’s charity the NSPCC, which last 
week set up a dedicated hotline – 0800 023 2642 – for football-related cases 
and has recorded more than 100 individuals contacting the number. The Premier 
League has said it is “very concerned” by the allegations.

Bennell, 62, who worked for Crewe, Manchester City, Stoke and junior teams in 
north-west England and the Midlands, has served three prison sentences for 
child sex offences, including one last year.

He was jailed for four years for raping a British boy on a 1994 football tour 
of Florida, and given a nine-year sentence for 23 offences against six boys in 
England in 1998.

On Friday, former players Steve Walters, Chris Unsworth and Jason Dunford 
spoke about being abused by Bennell in an emotional interview on Victoria 
Derbyshire’s BBC programme.

Former Manchester City youth team player Dunford said the scandal was bigger 
than the Jimmy Savile revelations. Police have put the total number of Savile’s 
possible victims at 589.
 