


Real Madrid's destination was never in doubt, the question was which route 
they would take. In the end they defeated the Cypriot side Apoel Nicosia 5-2 
with two goals from Cristiano Ronaldo and one each from Kaká, José Callejón and 
Angel Di María, but the visitors, too, left feeling like victors. For Apoel, 
who had to get through three preliminary games to reach theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> proper, their European 
adventure came to an end on a stage that they could barely have dreamed of 
treading.

They trod the boards in style, too: they scored twice and one of them was the 
best goal of the night. A lovely exchange of swift passes sent Gustavo Manduca 
clean through and he slotted neatly past Iker Casillas to make it 2-1 midway 
through the second half. Manduca was immediately withdrawn, a hero applauding 
and embracing team-mates as he went. High in the Bernabéu, four thousand Apoel 
fans bounced up and down singing. Madrid would score again – three times – but 
they hardly minded. Not least because Apoel did, too.

Three-nil up from the first leg against the Champions League's revelation, a 
club whose entire annual budget could not pay Ronaldo's wages, Real knew they 
were through. So did their opponents. This was either a formality to be 
fulfilled without enthusiasm or a night to really enjoy. Real chose the latter.

Although José Mourinho left Xabi Alonso, Karim Benzema and Mesut Ozil on the 
bench, there were few concessions. Ronaldo was included and was looking to add 
to his astonishing record of 133 goals in 133 Real games. The only man with a 
better goals-per-minute ratio than him in La Liga started, too: Gonzalo Higuaín 
joined Ronaldo and Kaká up front. The Bernabéu did not fill but those who came 
had one question: how many would Real score?

Hamit Altintop's shot was charged down, Ronaldo headed over. And then, in the 
26th minute, Marcelo's deflected cross evaded Higuaín and found Ronaldo alone 
at the far post. He nudged in his 48th goal of the season. Ten minutes later 
Kaká received the ball on the top left corner of the penalty area and curled a 
lovely shot into the top right corner of the net. On the bench, Mourinho nodded 
in appreciation. There were almost two of them: Kaká again opened up his body 
to curl from left to right, this time hitting a post.

Half-time came and so did the changes. Marcelo was withdrawn and Higuaín 
departed soon after, replaced by Di María. Apoel fired off a couple of shots, 
Casillas punching one away. Raúl Albiol, a centre-back, replaced Esteban 
Granero on 65 minutes. The statistic that mattered on the scoreboard seemed to 
be the minutes left, not the goals scored. But then, almost immediately, 
Manduca struck to change the feel of this meeting entirely. There was no way 
back, of course – even as two more chances came Apoel's way.

Ronaldo curled in a free-kick for Real's third and Callejón added a fourth; 
yet Apoel's Esteban Solari, the brother of the former Real player Santiago, 
scored a second from the spot with eight minutes left. Madrid's journey 
continues. Apoel's ended. But it has been some journey.
 