
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> pulled three 
points clear of second-placed Celta Vigo after holding off the valiant 10-man 
Galicians to secure a nervy victory in Saturday’s top-of-the-table clash in La 
Liga.

Luis Suárez scores hat-trick as 10-man Barcelona beat Eibar 3-1
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/26/barcelona-eibar-la-liga-match-report>
Cristiano Ronaldo and the Brazilian full-back Danilo struck early to put Real 
in control at Celta’s Balaídos stadium and Real’s goalkeeper, the Costa Rica 
international Keylor Navas, ensured they went into the break 2-0 ahead with a 
string of outstanding saves.

Real were missing the injured regulars Gareth Bale, Karim Benzema and James 
Rodríguez. But with Luka Modric back in the starting lineup after recovering 
from injury, Real went ahead in the eighth minute when Lucas Vázquez squared 
for Ronaldo to finish past Sergio Álvarez in the home goal.

Danilo doubled Madrid’s lead 15 minutes later when he found space on the right 
and had time to pick his spot.

Navas, who has only conceded three goals in Spain’s top flight this term, was 
on scintillating form in the first half and his saves from efforts by Fabián 
Orellana, Iago Aspas and Pablo Hernández were out of the top draw.

Celta, who thumped Barcelona at the Balaídos 4-1 last month, battled hard to 
get back into the game after the break, but their hopes were dealt a blow in 
the 57th minute when the centre back Gustavo Cabral protested a decision too 
energetically and was shown a second yellow card, earning a dismissal.

Real failed to make their numerical superiority count, however, and Marcelo 
had to clear a Nolito effort off the line in the 72nd minute before the Spain 
winger pulled a goal back with a stunning drive into the top corner five 
minutes from time.

The Celta substitute John Guidetti fired narrowly wide moments later but Real 
held firm and Marcelo scored with the last kick of the match in the 96th minute 
to make it 3-1.

Real have 21 points from nine matches, while Celta are level with the 
champions Barcelona on 18. Barcelona play their game in hand at home to Eibar 
on Sunday.

Atlético Madrid are fourth on 16 points going into Sunday’s match at home to 
Valencia. Villarreal, who also have 16 points and are fifth in the league 
table, play at promoted Las Palmas.
 