
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> went to the 
Vicente Calderón and won for one last time. At the end of this season, Atlético 
are leaving their home down by the Manzanares; Real will not be back to the 
arena that they left victorious for the 30th time. This, like the man who 
secured it, will be remembered on their side of town. Cristiano Ronaldo’s 
hat-trick here took him beyond Alfredo Di Stéfano: no player has ever scored as 
many Madrid derby goals. It also took Real, unbeaten in 29 games, nine points 
clear of Atlético in the league, four above Barcelona.

Barcelona fail to fire without Messi and Suárez against nine-man Málaga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/barcelona-malaga-la-liga-match-report>
There was symbolism here, too, the sense that something shifted. Zinedine 
Zidane described his team as “enormous”. “Not many sides will win here,” he 
said. That has included his side of late: Real had defeated Atlético twice in 
three years in the Champions League final, but Diego Simeone had resuscitated a 
derby that had died, and Atlético had been beaten only once in 11. Defeat was 
possible, but defeat like this was unexpected.

Real Madrid were without Casemiro, Pepe and Toni Kroos, and there was no 
starting place for Sergio Ramos or Karim Benzema, returning from injury. If 
that seemed problematic, it may have proven beneficial. Zidane has always said 
that the – BBC – a front three of Bale, Benzema and Cristiano – is 
non-negotiable; without them, he did not only change personnel, he changed 
positions too. Madrid began with something close to a 4-4-2, with Gareth Bale 
to the left of midfield and Lucas Vázquez to the right. Up front was Ronaldo 
and, dropping off him, Isco.

One of Madrid’s recurring problems against Atlético has been that they almost 
invariably found themselves outnumbered in midfield, red and white shirts 
flooding the area beyond their front three and to either side of the middle 
three. Here, it was different. “The middle is fundamental,” Zidane admitted. 
Madrid had four-plus-one in there, the space denied when Atlético looked to 
run. On either side, Bale and Lucas worked tirelessly though only occasionally 
broke free – it was the latter who was brought down in the move that lead to 
the opener and the former who provided the third goal.

In this formation, Ronaldo’s position was the No9 role he has increasingly 
adopted over the last two years and he responded his way: with a hat-trick. 
Isco, meanwhile, found himself in a role that rarely exists in this side and 
one in which, given freedom and responsibility, suits him best. “His best 
position,” in his manager’s words. For 45 minutes he was superb: passing, 
dribbling, turning, working, his touch smooth. Bandy-legged, wide-hipped, so 
often in possession , he stood out. From the middle, he combined with Luka 
Modric and Mateo Kovacic and carried towards Ronaldo.

Twice in the opening quarter of an hour, Isco lifted the ball cleverly, almost 
gently, over the head of opponents. Modric and Kovacic had a man to seek in 
short; Madrid had a man waiting to receive when they went long, the knock downs 
often his. Marcelo cleared a hard, swinging Yannick Carrasco free-kick at the 
far post, then Nacho hooked away from Fernando Torres and soon after Stefan 
Savic volleyed wide from Koke’s angled pass. All that happened in the opening 
10 minutes, but then it did not happen again. Atlético looked unsure in the 
middle, exactly where they are usually so strong.

Madrid began to exercise a degree of control. It was not total but it was 
there, ushered in by Ronaldo’s header from Marcelo’s ball. The Portuguese 
thought that Jan Oblak had saved it over the line.

Ronaldo then failed to connect from the edge of the area and Oblak saved 
Modric’s shot. When Lucas was brought down 28 metres from goal, there was 
another chance. Ronaldo stepped back, that long, paced-out run-up and struck 
the free-kick straight at the wall, which opened. The ball went between Gabi 
and Savic, hitting the central defender on the hip, changing course and going 
in. He had gone 33 shots without beating Oblak – not including that penalty in 
Milan – and soon he had a 35th, turning cleverly inside Godin but not getting 
sufficient power with his right foot.

Atlético flew out at the start of the second half. Inside the opening five 
minutes, Carrasco curled over, Antoine Griezmann flashed one across the face of 
goal, and then he shot from distance.

At the other end, Bale headed over. A double change followed: Kévin Gameiro 
and Angel Correa appeared to make good the change, but the rebellion was 
quashed swiftly. Isco hit the post and then, with 20 minutes left and the game 
alive, an Atlético goal kick ended it.

Raphaël Varane leapt to head it, the ball travelling 30 yards, over the top 
and back into Atlético’s area. Ronaldo and Savic ran after it, grappling for 
position. The defender fell, legs up, and brought Ronaldo down. Accidental, 
perhaps, but a penalty.

Ronaldo against Oblak from 12 yards again, just like the very last kick in 
Milan; just like Milan, Ronaldo scored. The game was over, Atlético crushed, 
Simeone later saying his team had seen its “hope cut”, but that was not the 
last of it. Bale broke on the left, released by Isco, and delivered the perfect 
pass for Ronaldo to score the very last derby goal at the Calderón.
 