
It is one of the strangest images you will see on the internet.

I happily grant you that the above claim is a bold, but have a look at this 
picture 
<http://s3-ec.buzzfed.com/static/enhanced/webdr06/2013/9/4/10/enhanced-buzz-15017-1378303228-4.jpg>
, out of the context for which it was created.

It is exactly what it appears to be. The background is a blandly composed, 
mildly irritating photograph of a pair of young models who are both of a 
catalogue level of attractiveness and who have never met before, wearing 
borrowed and studiedly casual clothes in an airy, dimly des-res condo with an 
ambience that suggests that it was used to shoot a commercial for something 
macrobiotic the day before, and as the set for a pornographic film the day 
after.

And the superimposed caption for this aspirational tableau is a condensed 
description of the death, 87 years ago, of an unhappy Hungarian waiter.

As I say, the combination leaves the strangest sensation in anyone who sees 
it. Why are the modern-day youngsters smiling? The wretched waiter, the caption 
explains, killed himself. It's not the kind of event that you expect to be 
illustrated by a smile, even the absent, stiff smiles in the image we're 
looking at.

There is more – though not a lot more. The waiter's suicide note was in the 
form of a crossword. Perhaps we're looking at a kind of horrible surprisedness: 
when you're confronted with something so bleak, the only response is a kind of 
wan smile?

Closer examination reveals a connection between text and image, albeit one 
that is literally hidden, almost occult.

At the stock images site Deposit Photos, the photo can be seen in its full 
insipidness <http://it.depositphotos.com/search/coursework.html?24etvd>. The 
young couple sits at a breakfast table, with a glass of orange juice, a biro 
and some paper. In the "keyword file" next to the snap are the words 
"crossword" and "puzzle". So while the photo does not depict a crossword, it 
has been filed in such a way as suggests that it might – so that is the 
connection to our dead Hungarian.

And the story of the waiter himself is the factual equivalent of a stock 
photo: slightly dodgy-looking, but available to all to reuse when space needs 
filling. It is a story that has appeared down the years in collections of 
factoids such as Richard B Manchester's Mammoth Book of Fascinating Information 
and Pustak Mahal's 501 Fascinating Facts.

While I was writing a book about crosswords 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9781846148415,00.html>, which 
should be out later this year, I came across this same depressing anecdote now 
and again, always with more or less the same phrasing. Here's a version from 
the Orlando Sentinel:

A waiter in Budapest who committed suicide left behind a crossword puzzle and 
a note that read: 'The solution will give you the exact reasons for my suicide 
and also the names of the persons interested.'

It's undeniably intriguing – the "names of the persons interested" gives it 
the flavour of a whodunnit. Indeed, following the crossword craze of the 20s, 
the detectives in many mystery stories found themselves confronted with clues 
in puzzle form.

But it has another flavour – "too intriguing to be true", perhaps. Who was 
this waiter? Why is there never any variation in the recounting? And isn't the 
Budapest of legend just the sort of city – where the sad citizens listen to
Rezső Seress's Gloomy Sunday <http://www.snopes.com/music/songs/gloomy.asp> and 
drink laudanum – that would make the setting for an urban myth?

The lack of any further information in any of the books or newspapers I could 
find left me sceptical about the whole bad business – but then I didn't check 
any Hungarian newspaper archives. Happily, the good people at theHungarian 
urban-myth site urbanlegends.hu 
<http://www.urbanlegends.hu/2013/02/keresztrejtvenyben-uzente-meg-ongyilkossaga-okat/>
 were more sedulous, and Marinov Iván has apparently found, in old microfilm 
archives, a name for our waiter – Antal Gyula – and a location – Café Emke. So 
it seems to be true.

Two mysteries remain. First, the answer to the puzzle. Nick Pelling of the 
Cipher Mysteries site 
<http://www.ciphermysteries.com/2013/02/20/1926-crossword-suicide-partially-revealed>
 translates the contemporaneous story as reporting that the puzzle was "taken 
to police committee headquarters". But what was it? And could we use the 
crowd-sourcin', hive-mindin' power of the internet to finally solve this 
mystery?

As the centenary of the crossword approaches, it seems likely that we'll be 
hearing this tale a good few more times; it would be only proper if we could 
solve it before the anniversary on 21 December. Reader, can you help? Budapest 
police archives, do you still have the crossword on file? It is the least 
humanity can do for Antal Gyula after using his bleak life, one of debt and 
unemployment, as a fascinating factoid for so long.

The other mystery is back with that image. Here it is in context 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/tabathaleggett/astonishing-facts-about-crosswords> at 
BuzzFeed, the website that has picked up where those 501 Fascinating Facts 
books left off, classifying its collections under such non-Dewey-compliant 
categories as LOL, OMG and WTF.

And the question is: who made the smile/suicide image? Once you see it for 
what it is – a copyright-free text snippet and a stock image the use of which 
is covered by a blanket agreement, both containing the word "crossword" in 
their metadata – you can see how a computer might have assembled it according 
to some heartless algorithm. In which case, welcome to the future of news.

The alternative – that a human being took the time to put that copy on that 
image file, without noticing the spookiness of the result, or that the text 
covers where a crossword should be, or that there is no actual crossword in the 
image – is, appropriately perhaps, just too depressing to bear.
 