
Work on the new version of the Guardian and Observer crosswords website is in 
its final stages and being tested. If some major glitch does not arise, it 
should go live in mid-February. It will include the Observer's Everyman and 
Speedy puzzles, but not the Guardian Genius nor the Observer Azed puzzles, 
which, for the moment at least, will remain in their present format. Nearer the 
time there will be a newsletter describing the changes for you. I hope (and 
believe) that you will find the new version a significant improvement.

At the same time the prize for the Guardian Saturday puzzle will be changed. 
Ever since I took on the crossword editing job I have had a steady stream of 
comments to the effect that offering a dictionary as a prize to a regular 
crossword solver is the publishing equivalent of carrying coals to Newcastle: 
though, to be fair, the (sometimes belated) arrival of the handsome Collins 
dictionary also seems to have given much pleasure to many and we are extremely 
grateful to Collins for its long support.

From the middle of February the prize will change to a copy of the expanded 
and updated edition of Guardian Style, edited by David Marsh; a guide to good 
modern English, which Ian Jack has described as "'Eats, Shoots and Leaves' with 
a lot of extra guidance thrown in"; plus a copy of Sandy Balfour's 'A Clue to 
Our Lives', his account of the first 85 years of the Guardian crossword puzzle 
that is also a cryptic social history of 20th century Britain.

_____

An email arrived last month from Australia that was both flattering and 
saddening at the same time. It was from MW who, from the context, must live in 
the Sydney area. Each day she used to do the Sydney Morning Herald crossword 
with a colleague at work, but has recently been made redundant. It seems that 
the Herald is now charging for access to its online crossword, so MW searched 
the web and found the free Guardian crossword, which she describes as 
"fantastic". That is the flattering bit. But she then goes on to say that, with 
our 'check' and 'cheat' buttons, she is now able to do the crossword alone. 
That is the sad bit, because I have always thought that the huge attraction of 
the crossword over some other newspaper puzzles that we need not mention is 
that it's essentially a social activity. Of course, it can be done alone or 
turned into a competition against the clock, but it can be and is a catalyst 
for human (often group) interaction. I have elsewhere quoted from the last 
interview that the broadcaster and journalist John Peel ever gave (to his old 
university's alumni magazine) just before he died in 2004: "My daughter, 
Flossy, always found me slightly embarrassing ... In fact, it was the Guardian 
crossword and texting that really brought us closer together. I would be 
walking round London, my mobile would go and it would be Flossy. There was 
never any preamble, she'd just say: 'Writing desk, 10 letters' and I would say: 
'That would be escritoire.' She would say thanks and then there would be a 
click. It's a small thing, but it brought us closer together." The 'check' and 
'cheat' buttons seem somehow a rather poor substitute.

_____

There was a large and lively response to the question I raised last month 
about whether the homophone bits of clues had to be based on received 
pronunciation, or whether Scottish, Irish, Welsh, cockney, northern, geordie, 
West Country and other even further flung variants were acceptable. I cannot 
here fairly summarise it all, but there was pretty general agreement that 
variations were in themselves interesting. Non-British solvers, in particular, 
seem to enjoy the window they offered into non-RP English. The last word can, 
perhaps, go to TH living at North Bay, Ontario, though she admits to having 
been born and raised in Edinburgh: "These homophone wurds come up jist once in 
a blue mune, so it's no' wurth ha'in cross wurds ower. If ye've seen enough RP 
filum and telly dramas, ye shude be able tae understand."

_____

Entries for Enigmatist's January Genius puzzle got off to a flying start. The 
stalwart Ian from London N14 was again first with the new record submission 
time of 00:55 on the first day, which would seem to indicate that it took him 
only 54 minutes to solve the puzzle and then to click on the 'send' button. 
Next was the equally stalwart Jeremy in Canberra, but not until 1 hour and 33 
minutes later (at 02:28 GMT). As there were also 26 other correct entries on 
that Monday my prediction was that the total number of entries would also be a 
record. But not so. By the deadline we had 321, slightly down on the 375 figure 
for December. I think that the explanation for this may be that, because of the 
way the dates fell, January was a 'short' month: the puzzle was posted on 
Monday 4 January and the deadline (which as you will all, of course, remember 
is 23:59 GMT on the last Saturday before the first Monday of the following 
month) was the Saturday 30 January, providing only 26 solving days.
 