
The Telegraph recently published a Centenary Collection of its puzzles 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780600629658>
, from the earliest grids to the Toughies and Enigmatic Variations of today.

Telegraph puzzle editor Phil McNeill gives a lively introduction to each 
section, and the collection includes the most apparently dangerous puzzles that 
the Telegraph has ever printed. Yes, and seeminglyfor the first time 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/features/10789884/Who-put-secret-D-Day-clues-in-the-Telegraph-crossword.html>
, Cryptics 5,246, 5,775, 5,792, 5,797, 5,799 and 5,802 are collected to reveal 
their apparently treacherous joint legacy.

Ardent solvers will know at once that these are the "D-day crosswords". For 
the benefit of newcomers, these are puzzles from 1944 that included among their 
answers UTAH, OMAHA, OVERLORD, MULBERRY and NEPTUNE, all of which were secret 
codewords for the Normandy landings, mere days away.

An understandably suspicious MI5 interrogated the setter in question, Leonard 
Dawe. The spooks found themselves confronted with a typical enough compiler of 
crosswords – that is, someone extraordinary. Dawe was a headmaster who, in his 
career, would also find the time to set 5,000 Telegraph puzzles, without a 
sniff of the quisling about him.

The authorities had cause to be wary of puzzles: Adam McQueen's recent 
collection of state secrets,The Prime Minister's Ironing Board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/05/prime-minister-ironing-board-review>
, discusses a Nazi propaganda leaflet that was dropped into Sussex the same 
year, containing among its trumpeting of the "German inventive genius" a puzzle 
in which the black squares spelled out the message "V1". But what were they to 
make of UTAH and so on?

At the point where Dawe was released to return to his school, the story is one 
of spooky coincidence; indeed it sat comfortably in Tales of the 
Unexplained-type, free-binder-with-issue-two periodicals until the 1980s.

Then, during the celebrations of the 40th anniversary of D-day, one of Dawe's 
former pupils approached the Telegraph and insisted that as a lad, he had 
overheard US and Canadian soldiers discussing the plans, picked up on the 
codewords, and suggested them to his headmaster as possible entries.

Here it stops being Tales of the Unexplained, and becomes more like Tales of 
the Unexpected – a gripping yarn with a cute twist in the tale. Too cute for 
me. Real life tends to be messier than that, its enigmas not easily tidied up 
by discovering the intervention of some delightfully pesky kids.

So I'm always interested to hear more about the affair. Val Gilbert, a 
previous puzzle editor at the Telegraph,felt the same 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1460892/D-Day-crosswords-are-still-a-few-clues-short-of-a-solution.html>
:

"So, is that the end of the story? Somehow I doubt it. Somewhere, someone will 
clear out an attic and come across more papers relating to 'The Crossword D-day 
Codenames'. I hope they will contact The Daily Telegraph when they do."

Tom Rowley, features writer at the Telegraph, expresses similar thoughts in a 
piece he has written about the mystery 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/features/10789884/Who-put-secret-D-Day-clues-in-the-Telegraph-crossword.html>
; he notes that two years earlier, DIEPPE had appeared as a Telegraph answer 
one day before the calamitous raid on that port.

The article contains two snippets that are new to me. Neither resolves the 
mystery, but they're both lovely splodges of colour. There's a quote from one 
Tom Weston, head boy of Dawe's school at the time, recalling the day that MI5 
came to school:

"An official-looking car turned up," he recalls. "I was interested, so I kept 
watching. After a time, I saw Mr Dawe go off in the car with whoever it was."

Weston and his schoolmates were flabbergasted, and the Telegraph has surely 
never printed anything more Telegraphy than this remark: "We were astonished at 
the thought that Dawe was a traitor. He was a member of the local golf club."

I was also tickled by how Bill Deedes, Telegraph editor during those 
40th-anniversary celebrations, responded when he heard about the Dawe affair. 
He was: "alarmed by the scandal afresh, and instructed the puzzles editor to 
check that no codewords relating to the Falklands had appeared in the crossword 
during the recent conflict."

That's right: to check that the crossword wasn't in the hands of traitors, he 
asked the crossword editor to find out any secret codewords being used by the 
military. Happily, no evidence was found that the puzzle was being used to send 
helpful military tips to General Galtieri.

As for MULBERRY, OVERLORD and the rest, the puzzle persists. I had hoped that 
the centenary of the crossword itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/08/celebrating-100-years-crossword> 
might have prompted some scrap of paperwork, recollection or fresh insight, but 
the wait goes on.
 