
For years I've been responding to those wary of the cryptic crossword by 
telling them that the puzzles are for everyone.

That is, that those such as John Humphrys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/apr/11/crossword-blog-clever-solve-cryptics>
 who presume that the world has its solvers and its non-solvers, each with very 
different brains, are mistaken: my happy-clappy take-home message is that it's 
all aboutlearning the tricks, conventions, abbreviations and so on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners>
 to get over an initial bump of incomprehension.

I may need to tweak that thought.

Every so often some decent research involving crosswords is published, and the 
latest is a pair of papers byKathryn Friedlander 
<http://www.buckingham.ac.uk/directory/dr-kathryn-friedlander/> and Philip Fine 
<http://www.buckingham.ac.uk/directory/fine-dr-philip/> of the University of 
Buckingham. They gave a series of exercises to two groups of long-time 
crossworders: regular solvers and what you might call super-solvers. That's 
what I'm calling them, anyway; the research certainly doesn't – but we're 
talking about those who might win the Times Crossword Championship, solve those 
fiendish weekend puzzles with no black squares, or actually set cryptics 
themselves.

The exercises included cryptic puzzles and something called the AH5 test, "a 
timed high-grade fluid-intelligence test that measures the ability to solve 
novel problems 'on one's feet'."

Fluid intelligence is at the heart of Friedlander and Fine's research: it 
means using your working memory to process data in front of you. This is not 
knowledge or learnedness; it's jumping deftly through mental hoops in order to 
solve new problems.

And what they found was that solvers as a whole have above-average levels of 
fluid intelligence. Now, that's not enough in itself to puncture my message of 
Crosswords For All, but another finding from the research at least sends your 
thinking in a direction opposite to the "practice makes perfect" of my 
exhortations.

Initiation into cryptics tends to be the same for most crossworders, both 
regular and super-solvers: people generally start in their teens or early 20s. 
Their solving workload tends to be the same, too: five to 10 hours each week.

But of course the super-solvers are better, or at the very least faster, than 
the regular solvers; to dispel any doubt, the super-solvers were much more 
likely to finish a puzzle created for the research in the time available than 
were the regular solvers. So the perspiration part of crosswording seems not to 
account for a difference between hobbyist and expert.

This is of special interest if you follow pop psychology, since received 
wisdom has been affected of late byMalcolm Gladwell's Outliers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141036250>
. Gladwell's message is that super-achievers may not be those who are born 
brilliant at something or other, but those who have put in the legwork – 
specifically the catchy-sounding 10,000 hours over 10 years. It is in itself a 
happy-clappy idea, at least if you're a pushy parent, but it doesn't seem to be 
the case with cryptic crosswords.

So what does account for the super-solvers' super solving? It might be 
accounted for in part by the fact that the top group has in turn higher fluid 
intelligence than the regular solvers.

And what does it all mean for my reassuring words to nervous would-be solvers? 
Nothing fatal, but I'm going to change the tenor away from "everyone can master 
cryptics", towards "try a few and see if you like 'em".

As for the super-solvers: they are happily irrelevant to meat-and-potatoes 
solving. The research suggests that there is no real point trying to make 
yourself into one if you're not that way inclined already. Which, for me, is a 
cheering conclusion. As we've said here before, the champions' performance is 
no yardstick.

For a regular crossworder, the battle is with yourself and the setter, not the 
mental gymnastics of a Listener solver or the uncanny speed of a Times 
Championship champion. So if they're a breed apart, that reinforces the message 
that says: "Forget about that lot, just get on and enjoy your solve."

One last thought: Friedlander and Fine noted that, despite the bookish image 
of crosswords, their solvers often come from IT, science and maths backgrounds. 
What about those who read about crosswords? Are you a liberal-arts lot, 
science-heads or Renaissance polymaths-of-all-trades?

The research mentioned is:
  • Fine, P & Friedlander, KJ (2013, 28-31 August): "Cryptic Crossword 
Expertise and Fluid Intelligence", presented at the International Symposium on 
Performing Science, Vienna; published by the Royal College of Music, London
  • Friedlander, KJ & Fine, P (2013, 4-6 September): "Fluid Intelligence and 
Cryptic Crossword Expertise", presented at the CogDev 2013: BPS Developmental 
and Cognitive Sections Joint Conference 2013, Reading, UK
 