
You don’t need someone like me to tell you that crumble is a delight at this 
time of year. Crumble is autumn and autumn is crumble: it’s a path so 
well-trodden that I’m aware of dipping well into cliché by choosing it as this 
week’s theme. Most of us could rustle up a passable apple crumble with neither 
recipe, nor scales, nor measuring cups. With that in mind, see the recipes 
below not so much as hard-and-fast guides, but just starting points for your 
own experiments. I’ve used nutty spelt flour and hazelnuts in my apple crumble, 
but there’s no reason why you shouldn’t try almonds, crunchy demerara sugar and 
a little rye. Or, play around with different cheeses in the savoury crumble to 
top the butternut squash stew, and try booze-laced cherries in place of the 
strawberries with the coconut and almond crumble topping below.

▲ Cook’s tip: use roughly half butter to flour by weight; be generous with 
spices and herbs; don’t overdo the sugar.

Nutty spelt apple crumble

I always use cox or braeburn apples in my crumbles, though I know there’ll be 
those of you who swear by tarter varieties to balance the sweetness of the 
topping. The choice is yours, really, and a pudding as homely as crumble is 
hardly the place to quibble over such specifics. Just make sure you tweak the 
sugar quantities depending on what apples you choose, and steer clear of very 
sweet eating apples, such as Pink Ladies, which don’t tend to hold up as well 
to cooking.


Serves 6
8 cox apples, peeled, cored and cut into chunks
60g soft light brown sugar
3 tbsp wholemeal spelt flour
½ tsp cinnamon
½ tsp ground ginger

 For the crumble topping
100g salted butter, cubed, at room temperature
200g wholemeal spelt flour
75g hazelnuts, roasted and chopped 
100g soft light brown sugar
75g dark chocolate, cut into small chunks

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Pick out a medium oven dish or tin 
– roughly 1.5 litre capacity.

2 Prepare the apples. Toss the apples with the brown sugar, flour, cinnamon 
and ginger.

3 In a mixing bowl, rub the butter into the flour, then stir in the sugar and 
chocolate chunks. Sprinkle the crumble mixture over the filling in a thick 
layer.

4 Bake in the preheated oven for 40-45 minutes, or until the apple is tender, 
the juices bubbling through and the crumble golden brown. Enjoy hot, with a 
good vanilla ice-cream.

Two sweet dessert recipes for seasonal fruit | Cook residency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/08/pear-upside-down-cake-and-apple-tart-recipes-fern-verrow-farm-cook-residency>
Butternut squash and spinach casserole with herbed feta crumble (see an 
interactive versionhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ng-interactive/2015/oct/16/ruby-tandohs-butternut-squash-and-spinach-casserole-with-herbed-feta-crumble>
)

Crumble doesn’t have to be sweet. Here’s a cheesy, herb-flecked version that 
you can adapt for more or less any stew or casserole. You could swap the feta 
for cheddar or gruyere, add a few pinches of spices or add a handful or 
breadcrumbs for a slightly lighter result.


Serves 6
4 tbsp olive oil
4 spring onions, finely sliced
4 garlic cloves, finely sliced
2 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground cinnamon
¼ tsp ground nutmeg
¼ tsp chilli flakes
1 small butternut squash, in 2-3cm chunks 
2 x 400g tins chopped tomatoes
500-600ml vegetable stock
400g tin chickpeas
350g fresh spinach



For the topping
200g plain flour
100g butter
200g feta, diced
A bunch of parsley, finely chopped

1 Heat the oil in a large casserole over a low heat, add the spring onions and 
fry for 3-4 minutes, until they begin to soften. Add the garlic, cumin, 
cinnamon, nutmeg and chilli and cook for 2 minutes, stirring all the while. 
Once the spices are fragrant and the garlic sizzling, throw in the squash, 
chopped tomatoes and stock, then put a lid on the pan and leave it all to 
simmer on a low heat for 15 minutes.

2 When the squash has started to soften, take the lid off and leave it to 
bubble for another 5 minutes to reduce the sauce a little. Add the chickpeas 
and spinach, stir everything together to wilt the leaves and remove the pan 
from the heat. Let it cool a little while you preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas 
mark 6 and prepare the crumble.

3 For the crumble topping, measure the flour into a large bowl, then add the 
butter and half the feta in small cubes. Rub the fat and cheese into the flour 
between your fingertips until there are no visible chunks left, then stir in 
the rest of the feta and the parsley.

4 Sprinkle the crumble mixture over the filling (if you don’t have an 
ovenproof casserole, first decant the butternut squash stew from its pan into a 
2½-3 litre oven dish). Bake for 25-30 minutes, until the sauce is bubbling up 
through the crumble and the chunks of feta are blushing golden brown. Serve 
straight away with plenty of green veg.

Strawberry almond crisp

I’d never send a good strawberry to the oven. The best strawberries – the 
tiny, dark red early-summer ones, so ripe that they stain your fingers crimson 
and fall eagerly from their stems – should be enjoyed with no more than a 
dollop of softly whipped cream. But when they’re out of season, underripe and 
pallid, strawberries need a little help. I’ve bundled a couple of punnets of 
them into an easy crumble, balanced with a splash of balsamic and topped with a 
buttery, nut-strewn topping.


Serves 6
600g strawberries
1 tbsp balsamic vinegar
75g caster sugar
3 tbsp plain flour

 For the crumble topping
75g plain flour
A pinch of salt
40g unsalted butter, in chunks
30g flaked almonds
30g desiccated coconut
40g caster sugar

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Rinse the strawberries, then hull 
them and cut into quarters (smaller berries need only be cut in half). Drizzle 
the balsamic vinegar over the strawberries, then toss through the sugar and 
flour until the fruit are well coated. Tip into a 900g loaf tin.

2 Combine the flour with a good pinch of salt, then rub in the butter, in 
chunks, between your fingertips. Once the mixture’s sandy in texture, stir 
through the flaked almonds, desiccated coconut and caster sugar. Sprinkle the 
crumble mix over the fruit in a thick, even layer, then bake in the preheated 
oven for 30-35 minutes, until the crimson sweet strawberry juices are bubbling 
through, staining the golden crumble top.Y
 