
In supporting Jean Jackson’s plea (Letters, 23 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/22/fragile-habitats-but-sturdy-ikea-flatpacks>
), I think that too-clever-by-half crossword compilers invent new rules to 
preserve their self-awarded intellectual power. Too many see themselves as 
Araucaria or Ximenes, assuming every challenge to be for prizes for which there 
must be a limited list of winners. We cruciverbalists face barely conceived 
neologisms; foreign practice; topical proper and trade names; web-speak; and 
irrelevant whole words representing unrelated single-letter abbreviations not 
recognised in any glossary.

We are expected to discover hidden themes, without being told that a theme 
exists – such as, last week, the names of the 1966 England World Cup team. That 
was totally unfair, presenting 11 unsolvable clues. Compilers should copy the 
Observer’s Azed and publish the logic of the more knotty clues with the 
solution – as not all compilers share the same devious mindset.
Ralph Gee
Nottingham

• Thank goodness other readers are finding the current crop of cryptic 
crosswords impossible. I thought it was just me. Perhaps we should form a 
support group and call ourselves Araucaria’s Anonymous. It used to be fun and 
the clues had wit, but now it’s a chore with impenetrable clues that go on 
forever and often with a four-word solution. I offer a possible way of dealing 
with the problem to my fellow sufferers.

Many years ago I played Ariel in the Tempest at the Old Vic with John Gielgud 
playing Prospero. Every day in the rehearsal room during tea breaks and idle 
moments Sir John would sit quietly doing the Times crossword. Sometimes he 
would complete it and put it aside within 20 minutes or so. Everyone was 
terribly impressed. The Times crossword was, in those days, the toughest nut in 
the bowl.

One afternoon after this had been going on for some weeks, one of the cast 
idly picked up the great man’s paper – he had finished for the day and had gone 
off to the Garrick Club or somewhere to meet Sir Ralph or someone. Suddenly the 
actor who had been looking at the paper gasped and showed us the crossword. It 
was indeed all filled in, but apart from one or two correct answers the rest 
were just words that happened to fit the spaces and had no bearing on the 
clues. Needless to say none of us confronted Sir John with the discovery and he 
continued to complete the Time crossword every day with consummate ease.

I offer this not as a luvvie dropping names and theatrical anecdotes, but as a 
frustrated Guardian crossword-doer.
Michael Feast
London

• The cryptic crosswords are indeed becoming increasingly difficult and so 
solvers should not be 2 down on themselves.
Adrian Brodkin
London

• I’m so relieved I’m not the only one struggling with the crosswords. I had 
blamed the clogging up of the brain cells, because until recently I’ve enjoyed 
the Guardian’s puzzles for more than 30 years. However, like Margaret Hopkins (
Letters, August 24 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/theresa-may-tops-trump-when-it-comes-to-nukes>
), now I can be confident of completing only those by Rufus and Paul. The other 
compilers chuck far too much into their clues so that solving them prompts 
groans of misery not delight. Only Paul has a touch of the wit, elegance and 
economy of the blessed Araucaria.
Susan Seager
London

• I now start at the bottom right-hand corner, as the clues seem to be easier 
there. Perhaps the setter is running out of fiendish clues by then, or just 
wants to get it over and done with. Whatever, it seems to work.
Marjorie Clark
Perth

• I have to say I tend to finish them, albeit after a lot of research and 
Googling. However, the positioning of the crossword so close to the centrefold 
of the new puzzle page makes it very difficult to insert the answers in the 
top line. Very irritating.
Pauline Wilson
Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire

• It’s a relief to know that others are also having trouble finishing the 
cryptic crosswords. For some time I have been assuring myself that they are 
getting more difficult, because I didn’t want to face the alternative 
explanation.
David Fielker
London

• Jean Jackson, please take heart. I not only fail to complete it, I fail to 
start it.
Ellen Hawley
Crackington Haven, Cornwall

• Having puzzled unsuccessfully over Picaroon’s crossword (24 August), I’m 
still at a loss with the solution in front of me. Is it time to take up 
knitting instead?
Pat Moulds
Kiln Hill, Lincolnshire

• Disappointed to see three women (Letters, 23 and 24 August) letting the side 
down. I also found the newer setters difficult at first but got used to them. 
Try harder please – unless you want the men saying we don’t have the right 
brains for cryptic crosswords.
Jean McGowan
Glasgow

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 