
Deeply distasteful news arrives from Verona where the mayor, Flavio Tosi, has 
introduced a ban on new restaurants serving mostly ethnic and deep-fried foods, 
apparently in a response to an outbreak of new kebab places. He has done this, 
he says, to protect “the tradition of typical culture of the Verona territory”. 
Tosi, whose name is only a couple of letters away from being accurate, was for 
many years affiliated to the far right Northern League. Even if he weren’t, 
it’s easy to see this as the pursuit of a xenophobic agenda via food. For 
“typical culture” read pasta. It’s a blunt-headed, knuckle-dragging law that 
says my culinary tradition is better than yours. It’s like saying my family is 
better than yours, which (as waspointed out by Vice  
<https://munchies.vice.com/en/articles/kebabs-are-under-fire-in-this-citys-ethnic-food-ban>
when they reported the news) is familiar territory for Verona. What with it 
being home to Shakespeare’s Capulets and Montagues.

If only this were an isolated example, but it isn’t. Food protectionism is 
everywhere. The instincts behind it, the desire to maintain a slice of 
venerable culture, may seem laudable; the unintended consequences too often 
aren’t. For example, Italy was the birthplace of the Slow Food movement. It 
presents itself as a protest against the corporate dominance of the food chain. 
In reality, it spends much of its time protecting niche products – saying my 
salami is better than yours – or even turning basic foodstuffs into exotica. 
Lardo, the cured fatback of the pig, was originally a source of much-needed 
calories for impoverished quarry workers from around Carrara. Now, courtesy of 
Slow Food, it’s a luxury item.

Likewise, Italy has more than a fifth of all products with protected status 
under European law, more than any other European country. Be assured, what 
follows is not a pro-Brexit argument by stealth; you can get that elsewhere. 
But these protections really are bizarre, and at odds with the way food culture 
works. Obviously, there’s the anti-protectionist argument. The pasta joints of 
Verona should surely be able to hold their own against local kebab places or go 
bust. Likewise, a food product should be able to survive in the marketplace 
without protection, simply by virtue of being good.

These protections are also deforming. The designated recipe of the protected 
Cornish pasty is so specific it can now never evolve. And yet all recipes 
evolve constantly. That’s how food works, They change over geography, time and 
even across families. We all have what American food researchers call our 
“foodways”. None of us is entitled to say one item is more true than another. 
They are just different. It results in absurd situations, such as that around 
stichelton, the blue cheese made in exactly the same way as stilton, but which 
can’t be called a stilton because it uses unpasteurised milk. Despite it being 
better than many cheeses that can be called stilton. Who does that serve?

Then there’s the Lakeland Herdwick issue. Herdwick is a hardy breed of sheep 
native to the Lake District. In 2013, the name Lakeland Herdwick received 
protection. To get the label the animal must beborn, raised and slaughtered in 
Cumbria 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/271318/pfn-lakeland-herdwick-pdo.pdf>
. But there are now too few abattoirs in the county, due to closures, so 
significant amounts of Lakeland Herdwick are slaughtered elsewhere. Thus it 
can’t be called Lakeland Herdwick even though essentially it is. An attempt to 
protect a form of farming merely reduces the product’s supply. In the end, food 
should be measured by one criterion and one only: does it taste nice? 
Everything else is irrelevant.
 