
Last month I reported the brouhaha caused by KOALA BEAR coming up as a 
solution in a puzzle, when the arboreal marsupial is, of course, not a bear but 
is merely bear-like. My riposte that the Oxford Dictionary of English says that 
the term koala bear is accepted and in general use as an alternative to koala 
(and that in Australia the koala is also called the 'native bear') was politely 
but firmly brushed aside by Mike and Chris of Kangaroo Valley, New South Wales. 
They concede that many people (including many Australians) do use the term 
koala bear, causing those who know better to cringe. But I am indebted to them 
for drawing my attention to an entry in the Macquarie Dictionary which, since 
its first publication in 1981, has become the accepted authority on Australian 
English. It has this to say on the subject:

'The compound form koala bear is either an unnecessary attempt to relate the 
fauna of Australia to that of the Old World, or part of the cute language used 
with children. It is a form which is becoming obsolete.'

One could continue to wriggle and say that, as 'koala bear' is only 'becoming 
obsolete' in Australia, it cannot yet be totally wrong to use it here; but 
since Guardian crossword solvers would certainly not wish to seem out of touch 
with modern trends or, even worse, to appear childish, I think that we shall in 
future de-bear the koala wherever possible.

I hope that we have not run into a similar problem with that familiar resident 
of Gibraltar, the Barbary ape (Quick No 12,469, April 28). Jaded of Jedburgh 
regarded it as further evidence of the relentless Americanisation in the 
British media, showing ignorance about the basic branches of the evolutionary 
tree by confusing apes with monkeys. My fairly confident defence against this 
charge rests on the entries for 'Barbary ape' in Collins, Chambers and the 
Oxford Dictionary of English. The last of these gives: 'a tailless macaque 
monkey that is native to NW Africa and also found on the Rock of Gibraltar'. 
These monkeys were still officially called Barbary apes on my last visit to the 
Rock in 1992 and, in the absence of any ruling in some Gibraltarian linguistic 
authority of which I am so far unaware, I think that we can safely still go on 
calling these animals (incidentally the only monkeys native to any part of 
Europe) Barbary apes.

_____

Several of you have asked whether it could be made possible to search the 
archive of cryptic puzzles not by serial number or month of publication but by 
setter. It seems that some readers like to work through the puzzles from a 
particular setter or to print off a batch from that setter to take on holiday 
or on a long journey. Particular solvers like particular setters and dislike 
some more than others.

You have, of course, always been able to use the archive search tool on the 
home page to search for puzzles by a particular setter but this has at present 
to be done month by month, which is plainly a tedious process. And, for some 
months, a particular setter may have had no puzzles published. I fear that in 
the present budgetary climate making the whole cryptic archive searchable by 
setter is not likely to be a high priority. But there is a way around this that 
is not too difficult to follow.

Say you are interested in puzzles set by Brendan. Use the archive search 
facility to find the interactive version of any Brendan puzzle (e.g. for 
January this year, No 24,916). At the top, above the grid, you will find 'Set 
by Brendan'. Click on 'Brendan' and you will get the full list of all the 69 
Brendan puzzles in the archive going back to May 2006 when he first started 
working for the Guardian. Note down the serial numbers and return to the home 
page archive search facility to print them off.

_____

Once again Ian of London N14 was first with the correct solution for last 
month's Genius puzzle (April, No 82 by Lavatch). Timed at 02.01 on Easter 
Monday he was a minute quicker than he had been the previous month. Peter of 
Montville in Queensland was second but a full 1 hour and 55 minutes slower. 
There were 16 other correct entries on the first day but you seem to have found 
the puzzle harder than other recent ones: the total of correct entries sent in 
by the deadline was only 235. Some of you, though, are beginning to worry about 
Ian of N14's sleep patterns, wondering whether (like French children 
traditionally on Christmas Eve) he has an early evening meal and then goes to 
sleep, having made arrangements to be woken at midnight, or whether he just has 
a natural tendency towards productive insomnia. Norman L. in France is led to 
wonder, in that case, how Ian fills the wee small hours on days other than the 
first Monday of the month when he can get to grips with the new Genius.
 