
In the end, it does not matter how Derby won, just that they did. The Rams 
secured their first win since Boxing Day and Darren Wassall’s firstsince taking 
over from Paul Clement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/09/derby-county-paul-clement-gamble-sacked>
, thanks to three late goals as they overcame an ultimately brittle Brentford.

For long spells Derby could not produce the football one might expect from a 
team of their means but they grabbed the three points after discovering in the 
final 10 minutes the ruthlessness they had lacked in the previous 80. This 
might not exactly have been the “Derby way”, whatever that is, that the 
chairman, Mel Morris, spoke of when Clement was dismissed, but the goals from 
Cyrus Christie, Jeff Hendrick and Chris Martin did represent their “moral 
courage”, according to Wassall.

For Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford>, this was a 
dispiriting defeat and the latest in a poor run. They came into the game as one 
of the few teams in as bad form as Derby. Indeed, it would have been much worse 
were it not for the efforts of their goalkeeper, David Button, described as 
“inspired” by Wassall and who kept Dean Smith’s side in the game for long 
spells. Smith admitted his team “found it tough” trying to compete with a side 
who added players at great expense in January, while the Bees lost James 
Tarkowski and Toumani Diagouraga.

Derby began the game like a side who had been given a robust talking to, 
Hendrick and Darren Bent denied by fine saves, but Brentford gradually inched 
back into contention, like an army operating on salami tactics. The excellent 
Alan Judge came close after he tried to pick out the top corner of the top 
corner from a training ground set piece, but did not quite measure the effort 
and Scott Carson held on.

The half then swung back in the opposite direction, as if both teams had been 
allotted strictly defined periods of attacking time. As Derby retook control, 
Button was seemingly the only man showing any interest in keeping them out; 
Smith said before the game that he had been working on ways to keep Derby 
quiet, but it did not look like his players had listened. But despite Derby’s 
superiority it was Brentford who took the lead, just after the break.

Judge won the ball inside the Derby half and drove into the area from the 
right before firing a terrific shot across Carson and into the far corner. In 
this period the hosts were much the better side, Judge directing things from 
pretty much wherever he wanted, creating multiple chances that they would 
eventually regret not taking.

“It would’ve been easy to feel sorry for ourselves,” said Wassall, “but it was 
a testament to the whole squad that they rolled their sleeves up.”

The rolling-up of sleeves helped but so too did Wassall’s considerable pool of 
resources, into which he dipped to summon Martin, Nick Blackman and Tom Ince 
from the bench. Yet it was a mild stroke of luck, rather than millions of 
pounds worth of talent, that brought the equaliser.

A Harlee Dean clearance was blocked, with a hint of handball – a “rugby 
charge-down” according to Smith – and fell to Hendrick, who neatly slotted home 
from a narrow angle. And a few moments later Derby had another, this time with 
a little more quality to it as Bradley Johnson, suddenly energised, broke down 
the right, crossed and the unlikely figure of Christie forced home from close 
range.

Brentford pressed for an equaliser and had a header cleared off the line but 
Martin added the third from a rapid counterattack. A fan behind the goal 
removed his shirt in joy, the rest of the Derby fans settled for a sigh of 
relief, and Wassall lingered at the end to celebrate.

Clockwatch: Reading 3-1 West Brom, Watford 1-0 Leeds, Las Palmas 1-2 Barcelona 
– as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/20/watford-leeds-reading-west-brom-fa-cup-fifth-round-clockwatch> 