
Former football stars have joined mourners as emotional tributes were paid to 
the ex-Aston Villa striker Dalian Atkinson at his funeral.


Dalian Atkinson's family tell of agony over footballer's Taser death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/dalian-atkinsons-family-tell-of-agony-over-footballers-taser-death>
The 48-year-old died after police shot him with a Taser when officers were 
called to an incident in his home town of Telford, Shropshire, earlier this 
year.

Hundreds of mourners – including family members, fans and the former Villa 
players Ian Taylor and Tommy Johnson – gathered at the town’s crematorium on 
Saturday.

Atkinsonwas fired on in the street where he had grown up in an incident 
involving West Mercia police officers on 15 August. He died 90 minutes later, 
despite hospital doctorscarrying out CPR for more than half an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/25/two-police-officers-to-be-interviewed-over-death-of-dalian-atkinson>
 to try to save him.

During the humanist service, the celebrant, Peter Mansell, said: “There was no 
one quite like Dalian. There never was before and there never will be again.”

He described how, as a boy, Atkinson played street football in Meadow Close – 
the same road where he was shot by police – with his brothers and friends. 
While still at school, he was spotted by talent scouts, leading to his 
apprenticeship at Ipswich Town FC.

“He found sitting at a school desk boring, but excelled at football and 
athletics.”

Mansell said Atkinson loved the “playboy lifestyle” and was “energetic, cheeky 
and funny” but also “generous, caring and protective”.

A family man, he was “an inspiration to his nieces and nephews” and often went 
home “for his mother’s home cooking”.

“For those who loved Dalian, a part of their world is gone.” 

Atkinson’s niece Josie said: “Inspiration is the word most appropriate to you, 
a figure I looked up to and still do.”

Another niece, Cleo, said: “You had such a charismatic soul and enriched 
everyone’s lives with your intellect, insight and warmth, never failing to make 
people around you laugh.”


Concluding the service, mourners were told there was “only one song” left to 
play in Atkinson’s memory - En Vogue’s What A Man.
 