
Daniel Ricciardo wrapped up third spot in the Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> world championship after a 
drama-filled finish to the Mexican Grand Prix, which saw two drivers penalised. 
The Australian crossed the line in fifth, but was initially elevated to fourth 
when his Red Bull team-mate Max Verstappen received a five-second penalty for 
holding his spot ahead of Vettel after going off track on the fourth last lap.

Vettel assumed the youngster’s spot on the podium, only to later get a 
10-second penalty for under-braking in an incident involving Ricciardo – 
pushing him back to fifth and the Australian to third.


Lewis Hamilton victory in Mexican Grand Prix keeps his title hopes alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/lewis-hamilton-mexican-grand-prix-title-hopes-alive-nico-rosberg>
Ricciardo was adamant after the race the Ferrari driver should also have been 
penalised over the matter in the second-last lap. “He [Vettel] is smiling now,” 
he said. “He doesn’t deserve to be up there [on the podium]. I thought I had 
every right to be there but he kept closing the door under-braking. I was 
frustrated with that.”

Vettel was livid at the end of the race, pulling up alongside Verstappen after 
delivering a foul-mouthed spray over the the team radio about the 19-year-old. 
“He [Verstappen] is a [inaudible],” Vettel yelled over the team radio. “Am I 
the only one, or are you not seeing what I’m seeing? He’s just backing me off 
into Ricciardo.

“Move, move for fuck’s sake. He cut the chicane. He has to give me the 
position. End of the story.”


The German then lashed out at veteran race director Charlie Whiting over the 
incident, again via his team radio after he was told the incident would be 
reviewed after the race. “Here’s a message to Charlie: fuck off. Honestly, fuck 
off.”

The late penalty is unlikely to go down well with Vettel, who also claimed 
through the team radio the only reason he was in a battle with Ricciardo was 
due to Verstappen holding his position. “He is just blocking me to Ricciardo 
... He is just backing me off” he said.

Ricciardo also compared Verstappen’s behaviour to that of Mercedes drivers 
Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg earlier in the race, who finished first and 
second respectively. Hamilton drove wide of the track at one point, while 
Rosberg also left the track following a nudge.

“I also didn’t understand the start, how you can be leading the race, defend, 
go off the track and not get a penalty?” Ricciardo asked. “What was different 
with Max Verstappen’s move and Lewis’? It was a mistake and you have to pay the 
price.”

Ricciardo’s third-place finish opens up an unassailable 55-point lead over 
Vettel in third place for the championship, his second time in the top three in 
the past three years.


The result also made this season the most prolific points-wise in the 
27-year-old’s Formula One career, taking him to 242 – four more than he scored 
in his breakthrough 2014 season.
 