
It was a match against the most limited opposition Liverpool will encounter 
all season but this felt like a particularly important debut forDaniel Sturridge
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/daniel-sturridge>. Before the game 
Brendan Rodgers had declared Sturridge would become Liverpool's first-choice 
centre-forward, implying that Luis Suárez would be forced to play a different 
role for the remainder of the season. "Daniel's best position is as a central 
striker," he said. "His best position will be straight through the middle with 
his pace."

For the trip to Field Mill not only did Rodgers throw Sturridge straight into 
the starting line-up in a central position but he rested Suárez. It meant 
Sturridge was unquestionably the star attraction – there was no danger of the 
Uruguayan frustrating him by taking up central positions, or making the same 
runs, and the perfect chance for the £12m signing to make the position his own.
 Jonjo Shelvey and Daniel Sturridge combined excellently throughout the first 
half, particularly for the opener. Photograph: Graphic 
It took seven minutes for Sturridge to get off the mark, with a cool 
right-foot finish from a Jonjo Shelvey through-ball. Sturridge, like Arsenal's 
Theo Walcott, has outlined his determination to play through the middle rather 
than wide on the right, pointing to Thierry Henry's tactical transformation as 
an inspiration. This opening goal was reminiscent of the Frenchman – starting 
in the inside-left channel and receiving a pass that bisected the opposition 
centre-backs, before finishing first-time towards the far post.

The calibre of opposition made it difficult to gauge how effective Sturridge 
will be in the Premier League but his relationship with Shelvey was 
unquestionably promising. The young midfielder was afforded far too much space 
and repeatedly played clever passes in behind the defence – Sturridge should 
have grabbed a second after a move that was a mirror image of the first goal. 
Stewart Downing and Suso stayed wide, pulling theMansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> full-backs towards the 
touchlines and increasing the amount of space the centre-backs were forced to 
cover. Against a player of Sturridge's pace, and with a disorganised offside 
trap, they stood little chance.

The debutant's performance is likely to influence Rodgers' selection for next 
weekend's trip to Old Trafford and he says Suárez will be happy to change role. 
"The idea was bringing in players that were multi-functional, who can play in a 
couple of positions," Rodgers said after the game, indicating that the duo will 
be switched from week to week. "I'll consider each game, depending on the 
opponent, when we see the areas we can exploit." Suárez, in the most prolific 
season of his career, with Ajax, was used on the right of a front three.

Yet it is a significant gamble to move him away from a permanently central 
role. It is only in 2012-13 that the Uruguayan has converted his significant 
talent into sheer efficiency in the Premier League – he is the second-top 
goalscorer with 15, one behind Robin van Persie. Previously Suárez's meagre 
goal return atLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> was 
the most blatant weakness in his game, which was at least partly attributable 
to him being deployed in a variety of positions under Kenny Dalglish – 
sometimes up front alone, sometimes just off Andy Carroll, sometimes wider in a 
front three.

For fitness reasons Suárez replaced Sturridge against Mansfield, rather than 
played alongside him, denying us the opportunity to see how they will combine 
in future. Suárez grabbed the controversial second goal, staking his own claim 
for that central position.

Statistics indicate that Sturridge's chance conversion rate is superior to 
Suárez's in the past couple of years but that does not necessarily mean he 
would be a more potent striker. Suárez remains such a tricky opponent because 
of his sheer persistence and determination – he has recorded 123 shots in the 
Premier League this season, 34 more than any other player. A large proportion 
of those attempts are half-chances he creates for himself, something Sturridge 
is less capable of. You can forgive Suárez for failing to score from situations 
few others would find themselves in, especially when finding the net so 
frequently.

Fabio Borini will return to training this week after recovering from a broken 
foot, which means that all of Liverpool's first-choice front three will be 
quick, versatile attackers, all capable of playing wide or through the centre. 
Suso and Raheem Sterling, both overplayed at such an early stage of their 
career, can become the alternative rather than the default. Suddenly Liverpool 
have a plethora of attacking options. Suárez has scored 44% of Liverpool's 
goals this season – only Newcastle have been more reliant on one striker, the 
recently departed Demba Ba – and Sturridge will help Liverpool spread the goals 
around.

The Ki to Swansea's creativity

Leon Britton's successful debut Premier League season saw him rightly hailed 
as a reliable, intelligent passer of the ball – and in 2012-13, opposition 
coaches have become aware of his threat, often trying to press him in order to 
break up Swansea's passing.

But while Britton is useful as a functional, robotic distributor of the ball, 
his midfield partner Ki Sung-Yeung is becoming increasingly important to 
Swansea.Against Arsenal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jan/06/swansea-arsenal-fa-cup-report>, 
he was often the man to play the first dangerous pass into the final third, and 
was allowed too much freedom in the centre of the pitch.

It is no surprise that Ki creates more chances than Britton, who keeps things 
simple, but it is interesting to learn his pass completion rate is superior 
too. Arsenal have now had two opportunities to assess Swansea's passing up 
close in recent weeks, and should be aware of Ki's creative threat in next 
week's replay.

Super subs

In a third round featuring a number of drawn matches, there were very few 
big-name casualties – of the 20 Premier League sides, only Newcastle lost to 
opposition from outside the top flight, at Brighton, while Chelsea comfortably 
defeated fellow Premier League side Southampton.

A key feature was the Premier League clubs' use of the bench. No fewer than 
eight clubs featured a goalscoring substitute – Lukas Podolski for Arsenal, 
Michu for Swansea, Robin van Persie for Manchester United, Andreas Weimann for 
Aston Villa, Connor Wickham for Sunderland, Marcos Lopes for Manchester City, 
Frank Lampard for Chelsea and Luis Suárez for Liverpool.

The impacts of Suárez, Van Persie and Michu were particularly decisive and 
indicate the incredible strength in depth the top division clubs can boast – 
the three players at the top of the Premier League goalscoring charts were all 
part-rested, then introduced to provide crucial goals late on.
 