
Spanish La Liga side Malaga were left frustrated after watching a series of 
golden chances go begging in their 1-1 draw withPerth Glory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory> in Sunday's friendly at nib 
Stadium.


Malaga encountered few problems in their 5-1 thrashing of another A-League 
side, Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/25/adelaide-united-thumped-by-malaga-in-friendly>
, on Friday night but they struggled to find a way past Glory goalkeeper Danny 
Vukovic in a match that featured plenty of niggle in the second half.


The visitors hit the lead in the 32nd minute when Ricardo Horta curled his 
shot into the top corner of the net from outside the box.


But their efforts to put the game beyond doubt were thwarted by Vukovic, who 
pulled off a series of fine saves throughout the match.


Glory got back on level terms when Republic of Ireland international Andy 
Keogh scored in the 57th minute, and they almost stole the win in the 80th 
minute, only for Danny De Silva's shot to be deflected.


Malaga's outfit was headlined by Paraguay captain Roque Santa Cruz, while 
on-loan Liverpool winger Luis Alberto, Venezuela international Roberto Rosales, 
and Portugal's Horta were also in the starting line-up.


Glory handed starts to new signings Richard Garcia, Diogo Ferreira, Mitch 
Nichols, Youssouf Hersi, Dino Djulbic and Keogh.


Perth made a bright start to the match, with Hersi and winger Sidnei causing 
Malaga's defence a few headaches with their deft touch and nippy speed.


Malaga soon settled and went on the attack, forcing Vukovic to pull off a 
reflex save to deny Roque Santa Cruz's short-range header.


Vukovic was helpless to block out Horta's curling effort from outside the box 
in the 32nd minute, but he kept out Santa Cruz's shot on the stroke of 
half-time.


Malaga replaced a swag of their stars at half-time, and Keogh capitalised with 
a sharp goal on the turn.


Glory's physical presence in defence didn't go down well with Malaga's 
players, who became increasingly frustrated as the match wore on.
 