
A stoppage-time penalty from Danny Williams earned Reading a controversial 
late 2-1Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> 
victory over Ipswich after Paul McShane was held back in the area by Jonas 
Knudsen at a corner and Williams slotted in the resulting spot-kick.

The home side, who climb up to third place, went in front on the stroke of 
half-time through a Garath McCleary penalty. Ipswich levelled in the 50th 
minute, also from the spot, when Brett Pitman made no mistake after he had been 
fouled in the area.

Huddersfield’s David Wagner: ‘We had no electricity, no toilet, no beds and no 
mobile phones’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/huddersfield-david-wagner-no-electricity-no-beds-football-championship>
Reading cruised through the corresponding fixture last season, almost a year 
to the day, with a thumping 5-1 victory. Yet such has been the summer turnover 
at the Berkshire club, only two of the 14 players who featured for them in that 
game – Chris Gunter and McShane – started the rematch. Ipswich went into the 
fixture on a three-match unbeaten run, likeReading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>, and were the first to threaten 
when Freddie Sears saw his volley saved by goalkeeper Ali Al-Habsi.

The hosts, 1-0 winners at Cardiff last time out, responded quickly, with the 
lively Roy Beerens scampering through – but as he looked to find the unmarked 
Yann Kermorgant with a pass, the Ipswich keeper Bartosz Bialkowski spread 
himself to make a vital save. Reading maintained the pressure, with George 
Evans heading powerfully over from a Beerens cross. The Dutch winger then had a 
go himself, after a lapse in the Ipswich defence, but Bialkowski made a 
stunning stop to turn away the fierce drive. Little was seen of Ipswich going 
forward, with Pitman a lone figure up front.

Three minutes into stoppage-time at the end of the first half, Reading went 
ahead. Grant Ward was harshly judged to have handled fractionally in the 
Ipswich area in a tussle with Tyler Blackett, and McCleary sent Bialkowski the 
wrong way from the spot.

Ipswich were level within five minutes of the restart. Blackett nudged Pitman 
at the far post, as he prepared to meet a Knudsen cross, and Pitman blasted in 
the resultant penalty. The Suffolk side could have gone ahead, only for 
Al-Habsi to save well from Ward, while McCleary should have done better at the 
other end when heading a Beerens cross weakly at Bialkowski.

As Ipswich mounted late pressure, centre-backs Tommy Smith and Christophe 
Berra both wasted good chances from close range. Bialkowski did well to keep 
out a low effort from home substitute John Swift as the game drifted towards a 
draw – until the dramatic climax and Williams’ winner. The Ipswich manager Mick 
McCarthy said: “Their guy has run into Jonas. They are grappling, but the pair 
of them are doing it. We’ve all had a warning, because he’s booked somebody 
just before, but he [the referee] could have done that in either box on a 
number of occasions. But he chose to do it in the 90-whatever-it-was minute.”
 