
So many people came to support Darlington, the club saved from football's 
scrapheap with a last-minute bucket of cash on Wednesday, that the kick-off was 
delayed at their 25,000-seat stadium that should never have been built. Formed 
in 1883,Darlington <https://www.theguardian.com/football/darlington> are still 
deep into their injury time, with the £50,000 raised by the fans due to run out 
on 31 January. Around the outsized arena built by the former owner, George 
Reynolds, to host his crazy vision of Premier League football, small children 
were rattling buckets, giving voice to the cry of the week: "Save Darlo."

Callum Vallis, 10, was a mascot when Darlington were at Wembley just eight 
months ago, winning the FA Trophy. On Wednesday, when the club's administrator, 
Harvey Madden, told the manager and former long-serving defender Craig Liddle, 
and all the players, that the club was bust, finished after 129 years, Callum 
said: "I was devastated, crying. Then I heard the club was coming back, I was 
well chuffed. We're doing whatever we can now. I just want Darlington to be 
known as a good club."

Madden agreed to keep Darlington going through this game against flourishing 
Fleetwood, then those against Hayes & Yeading and York City, after two members 
of the rescue group, Doug Embleton and Shaun Campbell, arrived banging on the 
door of the arena, pledging the £50,000. Embleton, at the match, said they have 
been overwhelmed by support from all over the world and there is a feeling 
around of "rebirth".

Yet the Quakers remain a long way from being sure they will survive for local 
boys to watch when they are men. Inside this lavish arena with its marble 
floors and escalators, built in 2003 by Reynolds, who was later found to have 
funded the arena improperly with his company's money and was jailed for tax 
fraud, the reality is threadbare. Liddle, all the players and staff, whose 
wages the current owner, Raj Singh, decided he could no longer pay having sunk 
£2m into the club since 2009, were made redundant by Madden on Monday.

Three players – Sam Russell, Jamie Chandler and Liam Hatch– left to seek a 
more secure living elsewhere, and only 10 professional players remained on the 
books, now being paid by the match until the money runs out. On the back of the 
programme, hastily produced after Madden allowed the club to continue, 
Fleetwood, second in the Blue Square Bet Conference, rolled out an experienced 
squad of 28, while only 11 names appeared on the home club's list. With 
Darlington still under a transfer embargo, Liddle was given special 
dispensation to sign a goalkeeper, 17-year-old Jordan Pickford, on loan from 
Sunderland, who played manfully in a senior debut that must have been odd for 
him.

Fleetwood, spending freely on players, are experiencing the opposite side of 
the non-league owners' lottery, with £10m spent by the gas and electricity 
businessman Andy Pilley since 2003, the year Reynolds ran out of money to 
complete his arena and put Darlington into the last administration but two. 
Strong on the ball and tidy in their passing, Fleetwood showed no sentiment for 
their opponents, most of whom barely trained in a week of tears and P45s.

In the biting north-east wind Darlington risked being overwhelmed, 
particularly after Danny Rose, formerly a Manchester United youngster, smacked 
in a rebound off Pickford's left-hand post to put Fleetwood 1-0 up after 43 
minutes. Yet with the crowd – at 5,638 almost three times Darlington's average 
this season – singing the Great Escape and "Stand up, if you love Darlo" with 
great poignancy, Liddle's team held out through the second half, clinging to 
the edge of their history.

"Everyone can be very proud," Liddle said. "There was a lot of emotion, and a 
lot of positivity around the club which we can build on." It has been, he said, 
"horrendous" for the players, two of whom have not been paid since October.

The chance of securing the club's future depends, as it so often does, on the 
value of the land it sits on. There is a deal to be done: if the local 
authority relaxes its planning restrictions, the vast unoccupied car park could 
be developed for houses and some leisure businesses, and money potentially 
released to build the club a smaller ground elsewhere.

Developers, so far unnamed, are talking to Madden, and the rescue group and 
the local MP, Jenny Chapman, are hoping to reform the club into supporters' or 
community-based ownership. In one of the lounges Reynolds built to cater for 
his doomed Premier League fantasy, Madden was warning that 31 January is a real 
and critical deadline: "I have stressed to everybody that I need money for the 
long term," he said. "If the club is to continue, I have to have a deal by 
then."
 