
Darren Bent scored his first goal for Derby but the Championship promotion 
chasers were given a real scare by League OneChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> before they won a pulsating 
FA Cup fourth-round tie 2-0 at the iPro Stadium.

Bent headed in from close range in the first half but Chesterfield dominated 
possession for long periods and wasted good chances before Will Hughes sealed 
victory with a late solo effort.

Derby’s head coach, Steve McClaren, had switched to a 3-5-2 formation with the 
Spanish centre-half Raúl Albentosa making his debut while Bent made his first 
start alongside Chris Martin, but it was Chesterfield who almost scored in the 
second minute.

Eoin Doyle got behind Derby on the right and crossed to the back post where 
Armand Gnanduillet looked certain to score until Cyrus Christie made a crucial 
block, and then Doyle and Sam Clucas combined dangerously before Albentosa 
stepped in.

Derby were struggling to get any meaningful possession and although Hughes 
made a strong run into the visitors’ penalty area, Chesterfield had another 
good chance when Gnanduillet got in on the left only to shoot tamely at Kelle 
Roos.

But the home side took the lead in the 20th minute when Bent forced a corner 
and, after Jake Buxton headed the ball down, the former England man was first 
to react to head past Tommy Lee from two yards.

That was hard on Chesterfield but James O’Shea lifted the 5,000-plus away fans 
with a clever turn and shot from 25 yards that flashed just wide with Roos at 
full stretch.

Chesterfield were playing the better football and they created another chance 
in the 38th minute when a patient build-up saw Jimmy Ryan slip through on the 
right and he set up Clucas who fired over from 10 yards.

Although they were in front Derby had looked far from convincing and McClaren 
replaced Albentosa with Johnny Russell at half-time, switching to a 4-3-3 and 
the Championship side should have scored again in the 51st minute.

Martin’s superbly weighted pass sent Bent clear but Lee saved with his feet 
and when Russell broke through on the right six minutes later, Tendayi Darikwa 
slid in behind his goalkeeper to clear.

Derby were finding more and more openings and a mistake by Charlie Raglan in 
the 59th minute let in Bent but his lob was clawed away by Lee – and 
Chesterfield should have equalised two minutes later.

Daniel Jones crossed low from the left and the ball fell invitingly for Ryan 
10 yards out, but the midfielder snatched at the chance and fired high over the 
bar.

The game had become really stretched and the former Chesterfield favourite 
Jamie Ward, who replaced the injured Russell, ballooned a chance over before 
Simon Dawkins headed against Lee’s crossbar in the 71st minute.

Chesterfield kept pressing but Derby made the game safe in the 82nd minute 
when Hughes robbed Clucas outside the area and slipped past a defender before 
placing a right-foot shot past Lee.
 