
David Nugent’s remarkable goalscoring run against Ipswich helped Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> to a 2-0 win at Portman 
Road, moving them top of the Championship.

Boro took advantage of playing before their promotion rivals with an assured 
second-half display that Ipswich, play-off hopefuls themselves, had no answer 
to.

Steve Clarke sacked by Reading after one win in eight games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/steve-clarke-reading-sacked> 
Christian Stuani broke the deadlock in the 54th minute before Nugent scored 
his 15th goal in 14 career matches against Ipswich to make the game safe.

A dominant second-half performance by the visitors was in stark contrast to a 
tight first 45 minutes which saw neither side give an inch. Half chances were 
shared as Nugent and Stuani both failed to trouble the Ipswich goalkeeper, Dean 
Gerken, while at the other end Brett Pitman’s long range effort was held by 
Dimitrios Konstantopoulos.

Up for sale and out of money: what on earth has gone wrong at Bolton?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/01/sale-money-bolton-relegation-administration>
In the 23rd minute Ipswich fashioned the game’s first real chance when Pitman 
exchanged passes with Daryl Murphy but his shot from 20 yards was beaten away 
by Konstantopoulos.

Five minutes later Ipswich went even closer when Pitman turned provider. His 
deep cross was poked goalwards by Luke Chambers but the Ipswich captain’s shot 
was straight at the relieved Boro goalkeeper.

A minute after the restart Ipswich again went close when Ben Gibson’s sloppy 
pass was picked up by the impressive Ainsley Maitland-Niles. His cross was 
missed by Daniel Ayala but Pitman’s downward header lacked power.

Moments later the visitors almost took the lead when Stewart Downing’s cross 
was headed back by Albert Adomah and Grant Leadbitter’s fierce, close-range 
shot was brilliantly deflected away by the alert Gerken.

Boro were not to be denied for long. In the 54th minute Adomah found some 
space on the left and his dangerous cross was headed in at the back post by 
Stuani, despite the best efforts of Gerken.

Middlesbrough were dominating proceedings now and Downing had Gerken sprawling 
to his left on two separate occasions before they deservedly doubled their lead.

Downing’s incisive pass inside found Nugent but the striker still had a lot to 
do, with his low shot taking a slight deflection off Tommy Smith before finding 
the net via the inside of a post.

Ipswich went close to pulling a goal back when Chambers’ cross was met by the 
head of his fellow full-back Jonas Knudsen but Konstantopoulos was again equal 
to it.

Four minutes from time it was almost three when Downing cut inside but his 
shot to the far corner was brilliantly tipped away and Nugent was unable to 
gobble up the rebound. Adomah should have added another but his shot was 
cleared off the line by Chambers.
 