
David Flitcroft openly admits he has joined the ranks of ‘mamils’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/05/clicktivism-unfollow-new-words-dictionary>
 and become a middle-aged man in Lycra consumed by a love affair with cycling 
on the open road. “I’ve got all the gear,” says Bury’s manager. “It’s changed 
my life.”

Not that Flitcroft is typical of the breed. At 40, he is at the younger end of 
the spectrum and it is unlikely that many fellow enthusiasts spend a near 
30-mile round bicycle commute between home and office reflecting on advice 
offered by Liverpool’s Brendan Rodgers.

“I spoke to Brendan in the summer,” he says before boarding a flight to London 
where his slick-passing side hope to consolidate their position at the top of
League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> on Saturday 
when they visit AFC Wimbledon.

“We talked about how important it was to develop the ‘Bury brand’ of football, 
a clear identity which everyone from players to supporters could buy into. 
Brendan said the most important thing was that I believed in the brand, because 
if I didn’t, no one else would. Now we’ve found that identity, the fans see the 
possession type of football we’re trying to play and they want to be part of 
it. The club’s engaging with the town again.”

Flitcroft, who played for Bury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury> a 
decade ago, became manager in December 2013 following an arguably harsh sacking 
by Barnsley and immediately set about keeping them in League Two. That mission 
accomplished, this summer saw him join Stewart Day, Bury’s 32-year-old property 
entrepreneur owner, in embarking on phase two of their blueprint, securing 
promotion to League One next spring.

Experienced players, including Kelvin Etuhu, Nicky Adams, Ryan Lowe and the 
Baghdad-born goalkeeper Shwan Jalal arrived. Behind the scenes, Jill Neville, 
the mother of Gary and Phil, oversaw a major overhaul in her capacity as 
secretary/general manager. “We’re in League Two,” says Flitcroft. “But we try 
and behave like a Championship club.”

While £100,000 was invested in improving the pitch and the dressing rooms were 
revamped, Bury now change in an area modelled on Wembley’s locker rooms, 
featuring 18 individual player “pods”.

As if that wasn’t sufficient, they travel on a Premier League-class team bus – 
“it’s like a moving hotel,” says Flitcroft – but have replaced the longer 
journeys with flights. “People say we must have spent a lot of money but we 
haven’t,” says the manager. “Players took big wage cuts to come here over the 
summer and the chairman has done some very good deals. By talking to airlines 
we’ve been able to get some very cheap flights.”

Unusually, in the often mercenary world of football, Flitcroft’s players 
agreed to sacrifice appearance money for the greater good of squad 
strengthening. “We didn’t think the players would do it but they were 
brilliant,” he says. “We had a group meeting and arranged we’d take the money 
off the players and put it in a pot to invest in new signings. The key thing is 
that everyone’s engaged in this project, we’re in it together.”

Flitcroft’s mother, wife and sons are regular fixtures at matches. “Bury 
market’s really good on a Saturday morning so my mum likes to go shopping 
before coming to the game,” he says. “We’re a real family club. Gates are up by 
1,000 to around 4,500 and there’s an energy between the town and the team.”

Energy is something that, thankfully, he does not lack. Determined to “look 
forward” when tragedy struck and his father, who suffered from anxiety 
depression, took his own life six years ago, Flitcroft was anxious to create 
something his dad would have applaudedand establisheda children’s academy 
called Strikerz <http://www.strikerz.co.uk/>. “We’ve got 31 teams so I’ve got 
quite a lot on,” he says. “Fortunately I don’t need much sleep.”

He does require a means of unwinding – which is where cycling comes in. After 
being advised to “get a bike” following knee trouble Flitcroft proved initially 
unsure. “I was apprehensive of the traffic at first,” he says. “But ever since 
I got my confidence I’ve loved it. I clear my head, get my thoughts into gear 
and my life back on track. And I’ve had no more knee pain.”

Unlike the former Manchester City manager Roberto Mancini, no minder crawls 
behind him in a car, ever ready to offer a lift should he tire or rain threaten 
to wreak havoc with his hair. “I did end up going home in the back of my 
groundsman’s van once when I had a puncture,” Flitcroft says. “But I don’t like 
to give in.”
 