
Ricardo Moniz said before his third match in charge of Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty>, against Crawley at 
Broadfield Stadium on Saturday: “For us it’s about dead or alive.” This may be 
Dutch for a six-pointer, though there are so many clubs scrambling to avoid the 
drop from League One that the English, too, is double Dutch. Crawley’s 2-0 win 
lifts them from 22nd to 19th and drops County from 21st to 22nd.

The position will be clearer after Tuesday, when five of the nine sides trying 
not to join Yeovil in relegation play their match in hand and everyone has two 
to play. County are at home to Preston but their home form is the worst in the 
division, with only one win since beating Crawley 5-3 in October. They ended 
that month in fourth, with 26 points from 14 games, before four wins in 23 saw 
the back of Shaun Derry as manager four weeks ago. The loan system may have 
backfired on them.

Crawley, mid-table at the end of October, changed manager sooner. They had 
gone eight games without a league win when John Gregory stood down for heart 
surgery after Boxing Day. Dean Saunders, who replaced him, needed six games to 
end the run. He is still “interim” manager which, in the nature of the game, 
most are as it happens. In a year and a half since taking Doncaster and Wolves 
down from the Championship he had identified players he would like to work with 
when he next got a chance. “I was able to bring nine players in,” he said last 
week. “Your own players want to do well for you.”

His team as a whole have shown spectacularly erratic form, following a 5-0 
defeat with a 5-1 victory in February, but this win was in line with three in a 
row against fellow strugglers in eight mid-March days and followed another 5-0 
defeat, at Walsall. Moreover three of his own players were at the heart of it, 
two on loan – Andrew Wordsworth in his last game before returning to Ipswich 
and Darren Ward from Swindon – and Kelly Youga in his third game since joining 
from Wimbledon last month.

The goals came in three minutes around the quarter-hour, each from a set-piece 
delivery by Wordsworth’s deft left foot from the right. Youga, the left-back, 
met his corner with a stunning overhead volley. Ward, a centre-back, met his 
free-kick with a strong header. Both were unopposed. Roy Carroll, already 
surprised perhaps to find he was the junior goalkeeper at 37, had no time to 
blink. For the rest of the half Brian Jensen, 39, was the busier keeper, making 
sharp saves to deny headers by Jimmy Spencer and Garry Thompson and a 
late-sighted shot from Gary Jones.

Thereafter Crawley were so well organised that County did not muster a shot. 
In fact the local Tory MP, Henry Smith, who went between the posts for the 
half-time kids’ kickabout, could have stayed there for the second half, despite 
looking pushed to save even his own deposit. If his orange jersey did not 
betray Lib-Dem tendencies, he may have won a few votes for his team.

Crawley were particularly interesting down the right where another Saunders 
signing, Mathias Pogba from Pescara, two years older than his brother Paul, 
shared the flank with Lewis Young, Ashley’s brother, fore and aft of Josh 
Simpson, returning from five-month injury. He is the club’s longest-serving 
player, dating from promotion to the League in 2011. So this was a meeting on 
frantic level terms between the oldest club in the world playing at 
professional level and one of the League’s newest, each emerging from recent 
financial trauma in Middle Eastern hands – been there, done for that – though 
Crawley’s Majeeds were born in Brighton.

“We’ve bounced back again, scoring two great goals from set plays we’ve 
practised,” Saunders said. “We used the wind down the pitch, then managed the 
game really well.” County, who for once were missing Liam Noble through injury 
not suspension (11 matches, three red cards, 13 yellow), escaped relegation on 
the final day last season. Such is their turnover that familiarity may be of no 
benefit. Moniz, his tight, shiny, black curls suggesting a poodle chasing a 
lost cause in water, said: “We don’t create as much the moment Jamal 
[Campbell-Ryce] is injured.” Of his pre-match remark he added: “We are dead 
now. Tomorrow we stand up.” He had also said: “You have to step out of the 
past.” And County have rather a lot of it.
 