
'Times change and we change with them.' Once upon a time a crossword editor 
might well have written that in Latin without feeling that Guardian solvers 
might like a translation of the aphorism 'Tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in 
illis'. No more. Our solvers have very little tolerance these days for any 
Latin much more recherché than 'Veni, vidi, vici' or 'Per Ardua Ad Astra'. And 
none at all for Greek, beyond 'hoi polloi' (incidentally, the Oxford Dictionary 
of English and theGuardian style book <https://www.theguardian.com/styleguide/> 
both say that 'the' before hoi polloi is now entirely acceptable).

But how does a crossword editor decide that once comfortable old friends must 
be put out to grass and what new words or phrases can be accepted, even before 
they have appeared in standard dictionaries? When I started editing these 
puzzles towards the end of the last century TREE used to appear quite regular 
in crosswords, standing for ACTOR and vice versa. This was, of course, a useful 
convention for setters wanting something to produce the letters TREE in a 
solution, for Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, half-sibling to Max Beerbohm (the 
author of the novel Zuleika Dobson) and illegitimate father of a number of 
people, including the film director Carol Reed, was perhaps the leading 
actor-manager of the late Victorian and Edwardian era. But he did die in 1917 
and I would guess that not a lot of people today have heard of him.

So, greatly daring, so far as Guardian crosswords were concerned I ruled that 
an actor was no longer a tree. At about the same time I also removed the hyphen 
from 'e-mail' (those were heady days).

But what about the convention that 'revolutionary' = CHE (executed 1967) or 
'chairman' = MAO (died 1976) or 'golfer = COTTON (died 1987)? And, in sport, 
what golfer under the age of 50 has the slightest idea what a mashie, niblick, 
spoon or stymie is? Or, with football and its modern 4-4-2 or 4-5-1 formations, 
who remembers where a left-winger stood (other than politically)?

Against all this, you won't find that the police tactic of 'kettling', or the 
American practice of 'extraordinary rendition', or the modern obsession with 
'twerking' have yet made it into any printed dictionary. But my instinct is 
that more Guardian solvers know about all three of these than know about Sir 
Henry Cotton.

The memory of Araucaria will for ever be part of the Guardian crossword world. 
The Quiptic setter Moley has drawn my attention to a poem written by his 
remarkable sister, Mary Holtby, who also wrote the poem about Araucaria that I 
quoted last month. Mary is the widow of a former Dean of Chichester. John loved 
Jane Austen, whose novels and their characters regularly appeared in his 
puzzles as a result. This poem by his sister about Pride and Prejudice was 
published (together with many others of hers) in a 1985 'collection of literary 
encapsulations', compiled by the late, great E.O. Parrott, entitled How to 
Become Ridiculously Well-Read in One Evening.

'Marry well' is Bennet tenet: Bingley singly must remain
Since classy Darcy (Lizzy-dizzy) thinks he's far too good for Jane.
Rummy mummy, jaunty aunty, those would drag both gallants down – 
Plus the younger siblings' dribblings over officers in town.
See the specious Wickham trick 'em with his tales of birthright gloom,
See how hideous Lydia's ruin looms before she gets her groom;
Glassy Darcy saves the bacon, shaken out of former pride:
Is he Lizzy's destined love, to shove her prejudice aside? 
Has she clout to flout that matron, patroness of priestly coz
(He whose ludicrous proposing Rosings rules – like all he does)?
Darcy oughter court her daughter, destined his through two decades …
'Mulish, foolish girl, remember Pemberly's polluted shades!'
Dare she share his great estate, or can't Aunt Catherine be defied?
Yes! and ere the bells ring jingly, Bingley too shall claim his bride.

I continue to get complaints from those tackling (or wanting to tackle) the 
monthly Genius puzzle, who are getting error messages such as 'puzzle not 
available' or 'application blocked by security settings'. Last month I said 
that the problem lay more often than not with the latest upgraded, 
security-enhanced version(s) of the Java plug-in that you need to have on your 
computers for the Guardian's Genius and the Observer's Azed puzzles. I 
suggested that you should open Java via your program control panel and add 
www.theguardian.com to the 'exceptions' list in the Java security settings box. 
I should have said add http://www.theguardian.com, as the exception is not 
recognised without the http:// bit.

If that doesn't do the trick, please ask for further and better advice from 
the User Help desk, not from me, for I am now well past the limits of my 
comfort zone on this matter.

The January Genius (No 128 by Boatman) produced only 11 correct entries on the 
first day. Indeed, it is surprising that there were so many in view of the fact 
that the 'special instructions' did not appear with the puzzle until the middle 
of the first day (for which many apologies). In fact there were no less than 
eight correct entries submitted before there was any indication as to how this 
particularly difficult puzzle was supposed to work. Genius solvers are amazing. 
Of these, Dave H was first in, followed by Tony of Demon. There were 233 
entries in total.Congratulations to Aini Zvirgzdins from Duncan, British 
Columbia, Canada, who is the winner of the February Genius puzzle.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 