
Defence was the best form of attack for Michael Valkanis as he began his time 
as caretaker coach atMelbourne City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-city> with a 1-0 win over 
Western Sydney on Friday night.

So often at City this season it has been forwards Tim Cahill, Bruno Fornaroli 
or Fernando Brandan in the limelight but fittingly for Valkanis – a one-time 
Socceroo centre-back – it was the defenders that shone brightest at AAMI Park.

David Squires on ... a true A-League hero: the ball boy who duped Tim Cahill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2017/jan/05/david-squires-on-a-true-a-league-hero-the-ball-boy-who-duped-tim-cahill>
City recorded their first clean sheet since the opening weekend of the season 
against the Wanderers, delighting the new coach.

Right-back Ivan Franjic scored a magnificent winner, earning praise from his 
new boss after enduring an injury-riddled year.

“He’s had his ups and downs with injuries and has worked really hard to find 
form and consistency,” Valkanis said. “He deservedly got a goal today and a 
very good goal.”

The strike was Franjic’s first in almost three years and a maiden goal in a 
City shirt.

There was praise too for the “magnificent” Michael Jakobsen, and for Jose Rose 
who rolled back the years.

Fellow defender Ruon Tongyik looked composed in his first win for the club, 
which came under a coach that, like he, switched from Adelaide to City in the 
off-season.

“I’ve known since he was 15 when he came into the [Adelaide] youth team,” 
Valkanis said.

“We’ve watched him grow and he’s developed under us. He’s a talented defender. 
I don’t think there are so many defenders that are so technically gifted on the 
ball and comfortable on the ball.

“The experience he gained playing in the three or four [City] games ... he 
took that pressure and played with calmness.”

The downside to Tongyik’s emergence was Connor Chapman’s non-selection, but 
Valkanis said the 22-year-old hot prospect still was “a required player”.

“Chappo just missed out from playing this week. It’s something I can’t 
discuss, the conversation we had, it’s personal,” he said. “He’s a very good 
defender. Especially now we’re playing with four [defenders], you need the 
extra central defenders.”
 