
Aberdeen's revival is entirely in tune with that of their bright young 
manager. When Derek McInnes left St Johnstone for Bristol City in October 2011, 
he was viewed as a hot managerial prospect. At that point Owen Coyle's star was 
still shining brightly in England; he had preceded McInnes at St Johnstone.

Subsequent events and struggles at Ashton Gate have vindicated McInnes, but 
when he left Bristol in January 2013, he looked like merely another Scottish 
coach who had toiled in the graveyard that is the Championship. Plenty from 
north of the border had done likewise, with David Moyes a notable exception.

"We kept them up from an impossible situation and in a 15-month period I felt 
that 12 months of that we were all right," McInnes explains. "The club had 
flirted with relegation for a few seasons and I know the belief from some 
people there was that they probably had to go down. It was a really mismanaged 
club. There were four different managers' signings in the one dressing room and 
it needed to sort itself out.

"It shows you how quickly things can change. I felt I had the confidence of 
everybody I worked for down south. Obviously, that changed quickly and ended 
with me losing my job."

On Sunday, as he leads Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen>
 out for their first cup final appearance in 14 years, it will only be natural 
for McInnes to relish the opportunity to settle a Bristol score. "There's an 
element of you where you think why do you want to be successful?" McInnes says. 
"Why do you want to be a winner? Why do you want to win trophies?

"There's always go to be some sort of motivation and you are always trying to 
prove people wrong, rather than trying to prove other people right. Because the 
people who love you, your family and the rest, they are there for you anyway 
whether you win games or lose games. It's always nice to prove people wrong and 
it's important that you never really lose that."

Thus far, McInnes's appointment at Pittodrie has been mutually beneficial. 
After years of underachievement, almost to the sad point where it was accepted, 
Aberdeen are a notable force once again. Amid what is a generally grim scene, 
that is clearly welcome; not least because of the following a successful 
Aberdeen can command. "I'm from a generation that knows what successful 
Aberdeen teams were like," McInnes says.

McInnes has taken his side to second in Scotland's top flight. They are the 
overwhelming favourites to defeat Inverness at Celtic Park, which would end a 
19-year wait for a trophy. "I did feel optimistic during pre-season," says 
McInnes. "I had enough conversations with the boys on an individual basis to 
know there was hunger there and the proper application. We just needed to bring 
consistency.

"Every club fancies their chances of winning a cup. The most pleasing thing 
for me has been the consistency in the league because that was one thing that 
clearly hadn't been good enough for our club for the past wee while."

In what may well be interpreted as a broadside towards Craig Brown, whom 
McInnes replaced, the former West Bromwich Albion captain insists "the whole 
football department needed sorting out" when he took charge last March.

McInnes must also be credited for the form of Peter Pawlett, who has emerged 
as arguably the brightest young talent in Scotland after his switch to a 
central position. Previously, the 23-year-old midfielder had been best known 
for his diving exploits.

"Pawlett we felt had more to offer than just being a wide player," McInnes 
says. "He can play there but has more to offer where he has been playing. In a 
wider area, at times, he let games bypass him.

"My first conversation with Peter, after two weeks in the job, was that he let 
training bypass him. Some days he would catch your eye and other days you just 
wouldn't see him. I said, 'you can't train like that, you've got to be able to 
come in and show yourself.' How you train doesn't always guarantee you a game 
but it can play you out the team. They had to see training was serious at the 
right time and show themselves."

McInnes, similarly, is to the fore once again.
 