
A few years back, a Premier League club found themselves in a moral dilemma 
because one of their academy players was creating problems behind the scenes. 
The boy was talented enough to have a chance of a successful career. But his 
behaviour was erratic and showed no sign of improvement. It went on long enough 
for psychiatric reports to be ordered and the prognosis was that he had a 
disorder – possibly ADHD – that needed medication.

The problem for the club was that some of the drugs were prohibited, meaning 
that if he took them he could not continue as a footballer and would have to be 
cut free. That left the club with two choices: go with the medical opinion or 
try to find another way and, in effect, ignore the professional advice.

They went for the second option, arguing that he was better in their care than 
out of it, and no doubt there will be plenty who agree they had little 
alternative. Equally, it isn’t too difficult to understand why others might 
feel uncomfortable that a football club with a teenage boy in their care should 
be effectively tearing up prescriptions that way. The club wanted to keep it 
quiet but when other authorities heard about it there were questions about 
whether the boy was being cared for properly. For the club, admitting they were 
denying a player important medication was not easy.

Referees’ debate over tackle on Luke Shaw shows limits of technology | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/19/referees-luke-shaw-technology>
Not every case is that complicated, but it is an example of the kind of issues 
that confront clubs when it comes to football’s anti-doping regulations. It is 
complicated at the best of times and the advice generally goes by one simple 
rule: don’t even take a headache pill without checking. Players are given 
advice cards, designed to fit into wallets so they can always be carried 
around. Booklets are sent to parents. There are 24/7 helplines. Go to any 
training ground and the Football Association’s posters will be on the walls. 
One is for a pot of muscle supplements called “Mega Contaminated” to point out 
the dangers of buying without knowledge. Another shows a shirt hanging from a 
dressing-room peg, with “4 Years” emblazoned on the back – a reminder that from 
this season breaking the rules can lead to a four-year ban.

Paddy Kenny’s nine-month ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/sep/07/paddy-kenny-nine-month-ban>, 
having been found with ephedrine in his system, originated from buying a cough 
medicine.Kolo Touré’s six‑month suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/26/kolo-toure-six-month-ban> 
came from taking his wife’s dieting pills and a less-publicised case – though 
probably the most serious of all of those in football – is that of the 
Fleetwood Town player Gerard Kinsella, who allowed his cousin, a taxi driver, 
to give him two injections to relieve the pain of a shoulder injury, without 
properly investigating what was being pumped into his system. It turned out to 
be nandrolone, an anabolic steroid,and Kinsella was banned for two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/25/gerard-kinsella-fleetwood-town-drugs-banned>
.

What there has never been in England is the classic case of a player being 
caught deliberately trying to beat the system with performance-enhancing drugs. 
But it would be naive to think that kind of cheating cannot happen – and maybe 
it already is. There is too much wealth in the industry, too much to gain and 
too many players for too few places, to think football isn’t vulnerable in the 
same way as other sports, and it is certainly worth paying attention when 
someone within the profession is candid enough to admit that, yes, he does fear 
that is what is coming next.

Stephen Hunt has seen, close up, the pressures that exist in football and how 
difficult it is for a young player to make the grade. He has spent 17 years as 
a professional, winning 39 caps for Republic of Ireland in the process, with 
spells at Brentford, Reading, Wolves, Hull and Ipswich. He also writes a column 
for theIrish Independent and in the last one 
<http://www.independent.ie/sport/soccer/stephen-hunt-its-worrying-what-ambitious-youngsters-will-do-to-stand-out-31541510.html>
 he noted the contrast between what it was like when he was starting his own 
career and what it is like in today’s sport, how much harder the younger pros 
work in the gym these days to get an edge and, of course, the vast sums of 
money that can be made from even a moderate career.

“This got me thinking and it got me worrying. There is such pressure to 
succeed these days that I don’t know how much further it can go. Well, I do. 
That’s what I’m worried about,” Hunt wrote. “I worry that things will change. 
That players will decide they’ve done the gym work like everyone else, but they 
still need more. They still need something to make them stand out. We’ve seen 
in cycling, athletics, rugby and other sports where that can take you. Football 
isn’t a special case.”

If any of this sounds like scaremongering, it is worth trying to imagine the 
pressures for, say, a player aged 17 to 20 when everything is so tantalisingly 
close but there is still the fear of failure and all the normal issues such as 
injuries, loss of form and – don’t underestimate this one – the footballer’s 
insecurity.

Kinsella’s story is the case in point. He was once just a normal 
football-obsessed kid – “chasing a dream” is how he remembers it – in the same 
Everton youth team as Ross Barkley. Yet his body failed him and, looking 
through the FA’s paperwork into the case, it doesn’t need a genius to draw a 
link to the line detailing how a “woeful catalogue of serious injuries has 
emasculated his short career”.

David Moyes released him at Everton after three injury-ravaged years as a 
professional. Plymouth gave Kinsella a chance to resurrect his career but a 
knee injury ended with his contract being terminated. Kinsella did not have a 
club throughout the entire 2011-12 season and, at the age of 20, was suffering 
from depression. Then the same demoralising grind of injury and rehabilitation 
kicked in at Fleetwood. He dislocated his shoulder, for a fifth time, and 
feared it needed a third operation and another long layoff. Kinsella saw his 
career slipping away: the glamour, the riches, the lifestyle. At the FA hearing 
he described what happened next as “desperation and stupidity”. Undoubtedly, 
the desperation came first.

There was a bit of that as well from Touré. He was 30 when he was banned, an 
experienced pro who had appeared in an anti-doping film, but he had a problem 
controlling his weight and the doctors who saw him as part of the FA’s 
disciplinary hearing concluded he was “obsessed” with a “misplaced perception 
that he was fat”. Touré played for Manchester City, one of six centre-halves 
competing for two positions, and in football it can be a big deal being a few 
pounds overweight, particularly at a club with so much competition for places, 
with the newspapers jammed full of stories about the next best thing who might 
be signing.

Touré’s thinking was so badly blurred he took the pills, containing 
bendroflumethiazide, without making the relevant checks and relying on 
fourth-hand information. The FA’s report details how he simply “asked his wife 
to ask her friend, who asked a receptionist, who asked a doctor”.Touré was so 
desperate to get an edge he “repeatedly, and for some time, took medication 
contained in a medicine bottle labelled only [with] a white sticky label on 
which was printed ‘water tablets x21’. Frankly, they could have been anything.”

How FA’s new rule can wipe the floor with football’s blatant deceivers | 
Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/12/rivaldo-rule-football-welling-sahr-kabba-feigning-injury>
These are rare cases but it is certainly startling that a recent study, 
commissioned by Uefa, showed that 68 out of 879 players competing in the 
Champions League, the Europa League and two European Championships, from 2008 
to 2013, gave urine tests that indicated possible steroid abuse, and that would 
have triggered a full investigation under new rules brought in this month.

Hunt’s point is this: how far will the modern-day player go to get an edge? 
And it is a relevant question when it is harder than ever to make the grade. 
There is more money in the game than ever before and, in turn, a culture where 
there are far too many mums and dads, and all sorts of other relatives, banking 
on it setting them up for life. Agents, too. Their industry is no longer 
regulated and it is not hugely encouraging, to say the least, that a senior FA 
executive privately described the business recently as turning into “the wild 
west”.

Those agents – and I’ve spoken to one or two in recent weeks who come across 
as wannabe gangsters – are increasingly scouring academies to get the players 
as early as possible, sometimes at primary school age. They stand to make a 
great deal if these players eventually make it; alternatively, they stand to 
lose out if the opposite happens. Who knows how far they will go to help ensure 
they get their payday and how impressionable some of these kids, chasing the 
dream, might be?

If anyone needs Sir Alex’s media training call, then it’s José

Sir Alex Ferguson has apparently developed a strange habit in retirement, 
whereby he watches other managers’ press conferences and then rings them up if 
he feels, perhaps, they should have said something different or their body 
language was wrong. “I love it,” he explains. “But there are times when I’m 
watching and I’ll think: ‘Ach, don’t say that.’”

Alan Pardew – a manager Ferguson rates highly – took one call when he was in 
his last few months at Newcastle United telling him he needed to start showing 
his abrasive side and “be Alan Pardew again”.

Nigel Pearson was another one Ferguson dialled, the advice being that he 
looked too relaxed at a time when Leicester City were stranded at the bottom of 
the league. Pearson was reminded that the club’s supporters probably wanted to 
see the manager was concerned. From that point onwards, Ferguson says, Pearson 
changed his demeanour.

Whether it was good advice, bearing in mind Pearson’s infamous attack on an 
“ostrich” journalist and subsequent apology, is another matter. It is certainly 
amazing, however, to see the hold Ferguson still has over many managers.

One member of the League Managers Association reminds me that the organisation 
once shifted its meeting to Manchester United’s training ground purely so that 
Ferguson could attend (Ferguson then left early, apparently, to go to see 
Peterborough, then managed by his son Darren, play).

But would Ferguson ring José Mourinho? Probably not, but if anyone can get 
through to Chelsea’s manager it would be appreciated if they gave it a go. 
Mourinho press conferences are starting to border on tedious and a man with his 
charisma and qualities should never be in that position.

Bundesliga all too easy for Bayern

Robert Lewandowski’s five-goal haul against Wolfsburg, all in the space of 
nine minutes and featuring the fastest hat-trick in Bundesliga history, was a 
remarkable demonstration of centre-forward play. Yet what does it say for 
German football that the top team can thrash the side in third that way? Bayern 
won the league by 19 points last season and 25 the year before that. After 
seven games this season, they have an immaculate record of wins, with 23 goals 
scored and only three conceded. We all know what happens from this point 
onwards. The Bundesliga has many things going for it but the most important 
aspect – a real sense of competition – is not one.
 