
Someone should have told me I needed to work on my Cockney accent. Nearly 
everyone in theMary Poppins cast was a Brit but no one said anything. I was 
given an Irish coach whose Cockney was much better than mine. Years later I 
asked Julie [Andrews]: “Why didn’t you tell me?” She said it was because I was 
working so hard.

I wanted to be a magician. From an early age I’d stand in front of a mirror 
for hours practising my sleight of hand.

I’m married to someone half my age. We learn from each other. She’s a singer 
and a dancer

Attitude is in the genes. I’m the kind of person who gets out of the right 
side of the bed. I’m full of ideas and make a list of the things I want to do. 
Bringing up my family I noticed two of my kids were like me, but the other two 
woke up grumpy. I’m not sure that’s something you can change.

I am hungry for contemporaries. It’s disturbing that there aren’t many people 
who can remember what I do. I have a few people I drop by on – likeCarl Reiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/31/dick-van-dyke-carl-reiner-hollywood-legends-in-their-90s>
, my mentor and idol, he’s 94. AndMel Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mel-brooks>. We mostly talk about how the 
past affects what we’re doing in the present. We see the mistakes and the roads 
not taken. There’s very little nostalgia involved.

I had no idea we were poor as a kid. I grew up in the Great Depression so 
nobody had much of anything. My dad was a travelling salesman and told a good 
joke. His side of the family all had a light touch when it came to life; I 
think I inherited that.

Absence does not make the heart grow fonder. My first wife and I lived apart 
for a year – I was working in LA and she was in Arizona. The geographical 
separation didn’t work.

It took me a while to figure out alcohol had to go. I was shy in my 20s. I had 
trouble relating to strangers and I found I’d loosen up with a Martini. Then it 
got a hold of me.

I’m married to someone half my age. We learn from each other. Her generation 
questions everything. Arlene [Silver] had trepidation about marrying someone so 
much older, but it became inevitable. She’s a singer and a dancer and we 
perform together, which we love.

You should have done as much unlearning as learning by the time you’re in your 
40s. Growing up you get your head stuffed with a lot of things that aren’t all 
true, and you have to rid yourself of some.

You can’t just sit around. A lot of older people bemoan that they can’t do 
what they once did. But you have to find new things to replace them.

My house looks like it’s been attacked by clowns. I’m always putting things 
off, like tidying up. I’m a terrible procrastinator. My wife’s the same. She’s 
kind of turned the place into Disneyland. She has balloons and characters 
everywhere and is building a toy guesthouse outside.

I would like to live to be 100. I’m working on it. I dance every day and go to 
the gym. And emotionally, I don’t feel old at all.

My Lucky Life In And Out of Show Business by Dick Van Dyke is published by 
John Blake at £8.99. To order a copy for £7.37, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-lucky-life-in-and-out-of-show-business.html>
 