
A wet and at times uncomfortable evening in Shropshire for Chelsea ended with 
José Mourinho’s team squeezing into the quarter-finals. Didier Drogba continues 
his refusal to be ignored on his return to the club, scoring the first goal for
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and making himself a 
nuisance for the winner, which came when Jermaine Grandison turned the ball 
past his own goalkeeper, Jayson Leutwiler, with nine minutes remaining.

Mourinho will be relieved to return home with this game safely navigated as he 
prepares for Queens Park Rangers’ visit on Saturday before the Champions League 
game with Maribor and the trip to Liverpool on 8 November.

Understandably he picked out the 36-year-old Drogba for playing a second match 
in two days after he starred in Sunday’s 1-1 draw at Manchester United. 
Mourinho, though, was clear he expected more from some.

“If players who play 90 minutes two days ago were fantastic tonight, I expect 
people who are not playing a lot to raise the level to create me problems. I 
love problems of choices [in selection]. And it is easy to choose my team for 
Saturday,” he said.

Pushed if André Schürrle and Mo Salah, who started against Shrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury>, were two players he wanted 
to give him a headache, he said: “Yeah.”

Mourinho said normally Diego Costa could play against QPR following a 
hamstring problem but of Drogba being able to make it a third match in seven 
days he said: “We will see. His character is bigger than his body. His 
character is stronger than his body. So what he did today was maybe because of 
his character and not because of his body. So let’s see the reaction. This is 
what makes players special and if I was a kid player and I play with this guy 
on my side and I am 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 what can I wish more? So for the kids it 
has to be a privilege and they have to learn by example.”

“Yes I was worried when they equalised. Shrewsbury put up a great fight. They 
are what the cups are all about.”

The rain came down before kick-off and continued to soak the players during a 
first half that unfolded predictably. Shrewsbury were breathless and in the 
visitors’ faces, while Chelsea preferred to wait and patiently prod and probe.

Two early corners won by Chelsea and taken by Schürrle came to nothing before 
Shrewsbury claimed their own via James Collins following a breakaway attack. 
When the ball arced in from the left Petr Cech did well to save a Nathaniel 
Knight-Percival header.

These teams last met 11 years ago. Then, Chelsea won 4-0 in an FA Cup tie with 
a side who included Gianfranco Zola, Emmanuel Petit, Graeme Le Saux, Frank 
Lampard and John Terry, who as a substitute here was the sole survivor from the 
encounter at old Gay Meadow.

The side named by Mourinho had a debutant – the 18-year-old Danish defender 
Andreas Christensen – and was led by Drogba, who showed flashes of his class 
throughout.

Micky Mellon initially selected the same side who defeated Portsmouth at the 
weekend, before James Wesolowski was replaced by Liam Lawrence before the start.

Drogba, who scored at Old Trafford, ended the half again finding the net but 
was adjudged offside.

The ground’s capacity had been specially extended to 10,210 with 1,720 of 
these a travelling support who were celebrating three minutes into the second 
half. Schürrle found Salah and when he slickly played in Drogba this time the 
Ivorian did score, leaving Leutwiler no chance.

Yet in Ryan Woods, a diminutive 20-year-old midfielder, Shrewsbury had a 
player who was willing to try to run the game. It was Woods who won the 
free-kick from which Connor Goldson might have equalised. Lawrence floated the 
ball towards Chelsea’s penalty spot and when it broke to the captain his shot 
ricocheted around the area to wrong-foot Cech before going wide.

While the score remained only 1-0 Shrewsbury had a chance of taking the tie 
into extra time. And, after Mellon’s introduction of Andy Mangan for Collins on 
75 minutes, that was were the contest was headed. Lawrence pinged in a corner 
from the left and after some scrappy play Mangan smashed home.

Mourinho had seen enough. Off came Salah and Mikel John Obi for Willian and 
Nemanja Matic. Seconds later Chelsea moved downfield and with Drogba in close 
attendance Grandison was the author of the dreaded own goal.
 