
The new Genius is now available at http://www.theguardian.com/crossword/genius

The solutions to last month's puzzle can be viewed at 
http://www.theguardian.com/crossword/solutions

Congratulations to Bob Taylor from Devon who is December's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any comments or queries, 
please send them to crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk

148 and counting at the time of writing, which is about half as many as usual 
entries for a genius puzzle competition. No doubt this is mainly due to the 
difficulty of Monk's theme, but it may also be that many people spent less time 
at their computers than usual over the holiday season. I thought it was the 
hardest of the year and several solvers - even those who completed it - 
appeared to agree. A couple of you even wrote in to check that the instructions 
had been printed correctly and one remarked that he had to use a mirror to 
check he had typed his solution correctly. I think the idea is that the puzzles 
start reasonably friendly manner in January and by December they are very hard. 
This month's puzzle by Paul should be easier - but we all know they're only 
easy if you get the answer. We shall see.

Earlier in the month I recall reading an article in which the author - forgive 
me; extensive trolling of the web has not produced the article - discussed the 
ways in which our identity politics is now so extreme that the most unlikely 
groups are calling themselves 'a community'. Often this is so that 'they' can 
then take offence at some or other slight and, presumably, exact a price from 
those doing the slurring. Now I am sure this is not the case for crossword 
solvers - but are we a community? This was brought home to me this month as my 
mailbag began to swell with letters from subscribers to the Times crossword 
site who wanted to know what I was going to do about it. Apparently our rival 
has had some difficulties with administering its crossword service. Of course 
there is nothing I could - or would - do. All journalists live in fear (or 
perhaps just loathing) of the consequences of schadenfreude and my first 
response on hearing the complaints was, there but for the grace of God... 
Crosswords are difficult enough in print; it is too easy to get things wrong on 
line. But my more enduring impression of these letters was that they assumed 
that as a solver, as a lover of crosswords, I would naturally share their view 
that 'something should be done'. There was a presumption that we are a 
'community', that we have a collective interest and that this interest could be 
best represented by mobilising the constituency in the proper way.

Which was interesting. I am sure the difficulties at the Times are only 
temporary. I am not sure they are any of my business. What I would say is that 
I like my politics as much as the next person, but in matters of crosswords I 
fear I belong to the 'let a thousand flowers blossom' school. Otherwise what 
next? A Royal Crossword Society with a constitution and a president and a list 
of patrons all with a fine assembly of letters after their names? An Act of 
Parliament, a governing body and sanctions against those who 'break the rules'? 
Heaven forbid! In much prefer the formulation of James C. Scott in Seeing Like 
a State. He concludes his stunningly original book on the nature of knowledge 
and its relationship to our political institutions like this: "Finally, that 
most characteristic of human institutions, language, is the best model: a 
structure of meaning and continuity that is never still and ever open to the 
improvisations of all its speakers."

Last month I asked for feedback. Many thanks to all those who wrote in. 
Naturally I lack space to do justice to them all. One which surprised me was a 
complaint about Araucaria's Christmas Special (22 December) which concluded 
with the memorable line, "The clues are supposed to help the solver, not simply 
to parade the setter's ingenuity." The idea was that once the solver had 
cracked the theme (novels by Thomas Hardy) the number of letters was sufficient 
to solve the clues. The clues themselves were irrelevant. Of course I disagree. 
Other correspondents took the view that "These puzzles must be fiendishly 
difficult to compile, but they are a joy to pit your wits against." Or, as a 
solver in France put it, "I have my favourite setters and, like so many other 
solvers, am thrilled when I see an alphabet Araucaria or a huge, holiday theme 
puzzle but I am grateful to each and every setter."

And now I'm going to ask for more feedback. Well, not feedback exactly. I'm 
working on a brief history of the Guardian crossword - we're coming up to 80 
years - which will be published by Guardian Books towards the end of 2008. I 
have access to all the puzzles and so on from the early days ; what I lack is 
readers' anecdotes and memories. Also stories of who the early - uncredited - 
setters were. The first puzzle was published on 5 January 1929. If anyone has 
stories - particularly pre-war - and wants to share them with me, I would be 
very grateful. Please use this address: info@sandybalfour.com.

A prosperous and peaceful New Year to you all.
 