
Heard the one about the teenager who tried to talk his father out of letting 
him travel nearly 6,000 miles to have a go at becoming a professional 
footballer? That teenager is now an adult and very grateful that his dad urged 
him to see how far his talent could take him. West Ham fans should be grateful 
too, because if Alain Payet had not convinced his son Dimitri to resurrect a 
buried dream, then the Hammers would probably not beenjoying a fantastic 
Premier League season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/dimitri-payet-west-ham-china> 
and heading to Manchester United on Sunday as many people’s favourites to 
progress to the FA Cup semi-finals.

Dimitri Payet is in the running for player of the year but his talent might 
only ever have been celebrated by fans in Réunion, a small tropical island in 
the Indian Ocean, 1,000 miles east of mainland Africa and 5,700 miles from 
France, of which it is an overseasdépartement. When he was 17, Payet intended 
to stay on his island forever after a dispriting first venture to France.

West Ham stun 10-man Everton as Dimitri Payet seals fightback win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/05/everton-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
He was 12 when he left his family to become a trainee at Le Havre and 16 when 
he returned home crushed at being told he was not good enough for a club that 
was then in the French second division. So whenNantes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nantes> invited him back to France a year 
later, he was dead set on doing the rejecting.

“I thought the dream was over,” Payet says. “I had spent four years at Le 
Havre and when they told me I wasn’t good enough for the second division, it 
hit me hard. I didn’t even want to hear talk about me ever going back to 
France. I was quite traumatised by the experience and the decision not to keep 
me. I just wanted to stay on my island and play football there.”

Looking back, the 28-year-old understands why he was let go. “I don’t blame Le 
Havre,” he says. “Back then I wasn’t an easy person to handle. I was always one 
of the first to mess around. So there were a lot of reasons why my adventure 
stopped at that point.”

Another of the reasons given by Le Havre was that he was too frail. But that 
changed when he went back to Réunion and, after joining local club 
Saint-Pierroise at 16, became the youngest player in the island’s top division. 
“The season I had playing as a kid against men in Réunion toughened me up a lot 
and taught me, basically, how to cope with hits,” he says.

Physically, he was ready to return to France, which is why Nantes offered him 
a route back. But mentally he was not prepared to make another trip. “When a 
second chance came along I argued about it with my dad and my uncle Jean-Marc 
and they convinced me I should try my luck again. And they were right. I 
accepted for my dad, in particular, because football is his passion and he 
never got the opportunity to go beyond Réunion. Having that idea in my head 
helped me stay strong in Nantes.”

His progress at Nantes was followed by millions because Payet was one of four 
trainees chosen as the subject of a five-part French TV documentary tracking 
the lives of aspiring footballers at the club over 10 months in 2005-06. “That 
documentary is important to me today because it reminds me what I was like 10 
years ago and shows how far hard work has taken me in that time,”says Payet, 
the only one of the group to make it to the top.

As a nod not to one of West Ham’s nicknames but to Nantes’ record of nurturing 
youngsters such as Henri Michel, Didier Deschamps and Marcel Desailly, the show 
was calledL’Académie du Foot. Viewers saw a softly spoken but still 
hot-tempered Payet receive an education on and off the pitch, including in the 
classroom as he took a baccalaureate in sales and marketing and did an 
internship at a Lacoste boutique.

On the pitch he quickly emerged as the star pupil, even though he sabotaged 
his first chance to make his league debut when he was sent off in a reserve 
match for driving his head into an opponent who had slapped him.

In the fourth episode of the show, however, Nantes’ first-team manager, Serge 
Le Dizet, selected Payet for a game against Bordeaux and gave him advice that 
many managers, including West Ham’s Slaven Bilic, have given him since. “Just 
do what you’re capable of doing,” said Le Dizet. “That’s what you came for, 
isn’t it? So play. If you come on, go past people, probe, help us push [them] 
backwards.”

Payet made little impact in seven minutes against Bordeaux but in his next 
match, against Metz, he scored with his first shot in Ligue 1. “It was magic, 
it transported me to another world,” he said on the programme as he started to 
change from reality TV curio into an international star.

Payet became a mainstay of Nantes’ first team the following season. His five 
goals in 33 appearances were not enough to save the club from relegation but 
did earn him a £3m move to St-Étienne. It was clear now that he was a player of 
rare artfulness, with exquisite touch, brazen trickery and a grand vision. The 
way he has almost taunted opponents with his talent in the Premier League this 
season makes it no surprise to learn that his idol was Ronaldinho. “People say 
he enjoyed humiliating defenders but he was always efficient,” he says of the 
Brazilian. “The reason I’m a fan is because he was able to put on a show while 
remaining effective and helping his team to win.”

There is an infectious joy in the way that Ronaldinho and Payet play. “I still 
try to treat football as a game even if there are now other considerations at 
stake, especially economic ones,” says Payet. “I try to put on a show while 
being effective because the spectators come to be entertained by beautiful 
play.”

West Ham fans prefer to compare their new hero to a former France great. 
“Super Slav’s Man, he’s better than Zidane” goes the chant among the Upton Park 
faithful. A nice sentiment but not strictly accurate the player says. “That 
might be the fans’ opinion but as someone who saw Zidane play many times, I 
wouldn’t say I’m better than him.”

Payet was probably too inconsistent to bear comparison with the greats until 
last season. For much of the 2011‑12 season he was kept out of the Lille team 
by an on-loan former West Ham darling, Joe Cole. Lille had signed Payet to 
replace Gervinho, who was bought by Arsenal, because he had been mostly 
brilliant at St-Étienne, though there were inconsistent spells and a period in 
the wilderness as punishment for butting one of his team-mates, Blaise Matuidi, 
during an argument over a pass that never came.

That is not what West Ham fans are referring to when they sing about him being 
better than Zidane. They are referring tohis displays this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/05/everton-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
, a continuation of his outstanding form for Marseille last term. Payet 
sparkled as Marseille hinted at regaining past glories under Marcelo Bielsa and 
the Argentinian made sure he got the best out of a player who needs careful 
prodding. “Bielsa left me out of the squad for a game last season but that was 
a way of making sure I kept focused and didn’t get complacent,” says Payet. “I 
think he was right because last season I was very consistent.”

It was West Ham’s luck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/west-ham-dimitri-payet-marseille>
 that financial problems forced Marseille to sell their best players. But why 
only the east London club were shrewd enough to pay the £10m required to lure 
Payet is a mystery. Everyone, meanwhile, has benefited from that debate Payet 
had with his father and uncle 11 years ago. “Without that conversation I 
wouldn’t be here now so I can never thank him enough,” he says.
 