
Dimitri Payet has signed a new long-term contract at West Ham. The 28-year-old 
French playmaker was only seven months into a five-year deal having joined from 
Marseille for £10.75m last summer but had been a reported £38m target for an 
unnamed Chinese club.

Such has been Payet’s impact for West Ham, they have moved to ensure he will 
not be easily lured elsewhere. A statement on their website said: “West Ham 
United are delighted to announce that Dimitri Payet has signed a new long-term 
contract with the club.

“The outstanding France playmaker, who has made a huge impact in claret and 
blue, has penned a deal until the summer of 2021 … and is delighted to have 
pledged his long-term future to the club.”

The West Ham manager, Slaven Bilic, had earlier on Thursday talked of his 
desire to keep Payet as an integral part of the squad. “Both parties have the 
intention to stay at West Ham. When you are playing like he is playing, many 
clubs are showing interest but we are going to do everything we can to keep him 
with us,” he said.

“Every player has a price but the good thing is he is happy at West Ham, we 
are more than happy with him and I hope – and I really think – that he will 
play with us for a long, long time.”

Payet will be in the squad that travels to Norwich on Saturday but Bilic has a 
host of new injury worries after Tuesday’s extra-time FA Cup replay win over 
Liverpool.

The defenders Winston Reid and Joey O’Brien are to undergo scans on hamstring 
injuries, while the midfielder Cheikhou Kouyaté will miss the trip as he was 
knocked unconscious during the 2-1 victory. The centre-half James Tomkins will 
also miss out after a scan showed the calf injury he suffered at Southampton 
last Saturday will sideline him for five weeks.

“We will know how long Winston and Joey will be out after the scans,” Bilic 
added. “With Tomkins out, we are without three defenders, so in that department 
it’s not a great situation. Kouyaté is OK, he is doing well but because of the 
rules he cannot play because he was unconscious.

“We have a few other knocks but to be fair we have a good feeling. Physically 
and psychologically Liverpool was a long game – 120 minutes drains you. But 
when you go through, it’s almost like pre-season – you don’t feel fatigue. You 
feel good and you are looking forward to the next game.”
 