
Given Divock Origi’s family background, it is no surprise that the 19-year-old 
has already made it to the top. The striker signed by Liverpool for £10m in the 
summer and then promptly loaned back to Lille is preparing to make his first 
appearance on Merseyside against Everton in theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> on Thursday.

Yet the speed of his development has come as a shock, even to his father Mike. 
Known as Mike Okoth during his own glittering career, Origi Sr became the first 
Kenyan player to feature in any top European league when he moved to play for 
the Belgian club KV Oostende in 1992.

A striker, he played in three Africa Cup of Nations finals for the Harambee 
Stars and spent more than a decade in the Jupiler League before choosing to 
settle in the country after his career came to end. Kenya’s loss has very much 
been Belgium’s gain as in the summer Origi became their youngest goalscorer 
with hiswinning strike against Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/22/belgium-russia-world-cup-2014-group-h-match-report>
 in the group stages of the World Cup.

“He has been part of the Belgian youth system from the age of 14 and has 
played in all of the various categories up to the senior team,” reflects Mike.

“It was his decision, he had to choose what he wants. He decided to choose 
Belgium over Kenya and I support him in what he did. It is where he feels 
comfortable and grew up his whole life. It is what he thought was best.”

There is an African proverb that states: “when you follow the path of your 
father, you learn to walk like him.” Origi Jr certainly seems to have taken 
this to heart as he blazed through the Belgian youth system that has produced 
so many world-class players in recent years.

Starting out at local club Waimes and then Park Houthalen until he turned 
nine, he was then snapped up by Racing Genk’s youth academy. Growing up in the 
same system that produced Belgium team-mates Steven Defour, Thibaut Courtois 
and Kevin De Bruyne, Origi earned a reputation as one of the country’s 
brightest prospects and was signed byLille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> at the age of 15.

Within three years, he had made his debut for Les Dogues’ first team and 
scored within six minutes of coming on as a substitute against Troyes in Ligue 
1. At the age of 17 year and 10 months, Origi became the second youngest 
goalscorer in the history of the French league.

By the start of the next season, he had become first choice under new coach 
René Girard and was often paired up front with the former Chelsea striker 
Salomon Kalou. Five league goals as Lille ended the season in third place were 
enough to persuade the Belgium coach Marc Wilmots to hand Origi his senior 
debut in the World Cup qualifier against Serbia.

The serious achilles injury suffered by the Aston Villa striker Christian 
Benteke in March created an opportunity and despite being courted by Kenya, he 
was named in Wilmots’ World Cup squad. Most pundits expected the 19-year-old to 
be taken for the experience but he came on for Romelu Lukaku in the opening 
match in Brazil against Algeria and then against Russia.

His winning strike in the Maracanã with just two minutes of the match 
remaining made Origi Belgium’s youngest goalscorer at the finals and the first 
player of Kenyan descent to achieve the same feat, a milestone not lost on his 
father.

“It was a very proud moment to see my son play and above all score in Brazil,” 
says Mike. “I was there and as a former player, I know that is the tournament 
every player wants to play in. I did not get the chance, Kenya never has but 
Divock did. For all the sacrifices he made, it was a reward for the hard work.”

Origi’s displays did not go unnoticed. After he was preferred to Lukaku for 
both thelast-16 victory over USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/01/belgium-usa-world-cup-2014-last-16-match-report>
 and then thequarter-final defeat to Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/05/argentina-belgium-world-cup-2014-quarter-final-match-report>
, Liverpool followed up their earlier interest by agreeing a deal that loaned 
back to Lille for the season.

Given Brendan Rodgers’ headaches in attack this season following the departure 
of Luis Suárez to Barcelona, the manager may be wishing he had done things 
differently. Fans on Merseyside will be granted their first chance to see Origi 
in action on Thursday, albeit against Liverpool’s fiercest rivals.

“It is his chance to feel the atmosphere of the English fans and know what 
awaits,” says his father. “It is good exposure for him and he will get 
experience facing an African great like Samuel Eto’o. Playing in the Europa 
League this season has been fantastic for his development.”

After breaking records throughout his fledgling career, Origi should take it 
all in his stride.
 