
After only four games of a two-year loan at Genoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa>, Manchester City’s Olivier Ntcham 
is already beginning to sparkle. The 19-year-old has swapped performing before 
the modest crowds watching Patrick Vieira’s elite development squad last season 
for the 36,000-capacity Stadio Luigi Ferraris and a starting place in Gian 
Piero Gasperini’s side.

Despite having never made a first-team appearance in City colours, Ntcham is 
mixing it with the aristocrats ofSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>, as he did in Sunday’s 
2-0 defeat to a Juventus led by Paul Pogba, the high-class midfielder Ntcham is 
drawing comparisons with in Italy.

Ntcham, who like Pogba is French, arrived at the Etihad Stadium from Le Havre 
in 2012. Ntcham was a vital part of Vieira’s under-21 side who won last season’s
inaugural Premier League International Cup 
<http://www.premierleague.com/en-gb/news/news/2014-15/may/090515-manchester-city-win-premier-league-international-cup.html>
. He played every minute en route to the 1-0 defeat of Porto in May’s final, 
which was staged at the City Football Academy and settled by Kelechi 
Iheanacho’s fifth-minute finish.

Manchester City sink Sunderland by half-time to reach fourth round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/22/sunderland-manchester-city-capital-one-cup-match-report>
Ntcham, who wore the No8 shirt for City, is a natural in Steven Gerrard’s 
position at Liverpool. Despite still being a teenager he already appears a 
powerhouse, a quality that is balanced by mobility, the ability to play the 
simple or clever ball, and a natural instinct to ghost into the penalty area at 
the right time to score.

He is also a flexible footballer, and is proving so for Genoa. In the defeat 
to Juve at the Stadio Luigi, Ntcham again showed how his talent is being honed 
by competing in Serie A. Genoa, who finished sixth last season, went down to 10 
men when the defender Armando Izzo was sent off before the break. At this stage 
a Juve side who featured Pogba, Mario Mandzukic, Álvaro Morata, Gianluigi 
Buffon and Giorgio Chiellini were winning 1-0. A second-half Pogba penalty 
confirmed victory for the visitors yet Ntcham was Genoa’s finest performer, 
operating in the No10 role.

This has been his position for three of the club’s four matches this campaign. 
In the opening game Ntcham played wide right when Genoa lost 1-0 at Palermo, 
and that display also drew plaudits. He was similarly impressive in the 2-0 win 
over Verona and the 1-0 defeat at Fiorentina, when the former France Under-16 
captain was stationed in the hole behind the strikers, Goran Pandev and Diego 
Capel.

Following the victory over Verona, Ntcham tweeted: “Merci a tous pour votre 
soutien et vos messages. Thanks all for your support. Work hard play hard.”

This message was to fans and the wider calcio cognoscenti, who believe a 
genuine talent has landed in their game. Gasperini, who has a penchant for 
harnessing promising young footballers, is a keen admirer. He says: “Ntcham is 
an unbelievable player. He’s a surprise for me – Olivier is only 19, but plays 
like a leader. He will become a top player.”

Genoa’s president, Enrico Preziosi, adds: “I’ve been in the world of football 
26 years and I’ve never seen a similar player at his age. He has an unlimited 
potential, and is really a fantastic talent.”

The view at Genoa is Ntcham could fly as high as Pogba, who was also at Le 
Havre before he arrived at Juventus via Manchester United. Pogba’s club are now 
keeping tabs on Ntcham, as are Internazionale, whom he came close to joining 
before City.

Ntcham chose Manchester ahead of Milan after City persuaded his family of the 
attractions of the club, paying Le Havre just over €1m (£730,000). Genoa have 
an option to buy Ntcham, who signed a fresh five-year contract in the summer 
and whose loan expires in June 2017, though City have safeguarded their 
investment by inserting a clause which effectively allows veto over any 
prospective permanent deal.

Following the loss to Juve, on Tuesday Ntcham tweeted: “Every game is a 
fight... Forza @GenoaCFC.”

It sums up his attitude well and it sums up why he has been able to move 
effortlessly from under-21 football to the big time. And, it points to why City 
are observing him closely at his new home.

During the last transfer window they had been intent on signing Pogba before 
dropping their interest. City could yet revive this. Yet as they continue to 
watch Ntcham’s rise they may not need to. The French schemer would cost City 
nothing more and save them spending around €100m for Pogba.
 