
There’ll be no club versus country tug of war over Timmy Chandler’s services 
this summer, but his coach atEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> says the defender’s 
call up to the USMNT’s Gold Cup squad is “not a great situation.” And after 
speaking with Jürgen Klinsmann before the squad was named, he admits there was 
nothing he could do about it.

Thomas Schaaf has questioned the impact of a packed summer schedule on 
international players such as Chandler. In any four-year cycle, the men’s 
summer includes a World Cup, the Olympics, the European championship, a Copa 
América, the Confederations Cup and two Gold Cups. (Africa and Asia hold their 
tournaments during the northern hemisphere winter.)

While that cycle leaves every second summer free for the majority of European 
international footballers, a US player like Chandler could find himself without 
an extended summer break for the foreseeable future.

Last summer was spent at the World Cup. This summer he will be stateside for 
the North American tournament. Next summer, he could be in back in Brazil for 
the Olympics and the summer after, darting back and forth across the Atlantic 
for the Gold and Confederations Cups. Then the cycle begins again.

Chandler’s USMNT team-mate Fabian Johnson recently told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/05/usmnts-fabian-johnson-interview-i-always-felt-american-i-just-grew-up-in-germany>
 that the World Cup had been been disruptive to his preparations for the 
Bundesliga season with Borussia Mönchengladbach, and that it wasn’t until he 
returned from the winter break that he felt he had caught up.


USMNT's Fabian Johnson interview: 'I always felt American, I just grew up in 
Germany'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/05/usmnts-fabian-johnson-interview-i-always-felt-american-i-just-grew-up-in-germany>
The Gold Cup has the potential to be even more disruptive. If the US makes the 
final, players like Chandler and Johnson will have barely two weeks to prepare 
for theBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
season. Those involved in the second division will miss the opening round 
altogether. By comparison, there was a gap of more than seven weeks between 
their World Cup exit and the beginning of the new season in Germany.

“The World Cup finishes earlier,” said Schaaf after Saturday’s draw at Hertha 
Berlin. “So you certainly have more time to prepare than after the 
confederation tournaments.”

When asked if he had discouraged Chandler from attending the tournament, 
Schaaf replied: “I spoke to [Jürgen] Klinsmann and the situation is really just 
that if there’s a request for a player, we have to accommodate that. We have to 
try to manage this as best we can, so that we nevertheless always look and see 
when there’s an opportunity for rest and recuperation.

“Between [the Holland and Germany friendlies] and then going to the Gold Cup, 
Timmy will have a two week holiday.

“It’s certainly not a great situation. He didn’t have a great preparation last 
year and this year won’t be much different. So it’s difficult for the boys to 
have a break, to regain their strength, and then on the other hand be available 
for the team, the club.”

It’s a club-centric – and Euro-centric – view, and one that gets shorter 
shrift with each passing year. Even Australian players can these days fly home 
from Europe for international matches with a minimum of fuss. But what are the 
alternatives for the North American competition?

Holding the Gold Cup during the northern winter might be easier for German 
coaches to stomach, given their league’s winter break, but wouldn’t go down 
well in England, Spain or Italy.

Moving it to World Cup years is obviously out of the question, and holding it 
in Olympic years, as the European Championship is, would mean it could only be 
played once every four years. That would starve fans west of the Atlantic of 
opportunities to see their best players in action, and this at a time when Fifa 
is trying to extended the game’s footprint.

The European leagues could, of course, reduce their fixtures, though that 
would deny game time to the many professionals not playing at international 
level.

Schaaf might not be pleased with the Chandler situation, but US fans will be. 
The Frankfurt-born, Frankfurt-raised son of an absent father from New York did 
not take part in the last Gold Cup, and in the past has often turned down 
invitations to play for the US side.

That reluctance has been seen as everything from a young player not wanting to 
get offside with his former club, to a snub by a player holding out for a spot 
in the German national side. There were also suggestions he didn’t feel fully 
comfortable playing for a country he hadn’t had a strong connection with. He 
has only limited contact with his US family. Perhaps, then, he had to deal with 
his past before he commit to his future.

Whatever the case is, he is not only cap-tied to the US now, but happy with 
how things are.

“There’s a great atmosphere within the team, like the sort of feeling you 
often only have as part of a family,” he told the Guardian before the recent 
friendly in Zürich. “That’s why I still feel good about being there and I’ll 
never regret the decision.

“They’re more laidback [in the US locker room than in a German one], I think. 
They all have fun together, but they know that when they’re out on the pitch, 
it’s time to get down to business and that’s important.

“I never had doubts. It was clear to me right from the start, after being 
invited by Bob Bradley, and so I’m still really happy to be here. I’ve never 
regretted the decision.”
 