
Economist Seth Stephens-Davidowitz <http://sethsd.com/> recently noted that 
one of the most common Google searches containing “my penis” was “how long is 
my penis?” Luddites might say a ruler would have a better answer than Google, 
but that’s not how digital natives think. Why should we figure out anything for 
ourselves, when everything is so easy to look up?


It’s a good question, one I confront in my book Head in the Cloud. I ran 
surveys of public knowledge in Britain and the US, on topics ranging from pop 
culture to quantum physics. In many regards the public is ill-informed. More 
than 50% of those under 30 can’t name the largest ocean on Earth, the palace 
built by Louis XIV, or the first artificial satellite; don’t know who invented 
the telegraph, radio or phonograph or which Roman emperor was said to have 
fiddled while Rome burned.

The cloud is making us meta-ignorant: unaware of what we don’t know

Does knowledge matter any more? There’s a decent case that it doesn’t. In the 
1950s economist Anthony Downs coined the concept of rational ignorance. In many 
situations, Downs observed, learning isn’t worth the bother. Most of us don’t 
learn car repair or medicine or accounting. Instead, we consult professionals 
when such expertise is needed – and that’s perfectly reasonable.

Today, we’re outsourcing memory and knowledge to the internet. This is often a 
good thing, but it comes with a drawback. The cloud is making us meta-ignorant: 
unaware of what we don’t know.

Each day we make hundreds of small decisions and judgments: what to eat, buy, 
or do; what to think about the latest film, trend and politician. Rarely are 
these assessments important enough to justify looking up facts. We make snap 
judgments in a state of rational ignorance, based on facts already in our heads.

I found that there are correlations between general knowledge and behaviour, 
political views and even socially responsible choices. One dilemma I posed was: 
would you throw your pet off a cliff for £1 million?

About 7% of the British public said yes. But the percentage was double that 
among those who scored poorly on a quiz of general knowledge. The less informed 
are either greedier or less kind to animals.

In the same survey, those who didn’t know which document King John signed in 
1215 were far more likely to say that people should be able to smoke in pubs. 
Those who can’t name their MP tend to say it’s OK for a business to post fake 
online reviews under a false name. Those who believe that early humans 
coexisted with dinosaurs are more likely to refuse to vaccinate their children 
for measles, mumps, and rubella.

These findings challenge the easy assumption that you can always look up the 
facts you need. Anti-vaccine parents do look up articles on the internet. It 
appears they are unable to distinguish valid medical advice from 
pseudoscientific nonsense drawing on paranoia, urban legends and conspiracy 
theorising.

Hence the survey’s finding: people who can’t answer an easy question about 
dinosaurs have a poor grounding in science and are ill-prepared to form good 
opinions about medical controversies, even with the internet to assist them. 
Unfortunately a “general background” in science or anything else isn’t 
something you can look up on a lunch break. It’s acquired through lifelong 
learning.

Knowledge is not wisdom, but it is a prerequisite for wisdom – and that’s one 
thing the digital revolution hasn’t changed.

William Poundstone is the author of Head in the Cloud: The Power of Knowledge 
in the Age of Google, published by Oneworld (£12.99, or £10.65 from 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/head-in-the-cloud.html>)
 