
There was a lively correspondence in the letters column of the Guardian last 
month, based on the assumption/assertion that the main cryptic puzzle in the 
paper has been getting harder: so much harder, in fact, as to cause one 
reverend resident of Poole to write that, until I did something about it, he 
would no longer even bother to attempt puzzles set by certain (named) 
compilers. His broadside ended, rather curiously, with the observation that, 
for his lunch hour diversion, he was grateful that he could now turn instead to 
the Sudoku puzzle.

I say curiously because, from the limited time I have spent Sudokuing, I 
should have thought that those puzzles cover an even greater range of 
difficulty than the cryptic crosswords - from a doddle to nigh impossible, in 
fact. What's more, the cryptic puzzles follow the same consumerist practice of 
labelling the product so that you know what is on your plate. The only 
difference is that, in the case of Sudoku, puzzles are labelled easy, medium, 
hard or fiendish, while above the crosswords you will find Janus, Rufus, 
Bunthorne, Enigmatist etc.

There has certainly been no conscious decision to alter the mix or the average 
level of difficulty of the crosswords: one third easier, slightly under one 
third harder and the rest in between. Of course, the classification of setters 
into class of difficulty is highly subjective and it is entirely possible that 
a particular setter's name on a puzzle may strike such terror as to cause 
individual solvers to underperform. Earlier this year, one Guardian solver sent 
me a message that supports the possibility that our policy of giving the 
setters "noms de plume" (or should that be "de guerre"?) can be inhibiting.

This correspondent grew up believing that he could not cope with the Guardian 
crossword at all, though he regularly rattled through those offered by the 
Times and Telegraph. One day, about 10 years ago, he was sitting in the bar of 
the Doha Sheraton, happily doing the crossword in the English-language Khaleej 
Times. "Good God, you're not doing the Guardian crossword, are you?" "No", he 
replied, "the one here is syndicated from the Telegraph." "They switched to the 
Guardian years ago", he was informed. To this day, he still cannot cope with 
some setters if their name is at the top of the puzzle, but can often make 
significant progress, even with the hardest, if he downloads the puzzle with 
the setter's name blanked out. I have suggested this as a tactic to my peeved 
parson from Poole.

______

The Saturday prize puzzle No 23,508 for July 16, set by Biggles, caused some 
people to ask who on earth was Air Commodore Cecil George Wigglesworth. It is 
true that the world of Wigglesworth ("Biggles" to his colleagues) is rather 
removed from that of Harry Potter, but he was the hero of more than 80 books 
for boys, translated into 17 languages, appearing from the early 1940s onwards. 
Several are still in print. His creator, Captain WE Johns, joined the army just 
before the first world war, transferring (like Biggles himself) to the Royal 
Flying Corps in 1916. He died in 1968. Memory plays tricks and I would have 
been prepared to bet quite heavy money that Biggles ended his career as an Air 
Vice Marshal, but I would have lost.

______

Though it is directly none of my business, since it concerns the Observer 
rather than the Guardian, I am happy to pass on the good news that at some 
point in August the Guardian Unlimited crossword site will start to include the 
weekly Azed puzzle. Many of our subscribers have been clamouring for it from 
the start and I am sorry that it has taken until now to solve the problems of 
handling barred grids on the site. But, provided there are no last-minute 
glitches, we are almost there.

_____

Could I end by repeating the plea that, if you have any technical questions or 
problems with any aspect of the crossword site, you should direct them to
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> rather than to me. 
This is not because I am unfeeling about your technical problems. But I am 
totally unqualified to help you with them and you will get a quicker and more 
helpful response from the experts at the userhelp desk, particularly during the 
summer holiday period when I am often away and unable to forward your emails to 
them myself.
 