
Both clubs took interim measures before the game at the Keepmoat on Saturday. 
Doncaster Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster> struck first, 
appointing Rob Jones, already player-coach, after dismissing Paul Dickov on 8 
September. Oldham Athletic followed on the 13th, installing David Dunn in place 
of Darren Kelly, so this was his first match, Jones’s second.

It was the same order on the field. Rovers went ahead through Andy Butler in 
the 26th minute. Jonathan Burn equalised in the 34th. Both are centre-backs, up 
for set-pieces. The occasion was more pleasing than the football. The 
caretakers’ union knows how to shake hands but their clubs are side by side 
below the dotted line of League One.

Jones had a head start in more ways than one. He is 6ft 7in and shadowed Brian 
Flynn when Dean Saunders left for Wolves at the start of 2013. Together they 
took Rovers into the second tier, heady stuff after five years to 2003 in the 
Conference. Dickov could not keep them there and paid the price for six points 
from the first six games (Oldham had seven from seven). Jones, naturally, was a 
central defender himself but only three appearances this season told of 
increasing struggles with injury.

It was looking much the same for Dunn, who signed for Oldham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> a week before the new season 
after only 12 appearances for Blackburn, his local club, in the last campaign. 
In all he played nearly 400 for them in two spells, a midfielder in the Steven 
Gerrard mould to the point even of his locomotive run and arm carriage. If he 
has played his last game, he retires with one cap, as half-time substitute for 
Gerrard in 2002, and much credit.

Both men are 35, born within a month of each other, well-armed with coaching 
badges and relishing their early chance of footballing life after action. 
Rovers have listed what they are looking for: a working knowledge of the 
Football League, success in managing a playing budget, excellent contacts, “a 
proven track record of developing a youth structure and pathway”, commitment to 
the local community, leadership and “a pleasing and willing personality” – a 
lot of boxes to tick.

Jones, already a trusted head of the academy, could do with a couple of wins 
during the deliberations. “I am very comfortable here and love this club,” he 
said after the draw. The League’s sponsors have him joint favourite with Neil 
Redfearn ahead of the usual list of experienced and failed suspects. Brian 
Laws, not in the 25 quoted, was in the directors’ box but could go either way.

Dunn, Oldham’s fourth manager this year, looked as relaxed as a golfer on a 
course he knows, only occasionally turning to his caddie. “You can never 
underestimate a point,” he said, which is true for them at present. “I thought 
the officials were really good and fair,” a nod to the linesman who flagged 
that Burn’s shot had crossed the line before being hooked out. Contrary to 
appearances, he said: “I never thought how draining it could be,” adding: “I’ll 
probably go straight to the doctor’s when I get back.”

After Oldham’s 5-1 home defeat that ended Kelly’s reign the assistant manager, 
Dean Holden, had said: “This is not a time for finger-pointing but for looking 
in mirrors.” On Saturday night Burn will have seen a bandaged head covering 
stitches while Andy Williams, Rovers’ new striker, may have seen a broken nose 
sustained in the fourth minute. It was not a violent game, though Oldham’s 
Green and Brown saw yellow in the feverish final moments and the creative 
instincts of James Coppinger, starting his 12th season with Rovers, and 
Oldham’s Carl Winchester deserved better reward. In added time Mike Jones 
headed off the line to deny Doncaster a win his surnamesake could have done 
with.

Last season they had one win in their first nine home league games. Now it is 
one in four and their 5,000 faithful crave more than five loaves, two small 
fishes and no magician. But after the shabby lunchtime fare at Stamford Bridge, 
sent proudly round the world by the Premier League, English football needed a 
game like this for reassurance. Its fans here are the lucky ones, among whole 
hearts.

Last week’s Focus from Portsmouth was blurred on one point, courtesy of a 
misinformant. The Tesco deal is not for £1m nor for players. It is “for a 
seven-figure sum bound by a confidentiality clause and ring-fenced, controlled 
via a planning condition with Portsmouth City Council and to be used 
exclusively for ground improvements”. The correction comes with true courtesy 
from the club and chimes with the concern of their owners, the Pompey 
Supporters Trust, for openness and transparency.
 