
Leeds United were dumped out of the Capital One Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/capital-one-cup> on penalties on a night 
of cruel firsts at the Keepmoat Stadium.

Never before had Leeds been ousted at this stage of the competition but they 
became the ninth Championship club eliminated by lower-league opposition this 
week after the teenage midfielder Lewis Cook followed his first senior goal 
with a first-half dismissal. His departure came moments after Andy Williams 
converted a regular-time penalty following Scott Wootton’s inexplicable felling 
of Cedric Evina.

Although Uwe Rösler’s team took the Yorkshire derby as deep as possible, Leeds 
suffered defeat in Doncaster for the first time in 64 years when the 
substitutes Sam Byram and Chris Wood ballooned their spot-kicks over the bar. 
In contrast, Doncaster Rovers were clinical and did not miss a single penalty, 
with Richie Wellens sealing asecond-round meeting with Ipswich Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/13/capital-one-cup-second-round-everton-barnsley>
 after dispatching his side’s fourth past Ross Turnbull.

“I don’t think we should be too harsh on Lewis. He was excited about his first 
goal in senior football and he was probably in that moment, that split-second, 
a bit too excited,” said Rosler afterwards. “It was unnecessary that we 
conceded a red card and unnecessary that we conceded a penalty – but the 
players gave me everything.”

Although Doncaster dominated the chances, during the second half in 
particular, Leeds showed they have intensity under their German manager and 
struck the base of a post on the interval of extra-time when a twice-deflected 
shot from Mirco Antenucci forced Thorsten Stuckmann into a low save.

Doncaster’s manager, Paul Dickov, a close friend of Rösler during their 
playing days at Manchester City, said: “Cup games are all about getting into 
the next round no matter about how you do it. We had not beaten Leeds at home 
for a long, long time so to do that was fantastic.”

Leeds appeared to be bucking the trend of upsets this week when they took the 
lead before the quarter-hour. Alex Mowatt burst through the heart of the 
Doncaster defence, eyed up the far corner and was only denied by Stuckmann’s 
parry. But Cook seized on the rebound and swept into the unguarded net.

However, two pieces of poor judgment saw their lead wiped out and Doncaster 
gifted a numerical advantage before the interval.

First, Wootton tripped Evina in the penalty area when there appeared little 
danger. Andy Williams, who scored more than 20 goals with Swindon Town last 
season, stepped up to score his first goal since a summer switch despite 
Turnbull getting his left-hand to the ball.

Then Leeds were reduced to 10 men eight minutes before the interval when 
Cook’s lunge at the Doncaster left-back Aaron Taylor-Sinclair on the touchline 
left the referee Keith Hill with no option but to produce a red card.

Doncaster Rovers v Leeds United: Capital One Cup – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/aug/13/doncaster-rovers-v-leeds-united-capital-one-cup-live> 