
Doncaster allowed Bury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury> to walk in 
an equaliser after netting a freak goal themselves in a bizarre 1-1 draw at the 
Keepmoat Stadium.

Paul Dickov instructed his players to clear a path for Bury to find the net 
after Doncaster scored by mistake in second-half stoppage time when attempting 
to return an act of good sportsmanship.

The midfielder Harry Forrester tried, following a throw-in, to return the ball 
to visiting goalkeeper Christian Walton who had knocked it out of play 
following an injury, but the ball bounced over Walton and found the Bury net.

Rather than take advantage, Doncaster allowed Leon Clarke to amble half the 
length of the pitch unchallenged before tapping home.

David Flitcroft said: “I’ve got the ultimate respect for Paul Dickov. He tried 
to get the referee to award a foul throw initially but then he’s allowed us to 
score from the restart.” The Bury manager added. “Paul put football into a good 
place with his sportsmanship today because if you lose morality the game has no 
substance for me.”

Dickov said: “I didn’t really think twice about allowing them to equalise. It 
just wouldn’t have been right for us to take three points in the circumstances. 
It was just an unfortunate ending to the game. Harry Forrester hit the ball too 
sweet and I was just hoping it wouldn’t go in. When it did we just had to allow 
them to score because you can’t win a game like that.”

Elsewhere, Nigel Adkins’ first game as the Sheffield United manager was one he 
will quickly want to forget after seeing his side beaten 4-0 at Gillingham. The 
Blades, who sacked Nigel Clough at the end of last season and replaced him with 
the former Scunthorpe, Southampton and Reading manager, are hotly tipped to 
finally win promotion this time round but their opening-day defeat shows they 
are not going to have it all their own way inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>.

Gillingham went ahead after only eight minutes through Emanuel Osadebe and 
Deji Oshilaja doubled the lead just before half-time.

John Egan headed a third goal with eight minutes remaining before Bradley Dack 
completed the rout in injury time to leave Adkins’ men bottom of the table at 
this embryonic stage.

The day’s other big result came at the County Ground between two other teams 
fancied for a promotion tilt.Bradford went ahead through Josh Morris’ 
fourth-minute strike and were handed the opportunity to go 2-0 ahead in the 
17th minute but Billy Clarke’s penalty was saved by Lawrence Vigouroux.

Clarke’s miss proved to be a turning point as Nathan Byrne hit a 16-minute 
hat-trick at the start of the second half before Jonathan Obika’s 70th-minute 
goal sealed a brilliant comeback victory forSwindon, who were beaten in the 
play-off final last season.

Much was made of the summer departures at Chesterfield but they, and new 
manager Dean Saunders, began with a 3-1 home win against Barnsley.

Conor Wilkinson put the Tykes in front early on but second-half goals from Jay 
O’Shea, Sylvan Ebanks-Blake and Sam Morsy gave the Spireites a morale-boosting 
start.

Stuart Beavon scored Burton’s first ever goal at this level as last season’s 
League Two champions overcame Scunthorpe 2-1 at the Pirelli Stadium.

Lucas Akins added to Beavon’s opener from the penalty spot after Luke Daniels 
had been sent off for violent conduct before Charlie Goode headed an 
injury-time reply.

Millwall were also 2-1 winners at Shrewsbury as Steve Morison and Lee Gregory 
cancelled out the lead given to the hosts by James Collins.

Coventry beat Wigan 2-0 thanks to Adam Armstrong’s double and Rochdale were 
also 2-0 home winners against Peterborough, with Callum Camps and Reuben 
Noble-Lazarus on the score sheet for Keith Hill’s side.

There were a handful of draws, with the highest-scoring coming at Colchester 
where they drew 2-2 with Blackpool. The Seasiders twice led through Mark Cullen 
goals but Alex Gibley and Darren Ambrose replied for the Essex club.

David Worrall equalised for Southend at Fleetwood, whose goal in the 1-1 draw 
was scored by Declan McManus.

It was also 1-1 at the Banks’s Stadium between Walsall and Oldham as Jonathan 
Forte cancelled out Romaine Sawyers strike for the hosts.

The local derby between Crewe and Port Vale at Vale Park was the only game to 
finish without a goal.

Premier League and Football League return: Saturday clockwatch – as it 
happened | Niall McVeigh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/aug/08/premier-league-and-football-league-return-saturday-clockwatch-live> 