
For 40-odd years the Swindon fan has lived with his grandfather’s words: “It 
all goes wrong after Christmas.” After five successive wins, all against 
top-half clubs in League One, he could have felt Christmas had come early. 
Sadly it had. Even a draw at home toDoncaster Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster> would have taken them to the 
top, as Bristol City went down to Crewe, but they fluffed a penalty in the 80th 
minute, lost to one in the 26th and slipped to third behind MK Dons.

It was not altogether a surprise. Doncaster travel as dark horses not donkeys. 
They came in 17th place because of one win in nine home games and left with six 
in 11 away. Paul Dickov, their manager, had tweaked his system to 4-1-4-1, he 
said, to confound Swindon’s overlapping full-backs but “we believed we had the 
players to hit them on the break”. They played in a diamond and made it in 
spades. “I don’t think many teams will come here and create the chances we 
did,” he added.

With Theo Robinson, who converted their penalty, menacing from the wide 
service of James Coppinger and Kyle Bennett, or later Harry Forrester, they did 
indeed create chances, though the best fell into their laps fromSwindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> whose high-risk, close-passing 
confidence in the 3-5-2 shape wavered between Barcelona and catastrophe. It was 
cool going on casual – a delight on the brink of disaster as even last 
defenders passed or were caught short.

Mark Cooper, their manager, said: “The last thing you need when teams get 
everyone behind the ball is to give them something to hang on to.” He called 
the tackle that conceded Rovers’ penalty “fantastic”, the decision of the 
referee, Kevin Johnson, “atrocious” but added: “Second half we had enough 
opportunities to get something out of the game. We have a penalty [also dodgy 
and wasted by Michael Smith] and a clear one-v-one on the keeper [set up by 
Smith for Andy Williams].” Jon Obika also saw a shot deflected on to a post. 
Dickov thought neither penalty correct – easier when Christmas has come early.

Both managers have been with their clubs for a season and a half. Cooper, a 
modest midfielder, is son of Terry, one of the earliest overlapping left-backs 
for England and Leeds and this is a serious chance to make his mark. Swindon 
have spent most of their time in anonymity, if not administration, with every 
now and then (League Cup winners from the Third Division in 1969, promotion to 
the Premiership in 1993) an assertion above their station. (Theirs is a railway 
town, headquarters of Brunel’s locomotive maintenance works, and the club have 
a train as well as a robin on their badge.)

After a sequence of owners in quick and embarrassing succession they look to 
have stability in the hands of a chairman, Lee Power, former team-mate of Tim 
Sherwood at Norwich, which has led to a flow of good players and goodwill from 
Carrow Road and Tottenham. Now the nth-phase possession in the boardroom has 
shifted to the pitch.

But, when the average attendance sank below 7,000, Power warned they had based 
their budget on 7,500 and would have to “sell one or two of these lads”, 
besides shortly losing two of the midfield five, Yaser Kasim (Iraq) and Massimo 
Luongo (Australia), to the Asia Cup. They really are lads, too. The average age 
of the starting XI was 22.

Saturday’s crowd of 7,793 barely half- filled the County Ground which, with 
its catchment area and classy play, should be bulging and rocking. For 
character this match compared well with anything offered by the greatest league 
in the world, which could not raise a single candidate for the Sports 
Personality of the Year award. “It wasn’t our day,” Cooper said, “but we won’t 
dwell on it. We move on.” If they dwelt a bit too much on the ball, they look 
fit to move on and upwards, even after Christmas.
 