
"I'm in an awful mood today," said Thomas Schaaf, which made for an 
interesting change from the other 364 days when the famously good-natured 
Werder Bremen manager is German joie de vivre personified, forever bouncing up 
and down with unbridled happiness and overflowing with cracking jokes. But the 
51-year-old, in fairness, had a good reason to feel a little down on Saturday 
night. His team could be grateful for not having their Bundesliga licence 
withdrawn on count of being unfit for purpose after a 5-0 hiding at home to the 
champions,Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>.

It was their biggest defeat in the Weserstadion since a 7-1 loss to Borussia 
Mönchengladbach in 1987. Schaaf had played in that match as a defender, next to 
luminaries such as Rudi Völler, Rune Bratseth and Norbert Meier. "I'm angry," 
he said in the wake of the drubbing by the champions, with a face like an 
arctic mountain range. "The team is angry. Angry about the situation, about the 
game, about the performance."

Schaaf must have been a tiny bit angry with himself, too, but then you don't 
last 13 years in the job by admitting your own ineptitude. After conceding 28 
goals and losing seven games before the winter break, the Bundesliga's most 
attack-minded (read: defensively shambolic) coach had been out to prove a point 
to the doubters and Guardiola-groupies: he switched his gung-ho 4-1-4-1 system 
to a 4-2-4 with Clemens Fritz as a second holding midfielder and no real No9 up 
front. It worked out a treat – for less than 10 minutes, until Marco Reus 
laser-guided a free-kick into the net. Nine minutes later, Mario Götze's 
deflected shot ended the match as a contest. Three more goals in the second 
half from Felipe Santana, Robert Lewandowski and Jakub Blaszczykowski were 
scant reward for the Black and Yellows' utter superiority. Their transition 
game, in particular, reached the perfectionist levels of their Champions League 
showings, perhaps for the first time in the league this year. "It was a 
fantastic evening for us, we want to continue in that fashion," said Jürgen 
Klopp, who'd spent most of the winter training camp in Spain focussing on 
direct, vertical combinations in midfield.

By contrast, Werder had plenty of possession (54%) but nowhere to pass it in 
the final third. "We only got to 25, 20 metres in front of their goal," said 
the midfielder, Zlatko Junuzovic. "It felt like there was no one in the box for 
us." There wasn't. Nils Petersen, the supposed Messi in Schaaf's masterplan (or 
was Kevin De Bruyne the false striker? Who can possibly tell?), had no idea 
where and how exactly he was supposed to operate. By the time Schaaf switched 
back to his regular and by no means better 4-1-4-1 on 57 minutes, Dortmund were 
merely toying with the hosts. "We should have scored more goals," said Ilkay 
Gündogan.

"This wasn't about tactics, it was about getting the basics wrong," insisted 
Schaaf later. "And it's wrong to blame the defence. If we had been better up 
front, the defenders wouldn't have been under pressure so much." That's 
undoubtedly true. But the days when his side regularly outscored the opposition 
and threatened to establish themselves as the second force in German football 
behind Bayern feel like a bygone era. Little by little, Werder have slipped 
down the pecking order, to the point that Kicker sees them "transforming into a 
grey mouse" (also-rans) in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>.

The defeat has left them 12th in the table and low on confidence. "Everything 
went down the toilet today," said the out-of-form, out-of-position and 
presumably soon-out-of-the-team-again captain, Fritz. Werder's poor finances 
will prevent Schaaf looking for solutions in the transfer market, so 
improvement has come from within. Their considerable talent up front should see 
them edge back into contention for a Europa League place but another defeat in 
the derby against Hamburg next weekend, coupled with Schaaf pointing the finger 
at the players again could well darken the mood further. The Bundesliga's 
longest-serving manager still has the backing of the cub. "We find him great, 
there's no discussion," said the advisory board member Willi Lemke. He 
emphasised that the club were in "total transition" and that "100% of the 
supporters" were behind the coach, too. One can't be so sure about the squad 
though. "Tactics? The manager's responsible for that," the goalkeeper Sebastian 
Mielitz said with an air of desperation. "We have to come together as a team 
and put into place what he's prescribing." And that, in a nutshell, is Werder's 
problem at the moment.

Talking points (to follow …)

• The man from Sky 'interviewed' a cardboard cut-out of Pep Guardiola before 
kick-off on the touchline, the players (including clearly nonplussed members of 
Greuther Fürth) were bombarded with Pep questions and Jupp Heynckes got so 
annoyed with all the Pep hype that he felt moved to declare "I am the boss 
here". Unfortunately, the media had little else to sink their teeth into after 
a regulation 2-0 win over the new boys in the Allianz Arena thanks to goals 
from Marko Mandzukic. Heynckes did his best to control the situation by 
insisting that he had decided not to renew his contract but Uli Hoeness was 
nearer the mark when he revealed that the 67-year-old would "probably have been 
persuaded to continue" if Bayern had really tried. Instead, they will have to 
chase the treble with Guardiola watching on over breakfast bagels from New 
York. "Everyone's going mad here," admitted Hoeness. The Bayern players seemed 
relatively unperturbed, however. "The name Pep Guardiola has no business here 
until 31 June, at one minute past midnight," said Thomas Müller, inventing his 
own personal calendar in the process. Well they do say that the clocks run 
differently in Bavaria.

• The league leaders obviously didn't exhaust themselves enough on the pitch, 
so they were in action again on Sunday. A nearly full-strength squad took on 
Alemannia Aachen in a charity match at the Tivoli stadium. 31,600 supporters 
turned up, and €500,000 was raised for the third division club. Alemannia have 
fallen on hard times and need another €1m to stay afloat until the end of the 
season. "We don't have enough hats to doff them all to them," said the thankful 
Aachen boss, Uwe Scherr.

• The Bay-Arena provided less harmonious scenes, however. Bayer Leverkusen's 
emphatic 3-1 win over Frankfurt saw away supporters burning plenty of flares 
and setting off fire-crackers; referee Wolfgang Stark stopped play after 15 
minutes. Armin Veh's side had been the better team until then but Leverkusen 
adjusted their tactics and ran out deserved winners to stay second in the 
table. Another side is set to benefit from the Frankfurt fans' misdemeanours, 
too: the German FA are reportedly planning to impose a "Geisterspiel" (ghost 
game) behind closed doors on the Eagles.

• Now that the increasingly modest Bundesliga will soon have the best manager 
in world, to go with the best stadiums, the best ticket prices and the best 
terrace sausages, it is only right that they should challenge the other 
self-professed "official bestest league in the world" in terms of end-to-end 
histrionics and comedy defending. Yes, Schalke's 5-4 win over Hannoveralmost 
had Premier League quality. All that was missing was one manager admonishing 
the fourth official for a disrespectful, biased sideways glance at an earlier 
encounter in 1994 and a stimulating debate about the ins and outs of diving.

• The good news for Spurs-bound Lewis Holtby is that he soon be able to 
experience the real thing. Schalke's sporting director, Horst Heldt, has turned 
down a first "unacceptable offer" from Tottenham for a winter transfer but all 
the indications are that an agreement will be reached – one minute before 
transfer-deadline on 31 January in classic Daniel-Levy-style presumably.

Results: Schalke 5-4 Hannover, Bayern 2-0 Fürth, Bremen 0-5 Dortmund, 
Leverkusen 3-1 Frankfurt, Wolfsburg 2-0 Stuttgart, Hoffenheim 0-0 
Mönchengladbach, Mainz 0-0 Freiburg, Nürnberg 1-1 Hamburg, Düsseldorf 2-3 
Augsburg.

• Latest Bundesliga standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 