
As the cheers rang round Parkhead yesterday it was difficult to know whether 
Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fans were celebrating 
their team's inexorable march to their 25th consecutive Premierleague victory 
or events at Tannadice where Rangers were losing to Dundee United.

There is little the champions-elect's supporters enjoy more than watching 
their side win while hearing of their great rival's problems elsewhere. A week 
before the Old Firm meet in the quarter-final of the Scottish Cup it is plain 
to see which of them is better prepared for the derby.

Not that this was one of Celtic's better performances, but it was still far 
too good forLivingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston>, who 
put up a decent fight in the first half and then collapsed. Martin O'Neill's 
team, 16 points clear at the top of the table, are on course to win the 
championship before the league splits in mid-April and have what appears to be 
a comfortable Uefa Cup passage in midweek. after beating FK Teplice 3-0 in the 
first leg. No wonder O'Neill was all smiles.

"There were two excellent results for us today but nothing has been decided 
yet," said O'Neill. "As for going through the season unbeaten, I don't think 
that is possible. We have hard games still to play."

Stephen Pearson put Celtic ahead after 12 minutes with a simple tap-in from a 
Stanislav Varga pass and Chris Sutton made it 2-0 later in the half when he 
reacted first to a Henrik Larsson flick. Livingston's striker Derek Lilley, who 
had missed an clearcut chance earlier, pulled back a deserved goal just before 
the break.

After the restart Celtic took control as two goals in seven minutes finished 
it off as a contest. The first was a fine right-foot finish from Alan Thompson 
after good work by Varga and the second, inevitably, was a contribution from 
Larsson, who fired home after a well-worked free-kick by Stilian Petrov and 
Thompson.

It was like a training exercise after that as both teams accepted the 
inevitable and Thompson's 79th-minute penalty after a Marvin Andrews foul on 
the substitute Craig Beattie was merely the icing on the cake.

 Man of the match: Stephen Pearson (Celtic)
 