
As time goes by it is a consolation of sorts that some things don't change. In 
all the years that I have been editing the Guardian crosswords there have been 
these constants:

1. Regular complaints that the Quicks were getting too easy.
2. Regular complaints that the Quicks were no longer quick, presumably because 
we had taken on a new setter, who was trying to be clever.
3. Regular complaints that the Cryptics, especially early in the week, were 
becoming insultingly easy for a Guardian readership.
4. Regular complaints that there were now too many themed Cryptics, which were 
either a doddle when the theme becomes clear or a real turn-off for those with 
no interest in it.
5. The odd comment that the Guardian crosswords are amongst the best on offer.

There has, in fact, been no conscious change of policy about the nature of 
Guardian crosswords from that which I inherited from John Perkin in 1997. Apart 
from all the puzzles now also being available online, the only obvious 
innovations have been the two website-only puzzles: the weekly Quiptic (as its 
name implies, designed to be a quick and relatively easy Cryptic) and the 
monthly Genius (which is not designed for the faint-hearted).

When I took over there were three setters doing the Quicks three weeks at a 
time. It is true that it is not the same trio now as it was 16 years ago. Then 
it was Araucaria, Rufus and the late Mercury. Today it is Paul, Chifonie and 
Orlando. But the current three have been doing it for quite a while and are 
still operating to the same 1997 brief. So, if individual solvers find 
individual Quicks more or less hard, the reason is accidental, not deliberate. 
(There was a brief phase a while ago when some batches of the Quicks were 
themed – dogs, birds, plays by Shakespeare etc – but that was clearly unpopular 
and stopped.)

With the Cryptics, I inherited the policy that the Guardian puzzles, unlike 
those in other places, should deliberately have a wide range of 'difficulty'. 
The justification was (and is) that some of the puzzles should offer challenges 
to seasoned solvers and some should be an invitation to people who think that 
the whole cryptic world is impossibly arcane. The argument is that publications 
where the cryptic crossword is of a uniform standard are fine for those who 
like the standard, but unsatisfactory both for those to whom it is too easy and 
for those to whom it is too difficult. John Perkin did away with anonymous 
setters, giving them noms de guerre, so that the solver could begin to identify 
with and know who they were up against each day. The only editorial drift of 
which I am conscious, apart from phasing out a few old favourites like TREE for 
'actor' (Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, d. 1917) and SPOON or BRASSIE for 'club' 
(golf), is to let in the odd French, German, Spanish or Italian word, where I 
think they will not be totally strange to most Guardian solvers, and to allow 
the odd word or phrase sanctioned by Google that has not yet made it into the 
printed dictionaries.

In the blogosphere there is a vociferous camp that clearly finds our easy 
puzzles an insult to its intelligence. Not represented there, obviously, are 
those who find the easier puzzles a welcome introduction to the wonderful world 
of the cryptic crossword and who then go on to discover that they can derive 
pleasure from tackling the more difficult ones, even if they cannot regularly 
or even ever fully complete them. My instinct, based admittedly only on 
anecdotal evidence, is that this second group is considerably larger than the 
first. One anecdote: a well-known Guardian journalist (there are surprisingly 
few who do the crossword) told me that she and her husband would be very happy 
if all the Cryptics were set by Araucaria and Rufus alone. I replied that I 
thought that would be going a bit far.

I will admit that there has been a tendency for more themed Cryptics to appear 
in the paper than of old. The newer/younger setters seem to like the challenge 
of compiling them and some to the older hands seem to have been influenced by 
the trend, too. Here I would welcome feedback on whether there are now too many 
themed these puzzles for your liking, or whether the mix is about right. There 
are, of course, different kinds of themed puzzle: light themes, heavy themes, 
subliminal themes that make the solver feel clever to have spotted it, but 
which do not have to be identified to make it possible to complete the puzzle. 
Your views would be very welcome.
_____

A note for your diaries. John Halpern (Paul) is planning with Nigel Stonier, 
the producer/songwriter, an 'event' in London in December to be the culmination 
of 2013, the centenary year of the publication of the first modern crossword. 
The probable date is 17 December (to be confirmed). You will get its planned 
flavour from its working title: Wordstock UK – a celebration of Rhythm & Clues. 
Apart from noting the provisional date, if you think you would like also to 
participate in the event, either john@cryptica.co.uk or 
nigel.stonier@btinternet.com would be pleased to hear from you.
_____

The March Genius puzzle (No 117 by Brummie) produced a good field of entries: 
356 by the deadline. The first in was Dave H.

Congratulations to James Hutchinson from Gateshead, who is the March winner.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 