
Unusually there was for once complete unanimity in the many responses I got to 
the question posed last month about whether 'anagrind' is a word fit for 
purpose in a Guardian crossword. A couple of people thanked me, because now at 
least they knew what it meant. But the answer was a resounding 'No'. Everyone 
agreed that the trend towards the unnecessary use of jargon by crossword 
setters, or any other special interest group, should be resisted, even if the 
word involved can be found by Googling: particularly if it is a word as ugly as 
'anagrind'. A slightly more extreme view was expressed by Barry E. 'Whoever it 
was that coined the word should be taken out and shot, revived and shot again 
for a Sisyphean eternity.' In short, I get the message.

Your responses also gave me a new thought that should have been obvious to me, 
but for some reason wasn't. When agonising over whether a word can be used in a 
crossword that, like anagrind, can be found on Google but not in a dictionary a 
fair test would be whether that word is regularly used in the body of the 
Guardian or not. This test would let iPad through but keep anagrind out. Armed 
with this thought I shall feel myself much strengthened in my occasional 
exchanges on such subjects with our distinguished setters. I don't know, 
though, whether I shall feel brave enough to deploy the argument the other way 
round: ie if a word clearly appears in, say, Chambers, but would never in a 
hundred years be used in the columns of the Guardian, is it fair game or not?
_____
There was a complaint last week from a solver, who apologised for being 
pedantic, about a clue (13 down) inQuick No 13,065 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/13065> for 24 March. (In passing, 
there is absolutely nothing wrong in my book with crossword solvers, setters or 
even editors being pedants.) The clue was: 'Large fish-eating hawk (3,5)' for 
SEA EAGLE. The complaint was that eagles do not belong to the same genus 
(Accipiter) as hawks. Ornithology is one of the distressingly large number of 
fields in which I am outside my comfort zone. But, falling back on the 
dictionaries, I found in Chambers under 'hawk': 'A name given to many birds of 
prey of the family Accipitridae (related to the falcons) which includes the 
eagles and buzzards.' The Oxford Dictionary of English, under sea eagle, has a 
note: 'Genus Haliaeetus, family Accipitridae'. All of this leaves me still 
confused, but at a definitely higher level. If hawks and eagles are not members 
of the same genus but are members of the same family can a sea eagle properly 
be clued as a fish-eating hawk in a Guardian puzzle? Answers on one side of a 
piece of paper only, please.

On another pedantic complaint I feel on much firmer ground. In my account last 
month of Rufus's 80th birthday party at the Guardian I wrote that 'fulsome 
tributes were paid to his hugely popular, benevolent and scrupulously fair 
style of clues'. Was I so ignorant as not to know that 'fulsome' was an 
adjective with negative connotations, meaning 'flattering to an excessive 
degree'? All my dictionaries give two meanings to the word. One is 'excessively 
flattering'; one is 'generous or abundant'. The usage note under 'fulsome' in 
the Oxford Dictionary of English reads, in part: 'Although the earliest use [of 
fulsome] was "abundant", this meaning in modern use is held by some people to 
be incorrect ... [though] the word is still often used to mean simply 
"abundant", especially in uses such as the critics have been fulsome in their 
praise ...' So I fear that, regardless of the views of some people, I shall 
continue where appropriate to offer fulsome tributes.
_____ 
From time to time we get messages to say that some part or other of the 
crossword website is no longer working. It is true that we have had a fair 
share of technical problems, the most recent being a continuing glitch in the 
program that allocates particular puzzles to particular dates. But many of the 
problems that present themselves to you, like the check, cheat or anagram 
buttons seeming not to work, or an inability to submit Genius puzzles on line, 
are the result of the particular server you are using not being able to 
communicate with the Guardian. The first resort when you hit such a problem 
would be for you to try using another browser (eg Internet Explorer, Firefox or 
Google). If that still does not work could I ask you to send a message to the 
User Help Desk (see email address below), describing the problem and giving 
details of the server that you are using.
_____
The March Genius puzzle (No 105 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-27871,00.html> set by 
Crucible) produced first entries from other than the usual suspects. Dave of 
'blueyonder' was first in at 00:47, followed by David in Penarth at 01:11. 
There were 18 correct entries on the first day and a total of 275 by the 
deadline.

Congratulations to Richard Calver, who is March's winner.
We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 