
The penalties for exceeding track limits at the British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>, which cost Lewis 
Hamilton his first run at pole position, will also be strictly enforced during 
Sunday’s race at Silverstone. The potential sanctions to be decided by the 
stewards will apply to drivers who transgress the “zero tolerance” approach the 
FIA have applied to turns eight, 15 and 18.

Jenson Button <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jenson-button>, Hamilton’s 
former team-mate at McLaren, has also clarified that the decision was agreed 
between the drivers and the race director Charlie Whiting, in a meeting before 
qualifying.

Lewis Hamilton v Nico Rosberg: just the latest in a long history of F1 
rivalries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-history-f1-rivalries>
Hamilton first flying lap in Q3 was one of several disqualified by the 
stewards after he put his car wide at Copse, on a lap in which he was 
three-tenths faster than his team-mate Nico Rosberg.He managed to turn the 
potential pole into the real thing however on his final quick run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/lewis-hamilton-takes-pole-british-grand-prix-nico-rosberg>
. “I ran a bit wide on my first Q3 lap and had that time taken away,” he said. 
“I just touched the kerb and it really pulled me out there. I didn’t even feel 
like I was going to be running wide until the car bottomed out and I just 
bounced outside the line.”

The strong line on track limits will be continued during the race on Sunday. 
Any driver adjudged to have “gained a clear and lasting advantage by leaving 
the track” will be reported to the stewards, as will drivers who repeatedly 
leave the track. The zero tolerance approach will apply to Copse, Stowe and the 
final corner, the exit of Club.

“We discussed it in the drivers briefing,” said Button. “We all agreed that it 
was the best way to move forward. The drivers and Charlie agreed that it’s best 
on those three corners that if we’re outside the track limits, all four wheels 
over the white line, our lap no longer counts. We all knew that. They are the 
places where we thought people would gain time.”

Button is also hopeful he can turn a disappointing qualifying into a comeback 
in the race that will keep his highly supportive home crowd happy. The British 
driver qualified in 17th after a problem with the rear wing meant he could only 
finish three laps in the first session.

He will doubtless do his best to put on a good show for the fans but he will 
not breaking his Formula One jinx at Silverstone.He has raced here 16 times and 
has yet to make the podium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/nico-rosberg-jenson-button-british-gp-silverstone>
, with fourth in 2004, 2010 and 2014, his best results. Although the McLaren is 
improving and the upgrades Honda have brought to the power unit here are giving 
cause for optimism “there is a lot more pace in the car,” he said the best 
realistic target is to finish in the points.

“I’m really disappointed with qualifying, but not too disheartened.” Button 
said after qualifying. “I am happy and I am going to have a good race tomorrow. 
I am going to have a lot fun tomorrow.”

During his run in Q1 the rear wing detached from the floor of the car, coming 
out of Woodcote, causing a severe loss of downforce. He returned to the pits 
but the team was unable to fix the problem in time for him to attempt another 
quick lap.

The belief that Renault’s Kevin Magnussen, who was one place ahead of the 
British driver at that point, had gone outside track limits caused McLaren to 
call Button back to his car in the minutes before Q2 but the second session had 
already started before Magnussen’s time could be deleted, making it too late to 
reinstate Button.

“I’ll do my best in front of the home crowd, when I got out and ran back to 
the car thinking we could go out in Q2 there was a massive roar from the 
crowd,” he said. “I think it was my running skill more than my driving skills 
at that point but it was a really nice moment.”

The issue of track limits also affected Button’s McLaren’s team-mate Fernando 
Alonso, who is ninth on the grid but who set a time that was fast enough for 
eighth that was ruled out due to going beyond the white lines at Stowe. Wet 
weather is forecast for Sunday and both the McLaren drivers will be hoping for 
a rain-interrupted race to boost their chances of moving up the order. “I’ll be 
hoping for rain and something unexpected to happen in the race, and I’m still 
aiming for points tomorrow,” concluded Button.
 