 The world of entertainment and millions of fans were yesterday mourning and 
paying tribute to Jack Lemmon, who died in a Los Angeles hospital following 
complications related to cancer. The star of Some Like It Hot, The Odd Couple 
and Missing, and the winner of two Oscars, was 76.
His wife, Felicia, his two children and his step-daughter were at his bedside 
when he died. He had been in and out of the University of Southern California/ 
Norris Cancer Clinic in Boyle Heights during the last few months as his 
condition deteriorated. He underwent surgery a month ago to remove an inflamed 
gall bladder. Although he died on Wednesday night, news of his death was not 
made public until early yesterday.

"He is one of the greatest actors in the history of the business," said his 
publicist and longtime spokesman, Warren Cowen. "To say one word about him 
would be 'beautiful.' It's an opinion that is shared by everybody who knew him."

His death comes almost exactly a year after his old friend and partner in The 
Odd Couple, Walter Mathau, died of a heart attack. "Happiness is working with 
Jack Lemmon," is how the director Billy Wilder once described him.

"What marks all the best work Lemmon has done are some trace elements of the 
man himself, some perceived truth that as clown or tragic figure, the persona 
within the character is likable, decent, intelligent, vulnerable, worth 
knowing; disorganised possibly, flawed almost certainly, but forever worth 
knowing," was the assessment of the Los Angeles Times film writer, Charles 
Champlin.

In 1999, he performed in the television drama Tuesdays With Morrie, for which 
he won an Emmy and in which he had an opportunity through his role to reflect 
on death. He was already ill with cancer.

 Enormous range


While he may be best remembered for his roles as the musician who had to dress 
in drag to escape the mob in Some Like It Hot, and as Felix Unger in The Odd 
Couple, Lemmon's range was enormous. Whether playing the distraught father of a 
son missing during the Pinochet dictatorship in Chile in the film Missing, or 
an alcoholic in The Days of Wine and Roses, or a speedy newspaper man in The 
Front Page, he managed to bring something different to the role.

Although regarded as one of the great comic actors in the history of film, 
five of his seven Oscar nominations were for roles in dramas rather than 
comedies.

Born in 1925 in a lift in a hospital in Newton, Massachusetts, legend had it 
that he had a case of jaundice which prompted a nurse to remark: "My, look at 
the little yellow Lemmon." John Uhler Lemmon III was the son of the owner of a 
bakery who suffered from childhood illnesses and required 13 operations before 
he was 13.

After studying at Harvard and serving in the US navy as an ensign in the 
second world war, Lemmon embarked on an acting career first in the theatre in 
New York, then on radio, television and film, that spanned half a century. He 
even managed to resist pressure from the legendary studio boss, Harry Cohn, who 
wanted him to change his name lest critics and audiences should ever be tempted 
to describe the movies he appeared in as "lemons". He won an academy award for 
the first time in 1956 for his part as Ensign Pulver in Mister Roberts, and 
again in 1973 for playing a compromised businessman in trouble with the mob in 
Save the Tiger.

Recently, he had been reflecting on his career. Explaining his roles in 
Missing, The Days of Wine and Roses and The China Syndrome, in which he played 
a nuclear power plant operator, he said: "I like a film that has a point of 
view." He said that it was not necessary for him to agree with a point of view 
in order to play the part, but that films that made people think always 
attracted him. But he was philosophical about the movie business: "We all make 
bad films _ you misjudge. That happens more often than the hits. But I have 
been able to get films that have worked, not only at the box office, but 
critically and with the public, often enough so that I'm still around. I can 
still get wonderful parts, thank God... I am passionate about acting, I love 
it, respect it. It gets me." He kept acting and getting parts until near the 
end.

While Lemmon said he had loved his career and felt privileged to have played 
so many different parts, he said that his career was always much less important 
to him than his family. He was married from 1950 to 1956 to the actress Cynthia 
Stone, and their son, Chris, was born in1954. In 1962, he married the actress 
Felicia Farr, and their daughter, Courtney, was born in 1966. His family said 
yesterday that his funeral would be private.

His two most rewarding film partnerships were with the director Billy Wilder, 
who directed Lemmon with Marilyn Monroe and Tony Curtis in Some Like It Hot, 
The Apartment, Irma La Douce and The Front Page, and with Walter Mathau, with 
whom he starred in eight films.

Related links
Jack Lemmon dies at 76 
<https://www.theguardian.com/Film/News_Story/Exclusive/0,4029,513824,00.html>
Tribute by Derek Malcolm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/Film/Film/News_Story/Exclusive/0,4029,513922,00.html>
Jack Lemmon top ten 
<http://film.theguardian.com/features/apicturestory/0,6412,513981,00.html>
Jack Lemmon picture gallery 
<http://film.theguardian.com/gallery/0,8454,513844,00.html>
 