
With their status as members of the Premierleague in serious jeopardy, Dundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> had to confront, on this final 
outing, opponents they had been unable to overcome in three previous meeting 
during this relentlessly desperate season.

Not even taking a lead through Calum McDonald was enough to see them break a 
harmful habit, conceding an equaliser to Craig Easton and, ultimately, lacking 
the wit or the strength to prevent their relegation to the First Division. They 
would realise that they were destined for the drop when Tom McManus hit a post 
with their last scoring attempt in the dying seconds.

With the Dens Park team's survival dependent on victory, it was hardly 
surprising that they should show the deeper sense of urgency in the matter of 
trying to score. With less feverishness on those occasions when they contrived 
space and opportunities near theLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> goal, they could have been 
more than one ahead by the time the home team scored their equaliser.

Steve Lovell, for example, moved on to a short header by Gustave Bahoken that 
had been intended for goalkeeper Roddy McKenzie, but he hurried his volley and 
shot against the keeper. Lovell, a lively and skilful striker, also created an 
opportunity for himself with a quick spin in midfield that took him to the edge 
of the area, but he pulled his left-foot drive wide.

In the circumstances, no one among the home fans could argue with the justice 
of the visiting team taking the lead. From a corner on the right, the ball was 
played out to Steven McNally, who sent a precise lobbed pass towards Bobby Mann.

The big defender, just off McKenzie's right-hand post, sent a perfectly 
weighted header towards McDonald, whose impetus - he had charged in from the 
18-yard line - allowed him to drive the ball into the net on the volley from 
close range.

Given Dundee's authority and their comfortable containment of Livingston's 
attempts to go forward, the equaliser was a shock. The goal was, however, 
beautifully executed. Hassan Kachloul wrong-footed Barry Smith on the left with 
a quick feint and delivered an impeccable cross to Easton, whose header from 
six yards sailed to the right of Derek Soutar.

In an attempt to exert more pressure on the home defence, Jim Duffy, the 
Dundee manager, replaced midfielder Steven Robb with striker John Sutton. But 
this seemed merely to allow Livingston to take control of the midfield for most 
of the remaining 24 minutes.

There was a sluggishness about Dundee for most of the second half, which made 
the home team appear conspicuously quicker mentally and physically. But for 
Livingston's lack of ambition - their readiness to commit only one or two in 
forward areas seemed to betray a satisfaction with what they had - they could 
have inflicted more damage.

As it transpired, they did enough harm to send the Dens Park club to a place 
from which escape can be extremely difficult.
 