
Dundee piled more misery on Dundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> with victory against 10 men 
at Dens Park. They came from behind after Kane Hemmings scored four minutes 
before half-time and Nick Ross just after the hour to cancel out Blair 
Spittal’s 15th-minute opener from a free-kick.

The result left Mixu Paatelainen’s team stranded at the foot of the table and 
staring relegation in the face. United’s frustration boiled over when the 
midfielder Guy Demel was sent off with seven minutes remaining for a second 
yellow card.

United handed a debut to the Japanese goalkeeper Eiji Kawashima, who had 
completed his move to Tannadice earlier in the week. For the hosts, the striker 
Greg Stewart was suspended so Hemmings led the line on his own.

It was a brisk start and United almost gifted their rivals an early opener 
when Gavin Gunning’s short backpass was intercepted by Hemmings – but Kawashima 
was quick off his line to clear. The ball went only as far as Gary Harkins, 
whose shot from 20 yards was held by the goalkeeper.

Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> suffered a double setback 
when their captain, James McPake, was carried off after a 10th-minute collision 
with John Rankin and replaced in central defence by Kostadin Gadzhalov. The 
referee, Kevin Clancy, awarded the free-kick against McPake and Spittal sent a 
glorious effort into the top-right corner of Scott Bain’s goal.

The Tangerines sought to add to their lead and Billy McKay had a shot saved by 
Bain before the on-loan Wigan forward shot over.

Dundee threatened in the 27th minute after Nicky Low’s long pass picked out 
the onrushing Hemmings inside the box. The striker turned and unleashed an 
effort at goal but again Kawashima was equal to the task. At the other end, 
John Rankin’s right-foot volley brought out a brilliant save from Bain. 
However, just before the break Hemmings equalised. Kawashima could only punch 
Low’s free-kick and Hemmings was on hand to volley into the net from six yards.

The second-half started with Spittal trying his luck with a free-kick that 
flew wide. Dundee got the winner when Ross turned 25 yards from goal and hit a 
left-foot shot that took a deflection off Sean Dillon, wrong-footed Kawashima 
and found the net. A few minutes later, Paul McGowan drove right through the 
United defence but his shot was touched wide by Kawashima. 

The 100 best footballers in the world 2015 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/21/the-100-best-footballers-in-the-world-2015-interactive> 