
For all the development and sale of players marks a club out as doing the 
right things, supporters will naturally crave tangible success. For that 
reason, Dundee United’s progression to a second cup final in as many attempts 
is worthy of wider recognition. United were comprehensively defeated by St 
Johnstone in the Scottish Cup final last May. Their chance to atone will come 
in the League Cup, where Celtic or Rangers will lie in wait on 15 March.

David Goodwillie, Johnny Russell, Ryan Gauld and Andrew Robertson have already 
moved from the Tannadice production line for considerable fees. Gary 
Mackay-Steven, who played for United, has agreed to join Celtic in the summer. 
Stuart Armstrong, also courted by the Scottish champions, was also watched once 
again by Burnley in the success overAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen>. Recent history shows that 
despite the loss of talent, United can survive. And some.

If United are doing something right with regards the advancement of their 
youngsters, it is quite another thing to retain a competitive team.

Moreover, Jackie McNamara’s team answered one question that has lingered time 
and again in recent months by winning a match when it really mattered.

Derek McInnes, the Aberdeen manager, has not suffered many recent 
disappointments. It was to his credit that he admitted his side weren’t good 
enough to keep grip of the League Cup. “This was a missed opportunity,” McInnes 
said.

Still, it took a rousing closing spell for United to book their Hampden 
return. Aberdeen, it must be said, did not do very much wrong other than 
perhaps fail to press home the advantage given to them by the debutant Donervon 
Daniels. The Aberdeen goalkeeper, Scott Brown, was also culpable at the time of 
Nadir Ciftci’s winning goal.

There were two mitigating circumstances for a turgid first half. The nerves 
commonly attached to semi-finals, and between two essentially evenly matched 
teams, served as one. Hampden’s dire playing surface, which cut up like a 
Victoria sponge, was also worthy of note.

It was Aberdeen who seized early second-half initiative. In the 49th minute 
Andrew Considine’s throw-in found the head of Daniels, with the on-loan West 
Bromwich Albion centre-back seeing his header loop beyond Radoslaw Cierzniak. 
United’s goalkeeper may not want to reflect on the goal for too long.

Given their season’s consistency, and the fact they had not conceded a League 
Cup goal since 2012, the expectancy there was for Aberdeen to press home their 
superiority. They probably should have done; Daniels came close to a dream 
second goal after Cierzniak flapped at a Johnny Hayes corner, with Goodwillie 
lacking a bit of conviction against his old side after rounding the goalkeeper.

A McNamara substitution proved United’s inspiration. Ryan Dow came on in place 
of Charlie Telfer and his first act was to win a corner, from which Callum 
Morris powered a header home.

Momentary controversy was to follow. Adam Rooney appeared to have sent 
Aberdeen back in front but the effort was ruled out for a supposed push by the 
forward. United had not exactly been strong in the appeal. Non-existent, in 
fact.

Dow came within a goalline clearance – and probably should have been awarded a 
penalty in the same incident – of a late United winner.

It was to arrive anyway, Paul Paton flicking a terrific first-time cross into 
the penalty area, from where Ciftci glanced a header beyond Brown. The 
goalkeeper hardly looked clever but United did not care; how they have merited 
another day in the limelight.
 