
The Dundee United midfielder John Rankin is aware the Taysiders have let one 
trophy slip through their grasp – but insists it will not happen again. The 
Tannadice club lost to St Johnstone in last year’s William Hill Scottish Cup 
final but Jackie McNamara’s men have the chance to make amends by beating 
Celtic to theScottish League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> when they meet at 
Hampden on Sunday.

Now Rankin has urged his Tangerines team-mates to relax and use the big-match 
atmosphere to their advantage “We are all very enthusiastic and desperate to 
go,” he said. “To be honest I think we just need to enjoy the occasion this 
year. There were too many of us uptight last year and we never actually enjoyed 
it. I think this year, if we go and actually enjoy ourselves, it will hopefully 
end in a very good day.”

Sunday’s Cup final is part two of an epic duel between the sides who meet four 
times in 13 days. Last week’s Scottish Cup quarter-final ended in a 1-1 draw 
but also featured a number of flash points. The Hoops defender Virgil van Dijk 
was sent off along with United’s Paul Paton – even though it was Calum Butcher 
who clashed with the Dutchman.

Paton was eventually cleared after the Scottish FA admitted the referee Craig 
Thomson had sent off the wrong man. The governing body’s rules prevented them 
from punishing Butcher but they avoided another row by clearing van Dijk 
following their off-the-ball tussle.

The United striker Nadir Ciftci – who is suspended for the final anyway – was 
spared further punishment when allegations that he had kicked theCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> midfielder Scott Brown in the 
head were found not proven. But the drama has threatened to turn the Hampden 
decider into another powder-keg fixture.

Rankin, though, insists calmer heads will prevail. “What happens in the last 
game is done,” said the 31-year-old. “We are not going to get involved in what 
happened the week before.

“You can only affect the next game that’s put in front of you and for us that 
next game is Celtic. And then Celtic again and Celtic again. It’s exciting. 
People might say it’s boring for the fans when you have four games in a row 
against the same team but it’s challenging for the players because each game is 
different and you have to rise to each occasion.”

Meanwhile, the Celtic midfielder Nir Biton is hoping he can finally break his 
knockout curse by lifting the League Cup. The Israeli international has never 
reached the final of a senior tournament but will finally get his chance. Now 
the former Ashdod midfielder is hoping he can add a League Cup winner’s medal 
to the Scottish Premiership gong he picked up last season.

“I have never played in a cup final, just two semi-finals in Israel,” Biton 
said. “When you get to the semi-finals and you only have two games to win for a 
trophy, it’s annoying to lose in a semi-final. But as a professional player you 
need to keep looking forward. Now I have a big chance to win a cup with Celtic 
and this is a big thing for me.

“Everything in life happens for a good reason and when you lose one title, you 
look to win the second title. Especially in a cup, anything is possible in 90 
minutes. We know everybody expects us to win butDundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> showed last Sunday, it will 
be difficult for us like every game in the Scottish league. We need to have a 
good mentality.

“A lot of Celtic games are live in Israel, especially cup finals. When you 
play for a team like Celtic it’s a huge club with a lot of fans all over the 
world, so a lot of people will be looking forward to it in Israel.”
 