
Dunfermline breathed a sigh of relief after their appeal for reinstatement 
into the Scottish Cup was upheld today at Hampden. The club have been ordered 
to replay their fourth-round tie againstStenhousemuir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stenhousemuir> at their opponents' 
Ochilview Park home and fined around £30,000.

The Pars' expulsion came partly as the result of fielding Calum Woods, who 
came off the bench in the second half of the 7-1 win at East End Park on 9 
January, despite the Scottish Football Association's official suspensions list 
declaring him banned for the match.

The club were also punished for further administrative errors, including 
submitting an inaccurate team line-up, altering a named substitute and not 
registering two outfield under-21 players.

A three-person independent panel, consisting of the Hamilton secretary, Scott 
Struthers, Gordon Law, a former president of the Scottish Junior Football 
Association, and the solicitor Stephen Miller, met at Hampden today to hear 
their case.

After more than five hours of deliberation, including an afternoon 
adjournment, they ruled that the decision be overturned. AlthoughDunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> will be fined around £30,000 
in total, £20,000 of which was for playing Woods, the club have the chance to 
make up the deficit if they beat Stenhousemuir for the second time.

The winners host Celtic in the fifth round in a game which the Pars chief 
­executive John Yorkston was quoted as saying could be worth as much as 
£250,000.

There was no disguising the relief in the voice of Dunfermline director of 
football, Jim Leishman, who said: "We got a fair hearing and we are delighted 
to still be in the cup. We can still only apologise to the Dunfermline fans 
that we are in this situation but we are delighted that we are still in the cup.

"Last week we thought we were out of the cup but we got the chance to present 
our case and we are delighted to have the opportunity to go forward. We will be 
making an official statement but we are delighted."

On the £30,000 fine, he said: "That's something that comes with the judgment. 
I can't say too much on that but we are looking forward to the game. 
Stenhousemuir have been magnificent in this. They haven't said anything against 
it, they went with the judgment."

Gordon Smith, chief executive of the Scottish FA, said in a statement: "We are 
surprised by the decision after what the emergency committee considered a 
number of serious infringements of the cup competition rules by Dunfermline 
Athletic.

"Nonetheless, we respect the decision of the appeals board and hope that the 
situation involving Dunfermline Athletic, and the sanctions imposed on them 
tonight, will ensure all participating clubs are mindful of the cup competition 
rules in the future."
 