
Sieb Dykstra rescued Dundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> in the Tennents Scottish 
Cup at Somerset Park with an outstanding goalkeeping performance.

 The big Dutchman proved unbeatable as the First Division side almost pulled 
off a shock result. Dykstra saved a penalty with five minutes to go, reading it 
correctly as Andy Walker drove the ball in.

He turned the ball on to the crossbar as Ayr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ayr> manager Gordon Dalziel turned his 
back and hid his eyes, unable - or unwilling - to watch the drama unfold. It 
was a crucial miss for Walker and now the teams will replay at Tannadice on 
Tuesday for the right to meet Celtic in the semi-finals next month.

 But United are making hard work of their cup campaign and this is the third 
time in succession they have been taken to replays by clubs in divisions below 
them.

 Queens Park and Clydebank also made them struggle as did Ayr today in front 
of a bumper crowd. United badly missed the experience of veteran defender 
Maurice Malpas who was sidelined with a hamstring injury.

 Ayr were busy and inventive and certainly shaded in the first half with Gary 
Teale and Andy Walker prominent as they put the Premier League side under 
pressure.

 Teale delivered a fine cross from the left after 17 minutes and Glynn Hurst's 
header seemed bound for the net. It needed a magnificent save by Dykstra to 
prevent Ayr taking the lead. Hurst, struggling in front of goal recently, 
directed his header towards the top corner but he was thwarted by a great 
diving stop. The keeper stood up eight minutes later when Teale tried to curl 
the ball past him and again took it safely.

 United struggled to get going in the first half and their only effort of note 
came from striker Billy Dodds whose shot with the outside of his right boot 
went narrowly over the top.

 Ayr continued to look menacing and almost took the lead two minutes into the 
second half when Walker thumped the ball in from 20 yards only for Dykstra to 
push it away. He was obviously destined not to be beaten.

 That seemed to spark United into action and Ayr defender David Craig got back 
quickly to divert to safety a shot from Dodds after keeper David Castilla had 
been beatten.

 Then the French keeper tipped away a 25-yard shot from Jim Paterson and a 
header from Jason de Vos went inches wide following a cross from Joe Miller.

 Ayr continued to threaten and Hurst was narrowly wide with a shot after Davis 
had put him clear. Then came that penalty miss from Walker, minutes after 
Dykstra had again made a superb block.

 The penalty was awarded after Andy Millen was bowled over by Tommy Mols but 
the home crowd were left frusttrated.

 United almost sealed victory at the death but Castilla managed to save 
cleanly from first Kjell Olofsson and then Dodds as the game finished with 
plenty of drama and excitement.
 