
Dustin Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dustin-johnson> can barely 
have imagined the claiming of his maiden major championship would arrive with 
such a swell of neutral support. Rory McIlroy, Jordan Spieth and thousands of 
Oakmont fans were vocal in their delight after Johnson recovered from a 
sensational rules controversy to end his drought.

McIlroy and Spieth had been fierce in their criticism of the United States Golf
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Association amid the furore which 
completely upstaged Sunday in Pennsylvania. “Take that, USGA,” tweeted McIlroy 
as Johnson played a magnificent iron into the 18th green to seal victory. Any 
upcoming penalty for an earlier infraction was suddenly irrelevant. Just when 
it seemed another title would be snatched from Johnson’s grasp, he held firm.

The future reference point to this event will be the USGA’s treatment of 
Johnson and fellow competitors. High farce and high confusion? You bet, with 
Johnson’s role in it even more noteworthy given the rules infringement which 
cost him the 2010 US PGA Championship at Whistling Straits.

Johnson, who was in pole position to claim his first major title, immediately 
called a rules official on the 5th green as his ball appeared to move. Johnson 
would be liable for a penalty, were he deemed to have caused the ball position 
to change. The golfer was adamant that did not happen, as was his playing 
partner, Lee Westwood.

Dustin Johnson wins the 2016 US Open – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/19/us-open-golf-2016-day-four-live>
While the official seemed content there was no case to answer, Johnson was 
approached on the 12th tee when leading the tournament. A rules official at 
that juncture told the 31-year-old that the incident would be reassessed when 
Johnson completed his round, much to widespread consternation. As Johnson holed 
out for a birdie on the last, thereby holding a four-shot lead, he knew even 
the rules could not defeat him this time.

Ernie Els branded the USGA’s treatment of Johnson as “absolutely shocking”. 
Graeme McDowell, Keegan Bradley and Luke Donald also took to social media to 
express their dismay with the way this major was concluding. McIlroy had cited 
“amateur hour”, with Spieth labelling the scenes “a joke.”

Shane Lowry was not laughing, the Irishman losing a four-shot lead during a 
wounding afternoon. Lowry ultimately joined Scott Piercy, Sergio García – again 
– and Branden Grace in falling marginally short.

Before the Johnson chaos unfolded, the biggest surprise of the 116th US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usopengolf> was Spieth’s failure to break 
70. His closing round of 75 meant an aggregate of plus nine. For the first time 
in six majors Spieth did not claim at least a top-five finish. The Texan’s 
thoughts will immediately turn towards next month’s Open Championship.

“The story of my week was just playing the easy holes poorly,” Spieth said. 
“The 2nd, 11th and 14th, to play it whatever I played them, seven or eight 
over, on those holes the leaders are playing them under par.

“The funny thing is I felt like I didn’t have my game this week but if I play 
the easy holes at even par, I’m still top five. That’s what’s tough to swallow 
leaving this week. You do all this work on this course, and it was the easy 
little iron then wedge holes that tore me apart.

“I’m going home for a week and then I’ll look forward to the World Golf 
Championship in Akron to try to gain some momentum for the next couple of 
majors.”

Danny Willett signed off with a 71, also for a nine-over-par total, before 
confirming that the putter he smashed into a bridge when walking to his closing 
hole of round three was the one which helped him win the Masters. Willett’s 
temper had got the better of him, to the extent where said club will now be 
retired.

“Unfortunately, it’s now in two pieces,” said Willett of the putter. “We’ll 
have to get it refurbished and then I won’t be using it again. There was a lot 
more than one club, I would say, that helped win the Masters.

“This was a week that could have been pretty good. I think we had 33, 35 and 
33 putts the first three days. It’s not really going to put you anywhere near 
contention with that amount of putts on this golf course.”
 