
Newcastle United usually had the edge over Leeds United when the two used to 
meet in the Premier Leagueand that trend is continuing in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/garry-monk-revived-leeds-united-rafael-benitez-buoyant-newcastle>
. Replace Alan Shearer with Dwight Gayle and the story is repeated, Newcastle 
leaving West Yorkshire having managed to subdue their opponents and a rare 
sell-out crowd.

Gayle – who reportedly suffered damage to his mouth following a recent 
altercation in Liverpool – scored twice to extend Newcastle’s lead at the top 
of theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> to five 
points and, in truth, it was a comfortable victory for Rafael Benítez’s side 
despite the game’s big billing beforehand.

Leeds United 0-2 Newcastle United: Championship as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/20/leeds-united-v-newcastle-united-championship-live>
Leeds were not helped by a terrible error from their goalkeeper, Rob Green, to 
hand Newcastle the lead and they created few opportunities in front of Elland 
Road’s first capacity crowd in six years. Garry Monk spoke before the match 
about harnessing that support yet his side never provided fans with the chance 
to find their true voice, save for a wonderfully observed tribute to Gary Speed.

For Newcastle it was an eighth successive league victory, a run they have 
bettered only once, in 1992 when Kevin Keegan was manager. Benítez said: “I’m 
really pleased.Every game in the Championship is so difficult 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/20/leeds-united-v-newcastle-united-championship-live>
 that you have to be sure that the approach is right.

“You have to give credit to our players. If we have the fans, the staff and 
players pushing all together in the same direction we will be stronger. We are 
strong now but there are still many games to play. We have to be sure that we 
don’t approach a game with overconfidence. If the team understands that, they 
will be stronger every week.”

On Gayle’s performance and reports that he lost some teeth in the recent 
altercation, the Spaniard said: “I knew what had gone on. It was almost 
nothing. I saw him but I didn’t realise [anything about teeth].”

Leeds started at a sluggish tempo and Newcastle, filled with a quality unusual 
for the Championship, had the edge on Monk’s team whose two key players this 
season had both been on international duty in the week leading up to this match.

The centre-half Pontus Jansson and the striker Chris Wood are crucial 
components in this Leeds side yet both lacked sharpness after playing for 
Sweden and New Zealand respectively.

In contrast Newcastle were full of energy and Yoan Gouffran in particular 
provided a dangerous threat early on. Gayle almost scored in the seventh minute 
with the Leeds defence asleep, when he slipped into the penalty area before 
firing straight at Green.

A bustling atmosphere fit for a Premier League game rose to a cacophony in the 
11th minute when supporters of both sides stood to applaud their former player 
Gary Speed. The late midfielder’s parents walked on to the pitch before 
kick‑off and received a warming reception on a cold afternoon and, as Speed’s 
name rang out around this old stadium, the football became an irrelevance for a 
moment.

Football League your thoughts: Tom Ince in spot of bother but Derby win again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/19/football-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again>
It was the first time Leeds and Newcastle had met in the league for 13 years, 
during better times for both clubs. Much has changed since then but optimism 
has returned this season after recent adversity. Monk has guided Leeds to a 
position just below the play-offs after last season’s woes while Benítez’s side 
look well set to earn promotion back to the Premier League at the first time of 
asking.

They took a deserved lead in the 23rd minute, although the goal came in 
circumstances that Green will want to forget. The goalkeeper has a reputation 
for producing the odd clanger and this was among his worst.

Jack Colback looped a high and timid ball forward from just inside the Leeds 
half but Green, underneath his own crossbar, palmed it straight to Gayle for a 
tap-in. It was the striker’s 12th goal of the campaign and none has been easier.

Newcastle controlled the flow until a late period of pressure from Leeds 
before half-time. The left-back Charlie Taylor was bundled over in the 
opposition area before a more concerted penalty appeal when Ronaldo Vieira 
crossed straight into an arm of Colback. Neither resulted in a sanction.

Eunan O’Kane produced Leeds’s first chance of the match shortly after 
half‑time, his low shot across goal well saved by Karl Darlow, but Newcastle 
soon increased their advantage. And while their first goal was certainly 
fortuitous, their second was a fine team move.

With Newcastle pushing Leeds back into their own penalty area Ayoze Pérez 
split the opposition defence with a precise pass that found the advancing 
Vurnon Anita. He demonstrated composure by sliding the ball across goal for 
Gayle, who had another tap-in.

Monk, who believed the “Colback handball incident”, as he put it, should have 
resulted in a penalty, said of Green’s error: “It’s a genuine, honest mistake. 
We did enough to score a goal today for sure. We’ve set high standards and high 
expectations. I don’t think we can be too critical or too disappointed.

“The fans were fantastic, we really wanted to give them something to go home 
with, so we’re a bit disappointed.”

Leeds United (4-4-1-1) Green; Ayling, Bartley, Jansson, Taylor; O’Kane, Vieira 
(Sacko 62), Doukara (Antonsson 78), Roofe; Phillips; Wood.Subs not used 
Silvestri, Cooper, Dallas, Grimes, Berardi.Yellow card Jansson.

Newcastle United (4-2-3-1) Darlow; Phillips, Clark, Lascelles, Anita; Colback 
(Hayden 83), Shelvey; Gouffran (Diame 76), Richie, Perez; Gayle (Mitrovic 79).
Subs not used Mbemba, Yedlin, Sels, Atsu. Yellow card Colback.

Referee G Scott (Oxfordshire). Attendance 36,002.
 