
Dwight Gayle scored a hat-trick as Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> moved back to the top of 
the Championship in style by brushing aside the play-off hopefuls Birmingham 
City 4-0 at St James’ Park.

Rafael Benítez’s side never looked back after hitting the half-time break with 
a two-goal cushion courtesy of Gayle’s double in front of the Gallowgate. The 
Championship’s leading scorer then took his tally to 16 by completing his 
treble with 12 minutes to go to end Newcastle’s recent three-game run without a 
victory. By then Yoan Gouffran had already added a third seconds after the 
break to ensure his team moved a point clear of Brighton again.

Cardiff’s Sol Bamba clashes with manager Neil Warnock after red card
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/sol-bamba-neil-warnock-sending-off-cardiff>
Birmingham struggled to come to terms with Newcastle, who fielded Jonjo 
Shelvey and Paul Dummett after they had the red cards they received at 
Nottingham Forest eight days earlier overturned.

Despite that decision Newcastle’s players were keen to put on a show after 
feeling aggrieved that they had lost at the City Ground having been forced to 
play a lot of the game with nine men - allowing Brighton to go hittop spot by 
defeating Leeds on Friday evening.

Put on a show was exactly what Newcastle did in the first half, and the only 
surprise was that Birmingham, who have now lost five consecutive away league 
games on Tyneside for the first time, did not concede more than two.

Gayle had already been denied by the goalkeeper Tomasz Kuszczak and Isaac 
Hayden was inches away from finding the top corner before the first arrived in 
the 18th minute.

before Newcastle’s leading marksman he worked his way free of his marker to 
cushion a tidy header inside the bottom corner to open the scoringwhen he got 
on the end of Mohamed Diame’s perfect centre.

Six minutes later Gayle added a second. Following a lovely move down the right 
involving several players, Hayden charged into the area and centred. After a 
fortunate deflection, Gayle controlled in the six-yard box before slotting 
inside the bottom corner and beyond the goalkeeper.

Before the break Gouffran, Matt Ritchie and Diame all went close, while 
Birmingham struggled to make any inroads towards Karl Darlow’s net at the 
opposite end.

And itIt did not take long for Newcastle to add the third after the restart.,; 
70 seconds in fact.

as Shelvey’s free-kick was poorly dealt with and Gouffran was on hand to 
convert from 12 yards, effectively putting the game to bed there and then.

Gayle came within inches of grabbing his hat-trick just after the hour when 
Kuszczak turned his effort behind following an incisive first-time pass from 
the impressive Diame.

Birmingham, who started the day fifth, did record an effort with 20 minutes to 
go when the substitute Lukas Jutkiewicz headed over at the back post, which 
raised an ironic cheer from the travelling fans.

Just when it seemed Newcastle were happy to slow things down in the closing 
stages, before Gayle pounced to turn in Shelvey’s pass in the 78th minute to 
wrap up a comprehensive win. 
 