
It was not the smoothest of take-offs but, at the third attempt, Newcastle 
United’s Rafa-lution finally became airborne. With the final score slightly 
flattering, there were quite a few nervous moments and, at times,Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> made life uncomfortable for 
Rafael Benítez’s still gelling team.

Eventually, though, a morale-boosting first win of the season rekindled hope 
on the Tyne. “It was most important to get three points today,” the Newcastle 
manager said after a match featuring two goals from Dwight Gayle. “We can play 
better and be stronger and I’m sure we’ll improve, but we showed character.”

Two successive defeats had demanded a response and sure enough, Benítez made 
four changes. If one was enforced by Mohamed Diamé’s ankle injury, Jamaal 
Lascelles, Daryl Janmaat and Rolando Aarons were all dropped to the bench. In 
the case of Lascelles this represented quite a statement as the young 
centre-half has only just been made Newcastle’s captain.

With the desperate-to-depart Moussa Sissoko unavailable after sustaining a 
diplomatic training knock, the replacements included Yoan Gouffran, who has 
barely featured in the first team over the past two years. No matter; the 
Frenchman swiftly created the opening goal for Isaac Hayden and operating in a 
wide-left attacking-midfield role, generally played rather well.

Brighton hit top of Championship after brushing aside Rotherham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/championship-round-up-brighton-rotherham>
Gouffran and company briefly believed they had taken a third-minute lead 
before that “goal” was rightly disallowed for a blatant hand-ball on Gayle’s 
part following excellent approach work from Matt Ritchie and Ayoze Pérez.

When the referee and a linesman initially let it stand, an incandescent Jaap 
Stam and his assistants were reduced to technical-area apoplexy. Happily for 
the Reading manager’s sanity, a word in the referee’s earpiece from the fourth 
official ensured that effort was quickly chalked off.

There have been some animated figures in St James’ Park’s away dugout in 
recent years but few can have cut such a formidably aggressive figure as the 
one‑time Manchester United defender, who joined Reading in June following a 
stint in the Ajax coaching ranks.

After appearing to suppress the urge to charge into the area and take his 
place in the wall as Reading prepared to defend a free-kick, Stam’s ferocity 
levels rose visibly when Ritchie’s initial shot was blocked and, pouncing on 
the deflected loose ball, Gouffran set up Hayden to score with a low, 
right-foot shot.

Perhaps aware of the need to pacify their manager before half-time, the 
Reading players regrouped. Garath McCleary’s wonderful change of pace swept him 
down the right, John Swift joined in and Roy Beerens’s shot hit the bar before 
Danny Williams forced Matz Sels into a desperate parry. Connecting with the 
rebound, McCleary should really have scored but instead shot over.

Newcastle, for whom Jonjo Shelvey disappointed once again, the six-time 
England midfielder hitting far too many overly ambitious long balls – have 
developed a nasty habit of conceding goals on the brink of half-time and they 
were soon at it again.

Making his debut after joining from Aston Villa, Ciaran Clark, Lascelles’s 
replacement, brought Swift down unnecessarily, and clumsily, in the area and 
McCleary beat Sels from the penalty spot. Stam, suddenly a study in calm and 
whose side had dominated the previous 10 minutes, indulged in a restrained hand 
clap.

A sunny Tyneside day had morphed into a slightly chill, distinctly autumnal 
evening, but Ritchie quickly restored a little warmth to an increasingly 
fractious mood, re-establishing Newcastle’s lead from the penalty spot after 
Chris Gunter had fouled Gouffran.

Ali Al-Habsi, Reading’s goalkeeper, was soon beaten again and this time 
Gayle’s contribution proved legitimate. A brilliantly executed right-foot, 
25-yard free‑kick from the former Crystal Palace striker arced over the wall 
and into the top corner in the wake of George Evans felling Hayden. Hayden 
created the fourth, his impressive cross being turned in by Gayle from close 
range as Newcastle’s campaign finally gained traction.

“We were the better team,” said a now composed, considered Stam, who believed 
his side should have had at least one more penalty. “Newcastle gave us a lot of 
space and we had a lot of possession. We deserved a lot more.”
 