
At West Ham they tell a story about the days when Dylan Tombides was locked 
into that excruciating chain of treatments, operations and grievous setbacks 
that is probably a good place to start if we want to understand why there are 
so many people at Upton Park who talk about him with a sense of awe.

He had been diagnosed with testicular cancer in the summer of 2011. The lump 
appeared in April but West Ham were bottom of the league, about to be 
relegated, and it’s difficult sometimes when a club is engulfed in that kind of 
pressure. Dylan didn’t want to worry anyone, or create any more hassle, when 
the place was stressed enough. He went to his local GP instead and he was told 
it was a cyst and nothing to worry about. Then, in June, he played for 
Australia in the Under-17 World Cup in Mexico. Dylan was selected for a routine 
drug test and the results came back with the force of a sledgehammer: he had 
either taken a banned substance or there was a tumour in his body. He knew 
immediately which one it was.

His next three years are a reminder what a callous, indiscriminate disease 
this is, and the horrors its sufferers have to go through. It’s brutal, 
chemotherapy. It strips your muscles, it wipes you out, it tests your sanity. 
There is an old quote: “The goal is pretty much to kill everything in your body 
without killing you.” And every time those little drips of poison appeared to 
have beaten the cancer, every time Dylan and his family thought they could 
start to live properly again, it returned within six to eight weeks, stronger 
than before.

He was dying a slow death but, boy, he did everything he could to try to see 
the bastard off. Dylan is not the first professional footballer to contract 
cancer. He may be the first, though, to continue playing during the ordeal. He 
made his debut for West Ham with the disease in his body. He played in the 
Asian Under-22 Championships in Oman three weeks after intensive chemotherapy.

At West Ham, when others might have curled up into a ball, he carried on going 
into training, building up his muscles, taking on specially tailored fitness 
programmes.

And here’s the thing: West Ham monitor all their players with bleep tests and 
various fitness checks. Dylan’s results amazed the medical staff. One of the 
physios spoke to his mum, Tracy. “Dylan’s putting a lot of pressure on the 
other players,” he told her. “His stats are still faster and stronger than a 
lot of the others.”

We meet at her work. She’s dignified and trying to hold it together. Yet there 
are moments when talking about it is unbearable. Tracy is still grieving and 
probably always will be. On her way to work, she can’t listen to music any more 
because the lyrics – it doesn’t even matter what song sometimes – always seem 
to take her back to her son.

Next Sunday, 8 March, would have been his 21st birthday, and goodness knows 
what it is going to be like. But she also makes the point that every day hurts. 
Taylor, Dylan’s younger brother, has moved into his bedroom and kept all his 
stuff out. Christmas was hard but, again, every day is bloody hard. And the 
house feels so different. “It’s so quiet,” she says.

As it turned out, the Crystal Palace captain, Mile Jedinak, invited the family 
to spend Christmas with him. Jedinak had followed Dylan’s story as another 
Australian footballer in the Premier League. When he scored for Palace at Upton 
Park last season he didn’t celebrate, to show his respect for Dylan, and when 
it came to Christmas he just wanted to try to make it more bearable. It’s worth 
remembering sometimes, amid all the headlines this sport creates, there are 
some wonderful people in football, too.

Back at West Ham, they have given Dylan the ultimate compliment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/20/dylan-tombides-honoured-by-moving-tributes-at-west-ham>
 – the Bobby Moore treatment – by retiring his No38 shirt. Sam Allardyce 
remembers that in his first week at the club he asked Tony Carr, that prolific 
nurturer of young talent, who was the outstanding prospect in the youth team. 
Carr told him to look out for an Aussie kid: two-footed, with natural balance, 
and an eye for goal.

It’s also worth checking out the video on the website for Dylan’s new charity 
foundation –www.dt38.co.uk <http://www.dt38.co.uk> – where his mates from the 
youth team remember what he was like. They use words such as “legend” and 
“inspiration” and tell stories about how funny and popular he was. Dylan once 
described himself as the happiest kid with cancer. He had a handsome smile, 
even on the photographs when he was pulling up his shirt to reveal the 10in 
scar where his chest and abdomen had been opened up, and it doesn’t need long 
to realise how much his old team-mates looked up to him. George Moncur, now at 
Colchester, has Dylan’s name tattooed on his arm. Elliot Lee has just gone on 
loan to Luton and asked to wear Dylan’s shirt number. “Dylan was a delight to 
watch,” another player, Callum Driver, remembers. “We can’t forget that he was 
pushing for the first team while we were all scholars.”

The foundation was launched on Saturday and it wouldn’t surprise me if one day 
there was a film about the boy who played international football after three 
years of on-off chemo. As a kid, Dylan used to sleep with his football. Tracy 
remembers he would even take it into the bath. They were from Perth but when 
the family moved to Macau in 2007 the 13-year-old Dylan would play in men’s 
games on concrete pitches. Every weekend, he and Taylor would catch the boat to 
Hong Kong for more games and training. The more you know of his background, the 
more you realise why he refused to give up football when the cancer arrived.

In January 2012, Dylan had surgery to remove his lymph nodes and it’s 
heart‑rending now to read the interview he did the following May when he 
clearly thought he was getting better. TheDaily Mail’s Neil Ashton recalls 
Dylan “bouncing around and putting wax in his hair for the photographs (and the 
girls)”. The cancer was still lurking. It returned the following month and it 
is almost implausible – a miracle of the body, West Ham’s doctor, Richard 
Weiler, will say – that Dylan was able to make his first-team debut in 
September, aged 18. By December, he was back on high-dose chemotherapy and 
needed a stem-cell transplant twice within eight weeks. Every time there was a 
breakthrough, another set of blood results kicked him in the gut. More surgery, 
more treatment. “The amount of times we saw him come back,” Allardyce recalls. 
“Then again and again, the cancer came back.”

It spread to Dylan’s liver after he had worked slavishly to be ready the 
Under-20 World Cup in March 2013. Dylan was out for three months and, in 
November, the cancer returned again. How he was able to finish another 
intensive course of chemo and fly to Oman for the Under-22 Championships defies 
medical logic. Dylan played in four games in eight days – two starts and two 
substitute appearances – but it was when he returned to England in late January 
that he was informed it had stopped working. He died on 18 April.

In case you’re wondering, the family never went after the doctor who 
misdiagnosed Dylan. The way they figured it, it wasn’t going to bring back 
Dylan. Yet they will always wonder what might have happened if the cancer had 
been caught earlier. “Dylan was robbed of the future he dreamed of as a young 
boy,” Tracy says. “It robbed Taylor of a brother and it robbed my husband and I 
of watching our beautiful son grow and fulfil his dreams.”

The foundation will try to heighten awareness of testicular cancer. But more 
than anything, it will campaign for a change to medical guidelines, whereby 
anyone who goes to see their doctor with a testicular lump is automatically 
sent for an ultrasound scan. That way, as Tracy says, it “takes the guessing 
out of it”. There is the potential here to save lives.

Taylor, 19, another graduate of West Ham’s youth academy, is going to be 
prominently involved. West Ham have been incredibly supportive and something 
tells me that if the foundation applies Dylan’s determination and spirit the 
family will make it work.

His dad, Jim, told a story at the funeral about something Dylan used to ask 
his team-mates: “Why say the sky is the limit when there are footprints on the 
moon?”

Fools will rush in where agents fear to trade

The Football Association’s punishments against three agents caught fiddling 
the paperwork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/25/brighton-fined-agents-dale-stephens-fa>
 surrounding the transfer of Dale Stephens from Charlton Athletic to Brighton & 
Hove Albion last year act as a reminder that there will be always be people who 
want to bend the rules when the sport is swilling with such money. But did you 
know there is the potential for it to get a whole lot worse?

Starting from 1 April, Fifa is scrapping the existing licensing rules for 
football agents and in effect allowing anyone to sign up players, initiate 
transfers and try to make their millions, as long as they fill in an 
application form from the FA’s website and don’t have the criminal convictions 
to fail what will be known as the “test of good character and reputation”. 
That’s about it, bar a small fee, and when there is so much money at stake it 
is no wonder there are people high up in the sport wondering about what kind of 
chancers and rogues are going to be attracted.

It’s happening already, judging by some of the stories I have heard from one 
club about would-be agents lining the pitch to watch under-13s’ games and then 
waiting outside the changing rooms with gifts for the parents.

Previously, there has been a rule in place that agents cannot sign anyone 
under the age of 16. That is being scrapped, as long as the agent has consent 
from a legal guardian, and another leading club confide that barely a day goes 
by without a parcel arriving for one of their 11-year-olds, usually containing 
some new boots and an introductory letter.

Don’t be taken in by the popular caricature: the leading football agents are 
mostly serious professionals, often qualified lawyers and accountants, with 
expertise when it comes to dealing with the complex rules surrounding transfers.

What we are going to get in the future, in the words of one senior football 
administrator, is football’s wild west and if the FA is dreading what is to 
come at least it knows who to thank. It was the FA’s former chairman, Geoff 
Thompson, who was in charge of the Fifa committee that came up with this.
 