
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 

The first time my mind was blown by a live standup was Boothby Graffoe in 
Edinburgh in 2003. He had absolute control of a very rowdy crowd without 
pandering to them at all, and was so delightfully silly that it actually turned 
them into a pleasant bunch of people.

The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen 

I’m Alan Partridge will never, ever be beaten. Some of the finest writing in 
any genre of entertainment. For a while, my entire personality was based on 
Alan Partridge quotes. My family were worried, but it’s probably the funniest 
I’ve ever been.

The funniest heckle I’ve ever had 

When I was a larger man, I went onstage wearing a stripy T-shirt and someone 
shouted: “Horizontal stripes are a fat man no-no!” Harsh but fair.

The funniest film show I’ve ever seen 

Probably a documentary called American Movie. It’s about an amateur film-maker 
in the States who is making a horror film. Everyone in it is utterly bizarre, 
and my favourite is Uncle Bill, a man who has $300,000 in his bank account but 
lives in a terrible broken-down trailer. He agrees to fund the film as long as 
he can have a part, and the moment when they have to film his part is one of 
the funniest things I have ever seen.

The funniest word

I’ve always been a fan of very mundane, blunt sounding words, like “back” or 
“hair”. Maybe that is my subconscious’s way of making it okay that I now have 
back hair.

The funniest item of clothing I’ve ever owned 

I used to have a leather trenchcoat and huge boots with flames on. I still 
think I looked awesome but I’ve been reliably informed I did not, and that it 
was laughable. I’m happy to laugh along with everyone for now, but one day I 
will start wearing them again.

The funniest dream I’ve ever had

The details are hazy but I know it involved a trampoline, the full cast of 
’Allo ’Allo and a mouse that could talk.

Ed Gamble is at Old Rep Theatre, Birmingham, Sat 
<http://www.oldreptheatre.co.uk/ed-gamble.html>; The Red Bull, Cambridge, Tue 
<https://www.ents24.com/cambridge-events/the-red-bull/ed-gamble/4707998>; The 
Counting House, Edinburgh, 3 to 29 Aug 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/ed-gamble-stampede>
 