
Former Labor powerbroker Eddie Obeid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eddie-obeid> has been jailed for improperly 
lobbying a senior bureaucrat to secretly further his family’s business 
interests.

Obeid looked shocked as he was sentenced to five years with a non-parole 
period of three years for wilful misconduct in public office.

Justice Robert Beech-Jones described Obeid’s crime as a very serious example 
of the offence, saying cases of corruption significantly damage the public’s 
trust in democratic institutions.

“Corruption by elected representatives consumes democracies, it destroys 
confidence in democratic institutions,” he said. “Given the nature of the 
offending, not withstanding Mr Obeid’s personal circumstances ... I’m satisfied 
that no penalty other than imprisonment is appropriate.”

The rise to power and tumbling fall of Eddie Obeid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/the-rise-to-power-and-tumbling-fall-of-eddie-obeid>
Beech-Jones said Obeid’s life, had he not committed the offence, could have 
been remembered as one of considerable public service and hard work.

“Instead his time in public life has produced a very different legacy.”

Obeid will be eligible for parole on 15 December 2019 at the earliest. 
Immediately after sentencing, Obeid’s defence began arguing an appeal, saying 
Beech-Jones had misdirected the jury during the June trial.

Obeid’s barrister, Guy Reynolds, SC, attempted to have his client bailed after 
the sentence, pending appeals against the conviction and sentence. That 
application was dismissed and Obeid was led to the cells by a group of 
corrections officers about 1.30pm.

His family, who were emotional following the sentence, did not comment as they 
left the court.

Obeid was found guilty in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/eddie-obeid-guilty-misconduct-public-office>
 of hiding his family’s financial interests in harbourside cafes at Circular 
Quay while lobbying a senior bureaucrat to preserve their leases in 2007.

Obeid, then a member of New South Wales’s upper house, was pushing NSW’s 
maritime authority chief executive Steve Dunn to allow the leases to be 
automatically renewed without competitive tender in 2008.

Dunn, who is accused of no wrongdoing, was under the impression that Obeid was 
acting on behalf of his constituents, not to advance the business interests of 
his family.

A draft commercial leasing policy was later changed to allow the Circular Quay 
leases to be renewed without competition in the first instance, although the 
court found Obeid’s actions had not directly influenced the decision.

The crown, during Obeid’s sentencing hearing, argued Obeid was unrepentant and 
showed remorse only for being caught. Obeid’s defence, led by Braddon Hughes 
SC, had earlier argued the prosecution were inflating the seriousness of the 
crime as one more akin to bribery.

Hughes had urged the court to consider Obeid’s 20 years of service to NSW 
politics, and a range of health issues he suffered, including a recent acute 
stroke.

His defence argued the 73-year-old should be able to serve his sentence in 
home detention, due to his short life expectancy. It was argued he would not 
receive the same level of medical attention in jail.

A large number of character references were handed to the court on his behalf, 
many praising his honesty, integrity and devotion to public work. But 
Beech-Jones found the healthcare Obeid would receive in prison was “adequate”, 
albeit inferior to that available in the community.

Beech-Jones acknowledged Obeid was of prior good character, but said it was of 
less weight in cases of corruption.

“In cases of corruption... where the need for general deterrence is especially 
strong, prior good character is to be afforded less weight than it otherwise 
would,” he said.

Beech-Jones said the “overwhelming majority” of politicians act in what they 
believe to be in the best interests of their electorate, knowing they could 
only expect “persistent criticism” of their actions.


The prosecution came after a finding in the Independent Commission Against 
Corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/independent-commission-against-corruption>
 that Obeid had acted corruptly over the Circular Quay cafes.

The Icac inquiry followed a Fairfax Media investigation that uncovered Obeid’s 
family’s ownership of the cafes were held through a secretive network of 
trusts. Obeid’s business dealings had been the subject of three Icac inquiries.

He famously remarked there was a 1%chance of him being charged following the 
Icac findings.

The NSW government has also moved to strip Obeid of his $120,000 a year 
parliamentary pension.

The premier, Mike Baird, announced on Thursday that parliament would legislate 
to ensure any politician convicted of a serious offence – one punishable by 
five years’ imprisonment or more – loses the entitlement, regardless of when 
they were convicted.

Previously, only politicians who were charged while still in office were 
liable to lose their pension.

“The crimes of Eddie Obeid and his cronies are the most serious instance of 
official corruption we have seen in our lifetimes,” Baird said. “Regardless of 
political affiliation, any MP who commits a serious offence while in office 
should face the consequences, and should not be shielded simply because they 
resign before being charged.”

The NSW government will also seek to be repaid $280,000 in taxpayer funds 
given to Obeid for legal assistance, money he was entitled to as a former 
minister.

Obeid was installed in the Legislative Council in 1991, quickly establishing 
himself as a rightwing factional heavyweight, along with ally Joe Tripodi.

Obeid entered cabinet in 1999, but was dumped by then-premier Bob Carr after 
adverse findings against him by the NSW parliament’s privileges and ethics 
committee. He eventually resigned from parliament in 2011.
 