
The intent had been laid bare in a post-training session at Bangkok's 
International School last July, even ifEden Hazard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eden-hazard> might not have envisaged 
quite how José Mourinho would go about progressing his development. "There is 
more to come from me," he had offered a week into the manager's second coming. 
"I want to improve, to do better, to make an even bigger impression." Seven 
months on and established as Chelsea's top goalscorer and leading light among 
title contenders, his form is more scintillating than ever. The Belgian is 
blossoming.

The journey to this point has not been straightforward. Mourinho had warned in 
pre-season that he was "not the kind of guy who makes life easy for the great 
players", his intention made public to ensure his most talented players 
employed their qualities to hoist those of the collective, and he has been true 
to his word. There were times this season when Hazard would wince at the 
constant ear-bashing administered from the technical area during games, all 
bellowed reminders of defensive duties and the need to track back and support 
his full-back.

That same message has been drummed into him through daily training sessions. A 
player once prone to laughing and joking through drills was quickly made to 
realise a change of attitude was required if he was to thrive under the new 
regime. Mourinho has acknowledged the player he had targeted for Real Madrid in 
2011 and inherited atChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in 
2013 would initially coast through sessions, trusting in his natural ability 
"so not at top-concentration or looking to improve". Such an approach was 
unacceptable. "But at this moment he's completely different, always working to 
improve," said the manager. He is deemed "professional" these days. The 
Portuguese had sought evidence of new-found maturity and the 23-year-old has 
responded.

The reprimand for returning late from Lille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> in November – he had mislaid his 
passport after attending his former club's victory over Monaco – which saw him 
dropped for the Champions League group game against Schalke has been pinpointed 
as a turning point, though the penny had dropped before then. There had been 
regular conversations, analysis and feedback sessions, constant suggestions and 
words of advice one on one, Mourinho added, "to show him the right way, or at 
least the way he has to follow".

Last year the £32m signing started with a flurry and ended with a flourish, 
enduring a mid-season lull when the physical demands of the English game 
appeared to grind him down. The breather afforded him by the three-match ban for
his altercation with a ballboy at Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/jan/24/eden-hazard-ballboy-chelsea-swansea>
 a year ago actually proved beneficial.

This year has been about steady improvement with the aim to achieve a higher 
level of consistency throughout each individual contest, ensuring he is as much 
a threat in the opening exchanges against organised and fresh opponents as he 
is capable of running riot against tired opponents who may be chasing a game 
late-on. Three goals in five games, andmesmeric displays such as that at 
Sunderland in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/04/sunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, have illuminated Chelsea's recent campaign. Only Wayne Rooney (19) can claim 
more Premier League assists than Hazard's 16 since the latter's arrival in 
English football.

The raw statistics demonstrate improvement: he already has as many league 
goals this season, nine, as he managed in his first campaign with shot accuracy 
(from 60% to 67%) and chance-conversion rate (21% to 33%) raised. There is 
greater involvement, with more successful dribbles (54%) and an impressive 
number of key passes for a player who has been granted more licence to cut 
inside from the flank or even revel as a No10 – which might reflect the drop in 
the number of crosses – under this regime, with his credentials preferred to 
those of Juan Mata.

His contributions make real and prolonged impact these days, his threat 
omnipresent rather than flaring then fizzling out. "There are times when I 
disappear out of the match, so I'm hoping to improve my work rate and get more 
consistency," he acknowledged last month. "There will be matches when I don't 
do so well, and matches when I am exceptional." When Chelsea labour, and they 
have threatened to stall at times, he invariably supplies that dash of 
brilliance to make the difference.

If the attacking data marks out a more imposing second season then the 
defensive numbers actually suggest plateau, though witnessing his displays 
first-hand provides evidence of a willingness to track back and support either 
Branislav Ivanovic, César Azpilicueta or Ashley Cole at his back. As Mata 
experienced early on, Mourinho was never likely to accept anything else. The 
player comprehends better which areas in which he is expected to provide cover, 
and where the onus is upon him to close opponents down. Nemanja Matic's arrival 
from Benfica may actually liberate Hazard from some of those defensive duties, 
offering him more freedom to concentrate on picking apart opponents, but the 
sense of responsibility will never recede.

It is in the development of key players where Chelsea's evolution can be 
properly measured. The lineup employed by Mourinho over recent weeks has hardly 
varied dramatically from that selected by Rafael Benítez towards the end of 
last season. Indeed, nine of the 11 who featured in last Saturday's win at Hull,
an occasion graced by a wonderful Hazard opener 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/11/hull-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, had started the key 2-2 draw with Tottenham Hotspur under the interim manager 
on 8 May. David Luiz began both fixtures in central midfield, with only 
Ivanovic and Mata absent at the KC Stadium from the team who collided with 
Spurs.

Yet, if the team seems familiar, the Belgian is a changed man even from the 
player who finished last term with that eye-catching burst of form – before his 
hamstring twanged. Perhaps Mata, in the manager's eyes, does not have the same 
stamina, stocky strength or speed across the turf.

Maybe, as a World Cup, European Championship and Champions League winner, the 
older man cannot be moulded in the same way. In contrast, Hazard seems as 
integral to Chelsea now as he once did to Lille. Standards must continue to 
improve, a pressurised title pursuit sharpening his focus, but his trajectory 
reflects that of this team. There is plenty more to come.
 