
Edin Dzeko scored a goal either side of half-time to set up a 3-1 win for Roma 
away to Napoli in the battle for second place inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> on Saturday but his 
manager Luciano Spalletti insists he still must do more.

Both sides created chances in an end-to-end first half but it was the visitors 
who went ahead two minutes before the break. Mohamed Salah won the ball off 
Kalidou Koulibaly on the edge of the area and his cross was swept home by Dzeko 
from 12 yards.

The Bosnia forward took advantage of more poor defending when he rose unmarked 
at the far post to head in Alessandro Florenzi’s free-kick nine minutes after 
the restart. It was Dzeko’s seventh Serie A goal of the season, only one short 
of his tally for the whole of last season.

“I congratulate him for the brace but it’s not just about the goals,” said 
Spalletti. “In Italy, players only get judged on how many goals they score and 
people tend not to pay attention to the rest of the match. Dzeko has to do 
better in terms of being clinical and ruthless.

“In the first half, there were four or five occasions where he could have 
caused them damage. He is an exceptional player but he could do more with his 
physical prowess and technical ability.“

Koulibaly kept the game alive when he headed in from a corner four minutes 
after Dzeko’s second and Napoli began to look capable of grabbing an equaliser. 
Instead, Daniele De Rossi sent Salah clear of theNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> defence and the Egyptian guided 
his shot wide of Pepe Reina to seal Roma’s win.

Napoli and Roma have alternated in providing the biggest challenge to the 
recent dominance of Juventus with each finishing as runners-up to the Turin 
club twice in the last four seasons.Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> have 16 points, two behind 
Juventus, who host Udinese later on Saturday.

Napoli, who sold their leading scorer, Gonzalo Higuaín, to Juventus in the 
close season and then lost his replacement, Arkadiusz Milik, to a serious knee 
injury last week, have 14 points after their second successive defeat without 
scoring.
 