
George Groves’ opponent Eduard Gutknecht has undergone surgery after falling 
ill after their fight on Friday night.

Groves beat the 34-year-old super-middleweight by unanimous decision at 
Wembley’s SSE Arena, following which Gutknecht was taken to hospital.

Gutknecht is sedated and will continue to be monitored in the coming days, 
according to the BritishBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board 
of Control (BBBofC).

Gutknecht took significant punishment throughout the one-sided fight before 
Groves, 28, was declared a 119-109, 119-109 and 119-110 winner on the three 
judges’ scorecards to remain in contention for an expected fourth shot at a 
world title in 2017.

George Groves defeats Eduard Gutknecht to close in on world bout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/george-groves-defeats-eduard-gutknecht-closer-world-title-bout>
Concerns almost immediately turned to Gutknecht, however, when reports of his 
condition emerged.

He was already clearly losing the fight against the heavy-handed Groves when a 
cut opened up around his swollen left eye in the ninth round, further reducing 
his ability to defend himself.

He impressed in surviving until the final bell despite Groves’ consistent 
aggression and did not appear distressed while the scorecards were announced.

It was afterwards in his changing room when his condition declined, leading to 
him requiring medical attention and swiftly being taken away in an ambulance.

According to the BBBofC, it was after that point that Gutknecht - born in 
Kazakhstan but who fights out of Germany - was operated on.

At the same venue in March, English middleweight Nick Blackwell collapsed at 
the end of his stoppage defeat by Chris Eubank Jnr. He suffered bleeding on his 
skull and was treated at St Mary’s hospital in Paddington where he eventually 
recovered, despite having to retire.

More recently in September, Scottish welterweight Mike Towell died just 25 
hours after losing to Dale Evans in Glasgow. He had suffered severe bleeding 
and swelling to his brain.

Speaking before Gutknecht was taken ill, Groves told Channel 5: “I am very 
happy with how I fought, it went exactly to plan. I set a great tempo and 
busted him up badly. I am surprised he made it to the bell - Gutknecht is a 
tough character.

“We want real, big, proper fights. There was no world title on the line, but 
we knew Gutknecht was going to give me a tough fight.”

After reports of Gutknecht’s condition emerged, Groves cancelled plans to 
discuss his performance at a post-fight press conference, considering it 
inappropriate.
 