
Northampton extended their club-record unbeaten run as they stunned West 
Bromwich Albionin the EFL Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup>. 
The Cobblers have not lost since January now knocked the Premier League side 
out 4-3 on penalties, following a 2-2 draw at Sixfields.

Rob Page’s side are now unbeaten in 26 games in all competitions after Kenji 
Gorré netted the key spot-kick as they repeated their 2010 heroics when they 
dumped Liverpool out on penalties at Anfield.

Liverpool rout Burton with Daniel Sturridge double icing on the cake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/burton-albion-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
Bradley Dack struck in extra-time as Gillingham came from behind to shock 
Watford 2-1. Walter Mazzarri looked set to enjoy his first win as Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> manager when Odion Ighalo came 
off the bench to fire them ahead before Dack missed a penalty. But Mark Byrne 
struck eight minutes from the end of normal time to level the scores before 
Dack found redemption.

Elsewhere Derby County won a dramatic penalty shoot-out 14-13 when debutant 
Timi Max Elsnik endedCarlisle’s challenge. The 19-year-old calmly converted the 
32nd spot-kick to send Derby into the third round after the teams were level at 
1-1 after extra-time.

Adama Diomandé claimed a double as Hull came from behind to beat Exeter 3-1 
while Peter Crouch bagged a hat-trick, completing his treble with an acrobatic 
scissor kick, in his first appearance of the season asStoke defeated Stevenage 
4-0.

Swansea, winners of the League Cup in 2013, beat Peterborough 3-1, with Norwich
 thrashing League OneCoventry 6-1. Brighton’s 4-2 victory came on the road at 
Oxford thanks to three late goals while Championship clubsLeeds, Nottingham 
Forest, QPR and Wolves were all victors by one-goal margins over Luton, Millwall
,Rochdale and Cambridge respectively.

Rafael Benítez’s Newcastle survived embarrassment by Cheltenham with a 2-0 
triumph thanks to two goals from Ayoze Pérez, the same scoreline whichPreston 
recorded againstOldham.
 