
“I heard the murmurs and I feared the worst,” Eneko Bóveda said.

A moment or so before, the Eibar centre-back had stood on the Ipurua pitch 
while drums beat and a Mexican wave rolled round him, but the wave had broken 
now and the cheers had died too, roars replaced by rumour. Up in the stands, 
some had radios; down on the bench, some did too. They were the messengers and 
they turned apologetically to those near them and delivered the news, three 
words that were a knife in the back:Gol del Depor. Bóveda didn’t yet know what 
was said but he could sense what it meant.Eibar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eibar> Sociedad Deportiva were going down.

Eibar always knew that relegation was likely. They weren’t just the smallest 
team in the first division this season, they had been the smallest in the 
second division last season. A club with a stadium that has been expanded but 
still holds just 6,000, nestled in the Ego valley in a town whose entire 
population could travel to the Camp Nou and leave 72,000 empty seats, a club 
who lost Raúl Albentosa to Derby County, the Championship team able to offer 
him a 12-fold salary increase.This was their first ever campaign at the top and 
most expected it to end at the bottom. Just not like this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/aug/25/eibar-la-liga-fairytale-introduction>
.

La Liga: Atlético Madrid secure top-three spot and Deportivo survive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/23/la-liga-roundup-atletico-madrid-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid>
Not when they’d reached half-way on 27 points, close to Europe; when they’d 
started the final day in the relegation zone but taken just six minutes to pull 
clear of it again and been safe for 69 minutes; when they’d scored three times 
without reply; and when they’d been in the safest possible hands, or so they 
thought; when the team that had to win to sink them appeared to have given up 
on winning. Not, ultimately, when they finished the season with the same number 
of points, 35, and a better goal difference than the two teams above them, 
either – two teams that survived. Unlike them.

“Unthinkable,” Bóveda called it. Team-mates called it cruel, unjust and 
unbelievable. Deep down, you wondered if they’d like to slip into something a 
little stronger. As Saturday ended many were left with the hint of a bad taste 
in their mouth.

Saturday was the final day of the season in Spain, all the games that mattered 
played at the same time, fates played out not just in front of fans but on 
faraway fields too, relayed by the radio, just like old times.Atlético Madrid, 
Valencia and Sevilla were competing for the Champions League slots. Athletic, 
Málaga and Espanyol were competing for the final European place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/23/la-liga-roundup-atletico-madrid-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid>
. And four teams were fighting to avoid two relegation places: Almería, Eibar, 
Deportivo de La Coruña and Granada.

There were 81 combinations but each was not as probable as the last. And nor 
was it simple: not least because in Spain, it is not goal difference that 
settles things if teams finish level, but the head to head record. Almería 
faced Valencia, who were chasing third and being chased for fourth. Granada, 
who’d won three in three having previously managed four in 33, their recent 
results incredible, played Atlético, the team Valencia pursued. And Deportivo 
travelled to the Camp Nou. As for Eibar, they might have won just one in 18 but 
they faced Córdoba, already relegated, already humiliated, and covering the 
797km by bus as punishment.

It took just six minutes for Eibar to go 1-0 up against Córdoba and three 
minutes more for Almería to do the same against Valencia. Inside 10 minutes, 
the two teams that had started the day in the relegation zone had pulled out of 
it and the two teams that had started out had been dragged in. But things had 
only just started: the composition of the relegation zone would change seven 
times. Almería were in, out, in, out and in again, while Granada embarked upon 
the opposite journey, out, in, out, in and out again. Eibar were in, out and in 
again and Deportivo were out, in and out again. The question was: how? In the 
end, Eibar beat Córdoba 3-0, Granada drew 0-0 with Atlético, Almería lost 3-2 
to Valencia and Deportivo drew 2-2 against Barcelona. And that was the twist. 
For Eibar, it was the twist of the knife. But that’s not the whole story.

Eibar’s fans were still celebrating Leo Messi’s fourth-minute goal 620km away 
when Mikel Arruabarrena scored for them. Six minutes in, they were winning and 
Deportivo were losing. It was the perfect start: they were safe. With an hour 
gone, the finish line getting ever nearer, they could hardly have looked safer. 
Most assumed they were home and dry. By then they were 3-0 up, Raúl Rodríguez 
Navas and Ander Capa adding the second and third, while Depor were 2-0 down, 
both scored by Messi. And at the Camp Nou too. Deportivo had appeared resigned 
to their fate, not even rebelling against relegation. No wonder the songs 
started and so did the waves at Ipurua. The wonder was that they did not last.

“If we replayed this game 10 times, we would never draw,” the Barcelona 
manager Luis Enrique insisted. And yet that was exactly what happened. If it 
did not matter to them, it mattered to others. “I’m sorry if our result has 
been detrimental to anyone else,” Enrique added.

On 67 minutes, the Coruña-born striker Lucas Pérez turned superbly and smashed 
a brilliant shot into the top corner.Gol del Depor. And on 75 minutes, a 
free-kick bounced back to Diogo Salomão, who scored.Gol del Depor. Deportivo, 
who’d had two shots on target all game, were drawing 2-2 at the Camp Nou and 
Eibar slipped into the relegation zone.

At 3-0 up, Eibar had done their bit, on the final day at least, and there was 
nothing else they could do, except hope – summed up by their manager, Gaizka 
Garitano, asking in the dying minutes how long was left and being met by a 
pertinent question “here or there?” There, of course. The problem for Eibar was 
that there was little hope; they needed the scoreline to change in Barcelona or 
the scoreline to change in Granada and no one in Barcelona or Granada seemed 
particularly interested in that happening.

Pérez had approached Messi. He pulled his shirt over his face, covering his 
mouth. Doing so is not necessarily suspicious: so aware of being caught by TV 
cameras, these days, most players cover their mouth every time they open it, 
even if its only to say: “sunny today, innit?” But Pérez had shouted “please, 
Leo,” as he approached, before heading off for a word with Neymar and Javier 
Mascherano as well. Afterwards, his team-mate the Depor defender, Alberto Lopo, 
admitted: “I told Barcelona to lighten up a bit, that the draw was good for 
everyone,” adding: “They’re 100% competitive and he didn’t say to me that they 
would gift us the game.” There were 15 minutes left but pretty much nothing 
else happened.

That was Barcelona. Granada meanwhile were playing out a contest looked as 
real as their president’s hair. There were plenty of goals cheered at Los 
Cármenes but none of them were scored at Los Cármenes. And no one cared. There 
had not been a single shot on target in the first half and there was only one 
in the second. In the entire game there had been just four shots and they 
barely deserved the name.The normal bar chart of match action, unusually a riot 
of lines and colour, lay bare 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/602569885185667072>. The cameras of Canal+ 
had caught the most fascinating of footage with their showEl Día Después 
suggesting that the Granada midfielder Manuel Iturra implored a team-mate to 
“ask yourself [what’s really in our interest]” and Rubén Rochina using the word
fuera, or off target, before hitting a free-kick off target.

If so, the reason was simple enough. Atlético Madrid only needed a draw to 
guarantee third place and Granada decided that a draw suited them too, 
embarking on a pact of non-aggression. “This is not a matter of talking about 
ethics, or a fix, or a con, or a plot, or abiscuit, as the Italians call it,” 
AS’s match report began. “It was [rather] a pact that favoured both of them.” 
The headline, borrowed from the Spanish wedding chant directed at bride and 
groom, ran: “Kiss each other! Kiss each other!” “Our idea was not to let any 
goals in an only take necessary risks,” Granada’s new manager José Ramón 
Sandoval said. “Trading blows openly with Atlético might not have worked well.”

True but the tactic was a risky one. A draw only suited Granada if other 
results went their way. They needed Almería not to win. But twice, Almería took 
the lead against Valencia, which meant that twice Granada slipped into the 
relegation zone, for 19 minutes and eight minutes respectively. And while both 
times Valencia equalised, it was not until the 80th minute that Paco Alcácer 
put them 3-2 up, clinching fourth ahead of Sevilla and keeping Almería out of 
harm’s way for Granada, Deportivo, and Eibar.

Even then, there was still another risk. If Deportivo had scored again, going 
3-2 up at Barcelona, Granada would have found themselves back in the relegation 
zone and Eibar would have come out of it. As it stood, all three teams were on 
35 points, the tie broken by the head-to-head record. In a three-way tie, 
Granada and Deportivo were the teams that would survive. But if Deportivo won, 
moving onto 37 points, that would leave it as a two-way tie on 35 points 
between Granada and Eibar, which would be level after two draws this season, 
meaning that then it would be settled by overall goal difference. And there 
Eibar, not Granada, would survive.

That was the slim hope that Garitano clung to. Turning to his bench, he asked: 
“A goal there [in Barcelona] saves us, right?” Right. A Barcelona goal would 
have seen Deportivo slip back below them; a Deportivo goal would have seen 
Almería slip below them – although it would make no difference to the record 
held by Almería or Eibar in terms of points, goals or their head to head 
record, it would turn their fates upside down, seeing them trade places. “The 
nerves are terrible,” said the Granada midfielder Piti. “But in the end it came 
off.” Some never doubted as much. Over on the Granada bench, the substitute 
Cala was listening to the radio, reassuring team-mates that Deportivo weren’t 
going to risk looking for that goal.

And so the final minutes drifted away, those who wanted to change things 
unable to do so – Eibar because adding to their lead made no difference, 
Almería because they needed to win but in front of them were a Valencia team 
that also needed to win – and those who could change things were either 
determined for it to end this way or not bothered if it did and not prepared to 
make a particular effort trying to prevent it.

At the Camp Nou, Pérez was screaming at the referee to blow the whistle. Up in 
the directors’ box, his president gulped, staring into space, the tears welling 
up in his eyes at the final whistle. Barcelona had already planned to celebrate 
their title and Xavi’s goodbye. Now Depor could join the party. Those Deportivo 
players not included in the squad hurdled over the barrier and raced onto the 
pitch. In the dressing room they plunged into the Jacuzzi. As they headed for 
the team bus in a passageway under the stand, their fans appeared, embracing 
them and singing them off. “This is mad, lots of the players are crying,” Pérez 
said.

Almería finished on 32 points, while Eibar, Granada and Deportivo were on 35. 
Their goal differences read: -21, -35 and -25 respectively, but it was Eibar 
that were relegated with Almería. As Depor celebrated at the Camp Nou, down in 
Almería, the home players slumped to the turf, while the away team gathered 
topless by their fans and took selfies. And in Eibar, they walked silently off 
the pitch, soon walking back out again, the fans waiting to applaud them. “It 
looked like we were going to get a happy ending but instead it was terrible,” 
the president Alex Aranzábal said. “Even Alfred Hitchcock could not have come 
up with a denouement as cruel,” insisted El Diario Vasco.

“It was painful, everyone’s devastated. I think we deserved to stay in the 
first division,” Garitano said. He resigned, insisting that by being relegated 
he had failed, but he had not failed at all. The surprise was not that Eibar 
went down but that they were so close to not going down; that they were never 
likely to survive and, on top of it all, a cruel culmination of circumstance 
had done so much damage. “Deportivo drawing at Barcelona is incredible,” said 
Jon Errasti, the Eibar-born captain, one of 10 players who won two consecutive 
promotions with the club, heading from the regionalised, four-division 80-team 
third tier to the top flight only to be relegated back down again. “It hurts.”

In Granada, a proper pitch invasion began, players eventually appearing from 
the throng in just their pants. Sandoval, the coach who has been in charge for 
just four games, on a one-month contract and an ultra short-term mission to 
rescue the team, was beaming. Cameras gathered round. After two games as coach 
he had already matched both his predecessors, men who had taken charge of 33 
games between them; after three games, he had racked up a seemingly impossible 
winning run, nine points from nine; and after four games, he was still unbeaten 
and Granada were somehow safe, the miracle consumed.

A bullfighting fan, Sandoval likes to insist that there are two ways to leave 
a stadium: out the main gate, triumphant, or through the infirmary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/apr/09/spanish-football-la-liga-rayo-vallecano>
 . Others left the final weekend fatally wounded, heading for the second 
division but he headed through the main gate alright.

As he talked to the media, one of his players soaked him. “This is holy 
water!” Sandoval shouted, the smile not washed from his face. “I’ve only been 
here for 23 days,” Granada’s manager said, “but it feels like two seasons.” In 
fact, it is just the one. And now it’s over.

Talking points

• And so Xavi has played his last league game at the Camp Nou. He marked the 
occasion by collecting the league title trophy – nice of the president of the 
RFEF, Ángel María Villar, to turn up this time – and was given a fabulous and 
well-deserved send off.Arguably the most important player in Spain’s history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/sep/30/xavi-hernandez-champions-league-record>
, an ideologue whotalks as good as game as he plays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/11/xavi-barcelona-spain-interview>
, and led thebest Barcelona and Spain there has been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/apr/12/xavi-hernandez-sid-lowe>
, he tearfully promised that he’s not quite done yet. There are still two 
finals to come and potentially two more trophies. He has 23 already.

• Andoni Iraola also bade farewell this weekend and he did so with a classy 
goal that defined a classy player.

• Sunday was a year since Real Madrid won the décima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/24/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league>
, the long-awaited trophy that had obsessed them for over a decade, the one 
they were desperate to win. So, naturally, they’re preparing to sack the man 
who led them to it. (With Rafa Benítez lined up as the replacement). Not that 
the players are happy. And they’re starting to apply the pressure. Cristiano 
Ronaldo scored his eighth hat-trick of the season – yes, eighth, for goodness 
sake – and then posed for a picture with Carlo Ancelotti afterwards, which he 
then put on Twitter with a message saying: “I hope we can work together next 
year.”

There may be trouble ahead. As usual Ancelotti handled it all with class, 
although actually it was a bit disappointing that he did not quietly rebel a 
bit more in the final weekend. There would have been something even more 
dignified about it if he had.

• “The goal is for my [late] dad,” Paco Alcácer said after he scored the 
winner at Almería, taking Valencia to fourth place.

• Sevilla missed out on the final Champions League place but could still get a 
place. They play the Europa League final on Wednesday in Warsaw. Win it and, 
quite apart from the fact that they will enjoy the glory that some fools turn 
their noses up at, preferring a few paltry points to lifelong memories and the 
pursuit of the success that is supposed to define sport, they will also qualify 
directly for next season’s Champions League. If so, Spain would have five teams 
in the competition.

• Golazo! Chory Castro scored another belting volley, this time at Rayo. “We 
didn’t deserve any more this season,” David Moyes admitted afterwards of his 
team. “Next season we have to improve.”

• Forget all that choreographed rubbish, this is how you celebrate a goal. 
Step forward Doctor Diego Cervero Otero 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z_OE-_9n1iM&feature=youtu.be>.

Champions: Barcelona

Champions League: Real Madrid, Atlético, Valencia (qualifying round). Sevilla 
possibly still.

Europa League: Sevilla (if they don’t go into the Champions League), 
Villarreal, Athletic.

Relegated: Córdoba, Almería, Eibar.

Pichichi: Ronaldo 48. [Messi, 43, Antoine Griezmann and Neymar 22].

Top scoring Spaniard: Aritz Aduriz 18.

Zamora: Claudio Bravo.

Still to come: Copa del Rey final, Athletic Bilbao versus Barcelona.

Results

Granada 0-0 Atlético Madrid, Almería 2-3 Valencia, Athletic Bilbao 4-0 
Villarreal, Celta 3-2 Espanyol, Rayo Vallecano 2-4 Real Sociedad,Real Madrid 
7-3 Granada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/23/real-madrid-getafe-martin-odegaard-la-liga-match-report>
, Barcelona 2-2 Deportivo, Eibar 3-0 Córdoba, Málaga 2-3 Sevilla
 