
What do you say if you’ve just scored a hat-trick on your comeback after knee 
surgery and a five-month injury break, and 51,500 people are shouting your name 
in rhythmic intervals, proclaiming you as their deity? If you’re Eintracht 
Frankfurt’s very ownFußballgott Alexander Meier and you’ve just scored two of 
the three goals with your head, you say this: “It worked out OK today but I 
maintain that I’m essentially bad at heading.”

Bayern Munich beat Augsburg at the last with Thomas Müller penalty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/bayern-munich-augsburg-bundesliga-report>
In another life, in another city, Meier – a 6ft 5in hunk with rock star hair 
and not one but two topknots – would not be able to leave the house for fear of 
being hugged and kissed to death by worshippers. Over the course of 11 years at 
the Commerzbank-Arena, however, the 32-year-old has developed an effective 
mechanism against the waves of Hessian mass adulation: he’s taken 
unpretentiousness to extreme levels, forever downplaying his own achievements – 
leading goalscorer in the league last season, fourth best goalscorer in 
Eintracht’s history with 104 league goals. “It doesn’t matter whether he’s 
scored one, three or 196 goals, he always shuffles through the stadium bowels 
slightly hunched, as if he’s bothered by something,” wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung. 
“Meier, born outside Hamburg, is not one for big words. He’s like the guy next 
door,” the formerEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> goalkeeper Oka 
Nikolov told Kicker.

He is not one for putting on a show on days off either. After training he 
mostly eats in the same Indian restaurant, just across the Main river, and 
always has the same dish – not too spicy, not too sweet. Meier, in other words, 
has the ordinary bloke routine down to a T. It has only brought him peace in 
his spare time though. The Eintracht fans, like all true believers, see right 
through it. Only the real messiah would pretend to be nothing special at all.

“To score three goals after five months out is not normal,” said the Frankfurt 
coach Armin Veh after his team’s 6-2 win over 1. FC Köln. “But then again, Alex 
Meier is not normal. He is an un-normal player, which makes it normal again, in 
a way.” The striker had looked good in training, good enough to warrant a first 
start since April – “He’s not someone you can bring on as a sub,” said Veh – 
but nobody could have known that he would find the net with his first touch of 
the game, a towering header between twoKöln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> defenders, four minutes in. 
Meier scored Frankfurt’s third with a sublime, cushioned left-foot volley from 
a Haris Seferovic cross. Another header completed his hat-trick and the home 
side’s 6-2 win three minutes from the end. Veh rewarded him by substituting him 
late in the game, which brought the crowd to their feet and the “Fußballgott” 
chants. “A football fairytale,” exclaimed the Eintracht board member Axel 
Hellmann. “Madness,” said Meier’s team-mate Marco Russ. “I knew I probably 
wouldn’t have the energy to last 90 minutes,” said Meier, nonplussed and as if 
he had just come back from the gym. “I tried to get involved as well as 
possible.”

“Eintracht Frankfurt’s class act made the difference today. It’s disappointing 
for us,” lamented Peter Stöger, the Köln manager, before declaring himself the 
latest member of the Meier appreciation society: “Nevertheless, it’s great that 
he’s back.”

Seven points from four games have lifted Eintracht to fourth spot in the 
table, the sort of position the cautious, sometimes overcautiously led, club 
need to end up in if they are to gain ground on all the sides that have zoomed 
past them since their last glorious days in the early 90s. Meier alone will not 
be able to make it happen but, in truth, Veh’s side is no longer a one-man 
team. The acquisition of the young, pacy Dutch striker Luc Castaignos, from 
Twente, looks like a masterstroke already. The 22-year-old scored twice on 
Saturday but, most importantly, he provides balance as a counterweight to the 
Swiss international Seferovic, who played the role of “Watson to Meier’s 
Sherlock” – 11 Freunde – all by himself last season. Flanked by both men, Meier 
can drop a bit deeper, which suits his act as Germany’s best ghost striker, the 
Bundesliga’s very own (not that) Slender Man. Often, it feels as if he’s barely 
there but as soon as he makes his lurking presence felt, he scares defenders to 
death with his eerily efficient finishing.

On current evidence, Castaignos-Meier-Seferovic is one of the most potent 
attacking tridents in the league and Veh, a genial man who never knowingly 
overanalyses the game, has created the perfect platform for them with three 
players who are essentially central midfielders behind them. Few are better at 
riding the crest of a wave than Veh, who is back at his second spell at a club 
that could well be his spiritual home. Frankfurt is a decidedly medium-paced 
city of banks and commerce but it likes its football fast and furious, with a 
touch of capriciousness. With Veh at the helm and Meier, the extraordinary Mr 
Extra Ordinary in frightening form again, the Eagles could well be flying high 
in 2015-16.

Talking points

• Gladbach and Stuttgart are the unlikely Kellerkinder (basement boys) after 
losing their respective fourth games in a row. While the Swabians struggle to 
come to terms with Alex Zorniger’s new system – they didn’t have much of a 
system in recent years - the Foals were unrecognisable in their 3-0 home defeat 
by Hamburger SV, gifting the northerners the goals and playing without any 
sense of confidence throughout. A crisis meeting without the coach, Lucien 
Favre, and the sporting director, Max Eberl, before their Champions League 
debut in Seville was supposed to help. “It was a good talk,” said Granit Xhaka. 
“We didn’t blast each other but it was pointed out clearly that we need to help 
each other again on the pitch. We need to run until we’re puking.”

• Markus Weinzierl looked blue in the face, too, on Saturday, but for other 
reasons. Douglas Costa had run into Markus Feulner deep into injury time in the 
Allianz Arena and, to everybody’s astonishment, the referee’s assistant Robert 
Kempter signalled for a foul. Penalty, Thomas Müller, 2-1, one of thoseterribly 
fortunate Bayern wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/bayern-munich-augsburg-bundesliga-report>
 that only Bayern are capable to pull off regularly. The referee, Knut Kircher, 
one of the better ones in the business, later apologised in front of every 
available camera: “It wasn’t a penalty. Our perception and interpretation were 
wrong, unfortunately. Augsburg won’t get any points for that but we’re sorry.” 
Weinzierl, however, was inconsolable. “We’ve been screwed over,” he cried. 
Bayern saw things a little differently, naturally, insisting that they had been 
up all afternoon – deep in the Augsburg half, with the ball – to get lucky.

Luckily, Kempter’s hallucination did at least not put Bayern top as Borussia 
Dortmund won as well, 4-2 at Hannover, to record the best start to a league 
campaign and lead the table for another week.

• Darmstadt is famous for its Art Nouveau architecture but SV Darmstadt 98 
don’t want you know that. The newly promoted Lilies, back in the top flight for 
the first time since Aston Villa were the best team in Europe, have positioned 
themselves as unashamed brutalists, out to annoy the bigger sides with underdog 
no-name anti-football and their rickety old ground. During their 1-0 away win 
away to Leverkusen, however, their fourth unbeaten match of the season, it was 
Roger Schmidt’s team who “said goodbye to football,” as their coach put it 
later. The visitors had not only succeeded in “ruining Leverkusen’s afternoon a 
little” (98 manager Dirk Schuster) but also played some very decent stuff on 
the break. One such venture into enemy space led to the winning goal by 
Lieutenant Sulu, sorry: captain Aytac Sulu. Can Schuster’s enterprise live long 
and prosper amid all the stars? The 47-year-old was certainly beaming on 
Saturday.

Results Gladbach 0-3 Hamburger SV, Hannover 2-4 Dortmund, Bayern 2-1 Augsburg, 
Ingolstadt 0-0 Wolfsburg, Frankfurt 6-2 Köln, Hertha 2-1 Stuttgart, Leverkusen 
0-1 Darmstadt, Hoffenheim 1-3 Bremen, Schalke 2-1 Mainz.
 