
Imagine you're a professional football player and your boss thinks The Office 
is a genuine documentary charting the exceptional motivational skills of a 
middle manager from Slough. You come to work, a demoralised place populated by 
those who neither want nor should be there – on account of being either a 
little too good or just too bad – and you're trying to raise your game one last 
time, for the match of the season. You know this is about survival, and you're 
up for it. But then your manager reverts to type and puts up a poster in the 
dressing room that even Avram Grant would have been too embarrassed to touch:
 "Every morning a player from Eintracht wakes up, 
He knows he will have to run faster and harder than the best player of our 
opponent, otherwise he will lose,
Every morning an opponent wakes up, 
He knows he will have to be better than each and every Eintracht player, 
otherwise he will lose against us,
When the sun comes up, you have to be better than any other player!" 
Can you feel your will to live dissipating like a cheap eau de toilette at 
this point? Do you instinctively grasp that all is lost when your leader, the 
revered football expert Christoph Daum, exposes you to this psycho-babble, an 
insult to your intelligence? (If you need to work harder to beat your opponent 
but he has to work harder to beat you, doesn't that suggest that you're both as 
good as each other? And if both sides just keep working harder and harder, 
doesn't the essential equation remain unchanged? Nevermind.)

Credit where it's due. No one could have blamed the Frankfurt players for 
doing exactly what the Wolfsburg playmaker Diego did in a Mannheim hotel on 
Saturday – he walked out of the team meeting and went awol – but they stuck at 
it, at least to a degree. They defended, sat back, hoped for the best, for some 
lucky break. And they got a couple of those.

Ralf Fährmann saved a penalty from Lucas Barrios in the 12th minute, then 
reacted well to thwart a few more Dortmund chances. The teams went in 0-0 at 
half-time, somehow. Daum could yet imagine a scenario where his team saved 
themselves from the drop while the champions, hampered by the combined effects 
of "yellow fever" (Süddeutsche Zeitung) in the city and alcohol, would keep 
wasting chances.

Then they scored. Sebastian Rode headed the ball in after good work from Halil 
Altintop and Theofanis Gekas a minute into the second half. It was against the 
run of play but who cared. Results elsewhere meant that Frankfurt were back in 
it, at least in with a chance to make the relegation play-off as 16th. 
Unfortunately the miracle lasted little longer than the substitute Marcel 
Titsch-Rivero's first match of the season. The 21-year-old midfielder was on 
for a full 43 seconds before committing a professional foul on Marcel Schmelzer 
– the fastest dismissal inBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> history.

By that stage Frankfurt were 2-1 down, looking utterly defeated and well on 
their way to Bundesliga 2. Barrios's header in the 90th minute sealed their 
fourth relegation in 15 years. The league's official site summed up the 
performance: "Lethargic, emotionless, anaemic". Daum, meanwhile, was spouting 
the usual nonsense. "Unlike Borussia Dortmund we have a quiet, carried by 
disappointment," said the 57-year-old, while his players sneaked into the team 
bus through a sea of black-and-yellow madness.

The chairman, Heribert Bruchhagen, was trying to look in charge and sound 
resolute. "Our first job is to find a new manager," said the 62-year-old, who 
will have to put up with a new sporting director taking over part of his duties.

Bruchhagen was chiefly responsible for six years of financial and sporting 
stability but his uncharacteristic gamble on the retro-shamanic Daum ("Mr 
Bruchhagen must have had some powder in his coffee," Uli Hoeness joked at the 
time) misfired badly. Daum picked up three points from 21 to make a terrible 
run worse. Frankfurt, seventh at Christmas under the super-nerdy guidance of 
Michael Skibbe, scored a total of seven goals in 2011 to secure eight points. 
It will, without a doubt, go down as the worst second-half offering since 
Prince followed up Mountains with Alexa de Paris on the 12-inch B side in 1986. 
"The table doesn't lie. We played a disastrous second half of the season; we 
can't complain," said Bruchhagen.

To be fair to Eintracht, they were beset by a freakish amount of injuries, 
especially at the back. They could not figure out a way to get Gekas scoring 
again and fell victim to an unlikely revival from Gladbach. In a year that saw 
Mainz and Hannover reach the Europa League and Kaiserslautern finish seventh – 
unbelievable – you couldn't even blame them for dreaming of glory during the 
winter break.

As it is, their strange collapse is weirdly fitting for this upside-down 
season: while an army of nondescript, unfashionable sides roared like lions and 
plenty of big names fought tooth and nail against demise (Stuttgart, Bremen, 
Wolfsburg), Eintracht, the very epitome of dour mid-table respectability, 
sadly, could not stay true to themselves.

Talking points

• Wolfsburg looked all set for a date with Joe Black but narrowly managed to 
miss the appointment. Hoffenheim were leading 1-0 – a result that would have 
consigned Wolves to the second division as things stood – before two goals from 
the Croatian striker Mario Mandzukic and a deflected fluke from Grafite's 
backside turned it around for Felix Magath's side in the Rhein-Neckar-Arena.

"I'm happy that they woke up in time and earned themselves longer holidays," 
said Magath, who had characteristically threatened to give the squad only two 
weeks off. It is unclear, however, if the six-hour journey back to Wolfsburg on 
a chartered train, together with 500 fans, was meant to be a reward or a 
punishment. "It's shame you're not here, it's a great party," the captain 
Marcel Schäfer, left behind for a TV interview, was told by Sascha Riether on 
his mobile phone, live on air. Riether's voice carried all the conviction of 
one of these poor reporters who have to make out that "the atmosphere is 
building all the time here" – 10 hours before the first punter shows up.

To everybody's surprise, Diego turned up for training on Sunday as if nothing 
had happened. By deserting the team a few hours before kick-off – the 
midfielder had been left out of the starting XI – the 26-year-old embarrassed 
himself and the club: Wolfsburg could name only 17 professionals on the 
team-sheet. Diego sent an apologetic text message to his team-mates on Saturday 
night but will not look forward to further service under Magath, a strict 
disciplinarian. Scarily, the manager has hinted at the possibility of sticking 
with the Brazilian, who will be fined heavily.

• Half a million people crammed into Dortmund's city centre to celebrate the 
championship on Sunday morning. Kevin Grosskreutz wasn't the only player to be 
overwhelmed by the emotions. "I see into the eyes of the people and I see their 
love for us," the midfielder said, quite poetically. The open-top bus tour was 
the last item on an extensive party programme that started with more 
out-of-control beer showers – Jürgen Klopp, CEO Watzke and the press officer 
were ambushed – and continued with a festive dinner, followed by more beer, 
more singing and dancing. Even Bayern felt the need to join in the chorus – 
full-page ads were taken out in local papers to congratulate the best and 
best-loved champions in recent years.

• The mood was more subdued at Gladbach, understandably so. Lucien Favre's men 
capped a great run of three wins with a 1-1 draw at Hamburg but will now have 
to hold off the yo-yo specialists VfL Bochum in the relegation play-offs (first 
leg, Thursday night) to complete the comeback. "It's not over," said the 
goalkeeper Marc-Andre ter Stegen. "We have to play better otherwise we won't 
make it," added the midfielder Marco Reus. The manager Lucien Favre was handed 
a lucky plastic pig by a couple of fans on Sunday but Borussia's real lucky 
charm in recent weeks has been Stefan Effenberg. Ever since the former great 
announced that he would front a consortium looking to take over the club (by 
democratic means), the team's fortunes have improved markedly.

• Mario Gómez won the "cannon" for the leading goalscorer. He scored the 
equaliser in the 2-1 win over Stuttgart to take his tally to 28, more than any 
other Bayern striker since Karl-Heinz Rummenigge in 1981. It's a remarkable 
figure, considering that the 25-year-old only started playing regularly in 
October and missed a dozen or so sitters to boot.

The Bavarians are already looking forward to prospective Champions League 
qualifier meetings with Arsenal. And it has been decided that playing with a 
half-decent defence would be advisable next season, so Man City's Jérôme 
Boateng and Leverkusen's central midfielder Arturo Vidal are scheduled to join 
the new-arrival Manuel Neuer.

• And: Leverkusen held on to second spot with a 1-0 win (Hanno Balitsch 
header) at Freiburg. In hindsight, it was churlish to bring up the bottler 
cliches last week. If Bayer can be trusted to get one thing right, it's to 
finish as runners-up.

Results: Bayern 2-1 Stuttgart, Hoffenheim 1-3 Wolfsburg, Dortmund 3-1 
Frankfurt, Hannover 3-1 Nürnberg, Hamburg 1-1 Gladbach, Mainz 2-1 St Pauli, 
Köln 2-1 Schalke, Freiburg 0-1 Leverkusen, Kaiserslautern 3-2 Bremen.
 