
In the not-so-mean streets of Mainhattan, "Five-O" isn't shorthand for the 
police but for one man's dream. "We want to make 50 points this season," 
Eintracht Frankfurt's coach Michael Skibbe confidently proclaimed back in 
August. It was, he added, an ambition his team shared and a realistic target, 
too.

Last season 50 points would have meant eighth place, hardly the stuff that 
nosebleeds are made of. But that didn't stop the Eintracht CEO Heribert 
Bruchhagen, the local sceptic-in-chief, to pour cold water on the idea, with a 
sense of realism bordering on the misanthropic. "Fifty points? I'd like to know 
who we would like to take them off," wondered the 62-year-old.

Bruchhagen's fears seemed justified five games into the season, when Frankfurt 
found themselves at the wrong end of the table with a meagre three points. "We 
should put the [50-point] target to one side, at least until the winter break," 
said the captain Patrick Ochs. There were crisis meetings, inquests into the 
transfer policy and the long-running disagreements between the determined coach 
and the cautious CEO were about to come to the surface again. That big number 
had become a millstone around the players' necks, the local press felt, 
numerical code for mistaken hopes.

The club were inevitably heading for trouble but somewhere, somehow the 
Eintracht eagle found its wings again. They won their next game, 2-0 at home to 
Nürnberg on 25 September, then just kept on winning while everyone was raving 
about their smaller neighbours, Mainz 05. Saturday's 3-1 defeat of Wolfsburg, 
their fourth three-pointer in five games, saw them climb to fourth in the 
table. "We are in a vortex that carries us upwards," said the defender Marco 
Russ, almost apologetically.

One might suggest that Frankfurt are simply doing what this city of bankers 
has always been good at: profiteering from the misfortune of others. A bit of 
consistency is enough to reach the upper echelons of a league where bigger and 
better teams like Bayern (9th), Bremen (11th), Stuttgart (14th) or indeed 
Schalke (16th) are currently nowhere. But that wouldn't do the team nor Skibbe 
justice.

Frankfurt have coherence, a healthy attitude, a settled defence and three 
individual players who really make a difference just now. Frankfurter 
Allgemeine Zeitung summed up two-thirds of their secret: "Oka Nikolov saves 
everything there is to save and Theofanis Gekas finished everything that can be 
finished." Between the two, one must add the Swiss playmaker Pirm Schwegler, 
who plays all the passes that can be played.

It is true, the 36-year-old Nikolov has never looked a better stopper. But 
even the Macedonian can't steal the limelight from the Greek striker Gekas, who 
has embarked on one of his demented goal-runs again. Skibbe had tried to sign 
the 30-year-old last January but Bruchhagen balked at the €2.4m pricetag.

"This summer he only cost €1m," Bruchhagen revealed. That was cheap enough, 
even for him. Gekas showed up with a Chinese tattoo that spelled "cold-blooded 
killer" and almost instantly lived up to it. Against Steve McClaren's sheep in 
Wolfsburg clothing the sublimely lazy fox in the box found his prey twice more. 
A perfectly placed shot from outside (!) theSechzehnmeterraum crept in for 
Eintracht's opener and he expertly dispatched a penalty that effectively 
decided the match. It was fitting that Schwegler should also score – his 
25-metre half-volley into the corner of the net was the kind of goal that might 
add a zero or two to his salary before too long.

Gekas, though, is really in a whole league of his own. When a loan spell at 
Portsmouth didn't succeed, he was smart to leave England just before the new, 
cold-blooded benefit-system killers of the Con-Lib government were voted in: 
his staunch unwillingness to do any work whatsoever would have seen him 
instantly deported to a northern town and made to sweep the streets.

Instead, he's managed to take the fabled Germanic ideal of efficiency to new, 
radical extremes. He hardly runs, rarely bothers to stay onside and doesn't 
mind switching off for long spells; against Nürnberg for example, he touched 
the ball only 17 times in 84 minutes.

Off the pitch he's mainly by himself, too. Gekas insists on single hotel rooms 
and hasn't muttered a whole sentence in German despite playing his fifth year 
in theBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>. But 
he scores goals on an industrial scale. Eleven in 11: only Cristiano Ronaldo 
(12) has been as proficient, domestically, in the whole of Europe. Unlike the 
selfish shoot-on-sight Real Madrid winger, however, Gekas only needed 25 
attempts to get there. Some believe only a Faustian bargain can explain this 
outrageous haul. "I think he sold his soul," said Russ. "He hits everything, 
from everywhere. It's incredible."

Gerd Müller's all-time record of 40 in a season looks slightly beyond the 
former mullet aficionado, but long-held dreams of a return to Europe might just 
be fulfilled in the Commerzbank-Arena if the big boys continue to underachieve. 
Skibbe, unwilling to provoke more disagreement from Bruchhagen, has refused to 
talk up the big "50" in public again. Nineteen points from 11 games suggest he 
might have got his prediction wrong, but in a good way. Behind those puppy dog 
eyes of his, that target might just be in the process of being revised.

Talking points

• "Those who jeer him aren't real Werder fans," Thomas Schaaf said about the 
less than enthusiastic appraisal for Mikael Silvestre's performance – if you 
can call it that – during the 2-0 defeat at home to Twente on Tuesday last 
week. The media, the coach grumbled on, had never given the Frenchman a real 
chance either. "He's been made a scapegoat," Schaaf said. Out of sheer 
stubbornness, he persisted with the left-back in Stuttgart yesterday, and duly 
paid the price: Werder were hammered 6-0 in the Mercedes-Benz-Arena, their 
worst defeat in 23 years. Not just Silvestre, but all Werder players were so 
abject that their supporters didn't even jeer this time. Ironic jubilation 
greeted the disaster instead. "I'm so embarrassed", said goalkeeper Tim Wiese. 
"It's always the same story, we lack the right attitude." While Schaaf tried to 
stay calm ("We didn't do enough, that's it"), sporting director Klaus Allofs 
issued fairly empty threats. "Those who still don't get it, will see other 
measures." He's already tried freezing half of the wages for a couple of weeks 
and it's difficult to fathom what else he could do now: nothing can possibly 
scare these players more than the thought that two-thirds of this train-wreck 
of a season still lie ahead of them.

• At half-time, Louis van Gaal told his players that he had never seen them so 
good this season. And he was right. "Bayern completely embarrassed and toyed 
with us," said the Gladbach coach Michael Frontzeck in view of 45 minutes that 
had seen 80% Bayern possession, numerous chances for the visitors and a 2-1 
lead. But Bastian Schweinsteiger's penalty miss just before the break gave the 
home team new hope. They tried to have one final go – and met a team that 
inexplicably lost its way. Marco Reus (56 min) and Ivan de Camargo (60 min) 
scored after Bayern's central defensive pairing of Daniel van Buyten and Martin 
Demichelis blundered in typical fashion. It took a late, rare Philipp Lahm goal 
to rescue a point for Bayern, who nevertheless felt defeated. "This is a 
dramatically bad result in terms of our position in the league," said 
Karl-Heinz Rummenigge. Van Gaal wasn't saying anything meanwhile – he was 
shouting at his players. "How can you let this game go?" the Dutchman raged in 
the changing room. Bayern, felt Süddeutsche Zeitung, lost possibly more than 
two points in the Borussia-Park: "This might have been a milestone in terms of 
surrendering the title."

• Thomas Tuchel also lost his cool. The Mainz 05 mastermind accepted that 
Freiburg had been the better side but couldn't agree with referee Wolfgang 
Stark when it came to the decisive penalty for the hosts. Niko Bungert tangled 
with Oliver Barth, Stark blew his whistle. "That's terrible for us. I can think 
of four or five identical scenes in every Bundesliga game [when the referee 
does nothing]," said the 37-year-old. The general manager Christian Heidel 
countered the inevitable "burst bubble" talk with sarcasm: "Please excuse me, 
I'm off for a crisis meeting", he told reporters.

• Dortmund continued their remarkable run with a 4-0 destruction of sorry 
Hannover. Their ninth win of the season saw them extend their lead to four 
points. The only serious contenders in top third, Leverkusen (seven points 
back) and Hamburg (10 points) are way behind, and Borussia have probably done 
enough to finish the season ahead of Bayern (12 points) already. Away from the 
pitch they put in an excellent defensive performance too. "We will continue on 
our way, dry as a bone," CEO Hans-Joachim Watzke announced cryptically, "I 
could say something now but won't," said goal-keeper Roman Weidenfeller. Or 
perhaps he didn't say it, it's difficult to be sure. Either way: Dortmund have 
it sussed this year. In fact, they're so smart that they've obviously decided 
to gallantly bow out of the Europa League early on too. Drawing a couple of 
games more will do the trick.

Results: Schalke 3-0 St. Pauli, Hamburg 2-1 Hoffenheim, Frankfurt 3-1 
Wolfsburg, Freiburg 1-0 Mainz, Nürnberg 3-1 Köln, Bayern 3-3 Gladbach, Hannover 
0-4 Dortmund, Bayer Leverkusen 3-1 Kaiserslautern, Stuttgart 6-0 Werder

Latest Bundesliga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 