
On one side there was one of the Bundesliga's most reliably boring clubs, a 
perennial mid-table side with a perennially middling squad. Never good enough 
to be really good, mostly not bad enough to be really bad, not even grey enough 
to belong to the pack of "grey mice" (unfashionable teams) in the league, they 
are German football middle-class incarnate. They used to be known as "the Diva" 
once upon a time. They had some success, swagger and style. But eventually, 
they tired of all the ups and downs. All the thrills were traded in for 
financial stability and a life more ordinary.

They haven't won anything since 1988. They haven't employed a truly exciting 
player since 1996 (Oliver Kahn knows his name 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RjkYmTKHq0g&feature=related>). They have hardly 
mattered at all in the last decade.

This winter, while most clubs were busy recruiting new players and recharging 
their batteries in the sun, they came close to falling apart because of 
internal strife. "This club can't develop. With this team, progress is not 
possible," said their frustrated manager after a training camp in Turkey last 
week. Once again, the board had refused to buy the players he wanted. The 
chairman said he was annoyed by the coach's repeated public outbursts and 
threatened consequences. As a couple, their prospects looked more Elizabeth 
Taylor and husband No3 than Ernie and Bert.

To make matters worse, they met one of the best and best-loved teams of the 
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> on 
Saturday. Packed with some incredibly gifted players and internationals, 
unbeaten throughout most of the season so far, most of the time spectacular 
going forward, real title contenders.

Lo and behold, the messy, hard-fought match in the Commerzbank-Arena finished 
1-0 to the less than illustrious hosts, thanks to a deflected shot. These 
surprises do happen, of course, especially at the beginning of the season. 
After all, Frankfurt also somehow managed to beat Werder on Matchday 1, after 
which the northerners didn't lose for 23 games. Whatdid come as a total shock 
to most observers, however, was a look at the table afterwards. After 18 
matches played, Frankfurt are in seventh, only one point behind Werder Bremen. 
The position is so incredulous, it really belongs in the Kama Sutra.

"How does the saying go? The table doesn't lie, does it?" said a very 
satisfied Michael Skibbe. Rudi Völler's former assistant at the national team 
used to be one of the league's most demure and unobtrusive coaches. But since 
taking the Eintracht job, he's reinvented himself as a success-hungry man who 
simply won't settle for mediocrity. For months, the Frankfurt newspapers 
wondered about his aggressive stance, some even accused him of an inflated ego 
and delusions. "His statements made Frankfurt appear very small and himself 
very big. The man is an enigma," wrote Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. The 
consensus was that taking on Heribert Bruchhagen, the conservatively-minded man 
in charge, was foolhardy going on bonkers.

Bruchhagen, true to himself, was immediately very offended when reporters 
asked him about making it into the Europa League in the wake of the Bremen win. 
"You can't ask me this question, this question is out of order," the chairman 
barked. "This is madness." "Frankfurt are glancing at the taboo zone," joked 
Frankfurter Rundschau.

It really isn't easy to explain their fantastic set of results, especially in 
the light of bad injury problems. Main striker Ioannis Amanatidis and Czech 
attacker Martin Fenin have missed most of the season. On Saturday, Skibbe 
singled out his two central defenders, the Brazilian Chris ("he was the rook in 
the battle") and the goalscorer Marco Russ ("one of the best technical 
players"), but it was really another excellent team effort. "We worked hard on 
closing down space in Turkey and did that every well today," explained 
Christoph Spycher.

Frankfurt will be hard pressed to continue their fantastic run, Skibbe knows 
as much. But by achieving results that are much better than the quality of the 
squad should warrant, his ambitious outlook has been validated. Dismissed as an 
uncharismatic underachiever when he succeeded Friedhelm Funkel in June, the 
44-year-old has turned up with a point to proof and upset theEbbelwoi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apfelwein>-cart. Bruchhagen, a man who was 
perfectly comfortable with Eintracht going nowhere silently, got much more than 
he bargained for. Eventually, he might come to see that as a good thing.

Talking points

• Leverkusen were quite brilliant and beat Mainz 05 much more comfortably than 
the 4-2 result suggested. Bayer remain top of the league and unbeaten. On-loan 
midfield maestro Toni Kroos seems more and more reluctant to come back to 
Bayern in the summer. Is he now nailed on for the World Cup? We'll know more by 
Easter (thanks to spargelhorz).

• Kroos' old club beat Hoffenheim 2-0 on Friday night, thanks to goals from 
Martín Demichelis and Miroslav Klose. It wasn't quite the horror show the 
Bavarians envisaged – "We want to make our rivals a little fearful," Louis van 
Gaal had said before the match – but scary enough in terms of efficiency. "A 
few months ago, we would have lost that match," said Mario Gómez after a 
forgettable first-half performance and decent second part. Bayern, 
incidentally, agreed to pay €1,000 (£880) to a woman who offers very specific 
services online. Anette Pfeiffer-Klärle, who posts what can loosely described 
as poems on the internet, saw one of her – frankly terrible – rhymes ripped off 
by MC Karl-Heinz Rummenigge at the club's annual meeting a few weeks ago and 
has now successfully claimed compensation.

• The Ruhrpott renaissance continues unabated with victories for Schalke (1-0 
over Nürnberg) and Dortmund's last-minute roller-coaster 3-2 away win at 
Cologne – Borussia conceded two late goals to lose their 2-0 half-time lead (a 
brace from Mats Hummels) before hitting back in injury-time. Kevin 
Grosskreutz's shot took a wicked deflection. A propos bad haircuts, Felix 
Magath revealed that he had been happy to sell Schalke's Kevin Kurányi to 
Sunderland; the deal fell through because the former Germany striker refused to 
go. The Borussia coach Jürgen Klopp, meanwhile, is in trouble with the 
authorities. After being sent to the stand by the referee, Klopp celebrated his 
side's winner with a manic run along and over the barrier. Imagine José 
Mourinho's 2-1 win with Porto, crossed with Arsène Wenger at Old Trafford in 
December 2008, and you're halfway there.

• Finally, any ideas why this little effort 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/forget-wembley-1966-this-goal-should-never-have-been-given-duisburg-fsv-frankfurt/45599/>
 from Christian Tiffert in Duisburg's 5-0 demolition of FSV Frankfurt in 
Bundesliga 2 should be considered "the new Wembley goal" (Bild) in Germany? If 
anything, 1966 was surely more clear-cut.

Results: Bayern 2–0 Hoffenheim, Hamburg 2–0 Freiburg, Hannover 0–3 Hertha, 
Frankfurt 1–0 Bremen, Gladbach 1–2 Bochum, Leverkusen 4-2 Mainz, Stuttgart 3–1 
Wolfsburg, Schalke 1–0 Nürnberg, Köln 2–3 Dortmund.

Latest Bundesliga table 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 