
Rangers crashed out of the Scottish League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> at the hands of 
Falkirk and their hopes of a treble this season were left in tatters.

Farid El Allagui grabbed a double for the First Division side before Dorin 
Goian and Nikica Jelavic netted forRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>. But Mark Millar had the final 
say with a stoppage-time winner as Falkirk booked their place in the fourth 
round.

The Rangers reserve goalkeeper Neil Alexander – who has started in every 
League Cup tie over the past two seasons – was drafted into the side for his 
first appearance this season. Alejandro Bedoya was handed his first start for 
the club, along with Lee McCulloch and David Healy.

Rangers started the match strongly. Gregg Wylde tried his luck with a shot 
from the edge of the area that was high and wide, before McCulloch tested the 
goalkeeper Michael McGovern with an effort from distance.

McGovern was called into action again, this time to block a left-foot drive 
from 20 yards from Bedoya. However, the best early chance of the match fell to
Falkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> 10 minutes before the 
interval, when El Allagui connected with a corner and saw his shot cannon off 
the body of Wylde on the line, before Rhys Bennett fired wide from the rebound.

David Weatherston blasted over after finding himself in space as the home side 
threatened again. But there was a nervous moment for the Bairns just before 
half-time when, with Kyle Lafferty and Bedoya both down injured, Bennett 
attempted to put the ball out of play and almost fired into the back of his own 
net instead.

Jelavic was thrown into the action after 55 minutes but it was Falkirk who 
took the lead three minutes later. Kieran Duffie supplied the cross for El 
Allagui at the back post and he nodded past Alexander from close range.

Steven Naismith was immediately added to the action for Bedoya and was denied 
by a post after just two minutes on the park. The holders pushed forward in 
numbers and Naismith's header from a few yards out was touched over by the 
goalkeeper, before McCulloch rifled wide.

Instead, Falkirk doubled their advantage after 73 minutes. Craig Sibbald was 
the provider as El Allagui connected with a header in plenty of space and 
nodded past Alexander.

Rangers handed themselves a lifeline when Goian threw himself in front of 
Steven Whittaker's cross and bulleted home a header with eight minutes to go. 
What followed was an intense period of pressure as Naismith was again denied 
from close range before Jelavic sent a header home from a few yards out after 
86 minutes.

But just when the tie looked set for extra time, Millar's shot deep into 
injury time was touched on to the underside of the bar by Alexander but he 
could not keep the effort out of the net as Falkirk claimed a dramatic late 
winner.
 