
My life changed at the Beijing Olympics. I was only 13, but I came away with 
two gold medals. I was so shocked and surprised to win. Later I won the Young 
Sports Personality of the Year and became the youngest person ever to get an 
MBE. To think that was only eight years ago… It feels like a lifetime.

I’ve never been bullied. I’m just small. I can do everything everyone else can 
do. If I wasn’t small I wouldn’t have gone to the Paralympics. My philosophy is 
that there is no point in being sad or hating who you are. I just embrace every 
day as it comes and try to live the best I can.

I don’t wear jewellery and I don’t care about shoes and dresses. But I love my 
handbags. They’re my real luxury.

I recently met Michael Phelps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michaelphelps>
. He is my absolute idol. I was totally starstruck. I did manage to get a few 
words out. We talked about what we were going to be doing for Christmas.

I’ve swum with bull sharks off Mexico. They didn’t tell me how dangerous the 
sharks were until after I got out

I’ve got my own house now. But I’m a bit OCD and way too organised. I like 
everything to be very particular and clean. My friends are always telling me to 
just relax.

I get recognised in the street, which I love. I never get asked for 
autographs, though, these days it’s always selfies. I like that. I’m very 
sociable so I’m always happy to meet people.

I love the ocean and I’m passionate about conservation and the environment. 
I’ve swum with dolphins in Mozambique and with bull sharks off Mexico. They 
didn’t tell me how dangerous the sharks were until after I got out.

My drive and ambition is purely down to me. My parents gave me opportunities, 
but they never pushed me. I am very self-driven and always want to be the best 
at what I do. I’m the youngest of five children and none of the others are like 
me.

I’m a patron of the Dwarf Sports Association <https://www.dsauk.org/>. It’s a 
charity that supports people of short stature and helps them get into sport. 
One of the highlights of the year is the convention we have in the spring. 
There’s everything from power lifting to athletics. Mum organises the swimming.

I very rarely cry. But I am terrible with happy tears. After a swimming event 
I normally cry on the podium and then in the interview, too. I suppose it shows 
that I am an emotional woman.

In 2014 I started working with WaterAid <http://www.wateraid.org/uk>. It is 
brilliant to see how a well can do so much for a family. I went to a village 
near Kampala in Uganda and the kids were having a whale of a time. Yet all they 
had to play with was this empty plastic bottle. It brought home to me how 
fortunate I am.

The call room, where we sit before coming out to the pool, is a very scary 
place. It’s just you and the other competitors. I don’t try to psyche them out, 
but I do wish them good luck – and I think that can be quite disarming.

I’m a Brownie leader with the Girl Guides in Manchester. My pack name is Aqua 
Owl.

Ellie Simmonds is a WaterAid ambassador. She also appears in the charity’s new 
Made of the Same Stuff campaign (wateraid.org <http://www.wateraid.org/uk>)
 