
John Stones <https://www.theguardian.com/football/john-stones> knew what he 
was doing. Danny Drinkwater had nodded the ball back to the edge of the England 
penalty area and, with Vincent Janssen closing in, the centre-half gathered on 
the half-turn. With that familiar unconcerned swagger, he waited to nick the 
ball clear of the onrushing striker before composing a more scenic route 
upfield. Then came the problem.

England frustrated as Luciano Narsingh goal seals Holland’s comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-international-friendly-match-report>
As he mustered the touch designed to ease him free, his standing leg gave way 
on the greasy surface and his opponent pounced, a passage suddenly cleared to 
goal. Stones had his head in his hands as Fraser Forster palmed away the 
forward’s weak attempt, butEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> never regained their shape or 
composure. Within seconds, Danny Rose had handled to concede the penalty from 
which the Dutch equalised and a disgusted Roy Hodgson was chuntering animatedly 
in the dugout.

The repercussions of that error were actually exceptional. This was only 
Stones’s eighth cap, and only the third time he has represented his country at 
centre-back, but England had never previously conceded in his fledgling 
454-minute international career. Young players should be encouraged to be bold 
and will inevitably make mistakes, and there were flashes here of the 
playmaking ability which had Hodgson considering him for midfield in the 
autumn, not least in the buildup to the hosts’ opening goal. Yet those 
qualities felt undermined by such an untimely error. This was in effect an 
audition, a chance to witness Stones in partnership with Chris Smalling. In the 
end, the slip did not actually come as much of a surprise.

There had been other moments in England’s 2-1 defeat to Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-international-friendly-match-report>
 which prompted angst amongst team-mates, coaching staff and home support. 
Rewind to the fourth minute and Stones, on the corner of the England penalty 
area, had taken a touch, looked up and realised Janssen was virtually on top of 
him. Rather than thumping the ball agriculturally into touch, he chose to ease 
it back across the box towards Smalling, who was being harassed by Georginio 
Wijnaldum. The resultant mess, with panicked attempts to hack clear from 
Forster and Drinkwater, culminated in a Dutch free-kick in a dangerous area. 
That may have been born of nerves but a better side, perhaps one who had 
qualified for Euro 2016, might have capitalised on that first glimpse of 
frailty.

There was a similar flashpoint just after the half-hour mark when Stones 
stopped the ball dead inside the area and considered a more ambitious pass. 
Janssen and Memphis Depay duly swarmed all over him, and Holland had been 
gifted a throw-in level with the edge of the area. These were the errors which 
haveundermined his progress at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/26/everton-roberto-martinez-john-stones-can-become-england-great>
 over recent weeks, when a player’s forte had threatened to become his achilles 
heel. He has erred towards over-elaboration. Decision-making which once felt 
bold and enlightened has suddenly been rendered risky, even downright unwise.

Roberto Martínez, a manager partial to a ball-playing backline, has attempted 
to remove him from the spotlight. The 21-year-old has started only one Premier 
League game in more than nine weeks, and was sacrificed in thatdefeat against 
West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/05/everton-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 with Everton reduced to 10. Of the trio of centre-backs in the lineup that 
day, Stones was the one hauled off at the break. Hodgson has retained faith, 
for all that Gary Cahill and Smalling have become his first-choice pairing, 
even if the support has come with the caveat that the errors must go. “But that 
does not mean all of a sudden you have to change your game completely and start 
booting the ball up the field every time,” said the national manager. “It just 
means you have to improve.”

There is quality in Stones’s delivery, vision and incision in more advanced 
areas, which demands he never resorts to anything so crude. It was his diagonal 
slide-rule pass, perfectly weighted, which liberated a scurrying James Milner 
away down the left as England roused themselves to conjure an exquisite team 
goal just before the interval. The rat-a-tat of passes, with a Daniel Sturridge 
dummy thrown in, sliced the Dutch apart, but it was the centre-half who had 
spotted the break in the first place. He produced something similar in a 
tighter area for Theo Walcott as England chased the game late on. Therein lies 
the promise. The problem is that, at present, the mistakes are just as 
eye-catching.

International football, like that in the Premier League, is a brutal arena in 
which to conduct an education but Stones will have to learn if he is to realise 
his vast promise. England need the penny to drop given the weakness which 
flares too often at the heart of their defence, whether in riotous victory in 
Berlin or meek and annoying surrender at home to the Dutch. Smalling has been a 
consistent performer in an unpredictable Manchester United side, but Cahill has 
endured a patchy campaign at Chelsea. Phil Jagielka has played more regularly 
at Everton than Stones of late, but Everton have never conceded more in a 
Premier League season than the 28 home goals they have already surrendered at 
Goodison Park.

Stones really should be the answer and, long-term, surely in partnership with 
Smalling. This was their first outing together at this level and, in time, that 
duo may thrive. Yet, in an attack-minded team, the younger man needs to be more 
defensively assured than this.
 