
So, maybe England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> are not going 
to bewitch everyone at Euro 2016, after all. Nobody should be anticipating an 
open-top bus parade around Trafalgar Square just yet, and perhaps we now have a 
more accurate reflection of the true credentials of Roy Hodgson’s team.

With England, it is probably always better to be cautious and after the 
thrilling comeback in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
 the balloon of optimism was quickly burst by the manner in which they lost 
this match from a position, courtesy of Jamie Vardy’s goal, when it looked as 
though they were on course for another encouraging result.

Hodgson’s team now know what it is like to be on the wrong end of a 
second-half comeback and, if nothing else, it was certainly a useful reminder 
that if he is going to flood his team with inexperienced players, there is 
always the risk that something might happen that will leave him wondering 
whether they can be fully trusted.

John Stones’s chances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/john-stones-england-holland-friendly>
 of starting in France this summer certainly must have receded because of the 
mistake that led to Vincent Janssen’s equaliser for Holland. Stones’s return to 
the team became a personal ordeal in that moment and, after a wonderful debut 
for Danny Rose in Berlin, it is fair to say England’s new left-back will not 
remember his second cap with the same fondness.

Paul McShane own goal costly as Republic of Ireland are held by Slovakia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/republic-of-ireland-slovakia-international-friendly-match-report>
England were probably entitled to feel aggrieved that Janssen was not 
penalised for a barge on the substitute Phil Jagielka before the striker set up 
the winning goal for Luciano Narsingh but, on the flipside, it could also be 
argued Rose was enormously fortunate not to give away a penalty after only six 
minutes. It was the same player, with a handball, who gave away the penalty 
five minutes into the second half for Janssen to score, and though Rose caught 
the eye again with his ability to break forward these were moments that will 
worry Hodgson.

On a brighter note, Danny Drinkwater had a competent debut and there were more 
signs that Vardy can flourish at international level. It was probably 
unrealistic to imagine England carrying on where they left off in Berlin and, 
however galling it must have been forHolland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> not to qualify for this summer’s 
tournament, nobody could suspect that Danny Blind’s team had been sapped of all 
their confidence.

What they lack compared with previous Dutch teams – and it was brought home by 
the 14th-minute tribute for Johan Cruyff – is the star quality to trouble even 
the most accomplished defences. As Blind pointed out afterwards, they were also 
missing 14 of their regular players. Yet they still went by the usual Dutch 
principles of trying to take care of the ball, and they were unfortunate to be 
behind at half-time given that Vardy’s goal came from England’s first move of 
real penetration.

Until that point it had been a stodgy first half and a reminder, perhaps, why 
Hodgson was cautious not to sound too optimistic after the result in Germany. 
Vardy’s on-pitch relationship withDaniel Sturridge certainly did not click 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-five-things-we-learned>
 immediately and when Ross Barkley had the ball in the No10 position there were 
not many occasions when team-mates were advancing beyond him. Dele Alli’s 
forward running was a prominent feature of the win in Berlin and, at times, 
England missed that directness. The tempo was too slow and the buildup play 
broke down too often once England had moved into attacking areas.

What happened in the 40th minute was out of keeping with the rest of their 
first-half performance. James Milner, Adam Lallana and Kyle Walker were all 
involved. Sturridge’s dummy when Milner played the ball into Lallana’s path 
should not be overlooked either and Rose’s overlapping run on the left had 
helped to stretch the Dutch defence. Walker was doing the same on the other 
side and, though Lallana took a while to make the pass, it was beautifully 
weighted as the full-back broke into the penalty area. Walker cut the ball 
across the six-yard area and it was a straightforward finish for Vardy.

England 1-2 Holland: International friendly – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/29/england-v-holland-international-friendly-live>
Unfortunately for Hodgson, the bottom line is that, defensively, there are 
still plenty of imperfections. Stones was in effect on trial here and his 
latest mistake reiterated why he has dropped out of Everton’s team recently. At 
the highest level, Stones has to realise Hodgson wants central defenders he can 
trust. His attempt to take the ball around Janssen was ill-conceived and when 
it ended with him slipping over it left his opponent with a clear run at goal.

Fraser Forster blocked the shot but it was directly after that save that Rose 
jutted out his right arm to give away the penalty from Narsingh’s cross. 
Janssen’s penalty was expertly directed into the top left-hand corner and the 
inexperience in Hodgson’s backline was punished.

Vardy came closest to restoring England’s lead with a shot that was heading 
for the top corner until Jeroen Zoet turned it away but the decisive goal came 
after 77 minutes. Janssen barged Jagielka to the ground before retrieving the 
ball and, as England’s players waited for a free-kick, Narsingh was waiting to 
turn in his team-mate’s pass.
 