
1) Southgate even more of a shoo-in for full-time job

Forget the reality that the scoreline felt rather deceptive at times, with 
this far from pristine. The Football Association has a formal process still to 
undertake, which will now include the input of Howard Wilkinson, but the 
appointment of Gareth Southgate on a permanent basis is surely a formality.
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> head into the winter 
lull clear at the top of this group, unbeaten now in 33 qualifying games, with 
the interim manager having taken seven points from three matches. Even a 
humiliating defeat by Spain in Tuesday’s friendly is unlikely to damage his 
chances of being offered the chance to succeed Sam Allardyce, most likely 
through to 2020 with a break clause after the World Cup in Russia. He has 
enjoyed his stint in temporary charge. The real work starts now.

England’s hat-trick of slick headers put feeble Scotland in their place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
2) Strachan’s time with Scotland may be up 

Gordon Strachan’s prospects do not appear quite so promising. His team 
selection had a hint of a last throw of the dice, with eight changes made from 
that thrashing in Slovakia, but there was a helplessness here to the manager as 
urgency and industry led to little. The perception is the last 12 months have 
been one prolonged retreat after initial progress under his stewardship, a 
legacy of a failure to reach Euro 2016 where Wales, Northern Ireland and, to a 
lesser extent, England enjoyed their summers. It mattered little thatScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland>, with three Championship 
defenders in their back four and some fine chances spurned, matched the English 
for long periods here. The frustration in Strachan’s face as those chances were 
missed and his defence gave way summed it up, with visiting fans choosing 
instead to fling objects from bottles to tennis balls on to the turf in a 
mini-protest. Whether the manager jumps or is pushed remains to be seen.

England v Scotland: World Cup 2018 qualifier – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/11/england-v-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-live>
3) England’s pursuit of an identity goes on

The lethargy which initially seemed to infect the hosts at the start of both 
periods here was troubling in a fixture, traditionally thunderously frantic, 
which is supposed to get the juices flowing. There was a carelessness in 
possession which had Southgate fidgeting uncomfortably on the sidelines, with 
Wayne Rooney and John Stones, Adam Lallana and Eric Dier all culpable of 
dawdling on the ball or placing passes beyond team-mates. At least Raheem 
Sterling offered them some forward propulsion to draw the focus and shrug the 
hosts awake, but a management staff so desperate to implement an easily 
recognisable, progressive style will have been unimpressed by this fare for 
long periods. The perfectionist in Southgate means he recognises their 
development remains very much a work in progress.

4) Home team’s quality told in the end 

Yet, for all the visitors’ endeavour, the flashes of quality that yielded 
reward were all English. Sterling, his remarkable miss aside, was bright and 
energetic, more the player who has thrived under Pep Guardiola than sank 
without trace under Roy Hodgson. Lallana is at the peak of his powers, 
inventive and incisive, and now boasts goals in successive England matches. 
Daniel Sturridge’s opener was superbly taken to make a mockery of his lack of 
Premier League goals to date this term, while Danny Rose’s drives down the left 
consistently wounded the Scots. In the passages of play when England clicked, 
they exposed these opponents for what they are. The vulnerability of Scotland’s 
defence was as alarming here as it had been in Trnava last month.

5) Teams’ show of respect may come at a cost

Remembrance felt right, but England and Scotland await Fifa’s judgment. 
Armistice day was observed in the right way here, with fans self-policing to 
choke the occasional untimely shout of allegiance in the stands as three 
wreathes were laid in the centre-circle, the lone bugler sounded the Last Post 
and the crowd hushed. Both sets of players wore black armbands sporting 
poppies, with the respective associations now waiting to see what sanction, if 
any, is flung their way by world football’s governing body. Fifa will consider 
its match commissioner’s official report before deciding whether there is a 
case to be heard by an independent disciplinary committee. Both the FA and 
Scottish FA will anticipate a fine, even if there is scope for other sanctions, 
including point deductions, to be imposed. Regardless, those at Wembley will 
insist the right course of action was pursued.
 