
James Milner believes England must learn to adapt when they face opponents who 
sit off them after shortcomings in possession were exposed byHolland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> on Tuesday.

The captain for the night admitted the failure to move the ball quickly enough 
contributed to a2-1 defeat against a Holland team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-international-friendly-match-report>
 who have not qualified for Euro 2016, and his comments were backed up by Daley 
Blind’s warning that England are likely to be confronted by sides attempting to 
stifle them this summer. The Dutch captain praised their opponents’ attacking 
options but felt his team were comfortable.

The verve and fearlessness evident three days earlier in England’s stirring 
victory over Germany in Berlin were sorely lacking. Blind revealed that Holland 
were happy to concede possession, leaving less space behind their defence, and 
Roy Hodgson’s side looked uncertain when the onus was on them to seize the 
initiative.

International football: 10 talking points from all the latest action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/international-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action>
“Maybe it is a reality check,” Milner said. “We have shown we can beat anyone 
by beating the world champions but also that we need to be more consistent 
game-in and game-out. You need that in a tournament – you can’t play one game 
and have a game off.

“We probably didn’t play with the intensity of the other day. We had more of 
the ball and I think sometimes it comes from us not moving it quickly enough. 
When the other team has the ball sometimes it is easier to start quicker and 
get in the faces and press and that gets the intensity into the game. When we 
have the ball it is down to us to get the intensity into the game and we didn’t 
do that.”

In England’s defence Hodgson selected an experimental side. The Tottenham trio 
of Dele Alli, Eric Dier and Harry Kane were rested along with Liverpool’s 
Jordan Henderson andEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> did 
take the lead with a fine team goal, Jamie Vardy finishing off a flowing move.

“It would have been good to back up the result [in Germany],” Milner added. 
“But on the other hand we have probably learnt more than we did in the game on 
Saturday – the reality of international football, not taking your chances, not 
playing at a high enough tempo and then at the other end not getting a couple 
of decisions and being punished.

“We will learn a lot from tonight and it shows us all as a group moving 
forward that we will hopefully learn those lessons and show the consistency you 
need if you’re going to do well in a tournament.”

Blind argued that Holland restricted England to few clear opportunities. “We 
played more on the counterattack,” the Manchester United player said. “I think 
against an opponent like England, with a lot of quality, it was more that type 
of game for us.

“I think we played really compact and with a lot of discipline and I think 
after the goal they didn’t create a lot of chances. Most of the time it was 
shots outside the box and we are prepared for that. We did well and we played 
on the counter and scored two goals.

“Today’s football, you look to the opponent and we know that England is a bit 
further than us at the moment. You have to adapt and it’s not the typical Dutch 
style because we want to play but we did well, really disciplined and fighting 
for every ball.”

England’s group opponents at Euro 2016, Russia, Slovakia and Wales, will 
surely take note. “It’s definitely a challenge because I think a lot of 
countries will say that England is a stronger team and they have a lot of 
quality in the team,” Blind said. “But I think England have enough quality to 
score goals. They have a lot of goalscorers, so I don’t think they have to 
worry.”
 