
Equity, the actors’ union, has ensured that the cast of the struggling West End
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> musical, Chicago, will not have to 
accept cuts in salaries by paying £5,000 into the production from its emergency 
fighting fund for the theatre.

In return, Mr Peter Plouviez, Equity’s general secretary, said that the show’s 
producer, Mr Larry Parnes, had guaranteed employment for the 31 members of the 
company for 11 weeks. “I’m delighted,” he said. “It’s just the kind of musical 
which could pick up.”


The agreement, which includes the promise by Mr Parnes of a midnight matinee 
of the musical with proceeds donated to the union’s theatre fund, was reached 
after three hours of negotiation between the two men on Friday.


Earlier, there had been a tense encounter between Mr Plouviez and members of 
the cast when he told them that Mr Parnes’s idea of saving the show by giving 
the performers new contracts and reduced salaries contravened an agreement 
between the union and the Society of West End Theatres (SWET) representing 
theatre producers.


Broadway hit Chicago makes UK debut in Yorkshire: From the archive, 18 
November 1978
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/the-northerner/2013/nov/18/chicago-broadway-roxy-hart-yorkshire>
It is the first time that the union’s fighting fund for the theatre has been 
used to save a West End show from closure. Mr Plouviez has committed about 25 
per cent of its total resources, which consist largely of donations from 
television and film companies, to the saving of the show. But a proportion of 
this money will be recouped by the midnight matinee, and the action averts a 
situation in which a company of 31 would have been put out of work.


Chicago enjoyed initial success with the public and considerable acclaim from 
the critics but has recently been playing to about 50 per cent capacity.


Equity has accused the foreign labour department of the Department of 
Employment of ignoring its advice on which foreign actors are allowed to work 
in the country. In a letter to the Employment Secretary, Mr Prior, the union 
says : “Increasingly, our impression is that the foreign labour department is 
likely to capitulate to whoever puts on it the greatest pressure.”


Equity’s letter follows the granting of a permit to Mr Christopher Sarandon, 
the American TV actor to play the leading role of Sidney Carton in Lord Grade’s 
new television film of Charles Dickens’s, Tale Of Two Cities.


The union is consulted by the Department of Employment’s foreign labour 
department about the granting of permits and points out that “blind chauvinism” 
does not affect its advice. It has approved permits for 1,300 foreign artists 
in the last year but has recently been overruled by the department three times.

The union believes that an “exceptional and damaging” change in policy has 
taken place and that it must now begin to think of “industrial action” as its 
method of protecting the employment of British actors. Mr Plouviez stressed 
yesterday that Equity had no feud or disagreement with its American 
counterpart, American Equity.

 