
This will probably be one of the more feeble challenges Tottenham face this 
season but, for Mauricio Pochettino’s young side, the future continues to shine 
brightly. Spurs selected an untried and inexperienced line-up for this European 
tie but, thanks to a hat-trick from Erik Lamela and a fluid display, they 
advance to the knockout stages as group winners.

Klopp relieved as Jordan Henderson returns in Liverpool draw with FC Sion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/liverpool-sion-europa-league-match-report>
There was no Harry Kane, rested for Newcastle here on Sunday, but Spurs did 
not need him. Lamela scored three goals in the first half – extending his fine 
record in this competition – and Tom Carroll’s dogged trickery added a fourth 
late on‚ his first for the club.

Stephan El Shaarawy scored a fine consolation for Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> but it will have provided 
Leonardo Jardim with little solace on the return journey after his side limply 
exited the competition.

Eric Dier went off injured shortly before half-time but is expected to be fit 
for the weekend while Nacer Chadli made his first appearance since October.

It was a serene Spurs night and extended their unbeaten run in all 
competitions to nine matches thanks to Lamela’s decisive finishing.

“Today he scored three goals, he deserves the headlines,” said Pochettino. 
“Always the younger players need time, they need time to improve and adapt 
their game to a new culture and country. It’s a difficult process to adapt, 
some players do it quick and for others it takes time. Now I’m very happy for 
him. It’s true that today he’s more confident and looks a different player from 
two years ago.

“I’m very happy and proud. I think it was a perfect game to show that we have 
a strong squad. It was important [to finish top] because we have the 
possibility to finish in White Hart Lane at home, the second leg at home [in 
the round of 32]. It was the opposite way last season against Fiorentina. This 
is important.”

Tottenham rested Kane but were not lacking any potency in attack during a 
shambolic first half for Monaco. Jardim’s side needed a victory here to stand 
any chance of advancing from the group but were cut apart during the opening 15 
minutes.

Spurs were soon two goals up and in cruise control on a night when they needed 
only a draw to qualify as group winners.

Pochettino will attempt to make it 14 Premier League games unbeaten on Sunday 
but his team at the weekend will probably bear little resemblance to this one. 
Dele Alli started on the bench with the 18-year-old midfielder Josh Onomah 
making his first start alongside Lamela and Son Heung-min in an attacking trio 
behind Clinton Njié.

It was Lamela’s night, however, as the Argentinian’s season of rejuvenation 
reached a new level. He opened the scoring after only two minutes, calmly 
stroking the ball into the bottom corner from the edge of the six-yard box 
after good perseverance from Ben Davies down the left.

If the defending was poor from Monaco then things only deteriorated as the 
half wore on. The French side played three at the back but space in front of 
the defence was ample and when a simple, direct ball fell to Lamela in the 15th 
minute he was all but invited to shoot.

He drove at the experienced Jérémy Toulalan – who must have wondered what on 
earth was happening around him – and released a left-footed shot from the edge 
of the area that slipped beneath the grasp of the goalkeeper, Danijel Subasic.

Spurs did not have to wait long for a third. More slack defending gifted them 
possession in the Monaco half and Son slipped a simple pass through for Lamela 
who finished well with the side of his foot past Subasic at the near post.

He scored a superb goal in the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> last season at White 
Hart Lane but this was Lamela’s first hat-trick for the club.

Monaco, at last, showed signs of life. The men in black had been playing with 
their heads down for too long and, even though they pulled one goal back, there 
never seemed to be any belief from within they could turn this tie around.

That said, their goal from El Shaarawy was a piece of true quality. The Italy 
international received the ball from Kylian Mbappé out on the left before 
curling a precise effort past Lloris into the bottom corner from 25 yards.

“It’s true we had an awful start to the game, conceding those three quick 
goals,” said Jardim. “It was down to misplaced passes on our part but we 
couldn’t cope with the high pressing of Tottenham. That led to our individual 
errors.”

Indeed, it was Tottenham who regained control and Carroll scored his first 
goal for the club after Chadli had been brought on. Carroll chested the ball 
down from a blocked shot and snuck to the byline before slotting underneath 
Subasic.
 