
Esmaël Gonçalves continued his superb form at St Mirren with both goals in 
their 2-0Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> win 
againstSt Johnstone. The 21-year-old took his goal tally to four in three games 
as the Buddies booked their place in the last eight. Gonçalves headed St Mirren 
into the lead six minutes after half-time and doubled the hosts' advantage 
eight minutes later.

Kilmarnock's assistant manager, Jimmy Nicholl, commended the substitute Paul 
Heffernan after the Irish striker brushed off the disappointment of his 
omission from the starting lineup to knockInverness out the Scottish Cup.

Heffernan was one of several experienced players on the bench as Kenny Shiels 
kept faith with Mark O'Hara, William Gros and Ross Barbour after bringing in a 
number of youngsters for the midweek defeat by Celtic. The Irishman came on 
just before the break after Cillian Sheridan pulled up with a hamstring injury 
and struck two goals to earn Killie a 2-0 win at Rugby Park. Heffernan pounced 
in the 58th minute following a break of the ball and then flicked home 
Barbour's strike with five minutes left.

Nicholl said: "We knew it was going to be difficult because of the way they 
have been this season and what we had on the park, with the inexperience. The 
manager had a decision to make and it turned out to be the right decision to 
stick with the young lads, Barbour and Gros and O'Hara. They did really well. I 
thought Willie Gros was excellent up front, O'Hara's composure, and Barbour's 
willingness, and then the attitude of the senior players who might have been 
disappointed they didn't start."

Falkirk beat Forfar 4-1 to reach the quarter-finals. A goal in each half from 
Lyle Taylor and second-half goals from Stewart Murdoch and David Weatherston 
gave the First Division Bairns victory against opponents from the tier below 
despite Ross Campbell levelling the scores after 21 minutes.

Second-half goals from Steven May, in the 51st minute, and Jonathon Routledge, 
10 minutes later, enabledHamilton to win their all First Division tie against 
Dunfermline 2-0 win at East End Park. The Pars striker Andy Kirk was denied by 
the post in the second half.

In the Scottish Premier League, a last-gasp equaliser from Ian Vigurs earned 
Ross County a deserved 2-2 draw in an action-packed Scottish match against 
Heartsat the Global Energy Stadium. Rocco Quinn gave County the lead in the 
20th minute with a deflected drive, but Michael Ngoo restored parity 11 minutes 
later.Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> took the lead when 
Jamie Walker scored with a header just after the hour mark, but Vigurs struck 
from close range to earn a point for the hosts.
 