
The Chinese are the most historically minded of people. In his conquest of 
power, Mao Zedong usedmilitary tactics derived from Sun Tzu 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Art_of_War>, who lived around 500 BC; 
Confucianism, dating from around the same time, remains at the heart of China’s 
social thinking, despite Mao’s ruthless attempts to suppress it.

So when president Xi Jinping launched his “New Silk Road” 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-international-growth-agenda-by-michael-spence-2015-06>
 initiative in 2013, no one should have been surprised by the historical 
reference. “More than two millennia ago,”explains China’s National Development 
and Reform Commission 
<http://en.theorychina.org/xsqy_2477/201504/t20150407_321152.shtml>, “the 
diligent and courageous people of Eurasia explored and opened up several routes 
of trade and cultural exchanges that linked the major civilisations of Asia, 
Europe and Africa, collectively called the Silk Road by later generations.” In 
China, old history is often called to aid new doctrine.

The new doctrine is “multipolarity” – the idea that the world is (or should 
be) made up of several distinctive poles of attraction. The contrast is with a 
“unipolar” (that is, an American- or Western-dominated) world.

Economic and political developments have created an opportunity for Eurasia to 
emerge from its historical slumbers

Multipolarity is a political idea, but it is about more than power relations. 
It rejects the notion that there is a single civilisational ideal to which all 
countries should conform. Different world regions have different histories, 
which have given their peoples different ideas about how to live, govern 
themselves and earn a living. These histories are all worthy of respect; there 
is no “right” road to the future.

Eurasia is an idea whose time, it is said, has come around again. Recent 
historical research has rescued the old Silk Road from historical oblivion. The 
late American sociologist Janet Abu-Lughod identified eight overlapping 
“circuits of trade” between northwest Europe andChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> that, under the aegis of a Pax 
Mongolica, flourished between the 13th and 14th centuries.

According to Abu-Lughod, western imperialism superimposed itself on these 
older circuits without obliterating them. Islam continued to spread across 
geographic and political boundaries. Chinese and Indian migrations did not stop.

Now a unique conjuncture of economic and political developments has created an 
opportunity for Eurasia to emerge from its historical slumbers. In recent 
years, western self-assurance was humbled by the financial crisis of 2008-2009 
and political catastrophes in the Middle East. At the same time, the interests 
of the two potential builders of Eurasia, China andRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, seem – at least superficially – to 
have converged.

China’s motive for reviving Pax Mongolica is clear. Its growth model, based 
largely on exporting cheap manufactured goods to developed countries, is 
running out of steam. Secular stagnation threatens the west, accompanied by 
rising protectionism sentiment. And, although Chinese leaders know that they 
must rebalance the economy from investment and exports to consumption, doing so 
risks causing serious domestic political problems for the ruling Communist 
party. Reorienting investments and exports toward Eurasia offers an alternative.

As China’s labour costs rise, production is being relocated from the coastal 
regions to the western provinces. The natural outlet for this production is 
along the New Silk Road. The development of the road (actually several “belts”, 
including a southern maritime route) will require huge investments in transport 
and urban infrastructure. As in the 19th century, reduction in transport costs 
will open up new markets for trade.

Russia, too, has an economic motive for developing Eurasia. It has failed to 
modernise and diversify its economy. As a result, it remains predominantly an 
exporter of petroleum products and an importer of manufactured goods. China 
offers a secure and expanding market for its energy exports. The big transport 
and construction projects needed to realise Eurasia’s economic potential may 
help Russia recover the industrial and engineering might it lost with 
communism’s fall.

This year Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kyrgyzstan> have joined together in a 
Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), a customs union with a defence component. The 
EEU is seen by its advocates as a step toward re-establishing the old Soviet 
frontiers in the form of a voluntary economic and political union, modelled on 
the EU – a project to take the sting out of the west’s “victory” in the cold 
war.

Official Russian opinion looks forward 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/267511978/Toward-the-Great-Ocean-3-Creating-Central-Eurasia>
 to “the interpenetration and integration of the EEU and the Silk Road Economic 
Belt” into a “Greater Eurasia”, which will afford a “steady developing safe 
common neighbourhood of Russia and China”. On 8 May, Putin and Xi signed an 
agreement in Moscow that envisages the establishment of coordinating political 
institutions, investment funds, development banks, currency regimes and 
financial systems – all to serve a vast free-trade area linking China with 
Europe, the Middle East and Africa.

How realistic is this dream? Russia and China both feel encircled by the 
United States and its allies. China’s anti-hegemonic aim, expressed in almost 
inscrutable prose, is to secure “tolerance among civilisations” and respect for 
the “modes of development chosen by different countries”.

Putin, meanwhile, has ratcheted up his much more explicit anti-American 
rhetoric since the Ukraine crisis, which he sees as a prime example of western 
interference in Russia’s domestic affairs. Boosting trade flows between Russia 
and China, and strengthening political and security coordination, will reduce 
their vulnerability to outside interference and signal the emergence of a new 
centre of world power.

It may be considered a singular success for western statesmanship to have 
brought two old rivals for power and influence in Central Asia to the point of 
jointly seeking to exclude the west from the region’s future development. The 
US, especially, missed opportunities to integrate both countries into a single 
world system by rebuffingreforms of the International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/china-global-governance-by-jim-o-neill-2015-03>
 that would have strengthened China’s decision-making influence and by blocking 
Russia’s overtures for Nato membership. This led both countries to seek an 
alternative future in each other’s company.

Whether their marriage of convenience will lead to an enduring union – or, as 
George Soros <https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/george-soros> 
predicts, a threat to world peace – remains to be seen. There is an obvious 
sphere-of-influence issue in Kazakhstan, and the Chinese have been squeezing 
the Russians for all they can get in bilateral deals. For the time being, 
though, squabbles over the New Silk Road seem less painful to the two powers 
than enduring lectures from the west.

 * Robert Skidelsky, a member of the British House of Lords, is professor 
emeritus of political economy at Warwick University. 

Copyright: Project Syndicate <http://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2015.
 