
Schalke, Athletic Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> 
and Sparta Prague were among the sides to book their place in the knockout 
stage of the Europa League on Thursday, while last year’s beaten finalists 
Dnipro crashed out.

Christian Benteke blasts Liverpool past Bordeaux and into knockout stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/liverpool-bordeaux-europa-league-match-report>
Schalke and Sparta Prague secured qualification from Group K with 1-0 home 
wins. Schalke saw offApoel Nicosia thanks to an 87th-minute winner from Eric 
Maxim Choupo-Moting. Dennis Aogo missed a penalty two minutes later for the 
Germans. Sparta’s goal againstAsteras Tripoli came rather earlier, Jakub Brabec 
scoring in the 33rd minute, but the Czechs had to play the last eight minutes 
with 10 men after the sending off of Ladislav Krejci. The win leftSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> top with Sparta two points 
further back.

A late brace from Aritz Aduriz earned Athletic Bilbao a 3-2 win at Augsburg 
which earned the Spaniards top spot in Group L. Bilbao trailed going into the 
closing stages after Markel Susaeta’s opener was cancelled out by strikes from 
Piotr Trochowski and Raúl Bobadilla. But Aduriz headed the equaliser in the 
84th minute and snatched the winner two minutes later to leave their opponents 
on the brink of elimination.Partizan Belgrade scored an 89th-minute winner 
through Andrija Zivkovic to win 2-1 atAZ Alkmaar and sit second, three points 
ahead ofAugsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg>, whom they 
face at home in their final game.

Lazio, already guaranteed top spot in Group G, beat Dnipro 3-1 in Rome. 
Antonio Candreva, Marco Parolo and Filip Djordjevic were on target for the 
Italians, with Bruno Gama briefly levelling.St Etienne sealed second place in 
Group G, despite only earning a 1-1 draw atRosenborg.

Anderlecht, who started the day bottom of Tottenham’s group, moved into pole 
position to join Mauricio Pochettino’s side thanks to a 2-0 win atMonaco, which 
lifted the Belgian club a point ahead of their opponents, three behind Spurs. 
The goals came from Guillaume Gillet and Frank Acheampong.

Harry Kane continues streak to sink Qarabag and send Tottenham through
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/qarabag-tottenham-europa-league-match-report>
Basel sealed qualification and top spot in Group I after coming from two goals 
down to claim a 2-2 draw at home to 10-manFiorentina. The visitors led 2-0 
after goals from Federico Bernarderschi, either side of a 27th-minute red card 
for Facundo Roncaglia. But Marek Suchy pulled one back and Mohamed Elneny 
equalised 16 minutes from time to put Basel three points ahead of the Italians 
in second, but with a better head-to-head record.Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> still need a point to secure 
progression, though, as they are only two ahead ofLech Poznan and Belenenses, 
who drew 0-0 in Portugal, Tiago Silva missing a first-half penalty for the 
hosts.

Besiktas moved into pole position to qualify from a very tight Group H thanks 
to a 2-0 win overSkenderbeu. Lokomotiv Moscow’s 4-2 home defeat to Sporting 
Lisbon left them in danger of being caught by the Portuguese side, with two 
points separating the top three. Besiktas’ goals both came from Cenk Tosun. 
Sporting came from a goal down, having conceded to Maicon, to race into a 4-1 
lead thanks to efforts from Fredy Montero, Bryan Ruiz, Gelson Martins and 
Matheus Pereira. Aleksey Miranchuk got a late second for the Russians, but it 
was too little too late.

Sion missed the chance to qualify from Group B as they lost 2-0 at Rubin Kazan
. The Swiss club had Birama Ndoye in the 34th minute and second-half goals from 
Blagoy Georgiev and Marko Devic condemned them to defeat and kept the Russians’ 
hopes alive.

In Group C Krasnodar beat Borussia Dortmund 1-0 thanks to Pavel Mamaev’s 
second-minute penalty, but both sides were already through. The match between
Paok Salonika and Gabala finished 0-0.

Celtic out of Europa League after Vaclav Cerny’s late Ajax winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/celtic-ajax-europa-league-match-report>
Fenerbahce moved into pole position to take second place in Group A with a 2-0 
win atMolde, who are already through. José Fernandao and Ozan Tufan scored 
after the break, with the hosts finishing with 10 men following a red card for 
Knut Olav Rindaroy.

Napoli made it five wins from five at the top of Group D with a 1-0 win at 
Club Brugge in a match played behind closed doors as a result of security fears 
in Belgium. Vlad Chiriches scored the winner, but the three other teams in the 
pool are still all in with a shout of qualification.Midtjylland have a 
two-point cushion in second, despite losing 1-0 atLegia Warsaw, Aleksandar 
Prijovic with the goal.

Braga established a two-point lead at the top of Group F with a 2-1 win at 
home toSlovan Liberec, who are second. Dmitri Efremov put the visitors in 
front, but goals from Alan and, in the last minute, Crislan secured a home win. 
Third-placedMarseille moved a point behind Liberec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/liberec-fc> thanks to a 2-1 home win over 
Groningen. Michy Batshuayi got the 88th-minute winner after Georges – Kévin 
Nkoudou’s opener had been cancelled out by Hedwiges Maduro.

In Group E, Villarreal moved top thanks to a 1-0 win, earned by Bruno 
Soriano’s goal, over their fellow qualifiersRapid Vienna. The two sides are 
level on points.Dinamo Minsk picked up their first points with a 1-0 success 
overViktoria Plzen, also already eliminated. Nenad Adamovic followed up to 
score after his injury-time penalty was saved, moments after Oleg Veretilo had 
been sent off for the Belarusians.
 