
Dundalk continued their fairytale European experience with a 1-0 win against 
Maccabi Tel Aviv <https://www.theguardian.com/football/maccabitelaviv> thanks 
to Ciaran Kilduff’s goal. Kilduff – the hero in the last-gasp draw against AZ 
Alkmaar – came off the bench to seal three points.

Switching from their home in County Louth to Dublin’s Tallaght Stadium, the 
Lilywhites faithful had to wait for 72 minutes for the breakthrough.

Patrick McEleney collected the ball inside the Maccabi half and played it to 
Daryl Horgan on the left of the penalty area from where the winger clipped in a 
cross for Kilduff, who turned 28 on Thursday, to score. It was no less than the 
Lilywhites deserved after dominating long periods by sticking to their creative 
and assured passing game.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic gives Manchester United the edge over Zorya Luhansk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/manchester-united-zorya-lugansk-europa-league-match-report>
On four points they trail only Zenit St Petersburg and move ahead of AZ Alkmaar
after Zenit won 5-0 in the meeting of those two sides. Aleksandr Kokorin scored 
twice with the impressive Giuliano, Domenico Criscito and Oleg Shatov also on 
target.

The three-time champions Internazionale face a battle to get through Group K 
after a second successive defeat. A 3-1 setback againstSparta Prague followed a 
2-0 loss to Hapoel Beer Sheva to leave Inter pointless and bottom of the group, 
four points behindHapoel and Southampton, who drew 0-0 in Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/hapoel-beer-sheva-southampton-europa-league-match-report>
. Vaclac Kadlec’s first-half brace set Sparta on their way and, though Inter’s 
captain, Rodrigo Palacio, pulled one back, they had the defender Andrea 
Ranocchia sent off and Mario Holek quickly put the game to bed.

Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/manchester-united-zorya-lugansk-europa-league-match-report>
 andFenerbahce enjoyed 1-0 wins in Group A, Fenerbahce moving top with victory 
overFeyenoord thanks to Emmanuel Emenike’s goal while Zlatan Ibrahimovic headed 
United pastZorya Luhansk.

Krasnodar and Schalke took a stranglehold on Group I after each recording 
their second straight win. The Russian side won 5-2 againstNice as Joaozinho’s 
double added to Fedor Smolov’s opener. Nice twice pulled within one, through 
first Mario Balotelli and then Wylan Cyprien, but the substitute Ari’s late 
double secured victory.Schalke beat Salzburg 3-1 with goals from Leon Goretzka 
and Naldo either side of Duje Caleta-Car’s own goal. Jonatan Soriano pulled one 
back for the Austrians.

Fiorentina were also comfortable winners, beating 10-man Qarabag 5-1 to top 
Group J. Khouma Babacar and Mauro Zarate scored twice each, with Nikola Kalinic 
also on target. Dino Ndlovu scored in injury time for Qarabag, who had Elvin 
Yunuszada sent off after half an hour.

PAOK Salonika beat Slovan Liberec 2-1 in the same group, Stefanos Athanasiadis 
scoring twice to overcome Nikolay Komlichenko’s first-minute opener.

Southampton earn draw at Hapoel Beer Sheva to top Europa League group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/hapoel-beer-sheva-southampton-europa-league-match-report>
Kasper Dolberg’s goal was enough to keep Ajax top of Group G with a 1-0 win 
againstStandard Liege, who hit a post late on through Isaac Mbenza. Celta Vigo 
are two points back after late goals from John Guidetti and Daniel Wass saw 
them beatPanathinaikos 2-0.

Shakhtar Donetsk beat Braga 2-0 with goals from Taras Stepanenko and Viktor 
Kovalenko to stay clear in Group H, despite Fred’s red card early in the second 
half.Gent beat Konyaspor by the same score thanks to Kenneth Saief and Renato 
Neto.

FC Zurich beat Osmanlispor 2-1 with goals from Marco Schonbachler and Dzengis 
Cavusevic – who also missed a penalty – as Group L closed up. Adam Maher scored 
for the previous group leaders, who were overhauled byVillarreal after the 
Yellow Submarine’s 1-1 draw with Steaua Bucharest – Rafael Borre and Sulley 
Muniru with the goals.

Mainz beat Gabala 3-2 in Group C’s early game, leading through Yoshinori Muto 
but falling behind to goals from Ruslan Gurbanov and Sergei Zenjov before Jhon 
Cordoba and Levin Oztunali swung the game decisively back their way.

Nolan Roux’s injury-time goal then earned St Etienne a 1-1 draw after Youri 
Tielemans’ penalty gaveAnderlecht the lead.

All four teams in Group F are level on three points after Athletic Bilbao beat 
Rapid Vienna 1-0 with a goal from Benat Etxebarria and Genk won 3-1 against 
Sassuolo. Nikos Karelis, Leon Bailey and Thomas Buffel scored Genk’s goals, 
with Matteo Politano responding.

Roma joined Austria Vienna at the top of Group E after a 4-0 win against Astra 
Giurgiuwith goals from Kevin Strootman, Federico Fazio and Mohamed Salah and a 
Fabricio own-goal.Austria Vienna drew 0-0 with Viktoria Plzen.

APOEL top Group B after beating Olympiakos 1-0 with a goal from Pieros 
Sotiriou, though they needed Boy Waterman to save brilliantly from Tarik 
Elyounoussi late on.Astana and Young Boys drew 0-0.
 