
Dundalk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundalk> tasted bitter 
disappointment as they went from the verge of a historic win to defeat against 
Zenit St Petersburg.

In a touch of Brazilian class the Zenit midfielder Giuliano exchanged a 
one-two in the box with the Belgian Axel Witsel and eased the ball home from 
close range for a 2-1 victory in their Group D game in Dublin. The substitute 
Mauricio missed a penalty chance to finish the game off in the final minutes.

Robert Mak had put the Russian club level after Robbie Benson’s opener for 
Dundalk. Zenit have a five-point lead while Dundalk are second, a point ahead 
of Maccabi Tel-Aviv, who secured a 2-1 win at AZ Alkmaar with a late goal from 
Eyal Golasa.

Paul Pogba gets two in Manchester United demolition of Fenerbahce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/manchester-united-fenerbahce-europa-league-group-a-match-report>
Zenit controlled most of the play with precise and short passes. Giuliano 
always looked threatening, turning deep inside the Dundalk half in an effort to 
create space. But for much of the game the gulf in class between the Irish 
hopefuls and the 2008 winners of the Uefa Cup was masked by a spirited 
performance from the hosts. 

They have endured a punishing domestic and international schedule in recent 
weeks and looked tired in the dying minutes of the match when it became clear 
their opponents had too much for them.

Dundalk displayed a flawless defensive performance against one of the 
favourites to win theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> during the first 
half. The Russian side dominated possession but Dundalk carved probably the 
best chances of the half. The Irish striker David McMillan set up Ronan Finn 
within the first 10 minutes but his shot inched past the keeper’s right post.

Minutes later the storming winger Daryl Horgan surged forward and tried to 
poke it towards the striker Patrick McEleney but he was foiled.

Zenit’s play was patient, waiting for Dundalk to make a mistake. Witsel 
controlled the game in the middle but failed to tee up any significant 
first-half chances.

Early in the second half the winger Benson picked the ball up 25 yards out 
with a little bit of space after the ball bounced off a Zenit defender. His 
shot beat the keeper who may have been unsighted by one of his defenders.

On 70 minutes Mak equalised for Zenit after a poor clearance from the Dundalk 
keeper saw the ball given away cheaply and the winger made no mistake from 
close range. Seven minutes later Giuliano played a 1-2 with Witsel inside the 
box and made it 2-1 and Dundalk heads dropped, buoyed little by the penalty 
miss after Brian Gartland’s foul on Mauricio.

Southampton take fight to 10-man Inter but Antonio Candreva strike earns spoils
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/internazionale-southampton-europa-league-group-k-match-report>
Feyenoord defeated the Ukrainian side Zorya Luhansk 1-0 at De Kuip with a goal 
from Nicolai Jorgensen on 55 minutes. They have six points in Group A and lead
Manchester United on head-to-head record after José Mourinho’s side enjoyed a 
4-1 win againstFenerbahce at Old Trafford.

In Group B, Young Boys came from behind to beat Apoel Nicosia 3-1 with a 
hat-trick from Guillaume Hoarau. The Cypriots are still top, level on six 
points withOlympiakos who recorded a 4-1 win over the Kazakh side Astana with a 
double from Junior Seba.

Three teams are locked on five points at the top of Group C. Mainz and 
Anderlecht drew 1-1 while Saint Etienne secured a 1-0 home win against Gabala, 
who are bottom without a point.

Austria Vienna battled to a 3-3 draw at Roma, with both teams level on five 
points at the top of Group E. Stephan El Shaarawy scored twice for the Italians 
but late goals from Dominik Prokop and Olarenwaju Kayode secured a dramatic 
draw.Astra Giurgiu won 2-1 at Plzen.

In Group F, Genk beat Athletic Bilbao 2-0 at home to move two points clear 
afterRapid Vienna and Sassuolo played out a 1-1 draw.

Shakhtar Donetsk maintained their 100% start to Group H as they thrashed Gent 
5-0, whileKonyaspor and Braga drew 1-1. Schalke also have three wins from three 
in Group I after a 1-0 away win against the Russian sideKrasnodar. Nice 
collected a first win, 1-0 atRed Bull Salzburg.

Fiorentina stayed top of Group J with a 3-1 win away at Slovan Liberec, where 
Nikola Kalinic scored twice in the first half.FK Qarabag beat PAOK Salonika 2-0 
to move above the Greeks into second place.

After Southampton’s 1-0 defeat to Internazionale, Sparta Prague are top of 
Group K after a 1-0 win away to the Israeli sideHapoel Be’er Sheva.

Villarreal remain leaders of Group L after battling back from two goals down 
to earn a 2-2 draw away at the Turkish sideOsmanlispor, who saw their 
substitute Mehmet Guven sent off.FC Zurich are second, level on four points 
with Osmanlispor, after they drew 1-1 atSteaua Bucharest.

Celta Vigo and Ajax shared four goals in an entertaining 2-2 draw to stay at 
the head of Group G. It was also 2-2 betweenStandard Liège and Panathinaikos in 
Belgium.
 