
Napoli continued to cut a swathe through the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>, blowing away 
Midtjylland 5-0 to qualify from Group D with two games to spare.

The Serie A side made it four wins in a row, and took their goals scored to 16 
with efforts from Omar El Kaddouri, two from Manolo Gabbiadini, Christian 
Maggio and José Callejón.

Mousa Dembélé sinks Anderlecht with a beauty to keep Tottenham on track
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/05/tottenham-anderlecht-europa-league-match-report>
Rapid Vienna progressed to the knock-out stage from Group E after continuing 
their 100% record with a 2-1 win atViktoria Plzen. Philipp Schobesberger scored 
both goals for the Austrians, with Jan Polenda having briefly equalised.

Roberto Soldado scored twice as Villarreal came from behind to take all three 
points with a 2-1 success atDinamo Minsk, who have now lost all four.

Borussia Dortmund extended their club scoring record, netting for the 31st 
competitive game in a row. They were 4-0 winners overQabala, with Marco Reus, 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, a Sergei Zenjov own goaland Henrik Mkhitaryan 
completing the rout.Krasnodar defeated PAOK Salonika 2-1 to stay second behind 
Dortmund.

FC Sion remain top of their group after a 1-1 draw with Bordeaux. Thomas 
Meunier scored the only goal of the game asClub Brugge recorded their first 
win, at home toLegia Warsaw in Group D.

In Group F, Marseille denied Braga the chance to guarantee a place in the next 
round, Georges N’Koudou on target in a 1-0 triumph. Sergio Padt’s own goal gave
Liberec the win over Groningen by the same scoreline.

The Group H rivals Besiktas and Lokomotiv Moscow drew 1-1, as did Qarabag and 
Monaco in Group J.

Schalke missed the chance to seal a spot in the next round, drawing 1-1 against
Sparta Prague in Group K. Asteras Tripolis got their first win in the same 
group, 2-0 at home overApoel Nicosia.

Two Group L games shared 11 goals, Athletic Bilbao and Augsburg firmly on the 
goal trail. Iñaki Williams scored the first two in Athletic’s 5-1 win over
Partizan Belgrade, while Aritz Aduriz added his 100th career goal for the club. 
Augsburg thrashed AZ Alkmaar 4-1, with Raul Bobadilla netting a hat-trick.

Marc Janko and Breel Embolo hit the target as Group I pace-setters Basel made 
it nine points from 12 with a 2-0 victory overBelenenses. Fiorentina jumped 
from fourth to second as Josip Ilicic scored both in a 2-0 away win atLech 
Poznan.

The Group H leaders Lokomotiv Moscow were held 1-1 at Besiktas and Sporting 
Lisbon went down 3-0 at Skenderbeu after a first-half red card for Rui Patricio.

Lazio and St Etienne strengthened their hold on the top two spots in Group G, 
Filip Djordjevic with both in the Italians’ 2-0 win over visitingDnipro and the 
Ligue 1 outfit with a 3-0 defeat ofRosenborg.

Ajax and Fenerbahce drew 0-0 in Group A.
 