
This is it. This is the year you will sort out the drawer next to the hob. 
This is the year you will find love. This is the year you will limp out into, 
like Winona at the end ofHeathers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/heathers>, 
lighting a fag on the embers of your ex. With a certain swagger. A dark sort of 
acceptance. This is the year you will be confident in the knowledge that David 
Bowie will not die, that Hillary Clinton will not lose, and that half the UK 
will not be left reeling at the realisation it doesn’t know its neighbours. 
This is the yearHarambe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/12/harambe-the-meme-that-refused-to-die>
 will not be shot.

This is the year your plans for a “nice New Year’s Day walk” will not meet you 
in the darkness of 4pm shattered on the kitchen floor. This is the year you 
will stroll across the heath, belly full of toast, nodding at dog walkers with 
a holiness that more than makes up for the horrors of last night.

This is the year when you will get rid of all trousers that make you feel a 
failure, all shoes that call their own Ubers

This is the year you will stop pretending to be in control in meetings, and 
actually unlock the secret level that enables you to look a colleague in the 
eye and politely tell them they’re wrong. This is the year you will decide what 
you like. What kinds of chairs. What kinds of sandwich. This is the year you 
will decide what you want to do for work, rather than what you think your dad 
might have wanted. This is the year you will watch an entire episode of a 
Channel 4 drama without looking at your phone.

This is the year you will look in the mirror and think, “Fine.” A full-length 
mirror, in sunlight, no less than halfway through the working day. You will rub 
cream into your face that evening with the firm care of a Kensington masseuse. 
This is the year you will get rid of all trousers that make you feel like a 
failure, all shoes that call their own Ubers.

This is the year that the older temps told you would come as you sat, 19, and 
nervous during their fag break – the year everything slips comfortably into 
place. This is the year you will get back in touch with them, those old friends 
you left behind when you moved out of the world and on to the internet for its 
mild winters and promise of summer. You’ll sit round a real-life table and look 
at pictures of their kids, and cackle when Leah spills your drink all over the 
chips when gesticulating during a story about lilies.

This is the year when the pressure to change – the pressure that is 
traditionally amplified today – retreats in a tide of blue, rather than, as in 
previous Januaries, becoming a furious string section in your head, preventing 
you from moving even sideways. A pressure which once led only to inertia and 
disappointment will this year be replaced by a kind of blooming, much like when 
a dinner is cancelled and you sink back into the sofa with all the wonder of an 
evening free.

This is the year when, instead of attempting your usual outrageous 
improvements re friendship, fitness or intelligence, you will succeed in doing 
things such as: using those colour-catcher sheets in the washing machine. 
Reading the business pages of a newspaper. Looking after a friend’s baby for a 
whole afternoon while they sit at yours and watchTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
. This is the year you stop apologising for the food you cook.

This is the year you will walk past a vegetable stall and laugh at the size of 
an avocado. You will take it home where your boyfriend will laugh, too. You’ll 
cut it in half, spoon out the stone, and eat it together, and the whole thing 
will take ages and ages. This is the year you will get everything you want, 
because you will want a little less. This is the year the cactus will flower. 
This is the year you will learn all your online passwords without having to 
check the desktop document cunningly titled Carpet Estimates 2013. This is the 
year you will stop getting cold calls from charities that had almost made you 
give up giving. This is the year you stay home from parties to which you’d only 
have gone to avoid missing out. This is the year you will catch sight of your 
sullen reflection in the dark screen between Netflix episodes and smile at the 
self-portrait – a cup of tea balanced on your chest, glasses low on your nose, 
this is you, and it will be you tomorrow, too.

This is the year. This is it.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 