
Leighton Baines believes Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> progress can be a 
step towards “something bigger” for Everton, with the England left-back 
confident Roberto Martínez’s style can deliver honours and Champions League 
football to Goodison Park.

Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> top Group H going into 
Thursday’s return meeting with Lille on Merseyside having picked up important 
points in France and Krasnodar following an opening win over Wolfsburg. Sylvain 
Distin is expected to return to central defence with Antolín Alcaraz facing 
between six and 12 weeks out with a dislocated shoulder. The length of the 
Paraguayan’s absence will be determined by whether he requires surgery.

Martínez has not shied from his ambition to win the Europa League, a prize 
with the bonus of a Champions League place from this season, and Baines admits 
qualification from a challenging group is not the limit of Everton’s aims this 
season.

The 29-year-old said: “Europe is an added incentive for all of us. We all want 
to be part of something bigger and go on to that next level. We want to bring 
that next level to the football club and that is the motivation.

That is what we are all working towards. We want Champions League football and 
silverware. We don’t just want to do well, we want to create special memories. 
These European nights are special at the moment, the support we have on the 
road at places likeLille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> is just 
unbelievable, but we’d like to excite the supporters even more if we can. We 
all want to play at the top level and share those moments with the fans as 
well.”

Everton and Lille played a goalless draw a fortnight ago but Baines believes 
his manager’s style, plus long-term planning behind the scenes at Goodison, 
have equipped the club for more than Europa League football.

He explained: “We are trying to develop our style into a way that isn’t 
limited, so that there’s no ceiling if we continue to improve on what we do, 
and we know we have still got to do that. It’s the style the top teams will 
also be playing and it would be well suited to the Champions League if we go on 
to that level of football.

“We have got a really good young group of players here now as well. I am part 
of the senior group if you like, with Phil Jagielka, Tim Howard, Leon Osman and 
Tony Hibbert, and there is also a secondary core group now of Seamus Coleman, 
Ross Barkley, John Stones and James McCarthy who are all key players in the 
squad and are the real future now. It is part of the senior group’s job and 
responsibility to help them move forward because they are the future. Me 
staying, then Seamus, Ross and Stonesy, who have all signed long-term contracts 
as well, is a real sign of where the club is at. They are all top players and 
the future of this football club. That is why we are heading in the right 
direction.”

Everton Probable 4-2-3-1 Howard; Coleman, Jagielka, Distin, Baines; Besic, 
Barry; McGeady, Barkley, Pienaar; Lukaku.
 