
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> limped away from Lille 
with the events off the pitch arguably more noteworthy than any event during 
the game. In a match of few chances, the draw leaves them unbeaten and top of 
the group.

The match kicked off against a backdrop of tension on the streets after 
hundreds of Everton fans in the main square were dispersed with tear gas by 
police. The incident, which appeared to be triggered by undercover officers 
trying to arrest a lone fan, came the day after several Everton fans were 
treated for injuries following an ambush by a masked group wielding metal 
chairs outside a pub late on Wednesday night.

Roberto Martínez said the patchy state of the pitch was a key factor in his 
side’s inability to play through the thirds with the fluency and cohesion he 
wanted, but he was delighted by his side’s defensive display. “We were 
fantastic defensively. We showed we can go anywhere and be ourselves. The 
condition of the pitch didn’t help us butLille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> threw everything at us and we 
defended really well against a very strong team, who will finish the season 
strongly despite their form at the moment.”

When asked about the tear-gassing of fans in the town centre square, Martínez 
said: “I heard that something was reported but I don’t know any details of it.” 
He described the Everton fans as “quite unique in Europe” and said: “I have 
immense pride and an incredible feeling in seeing what we are as a football 
club. The day-to-day support of this club doesn’t stop to amaze me. I’ve seen 
full families coming across, some without tickets, staying in or near the hotel 
wishing the players well. This game really meant something for thousands of 
families. We get closer to understanding what the Evertonians deserve. It gives 
us more strength to make sure Everton keep progressing.”

Neither side deserved to take all three points on a night when the goalkeepers 
were largely untroubled despite some promising attacking play in the wide 
areas. Aiden McGeady had Everton’s best chances but failed truly to extend 
Lille’s Vincent Enyeama. The Nigerian racked up an astonishing 11 consecutive 
clean sheets last season and here Lille’s obdurate defensive nous held sway.

Martínez brought in the veteran Tony Hibbert at right-back and the big 
question was whether Hibbert could cope with the pace of Divock Origi, the 
Belgian teenager on loan from Liverpool. He started out centrally but was soon 
occupying space on the outside of the Everton right-back.

With the bobbly pitch not conducive to patient approach play, the game began 
scrappily. Both teams appeared willing to press only once the opposition 
entered the middle third of the pitch, which led to numerous scrappy 
transitions in that area.

Lille’s attacking players were keen to allow Sylvain Distin and Phil Jagielka 
to step out with the ball before triggering a midield press. It worked on three 
occasions, discomfiting Distin and forcing him into a hurried pass.

Everton looked like a team who had made several changes. After 13 minutes Ross 
Barkley needed treatment for a cut after complaining of an elbow from the Lille 
central defender Marko Basa. He returned to the field after two minutes 
sporting a bandage on his head and was immediately involved in a spell of 
possession by Everton as they tried to get a foothold in the game.

Two minutes later Samuel Eto’o’s footwork let him down in a promising position 
when, after exchanging passes with Steven Pienaar, he skipped past Simon Kjaer 
but got the ball caught under his feet and was dispossessed before he could get 
a shot off.

Moments later Origi, who had been popping up menacingly all across the 
frontline, timed his run perfectly down the right and teased Leighton Baines 
before floating the ball into the box only for Jagielka to clear.

After 25 minutes Lille went closest to scoring when Barkley was dispossessed 
on the edge of the box while dangling a leg hopefully towards the ball. The 
ball fell to Idrissa Gueye, who swivelled smartly and struck a fierce, low 
drive that whistled past Tim Howard’s left-hand post. In between one or two 
nice touches in linking with Eto and Baines on the left, Barkley was also 
culpable for another threatening moment for Lille when he dallied in possession 
10 yards outside the Everton penalty area and had to rely on Distin and 
Jagielka to shepherd the onrushing Sébastien Corchia away from danger.

It was not until the 32nd minute that Everton tested Enyeama for the first 
time. Hibbert latched on to a long, raking pass by Jagielka in the 
outside-right position and nudged the ball inside to the supporting Barkley. 
The 20-year-old showed great touch and vision to set the ball back first time 
to McGeady, who unleashed a drive that Enyeama gathered comfortably.

The second half began much the same as the first, with Origi providing a 
threat in wide areas before the perennially creative pair of Baines and Steven 
Pienaar came to life. A classic combination down the left freed the left-back 
only for his pulled back cross to be cut out by a Lille defender.

Sensing the shift in momentum, Martínez sent on Romelu Lukaku for Pienaar. 
This optimism was rewarded instantly with a flowing attacking move involving a 
clever ball into Lukaku’s feet by Barkley. The striker showed good vision to 
wait for McGeady’s run and released the Ireland international but his shot, 
while powerful, was straight at the well-positioned Enyeama.

Everton’s second substitute, Christian Atsu, was also quick to get involved 
after entering the fray with eight minutes remaining. Linking with Lukaku on 
the right, he quickly switched play to the left, allowing Baines to overlap 
Eto’o. Barkley and Lukaku tore into the box expecting a cross only for the ball 
to be blocked and allow Lille to counter.

The final 15 minutes resembled a training-ground counterattack six-versus-four 
as both sides poured forward rapidly but without leaving themselves outnumbered 
at the back. At the end the Everton players went over to applaud the huge 
numbers of visiting fans in the away end. Those supporters will surely hope the 
rest of their stay in France is as uneventful as the match.
 