
Tim Howard signed off with a clean sheet – Everton’s first at home since 
3 February – but it was his prediction that Roberto Martínez’s successor would 
be “sitting on a goldmine” of talent that resonated most at Goodison Park. 
Teenage debutants shone as Everton ended a tumultuous week and season with a 
convincing victory againstNorwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity>.

David Unsworth, the under-21s coach in temporary charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/david-unsworth-everton-performance-goodison-park-norwich>
 followingMartínez’s dismissal on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/roberto-martinez-sacked-everton>
, believes that Everton have “seven or eight players who are ready now or in 12 
months to play in the first team”. He backed those words with action, handing 
the 17-year-old Tom Davies and the 18-year-old Kieran Dowell full debuts in 
midfield and giving the under‑21s captain Jonjoe Kenny his first senior outing 
from the bench.

All three excelled as Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> 
recorded only their second win in 11 matches thanks to goals from James 
McCarthy, Leighton Baines and Kevin Mirallas, although the uncertainty around 
Goodison includes whether the trio will also be valued by whoever is in 
permanent charge next season.

Rafael Benítez could talk to Everton but is negotiating with Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/rafael-benitez-everton-newcastle-talks>
“I think they will play a part in the club’s future because they are good 
players,” Unsworth said. “You know from seeing Tom, Kieran and Jonjoe today 
that they are here to stay. I had no hesitation in putting Jonjoe in. Kieran 
showed flashes of genius and the quality he’s shown for the under-21s all 
season. And for me Tom Davies was man of the match. He was everything we want 
in an Everton central midfield player – all action, good on the ball and quick 
to spot danger. It was a great all-round midfield performance.”

Unsworth’s selection, taken in conjunction with Joe Royle and the first-team 
coach Duncan Ferguson, was also instructive for the omission of Ramiro Funes 
Mori and Oumar Niasse. Young potential is part of Martínez’s legacy at Goodison 
but so too is the £24m spent on two imports who did the former manager few 
favours before this summer’s recruitment drive.

Davies and Dowell repaid their coach’s confidence with assured, creative 
displays. They had the trust of senior players, judging by how they were given 
the ball at every available opportunity, and were instrumental in the defeat of 
a Norwich team that brought commitment but precious little quality to Goodison.

John Ruddy, the visiting goalkeeper, had saved twice in quick succession from 
Romelu Lukaku before McCarthy swept Everton ahead. The goal owed plenty to 
Dowell’s determination and Unsworth’s decision to play the Republic of Ireland 
international in a more advanced role. The teenager drove at the heart of the 
Norwich defence and, when the ball broke loose 20 yards out, the midfielder 
sent an excellent first time finish inside Ruddy’s left-hand post.

“The first goal summed us up this season,” lamented Alex Neil, who could only 
say it “looks likely” he will be Norwich’s managerin the Championship next 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/norwich-city-watford-premier-league-match-report>
. “Cameron [Jerome] has a good chance from eight yards out, the keeper makes a 
comfortable save and 20 seconds later it is in the back of our net. It was a 
good strike by McCarthy but you’ve got to look at how it’s got there.”

Nathan Redmond and Matt Jarvis both put decent chances to equalise over 
Howard’s crossbar. The veteran goalkeeper was making his 414th and final 
appearance for Everton after a decade at the club. A clean sheet and an 
emotional farewell to the Gwladys Street provided the perfect send-off for his 
move to Colorado Rapids.

Unsworth’s side doubled their lead, somewhat fortuitously, when Romelu Lukaku 
collapsed inside the Norwich area following slight contact from Robbie Brady. 
Goodison erupted with ironic cheers when Leighton Baines stepped forward to 
take the penalty having had the responsibility removed under Martínez. Baines 
duly sent Ruddy the wrong way from 12 yards. “It was really soft and changed 
the dynamic of the game,” Neil claimed.

Everton’s third was a rewarding moment for the club’s academy, Unsworth 
included. The tenacious Davies regained possession with a strong tackle in 
central midfield, Dowell released Kenny down the right and when the full-back’s 
cross deflected across the Norwich goalmouth, Kevin Mirallas was unmarked to 
convert at the back post.

Dowell had a brief spell in his favoured playmaker’s role as Unsworth shifted 
to a 4-4-1-1. His awareness and his accurate left foot had Goodison purring 
before he departed to a deserved standing ovation when replaced by Ross 
Barkley. The future appears both bright and blurred for Everton.

Man of the match Tom Davies (Everton)
 