
As they peered anxiously through the spray and narrowly avoided rivals 
bouncing off the barriers at 170mph, the current crop of Formula One drivers 
proved their worth in São Paulo last Sunday. Heavy rain turned the Brazilian 
Grand Prix into a proper race, full of the kind of excitement and 
unpredictability that have been virtually banished from modernFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>.

If only F1 were like that all the time. Or even half the time. Instead the 
circus pitches up in Abu Dhabi next week with the world drivers’ championship 
still in the balance but very little prospect of the sort of spectacle we saw 
in the penultimate round of a largely uneventful series.

Changes are coming to Formula One, and some hallowed monuments are falling. 
The 69-year-oldRon Dennis’s enforced departure from the leadership of the 
McLaren team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/ron-dennis-leave-mclaren-f1>, 
whom he rescued 45 years ago, may be followed by that of the sport’s 
ringmaster, the 86-year-old Bernie Ecclestone, once the sport’s new US-based 
commercial rights holder, Liberty Media, sorts its plans out. Jenson Button and 
Felipe Massa, with 550 grand prix starts between them, take their final bows 
next weekend, while Max Verstappen leads a new bunch of teenage tearaways ready 
to take their place. Mercedes, Ferrari and Honda are looking with interest at 
the commitment of Renault, Jaguar, BMW, Audi and others to Formula E, which 
seems more in tune with a future of all‑electric road transportation. But what 
doesn’t change is what happens when rain falls on race day.

Ayrton Senna: the gladiatorial virtuoso who still sets the standard | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/apr/30/ayrton-senna-death-formula-one-20-years>
Last Sunday it made all the difference, as it did when Ayrton Senna produced 
his masterpiece at Donington Park in 1993 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/05/formulaone.motorsports4> and 
Lewis Hamilton opened a few eyes at Silverstone in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/07/lewishamilton.formulaone>. Even 
at Monaco, where overtaking is all but impossible in dry conditions, a spring 
shower transforms the event into something likely to live in the memory, such 
as Olivier Panis’s victory in 1996, when his Ligier was one of only four cars 
still moving at the finish.

According to the forecast, it will not rain in Abu Dhabi next weekend. Rain is 
not actually unknown there – there were light showers during the free practice 
sessions of 2010 and 2015 – but this year the sun will shine from a cloudless 
sky. So if Hamilton wins his 12th pole position of the year, andNico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> makes it yet another 
all-Mercedes front row, you can pretty well bet the house on the general 
outcome.

In its normal bone-dry state, the Yas Marina circuit is not designed to 
produce interesting racing. Fernando Alonso can still feel the frustration of 
being denied a third title when the nature of the track prevented him from 
overtaking Vitaly Petrov in the 2010 season finale. What it does produce, in 
very large quantities, is money for the owners of Formula One, on whose behalf 
Ecclestone negotiated a huge fee in exchange for allowing Abu Dhabi to host the 
final round.

So there will be great television shots from exotic camera positions capturing 
the sun setting over the circuit during the race, showing the lights 
illuminating the track, and sweeping across the blue shroud covering the 
five-star Yas Island Viceroy hotel, which overlooks the action. It will all 
look just like the brochure: a vision of some new corporate leisure paradise 
where all the inconveniences are neatly tucked out of sight. The drivers will 
go round and round and the only displays of overt emotion will come once they 
are out of their cockpits.

It was different in São Paulo, where the rain seeped inside their visors and 
they could not be sure when their tyres would skate across a lake of standing 
water, leaving them helpless. Sure, it was dangerous. That’s how it should be. 
To the fury of the crowd, the race director did his best to minimise the danger 
by starting the race with the cars droning round for lap after lap behind the 
safety car. He didn’t want to see half the field out of the race at the first 
corner. But risk is something that the drivers have to accept when they apply 
for the job.

At times on Sunday we saw very clearly what separates them from us. Hamilton 
had the advantage of a clear track and no spray, but he drove with a wonderful 
finesse to avoid the aquaplaning that made victims of so many others. And 
Verstappen’s charge from 14th to third in the last 16 laps, overtaking one car 
after another by venturing on to areas of the track that others were too 
cautious to use, was a performance to settle any doubts about the 19-year-old’s 
talent at the wheel.

Others did not fare so well. Rosberg, finishing a safe second but never 
looking in the same class as his Mercedes team-mate up ahead, moaned into his 
radio: “Haven’t they seen enough crashes?”

But then a premature halt to the race would have suited his purposes, since he 
needed only to finish in a high position to maintain his advantage over 
Hamilton in the title race. Sebastian Vettel’s whingeing over the airwaves was 
tiresome, his loudly expressed desire to have the race stopped hardly befitting 
a four-times champion.

An exception to criticism would have to be made for Massa, who showed his 
vulnerability in wet conditions – he is remembered, among other things, for 
spinning his Ferrari no fewer than five times during the race at Silverstone in 
2008, which he finished in 13th and last place. Last weekend his penultimate 
grand prix ended with a high-speed crash on the 46th lap, but his 
disappointment was quickly assuaged by the reception he received from his 
home-town crowd on his last visit to Interlagos as an F1 driver.

It was there, in 2008, that he spent 39 euphoric seconds believing that he had 
become world champion, only to learn that Hamilton had snatched the title on 
the last lap by slipping past Timo Glock into fifth place, earning the points 
that gave him his first title. Massa was never a truly great driver, not a 
Senna nor a Schumacher, but he was an honest, fair, wholehearted and thoroughly 
likeable competitor, a proper racer whose recovery from a horrible eye injury 
in 2009 won widespread sympathy.

As he walked along the pit lane on Sunday, listening to the cheers of the 
crowd and giving way to tears when other teams came out to join the applause 
and his wife and small son arrived to embrace him, there was a glimpse of a 
better Formula One, one unafraid to show some humanity.
 