
Nico Rosberg extended his championship lead over Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> with a thumping victory in 
the Chinese Grand Prix. Hamilton, who started from last after his engine 
expired in qualifying, stopped five times in a race brimming with drama, and 
eventually crossed the line in seventh place.

Sebastian Vettel points finger at Daniil Kvyat after F1 Chinese GP collision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/sebastian-vettel-daniil-kvyat-exchange-f1>
It means that Rosberg, who has become only the fourth driver in the sport’s 
history to win six races in succession - a streak that stretches back to last 
year - now holds a 36-point lead over Hamilton.

Sebastian Vettel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel>, 
involved in a first-corner collision with his Ferrari team-mate Kimi Raikkonen, 
finished second following an exemplary recovery drive, with Red Bull’s Daniil 
Kvyat securing the final spot on the podium. Despite a number of incidents and 
plenty of excitement, there were no retirements at all in the race.

Earlier this week, Hamilton predicted that Rosberg would be guaranteed an 
“easy” weekend after he was dealt a five-place grid penalty following a gearbox 
change. However, not even Hamilton, nor Rosberg for that matter, would have 
envisaged just how straightforward it would prove to be.

After Vettel and Raikkonen collided with each other at the opening corner – 
both having to take on replacement front wings – and then Daniel Ricciardo, who 
had beaten Rosberg off the line, suffered a tyre blow-out on the following lap, 
Rosberg’s main opposition had been wiped out in the opening minutes of the race.

At the back of the field, Felipe Nasr attempted to avoid Raikkonen and Vettel 
but instead bumped into Hamilton, causing the latter to lose his front wing. 
The world champion was forced into the pit lane and emerged last but one in the 
order.

A safety car was deployed to clear the debris following Ricciardo’s tyre 
blow-out, at which point Mercedes opted to call Hamilton in once more. With the 
safety car on track, their theory was for Hamilton to do only one lap on the 
supersoft tyre compound - the fastest but least durable of the three compounds 
available - before pitting again for the soft-tyre option.

Hamilton had stopped three times in the opening six laps but with the safety 
car still on track, he was right on the back of the pack when the race got 
under way again on lap nine. From there, Hamilton, who also suffered damage to 
the floor of his Mercedes in his first-corner prang, was on a recovery drive, 
joined by Raikkonen in 19th and Vettel 15th.

The championship protagonists sets about carving their way through the field 
and by the next round of pit-stops, the trio had made light work of much of the 
opposition with Vettel and Hamilton in particular holding nothing back to 
provide great entertainment.

Hamilton was third at the time of his fourth stop on lap 21 and he emerged 
midway through the order, but that was where his charge – with the damage to 
his car now taking more of an effect on his performance – stopped.

“Lewis, give it everything you’ve got,” was the call from Hamilton’s team but 
his response was telling. “I am,” he replied – and by lap 30 he was back in the 
pits for a fifth and final time.

Hamilton then negotiated the slower cars with ease but Felipe Massa was 
proving an altogether different animal in the Williams, allowing both Ricciardo 
and Raikkonen to pass the limping Briton. Hamilton could manage no better than 
seventh in what will be a weekend to forget for the defending world champion.

There were no such concerns for Vettel – who despite being only 15th in the 
opening phase of the race – stormed all the way back through the pack to finish 
nearly 40 seconds behind a cruising Rosberg, with Kvyat in third.

F1: Nico Rosberg wins the Chinese Grand Prix – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/17/f1-chinese-grand-prix-live> 
Rosberg said: “The start was not quite good enough but then I had a really 
quick car today, so I was feeling great. I attacked Daniel [Ricciardo] 
straightaway and then I managed to pull a good gap after that.”

Reflecting on the drama behind, the German added: “I didn’t see anything, I 
had no idea. I just know the gap and I just knew I had to extend it as much as 
possible.”

Second-placed Vettel said: “It was a very entertaining race, a lot of cars 
that I had to overtake – it was good fun. The car was great this afternoon, so 
a big thanks to the team for that.”
 