
Lewis Hamilton pulled out a bravura last-gasp performance to take pole 
position for Sunday’sBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> and send Silverstone 
into ecstasy. It was the British champion’s fourth home pole and the 55th of 
his career on his 177th race weekend, but he left it late after having the time 
for his provisional pole lap deleted for running wide at Copse.

Vigilant officials had warned that they would be adopting a zero-tolerance 
view of any transgressions at Copse, Stowe and Club. Hamilton also went a 
little wide on his successful lap, but that was at Luffield.

It was another bad day at the office for his one serious rival and Mercedes 
team‑mate,Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg>, who 
was beaten into second place by 0.319 seconds. After the end of qualifying, the 
German was summoned to the stewards for an alleged breach of rules at the start 
of Q1, though that, to his undoubted relief, was later dismissed.

Rosberg was also made fully aware that he is in his arch enemy’s lair. Apart 
from the flags he was confronted with a banner that read: “Nico: Caution. 
Corner Ahead. Don’t Forget To Turn”, a reference to Austria a week ago where he 
received a reprimand for his last-lap collision with the world champion.

These two have been racing each other for two decades and the intensity of 
their recent battles has eroded their once close friendship. The days when they 
used to clown around together on unicycles feels like an aeon ago and now 
Rosberg leads Hamilton by 11 points in the drivers’ title race.

Hamilton’s qualifying triumph sets him up to equal Jim Clark’s hat-trick of 
successes in the British Grand Prix but he would become the first driver to win 
a Silverstone hat-trick because two of Clark’s victories were at Aintree and 
Brands Hatch.

It was a familiar Silverstone scene as Hamilton jumped atop his car and 
saluted the flag-waving crowd. After his earlier effort had been deleted 
Hamilton just had time to put in two flying laps at the end of Q3. “Honestly, 
it energises me, I don’t know why,” he said, referring to the weight of 
expectation he was under in those final minutes. “Those moments are when I am 
most excited.

“Being under pressure is something not to shy away from, something to attack 
full on and that is generally what I try to do. Every single lap I go out and 
every single corner I see the crowd they wave. There is nowhere in the world I 
can ever experience that and I wish people could feel what I feel.

“When I look and see the flags waving, it is very reminiscent of when I was 
growing up – I appreciate it more than anything, and that is why I did the lap.”

Hamilton is quick anywhere but he appears to thrive on this old-school track 
in Northamptonshire. It is a fast and challenging circuit, and that’s the way 
he likes them.

Hamilton has dominated Rosberg in qualifying this season but his team-mate has 
been difficult to shake off. Perhaps they should forget about racing cars and, 
to settle the issue once and for all, climb aboard the fighter planes that are 
performing over the circuit this weekend.

Hours later, in the Mercedes motorhome, Hamilton’s excitement had not subdued. 
“My love and appreciation for this track has grown so much over the years,” he 
said. “I complain about some of the newer tracks that don’t have character but 
this one has, old and new. As soon as I get on to the turf it’s reminiscent of 
what you’ve seen historically, when the great drivers were driving. You feel 
like you’re part of that history.”

And that late quick lap? “Imagine the most pressure you can be under, and 
that’s it. I feel comfortable in that scenario. Not if I’m having an argument 
with someone, because I don’t like confrontation, but in a car it’s to do with 
confidence and belief in your ability.” He was so pleased with himself that he 
was even contemplating a night out in London, he said.

Rosberg, whose best chance on Sunday is for Hamilton to make another of his 
poor starts, said afterwards: “Congrats to Lewis who did a good job here, and 
that’s it. It just wasn’t the best day out there for me. But tomorrow’s still 
to play for.”

The day had started badly for the British flag-wavers. Both Jenson Button 
and Jolyon Palmer dropped out of qualifying at the first hurdle. But Hamilton’s 
thrilling late charge more than made up for that.

Third place in qualifying was won by Max Verstappen, who beat his Red Bull 
team-mate, Daniel Ricciardo, for the first time.

Ricciardo sounded less than happy about that.

“It sucks,” he said. “You’d love to go through a perfect season, but we just 
missed a little bit here and there today.”

Qualifying positions for British Grand Prix

1 Lewis Hamilton (Gbr) Mercedes GP 1min 29.287secs, 2 Nico Rosberg (Ger) 
Mercedes GP 1:29.606, 3Max Verstappen (Ned) Red Bull 1:30.313, 4 Daniel 
Ricciardo(Aus) Red Bull 1:30.618, 5 Kimi Raikkonen (Fin) Ferrari 1:30.881, 6 
Sebastian Vettel(Ger) Ferrari 1:31.490, 7 Valtteri Bottas (Fin) Williams 
1:31.557, 8Nico Hulkenberg (Ger) Force India 1:31.920, 9 Carlos Sainz (Spa) 
Scuderia Toro Rosso 1:31.989, 10Fernando Alonso (Spa) McLaren 1:32.343, 11 
Sergio Perez(Mex) Force India 1:31.875, 12 Felipe Massa (Bra) Williams 
1:32.002, 13Romain Grosjean (Fra) Haas F1 1:32.050, 14 Esteban Gutierrez (Mex) 
Haas F1 1:32.241, 15Daniil Kvyat (Rus) Scuderia Toro Rosso 1:32.306, 16 Kevin 
Magnussen (Den) Renault 1:37.060, 17 Jenson Button (Gbr) McLaren 1:32.788, 18 
Jolyon Palmer (Gbr) Renault 1:32.905, 19 Rio Haryanto (Ina) Manor Racing 
1:33.098, 20Pascal Wehrlein (Ger) Manor Racing 1:33.151, 21 Felipe Nasr (Bra) 
Sauber-Ferrari 1:33.544, 22Marcus Ericsson (Swe) Sauber-Ferrari No Time

Lewis Hamilton targets hat-trick and British GP history at Silverstone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/lewis-hamilton-f1-british-grand-prix-silverstone-hat-trick> 