
The second of the two press conferences held at a Formula One race weekend 
tends to be the drier. With the glamour boys going first on Thursday, Friday 
heralds the team principals and chief engineers. Prospective tyre wear, obscure 
technical regulations and the significance or otherwise of the addition of a 
new vane to the front wing are often the order of the day. They are issues that 
are crucial to the coming race but the whole affair is usually done and dusted 
in under 30 minutes. Friday’s, however, was quite the show and, half an hour 
in, was still going strong, including the priceless moment when theForce India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/force-india> owner, Vijay Mallya, insisted 
Bernie Ecclestone’s new task for the sport was to “uncrap it”.

The process had begun with questioning over the strategy group’s announcement 
ofpotential changes to the rules to improve the show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/02/f1-race-reforms-drivers-responsibilities>
. So far so expected for a Friday, but then it moved on to the intriguing 
subject of what each participant would change if they had a chance. Mallya and 
Sauber’s Monisha Kaltenborn understandably plumped for a spot of financial 
parity but Claire Williams, the Williams deputy team principal, was eager for 
the sport to show more positivity amidthe criticism it has recently attracted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/01/f1-fans-sport-boring-expensive>.

The subject of tyres inevitably resurfaced but that issue of negativity would 
not go away. The McLaren team chief, Éric Boullier, passed it off as part of 
the transition period the sport is going through but the Lotus CEO, Matthew 
Carter, chose to point the finger at the press. When it was pointed out to him 
that at the last race in Austria, Ecclestone had, entirely unprompted, blamed 
the engineers for giving him a“crap product to sell” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/f1-chaos-bernie-ecclestone-austrian-grand-prix-jenson-button-fernando-alonso>
 he refused to change tack. “The negativity about what we achieve and what we 
are as a sport tends to come from the press. I don’t think you do enough of 
picking up on what we do achieve; it is easy to look at the negatives,” he said.

Positive answers were suggested to forthcoming questions but it is hard to put 
off the press when they have a spot of negativity and an Ecclestonefaux pas to 
toy with. Asked what they would do if the chief executive of their companies 
described their product as crap, Boullier was blunt. “I would tell him to sort 
out his house,” he said. Mallya was blunter: “Considering that he sells the 
product that he calls crap and makes billions out of it, he needs to work with 
the participants to uncrap it.” Which is about as close to a killer punchline 
as a Friday afternoon in the paddock is likely to throw up. Perhaps F1 should 
listen to Vijay on the financial parity issue, too.

Nico Rosberg, who won in Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/21/nico-rosberg-austrian-f1-gp-lewis-hamilton-mercedes>
 and now trails his team-mate, Lewis Hamilton, by just 10 points in the drivers 
standings, topped both the practice sessions on Friday at Silverstone.

Running in fine, sunny conditions, Rosberg recovered from a problem in the 
morning session, when a loss of hydraulic pressure caused his car to stop after 
only six laps, before it was returned to the pits. Hamilton promptly went 
quickest, running the hard tyres and appeared to be on track to secure the top 
spot. However, Rosberg returned to put in three very fast circuits. The 
penultimate lap put him one-hundredth quicker than his team-mate, who had 
lasted for 26 laps compared with Rosberg’s 12, and on the final run he went 
seven-hundredths clear.

The Toro Rossos of Max Verstappen and Carlos Sainz also enjoyed good runs in 
third and fifth respectively, while Kimi Raikkonen and Sebastian Vettel in 
Ferraris were fourth and sixth. Susie Wolff, theWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> test driver was 13th, sixth-tenths 
back from her team-mate Massa but a full second clear of the McLarens of 
Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button, who struggled again, completing only 22 laps 
between them.

Rosberg again led the afternoon session, putting in 1min 34.155sec on the 
quicker medium tyres, over four-tenths clear of Hamilton, who finished in 
fourth place after he made an error on his final run on low fuel. The British 
driver had not been happy with his set-up during the session and was separated 
from his championship rival by Raikkonen and Vettel. The Red Bulls of Daniil 
Kvyat and Daniel Ricciardo finished fifth and sixth, while the top-placed 
Williams, who have taken two podiums in the past two races and are expected to 
show good form here, was Felipe Massa’s 10th, although the team have largely 
this season been looking for race-pace set-up rather than raw pace on a Friday.
 