
1) Palmer’s days at Renault look numbered

Britain’s talented former GP2 champion is one of the most popular drivers in 
the paddock but Jolyon Palmer is struggling to hang on to his drive for next 
season now, after two disappointing back-to-back performances in Hungary and 
Germany. He was 14th on the grid in Hockenheim and was running 11th when he 
crashed intoFelipe Massa <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/felipe-massa>, 
eventually coming in 19th. In Budapest Palmer, 25, was in line for his first 
points of his career when he spun off and finished 12th, a result he described 
as “disaster”. He now has to do something exceptional to keep his seat. The top 
teams have kept the same drivers for 2017 but there is still likely to be 
plenty of movement involving Williams, Renault, McLaren and Force India.

Lewis Hamilton elated by ‘crazy’ gap of 19 points over F1 rival Nico Rosberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/lewis-hamilton-crazy-gap-19-points-f1-title-rival-nico-rosberg>
2) Alonso seeks a rebrand

Before the race Fernando Alonso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> complained that only his 
negative radio messages were being broadcast on TV. “I don’t complain as much 
as people think, and I hardly talk on the radio,” he said.

But then he didn’t help himself come race day. After a slow first pitstop he 
told his engineer, in a voice dripping with sarcasm: “Yeah, don’t worry, I will 
lose another position in the next stop and I will recover it later on.”

And given Alonso’s default expression makes him appear as happy as Les Dawson 
used to look when his mother-in-law was coming to stay, maybe the driver 
himself needs to work on projecting a more positive image.

3) Mercedes need a new stopwatch

When you think of the multimillions they spend on Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> it’s amazing that a simple 
stopwatch malfunction resulted in Nico Rosberg serving more than his 
five-second time penalty when he came into the pits.

The team’s motorsport boss, Toto Wolff, said it was not a human error: “It was 
a stopwatch failure. The damn thing failed, it didn’t function like it should 
have done. We could have counted, one thousand one, one thousand two, one 
thousand three, but we relied on the stopwatch, and it let us down.”

4) Drivers know best

Mutinous drivers are often proved right when they ignore instructions from 
their pitwall. BothSebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> and Jenson Button – 
admittedly very experienced former world champions – were vindicated by their 
refusal to come in to change their tyres late in the race on Sunday.

Button told McLaren: “This could be tricky, guys, this could destroy both [me 
and my team-mate Fernando Alonso] our races.” Button was right, and finished 
eighth. Vettel said: “Negative, negative,” when told to come in, questioning 
who his engineer expected him to come out ahead of, and finished fifth.

5) Retirement beckons for Massa

Felipe Massa, 35, said back in May that he was already looking around – and so 
are Williams now, after a run of poor results. Button and Sergio Perez are 
among a number of drivers who have been linked with the team. Massa has never 
looked comfortable in wet conditions and lately he has looked equally troubled 
in the dry. In Hockenheim, he started 10th on the grid, but was already looking 
out of sorts when the early contact from Palmer on his right-rear tyre damaged 
the car. The impact left it “undriveable” in Massa’s words and the team retired 
him when he was making no headway.
 