
The Austrian Grand Prix will take place against a backdrop of arguments and 
recriminations over the sport’s increasingly complex and draconian regulations 
on the weekend that Formula One was described as “crap” byBernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> – only for the Formula 
One impresario to hastily backtrack and urge a change to the rules to make it 
more fan-friendly.

He could start with taking a look at the regulations under which two former 
world champions,Fernando Alonso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> and Jenson Button, will 
start at the back of the grid for Sunday’s race. The McLaren pair have been hit 
with 25-place grid penalties – even though there are only 20 cars taking part.

To add to the growing sense that F1 is in dire need of a fresh approach and 
more dynamic leadership, the “home” team Red Bull’s already struggling drivers, 
Daniel Ricciardo and Daniil Kvyat, were hit by 10-place grid penalties on 
Friday.

Lewis Hamilton takes pole at Austrian Grand Prix ahead of Nico Rosberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/lewis-hamilton-pole-austrian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg>
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> is in desperate 
need of a good race to take some of the pressure off itself, having arrived 
here on Thursday against a background of an alarming audience decline, and with 
the local hero and three-times world champion Niki Lauda – and head of Mercedes 
F1 operation – saying: “The sport has basically been regulated to death down 
the years.” The four-times champion Alain Prost said recently that the rules 
were too complex.

Button, who is now on his sixth Honda engine and was given a 15-place penalty 
in the last race in Canada, learned on Saturday morning that he would be 
demoted 25 places in Austria, which means the British driver will face a time 
penalty.

Alonso, who has retired from the past three races, also had his power unit 
changed on Friday and so knew he had a 20-place penalty before the final 
practice run. He then needed further work done on his gearbox after coming to a 
standstill in FP3, incurring a further drop of five places.

The rules state that four engines must last the entire season.

The severity of the penalty is decided by the number of changes made, with 10 
places for one component and a further five places for each subsequent 
replacement. But it was all a little too much for a frustrated Alonso, who has 
not scored a single point this season. “I would probably change many things – 
better not to say. The technology is too complex, especially for the people at 
home,” the Spaniard said.

“They want to see cars crashing and overtaking each other and fighting for 
position, not saving tyres and saving fuel, and talking about DRS and tokens 
and penalties. The penalties we have are very difficult to understand. There 
are things that are too complicated and some of the rules are made by engineers 
and mathematicians and grandmother at home doesn’t care about these things.”

McLaren’s race director, Eric Boullier, said: “They are the same rules for 
everybody. But I think we should have had a rethink – it was a bit too harsh or 
ambitious. We have to respect the rules but I find it sad for F1 that we have 
two world champions starting at the back of the grid.” He added caustically: 
“I’m pretty sure we are going to have a new record in the Guinness Book of 
Records by the end of the year.”

Jenson Button and Fernando Alonso land 25-place Austrian F1 grid penalties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/jenson-button-25-place-grid-penalty-f1-austrian-gp-fernando-alonso>
Ecclestone had been quoted by AFP as saying: “I told them they have given me a 
crap product to sell.” But later he backpedalled when asked about his comments. 
The 84-year-old said: “Really? I don’t know who said that. Bad quote.

“The product at the moment is a bit top heavy with one team winning a lot of 
races, probably too easy. So when Ferrari are getting their act together we’ve 
seen a big improvement and exactly the same thing happens with McLaren.

“There’s people always complaining about something. The winners never 
complain. The losers complain. All I’ve ever said is that it’s a pity that one 
team is at the moment dominating the sport.”

He added: “We need to have a very, very good look at all our sporting 
regulations. Don’t go over the white line, don’t do this, don’t do that. If you 
change your engine you go back 20 places. It’s not what the public understand. 
They don’t understand and when they do understand they don’t care basically.”
 