
1. Rosberg is still playing it cool

Despite having seen his early-season championship lead of 43 points turned to 
a 19-point deficit before Spa, then two points after Monza and now an 
eight-point lead againwith his third win on the trot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/nico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one>
, Nico Rosberg remains absolutely steadfast in his refusal to be drawn into 
considering whether the title finally has his name on it this year. His 
weekend, bar biffing the barriers after locking up on ageing tyres in first 
practice, could not have gone better, his 200th grand prix yielding a first win 
in Singapore but more importantly a real blow to Lewis Hamilton, who could not 
match him in qualifying or the race.

His public pronouncements, however, while winning at the start of the season, 
being hauled back by Hamilton and now back on top, have been firmly of the 
only-taking-it-one-race-at-a-time variety. When informed that in seven out of 
the past eight seasons the driver who won in Singapore has gone on to take the 
title, the mask did not slip. “A statistic like that, it’s not something that I 
focus on, at all. It doesn’t have any importance to me,” he deadpanned.

Nico Rosberg wins Singapore Grand Prix to lead F1 world championship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/nico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one>
Prodded further, he was asked whether the three wins in a row and taking the 
lead again excited him or whether he should be given the nickname ‘Mr Cool’. 
“No,” flatlined Mr Cool. “I’m just excited about winning the race today. I’m 
not excited about any of those other points. Sorry.”

Sports psychologists everywhere will be applauding this dedication to their 
science, even if it means we are denied a bit more verbal sparring between he 
and Hamilton but, to be fair, it is working for him. Six races remain in what 
promises to be a fantastically tight run-in, can he keep a lid on it, or might 
there be a Keegan-esque boiling-point? Don’t hold your breath.

2. Safety must still come first

The sight of a marshall on track 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/marshal-runs-safety-singapore-grand-prix-restart-on-track>
 during the restart after Nico Hülkenberg had crashed out following a clash 
with Carlos Sainz off the grid, was terrifying to behold. They do a sterling 
job at circuits around the world at all levels of motorsport and must venture 
on to the track but seeing anyone in proximity to cars hitting full whack is 
unacceptable.Since Jules Bianchi’s accident and subsequent death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/f1-driver-jules-bianchi-dies-from-injuries-sustained-in-crash-at-japanese-grand-prix>
, safety has dominated the agenda in F1 – Lewis Hamilton was testing the Halo 
cockpit safety device under the lights of Marina Bay this weekend – but there 
should be no let up in ensuring that concern extends to everyone who works at 
circuits worldwide, whether paid staff or, as is the case with the vast 
majority of dedicated marshals, entirely voluntary. When the circuit was called 
as clear for racing the marshall was still running across the track.

The FIA has stated that the man in question had been told to go out by a 
circuit representative after the official FIA procedure of race control giving 
the track clear notification three times before restarting the race. It added 
that its procedures were not properly executed by the clerk of the course. “We 
take this very seriously,” the FIA stated. “Everything will be done to ensure 
this does not happen again.”

Rosberg, leading the restart, had come closest to the marshal. “It was not a 
nice experience to see someone running across the track when I’m arriving at 
300kmh,” he said. “So I just made sure I drove through safely, but it was a bit 
of a hairy moment because I don’t think he saw us coming.” Some aspects of 
racing simply cannot have danger entirely removed but injury or death through 
poor procedure, lax discipline or insufficient communication would be 
unforgivable. Singapore was a wake-up call that must reverberate up and down 
the sport for the good of everyone involved – on track and off.

3. Ferrari make-ups and downs

Sebastian Vettel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> could 
not have hoped for more at Marina Bay once it became clear he was going to have 
to start from the back of the grid due to a broken right suspension in 
qualifying. Ferrari took advantage of the failure, fitting new power unit 
components and a new gearbox with the usual pointless penalties and he made the 
most of it. On a two-stop strategy and using the new ultra-soft tyres he had 
not worn in qualifying he charged through the field on a track where passing is 
difficult and slotted into a very respectable fifth place – behind his 
team-mate Kimi Raikkonen, who had started in fifth. “We sure had a good 
strategy today,” he said. And indeed, for him, they had.

For Raikkonen however, the Scuderia’s calls, in a season peppered with poor 
decisions, were once again in question. The Finn had taken third on track from 
Hamilton, slipping up the inside after the British driver locked up and had six 
seconds on him when Hamilton pitted for the final time. Raikkonen was on the 
soft rubber with 16 laps to go at that point and the team could have left him 
out – leaving Hamilton with around 28 seconds to make up but also then having 
to overtake.

As Daniel Ricciardo’s ultimately fruitless tilt at Rosberg proved, it would 
have been a tall order andFerrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> 
were already second-guessing themselves afterwards. When the team principal, 
Maurizio Arrivabene, was asked if had been the right choice, he said: “To be 
100% sure, you have to look at the data.” The inquest will continue. “We took a 
decision based on our data, and now the exercise to do is verify if our data 
was right,” added Arrivabene. The title is long gone but they are only 15 
points behind Red Bull’s second place and cannot afford to drop the ball again.

4. Hamilton must fight from the front

Mercedes leave Singapore with a first and third, not quite the one-two they 
would have wanted but nonetheless a result with which they are hugely pleased. 
Their car was very poor at Marina Bay last year – a second a lap off the pace – 
and they went away and worked at the problem.

“Perhaps the severity of our lack of performance last year opened up a new way 
of thinking,” said the executive director, Toto Wolff. It was certainly the 
fillip they needed. Rosberg was sixth-tenths clear in qualifying and until Red 
Bull’s tyre gamble during the race had the pace well within his control. They 
had pushed the car to the edge, the brakes were on their limit from the off, 
but proved they could make the car work on a track to which it was not 
previously suited. Hamilton’s problem, however, was in finding the right 
set-up. Lost time with a mechanical problem in practice cost him and third in 
qualifying was the result. It left him following Ricciardo and showed again 
that the F1 W07 does not work to the optimum in dirty air – a problem 
considerably exacerbated when trying to manage brake wear.

“Once you get into turn one in third the likelihood of winning is very, very 
low,” he said. “I was thinking of trying to improve my position but immediately 
I was having these brake problems. Soon after the safety car I could see them 
pulling away and there was nothing I could do about it.” Out front his 
team-mate, in clean air, had the same issues but to a much lesser extent. 
Hamilton was disappointed with his weekend, but knows that from the same 
position he is usually unassailable. Qualifying on the front, then, is his 
first task for the next round in Malaysia and then backing it up with a clean 
getaway. He has dropped places four times this season with slow starts from 
pole – from first to sixth at Monza. Mercedes have no fix for how the car 
performs in dirty air so Hamilton must dictate from the front.

5. New boss goes home smiling

The new chairman of the Formula One Group, but let’s call him what he is – the 
sport’s new boss, was in Singapore to see his first F1 race since he was 
appointed by Liberty Mediaafter their £6bn takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/f1-liberty-media-8bn-takeover-deal-agreed-bernie-ecclestone>
. The mustachioed 62-year-old was smiling happily in the paddock and treated to 
a race that evolved over almost two hours to present a thrilling finale with 
what is always in Singapore, a visually glorious spectacle. Wolff, believed the 
sport had done itself proud. “I saw Donald [Mackenzie, chairman of former F1 
owners CVC] on the podium and I said: ‘You sold too early’,” said Wolff. “There 
is a great show going on. You saw Formula One at its best today. You have good 
football games and bad football games and today was a good football game.”

But Chase Carey was here to do business as well. Having already met with 
leading teams in the UK, he was seeing others in the paddock in Singapore and 
then promptly announced that the days of the Bernie Ecclestone dictatorship 
were over. “You cannot make everybody happy all the time, but you’ve got to 
understand what everybody wants and then find a path,” he said. “Sure, that is 
not a task for a committee, as committees tend to become bureaucratic – but 
there also can’t be a dictatorship – even if probably here they are used to 
it.” Ecclestone is contracted as CEO of F1for three more years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/bernie-ecclestone-claims-he-will-be-kept-on-after-f1-takeover-liberty-media>
 but it seems increasingly unlikely he will see them out. Did he have to work 
with Carey? “The only thing I have to do is die and pay my tax,” Ecclestone 
said. “Short of that I don’t have to do anything.”

Further cause for optimism came from the new leader as he also reiterated his 
desire to push F1 in the US, a fanbase the sport needs to be part of. “There is 
a big untapped audience in the US.Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> is a great premium brand and 
that means to me that you want to be at a location like Los Angeles, New York 
or Miami,” he said.
 