
Marussia have become the second Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> team in a matter of days to be 
placed in administration.

The London-based restructuring and recovery firm FRP Advisory has taken on the 
role of administrator, and confirmed Marussiawill miss the United States Grand 
Prix in Austin.

A statement from FRP confirmed the company, known as Manor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor> Grand Prix Racing Limited and trading 
as Marussia F1 Team, “will continue to operate while the joint administrators 
assess the longer-term viability of the company in its present form”.

Caterham entered administration on Friday and have been given special 
dispensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/25/marussia-caterham-miss-f1-us-gp> 
to miss the next two grands prix while a buyer is sought. Last Monday a company 
known as Caterham Sports Limited also went into administration. CSL supplies 
and makes cars for 1MRT, the entity which owns the licence for Caterham to race 
in F1.

Following a mud-slinging dispute between the past and present owners of 
Caterham in the days that followed, on Friday it was decided the administrators 
of CSL, the London-based accountancy Smith & Williamson, would be handed 
full-management responsibility for the team.

Smith & Williamson is already working to find a buyer of “substantial 
financial means” for Caterham.

Ecclestone also granted Marussia dispensation, with the Banbury-based team 
also able to miss the race at Interlagos should they require to do so.

One of the joint administrators from FRP – Geoff Rowley – said: “Whilst the 
team has made significant progress during its relatively short period of 
operation, the highlight of which included securing two constructors’ 
championship points in the current F1 season, the position remains that 
operating a F1 team requires significant ongoing investment.

“With the existing shareholder unable to provide the required level of 
funding, the senior management team has worked tirelessly to bring new 
investment to the team to secure its long-term future, but regrettably has been 
unable to do so within the time available. Therefore, they have been left with 
no alternative but to place the company into administration.

“The joint administrators have assessed that, given the current financial 
circumstances of the group, it is not viable for the Marussia F1 team to 
participate in the next race, the 2014 Formula One United States Grand Prix, 
due to take place this weekend in Austin, Texas.

“The company will continue to operate while the joint administrators assess 
the longer-term viability of the company in its present form. Following Austin 
there are two further rounds of the 2014 championship remaining, in São Paulo 
and Abu Dhabi, and the team’s participation in those races will depend on the 
outcome of the administration process and any related negotiations with 
interested parties in what is a very limited window of opportunity.

“No redundancies have been made following the company’s entering into 
administration and all staff have been paid in full to the end of October. The 
ongoing staff position will, however, be dependent on whether the company can 
secure new investment in the limited time available.

“We remain highly focused on engaging with interested parties.”
 