
Cardiff City breezed into the fourth round of the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> with a comfortable 3-1 victory 
overColchester United.

Though there were only 4,194 present – the lowest crowd in the six-year 
history of theCardiff City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> 
Stadium – as home fans showed their apathy after a poor run of league form 
under Russell Slade, the manager’s men did not let it affect them as they made 
light work of opposition one place off the bottom of League One.

A deflected shot from Joe Ralls gave the home side a half-time lead and then 
further goals from Kadeem Harris and the substitute Kenwyne Jones increased the 
gap beforeColchester <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> netted a 
consolation goal through Freddie Sears 16 minutes from time.

Cardiff were ahead after 34 minutes when the ball invitingly fell to Ralls 25 
yards out. The shot was well hit but the fact Walker was left totally 
wrong-footed was down to a cruel double deflection.

They extended their lead after 53 minutes when Ben Turner met Peter 
Whittingham’s corner and the ball ballooned into the air, with Harris reacting 
quickest to hook home. Colchester conceded a third goal on the hour when Jones 
scored with his first touch, nodding home Whittingham’s corner unchallenged.

Elsewhere Chesterfield booked a third-round tie against Scunthorpe United 
after seeing offMK Dons in a replayed match. A goal from Gary Roberts two 
minutes before half-time was enough to see them through.Chesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> won by the same score last 
month but the Football Association ordered a replay as they fielded Georg 
Margreitter, who was ineligible.

The man who scored the only goal in the original game, Armand Gnanduillet, had 
an early header into the bottom corner disallowed for offside.

Chesterfield made the decisive breakthrough two minutes before half-time when 
a long ball by Charlie Raglan ran for Eoin Doyle, who laid the ball off for 
Roberts to finish past David Martin.

Dean Bowditch sent a header from Danny Green’s cross wide for the home side 
shortly after the interval as they sought to ensure their second chance did not 
pass them by.

Gnanduillet missed the chance to seal the tie when he chipped wide with Martin 
off his line - but the visitors held on to seal a third-round trip to 
Scunthorpe on Tuesday.
 