
An evocative, memory provoking FA Cup third round takes Liverpool to 
Kingsmeadow, the home ofAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> in early January. It is 
the first time in their 12-year history that Neal Ardley’s League Two side have 
reached this stage and they have secured a tie bound to recall 1988 and the 
original Wimbledon’s famous 1-0 FA Cup final victory over Liverpool courtesy of 
Lawrie Sanchez’s looping header.

Much more recently Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> beat 
Hull in last season’s final, recovering from being two goals down to win 3-2 
thanks to Aaron Ramsey’s extra-time winner. and In an uncanny piece of 
symmetry, the pair meet again at Emirates Stadium. “Let’s hope it’s as good a 
game as the final,” said Steve Bruce, the Hull manager, who was startled to 
learn that his and Arsène Wenger’s teams had also been paired in the rehearsal 
for last night’s televised draw. “It’s quite remarkable,” said Bruce. “For it 
to happen again is amazing.”

As the lowest-ranked surviving side in this season’s competition Blyth 
Spartans of the Northern Premier League had been hoping for Premier League 
opposition. Instead they got Championship Birmingham City who must visit their 
Croft Park home on the Northumberland coast. “Birmingham are a good side,” said 
Tom Wade, Blyth’s manager. “But we’ve got a chance at Croft Park.”

Their north-east neighbours, Gateshead did land a trip to Premier League West 
Brom while Dover, also of the Conference, will be delighted by the prospect of 
entertaining another top-flight club, Crystal Palace, on the Kent coast.

Two more Conference rivals should be similarly pleased with their 
destinations. While Wrexham face an interesting trip to Premier League Stoke 
City, whose manager Mark Hughes is from the Welsh town and grew up supporting 
Wrexham, Southport visit Steve McClaren’s Championship topping Derby County. 
Gary Brabin’s side may be only 20th in their division but says he is looking 
forward to a tactical duel with a former England coach. “Derby are riding high 
and Steve McClaren has organised them well,” said Southport’s manager. “But I’m 
sure we can give them a good game.”

If Sunderland’s meeting with Leeds United at the Stadium of Light immediately 
recalls a May afternoon at Wembley in 1973 when Jim Montgomery’s double save 
and Ian Porterfield’s decisive goal ensured Bob Stokoe’s Sunderland shocked 
then all-conquering Leeds United, Manchester United have a less glamorous tie 
in store. Louis van Gaal’s introduction to the FA Cup involves an excursion to 
eitherAccrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley> or Yeovil who must 
replay their second round tie but José Mourinho’s Chelsea should be reasonably 
happy with the short journey to Championship Watford.
 