
1. The battle of Hastings 


There are not quite 1066 places between Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> and Hastings United in the 
football pyramid but the chasm is still enormous (153 places, to be precise) 
and defeat for the Championship side, or even a draw or, come to think of it, 
anything less than an emphatic 6-0 victory, would be a major surprise and a 
mighty achievement by the Ryman League laymen. It is wonderful that the FA Cup 
forces big professional clubs to fraternise with grassroots heroes, and it is 
also wonderful that Hastings are going to the Riverside believing they can 
create history and not at all in danger of showing their hosts too much 
respect, an attitude summed up by the left-back Matt Whitehead's plans for 
shirt-swapping: "When we're walking down the tunnel, I'll say: 'Can I have your 
shirt?' If they ask for mine, I'll say: 'Mate, I'm sure you can afford to buy 
one.' So I'll have a bit of memorabilia and have my own shirt put in a frame."

2. New woe for Wolves?


The last time Wolverhampton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves> were drawn away to a non-league 
team in the FA Cup was against Chorley of the Multipart League in 1986. A 
humiliating 3-0 loss ensued, a fact that will have absolutely no bearing on 
this weekend's match at Luton Town but may just console Wolves fans by 
suggesting that no matter what happens against the Hatters, things can't get 
any lower than they did in 1986. Or can they? Perhaps we shouldn't rule out a 
new nadir given how things have been going recently, with the manager, Stale 
Solbakken, in a malodorous rut following three straight defeats during which 
the performances have gradually regressed from unlucky to totally unacceptable.

3. Zola's borrowed blue 


Gianfranco Zola seems to be getting things together at Watford, who have 
glided up the Championship in the past two months thanks to some free-flowing 
football. And not all of it is played by Italian Udinese loanees: the 
18-year-old midfielder Nathaniel Chalobah has been so good for Watford this 
season that he was called up to the England Under-21 side, and the news that 
Chelsea have agreed to extend his loan until the end of the campaign means he 
can play againstManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and give us an indication 
of how close he is to being ready for the big time.

4. Mansfield bliss?


Mansfield Town's manager, Paul Cox, will spend his wedding night trying to 
figure out how to shackle Jonjo Shelvey. That, ladies and gentleman, is the 
romance of the Cup. Cox gets married on Friday and will hold his reception in 
the marquee tent that has been specially erected beside the One Call Stadium 
for the visit ofLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> in 
the third round. Brendan Rodgers's job is to spoil the celebrations and he may 
even deploy Daniel Sturridge to help him do that, giving the new striker a 
chance to start improving his decision-making in front of goal. But if the 
non-leaguers spring a surprise, Cox and co will be remembered till death do us 
part.

5. Zaha's last laugh?


Tony Pulis should target victory for Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> not just at Selhurst Park but 
in this competition outright. Ian Holloway, meanwhile, has an interesting 
pickle when it comes to picking his team: not only does he have to decide how 
to distribute his resources when locked in a promotion battle but he also has 
to determine how to factor in the potential consequences of Wilfried Zaha 
tearing up the third-best defence in the Premier League. Would that convince 
top clubs to submit an offer that Palace couldn't refuse? To what extent can 
excelling against them be considered an adequate test of a player's readiness 
for the top flight? Word is Holloway will give Zaha just 45 minutes against 
Stoke. Lots of people will be watching with interest.

6. Forest and Oldham managers seek better mood 


Oldham Athletic's sorry form of late has left Paul Dickov with a precarious 
hold on his job. The board met last week and decided to remove his assistant 
and two other members of his backroom staff but allowed him to keep clinging 
on. Dickov has been in his job for two and a half years. Alex McLeish, 
meanwhile, has been in his job for two matches but could be forgiven for 
feeling under as much pressure as Dickov. Ditching Sean O'Driscoll to replace 
him with McLeish was a deeply unpopular move by the owners ofNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> and a draw with Crystal 
Place and a 3-0 defeat by Blackburn Rovers have done nothing to alter fans' 
views. Winning hearts and minds means winning matches and victory over Oldham 
is an essential starting point. At least one Scot is going to come out of this 
tie very cranky.

7. Can MC replace DJ to keep Ipswich on song?


Ipswich Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> have more 
important things on their minds than this so, after back-to-back wins in the 
Championship slightly alleviated relegation fears, Mick McCarthy will rest 
several players – but also, crucially, he will give Michael Chopra a chance to 
prove that he can fill the void left by DJ Campbell, who has returned to Queen 
Park Rangers following a prolific loan spell at Ipswich. If Chopra can show 
sharpness he may solve a big problem for Ipswich. Meanwhile, Aston Villa are 
also fighting relegation this season so Paul Lambert could also make sweeping 
changes and, um, send out a load of promising but callow youngsters. What? Ah.

8. Howe to win the Wigan way?


Bournemouth are unbeaten since Eddie Howe returned to the club in October 
following his departure from Burnley, winning 12 matches and drawing four. They 
could hardly be in better shape ahead of their trip to the DW.Wigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wiganathletic> will make many personnel 
changes for the match but will not change their methods, which means we should 
see a fun contest between two teams with decent passing styles – and possibly a 
win for the underdogs.

9. The tie of the round?


Great! An all-Premier League clash! Certain TV folks keep telling us that is 
what we want but, really, is another Sam Allardyce/Sir Alex Ferguson face-off 
what theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> third round is all 
about? No, it is not.

10. Swansea v Arsenal 


Oh, go on then. This will be an interesting match. Arsène Wenger was wise 
enough to say after his team's wild 7-3 win over Newcastle United last week 
that he was "cautious" about suggestions his team had come out of crisis. The 
limp display at Southampton on Tuesday showed he was right not to get too 
excited. But what is he going to do about it? And how are his team going to 
react? Swansea wounded Arsenal's pride when beating them at their own game at 
the Emirates last month: do thisArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> team have it in them to exact 
retribution?
 