
Blyth Spartans from the Evo-Stik League Premier Division have been handed a 
derby in the FA Cup second round as they travel to faceHartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool>.

The seventh-tier outfit overcame Altrincham at the weekend and will now make 
the short trip to face a Pools side who sit bottom of League Two.

The lowest ranked team left in the competition are Warrington of Evo-Stik 
Division One North and they have been handed a trip to Vanarama Conference 
Gateshead as reward for defeating League Two Exeter.

The Spartans manager Tom Wade is now looking forward to a sellout clash on the 
weekend of 5, 6 and 7 December.

“There’ll be a lot there,” he told BBC Two. “It’ll probably be a sell out. 
We’ll be looking forward to it. We’ll play anybody, we’re in the hat, we’ve got 
a chance. I think everybody has got a chance and we’ve just got to there and 
give everything we’ve got.”

The Warrington manager Shaun Reid was glad to avoid a league team and was 
confident his side would approach the match in the same manner as they did 
their first-round tie.

“It’s a good draw for us,” he said. “They’re a decent side. We’ve just got to 
go about it the way we went the other day. We can’t go into any game with fear. 
We’re in theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> and that thing 
over there just brings out the best in people. We’ll go there confident and 
give a good account of ourselves and have a right good go.”

Conference North Worcester knocked out League One Coventry and they will next 
face more third-tier opposition in Scunthorpe.

“It’s another tough draw on the road again,” said manager Carl Heeley. “We’re 
just delighted to be here, same as yesterday, just go and give a good account 
of ourselves and you never know, it’s a magic competition. We’re in there and 
we’ve every chance. There’s no fear for us there.”

The Ryman League Premier Division outfit Maidstone United face a replay 
against Stevenage and should they come through it they face a trip to Wrexham.

Basingstoke also face a replay against Telford and the winners have been 
handed a trip to Ashton Gate to face the highest-ranked team in the draw,
Bristol City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity>.

Concord Rangers saw their match against Mansfield postponed and the winners 
will travel to Cambridge while fellow sixth-tier side Weston-super-Mare will 
travel to Oldham should they overcome Doncaster in their postponed tie.

Conference South Havant and Waterloovile face Preston in the first round and 
the winners have a home draw against Walsall or Shrewsbury.

FA Cup second round draw: Oxford United v Tranmere Rovers; Bury v Luton Town; 
Wrexham v Stevenage or Maidstone; Scunthorpe United v Worcester City; 
Colchester United v Peterborough United; Wycombe Wanderers v York or AFC 
Wimbledon; Notts County or Accrington Stanley v Yeovil Town; Hartlepool United 
v Blyth Spartans; MK Dons v Chesterfield; Dagenham & Redbridge or Southport v 
Eastleigh; Gateshead v Warrington Town; Oldham Athletic v Weston-super-Mare or 
Doncaster Rovers; Havant & Waterlooville or Preston v Walsall or Shrewsbury; 
Barnsley v Chester; Bradford City v Dartford; Crewe v Plymouth Argyle; 
Cheltenham Town v Dover Athletic; Cambridge United v Mansfield Town or Concord 
Rangers; Bristol City v Basingstoke or AFC Telford; Portsmouth or Aldershot v 
Northampton Town or Rochdale.
 