
Stourbridge, the lowest ranked side in the third round, were beaten 2-1 at 
League TwoWycombe. Dan Scarr cancelled out Sam Wood’s opener 20 minutes from 
time, but the Northern Premier League team were left heartbroken by Adebayo 
Akinfenwa’s late winner.

FA Cup third round: AFC Wimbledon's return to Sutton United – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2017/jan/07/fa-cup-third-round-afc-wimbledons-return-to-sutton-united-in-pictures>
Wycombe’s manager, Gareth Ainsworth, was full of praise for his team’s 
non-League opponents, telling the BBC: “Fair play to Stourbridge, they were the 
better team in spells. What they gave us today was a real full-blooded cup tie. 
Either club being in the fourth round is a fairytale. Don’t dismiss how big
Wycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> Wanderers in the fourth 
round is.”

The Stourbridge manager, Gary Hackett, said: ”When you’ve been at a club for 
so long and you see that amazing support, it was a bit emotional. There’s 
nothing wrong with that, I don’t think.”

Oxford’s manager, Michael Appleton, distanced himself from the vacant England 
Under-21 job after seeing his side knock out Championship clubRotherham with a 
3-2 away win. Goals from former Miller Ryan Taylor, Phil Edwards and substitute 
Kane Hemmings secured a fourth-round place. “Talk about that job is pure 
speculation. It is a fantastic role for whoever does get it but I’m just 
keeping my focus on Oxford. I’m delighted with this win. We knew the game was 
there to be taken.”

QPR’s manager, Ian Holloway, pledged to make major changes after his new-look 
side, featuring a number of fringe players, were beaten 2-1 at home byBlackburn
. “That team, who haven’t played before, will never be picked again. Simple as 
that. I wanted that team to fight and do it for each other. Unfortunately they 
couldn’t. We went out with a whimper.” 

The Eastleigh manager, Martin Allen, described his side’s 5-1 FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> defeat at Championship club 
Brentford as “one of the highlights” of his career. The former Bees manager was 
given a hero’s welcome by the Griffin Park crowd and, despite the result, he 
was far from downbeat. “It was very special coming back here,” he said. “I had 
tears in my eyes as I walked across the pitch … but I didn’t cry.”

Yoann Barbet stroked home Brentford’s first goal from the penalty spot after 
being fouled in the box by Graham Stack. Two goals from Tom Field and one each 
for Lasse Vibe and Romaine Sawyers put the damper on Allen’s return despite Ayo 
Obileye’s consolation, all the goals coming in the first half.

Huddersfield’s manager, David Wagner, said his belated first cup win in 
English football felt special after his side’s 4-0 victory over League One 
strugglersPort Vale. A double from Jack Payne and goals from Kasey Palmer and 
Harry Bunn ensured the Terriers’ first win in any cup competition since August 
2014. “I think we did everything that could be expected in a cup match at home 
for a team in the Championship against one from League One,” Wagner said.

Barrow of the National League were beaten 2-0 at home by League One Rochdale, 
prompting their manager, Paul Cox, to shrug off the Cup disappointment and 
refocus their efforts on ending the club’s 45-year exile from the Football 
League. Two goals from in-form striker Ian Henderson ended the home side’s 
hopes of reaching the fourth round for the first time in their history at a 
foggy Holker Street.

Relegation-threatened Wigan also recorded a 2-0 win, putting their league 
problems aside to beatNottingham Forest with goals from Will Grigg and Yanic 
Wildschut. The Latics’ manager, Warren Joyce, was pleased with the result. 
“Obviously it’s very satisfying to get the win,” he said. “Whether it’s the cup 
or the league, it’s just nice to win games.”
 