
It might be the year of the underdog, copyright Alan Pardew 2016, but 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> were 
taking no chances. The sight of Sir Alex Ferguson walking out with the FA Cup 
before kick-off might have been designed to remind everyone who the underdogs 
were supposed to be, even if he was accompanied by Steve Coppell.

Unlike the 1990 final this was no six-goal thriller. It took an age to get 
going and only came to life in the last 10 minutes, when Pardew’s bid for 
dad-dancing posterity after Jason Puncheon looked to have scored a winner was 
cut short by a determined run from Wayne Rooney that allowed Juan Mata to 
level. If it is remembered at all, it is likely to be as Louis van Gaal’s last 
United game, or alternatively as the day the José Mourinho background noise 
became loud and screechy enough to even drown outFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> celebrations.

Manchester United win FA Cup as Jesse Lingard sinks Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
The joke in the 80 minutes before the late excitement was that the Ferguson 
succession at United has been botched to such an extent that the side formerly 
known as the mightiest in England are now regarded as underdogs when the bigger 
games come around, though it must be said that very few real underdogs can run 
to Rooney pulling the strings with Anthony Martial and Marcus Rashford running 
off him.

With their young strikers both showing up well and Mata getting involved 
United dominated the early stages, but that was to be expected. The question 
was whether United could make their possession and superior passing ability 
tell before Palace used their pace to try to catch them on the counter. It did 
not bode well when Connor Wickham left Chris Smalling in his wake in the first 
proper attack Palace mounted, particularly as the striker stayed on his feet 
through two heavy challenges and had cause to feel aggrieved that Mark 
Clattenburg had not seen fit to play advantage. Smalling received a booking for 
his ungainly attempt to prevent Wickham breaking free, which in turn did not 
bode well for a central defender certain to start when England’s European 
Championship campaign begins. Neither did the attempted rugby tackle on Yannick 
Bolasie that earned Smalling a deserved red in extra time.

This did not look like the joint best defence in the Premier League this 
season, especially when Marcos Rojo joined Smalling in the book for a similar 
sprawling foul on Joel Ward on the halfway line. Again, the referee could have 
played a useful advantage but did not, and the look on Pardew’s face as he 
angrily gestured that the same thing had just happened twice was probably 
mirrored by the two coaches in Madrid, who will be getting Clattenburg for 
Saturday’s Champions League final.

Louis van Gaal was doomed at Manchester United by refusal to adapt | Amy 
Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-sack>
It was hardly the performance Van Gaal would have been hoping for to convince 
supporters, let alone the United board, that he is worth another season at Old 
Trafford, though if the reports swirling around Wembley in the aftermath of 
eventual victory are correct contact was made with José Mourinho before the 
final took place.

It was generally agreed before the game that an FA Cup win would count for 
little in the overall scheme of things anyway. An FA Cup win combined with 
Champions League qualification would have amounted to a decent return – well, a 
couple of reasons to be cheerful at any rate – but Van Gaal could not expect to 
save his skin with the Cup alone in the manner pioneered by the Manchester 
United manager who overcameCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> in the 1990 final. Jesse 
Lingard’s decisive strike at least let Van Gaal and United finish their season 
on a high, though in the manager’s case euphoria was cruelly short-lived.

Ferguson claimed the 1990 win bought him time; he still needed another three 
seasons to land the league title. Van Gaal was never going to be granted 
another three seasons – many United supporters would have been up in arms had 
he been awarded another one. It is true that in the final analysis Van Gaal did 
what Ferguson could not do and beat Palace on the day, thanks to Lingard’s 
thunderous extra time decider. It is also true that not every manager would 
have promoted Lingard and that the last United manager to beat Palace in an FA 
Cup final went on to become the most successful in the club’s history.

Considering United were down to 10 men at the time it appears some of the old 
fighting spirit still remains, along with the knack of scoring late winners. 
History does repeat itself sometimes, but what followed 1990 is not going to 
happen again. If this does turn out to be the start of a new golden era for 
United it will be with a different manager in charge.
 