
The Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> 
midfielder Jonjo Shelvey was accused of referring to his Wolves counterpart 
Romain Saiss as an “Arab cunt”, the Football Association has revealed.

Shelvey was banned this week for five games, fined £100,000 and ordered to 
attend a mandatory education course after an FA misconduct charge, which the 
England international denied, was found proven by an independent regulatory 
commission.

The written reasons for the commission’s decision were released on Friday 
detailing the evidence presented by both sides at the hearing in Birmingham. 
The contributions of Saiss’s team-mates Dominic Iorfa, Matt Doherty and Cameron 
Borthwick-Jackson were key.

The document states: “The commission has considered whether the three 
witnesses could have each misheard the use of the word ‘Arab’ by Mr Shelvey and 
we conclude this suggestion is unrealistic.”

Newcastle’s Jonjo Shelvey decides not to contest ban for racial abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/newcastle-jonjo-shelvey-ban> 
The case centred around the incident which led to Vurnon Anita’s dismissal in 
the 87th minute ofNewcastle’s 2-0 defeat against Wolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/newcastle-united-wolverhampton-wanderers-championship-match-report>
 on 17 September.

Saiss, who was born in France of Moroccan extraction, was seen to brandish an 
imaginary card as the referee, Tim Robinson, assessed the situation, much to 
the annoyance of Shelvey.

The Wolves defender Iorfa told the hearing Shelvey called Saiss “you Arab 
cunt” and “you Arab prick”, while Doherty heard him say “Moroccan prick” and 
“Arab cunt” and Borthwick-Jackson “smelly Arab cunt”.

The exchange was not heard by Saiss, who had a limited understanding of 
English at the time, or the referee, but was reported to the official after the 
final whistle.

Robinson relayed the details to Rafael Benítez, who after speaking to his 
player, reported he disputed the claims and said he had used the phrase 
“smelly-breathed prick” in response to Saiss calling him a “bald cunt”.

Shelvey, who has suffered from alopecia since childhood, said he had lost his 
temper because of that, not Saiss’s actions in calling for a red card, which he 
claimed he did not see. He also admitted calling Iorfa “peasant”, a reference 
to his higher salary.

Dwight Gayle and Aleksandar Mitrovic were called as witnesses for their 
Newcastle team-mate but the commission found the FA’s case more persuasive.

Shelvey and the FA, who could have challenged the punishment if it felt it was 
insufficient, opted not to appeal against the decision and the player’s ban 
will take immediate effect.
 