
Fabio Liverani does not have to decide who he will be supporting in this 
weekend’sderby della capitale. Instead of watching events unfold at the Stadio 
Olimpico this boyhood Roma fan who won the Coppa Italia with Lazio will be 
ingratiating himself into English footballing culture, a transition he has been 
attempting to hasten since hisappointment as Leyton Orient manager  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/08/leyton-orient-mauro-milanese-sacked-manager>
in December.

Liverani will be watching Arsenal play Stoke on Sunday instead of Serie A’s 
Rome derby. Far more important, though, is his side’s home fixture against 
Fleetwood Town on Saturday afternoon, a fifthLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> match at the helm and 
an opportunity for a third successive victory after a difficult start.

Even before replacing Mauro Milanese as Orient manager, Liverani’s journey has 
been a remarkable one. The 38-year-old, who stopped playing only three and a 
half years ago, grew up in 1970s Rome the son of a Somalian mother and Italian 
father. After signing forLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> in 
2001 racist graffiti was scrawled across the entrance to the club’s training 
ground, as it had been for Aron Winter’s arrival in the 90s. That same year he 
became the first black player to represent Italy, selected by Giovanni 
Trapattoni for a friendly against South Africa.

His first foray into management at Genoa was cut short after six games, sacked 
after a poor run despite overcoming rivals Sampdoria 3-0. Now his job is to 
steer Orient away from the bottom four and resurrect a campaign that began with 
aplay-off hangover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/25/leyton-orient-rotherham-united-league-one-play-off-report>
, tasked by the club’s new owner, Francesco Becchetti, with developing a side 
capable of promotion to the Championship.

“Leyton Orient,” he grins when asked which side his heart would follow amid a 
giallorossi-biancocelesti battle in the Italian capital. A diplomatic response 
but one which reflects his mindset; for all Liverani’s history, immediate 
ambitions at Brisbane Road are clearly dominating his thoughts.

Since Becchetti bought a 90% controlling stake in the club from Barry Hearn 
last year there have been significant changes. The players have different food 
after training, the matchday transport has been upgraded and four different 
managers have occupied the dugout this season.

Yet for a man who has lived in Florence and Sicily as well as Rome, Liverani 
is remarkably upbeat having spent the majority of a bleak winter morning on a 
sodden training field in east London, at the club’s Chigwell base where he 
makes the daily commute from Mayfair.

He is a serious man, one who appears keen to prove himself as a tactician the 
same way he did as a midfielder, the same way he did on the streets of Rome as 
a kid with Somalian heritage. Liverani often mentions the “project” atLeyton 
Orient <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>, an overused word in 
football parlance but a legitimate one in this case, as owner and manager feel 
their way into the English game during a debut campaign.

“At the moment it is beautiful for me, it’s going very, very well, the city of 
London is beautiful,” Liverani says, sitting in his office after a morning on 
the training field with his squad and coaching staff. “To have the experience 
to manage in England is important, in London, which I love for the quality of 
life and multiculturalism. I wanted this experience. It’s an important project 
and there is the prospect of at least getting Leyton Orient into the 
Championship.

“Unfortunately I played my whole career in Italy and did not have a foreign 
adventure. However, I have always followed English football and the Premiership 
with great enthusiasm, I have always been interested in the passion and culture 
of football here. The start wasn’t positive, we had two defeats. Not everything 
was rosy for sure, we had a great number of injuries. But then we won twice. I 
am lucky that when I arrived as manager I inherited a good group of lads.”

Liverani’s debut for Italy was a landmark moment in the team’s history, the 
first time a black man had played for the Azzurri. He was also the first black 
first-team coach in Serie A, succeeded by Clarence Seedorf’s appointment at 
Milan last year.

However, he is reluctant to be perceived as a trailblazer in his country. For 
Liverani, his elevation to the national side was the pinnacle of a career that 
included spells at Perugia, Lazio, Fiorentina and Palermo, a long road to the 
top and one that he is proud of. When reflecting on his appearance against 
South Africa – one of three caps – he considers it as such. Though the 
significance of his debut may have been a talking point for others, it was not 
a matter of race for Liverani.

“When this happened I was extremely happy, but not because I was a black 
player,” he says. “Putting on the national shirt is a dream for any player when 
they start out. The final achievement for any player is to wear the national 
jersey. For me, I had great pride after the path I started as a player, after 
all the sacrifices and efforts I made. I remember that I was so happy to play 
for my country and I did a few times.

“Maybe I opened the discussion about the racism, but I didn’t see the 
difference. Maybe it was more important for other, external people. For me , 
personally, it was very simple, it was normal and something that made me proud 
–, proud I got there a good player not because I was a different colour.”

Football in Italy has been blighted by a series of racist incidents in recent 
years. Not least the comments made byCarlo Tavecchio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/20/uefa-italy-fa-president-carlo-tavecchio-alleged-racism>
, the president of the nation’s football federation, during his election 
campaign in July last year, when he referred to a fictional player as “eating 
bananas” during a discussion about the influx of foreigners to the Italian 
leagues.

“I don’t say that there are no problems,” Liverani says when discussing racism 
in his homeland. “I say that the problems are not different to those in other 
countries. More than enough has been said about Tavecchio. He was the first to 
understand he made an own goal. He has said sorry and he will pay. Everyone in 
the world can make mistakes. Let’s give him another chance. He has apologised. 
The mistake is made, he said sorry, he will pay because Uefa has suspended him [
for six months from October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/fifa-italian-fa-president-carlo-tavecchio-banana-eaters>
].”

Liverani insists he should be regarded as Orient’s first long-term coach under 
Becchetti. Russell Slade resigned following Cardiff City’s interest earlier 
this season, the former interim manager Kevin Nugent remains on the coaching 
staff and Milanese has returned to his previous role as sporting director.

Time is a commodity Liverani did not receive at Genoa, although he believes 
the experience made him stronger. A notable victory over Sampdoria was not 
enough, a match preceded by the remarkable incident when the Genoa youth-team 
coach,Luca De Pra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/14/genoa-coach-spying-sampdoria-rambo>
, was caught spying on a Samp training session, “like Rambo hidden among the 
branches on the hill” according to a statement.

“He went on his own,” insists Liverani, who had no involvement in the 
controversial espionage. “He went there to look for secrets. But in Italy, like 
here, secrets don’t exist these days. It’s impossible, everything is open. You 
don’t win by spying on others.”

On his learning curve at Genoa, Liverani adds: “In Italy the managerial jobs 
are shorter, there is a lot of pressure. It is a bit different to here, it can 
be too important to get certain results. I was unfortunately the manager during 
a rebuilding period for the team, and we met difficult opponents quickly – 
Napoli, Inter, Fiorentina and the derby. Unfortunately there were one or two 
results that weren’t good, but it was an excellent experience for me and it 
helped me a lot.

“In Italy there is a lot of fear of bad results very quickly. When you make 
decisions you sometimes need more patience; in Italy this is more difficult. 
The football here is not like in Italy. The tempo of the game is different, in 
Italy it is a lot softer, in England it is more physical and fast. There are 
many breaks in the games in Italy because of the referees. For a spectacle it 
is better here.”

Such are the nuances between English and Italian football that Liverani is 
embracing. He is surrounded by a coterie of compatriots at Orient, and has 
family in nearby Tottenham. Like before, though, this is very much a personal 
journey, the latest step on the road out of the eternal city.
 