
The rights and wrongs of Googling as an aid to solving crossword clues have 
been a theme of my mail in this last month. One solver, referring particularly 
to prize crosswords, argued that allowing the use of Google searches is grossly 
unfair to solvers without access to the internet, who as a result were made 
into the crossword world's equivalent of a deprived underclass. He also made 
the point that, where a puzzle has an identified theme that can be typed into a 
search engine, getting the right answers may become more of a clerical exercise 
than a mind game.

My personal view is that, even with those puzzles that come with some modest 
prize attached, solving them is just a pastime indulged in for the pleasure of 
solving alone and not as a competitive exercise under exam conditions. If you 
accept that view, then what aids you make use of along the way is a personal 
choice. Some like the satisfaction of getting all or most of the answers 
without any external help, not even from dictionaries or other reference books. 
Some like to phone a friend. It is a personal experience, not a matter of right 
and wrong. What a consenting adult does with her or his crossword is surely a 
private matter.

Beyond that, most people find that one of the joys of solving crosswords is 
that the process often leads one to discover words or facts not previously 
known. In this case what is the difference in principle between using a 
reference book, such as an encyclopedia or a dictionary of quotations, and 
using the internet in general or a search engine like Google in particular? 
There is certainly a difference in practice in that a Google search is likely 
to be much quicker than one based on printed reference books. In checking 
crosswords for publication I now find myself using the internet much more and 
admirable books like the Chambers collection of lists of themed crossword 
solutions much less; but why should using such books (with their lists of novel 
titles by letter count and then in alphabetical order, European football teams 
and stadia, fruit and vegetables, Roman emperors etc etc) be considered 
acceptable, while using Google is in some quarters questionable? I suspect that 
part of the reason why the question is even raised is generational. For those 
of a certain age using books is good, but online activity is suspect; while, 
for those below that certain age, going online to find an answer is clearly a 
more sensible use of time than going to a library or buying a very expensive 
book. It would seem Canute-like to think that information readily available 
online can, uniquely, be excluded in some way be from the world of crosswords.

_____

Guardian readers are rightly quick to complain about political incorrectness 
slipping into the paper and the crosswords get pulled up from time to time for 
perceived lapses in clues and/or solutions. A permanent problem area for 
crosswords, though, is language associated with mental health. The paper's 
editorial policy is that specific mental health terms should not be used unless 
the context is genuinely clinical/medical. But it would be hard to produce 
clues if anagram indicators such as crazy, mad, idiotic, bananas or nutty were 
universally banned on the grounds that they could upset people with mental 
health problems or offend those who are professionally involved with helping 
them.

Others, too, find offence where none is intended. Rufus once ran a clue: "Did 
better? (7)" to which the solution was WELSHED. I got a strong letter from an 
Englishwoman married to a Welshman, whose children were thus half-Welsh. She 
accepted that the clue might be a light-hearted joke, but wanted me to know 
what real hurt it could cause a Welsh person. The word means, of course, to run 
off (particularly from a racecourse) without settling one's debts. All my 
dictionaries say that the word's origins are uncertain. None says that is 
derived offensively from the supposed behaviour of those coming from Wales. On 
this basis, I replied, there seemed no reason to put the word on a black list.

_____

An observant solver (J.L. from Rochester in Kent) noticed that the Quick 
puzzle No 12,550 published on 31 July contained these two clues: "West African 
country (7)" and "As a rough diamond? (5)" to which the solutions were LIBERIA 
and UNCUT respectively. I wish I could claim that we were being right 
up-to-the-minute about the war crimes trial then in the news; but, sadly, it 
was pure coincidence.
_____

The August Genius (No 86 by Enigmatist) attracted another large entry - 360 in 
total. Ian of London N16 was first in at 02:35, followed by Alan H. of York at 
09:52 and Audrey T. of Milford Haven at 10:08. The first correct entry from 
abroad was from John L. of Pomona, NY at 12:42.

Congratulations to Joseph Marsland from Cumbria, who is August's Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with it, 
please emailsubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>. If you 
have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 