
Walking into a comedy show that is billed as an exploration of cancer and 
mortality, the last thing you’d expect is to find a woman in a blond Dolly 
Parton-style wig wearing large fake rubber breasts, standing on stage handing 
out ping-pong balls.

But then, as comedians go, Beth Vyse doesn’t have much time for the expected. 
The former RSC actor, who turned to comedy five years ago, has made a name for 
herself with absurdist and over-the-top shows, featuring characters such as her 
leopardskin-clad alter ego Olive Hands.

For this year’s Edinburgh festival fringe though, the 33-year-old has for the 
first time chosen to draw on her own life for material in her show As Funny As 
Cancer. Last November she was give the five-year all clear from breast cancer 
and decided the time was right to start making jokes about it in public.

“I just wanted to get it off my chest,” Vyse said, roaring with laughter at 
the pun on her mastectomy. “Look, people are so bad at laughing at these 
things. But we should be able to laugh at it because one in three of us are 
going to have first-hand experience of cancer in some way in our lives. And 
everything that happened to me from the moment I was diagnosed was just so 
tragic but also just so funny.”

The decision to abandon her usual style of character comedy in favour of a 
deeply personal, and sometimes raw, story was prompted by her success on the 
fringe last year, where her showGet Up With Hands 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/beth-vyse-get-up-with-hands/> was later 
transferred to the Soho Theatre. Having kept her breast cancer, which she was 
diagnosed with aged 28, a secret from everyone aside from her family and very 
close friends, she was suddenly overwhelmed by the feeling that she was lying 
both to herself and to audiences.

“There was a moment, after Edinburgh last year, where suddenly I wanted people 
to know about the cancer, whether that’s wrong or right,” she said. “It’s me, 
it’s who I am and it bothered me that it was something I was always hiding. I’d 
coped so well with it that it felt like if I didn’t get it out of my system 
that I was lying to everyone.”

It was not an easy decision to switch her comedy from the weird to the very 
personal, particularly when her success was built around her comedy characters.

“It did feel risky, it felt stupid because people had this expectation of what 
my comedy would be based on my show last year,” said Vyse. “One agent went to 
me: ‘Oh, don’t do a show about cancer, it’s not funny.’ But it is fucking 
funny.”

Finding the comedy in cancer is not as hard as it would seem, said Vyse, 
though she admitted the first time she tried telling her story, at an open mic 
night in London, she found the whole audience dissolved into tears.


Edinburgh fringe 2015: How to be the perfect audience member
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/07/how-to-be-perfect-edinburgh-audience>
She said: “I hadn’t really told anyone before so to stand up and tell a room 
of strangers is quite mental, I know. The first I literally just sat on a stool 
and I could barely get words out and it was all higgledy piggledy. But I kept 
doing it and by the fourth show I stood up, and it’s been getting easier since 
then. Every story I tell in this show is real and personal and really 
upsetting, but it’s all about putting in the jokes and letting people know it’s 
OK to laugh.”

Situations that Vyse riffs on include everything from the traumatic chaos of 
her first MRI after she was diagnosed, to having to choose which nipples she 
wanted for her breast reconstruction after her mastectomy and the fact that her 
boyfriend at the time was named Michael Jackson.

She also retains her surreal sense of humour – she starts the show dressed in 
the Parton-esque outfit, telling the audience loudly it is “all a dream”. 
Later, during a scene re-enacting the fertility treatment she and her boyfriend 
went through, a giant inflatable penis is brought out and the audience have to 
throw ping-pong balls and fire water pistols at her to symbolise semen.

“Some days it is more of a struggle than others,” Vyse said. “For the first 
time this show is very heavy on me so it’s quite difficult to comically pace 
things. It’s all ridiculous and silly and some people might see it as crude, 
but fuck it. My cancer, I get to talk about it the way I want.”

It seems there is almost no realm of her cancer too personal to reveal, from 
the loving support of her family to the inconveniences of her implants. “As you 
get older this one gets bigger,” she said after the show, grabbing one breast, 
“while this one [grabs the other breast] stays the same. But hey, what can you 
do?”

It is not all laughter though. Vyse’s own complex relationship with the show 
(“I still don’t know what people will get from it or exactly what I’m trying to 
say”) is reflected in the fact that her eyes welled up several times during one 
performance, and again when she sat down to chat afterwards.

“When Michael Jackson proposed to me, that part of the story still makes me 
cry,” she admitted, her face falling. “It was crazy, we’d been going out for 
just three months and the only reason he was asking me to marry him was because 
he thought I was going to die … Oh look, I’m crying again.” Vyse laughed but 
her eyes filled with tears which she hurriedly wiped away. “It’s because I’ve 
always wanted to be married and I’ve always wanted to have babies … sorry.”

Vyse tailed off as she wiped away more tears, but taking a breath, continued: 
“I don’t know why I’m crying now, because during the whole thing I only cried 
once and that was when I saw my breast removed. My body was all battered and 
bruised and they put all these drains in and things and that … really upset me 
then. That was the one thing I couldn’t put in the show.”

She paused, then smiled: “But fuck it, shut up, you just gotta get on with it, 
don’t you? That’s why I’m doing this show. I don’t know what this show is, but 
I just wanted to say it anyway.”
 