
Jimmy Calderwood, the Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> manager, called it "the 
longest afternoon" of his career, a sentiment that was entirely understandable 
as his team survived some threats from Falkirk – as well as five minutes of 
stoppage time – to remain in the SPL at their opponents' expense.

His counterpart, Steven Pressley, would consider himself a trifle unfortunate 
not to have fulfilled the pledge he made to supporters when he succeeded Eddie 
May midway through the season that "this club will not be relegated, I can 
promise you that".

As always, this last match of an arduous campaign would not have left the 
aesthete feeling as though he had been exposed to unbearablebeauty. For the 
non-aligned, it was more like unendurable tedium as the two weakest teams in 
the league fought for the right to be called the second worst.

Tension will sabotage these matches as surely as a stick of dynamite will 
derail a train and there were times at Rugby Park when it seemed that the 
damage had been done even before the event got moving.

Partly from jangling nerves, the uncertainty in both teams would also be 
rooted in the tactical dilemma of how to approach the match. It could have been 
argued thatFalkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk>, needing 
nothing less than victory, would have to opt for unrelenting aggressiveness, 
but that would have left them vulnerable to counter-attack from a home side 
deployed in a 4-3-3 formation designed to maximise scoring chances.

Kilmarnock, needing only to avoid defeat, would be similarly constrained, 
reluctant to commit entirely to the pursuit of victory, and simultaneously wary 
of inviting the visitors into forward areas by retreating into a defensive 
cover.

In the circumstances it was entirely predictable that it should take the match 
25 minutes to yield even a hint of a scoring opportunity. That was when Manuel 
Pascali played the ball forward to Kevin Kyle, the striker returning it into 
the path of the defender, whose powerful low drive was blocked before it could 
test the Falkirk goalkeeper, Robert Olejnik.

The moment, however, seemed to encourage the home side, as they earned five 
corner kicks before the visitors had gained one. But Falkirk appeared to be 
under instructions to be patient, as they gradually, almost subtly, gained what 
might be called the ascendancy.

Their attacks were more threatening than Kilmarnock's, and it was only a 
terrific intervention from Pascali that prevented Colin Healy from finishing a 
sweet move between himself and Scott Arfield with a shot from 10 yards.

But, when Pedro Moutinho flicked the ball into the path of Ryan Flynn, it 
seemed certain the Falkirk midfielder would take advantage from six yards out. 
But the ball bounced awkwardly and span out of his control as he stretched 
desperately to make contact.

Unsurprisingly, the prospects of goals were impaired by a lack of quality.The 
battle for survival does not allow much room for artistry, with largely 
unimaginative physical endeavour the commonest strength among the protagonists. 
Those who do attempt some fluency of movement or subtlety of pass are almost 
invariably disappointed by the clumsiness of the intended beneficiaries. A 
prime example was the pass from Arfield that cut through the home defence to 
the right foot of the substitute Mark Stewart. The Falkirk forward chose the 
wrong option and his attempted ball into the area was blocked by the Killie sub 
Simon Ford.

Worse would follow, however, when Ryan Flynn was the recipient of a perfect 
pass that left him with only Alan Combe to beat from eight yards and he 
volleyed over. It was the moment Falkirk's demotion seemed to become inevitable.
 