
Falkirk cut the gap at the bottom of the Scottish Premier League to one point 
after inflictingMotherwell's first home defeat of the year, winning 1-0 after a 
brilliantly worked goal from Ryan Flynn.

Flynn finished off a slick move in the 27th minute following an uneventful 
start to the game and Steven Pressley's side comfortably held on for their 
first win in seven games. The home team went into the contest without their 
injured on-loan Everton striker Lukas Jutkiewicz and rarely looked like 
avoiding their second consecutive league defeat.Falkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> had taken the lead in each of 
their previous four matches and collected only two points, but with Darren Barr 
back in the heart of the central defence amid Brian McLean's suspension, this 
time they were resolute at the back. Well lacked a cutting edge as they 
followed up the end of their unbeaten 12-match SPL run at Dundee United last 
week with another blow to their European qualification hopes.

John Sutton passed up several chances on either side of the interval to 
restore parity and Michael Fraser kept out a Jack Compton strike for Falkirk. 
The best opportunity for Sutton came in the second half: Chris Humphrey created 
a good chance when he got to the byline and crossed for the striker six yards 
out but his header lacked conviction and failed to work Robert Olejnik. But 
Barr and Tam Scobbie continued to dominate their penalty box. Scott Arfield 
should have made it two in injury time but he shot over from eight yards after 
Mark Stewart had dispossessed Stevie Hammell. The Steelmen almost made him pay 
when Stephen Craigan flicked on a long ball for Steve Jennings but Olejnik came 
off his line to block as the midfielder slid in.

Graham Carey and Marius Zaliukas scored either side of half-time as St Mirren 
andHearts shared the points in a 1-1 draw in Paisley. Carey, whose set-piece 
deliveries were a threat throughout, executed an impressive free-kick from 
outside the box high into the net to put the hosts in front two minutes from 
the interval.

However, Hearts responded immediately after the restart, Zaliukas connecting 
strongly with a header after Suso Santana had done well to work himself into 
position for a cross from the left. Both sides played for a spell with 10 men 
as Steven Thomson and Ian Black received treatment after a clash of heads in the
St Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> penalty box. Steven 
Thomson returned to the fray but Black was eventually replaced by Craig Thomson.

Chris Innes headed over the bar from a Carey free-kick, and Carey was then 
dispossessed in his own box by Santana, but John Potter hurled himself at the
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> midfielder's cross.

Hearts had to engage in some last-ditch clearing headers, while Craig Thomson 
tried his luck with a long-range drive 10 minutes from time which Paul 
Gallacher had to palm out for a corner. In the four minutes of injury time, 
home substitute Rory Loy went on a blistering counter-attack, passing three 
defenders and finding Michael Higdon, whose on-target effort was turned round 
the post by Jamie MacDonald; and then Gallacher similarly turned a Calum Elliot 
drive over.

Two SPL games take place today as St Johnstone attempt to keep up their charge 
for a top six place ahead of the SPL 'split' from their home fixture with 
Dundee United. Kilmarnock manager Jimmy Calderwood hosts his former club 
Aberdeen at Rugby Park. In midweek, Rangers play Aberdeen at Ibrox.Nial Briggs
 