
Osasuna and Real Valladolid will join already relegated Real Betis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> in the Spanish second division 
next season after a nail-biting final day of action in La Liga was disrupted 
when a barrier collapsed at Osasuna.

The match in Pamplona was halted for around 30 minutes when the barrier 
tumbled to the ground following Osasuna's 12th-minute opening goal against 
Betis and fans spilled on to the pitch.

Around 60 fans were treated on site for minor complaints and 10 were taken to 
hospital but none suffered serious injury, according to the local Red Cross.

The Spanish professional league (LFP) decided there would be extended 
half-time breaks in the other three games involving relegation-threatened sides 
to allow the Osasuna-Betis match to catch up.

The game ended 2-1 to Osasuna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> 
but they were condemned by results elsewhere and relegated after 14 seasons in 
the top flight.

"Despite the victory the results just didn't go our way," Osasuna's coach, 
Javi Gracia, said.

"Any analysis of the match and the situation is pointless given the state of 
the team, the club and everyone else. It's a very sad day for me personally and 
professionally."

Valladolid, who were promoted in 2011-12, went down following a 1-0 home 
defeat by Granada who, with Almeria and Getafe, avoided the drop.

Almeria drew 0-0 at home to fourth-placed Athletic Bilbao and Getafe beat Rayo 
Vallecano 2-1 in a bad-tempered clash between the two Madrid clubs which ended 
in a mass brawl.

Betis finished 20th and last with 25 points from 38 matches, Valladolid were 
19th on 36 and Osasuna 18th on 39, a point behind Almeria and Elche. Getafe 
finished in 13th with 42 points and Granada in 15th on 41.

Atlético Madrid won their first La Liga title in 18 years on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/17/barcelona-atletico-madrid-la-liga>
 thanks to a 1-1 draw at second-placed Barcelona in a thrilling climax to the 
campaign.

Villarreal won 2-1 at Real Sociedad on Sunday to leapfrog the Basque club into 
sixth, with both qualifying for next season's Europa League along with this 
term's winners Sevilla.

The Andalusian club finished fifth, four points ahead of Villarreal, after 
beating Elche 3-1 in Sunday's late kick-off.
 