
Jules Bianchi’s father is becoming “less optimistic” that the former Marussia 
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> driver will recover 
from life-threatening head injuries he suffered during last October’s Japanese 
Grand Prix, when his car slid off the track in wet conditions and struck a 
recovery vehicle attending a previous crash.

The 25-year-old Frenchman was left in a coma and his father has spoken of the 
“daily torture” of waiting for signs of progress. “It’s impossible,” Philippe 
Bianchi told radio station France Info.

“You sometimes feel like you are going mad. For me it is more terrible than if 
he had died in the accident because we have no power to help him more. 
Generally progress must be made in the first six months. It has been nine 
months and Jules has not woken up and there has been no significant progress.

Bernie Ecclestone still a force to be reckoned with in F1’s engine room | Paul 
Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/09/bernie-ecclestone-f1-> 
“It is hard to get up in the morning when you are not sure if your son will 
live and when every day is like that. Time passes and I am less optimistic than 
I was two or three months after the accident, when we could hope for better 
progress.”

Occasionally feeling that his son’s hand tightens on his own, Bianchi Sr is 
not sure if the sensation is real or imagined – acknowledging that “in this 
situation, you cling on to anything”, but adding that “you have to understand 
the gravity of the situation”.

Even if his son should recover consciousness, though, he admits that will be 
the beginning of a new pain. “You have a son who lives with passion, who 
travels around all the countries of the world, and overnight he ends up in a 
hospital bed in between life and death,” he said.

“If he had a severe handicap, we are convinced that is not what Jules would 
want. We talked about it. He discussed with us that, if one day he had an 
accident like that of Michael Schumacher, that even if his only handicap was 
not being able to drive, he would have a lot of difficulty living because it 
was his life.”

The seven-times world champion Schumacher spent more than five months in an 
induced coma after suffering severe head injuries in a skiing accident in 
December 2013. He eventually recovered sufficiently to leave hospital and 
return to his family home on the shores of Lake Geneva.

The Bianchi family have been inundated with messages of support on social 
media, many using the hashtag ForzaJules. Philippe Bianchi, who has the phrase 
tattooed on his forearm, said: “We are sorry we cannot reply to everyone but we 
have received their wishes. That gives us enormous strength and it certainly 
gives Jules enormous strength.”

Jules Bianchi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jules-bianchi> drove in 34 
grands prix for Marussia in the 2013 and 2014 F1 seasons, with his best result 
ninth place at Monaco last year which earned him two world championship points.
 