
Apparently, everyone knew this would happen except that, in reality, they did 
not. There were no grand pronouncements that Joey Barton and Rangers would be 
consigned to a messy divorce before Christmas carols were on the agenda. After 
eight appearances, one yellow card and a training ground rumpus,the Barton and 
Rangers alliance is no more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/rangers-terminate-joey-barton-contract-immediate-effect>
 Life around Joey was never dull.

There is a sadness attached to this. Barton should have enhanced the Scottish 
football scene, on and off the field. He has the talent and character for both 
aspects. Instead, you missed his turning out in a blue shirt with one blink, 
just as he never immersed himself at all in the lively and engaging city that 
is Glasgow. Barton himself probably regrets the latter aspect in particular.

The 34-year-old thereby enters inauspicious company as among the worst 
Scottish football signings of the modern era. There can be no other way to 
describe such a brief time in Glasgow, which on the rare occasions when Barton 
took to the field wasn’t even memorable.

Joey Barton: ‘If someone is looking for conflict I won’t shy away from it – 
ever’ | Donald McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-interview-conflict-rangers>
Rafael Scheidt, Mirsad Beslija, Francis Jeffers, Daniel Prodan and the likes 
have company. And yet, it is the context which ensures Barton’s place in this 
hall of shame; he was not seen falling over the ball or playing passes into pie 
stalls. He had arrived in Scotland as a marquee signing (on a £20-000-a-week 
contract) to supposedly jet-fuel Rangers’ bid to keep pace with Celtic. The 
coverage in the early summer suggested Lionel Messi had landed in Govan.

Barton talked up this possibility himself. “I’m coming up here to be the best 
player in the country,” he said, added to unnecessary comments about the Celtic 
captain, Scott Brown, and their manager, Brendan Rodgers. It was hardly 
rage-inducing stuff, but the sort of thing which came back to bite Barton – and 
some – as hisRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> career 
spectacularly unravelled.

Rangers are not without blame here. They have also escaped pretty lightly. 
Given there were no clear grounds to sack Barton, it was only the individual’s 
desire to play football elsewhere swiftly that ensured the paying of a paltry 
sum in relation to the remainder of his two-year contract. Barton was not 
interested in the kind of lengthy legal wrangle which could have ensued.

Rangers gave him the deal in the first place, after all, which means any 
suggestion Barton should have left the premises without a penny was always 
ridiculous. When Barton had been signed off with stress and that medical 
information was leaked, the prospect of a constructive dismissal case looked a 
live one.

When signing Barton, the club surely knew this was a high-maintenance player 
who would not be of a mind to sit quietly in the corner of a dressing room. 
Barton, rightly or wrongly, believes he has a duty to raise standards wherever 
he goes. He also, being fair, has a superior pedigree to others in the Rangers 
squad. Yet in a core football sense, it seemed curious for a team which plays 
so openly and expansively to add a midfielder of Barton’s ilk to their roster.

For all Mark Warburton has impressed as a manager, he lacks the experience of 
taking charge of players with Barton’s profile. Warburton is also a coach who 
constantly seeks verbal answers from players around training; if the answers 
are not at all to the manager’s liking, it seems partly unfair to cry foul. 
Barton’s problem, especially in respect of his team-mates, is that his own 
displays were not of sufficient standard that he could preach with authority. 
Contrary to perception though, he was not universally unpopular among 
team-mates at Ibrox.

The notion that Barton either is not half as clever as he thinks he is or 
lacks any degree of self-awareness is enhanced by an upcoming date with the 
Scottish FA regardingbetting on matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/joey-barton-sfa-charged-placing-44-bets-football-matches>
. This is not crime of the century – a few dabbles during Euro 2016 and a 
successful flutter on Barcelona to hammer Celtic – but is not the behaviour of 
someone who readily accepts authority. After all, having a gambling account in 
one’s own name is not a particularly wise move when placing wagers on all 
football is outlawed. The likelihood is a short ban, which the governing body 
that next presides over Barton will have the choice over whether or not to 
impose.

A return to England will almost certainly be Barton’s next step, amid interest 
from the lower end of the Premier League and upper echelons of the 
Championship. Club X will inherit a player with a point to prove, which is 
rarely a bad thing, but also a blatant lack of match sharpness given the 
tribulations of the last five months. It will be difficult for Barton to 
approach full speed before this season ends, with a write-off year at the age 
of 34 basically a step towards retirement.

By that May juncture, Barton’s Ibrox sojourn will be a footnote. It will still 
be noteworthy; on later reflection, both Barton and Rangers should realise the 
error of their ways.
 