
FC United have been told they must comply with competition rules after they 
opposed the decision to move the FA Cup tie againstChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> for television coverage.

The club, formed in 2005 by Manchester United supporters opposed to the 
American businessman Malcolm Glazer’s takeover, is owned and democratically run 
by its supporters.

Since their inception, FC United have campaigned for change on a number of 
issues affecting the game and football fans – including kick-off times, which 
they believe should largely remain at the traditional slot of Saturday 
afternoon.

'Football is not a game show': FC United of Manchester criticise BBC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/fc-united-manchester-bbc-criticise>
The club recently declined a request from the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/fc-united-manchester-bbc-criticise>
 to move their FA Cup fourth-qualifying-round tie against Sporting Khalsa to 
accommodate a “brand-new BBC Mobile Match of the Day Live experience”, saying 
that “football is not a TV gameshow”.

After progressing past the West Midlands club at the weekend they were drawn 
against League One side Chesterfield in the first round proper, with the game 
at Broadhurst Park one of several selected for TV coverage.

BT Sport will show the tie on the evening of Monday 9 November – but only 
after the Football Association forcedFC United of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fc-united-of-manchester> to accept the 
decision.

A statement release by the club said: “When we were informed of this, the FC 
United board contacted the FA to inform them of our views, outlining the club’s 
historical opposition to changing kick-off times from their traditional slots 
as this can be inconvenient to fans and detrimental to the match-day atmosphere.

“Out of all the options, Mondays are potentially the most punitive for 
supporters. Monday is a working day as is the following day and Monday night 
football is a TV invention in any case. While recognising that TV is important 
to football, the club also have a stated pledge to seek to change football for 
the benefit of supporters, without whom the game would not exist.

“Having considered the club’s stated views on this issue as expressed 
democratically by members, the board of FC United of Manchester has refused to 
agree with the move ourFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
first round game against Chesterfield to Monday 9 November 2015.

“The FA has responded this morning to inform us that they insist on the game 
being moved according to rule 2 and 8.13 in the FA Cup competition rules and 
therefore we have no option but to hold the match on the Monday evening at 
7.45pm. We are deeply disappointed by the FA’s stance and have made them aware 
of this.

“FC United has a proud history of campaigning for change on issues affecting 
the game and its supporters. The history of that protest has always been about 
respect for the integrity of the game and not disrupting the match or players. 
In that spirit, on this issue we believe that we needed to make a stand.”

Meanwhile, just down the road from FC United of Manchester, Salford City FC 
have also been chosen for television coverage.

The club are part-owned by the former Manchester United stars Ryan Giggs, 
Nicky Butt, Paul Scholes and Phil and Gary Neville and they will host Notts 
County on Friday 6 November.

The co-owner Phil Neville said: “When we bought the club last year we never 
imagined that we’d reach the FA Cup first round so soon, let alone have a live 
game on the BBC.

“It’s been fantastic for Ryan, Paul, Nicky, Gary and myself to have been 
involved in the competition as players – it will be a completely different 
emotion for us all as owners.

“I’m sure it will be a packed crowd under the lights at Moor Lane next Friday 
night and we’re all hoping to be there to cheer the boys on. Notts County will 
obviously start as favourites, but it’s the FA Cup and anything can happen.”
 