
Driving past Hampstead Heath pond to chase an interview the car radio was 
tuned in to the 2pm news. All was as it should be for any news reporter just 
back from a foreign assignment and keeping up with events. The first item, 
tagged "news just in", made me listen a bit more closely. The shock of the 
words that followed made me swerve, then swing the car round in a U-turn, and 
head straight back to the office.

The report said, "Greenpeace environment group's flagship the Rainbow Warrior 
has been sunk in Auckland, New Zealand following explosions. Early reports say 
crew members are missing but there are no more details."

The faces of those crew members flashed before me immediately. A few days 
before, 12,000 miles away, I had been laughing, drinking with and hugging this 
crew of eight nationalities as I left the ship after a month's hard labour and 
fun. My cabin partner had been Fernando Pereira, a Portuguese photographer. We 
had some good times together; I had attended his 35th birthday party on board 
just before I left.

The 11 crew had taken on Greenpeace's most ambitious campaign in its history, 
moving a contaminated people to a safe haven. The Americans, whose 1956 Bravo 
bomb had covered the people of Rongelap island in radiation, had removed all 
the population's thyroid glands to prevent cancer killing them and were using 
them as guinea pigs to see what further effect continued radiation had on their 
health. An increasing proportion of children were being born deformed. The 
island's elders appealed toGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> for help, and I had signed 
on as a deckhand for a month to report the evacuation for the Guardian.

The next stage of the trip was for the Rainbow Warrior to sail to Auckland for 
supplies and then head a peace flotilla into the French nuclear test zone at 
Mururoa in the South Pacific. The Greenpeace crew, having seen the long-term 
effects of previous nuclear testing on innocent bystanders, was determined to 
do its best to disrupt the French programme.

In the shock of the news of the sinking all these memories and thoughts 
swirled through my mind. My job was to write the story, the facts as known, but 
there were not too many of those. This was July 11 1985, before mobile phones. 
New Zealand was still a long way away. In Auckland it was the middle of the 
night and every telephone line to Greenpeace's New Zealand office was jammed.

But by first edition I was able to report that all members of the crew had 
been accounted for but one - the body of Fernando Pereira had been found by 
navy frogmen. He had been trapped in his cabin by a second explosion as he went 
to retrieve his precious cameras.

The headline assigned to my piece was the first inkling of a longer-running 
and more disturbing story. It said: "Saboteurs sink Greenpeace campaign ship." 
At first the Auckland police were not sure what had caused the explosions. To 
them, sabotage seemed "the most likely explanation", but in an old ship with 
what they regarded as a bunch of amateur crew members, accident or stupidity 
were just as plausible.

Davey Edwards, the Rainbow Warrior's Yorkshire-born chief engineer, also had 
doubts "I was desperate for the first 24 hours because I thought it must be my 
fault. The explosion had come from the engine room, my responsibility. I kept 
racking my brains about what could have caused it, there were banks of 
batteries that could have caused a spark but nothing explosive."

But the following day an inspection of the hull by divers meant that an 
accident could be ruled out . The very substantial riveted plates of the 
converted Aberdeen-built trawler had had huge holes torn in them, but the 
jagged pieces of metal that remained were all bent inwards. The divers said 
limpet mines had been attached to the outside of the hull.

"It may sound strange but when we were told the explosion had come from 
outside, it was sabotage, or terrorism, it came as a relief," said Edwards.

It is hard to understand now that what came as a relief to Edwards came as an 
extraordinary shock to the rest of the world, and particularly New Zealand, 
which had never seen a bomb explode in anger on its territory, let alone an act 
of terrorism. Neither has there been one since, the event remaining deeply 
scored on the nation's psyche.

The puzzle for the police was who could be responsible for this murderous act 
against a peace group, their whole ethos based on the Quaker principle of 
non-violent direct action, of bearing witness to moral wrongs.

In my mind, and for the crew, suspicion naturally fell on someone French; 
after all, they were next in line for a protest. They also had a long history 
of violence against Greenpeace, albeit confined to boardings vessels, using 
tear gas and beating crew members with truncheons. Yet an act of terrorism by 
the French state on the soil of a friendly power, clearly designed to kill, was 
still unthinkable.

Twenty years on it seems just as strange. State terrorism is something the 
United States and the United Kingdom are prepared to go to war over. It is 
something carried out by rogue states, members of the "Axis of Evil". Members 
of the European Union somehow do not fit the description.

But by day two of the Rainbow Warrior inquiry Auckland police were looking for 
French people. One had visited the ship hours before the explosion when, during 
an open day for the Auckland public, one unknown Frenchman had spent time 
looking round the crew quarters.

Within hours information was flooding into the police from all over the North 
Island of events involving French nationals, sightings of yachts, strange 
landings of equipment, movements of camper vans and rendezvous in obscure 
places. In a country where the population is tiny, strangers a curiosity, and 
French tourists rare, the sighting of so many French people seemed a remarkable 
coincidence.

Five days later a French "honeymoon" couple, Alain Jacques Turenge and his 
wife Sophie Turenge, were arrested. Inquiries revealed they were French secret 
agents Major Alain Mafart, aged 35, and Captain Dominique Prieur, aged 36. They 
were first charged with passport offences then arson and murder.

The information pouring in from all over New Zealand, the Pacific and even 
England built up a picture of an extensive French secret service operation to 
cripple the Rainbow Warrior. But it was too late to catch the perpetrators. 
Even though detectives interviewed four Frenchmen in the Australian territory 
of Norfolk Island after the attack they had not got enough evidence to hold 
them and the Australian government insisted the New Zealanders leave.

These four agents disappeared on a yacht which was never seen again. The 
official police report says officers believe the Ouvea was scuttled when the 
men were picked up and returned toFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> in a nuclear submarine.

In the time leading up to the trial of the two agents in custody French 
journalists continued to press President Mitterand for who had sanctioned the 
operation. On August 27 he issued a report which fully exonerated the French 
secret service. It was not credible, and when a request by New Zealand for the 
extradition of the crew of the Ouvea was refused it was clear this was a 
cover-up at top level.

By September 22 the game was up. Prime Minister Laurent Fabius admitted that 
the French secret service had ordered the attack on the Rainbow Warrior and the 
French defence minister Charles Hernu, a close ally and friend of Mitterrand, 
resigned, accepting responsibility and saying the president was not involved. 
We know now that this was not the full truth either: a recent confession by the 
former head of the Secret Service claims that Mitterand did, in fact, sanction 
the attack after all.

Astonishingly no government outside New Zealand condemned the French action, 
least of all Britain, despite the fact it was a British vessel.

The role and attitude of the French state remains murky. Marfart and Prieur, 
who clearly did not plant the bombs themselves, had their charges reduced to 
manslaughter and were sentenced to 10 years. The French government was 
horrified and leaned heavily on New Zealand, even threatening trade sanctions, 
and barring lamb imports to the European Union. Within three years the UN had 
brokered a deal between the two countries. The French would formally apologise, 
and pay $13m in compensation to the New Zealand government. They also paid a 
further $8m to Greenpeace, which was already suing them in the Paris courts for 
compensation.

As part of the deal the convicted agents were transferred to French terrority 
to complete their sentences. Within months they were freed to a heroes' welcome 
in Paris.

Greenpeace could not repair the original Rainbow Warrior and it was towed out 
to sea off North Island to be sunk again as a reef for sea life. The 
organisation used the money paid in compensation to launch the new Rainbow 
Warrior, a flagship larger, better equipped, and because of the French action, 
recognised worldwide. What happened in Auckland made Greenpeace a multinational 
in its own right.

The new Rainbow Warrior went back, and back again to Mururoa, and in 1996 was 
again the subject of an attack by the French military when it was boarded, the 
crew tear-gassed and equipment smashed. This time, as a journalist covering the 
event, I was arrested on the high seas, briefly imprisoned and interrogated on 
Mururoa itself while the tests continued. The worldwide protests finally led to 
the French abandoning nuclear testing in the Pacific.

This year I travelled to New Zealand for an anniversary party. It was clear 
that among the celebrations of meeting old friends and happy past times there 
was still some anger. Edwards, who now runs a fish restaurant in the Bay of 
Islands, which ironically was once a meeting place for the four French frogmen, 
summed up his current view: "The response, or rather non response, of the 
British government was a disgrace. Up to that moment I had always been proud to 
be British, but this was a British flagged vessel with a British citizen in 
desperate need of help and I heard nothing. Everything I had was sunk with the 
Warrior, but there was no offer of help, not even a new passport."

The Guardian applied in April under the Freedom of Information Act to try and 
find out what the British government knew about the attack and when, to perhaps 
give a clue as to why in 1985 state terrorism against British ships was 
acceptable. So far Downing Street has refused to answer although the Foreign 
Office has said it will do so soon.
 