
David Wagner had no complaints after Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> ended Huddersfield 
Town’s 100% home record on Sunday and, with a 1-0 win, denied them a return to 
the top of the Championship which they had conceded on Saturday to Norwich.

Fernando Forestieri’s penalty midway through the second half was enough to 
decide the Yorkshire derby in front of 22,368, Huddersfield’s biggest league 
attendance at the John Smith’s Stadium.

Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> dominated 
possession but could not break down a stubborn Wednesday side who always looked 
threatening on the break.

“It’s a disappointing result but I don’t have any complaints about the 
performance, the effort, the fighting attitude,” Wagner, the Huddersfield 
manager, said. “If two strong sides play against each other, then it’s even – 
it’s tight like it was today. One situation decided the game and unfortunately 
it was a situation for Sheffield Wednesday.

“I can accept this result because we performed good – not outstanding but 
good. This is Sheffield Wednesday, one of the top teams in this division, and 
we are able to be competitive against them.”

The penalty came when Rajiv van La Parra blocked Tom Lees’s shot with his hand 
and Wagner refused to criticise the decision. “The referee is on the pitch to 
make this decision and that is something we have to accept,” he said.

“It was disappointing that we had this result but it was great to see that we 
had the highest ever crowd for a league game at the John Smith’s Stadium.”

Wednesday started at a frantic pace, with Forestieri getting clear down the 
left in the fourth minute and his cut back eventually falling for Kieran Lee, 
whose effort deflected behind. From the resulting David Jones corner, Daniel 
Pudil missed a good chance at the back post, and when the ball was worked back 
out to Jones on the right the former Burnley midfielder’s cross cannoned back 
off the crossbar.

Huddersfield soon began to gain control in midfield and Nakhi Wells found 
space down the left to cross but Elias Kachunga could not get enough purchase 
on his header.

Chris Lowe’s corner was cleared only as far as the Australian Aaron Mooy, 
whose 25‑yard shot fizzed over the bar, while Kachunga and Kasey Palmer were 
both denied by Keiren Westwood.

Four minutes after the break Forestieri was sent scampering clear, but 
although his delicate finish beat goalkeeper Danny Ward it bounced back off the 
post.

Having been denied once, the Italian Forestieri did open the scoring after 
Van La Parra’s handball following confusion at a corner. Mooy fired a free-kick 
over and substitute Jack Payne saw his effort headed over the bar as 
Huddersfield tried to respond, while at the other end Lee picked out Gary 
Hooper at the back post but he could not direct his header on target.

With 10 minutes remaining Lee headed a Kachunga shot off the line, but Tom 
Palmer should have wrapped up the points for Wednesday when he was played in by 
Hooper. The striker was only able to find Ward.

Carvalhal, the Wednesday managerwas full of praise for the front two 
Forestieri and Hooper following a second away win of the season which boosts 
their own promotion aspirations.

“Fernando and Gary Hooper have got everything they need to do very well, but 
like all good strikers they need something to make them click – Fernando’s 
click was he played well and linked superbly with Hooper,” he said. “I believe 
the future is bright with these two.

“Huddersfield have been one of the strongest teams so far in the competition 
so this was a big challenge for us. It was a typicalChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> game, a typical derby, and 
we came through it very well. It was important for us to win.”
 