
The world champion's tyre switch leaves the other cars standing Michael 
Schumacher's amazing ability to walk on water left the rest of the formula one 
paddock bedazzled and sceptical in equal measure, as theFerrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> team leader romped to his second 
successive win of the season in a Malaysian grand prix thrown into turmoil and 
confusion by a tropical downpour only two laps into the 55-lap race.

This was Schumacher's 46th career win and his sixth successive triumph since 
Monza last year, achieved behind the wheel of his spare Ferrari F2001, which he 
took shortly before the start after traces of a possible oil leak were detected 
on his No1 machine.

It was a stunning performance which saw the German at one point lapping 6.3sec 
faster than the third finisher David Coulthard's McLaren-Mercedes on a track 
which was still patchy damp as it dried out in the sweltering heat.

However, the performance of the Italian cars inevitably rekindled the distrust 
and suspicion that has existed in the formula one fraternity over the past few 
years over the possible use of traction-control systems which, although now 
illegal, will be allowed for the fifth race of the season.

These systems, which can effectively reduce the power delivery to the rear 
wheels when they detect any possibility of wheelspin, can be duplicated legally 
by complex electronic engine-mapping which anticipates wheelspin.

Within the formula one regulations there is a fine but very specific dividing 
line between the two systems, and there is no doubt that Ferrari's system - 
deemed legal by the FIA - does a remarkably effective job. Yet such was the 
magnitude of Schumacher's victory that many faces wore a quizzical expression 
at the end of the afternoon.

But in reality the outcome of the race was decisively influenced by an 
inspired strategic call from the Ferrari team management. They gambled to 
switch their cars on to intermediates rather than full rain tyres when they 
splashed into the pits at the end of the fourth lap as the heavens opened and 
cars spun in all directions.

However, it was a nerve-rackingly close call for the famous Italian team. On 
lap three both Ferraris had flown off the road on a patch of water at the point 
where Olivier Panis's BAR-Honda had spun off after its engine expired. And the 
pit stop was botched when Schumacher had to queue behind Barrichello after a 
dithering pit crew put a full wet tyre on the Brazilian's right front before 
quickly replacing it with an intermediate to match the other three wheels.

But Ferrari were immeasurably assisted by a safety car which stayed out from 
lap three to lap 10, enabling Barrichello and Schumacher to catch up the tail 
of the queue led by Coulthard. And once the pack was unleashed again the 
Ferraris simply stormed into fast-forward action, Schumacher slicing ahead of 
his team-mate on lap 12 to take sixth place.

"It was a very exciting race," he said. "It was my decision to fit 
intermediate tyres, which we knew would be difficult at first but would be 
better when the rain eased.

"After the pit stop I asked if the team had made the right changes to the car 
because it was difficult to drive, but it got better as the race went on. The 
conditions were atrocious and undriveable, and at times the safety car was 
quicker than us."

Coulthard kept manfully ahead until lap 15 but it was a lost cause. He was on 
full wets, grappling with incipient understeer, while the Ferraris were using 
their intermediates to brilliant, some would say scarcely credible effect.

Barrichello went through into second at the end of lap 16 and from then on the 
Ferrari team-mates waltzed away with the race, which strengthened their grip on 
the points table.

Not that the race finished with unconditional love and kisses between the 
Ferrari drivers. Barrichello said the uncompromising manner in which Schumacher 
had passed him was "a bit sad". The Brazilian, who had already collided with 
Schumacher's younger brother Ralf on the first corner, had just told Ferrari's 
technical director Ross Brawn over the radio that there was a lot of dirt on 
the circuit and that Michael needed to take care. But clearly the champion had 
his own ideas. "Michael took a chance," said Barrichello. "It was not what you 
would expect a team-mate to do."

Schumacher countered: "We're team-mates, we respect each other, we leave each 
other room not to hurt each other, but I was on a better go and I was faster as 
well. We are in equal situations so you fight for the position; I don't think 
that's unreasonable."

McLaren's chief executive Ron Dennis criticised what he saw as Ferrari's 
massive gamble of switching to intermediates. "There was absolutely no way we 
would have put our drivers on to intermediates," he said. "David was 
complaining that conditions were impossible at 100mph. In rain like that you 
can't take the decision to put drivers' safety at risk in conditions like this."

Both McLarens came home in the points, Mika Hakkinen coming sixth, unable to 
pass Ralf Schumacher's Williams-BMW despite rattling off four consecutive 
fastest laps on new rubber after a late second pitstop; both finished behind 
Heinz-Harald Frentzen's fourth-placed Jordan and ahead of Jos Verstappen, a 
superb seventh in the Arrows A22. But Dennis put a gloss on the result. "I felt 
we were in good shape, but they were in a difficult situation and they took a 
calculated risk. But I think these things reverse themselves over time."

Coulthard's assessment of the McLaren situation was more downbeat. "We know 
we've still got a long way to go," said the Scot. "We were one second a lap off 
the pace in Australia and two seconds a lap away here. Yes, it's pretty grim."

Yet even Schumacher knows not to count McLaren out at this early stage of the 
season. This time last year they had not a single championship point to their 
credit but they bounced back spectacularly to challenge for the title. After 
yesterday's disappointment, Coulthard and Hakkinen are keeping their fingers 
crossed that history will repeat itself.
 