
The United Auto Workers union and Fiat Chrysler have reached a tentative deal 
on a new contract for about 40,000 US factory workers that will serve as a 
template for pacts withGeneral Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors> and Ford.

Terms of the deal were not disclosed on Tuesday. Fiat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/fiat> Chrysler’s US hourly workers must 
vote to ratify the agreement before it can take effect.

The president of UAW, Dennis Williams, said the agreement met the union’s 
goals but still kept Fiat Chrysler competitive. His three goals for the 
four-year contract were to give entry-level workers a path to higher pay, 
reward members for sacrifices they made while FiatChrysler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/chrysler> struggled financially, and deal 
with escalating health care costs.

“We believe that we have met those goals, but ultimately our membership will 
make the final decision,” Williams said on Tuesday evening.

The union was seeking hourly pay raises for long-serving workers who had not 
had one in a decade. It also wanted to narrow or close the wage gap for new 
hires, who start at about half the $29 an hour that long-serving workers are 
paid.

New generation of United Auto Workers push to end second-tier union status
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/13/new-generation-of-united-auto-workers-push-to-end-second-tier-union-status>
The UAW agreed to the two tiers of pay when then-Chrysler was near bankruptcy 
in 2007. But Fiat Chrysler’s chief executive, Sergio Marchionne, agreed with 
the union that tiered wages were unfair. Marchionne said negotiators came up 
with a carefully crafted agreement “whereby that issue will go away”.

The UAW began bargaining in July with Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford>, GM and Fiat Chrysler. Contracts 
with all three – which cover about 140,000 US hourly workers – expired on 
Monday night but were extended while talks continued.

Fiat Chrysler, or FCA, was picked as the lead company in the talks this year, 
making it the focus of bargaining and a potential strike target if talks hit a 
snag.

The deal came after a furious 48 hours of bargaining that included an 
all-night session from Monday to Tuesday. Both sides had agreed to extend the 
contract on an hour-by-hour basis while talks continued, even as some members 
called for an end to talks and a strike at FCA plants.

The main issue in the talks appeared to be pay rises. The wage gap between 
entry-level workers and veteran employees benefits FCA the most, since 45% of 
its hourly workers make entry-level wages. Only about 20% of workers at Ford 
and GM make the lower wage.

Marchionne had been outspoken about wanting to eliminate the wage gap. But he 
had indicated the top wages should come down in favour of bigger profit shares. 
Over the past four years, each FCA worker has received $9000 a year in 
profit-share checks.

Although the agreement will serve as a pattern for pacts with Ford and GM, 
there are significant differences in the companies. FCA is the only one of the
Detroit <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit> Three whose US labor 
costs are lower than foreign competitors such as Toyota; Ford and GM think that 
is an unfair advantage and want to be on par with FCA.

The union is also seeking guarantees from all three carmakers that new 
vehicles will be built in US factories and not in Mexico, where companies have 
been moving some production.

To pay for some of the union demands, Williams has proposed a giant healthcare 
pool to save money for the union and the three companies. A union-run trust 
pays most health insurance costs for about 600,000 retirees and their spouses, 
and the companies fund healthcare for about 551,000 hourly and salaried workers 
and their families.

Marchionne canceled plans to attend the Frankfurt international motor show in 
Germany on Tuesday, a strong sign that a deal was near.

Williams and Marchionne, who greeted each other with a hug as the negotiations 
began in July, said they would consider it a failure if they could not reach an 
agreement and workers went on strike. FCA workers went on a seven-hour strike 
during contract negotiations in 2007 but were prohibited from striking in 2011 
under terms of a government-funded bankruptcy.
 