
Peterhead's dream of a place in the Scottish Cup semi-finals was destroyed at 
Livingston in 15 first-half minutes. During that period, the Third Division 
team, having gone ahead with an early Martin Johnson goal, were effectively 
sunk by two from Livingston defender John Andersen. The first came with a 
header from a free-kick, and the other with a shot from a corner.Livingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston>, who had experienced a major 
blow before the kick-off with the news that their first-choice goalkeeper, Neil 
Alexander, had been ruled out because of a hand injury, deservedly made it 3-1 
with a delightful volley by David Bingham.

Livingston general manager Jim Leishman said: 'This was a more important and 
bigger game than the one on Tuesday and that's not taking anything away from 
Aber-deen, but this game allowed us to get to the semi-finals of a national 
competition There was no pressure on us on Tuesday. We were underdogs and we 
had the feeling that we wouldn't get beaten.

'That role was reversed today and all credit to Peterhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterhead>. Mentally it took a lot out of 
us on Tuesday but our fitness was great today.'

Hearts defender Steven Pressley has called on his team to assert themselves 
physically in today's quarter-final against Celtic.

While acknowledging Celtic's individual skill, he said: 'The one big 
difference I see in Celtic this season is that they are a very big and physical 
side.

'I think they scored a lot of goals from set-plays this season and if you look 
at their squad, they have got Val gaeren, Vega, Mjallby, Larsson and Sutton who 
are all extremely good in the air.

'I wouldn't say we are a particularly big side, so it is important for us to 
be aggressive. The fact that they have the height advantage does not mean that 
we can't compete and hold our own.'

Dundee United, who have a similarly tough task against Rangers, are clearly 
ignoring the tales of woe emanating from the Ibrox camp because of the number 
of players unavailable to them.

United's captain, Jason de Vos, referring to the so-called Rangers 'crisis,' 
said: 'I think it would be nice for us to be second in the league and have to 
talk about a crisis.'

If only Hearts or Dundee United had a Bebeto at his peak. Indeed, it is 
tempting to suggest that the former Brazilian World Cup striker could still do 
a good job for them now at 37, although St Mirren's manager Tom Hendrie clearly 
does not think do. Hendrie insisted yesterday that he had made the right 
decision in rejecting the chance of signing Bebeto.

Hendrie explained: 'The player is 37 and he was not prepared to come and allow 
us to assess his fitness and what condition he is in. The agent said that his 
reputation should be enough for us to sign him without seeing him but we simply 
couldn't get ourselves into that position.

'Bebeto is not playing at the moment after playing in Japan following his 
release from Vasco da Gama in Brazil. He is not signed to a club and it would 
have been easy to bring him in.

'Though he was a fabulous player, his main contribution to the Brazilian squad 
was in 1994 and there is a big difference from then to now. Our defender Tommy 
Turner is proof that some players can play in the first team at 37 but some 
players can't.
 