
Miss Amelia Earhart <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amelia-earhart>, the 
American flyer, who left Harbour Grace, Newfoundland, at 10.51pm (British 
Summer Time) on Friday night, landed safely near Londonderry, Northern Ireland, 
yesterday afternoon.

Paris was her objective, but engine troubles caused her to alter her plans and 
to make for the nearest land. By her feat Miss Earhart has established three 
records.

She is the first woman to have crossed the Atlantic alone by air. 

She is the first woman to have crossed the Atlantic by air twice. In 1923 she 
was a passenger in a machine, piloted by Mr Wilmer Stutz, which landed at Barry 
Port, South Wales.

By completing the journey in fourteen hours and fifty-four minutes she has set 
up a new Atlantic flight record.

Her flight yesterday was on the fifth anniversary of the solo Atlantic 
crossing by Lieut. (now Colonel) Lindbergh.

The distance of the flight, in a direct line, is nearly 2,000 miles. Miss 
Earhart landed at 1.45pm.

She gave the first news of her landing to a Press Association reporter over 
the 'phone from Londonderry: 'I'm not a bit hurt, and I think the plane is all 
right. I had trouble with my exhaust manifold, which had burnt out. I had this 
trouble for about ten hours, and for a lot of the way I as flying through 
storms - mist, rain, and a little fog.'

Miss Earhart was asked: 'What was the solo flight like compared with your 
other one?'

She replied: 'Oh, there's no comparison. On this go, I was flying low the 
whole time and had to rely on myself. I am afraid I'm a bit deaf after the 
terrible roar of the engines in my ears all the time, but at any rate, I've 
done it. In addition, the petrol gauge had broken, probably in the storm of the 
night, and there was a little leakage, so I decided to come down.

'I landed in an open field only a mile or two from the town of Londonderry. 
The first one to greet me was the owner of the field. I am now in a hotel at 
Londonderry. My first thought on getting here was to ring up the Press 
Association, so that my safe landing would be made known without delay.

'To my friends in New York, I want to send this message: "I am very glad to 
have come across successfully, but I am sorry indeed that I did not make 
France."'
 