
The first thing to report is that John Gregory is in good health. Sitting in a 
restaurant in central London, Gregory looks and sounds remarkably well for a 
man who underwent open heart surgery at the start of the year and it says much 
about the speed of his recovery that he is already talking about the next 
chapter of a managerial career that in recent times has taken him from Israel 
to Crawley via Kazakhstan.

That breathless feeling Gregory experienced after climbing a flight of stairs 
has gone and at the age of 61 his appetite for football management burns as 
strong as ever. “I’m in better condition than the vast majority of the managers 
in the game at the moment because my heart is perfect now,” says Gregory, who 
was referred to a cardiologist in December while in charge of Crawley. “It’s 
not a stress issue. I had a faulty valve, I’ve got a brand new one now.”

Gregory is in good spirits, enjoying life and free from any discomfort – at 
least that is the case until we discuss Saturday’s FA Cup final between Arsenal 
and Aston Villa and, in the same breath, row back to the last time when the 
Midlands club were in this position. The year was 2000, Chelsea were the 
opponents, Villa lost 1-0 and Gregory was in charge. A largely forgettable 
match was settled by a second-half Roberto Di Matteo goal following a mistake 
from David James. Except Gregory has never thought of the game in that way.

“Jamo got us there, he saved two penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2000/apr/03/match.sport4> in the 
semi-final in the shootout. I’d never point a finger, I look at myself. I could 
have done more and I should have done more. I should have been more offensive, 
maybe put on another striker, risk losing the game 2-0 or 3-0 but have a go.

“You just put the trust in the players and maybe on the day there wasn’t too 
many in the team who performed as well as they had done in the league games 
that year. But it’s gone. And I’ve felt guilty ever since. It keeps me awake at 
night. Even now.

“We hadn’t been back there in the FA Cup since ’57, so it was 43 years. But we 
didn’t win it and that still haunts me. And to this day, I never ever want to 
talk about that final to people because we lost. It’s failure. And that feeling 
– and I talk about this with my family at times, you kind of look back and 
think: ‘You’ve done this, this, this and this, you ain’t done badly in your 
life.’ And it’s like: ‘Yeah, I know, but I didn’t win the FA Cup.’”

Gregory had appeared in the FA Cup final as a player for Queens Park Rangers 
against Tottenham Hotspur in 1982 and he tells a nice story about how he 
received a telegram beforehand from a former classmate that said: “Every 
schoolboy’s dream.” QPR were beaten by Spurs in a replay, courtesy of a Glenn 
Hoddle penalty, yet Gregory never felt anything like as bad about that defeat. 
With a manager, he says, the sense of responsibility is so much greater and 
even more so when there is an emotional attachment, which was the case with 
Gregory and Villa. He had played and coached at Villa before being appointed 
manager in 1998 and the overwhelming feeling at the end of that Cup final 
against Chelsea was that he had let people down.

“I had 40,000 Villa fans there that day and as I walked out the tunnel, in 
what was the old Wembley, all the Villa fans were at that end of the stadium. 
The sight was beautiful. It wasn’t just ‘wow’, it was a thing of beauty: ‘This 
is my team.’ I can see it all now still, it was just washed in claret and blue. 
The thought that went through my head, of course, was: ‘You’ve got to come back 
past this lot and back into the dressing room. Make sure you win.’”

At the time of the final Gregory had been Villa manager for a little more than 
two years and the one consolation for him in the wake of that defeat was that 
there was a chance to put things right in seasons to come. Yet despite taking 
Villa to the Premier League summit in three of his four seasons in charge, 
there was no silverware and Gregory resigned in January 2002 after becoming 
exasperated with Doug Ellis, the chairman at the time, for refusing to sanction 
the signing of Muzzy Izzet several months earlier. “We were top of the league 
and I couldn’t believe he didn’t want to make that jump to get another player,” 
he says.

Ellis, in Gregory’s words, “wasn’t the worst” and the two of them always 
exchange pleasantries whenever their paths cross these days, yet there were 
plenty of times when the Villa chairman would drive him round the bend, whether 
it was complaining about paying a right-back more than £10,000 a week or being 
stuck in a time warp. “I always remember I criticised our training ground once, 
before they rebuilt Bodymoor Heath, and Doug told me: ‘Bill Shankly said that’s 
the best training ground he had ever seen’ – which Bill Shankly had said. But 
he said it 25 years before. That was where it was hard sometimes dragging Doug 
into the next century.”

There were no shortage of egos in the Villa dressing room back then and 
Gregory shakes his head as he recalls some of the things he had to deal with 
while in charge. He remembers being in Cannes on holiday in 1998 and being 
criticised for not controlling his players in the wake of Stan Collymore 
physically assaulting Ulrika Jonsson. “I had the Women’s Liberation on the 
phone asking why I wouldn’t give them an interview,” he says.

Gregory’s Villa teams were, by his own admission, workmanlike rather than 
entertaining and so it was no real surprise that David Ginola’s move to the 
club never worked out. Although Ellis pushed and pushed to sign Ginola – “He 
came back from Mauritius, where he’d met David one summer and he was in love 
with him” – Gregory says that the deal would not have gone ahead without him 
agreeing to it. It was a decision that all parties would later come to regret, 
perhaps with the exception of Ellis, who seemed to enjoy having his photo taken 
with Ginola at various points.

The biggest problem for Gregory, who had been talked about as a potential 
England manager at one stage, was coming to terms with life after Villa. “I 
thought I’d never leave. I thought I’m going to be here for ever,” he says. 
“But I also remember saying to people very close to me when I left Villa: ‘It’s 
all down hill now.’ I knew it wouldn’t get any better than that. And that’s how 
it’s been.”

Gregory had spells with Derby and QPR before going out to Israel but he has 
always kept a close eye on things at Villa. Gregory is, essentially, a Villa 
fan, as anyone whofollows him on Twitter <https://twitter.com/johngregory77> 
would know. On the day ofthe semi‑final against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/19/aston-villa-liverpool-fa-cup-semi-final-match-report>
, Gregory posted a picture of himself next to the Villa dugout at Wembley, 
titled “The winners’ enclosure”. “That was before the game kicked off,” he 
says, smiling.

Gregory is full of praise for the job that Tim Sherwood has done since 
replacing Paul Lambert. “I think Tim’s been brave, he could have come in and 
taken a really cautious approach but he hasn’t done that. He’s selected 
offensive teams and I think that’s really commendable. You get a honeymoon 
period and Tim has now given himself until next January because he’s got all 
the fans onside. I follow a lot of Villa fans on Twitter and there is one guy 
who has basically made a full blown apology after slagging Tim off when he 
first came in.”

It is difficult to know where Gregory will show up next on the back of his 
last few experiences. He managed two clubs in Israel, Maccabi Ahi Nazareth and 
Ashdod, between 2009 and 2011, and thoroughly enjoyed his time in the country, 
even if he ended up pleading for a bit of rain on a morning to provide some 
respite from the sunshine.

Gregory has been back to Israel since and says that he never had any security 
concerns while he was out there. “When I was in Ashdod there was a little bit 
of trouble because Ashdod is right in the south, 25kms further than Tel Aviv, 
so you’re heading towards Gaza. So the sirens used to go off, every apartment 
has got a bomb room, which is lined with steel and the advice was always to go 
and get in that. But I never feared for my own safety. I’m realistic, get on 
with it, don’t spend your life worrying.”

As for Kazakhstan, the city of Almaty did not quite tally with the image that 
Gregory had in his head when he flew in to become manager of FC Kairat in 2011 
and pictured Sacha Baron Cohen. “I landed, got picked up at the airport, there 
were Porsches, Mercedes, BMWs everywhere. And then we drove past a Bentley 
garage. I was thinking, obviously, Borat, pony and trap, and here were all 
these fantastic cars. It was like Mayfair.”

Gregory returned to management in England for the first time in six years when 
he took over at Crawley in 2013 and it is a source of frustration that surgery
prevented him from seeing the job through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/09/john-gregory-leaves-crawley-town-post>
 – Dean Saunders was appointed on an interim basis in December – and having a 
shot at keeping the club in League One.

It is unlikely, however, to be the last time that we see Gregory in a dugout. 
“I think out there somewhere there will be a job for me,” he says. “If you’ve 
got the right financial backing, and the right support, and someone who has got 
common sense and doesn’t sit there reading the message board all day … I worked 
for Briatore at QPR, I had no chance, nor did the other nine that followed me 
in two years because it was all about Flavio and every decision appeared that 
he was just making it on a whim, similar with the guy at Leeds. But I’ll be 
ready to go back whenever it may be.”
 