
1) Vettel brings the noise

Radio Sebastian Vettel is becoming something that should be confined to a 
post-watershed time slot. His increasingly erratic and expletive-laden messages 
are upsetting people in much the same way that the late, great John Peel did 
when he brought punk to the airwaves in 1976. Red Bull’s Helmut Marko, with 
whom Vettel had been very close during his championship-winning years at Red 
Bull, was certainly unimpressed. “The situation is unworthy of a four-time 
world champion,” he said. “His choice of words certainly wasn’t first-class.”

Many will have been offended and his decision to send a message to the race 
director, Charlie Whiting, to “fuck off” was absolutely uncalled for, 
especially given Whiting’s dedication and long-term commitment to the sport, 
not to mention his skill and professionalism that is admired across the paddock.

But equally Vettel’s exasperated missives from the cockpit are without doubt 
entertaining. Modern drivers are routinely criticised for being PR-trained 
automata,indeed Emerson Fittipaldi praised Lewis Hamilton this weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/lewis-hamilton-formula-one-emerson-fittipaldi>
 for being one of the few to show real personality, so should Vettel really 
take so much flak for being human? Had he reacted entirely calmly after Max 
Verstappen failed to give back the place Vettel believed he had earned, it 
would have been exceptionally unemotional and hugely dull.

Vettel is clearly frustrated at the position Ferrari are in, with no wins this 
season, no advance towards Mercedes and third in the constructors’ championship 
to Red Bull. But he is also a grown-up and, as Christian Horner noted, if you 
miked up footballers the results would doubtless put Vettel’s outbursts in the 
shade. If there is real concern his language is corrupting the nation’s kids – 
as many thought Peel spinning the Damned and the Pistols was – then FOM need 
not broadcast them. But the show would be poorer for it.

2) Confusion rules over cutting corners

Lewis Hamilton, suffering with glazed brake discs from the formation lap, 
locked up on entering turn one and cut the corner to maintain his lead from 
pole but escaped censure. Verstappen cut the same corner while Vettel was 
attempting to pass and took a five-second penalty that cost him his podium spot.

That there appeared to be a double standard caused considerable debate and 
plenty of vexatious remarks from drivers. Verstappen and his Red Bull 
team-mate, Daniel Ricciardo, were extremely vocal post-race in criticising the 
lack of sanction against Hamilton and it certainly will have made little sense 
to casual fans of the sport. In fact the stewards did look at the incident 
involving the British driver. They concluded he had not gained any lasting 
advantage from cutting the corner and looked at telemetry that showed he had in 
fact backed off immediately afterwards. That Nico Rosberg was some way back and 
tussling with Verstappen through the corner would have been a factor, as was 
the deployment of the safety car shortly afterwards which brought the cars 
together again.

In contrast Verstappen was adjudged to have maintained his place ahead of 
Vettel only by cutting the corner and hence was punished. He, with his usual 
enthusiasm, vehemently denied that Vettel had got ahead, but the stewards 
examined all the data and angles and will have been in a better position to 
make that call than the driver.

None of which makes it necessarily clearer to viewers just tuning in for the 
race on a Sunday but it does highlight the issue that going off should carry 
some forfeit. Again here perhaps the return of some form of gravel trap, an 
imposition to speed and the state of the tyres, would be useful, or indeed 
raised curb chicanes that force the driver to slow before rejoining would be 
worth investigation. If Hamilton had faced some form of obvious impairment for 
going off, the question of an official penalty would not have needed to be 
raised.

3) Ecclestone’s plan highlights a real problem

Hamilton’s off-track excursion had been to an extent pre-empted by Bernie 
Ecclestone, increasingly sounding like almost a fringe group of one in F1, even 
before the race weekend began. He had suggested that 40cm-high walls on the 
corners would increase the danger and the excitement of the sport and was 
almost universally panned.

Rosberg, who had already given short shrift to another Ecclestone comment that 
his taking the title would not help the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/nico-rosberg-bernie-ecclestone-jibes-f1-title-mexican-gp>
, had even less time for this idea. “There are 10 other areas which we should 
look at, if we want to make the sport even better than it is, before we start 
looking at turning back time on safety,” he said.

Various other drivers agreed and Jenson Button, a director of the Grand Prix 
Drivers’ Association, was pithy. “It would be good for advertising in the sport 
– the sponsors,” he said drily, adding: “It’s a pointless comment to comment 
on.” But he and Daniel Ricciardo did acknowledge that it had raised an issue 
that really must be dealt with – staying within track limits.

Currently the rules vary from circuit to circuit as does their enforcement and 
of course drivers exploit them everywhere to take advantage. The FIA World 
Endurance Championship race director, Eduardo Freitas, makes track limits clear 
before every meeting and rigidly enforces them with warnings and then penalties 
during races. A technique which would at least be a good place to start.

4) F1 belongs in Mexico

The numbers at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez were huge in 2015 – 134,850 – 
second only to Silverstone and this year they were even better with 135,026 
fans packing the circuit in Mexico City. Interest was expected to be high after 
absence from the calendar for 23 years but bucking the traditional drop-off in 
year two is an extraordinary achievement.

There are two factors at work here. The first is fairly straightforward – 
Mexico loves F1. There is a motor racing heritage here – 38,000 attended the 
WEC race in September – but a long-standing, deep-seated passion forFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> in particular. It was clearly 
evident from Friday practice when swarms of fans, bedecked in team merchandise, 
arrived before any cars had gone out and filled the circuit to a level that 
many tracks would gladly take on a Sunday.

Trackside in the stadium section during FP2, to hear the roar every time 
Sergio Pérez and Esteban Gutiérrez went past was an absolute pleasure and their 
presence certainly helps, but it is really further evidence that taking the 
sport to a decent track (which it still is, even post-Herman Tilke 
remodelling), where there is genuine passion for the sport, does work.

It has also been promoted exceptionally well. “Join the ‘F1esta’,” proclaimed 
the posters that were spread blanket-like all over town. The city’s myriad 
underpasses hosted huge, long pictures of a sequence of cars and, as one drove 
through them, it triggered speakers blaring out engine sounds – which was 
innovative and a sure-fire way to stir the heart of fans. A public-private 
partnership, the organisers have tried to price tickets to take account of 
local incomes and not just sat back and waited for them to buy.

A full track promotes the city better than a half-empty one and makes the TV 
coverage all the more spectacular. Some circuits will never attract such 
interest but they could at least make the effort as Mexico has done.

5) The Hulk is making his mark

He was a winner of the Le Mans 24 Hours with Porsche in 2015 but Nico 
Hülkenberg has still to stand on the podium in Formula One after 113 starts and 
six years competing in the sport. It is a record he will not take pleasure in 
but one that Mexico proved again surely cannot last.

He will join Renault, a works team, next year and they will expect to be 
vastly more competitive than this season. Now they have had the manufacturers’ 
full backing this year in developing 2017’s car, their engine should also make 
a further step forward – it is already performing well in a car with a good 
chassis as Red Bull finish the season second only to Mercedes. They will expect 
much from Hülkenberg and he showed it at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez.

He qualified exceptionally strongly in fifth ahead of the two Ferraris, only 
two-tenths of a second back from the fourth-placed Red Bull of Ricciardo and a 
full seven spots ahead of his team-mate Sergio Pérez, who was in identical 
machinery. His race was equally impressive, even given his spin while battling 
Kimi Raikkonen and seventh, the first place outside the big six, even after the 
musical chairs of the stewards had been completed, was another strong run – and 
three ahead of Pérez.

It was crucial for his team as well; with the two Williams finishing in eighth 
and ninth, these were vital points to keep Force India nine ahead of the 
Grove-based squad in the battle for fourth in the constructors’ championship. 
Renault will expect similar, while the Hulk will be happy with a car that can 
help him achieve that elusive podium finish.
 