
1) There is no magic formula for safety

Carlos Sainz Jr was travelling at 190mph when he braked on the entry into turn 
13 and his rear wheels locked up.When he hit the left side wall he was still 
going 130mph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/carlos-sainz-jr-formula-one-russian-grand-prix>
. At the corner this first short and sharp collision had stripped the hoarding 
down to the metal. His final clash with the wall and journey across the run-off 
area only slowed him to 90mph when he hit the Tecpro barriers.

F1: Russian Grand Prix – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/oct/11/f1-russian-grand-prix-in-pictures>
For some minutes there was real concern, especially as he had gone in so deep 
and the barriers had lifted and come down on top of him. Extraordinarily, and 
to everyone’s relief, he was fit to race on Sunday. So the barriers had done 
their job. But there was also great concern that his nose-first entry had 
lifted them onto the car. Yet the same Tecpro barriers had worked exactly as 
designed when Max Verstappen hit them at Monaco.

Williams’s Rob Smedley described the incident as F1 dodging a bullet. “The car 
shouldn’t have gone under the barriers, absolutely not. That is not what is 
supposed to happen,” he said.

Rightly, how it happened will be investigated, but it is worth also 
reiterating Smedley’s other observation that simply changing nose heights would 
not necessarily solve anything. “Whatever you do, you will find a freak 
situation like we found today that will circumnavigate all the safety work,” he 
said.”You will find those situations and we can never be 100% safe. There will 
always be something that catches you out.”

2) Williams suffer cruel rules

After Kimi Raikkonen took Valtteri Bottas out with a late lunge at turn four, 
the immediate interest was in whether he would be penalised and thus ensure
Mercedes won their second constructors’ championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/lewis-hamilton-russian-grand-prix-f1>
 here in Sochi. He was and they did but that was cold comfort for Williams. 
Bottas was in a well-deserved third place at the time – the last lap of the 
race – but was pitched into the barriers and failed to finish, his potential 15 
points converted to zero in the blink of an eye. Raikkonen was given a 30 
second penalty that demoted him to eighth, but still in the points. Raikkonen 
insists it was a racing incident, a view that Bottas understandably does not 
share, but regardless of that, the stewards blamed Raikkonen. So was the 
penalty really fair? Williams and Ferrari are fighting for second place in the 
championship and the points might have been crucial. Given that, in an incident 
that clearly costs a team points would a grid penalty for the next race not 
have been a more realistic punishment and some recompense to Williams?

3) Bernie in the doldrums

Once the mighty fixer, Bernie Ecclestone’s iron grip on the sport seems 
increasingly weak. On Thursday the Financial Times published a story saying the 
sale of F1 was going through, at exactly the same time Ecclestone was in the 
paddock repeatedly reassuring people that there was to be no sale, because 
neither he nor Donald Mackenzie, the co-chairman of CVC, F1’s owners, wished to 
sell.

At the same time the Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> 
engine fiasco continued to whirl around the paddock. Ecclestone insisted it had 
been “sorted out” but no confirmation was made and sources suggest that the 
team are no closer to concluding a deal with Ferrari or returning to their 
contract with Renault than they were months ago. Indeed, what is believed to be 
the more likely now of the options – mending their relationship with Renault – 
is said to be in its infancy.

In the old days this situation would have been brought to a close privately by 
Ecclestone long before this stage by him banging heads together. He was trying 
to present that impression in Sochi but this time there was no actual evidence 
that he had succeeded.

4) Russia pulls it off

Derided by many for its location and relative difficulty to reach, Sochi has 
attracted a fair bit of flak in the past two years. But after last year’s 
procession, it delivered on track. Behind Lewis Hamilton’s solo run at the 
front, overtaking and incidents were further enlivened by a difference in tyre 
strategies that played out at the death. It is a track surface that is unique 
on the calendar and it presented rubber that was wearing and on which the 
drivers could push, but that was not falling off the cliff – as evidenced by 
Sergio Pérez’s bold and skilled run to third place.

Pirelli, who have renewed their contract with the sport until 2019, and F1 
might look to this as an example of where to go in future. Equally while Friday 
and Saturday did not see huge crowds, come race day the Russians arrived in 
droves, with 62,000 the figure released by the Sochi Autodrom. A good number 
especially in comparison to some of the other recent additions to the calendar. 
And they put on a good show, with the terrifying exception of what Sebastian 
Vettel described as a “brave” marshall running across the track. Most marshals 
would have described it as dangerous and foolhardy but he made it, thankfully, 
to the other side.

5) Air time still mean for Mercedes

After barely making an appearance on TV during his win in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/lewis-hamilton-tv-blackout-japanese-grand-prix-mercedes-bernie-ecclestone>
, Hamilton didn’t get much of a look-in in Russia either. It wasn’t quite the 
“blackout” as Suzuka was described but his Mercedes was certainly not in a 
starring role. It has been interpreted as a stick with which the team is being 
beaten for their unwillingness to supply Red Bull with engines, since it is 
Ecclestone’s Formula One Management that controls the pictures.

However Niki Lauda and the head of Mercedes motorsports, Toto Wollf, have both 
denied they believe that to be the case. Ecclestone passed it off over the 
weekend as a factor of fans wanting to see more overtaking – which is happening 
further down the field. A perfectly reasonable argument but perhaps not to the 
extent that the leader is almost being ignored. Spotting the silver arrow on 
Sunday was a rare occurrence indeed. Hamilton can take the title at the next 
round in Austin. If the cameras remain shy of that performance, Lauda and Wolff 
may be less convinced.
 