
1. Can Ipswich pull their season around?

Ipswich's 1-0 victory at St Andrew's 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2012/nov/03/birmingham-city-ipswich-town-championship>
 on Saturday was hugely encouraging, but managerial changes often cleanse 
players of negativity and produce short-term success, regardless of the new 
manager's suitability for the role. The positive atmosphere Mick McCarthy 
enjoys in his dressing room this week could evaporate as quickly as it appeared 
and, with Ipswich Town still rock-bottom of the Championship, an extended 
honeymoon seems highly unlikely. The game against Crystal Palace –themselves 
buoyed by the arrival of the charismatic Ian Holloway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2012/nov/03/crystal-palace-blackburn-rovers-championship>
 – will provide a much sterner test than a lacklustre Birmingham City, and show 
us just how capable Ipswich are of climbing the ladder to safety.

McCarthy has already admitted that, despite Ipswich's rich history, "What it 
hasn't got at the moment is a particularly good team." If Town are to avoid 
relegation this season then they will require an initial boost in form. If they 
fail to put together a decent string of results in these early games, they will 
probably go down.

When McCarthy became Sunderland's manager in March 2003, taking over Howard 
Wilkinson's team, he was unable to inspire them and they slumped helplessly 
into theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, with 
their manager – famed for his man-management and disciplinary skills – unable 
to heave a woeful set of players out of trouble.

If DJ Campbell, on loan from QPR, and the free transfer Nigel Reo-Coker can 
shake Ipswich out of their slumber, survival is possible. But these early 
results are vital, and will tell us if escape is possible.

2. Sheffield United could leapfrog Tranmere

Ronnie Moore has had a fairytale (second) beginning as manager of Tranmere 
Rovers, converting a distinctly average League One side into formidable title 
challengers almost overnight. However, signs of fatigue may have crept into 
their game, with Rovers collecting a solitary point from the past nine 
available and their early-season sprint faltering. An unbeatenSheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited>, meanwhile, have been 
quietly moving up the table and now loom ominously over top-of-the-table 
Rovers. On the back of three successive wins, United have the chance to move 
ahead when they take on Swindon, with Tranmere not scheduled to play until 
Wednesday, when they travel to Hartlepool.

3. Make or break for Lee Clark?

Lee Clark understands the high expectations of impatient chairmen more than 
most, having been sacked by Huddersfield despite building a successful League 
One side. Unless hisBirmingham City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/birminghamcityfc> team dramatically 
improve, he may find himself confronted with a disgruntled employer once again. 
Realistic Blues fans recognise the difficulty of Clark's task, but their 
sympathy may fade if results continue to disappoint. The 1-0 defeat to 
bottom-of-the-table Ipswich last Saturday was the third game this season in 
which City have failed to score on their own ground. Marlon King, their top 
goalscorer, is yet to find the net from open play at St Andrew's.

Their game against next-to-bottom Bristol City could be an important moment in 
their season, the opponents' weakness offering Birmingham the perfect 
opportunity to score a few and record a first home win since mid-September.

4. The best of times, the worst of times

The match at the Ricoh Arena brings together two teams with wildly contrasting 
fortunes, soaring or plunging through the leagues to the delight or despair of 
their respective fans. Just 11 years ago,Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> were six divisions above 
Tuesday night's opponents Crawley Town. Now they sit 18 places below them in 
League One. The Sky Blues' hopeless demise looks set to continue unless drastic 
changes are made at the cash-strapped club. Back-to-back relegation is a 
serious possibility.

Crawley, on the other hand, are two points off the top of the table, looking 
for an amazing third successive promotion. Everyone is waiting for the bubble 
to burst, but their impressive run of form is unlikely to end at Coventry.

5. Just like starting over

Bolton, Blackburn, Burnley, Ipswich and Crystal Palace all have new managers, 
while Blackpool still have a vacancy after Ian Holloway's departure. There 
should be plenty of optimistic fans and reinvigorated players on display, and 
plenty of opportunities for headline-grabbing goals and the hailing of new 
dawns.

Henning Berg faces the daunting task of reviving Blackburn Rovers, following 
on from Saturday's defeat at Palace with a difficult trip to fellow promotion 
hopefuls Huddersfield, while Dougie Freedman's Bolton welcome Leicester City to 
the Reebok. Burnley host Leeds United, with the two sides separated by goal 
difference alone. After last week's merry-go-round, there are many Championship 
clubs essentially starting their seasons all over again.
 