
Villa might benefit from a spell out of the Premier League

Aston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> are a sad sight 
these days – tired, directionless, timid, miserably shambling through another 
season of nothingness. What enjoyment is to be had on the Villa Park terraces 
these days? They are a club that seem overworked, huffing and puffing just to 
tread water in the Premier League, running to stand still. They need to 
recharge their batteries, to find some momentum, to stop constantly 
fire-fighting and find a way to move forward as a club.

What better way to do that than with a year or two (or more) in the 
Championship? Plenty of clubs have found relegation to have a restorative 
effect. Norwich are probably the best example. Between 2005 and 2009 the 
Canaries were going nowhere fast, scratching around in the bottom half of the 
Championship, good enough to stay up but only just. It took relegation to 
League One in 2009 and the appointment of Paul Lambert after a disastrous start 
to that season in the third tier to turn the club around.

Instead of grubbing around for points – the club won only 56 league games in 
four seasons from 2004-05 – they were able to strip things down, start again 
and build momentum, momentum that stays with them today. If the Canaries had 
somehow cobbled together enough points to stay up over the final few weeks of 
the 2008-09 season they would not be in the position they are today. Newcastle 
are another who have bounced back from the drop in style.

Alex McLeish – who would almost certainly be replaced in the event of 
relegation, another bonus for Villa fans – has a very young squad at his 
disposal, a talented one that is not yet in full maturity. Ciaran Clark, Nathan 
Baker, Chris Herd, Gary Gardner, Samir Carruthers and even Andreas Weimann, 
Barry Bannan and Marc Albrighton could benefit from finding their feet in the 
professional game at the lower level, rather than learning the hard way in the 
top flight. Indeed the suspicion is that the only reason several of those 
players are not on loan outside the Premier League is the paucity of McLeish's 
squad.

One step back to take two steps forward? It can be painful but it might just 
be fun. And Villa fans have not had much of that this season.JA

Blackburn fooled us

Steve Kean has been so unpopular this season, you could probably find people 
in Shoreditch wearing T-shirts ironically celebrating him. For fans ofBlackburn 
Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn>, though, the joke has 
worn thin fast and their side, in a position of relative strength not so long 
ago, now stands on the brink. When Blackburn beat Sunderland 2-0 at Ewood Park 
on 20 March they were five points clear of 18th-placed Bolton Wanderers, albeit 
having played a game more. They were also six points ahead of Wigan Athletic. 
Safety was in sight. Kean in!

Five games and five defeats later it has all gone wrong for Blackburn. Now 
19th, they are three points behind QPR and Wigan, and one behind Bolton, who 
also have two games in hand. Perhaps it should not come as too much of a 
surprise. They have been up and down all season, deceiving us throughout with 
their inconsistent, unpredictable performances. They picked up one point from 
their first four games and then defeated Arsenal. After losing at home to 
Bolton in December, an ominous result that left them bottom on Christmas Day, 
it was assumed there was no way back. Then they drew at Anfield and won at Old 
Trafford. A 7-1 hammering at Arsenal was followed by a 3-2 home win against 
QPR. Kean in, Kean out, Kean in, Kean out – marvel at the hokey-cokey manager.

The fallout from Blackburn's latest defeat, a 3-0 thumping by Swansea City, 
suggests the game is up, especially as they also lost 3-0 at West Brom last 
week with a home defeat by 10-man Liverpool in between. Most worrying for Kean 
was the sight of his two best players, Junior Hoilett and Yakubu, coming off 
injured. Without them Blackburn have little threat. Grant Hanley also suffered 
a bad injury, while apparently Gaël Givet was not "in the right frame of mind" 
to play, although given the state of the Blackburn defence, it might have been 
hard to tell.

Blackburn have some good players and, though they can still survive, there is 
a nagging feeling that this season did not necessarily have to turn out so 
badly. Below them sit Wolves, who definitely have no way back. Some advice, 
then, to anyone who happens to own a football club: the Premier League's two 
bottom sides are run by owners who have over-promoted someone from within to 
run the team. Last season Avram Grant's West Ham, who bore some resemblance to 
Kean's Blackburn 
<http://www.thefootballramble.com/blog/entry/blackburn-rovers-this-years-west-ham>
, finished bottom. It is not a recipe for success.JS

The Championship will go down to the wire

Sam Allardyce cut a forlorn figure in the West Ham press room on Saturday 
evening. "Everything about the game was fantastic from start to finish," he 
said, with the air of a man just told that they have stopped making Scampi 
Fries. "They were a well-deserved six goals," he added miserably.

Allardyce's unhappiness in the face of a barnstorming performance from his 
side against Brighton is actually more understandable than it might appear. The 
Hammers were outstanding, unstoppable in the first 10 minutes (when they scored 
three times) and clinical in the second half even when their collective feet 
had been taken off the gas. It might well have been the most impressive single 
performance from any side in the Championship this season. And yet it still 
leaves the Hammers three points behind second-placed Southampton.

That is the source of irritation for Allardyce – where was this performance 
when they drew at home to Doncaster last month? When they failed to beat 
Watford and Crystal Palace at Upton Park? When Burnley left east London with 
three points?

But even so, such was the margin of victory on Saturday that goal difference 
comes back into play. Southampton's goal difference was 11 goals superior to 
West Ham's at the start of the weekend. The gap is now a far less certain 
three. If the Hammers maintain any semblance of this form, they are more than 
capable of winning three out of three to the end of the season. It is going to 
go to the wire.JA

League football will return to Highbury (just not that one)

Fleetwood Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town> (or as 
they were then known due to an advertising deal, Fleetwood Freeport) began this 
century in the North West Counties Division One, competing against Atherton 
Collieries, Woodley Sports and Ramsbottom United (whom they finished six points 
behind). Next season they begin life in the Football League. It is a remarkable 
rise for a team that only seven years ago were still playing in the fifth tier 
of non-league football.

Back then there were 220 teams between the Trawlermen and the Football League 
– Shepshed Dynamo, Barking & East Ham United and Burgess Hill Town, for 
example, were all playing further up the non-league pyramid. That year 
Gillingham, Plymouth, Crewe and Rotherham were all Championship sides, eight 
leagues above. In August they will kick off the 2012-13 season as equals.

The club were denied promotion from the North West Counties Division One in 
2003-04 because their ground was not up to scratch for the Unibond First 
Division. There were not many there to grumble about the state of Highbury – 
the club's average attendance that season was 134. But they made the necessary 
improvements and sealed promotion with the title, then followed it up with 
second spot and another promotion in 2005-06. That put them in the Unibond 
Premier, a division from which they escaped in 2007-08. Blue Square North 
play-off success in 2009-10 took them into the Conference

And thanks to Wrexham's failure to win on Saturday they have secured 
promotion. As with so many fairytale football stories, cold, hard dosh plays 
more than just a bit-part in the plot. But as plenty of sides have found out, 
simply splashing the cash is not a guarantee of success. The average attendance 
this season has been 2,165, mid-table in Conference terms and smaller than all 
but three sides in League Two, so the long-term viability of sustaining 
themselves in the Football League perhaps remains uncertain. But for now the 
club can enjoy the culmination of many years' hard work.JA

Beattie brings back the celebration 

It was not enough that the referee, Euan Norris, did his best Mike Dean 
impression 
<http://d.yimg.com/i/ng/sp/empics/20091128/15/2474828724-soccer-barclays-premier-league-portsmouth-v-manchester-united-fratton-park.jpg>
 when awarding Hearts' penalty against Celtic at the end of a brilliantly 
entertaining semi-final. No, Craig Beattie had to go one better. After scoring 
the winner from the spot the Hearts striker whipped off his shirt, did not even 
bother to hold on to it and then ran off behind the goal for an impromptu lap 
of honour, which was as preposterous as it was hilarious.

As he wheeled away, his knees high and his arms going up and down as if he was 
on an invisible cross trainer, there seemed a strong possibility Beattie would 
not stop and would end up dashing down the tunnel, like the timeSuper Hans 
accidentally ran all the way to Windsor 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rrCJ6lX2kv8>. It is not often we are treated to 
such an absurd celebration these days, with players preferring smug 
choreographed dances instead. But it isEric Cantona's iconic pose <>, Temuri 
Ketsbaia's deranged assault on the advertising hoardings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JlqCCDh9XT0> or Marco Tardelli's outpouring of 
emotion <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7XOL8o-3TZ8> in the 1982 World Cup 
final that are truly cherished. No one is going to forget Beattie's mad dash in 
a hurry.JS
 