
Fleetwood are one win away from a remarkable sixth promotion in 10 years after 
they booked a spot in theLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-off final at the 
expense of York.

The Cod Army have risen through the divisions since reforming, for the second 
time, in 1997 and Graham Alexander will now take his side to Wembley on Monday 
week hoping to make further history by elevating them into the third tier of 
English football. They will face Southend United or Burton Albion, who play 
their second leg on Saturday.

They battled to a 0-0 draw against the Minstermen at Highbury on Friday night, 
knowing that was good enough following their 1-0 win in Yorkshire with Matty 
Blair ultimately scoring the only goal of the tie against his former club.

Given the precarious nature of the hosts' lead and the visitors' need to 
overturn the one-goal deficit, it was unsurprising to see the game start with a 
flurry of chances at either end.

For Fleetwood Josh Morris rifled a first-time shot over the top following a 
one-two with David Ball before the Blackburn loanee turned provider, teeing up 
Iain Hume to steer a shot on the turn into the travelling support.

Between times the York midfielder Russell Penn could not quite keep his 
vicious effort below the bar and the Fleetwood captain, Mark Roberts, was 
needed to block Adam Reed's near-post try.

Though Nigel Worthington's men have scored twice in a game only once in their 
previous 10 fixtures they were creating plenty of opportunities, Michael 
Coulson drawing the goalkeeper, Chris Maxwell, into a decent save while Calvin 
Andrew nodded off target.

The size of Andrew and York's two centre-backs meant they looked a threat from 
dead-ball situations too and Maxwell breathed a sigh of relief when his 
defenders were able to clear after he floundered at a back-post set piece.

The former Wrexham goalkeeper quickly made amends, though, punching away 
inside his own six-yard box with Andrew seemingly poised to nod in from Keith 
Lowe's head across.

However, it was Alexander's side who would go closest before the interval as 
Steven Schumacher's free-kick was flicked on by Nathan Pond and hit his 
centre-back partner Roberts, who knew very little about the chance as it 
dropped just wide.

York wrestled back the initiative after the break and experienced joy down the 
left with the impressive Pond needing to head away Will Hayhurst's centre just 
yards away from his own goal.

Still the game ebbed and flowed and Fleetwood twice came desperately close. 
Blair wriggled free near the byline and steered a delivery across the six-yard 
box which nobody in a red shirt gambled on. Then Antoni Sarcevic, largely 
marginalised in midfield, worked space for a left-foot shot in the area only to 
see Nick Pope brilliantly turn the ball round a post.

Sarcevic was substituted for the defender Ryan Cresswell inside the final 10 
minutes, a clear indication that Alexander was shutting up shop, although they 
still had chances to win the game with Ball and Morris wasteful in stoppage 
time.

They held on anyway and it was fitting that Pond, with the club for each of 
their previous five promotions and in his testimonial year, was man of the 
match.
 