
There is life at Bloomfield Road yet as well as luck and pluck. Last but one in
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> amid 
continuing efforts by supporters to wrest control of the club, Blackpool faced 
a first league derby against Fleetwood, upstart Fylde coast neighbours. The 
occasion invited further embarrassment but somehow they won with an early 
own-goal. Steven Pressley, Fleetwood’s manager, was entitled to disbelief. 
“We’ve lost a match in which they had no shot on target,” he said. Owen 
Oyston’s club got away with pillage.

Blackpool’s plight has been a running sore, if not disgrace, in the league for 
a while, briefly relieved when Ian Holloway led them to a season in the Premier 
League in 2010. Last season they propped up the Championship from September, 
won four games in all and an on-pitch protest by fanscaused abandonment of 
their final match against Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/02/blackpool-fans-suspend-game-pitch-invasion-protest>
 at 0-0 in the 48th minute. The Football League let that score stand as the 
result and one point improved their average. If the fans had done it all 
season, 46 points and a level goal difference would have kept the club up 
instead of 20 points shy.

If Blackpool are on their uppers, Fleetwood are on the up. In 2004 Andy 
Pilley, a local businessman and fan, became involved and soon chairman. Six 
promotions in 10 years powered them into League One in May last year. In 2012 
they restored historic Highbury, abandoned by Arsenal, to the list of league 
grounds, a few months after losing 5-1 there toBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> in the FA Cup, when Jamie 
Vardy was their scorer.

A dozen seasons ago Fleetwood’s average crowd was 134. Last season it was 
3,521. The town’s population is 27,000. Blackpool’s is 142,000 with an average 
crowd of 10,928. Last season Fleetwood’s went up 25%, Blackpool’s down by 23%. 
Fifty seasons ago, when they finished second in the top tier three years after 
winning the Cup, they had 38,000 at Bloomfield Road for the visit of Wolves. 
Saturday’s 7,755 was their season’s best in numbers that suggest a consistently 
loyal core. The visitors’ quarters were packed while swaths of the rest were 
empty. Fleetwood have 2020 vision of the Championship and with each roll of the 
dice seem to find a ladder while Blackpool get the snakes. It cannot all be 
down to luck.

On Saturday, though, fortune favoured them in a match of oranges and lemons, 
courtesy of Fleetwood’s away colours. Outside the ground gales lashed the sea 
front that separates the towns by seven miles, stopping walkers in their 
tracks. With winds like this who needs a rollercoaster for screaming thrills? 
At Highbury Stadium, comparatively unprotected, play might have been a farce. 
Here the players made the best of an awkward job, with Blackpool, on the back 
of seven defeats running, meeting Fleetwood’s slicker approach work with 
numbers in defence and occasional charges on the break.

Such a break prefaced the goal. Nathan Pond, sole survivor from that Cup 
match, was almost undone by the wind earlier. This time the centre-back scuffed 
in Brad Pott’s cross. Between times Hayden White headed off the line a pot shot 
worthy of the name Joe Davis, one of Fleetwood’s wide supporters of David Ball, 
whose lob against Preston isup for Fifa’s Puskas Goal of the Year Award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/06/fifa-puskas-award-david-ball-fleetwood-messi>
. In added first-half time Jack Redshaw should have capitalised on another 
mix-up in Fleetwood’s defence but shot high. At 5ft 5in and 10st 3lb he looked 
as likely to vanish over the Mortensen Stand as the ball nearly did.

After the interval Fleetwood regained the poise that the goal had disrupted 
but they could not create the unmissable chance. Nine shots on target exercised 
Dean Lyness in goal without extending him. “We showed solidarity in everything 
we did,” said Blackpool’s manager, Neil McDonald. “We stopped their crosses 
into our box.”

Saki once wrote of “the sympathetic unselfishness of an oyster”. What a 
difference a couple of letters make. Through Blackpool’s playing and 
non-playing staff and fans the club preserves a pride and dignity as they wait 
for the shame to pass. The club’s motto is “Progress”. People may talk of 
bragging rights. For the moment Fleetwood, going about their business, retain 
those.
 