
Fleetwood Town’s supporters had to pinch themselves to make sure it happened. 
It is 18 years since financial difficulties forced the club to fold for the 
second time in their turbulent history and left them stuck in Division One of 
the North West Counties League, the 10th tier of English football, and now, 
after this victory over lucklessBurton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion>, they are in League One. 
After all the years of toil, all the hardship and the fears that the money 
would dry up, the Cod Army are living the dream. That they first entered the 
Football League two years ago makes their achievement even more remarkable.

This most heartwarming of feelgood stories boasts many heroes. Antoni Sarcevic 
will never again have to buy a drink in Fleetwood – the smallest town to have a 
Football League club – after his winner in the 75th minute. Their manager, 
Graham Alexander, also deserves praise and then there is Andy Pilley, the local 
businessman who dragged the club off the floor when he bought it in 2003. 
Fleetwood are unrecognisable from the dilapidated mess he discovered and it was 
fitting they should win their sixth promotion in nine years on Pilley’s 44th 
birthday. “We’ll have a couple of beers tonight and a chat,” Alexander said. 
“I’m hoping the trophy was enough of a present!”

Spare a thought for Dean Lyness. It was the Burton goalkeeper’s misfortune 
that his dreadful error was the defining moment of the match. Lyness looked 
like he wanted the Wembley turf to swallow him up after his hapless attempt to 
deal with Sarcevic’s free-kick gifted victory to Fleetwood and it will be of no 
consolation to him that the goal could have been disallowed for offside against 
Nathan Pond. For Burton, it meant more play-off heartache after last year’s 
defeat in the semi-finals, although at least they can afford to take a 
pragmatic view having won promotion to the Football League for the first time, 
in 2009.

This was the eighth meeting between Burton and Fleetwood in the past two 
seasons but familiarity has not bred contempt. There is respect rather than 
animosity, an appreciation of how far both have come despite the prize on offer 
for the winners. These sides have not made a habit of gracing showpiece 
occasions: this was Burton’s first appearance at Wembley since 1987, when they 
lost to Kidderminster Harriers in the FA Trophy final, and Fleetwood’s first 
since they lost to Halesowen Town in the FA Vase final in 1985.

Fleetwood have had greater concerns during those 29 years than whether they 
would make the trip down to London again. This tiny club’s fortunes changed 
when Pilley arrived as their saviour and Fleetwood have barely had time to 
pause for breath during their giddy rise through the divisions. Alexander 
attributed Fleetwood’s success to Pilley’s belief that they could “smash 
through any glass ceiling”.

Fleetwood knew that Burton would be stubborn opponents, however. Burton 
sometimes give the impression that they could be thrown into a furnace and 
emerge unscathed. What they lack in attacking fluency, they more than make up 
for in defensive solidity, organisation, bloody-minded commitment and a sheer 
refusal to give up and they needed those qualities to cope with Fleetwood’s 
dominance in the first half.

The game was only two minutes old when Fleetwood first threatened. Iain Hume’s 
scuff found David Ball in the area and the striker produced a sharp turn before 
trying to curl the ball towards the top corner, but Lyness clawed his shot 
behind. From the corner, Ball’s header forced another superb save from Lyness.

Fleetwood’s midfield diamond sparkled at times and the speed of their passing 
allowed them to bypass Burton regularly. However, Burton are nothing if not 
persistent and they began to impose themselves more at the start of the second 
half, Billy Kee hooking over after 56 minutes.

That was a warning for Fleetwood, who found it harder to make passes connect 
now that they were being pressed with more intensity and higher up the pitch.

But then came the moment that Lyness will want to forget in a hurry. 
Sarcevic’s free-kick from the left was overhit and should have been dealt with, 
only for Lyness to mistime his jump as he was challenged by Pond and allow the 
ball to fly into the top corner. A new chapter in the Fleetwood fairytale is on 
the way.

Man of the match Antoni Sarcevic (Fleetwood Town)
 