
You have to go back to 1987 for the last time Burton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion> were at Wembley. “The FA 
Trophy final,” recalls David Broome, who covers the club for the Burton Mail. 
“They drew 0-0 against Kidderminster at Wembley and then lost the replay 2-1 at 
West Brom.” Burton have waited 27 years to scratch that itch.

Fleetwood Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town>, Burton’s 
opponents in Monday afternoon’s League Two play-off final, can trump that sense 
of longing by two years. Their last appearance at Wembley was in the FA Vase 
final against Halesowen Town in 1985. “And we lost,” says David Mitchell, a 
feature writer for Fleetwood’s programme.

Fleetwood, who were formed in 1908 as Fleetwood FC, have come a long way since 
those days, but their turbulent history means that no one is getting carried 
away. The money first dried up in 1976 and although they returned a year later 
as Fleetwood Town FC, the gates at Highbury Stadium were locked again in 1996. 
Then, emerging as Fleetwood Wanderers in 1997, they were marooned in Division 
One of the North West Counties Football League, the 10th tier of English 
football.

However, their faith was rewarded when entrepreneur Andy Pilley bought the 
club in 2003 and sparked a giddy rise up the football pyramid, culminating in 
promotion from the Conference in 2012.

“It was really triggered when the chairman came in,” Mitchell says. “There was 
a famous story about him opening a window and the frame fell out. It was 
dilapidated and he started a rebuilding process which has taken us through a 
glorious time. We’re more or less averaging a promotion every two years.

“The town is buzzing. It’s had a difficult period because of the demise of 
fishing and Pilley brought a smile back on to people’s faces before this even 
happened.”

Despite their success, Fleetwood have had their critics because of the backing 
they receive from Pilley. “Having somebody of that ilk does allow you to 
attract better players,” Mitchell says, “but some of our key players over the 
years have cost us very little. He’s a massive enthusiast and a very 
knowledgable chairman.”

Like Fleetwood, Burton have never been as high as League One before. But their 
progress has been more steady since they were first promoted to the Football 
League five years ago.

“It’s been a gradual rise up the league since the chairman, Ben Robinson, came 
in,” Broome says. “He gave Nigel Clough the job, and from there it was slow and 
steady progress. The club are never going to spiral into debt while the 
chairman’s in charge – if they ever did get relegated, it wouldn’t be a 
catastrophe.”

Burton flirted with relegation in the 2011-12 season, which cost Paul 
Peschisolido his job. Gary Rowett came in, and he has constructed a team whose 
obduracy means they never know when they are beaten, and Fleetwood are steeling 
themselves for an awkward match even though Burton have been hit by injuries.

On paper there is little to choose between the sides, although the 
head-to-head record slightly favours Burton. “Two years ago they’d never played 
each other ever despite the fact that they’d both come from non-league and 
they’ve played each other seven times since then,” says Broome. “I think they 
sort of appreciate each other’s different styles of football.”

Mitchell concurs. “There’s been ultimate respect between the sides,” he says. 
“Burton were our first league win. We went there and won 1-0 in our third 
match, so they’ll always play a part in our history.” Whatever happens, more 
will be made on Monday afternoon.
 