
There was a huge response (well, 25) to my request last month for feedback on 
the question of themes that run through Quick puzzles for several consecutive 
days. Virtually all of the replies were strongly in favour of them. The only 
caveats were that it became irritating when the needle stuck too long in a 
groove that you knew nothing about: musicals and Gilbert & Sullivan were cited 
in this context, though even here one reply was: "My husband, who claims to be 
totally unmusical, discovered a hidden knowledge of musicals - even obscure 
ones - and I, who am unsporty and dislike football, had an uncanny knowledge of 
football teams." All of this has been extremely helpful, as otherwise one tends 
to be overinfluenced by the odd splenetically worded letter or email of 
complaint. I am particularly grateful for the response from Tim Moorey, who 
gives talks and workshops to more than 600 crossworders each year. His 
experience is that those who are aware of a theme running though a puzzle 
generally like it, though a surprising number seem not to notice. He says that 
he has not yet met a punter who claimed actively to dislike them.

_____

Moving from themes to a question of "taste and decency", I have had a number 
of complaints (well, two) about 8 down in Enigmatist's Saturday puzzle for June 
23 (No 24,111). The clue was "Dugout location (4,5)" for PAGE THREE. (For the 
record, the gender split of the complainants was 50:50.) The burden was that 
the first meaning given for "dug" in most modern dictionaries is the nipple, 
teat, udder or breast of a female mammal and that, as dug = a woman's breast is 
given only as an archaic secondary meaning, its use in this context is 
offensive and un-PC, particularly in a paper like the Guardian.

My defence to the charge would run something like this:
 1. While the Oxford Dictionary of English does mark the second meaning as 
"archaic", Chambers and Collins do not.
 2. A blanket ban on the use of all words marked "archaic" in the dictionaries 
would provoke serious rumblings from Guardian crossword setters and a ban on 
all meanings other than the most usual would risk an all-out strike.
 3. Being a townee, I may not be up to speed on the language of the country, 
but I have never seen the word "dug" in print referring to a cow's udder or any 
other part of an animal's mammary gland. In fact the only place where I can 
remember seeing the word in print is in the third section of TS Eliot's "The 
Waste Land" (The Fire Sermon) (published in 1922, so not that archaic in any 
case), where he has a monologue from Tiresias, the blind prophet of Thebes, who 
was transformed into a woman for seven years and who was cursed with the 
punishment of eternal life. Being in the middle of moving house I cannot find 
my copy of the poem and the texts available via Google vary surprisingly. But 
the following is something like the lines he wrote:
 "I, Tiresias, old man with wrinkled dugs
 Perceived the scene, and foretold the rest ..."
 What was good enough for Eliot is good enough for me.
 4. Also "Page Three" itself seems to me more obviously offensive to more 
women than the use of an unusual word in a crossword clue, but I am open as 
ever to alternative views.

_____

More than two subscribers, however, pointed out that last month I displayed 
both a woeful ignorance about cooking and an obstinate unwillingness to face 
facts. The issue centred on the clue and solution to 10 across in the May 
Genius by Pasquale: "Food mostly made with egg (4)", where the "official" 
answer was TACO, which I explained as being constructed as TAC(k) [food mostly] 
+ O [egg], claiming that this was also "& Lit". I now know that no egg comes 
anywhere near the process of making a taco, which is not good for the clue.
 Alternative answers were suggested. Dot and Gareth wanted MAYO, being "food" 
[mostly MA(de) + mostly YO(lk)], supported by the additional point that mayo, 
provided it is not mayo lite, is made with egg. Peter from Manitoba pressed the 
case for MADO [MAD(e) + O], which does not appear in Chambers or Collins but is 
in the ODE as a small, yellowish fish found around eastern Australia and New 
Zealand. He claims that the mado (aka the sweep) is edible, though the 
dictionary is silent on this point.
 One further food footnote to last month. Peter Graham, the food author, has 
drawn my attention to a passage in the Oxford Companion to Food (ed. Alan 
Davidson, OUP 1999) which goes to the point of whether cassata is Sicilian, 
Neapolitan or just plain Italian: "... a speciality of Sicily, where it is a 
traditional Easter food, was originally a sort of ricotta, beaten up with 
sugar, chocolate, vanilla, candied fruit (especially small cubes of pumpkin), 
and liqueur ... Nowadays, however, the name cassata is better known 
internationally, and in Italy, as a kind of ice cream exhibiting three colours 
-- typically chocolate, white (for vanilla), and green (pistachio or candied 
angelica)". So now you know!

_____

You seem from the figures to have found the June Genius by a new setter, Monk, 
harder than those you have faced of late. The first correct answer did not come 
in until 1126 GMT on Day One (from Elancourt in France); there were only two 
others that day; and only 76 by the deadline.

* Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor.
 