
Several of you took me to task for suggesting last month (in passing in a note 
about the West Midlands origins of balti cooking) that the ubiquitous Chinese 
dish 'chow mein' was invented in the United States. Surely, I was told, the 
dish I was after was chop suey, not chow mein. For example, Rob W. insisted 
that chow mein was an authentic Chinese menu item, since the words mean 'fried 
noodles' in both Mandarin and Cantonese. With respect, as we say, that argument 
is a non sequitur. Forbalti is a word found in both Urdu and Hindi, meaning a 
pail or bucket, but that is not evidence that balti cooking was first practised 
in the Indian subcontinent, because it wasn't.

I would not for a moment deny that the Chinese-style dish of meat or chicken, 
stewed with bean sprouts and other delicious things, that we all know as chop 
suey originated in the United States and I would never dream of using the 
argument that chop suey means 'mixed bits' in Cantonese to suggest the 
contrary. But chow mein is defined by no less an authority than Collins as 'a 
Chinese-American dish'; Chambers has it as 'a Chinese-style dish, served with 
fried noodles; and the Oxford Dictionary of English has it both as 'a 
Chinese-style dish' and dates its invention to the late 19th century. Taken 
together this seems to suggest that chow mein was not traditionally eaten down 
the centuries by either Mandarin or Cantonese speakers on the Chinese mainland. 
Its origins would seem to have been in post-gold rush San Fransisco's 
Chinatown. But I should be delighted to be contradicted by anyone who actually 
knows about the subject.

It raises, though, a question about how many ethnically-styled, now globalised 
dishes did not in fact originate in the area with which they are associated. 
The thin pizzas of Pizza Express presumably owe more to Italian immigrants in 
the United States than they do to Italy itself. And I am reliably informed that 
'spaghetti with meat balls' was an invention some time around 1955 at the 
original Spaghetti House in Goodge Street, London W1. If there were enough 
other examples of this gastronomic genre, perhaps at some point I could 
persuade one of our setters to construct a puzzle around the theme.

_____
A correspondent tells me that, over the years, he and his mother have 
submitted quite a number of completely correct Saturday prize puzzles, but have 
yet to win a prize. He wonders whether there are some undeclared rules that 
govern winning entries. For example, does the solution have to be filled in 
very neatly, or in capital letters only, or with no scribblings in the margins? 
The answer is that there are no such undeclared rules and that, provided the 
solutions are entered legibly (it matters not whether that be in ink or 
pencil), each correct entry should have the same random chance of winning. The 
process is simple. All the entries (by post and by fax) go to the same mailing 
house in Birmingham. The staff there select randomly a small sample, which is 
sent to the Guardian's offices in London on Friday afternoon. There the entries 
are checked to weed out any that contain errors and the first five (or the 
first 10 with Araucaria's bank holiday specials) are declared as that week's 
winners.

_____
From time to time I get cries for help from solvers who cannot get a puzzle on 
the website to print on A4 paper. Depending on your computer/printer system, 
you should first check your printer settings, where there is usually a box 
which says "adjust to full screen", or something similar. Putting a tick in 
that box could well solve the problem. If it does not, could I ask that you 
write directly touserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> as I 
am now at the extreme limit of my expertise on this subject. Alternatively, of 
course, you could always print off the PDF version of any Quick or Cryptic 
puzzle, which is made to measure for an A4 page.

_____
The August Genius puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-28256,00.html> (No 110 set by 
Picaroon) attracted 288 correct answers, 16 on the first day. Tony at 01:39 
would have been first, but for an error. So the line honours went instead to 
Dave H. at 01:43, closely followed by Ian at 01:45. Brian of Paderborn, Germany 
was again the first overseas entrant at 11:12. Several of you thought that 
there must be an error in the clue for 3 down, on the grounds that "just over 
500 metres" could not produce the L in CRINKLIER, since the Roman numeral for 
500 is D, not L. In fact you were being asked to think Chinese, not Roman, 
where the LI is a measure of distance, equal to just over 500 metres.

Congratulations to Dave Howell, who is August's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <>
 