
Darren Sarll may be the youngest manager in the Football League but some of 
his views come straight from the old school. The Stevenage manager made sure 
his players trained “harder and for longer” last week and the result, a 6-1 win 
overHartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool>, suggests his 
traditional methods may just be worthwhile at a club where, for now, survival 
represents success.

On Saturday Sarll’s team fought back from going a goal behind against a dismal 
Hartlepool to earn not only their second win of the season but also record 
their biggest home victory in the league. They have gone one better on the 
road, putting half a dozen without reply past Yeovil in April 2012. Cruelly, 
Hartlepool’s midfielder Michael Woods was on the opposing side at Huish Park 
too.

And, really, Stevenage <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> could 
have added a few more. The manner in which Hartlepool threw in the towel midway 
through the second half should cause their manager, Craig Hignett, much cause 
for concern but Stevenage’s transformation within the game from anxiety after 
falling behind, following a defensive calamity, to supreme confidence by the 
end was quite impressive.

Football League your thoughts: AFC Wimbledon claim first win, Luton top League 
Two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/03/football-league-your-thoughts-afc-wimbledon-claim-first-win-luton-top-league-two>
“August is now history and September is our world,” Sarll wrote in his 
programme notes. The form guide and early exchanges suggested that was a tad 
optimistic but by full-time the 33-year-old wore an expression of delight.

Stevenage had endured a dismal week, conceding five at Grimsby before 
succumbing at Leyton Orient in the EFL Cup. Nobody saw such a winning margin 
coming. Even Sarll, who is being assisted by Glenn Roeder, seemed quite 
surprised. “It was a long time coming,” he said before sagely preaching that 
one big win does not make a season. “This time last Saturday I was in a 
completely different emotional place.

“We’ve had some real in-depth meetings this week to discuss absolutely 
everything. But I’ve said to the players let’s not get our heads among the 
clouds here. Things are still not right, the balance and play is not right. We 
made necessary tweaks last week, and we will make necessary tweaks this week 
for next Saturday. But it’s a good way to start September.”

While the results were gravely concerning – a win and a draw from five league 
games – the final moments of August may be marked as crucial. Deadline day in 
League Two is aeons away from thebillionaire boys club of the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/01/premier-league-billion-pound-spenders-transfer-window>
. Sarll spent the final moments of the window trying everything to bolster his 
squad and on this evidence, the loan signing of Tyler Walker from Nottingham 
Forest looks like a fantastic piece of work.

Walker, a rapid and lean striker recently hampered by injuries, scored twice 
and could have had a hat-trick if Michael Tonge had not demanded to take a 
penalty in the 69th minute. The teenager’s body language as the veteran 
midfielder dispatched low to the left of the unfortunate Adam Bartlett said 
plenty about his disappointment, although he did make certain to congratulate 
Tonge for his goal. He also missed a one-on-one two minutes later, before being 
substituted to a standing ovation.

The 19-year-old’s first, to put Stevenage in front a minute before the 
interval, after Tom Pett equalised on the counter, was a wonderful overhead 
kick and his second, making it 4-1, was executed with notable confidence. “Long 
may it continue,” Sarll said.

Dean Wells and Matt Godden scored the others, and it will be of little 
consolation to Bartlett that without him Stevenage could have racked up double 
figures.

Boro’s other debutant, Kgosi Ntlhe, acquitted himself well at left-back, 
though was fortunate to remain on the pitch after a nasty tackle on Jordan 
Richards 11 minutes before half-time, sliding in high after losing control of 
possession. He escaped with a yellow card from the referee, John Busby, a 
recent promotion from the National League where his record suggested a penchant 
for flashing red.

Sarll was impressed by the 22-year-old South African, signed from Peterborough 
hours before the deadline. “I was delighted to get him in because since [Scott] 
Laird was here [in 2012] we haven’t had a top quality left-back, but on the 
whole he knows more hard work is to come,” he said.

“It has taken us a while to learn and evolve but today was a clear indication 
that we are trying to get better,” the manager added.

They may not achieve a more convincing win all season but if Stevenage can 
continue to attack with such verve, staying in the league should be no problem.•
 The Hartlepool manager, Craig Hignett, could not hold back on his team’s 
shortcomings in Hertfordshire, though his players were not shying away from the 
embarrassment by apologetically applauding the disgruntled travelling 
supporters at full-time. Several made their feelings known at the end – and 
they had a right to after a 450-mile round trip. “It was painful to watch,” 
said Hignett. “But what can I say after that, it was embarrassing, I’m 
struggling to find the words to sum it up.” Embarrassing was his word of the 
day – adding that the “schoolboy” manner in which they defended for every goal 
left them repeatedly red-faced.

Talking points

• In League One the result of the weekend was AFC Wimbledon’s first in the 
division, coming against Chesterfield thanks to Dom Poleon’s 91st-minute 
winner. And that was probably made all the sweeter by MK Dons falling apart 
against their local rivals Northampton in startling fashion early-on, though 
they did fight back to make it 3-2. Yet perhaps the most startling statistic of 
the weekend is that Northampton, last season’s runaway League 2 champions, are 
now unbeaten in 30 league games.

• With 25 minutes to go at Priestfield on Sunday, the former Northampton 
manager, Chris Wilder, may have been pondering if his departure from Sixfields 
at the end of last season was the right call, but Sheffield United came from a 
goal down to beat Gillingham, thanks to a last-minute penalty, and ensure they 
are not in the relegation places. But what is the minimum Blades fans will 
accept in May? It should be a play-off place at the very least.

• Luton not only lead the way in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> but they are also the 
highest scorers in the Football League with 14. A lot of that is down to Danny 
Hylton, whose hat-trick went a long way to beating Wycombe on Saturday. He has 
five from six and had big plans for celebrating afterwards. “I’ll go back to 
three kids, my wife’s going out. It will probably be playing Nerf guns or 
something and then fall asleep about nine o’clock.”

• The deluge that descended upon Rodney Parade on Saturday, forcing Newport’s 
game with Barnet to be abandoned after 45 minutes with the visitors leading 
1-0, brings to mind other early-season waterlogged pitch fiascos. From recent 
memory, Charlton had a home game against Doncaster in the Championship 
postponed on 24 August 2013 – with the away team livid because they led 3-0. 
But what has been the earliest abandonment due to the weather (in a season, not 
minutes)? Answers by post, or, er, below the line.
 