
Thiago Silva’s mooted move to Juventus is “a serious thing”, according to the 
lead story on the front page of today’s Tuttosport, the paper saying that talks 
between the clubs have not just already started, but very nearly concluded. “A 
source, well acquainted with the facts of the situation, says that contracts 
are virtually signed,” they enthuse, dismissing the potentially 
transfer-scuppering threat of an automatic renewal clause in the player’s 
contract withParis Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain>. The Brazilian apparently 
has a “contraclausola” similar to that which greased the wheels of Ever 
Banega’s move to Internazionale (some kind of cut-price buyout arrangement), so 
it’s all good.

Juve and Arsenal are expected to go head-to-head in the fight to sign 
Wolfsburg’s 23-year-old aceJulian Draxler – who tried pretty hard to engineer a 
move in the summer but failed, and may still have itchy feet – but the 
Wolfsburg director Klaus Allofs has warned that “there is absolutely no reason 
to even talk about Julian leaving in January”.

Gareth Southgate is offered the England manager’s job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/gareth-southgate-england-manager-offered-job>
Nobody was suggesting that Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> were also about to sign Milan’s 
young goalkeeping prodigyGianluigi Donnarumma, but just in case they were 
tempted the player’s brother, Antonio, has revealed that “he’ll never go to 
Juve”, and furthermore that “he’ll never leave Milan, not for anyone in the 
whole world”. “He’s really happy at theRossoneri,” Antonio enthuses, “and he’s a
Milanista forever”.

Talking of prodigies, Exeter City’s Ethan Ampadu, already valued at £2m at the 
age of 16, is English football’s latest and hottest young starlet.Chelsea, 
Arsenal,Liverpool and Manchester City are all in the hunt for his signature, 
but Stamford Bridge is considered his most likely destination – slightly 
embarrassing for the Gunners, for whom the player’s father, the former Swansea, 
West Bromwich Albion and indeed Exeter player Kwame Ampadu, works as an academy 
coach.


Torino’s Andrea Belotti, linked with Everton in Monday’s Mill and apparently 
watched by Manchester United in every game he has played this season, is being 
offered a bumper new £1.3m-a-year contract by the Italians, which will have an 
offputting£80m buyout clause. Also preparing to pen new deals are Diego Costa 
and Thibaut Courtois, but don’t hold your breath. “With the pair contracted to
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> until 2019, there is no 
immediate rush to get them signed up to new deals,” thrills the Telegraph.

Reading’s search for a striker has led them to 36-year-old Robbie Keane, who 
is available on a free transfer as he leaves LA Galaxy, but Jaap Stam must 
battle Brisbane Roar, who have the advantage of being managed by Keane’s former 
Coventry team-mate John Aloisi. And also being in Australia. Less 
encouragingly, Aloisi says he hasn’t “spoken to the owners about any marquee 
player”, but Tony Popovic ofWestern Sydney Wanderers says he is ready to have a 
go, trilling that “he’s certainly a player it’s hard not to have a look at”.

Talking of buyout clauses, as we were some time ago, the in-demand Bristol 
Rovers striker Matty Taylor has one too, today’s Mirror saying only that it is 
“cut-price”. Brighton, Cardiff, Wolves, QPR and Rangers are all tempted to 
trigger it, even if his current club’s chairman, Steve Hamer, says the player 
“has recently signed a new contract and selling him in January is the last 
thing on our minds at the moment”. 

Aston Villa, meanwhile, are interested in Jonathan Cafu, the Brazilian right 
winger currently excelling at Ludogorets. Steve Bruce also wants Hull’s Abel 
Hernández, with rumours suggesting that the clubs could agree a swap deal 
involvingRudy Gestede, Villa’s three-goal Beninese hotshot. Hull’s interest in 
players who made largely unsuccessful transfers to English clubs in the summer 
of 2015 doesn’t end with Gestede, however, with Mike Phelan apparently also 
interested inBournemouth’s Max Gradel, upon whom the Cherries lavished £7m a 
year and a half ago, and who has made just five Premier League appearances this 
season, none lasting longer than half an hour.
 