
Sir Alex Ferguson never ceases to amaze. Just when you thought the knight in 
whining armour could no longer stun with his skills, we find out that in 
addition to his football prowess he is a tip-top post-impressionist painter.
This effort <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/At_Eternity%27s_Gate>, we believe, 
was daubed by the Scot last Saturday and is, according to critics, "a masterful 
rendering of the anguish endured by managers of clubs in flux or plain old 
decay, in this case, evidently, Portsmouth's Paul Hart."

That tableau has been compared to certain works of Vincent van Gogh, which is 
apt really, as the Scot's management is also beginning to bear uncanny 
resemblances to that of the Dutch brush-wielder. Famously, Van Gogh cut off his 
own ear (though some historians now claim it was, in fact, Gaugin who lopped it 
off in a fit of pique but the Dutchman was so drunk at the time that he thought 
he'd done it himself, or something), whereas Ferguson is currently in the 
process of lopping off his own nose, apparently to spite his face. At least 
that's what the Mill deduces from reports that he will deplete his already 
inadequate squad by flogging bothAnderson and Michael Carrick before the 
transfer window closes.

Word is the manager has fallen out with both players, neither of whom made it 
even so far as the bench for United's trip to Wigan at the weekend. Barcelona 
are said to be eager to liberate Anderson from Old Trafford, while Fergie's old 
chum Rafael Benítez, wants Carrick, whom he fancies as a decent replacement for 
Xabi Alonso. Fergie isn't particularly keen on sending him to Anfield, of all 
places, but money is so tight around Old Trafford that if Rafa can come up with 
£10m the deal will be done. That's a mighty big 'if', though.

Elsewhere, Fergie's one-time protégé, Roy Keane, is taking a similar approach 
to squad-building and has reportedly told nearly half hisIpswich squad that 
they can skedaddle. Given that Keane has previously said he won't be making any 
more signings this summer, that'll leave the Tractor Boys' squad about as deep 
as a debate on The Jeremy Kyle Show.

See how big a name Roy Keane is? Because of him Ipswich got a mention before 
Chelsea, who are keeping tabs on between two and four Benfica players, ie 
three: defenderDavid Luiz, midfielder Angel di Maria and wideman Fabio Coentrao.

Elsewhere, Arséne Wenger is hoping to read plenty of 'Blaise of Glory' 
headlines once he wraps up the signature ofSaint-Etienne midfielder Blaise 
Matuidi.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> old boy Gianfranco Zola
, meanwhile, has jetted back to his native Italy to complete the capture of
Livorno striker Alessandro Diamanti.

And finally, Harry Redknapp has decided that that last piece in the Tottenham 
jigsaw is a large one carelessly discarded by a previous manager.Andy Reid is 
on his way back to White Hart Lane. Unless Redknapp leaves there soon – word is 
he's the manManchester City will seek to lure if Mark Hughes doesn't have them 
in the top four by Christmas.
 