
You know the Rumour Mill as an all-singing, all-smiling transfer tattle 
generator. And it is. Most of the time. But sometimes, just sometimes, its goat 
gets taken. Twitter will do it. People who chew with their mouths open too. Not 
to mention those who blather about their friends’ love lives on a busy bus on a 
Sunday afternoon in north London. But none, repeat none, bring forth the angry 
tears more so than those who talk at concerts. Seriously people. What is the 
world coming to when a person can’t go to a gig and shut their cake hole for an 
hour or two while the wonderment of music unfolds before their very ears? Oh, 
how the Mill wishes to weep but sorrow is stupid and there are lies to be made 
up. Speaking of. Let’s go.

First up is Liverpool. Brendan Rodgers is sick to the back (of his very white) 
teeth withMario Balotelli finally getting his back side into gear and scoring 
important goals, as well as contributing to the team, and so he has decided to 
flog him to the 45th caller who rings up the club and shouts the phrase that 
pays – the night old stars twinkled again – down the phone. In order not to 
miss out, Sampdoria charged their phone over night and typed Liverpool’s digits 
into the first eight speed dial entries on their phone. Balotelli will be a bit 
reluctant at first but whenSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> tell him how nice it is to 
stroll down the Via XX Settembre with a mint and strawberry ice-cream to hand 
and sit in the Piazza De Ferrari and watch the weather go by before a nice 
seafood meal in one of the many restaurants by the port, Balotelli will get 
nostalgic for his Italy and agree right away. Brendan will pretend that he is 
sad to see him go but smart cookie that he is, Brendan already has a 
replacement ready to go in the shape ofLuciano Vietto. The 21-year old 
Villarreal striker has no caps for Argentina, has had one decent half-season 
and very little experience playing at the highest level and so sounds just like 
the sort of proven forward that Liverpool are in need of.

Over at Manchester United, Louis van Gaal is angry but his anger is not aimed 
at people who talk at gigs. (Van Gaal doesn’t go to gigs, he just stays at 
home, sits in his favourite chair and plays recordings of his best press 
conferences at very loud volume, laughing to himself when he knows a 
particularly good verbal slap-down is on its way.) The reason for his anger is 
that so far this season his wingers have been pants. Big, baggy, bad-smelling, 
unwashed, ill-kempt pants. The sort of pants that Van Gaal despises. To combat 
this, Jack, he dialled up PSV Eindhoven – and being fully versed in how the 
Dutch like to do business – he did not make small talk nor did he ask personal 
question. Instead he asked directly about the availability ofMemphis Depay. The 
words “he has the option to leave after this season” was the reply from the 
other end and suddenly sunshine burst through the windows. Van Gaal put down 
the phone, smiled and replayed his favourite part of the recording.

Speaking of United, they are dangerously underweight when it comes to forwards 
so they have been putting in calls toInternazionale, saying nice things about 
their hair, asking how their mother has been and how the kids are getting on at 
school, all in an attempt to grease them up like a muscle-caked caretaker that 
need to fit in a tight school vent in order to rescue a trapped dog. But Inter 
see through the compliments as they would with freshly wiped windows. They know 
that United want something and they know it isMauro Icardi. They’ll tell United 
– as well as Chelsea and Arsenal – where to go in a sentence littered with 
unprintable adjectives.

Finally. Chelsea have decided that the world is all too angry a place right 
now and that we are all need a laugh, the type of laugh where it is hard too 
breathe, the type of laugh where your belly shakes like jelly, the type of 
laugh where your sides feel like they have gone 12 rib-bruising rounds with 
Manny Pacquiao. But how could they do this, you ask? What could they possibly 
do that would have us so inebriated with laughter? SignRob Green, of course.
 