
The Mill can still remember exactly when it all started to go wrong for its 
favourite lumbering equine colossus Tony Adams. It was the moment Arsène Wenger 
described him, albeit light-heartedly, as "a professor of defending". Until 
then Adams had been quite happy as a shambling, funny little 
elbows-out-trotting,wholehearted-like-Boxer-from-Animal-Farm, comically 
yodelling defensive obstacle. The problem was, Adams took it seriously. The 
idea of a professor of defending didn't seem silly to him – the equivalent ofa 
professor of jostling or a professor of running sideways and pointing. It 
seemed like an entirely plausible alternative identity and so he set about 
dedicating himself to his professorship, becoming tousled and pensive and 
furrowed, speaking passionately atdefensive symposiums, publishing defensive 
research papers, negotiating the politics of the defensive senior common room, 
andplacating Myra and the kids in the tough years while he struggled 
desperately to achieve defensive tenure, all the while fantasising vaguely 
about conducting steamy Philip Roth-novel-style affairs with his more passionate
female defensive graduate-students.

In time he duly began to seem odd and confused and unironed, a defensive mad 
professor. And so this morning it seemed entirely plausible the Sun should 
reveal that: "Tony Adams is poised to return with St Etienne". The idea of Tony 
Adams mulling over a move to low-fi 1990s art school pop comboSt Etienne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stetienne> seems about right now – 
perhaps he could bethe one at the back who fiddles with a synthesiser and looks 
miserable, or even the ethereal semi-ironic blonde babe front woman who pensive 
indie boys can moon over quietly.

Adams "has already had talks" with St Etienne 
<http://www.playitasitlays.net/wp-admin/images/saint.jpg>, who, according to 
the Sun recently "sacked another former Pompey manager Alain Perrin", are 
currently fourth bottom of Ligue 1, and have spent the past decade mooching 
around in theirquirky and stylised Clerkenwell loft apartments listening to 
vintage vinyl, except for the blonde front lady who probably lives in Los 
Angeles.

Meanwhile Carlo Ancelotti is "ready to tell his Chelsea superstars to 'fuck 
off' ifthey do not end a run of four games without a win". In this morning's 
Sun he says "Fuck off is an excellent language".

José Mourinho will definitely leave Inter at the end of the season. "This is 
definite," says an unnamed source who deals only inabsolute certainties, even 
when speaking about the future.

Real Sociedad keeper Asier Riesgo wants to play for Spurs after his trial, 
during which he presumably had a decent look at the competition. Steve Bruce 
wants to signWigan left-back Maynor "Star Wars" Figueroa. He is also willing to 
"listen to offers for Anton Ferdinand", but not nasty, mocking, sarcastic ones 
like "an old push-along lawnmower with rusted together blades" or "a handful of 
jagged toenail clippings". Nigel Pearson wants to buyKerrea Gilbert for 
£750,000.

In the Mirror, Manchester United are after 17-year-old Serbian central 
defender Uros Cosic, who plays for CSKA Moscow. "They have already made several 
attempts to approach me," says CSKA president Yevgeni Giner, turning around 
very quickly and adopting a kung fu pose just in case someone tries to approach 
him.

Aston Villa defender Carlos Cuellar is "on Real Madrid's radar". Cuellar is 
wanted as a replacement for the injured Pepe who is out for the season, 
allowing him to concentrate instead on his 1980s stonewashed baggy denim jeans 
empire.

Roberto Martínez wants to sign Chilean defender Waldo Ponce, who plays for 
Vélez Sarsfield, presumably in a pair of vintage trainers while fiddling with 
his iPhone and drinking a really expensive cappuccino from a pretentious 
Hoxton-based "barista" with anorganic coffee-trolley made of hemp. Ponce will 
fly in for talks today.

David Moyes has almost tied up Landon Donovan's loan move from the LA Galaxy. 
AndDavid Bentley and Roman Pavlyuchenko will leave Spurs in January, but not 
before Harry Redknapp has attempted to wiffle up their price tags by telling 
lies. "They are both good players, technically fantastic so it has to be the 
right price. We could make a profit on them," he said, crossing his fingers 
behind his back but still feeling, deep down, with a horrible cold certainty,
the chill of unanswerable transgression.

In the Daily Mail, Adriano will not be bringing his galloping, wobbling, 
motorcycle sidecar paunch to West Ham. Everton want to sign bandage-clad Real 
Madridhermaphrodite Fernando "Lady" Gago. Fiorentina are also interested. 
Barcelona will not be signing Manchester City disappointment Robinho no matter 
how much he talks about them wanting to sign him and tells all the other City 
players they want to sign him and sits in the stands looking aristocratic and 
haughty beneath his ill-fitting beanie hat because it just doesn't work like 
that.

And according to the Muenchner Abendzeitung, via Goal.com, Bayern Munich may 
be prepared to sell Franck Ribéry. "If Ribéry doesn't renew his deal in the 
spring, it would be fiscally irresponsible to keep him," said club president 
Uli Hoeness, disproving the theory that anyone called "Uli" must be cheerful 
and avuncular and forgiving and never say slightly sniffy or cross things.
 