
In what must go down as one of the all-time great transfer rumours, word 
reaches the Mill ofLiverpool’s interest in the Liverpool midfielder Gustavo 
Viera. The 16-year-old currently plays for theLiverpool that sit fourth in the 
Campeonato Uruguayo, as well as for Uruguay’s Under-17s, but could swap South 
America for Merseyside if Jürgen Klopp wins what seems certain to be a heated 
battle for his services. Viera’s abilities – and his handy Italian passport – 
have also got scouts fromEverton (actual English Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> rather than the Chilean Everton) 
andBarcelona (not the one in Ecuador) all excited.


Talking of Everton, Torino’s victory over Crotone yesterday was apparently 
watched by one of their fine representatives, who had been sent to cast an eye 
over both the midfielder Deniele Baselli and striker – and former rumoured
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> target – Andrea 
Belotti, who scored twice in the last 10 minutes to decide the game, has five 
goals and two assists in his last four league matches, sits joint top of the
capocannonierestandings with a total tally of 10, will turn 23 next month and 
has apparently been valued at £30m.

Potentially heading to Italy shortly, meanwhile, is Jack Wilshere, with the 
Star insisting thatMilan are still keen on brittle Englishman, even though he 
snubbed them back in the summer to spend a season on loan at Bournemouth 
instead. Also retaining an interest in a failed summer target are Leicester, 
who still like the look ofNorwich’s Robbie Brady. Claudio Ranieri’s January 
shopping list doesn’t end there, however, with the Olympiakos and Serbia 
midfielder Luka Milivojevic also making an appearance.


Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/21/premier-league-10-talking-points-crystal-palace-arsenal-west-ham>
Jordon Mutch, whose appearance on the bench for Crystal Palace’s match against 
Manchester City on Saturday is as close as he’s got to a Premier League pitch 
since his eight-minute run-out against Spurs back in August, is apparently on 
his way to Celtic for £2.5m, reports the Daily Record, though they say Brendan 
Rodgers has “a host of midfielders on his radar” andAston Villa are also keen. 
Potentially heading in the other direction isDundee’s 18-year-old midfielder 
James Cowan, who has got scouting hearts a-flutter with Derby, Oxford and West 
Ham providing an unusually diverse array of Sassenach-flavoured interested 
parties.

Less encouragingly for rumourmongers everywhere was Harry Kane’s insistence 
that a recent rumoured transfer-negotiating impasse with Tottenham was not 
actually in any way impasseful. “We’re in talks and I’m sure that we’ll get 
something sorted,” he said over the weekend. “I’m not panicking and I’m not 
demanding anything. I’m happy at the club and want to be here for a long, long 
time. We’ve only just started talking about it.” The Mill would expect a 
negotiation in which one party was “not demanding anything” to have been very 
brief indeed, but this would nevertheless seem to be encouraging news for 
Spurs. On a similar theme,West Ham are ready to hand Reece Oxford a new 
five-year deal to keepManchester City’s greedy mitts off him, and Manchester 
United will hand Michael Carrick a one-year extension to delay his gentle drift 
into retirement.
 