
Say it ain’t so, N’Golo! Today’s edition of Google Translate says that N’Golo 
Kanté will begin the break-up of Leicester’s league-winning team by moving to 
Real Madrid. Kanté will follow other Feeder League stars of the past 15 years – 
Ronaldo, Alonso, Beckham, Gravesen – and serve as a replacement for Claude 
Makélélé, just 13 years after Madrid sold him in an act of egregious hubris. 
But he also has the option of going toParis Saint-Germain, should he so wish.

Real Madrid’s coach, future Bond villain Zinedine Zidane, also wants the 
occasional genius ofEden Hazard. He’ll offer £40m plus human pawn Álvaro Morata
. While they’re getting rid of Belgians,Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will also consider offers in 
excess of sanity forThibaut Courtois.

Newcastle close to signing Dwight Gayle from Crystal Palace for initial £8.5m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/newcastle-dwight-gayle-crystal-palace-close-signing>
According to Mundo Deportivo, new Manchester United manager José Mourinho will 
do anything forNeymar. Even that.

In the new series of Surprise Surprise, Jürgen Klopp will be reunited with 
Dortmund defenderNeven Subotic. Backstage, Sam Allardyce and Mark Hughes will 
grumble about how they wanted Subotic first.

Allardyce is one of 472 men touted for the England job in today’s papers, a 
list that also includes Arsène Wenger, Glenn Hoddle, Jürgen Klinsmann, Laurent 
Blanc, Luiz Felipe Scolari, Steve Bruce, David Beckham, Gareth Keenan, Richie 
Aprile, Jeffrey Lebowski and Jessica Fletcher.

Wenger has reportedly “refused to rule out” a move for Lyon striker Alexandre 
Lacazette, a stance the Arsenal manager determinedly maintained even when being 
tortured via the medium of cattle prod by impatient hacks in need of a scoop to 
partially justify their existence.

Crystal Palace want Christian Benteke. Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> want £30m. As you were.

Napoli want the artist formerly known as Radamel Falcao.

Pep Guardiola is still desirous of John Stones, and will offer Manchester City 
misfit Wilfried Bony as part of a potential deal, but only if Everton sell 
Romelu Lukaku first.

Newcastle’s attempt to return whence they came will be aided by the signings of
Dwight Gayle from Crysal Palace and Matt Ritchie from Bournemouth, though 
Andros Townsend is likely to do one, possibly to Palace.

Some final bits and bobs: Japan striker Takuma Asano says he has been 
approached byArsenal; West Brom would like Atlético Madrid’s Borja Baston, and 
their interest will spark an unlikely friendship between Tony Pulis and Diego 
Simeone that will eventually manifest itself in an offbeat buddy movie directed 
by Shane Black and calledTwo Banks of Four; and Norwich want to make 
Sunderland’s unwanted strikerSteven Fletcher feel wanted.
 