
The Mill lives a frictionless kind of existence. It sees no borders, carries 
no passport and exists mainly on a diet of extra salty jumbo peanuts and small 
lukewarm cans of Heineken that cost £6.50. The Mill is a citizen of the world: 
craggy, well-groomed and surfing the rip-tides of international commerce. A bit 
like Tom Cruise in that film where he flies around killing people and preaching 
at taxi drivers and has perfectly sculpted bouffant grey hair and the best bit 
is when he dies at the end and finally stops talking. Or, at least, a bit like 
Tom Hanks in that other film where he gets stuck in an airport and wanders 
around being a rootless, charming idiot savant with a generic "foreign" accent 
that involves saying things like "HyI hyave hyleanrt hymany hythings hyabyout 
hyAmerica".

So the Mill hates international week. Nobody ever issued a sensational 
want-away come-and-get-me-plea cash-plus-player swap loan deal involving a 
16-agent pay-off clause in international week. International week is the 
anti-rumour. And it's all terribly sad because even the Mill can see that if 
England could just shift out David James, Glen Johnson and Emile Heskey to 
Finland or Slovenia or Honduras, and then successfully unsettle, chisel out and 
swoop for Maicon, Igor Akinfeez and Dider Drogba, then they might have a decent 
team. Chuck in Ryan Giggs on a Bosman and Franck Ríbery in an octuple swap deal 
involving Carlton Cole, Shaun Wright-Phillips and six other of Those Blokes Who 
Sit There Next To Wes Brown Chewing Gum And Then Clapping At The End, and we 
might be in business.

But no, at times like these The Mill has to be content with Louis Saha 
revealing in today's Sun that he "nearly quit with depression" during his 23 
injuries in four years atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, presumably only 
dragged back from the brink by the consolation prize of being paid 
£60,000-a-week to sit around in his white leather mansion with a packet of peas 
on his knee watching ESPN Classic re-runs of the 1994-95 Ashes series all day. 
"I can laugh now but I was a depressive," he laughed now.

Also in the Sun, blue-spectacled Italian Austin Powers type Flavio Briatore is 
likely to be "banished from football" some time today.David James thinks he can 
be really good and really old, like Dino Zoff, rather than just really old. And 
bearded, smock-wearing, 19th-centuryHull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> agricultural worker Caleb Folan
, currently on loan at Middlesbrough, has described Phil Brown as "childish, 
pathetic and laughable". "I just think they are not being managed in the right 
way," Folan muttered, adjusting his tall felt hat.

The Mirror reveals exclusively that George Gillett is selling half of Liverpool
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> to Prince Faisal bin Fahd. 
"The Arab is looking to become a major player and building a new Anfield would 
make the business world look up to him," says the Mirror, a phrase that somehow 
makes the Mill feel slightly queasy while an image of a bearded, overweight man 
in a baseball cap and a Beatles wig punching the air and singing You'll Never 
Walk Alone swims before its eyes.

Also in the Mirror, an actual rumour [pause while the Mill falls ravenously 
upon the corpse ofMaicon's potential move to Manchester United and 
energetically devours its brain like a George Romero zombie extra who feels he 
was insultingly overlooked for a more central role, perhaps as the chief, 
slightly more intelligent zombie, and feels he has a point to prove].

Although, hang on. "Maicon's agent believes Manchester United have upped their 
interest in the Inter Milan defender but insists there are no offers on the 
table." "They have been following him for a while," Maicon's agent insists, 
ducking into a small cafe in a minor European capital city and then cleverly 
managing to lose "them" by hiding behind a tram and doubling back before going 
off to dye his eyebrows black at the sink in a small rented room and staring 
into the mirror soulfully.

Also Sol Campbell is "in talks" with West Brom about an immediate comeback.

And Adrian Mutu could leave Fiorentina in January. "If an interesting offer 
arrives in January, for both the player and the club, we will evaluate it 
together," slavered his agent, wobbling his chins, wiping the drool from his 
cheek, cramming en entire roasted partridge into his jaws and falling sideways 
on to the floor in order to roll around like a milk-sozzled baby pig in an 
accumulated swill of discarded bank notes, ostrich leather foreign currency 
wallets, Parmesan cheese wedges and the keys to a fleet of essentially quite 
silly-looking orange and yellow muscle cars.

In the Times, Manchester United have been given the go-ahead to sign Le Havre 
wingerPaul Pogba, who likes Ben 10, Power Rangers, Dinosaur King and riding his 
bike. In the Mail,Glenn Hoddle has revealed terrorist planned to blow him up at 
the 1998 World Cup. "There had been lots of trouble on the streets the night 
before. I didn't know at the time, but I was told years later that people were 
trying to blow up the England bench," he says, preposterously. The People's 
Front For The Righteous Annihilation Of Ray Clemence were unavailable for 
comment.

And Spurs hatstand Roman Pavlyuchenko could be on his way to Zenit St 
Petersburg. "There are several clubs, in which Roman is interested," said his 
Mr 10%, brandishing a flyer from The Venue in New Cross and discreetly drawing 
attention to the forthcoming George Michael and Wham! "Keep The Faith" Tribute 
night.

Feel free to contribute your own hot'n'juicy rumours below the line
 