
Concerned that the 30-year-old Wayne Rooney is approaching the stage in a 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
player’s life where he must remove his boots and adjourn to a TV Studio to 
drone on and on about how things were much better when he was much better, Old 
Trafford bosses are already looking for a replacement for the man whom you just 
know Roy Hodgson is going to start at the Euros in an England line-up also 
featuring Jack Wilshere and Her Majesty the Queen. Naturally United’s focus has 
zeroed in on 34-year-oldZlatan Ibrahimovic.

OK, so the Swede is older than Rooney but, on the other hand, he has spent 
most of the last four years resting in Ligue 1, nodding the ball into nets 
several times a week while sitting in the Lotus position. The only 
complications that United face are the reports thatArsenal and Chelsea are also 
interested in Zlatan, who is believed to favour a move to London because where 
else could a man from Malmo feel at home than in a heaving megalopolis?

Antonio Conte wants Juan Cuadrado and Radja Nainggolan at Chelsea next season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/antonio-conte-chelsea-juan-cuadrado-radja-nainggolan>
Paris Saint-Germain, meanwhile, have their eyes on the kid reputed to be the 
new Ángel Di María. The French club are keen to sign the 19-year-old Rosario 
winger Giovani Lo Celso so that they can play him in the same team as the old 
Di María. But Chelsea, Internazionale and Borussia Dortmund are also plotting 
to entice the teenager.

Jürgen Klopp has spent the last few months making judgments on Liverpool 
players and knows he has to do lots of clever trading this summer because next 
season he’ll be the one in the dock. Not the Albert Dock, mind, and certainly 
not an actual dock, hopefully, but a metaphorical one in which Liverpool hope 
to be to be presented with conclusive evidence that Klopp is not just a German 
Harry Redknapp. The good news forChristian Benteke is that Klopp is willing to 
put the Belgian on the path to understanding, and since all roads lead to Rome, 
that could help pave a way for Liverpool to sign theRoma midfielder Leandro 
Paredes. Klopp will also return to his homeland to renew his ties with Mario 
Götze, who broke his heart when defecting from Dortmund to Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/may/18/mario-gotze-borussia-dortmund-bayern-munich>
.

Aston Villa want to set up Garry Monk heartbreak by appointing him as the 
manager charged with leading their shower of players back to the Premier 
League. Pep Guardiola’s reconstruction ofManchester City, meanwhile, will 
include an attempt to prise Isco from Real Madrid.

Everton and Stoke City are eager to buy Leeds United’s classy teenager 
midfielderLewis Cook. Massimo Cellino may sell, then again he may not, it all 
depends on how he’s feeling at the time.

Annoyed that Leicester City have deflected attention from his attempt to suck 
all the joy out of football, Tony Pulis is considering a move into competitive 
ploughing. If he really has to stayWest Bromwich Albion, he may entertain 
himself this summer by making a bid for theWerder Bremen midfielder Florian 
Grillitsch. Who’s wanted by Crystal Palace.
 