
Favourites to win the FA Cup final, and now with their Champions League 
qualification in their own hands, WHAT a season this has been forManchester 
United. Having only spent £260m in less than two years, underdog champ Louis 
van Gaal will reportedly see out the final year of his contract and has set his 
sights on another summer of sticking it to The Man. And by sticking it, the 
Mill means spending it. And by The Man, the Mill means money.

Top of the shopping list is Mill fave Renato Sanches, the wonderfully 
dreadlocked 18-year-oldBenfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> 
midfielder who only made his first-team debut in October and who was rather 
less gloriously sent off on Sunday. After literally minutes of negotiation, Ed 
Woodward has withdrawn his feet from under the bargaining table, removed his 
wraparound Oakley sunglasses from his face, smirked, tossed £63m on to said 
table (said to be paid in two €40m payments) and walked out into the glorious 
sunshine we’ve been having recently and fumbling around in his pocket for those 
damn sunglasses.

But Louis and Ed aren’t done there. Rafa Silva, another young buck pulling up 
trees at Braga, has been widely touted for a move to Manchester, not least by 
his own agent, Antonio Araujo. “Our client, Rafa Silva, sees with very good 
eyes the possibility of playing in the Premier League,” hetold Sport Witness 
<http://sportwitness.ning.com/forum/topics/after-liverpool-make-official-approach-agent-tells-us-he-s-workin>
. “We are working towards achieving this objective.”Liverpool are also said to 
be keen on the Portuguese international, before his stock potentially rises at 
Euro 2016.

Liverpool have also realised that they might enter next season without Mamadou 
Sakho and with Dejan Lovren, Joel Matip, Martin Skrtel, Kolo Touré and Tiago 
Ilori in central defence and reckon there is room for one more body in the 
shape of Stuttgart’sAntonio Rudiger, currently on loan at Roma. The German 
would cost £15m, although another Antonio, Conte, has left a trail of tenners 
that lead toChelsea in the hope that the 23-year-old might follow them instead. 

Premier League overlords Leicester City are, perhaps unsurprisingly, also keen 
on importing from Italy, although they, perhaps unsurprisingly, want someone 
that nobody apart from Steve Walsh, James Richardson and Paolo Bandini has ever 
heard of before: Serie B strikerGianluca Lapadula. The Pescara 26-year-old has 
scored 24 goals this season and the club’s president has revealed he has spoken 
to the nicest man in football. “I received a phone call from Claudio Ranieri 
some time ago, before Leicester were crowned Premier League champions,” Daniele 
Sebastiani said. “It was a courtesy call [of course] where we talked about 
football and he confided to me that he is following our striker with interest. 
It was not anything official, but only interest.” The Mill doesn’t see how they 
could, but should Ranieri’s charms fail, Leicester will take an improved punt 
at CSKA Moscow’sAhmed Musa, having had a bid of £17m rejected in January.

No Mill would be complete without Arsenal lining up a bid for an up-and-coming 
star, and Arsène Wenger duly obliges in the form ofRob Holding, who the Sun has 
claimed has “enjoyed a stunning breakthrough campaign” in Bolton’s back four, a 
defence that has conceded just 81 goals on the way to finishing rock-bottom of 
the Championship. £5m should do the trick. 2016-17, watch out!
 