
Tottenham want to pull off a stunning summer swoop for Chelsea's Didier Drogba
, according to the Express, though the Ivorian's £130,000-a-week wages may well 
scare off the White Hart Lane outfit. Just in case they're also interested in a 
veritable busload of alternative attacking targets, with a £14m offer for
Espanyol's former Atalanta, Lecce, Fiorentina and Bologna striker Pablo Osvaldo 
very much on the cards in an effort to trump Atlético Madrid's £11m rival bid, 
and tabs being pretty firmly kept onHertha Berlin's Pierre-Michel Lasogga, 
dubbed the new Lukas Podolski. Harry Redknapp is also monitoring £8m-rated 
Birmingham player of the seasonBen Foster, for whom White Hart Lane holds some 
unhappy memories 
<http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-2080751364193559477%C2%A3>.

Manchester City are to make Craig Bellamy available to anyone willing to pay 
his wages, after stumping up £70,000 of his £90,000-a-week pay packet all 
season for the pleasure of watching the mouthy hitman play for Cardiff City.
Manchester United, meanwhile, are set for a "slightly busier than normal" 
summer, according to their chief executive, David Gill, with the6ft 3in 
18-year-old Lens centre-back Raphaël Varane apparently on the list. He's 
available for £9m. "I am looking at maybe three signings," says Sir Alex 
Ferguson. That's one more thanManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>, whose chairman, Khaldoon 
al-Mubarak, insists: "We don't need quantity, as today we have quality. We just 
need a couple of players."

Brazilian star Neymar hopes that his mooted move to Chelsea can be 
resurrected. "To play in Europe is my dream. I was very proud of Chelsea's 
interest and I hope to keep playing well so that this proposal can happen 
again," he pleaded. "I know about these teams;Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, Manchester – to play for them 
are the dreams of all players. I know about players in England – Drogba, 
Lampard, Gerrard – these are very good players. I have spoken to Ramires and 
David Luiz and they say England is a very good country and London is a 
beautiful place to live."

Pirates of the Caribbean star Johnny Depp has been ordered to throw out his 
vast collection of hats.

Charles N'Zogbia is set to be the subject of a stunning six-way summer tug of 
love as a bevy of top teams battle for his southpaw services. Kenny Dalglish 
would prefer to signStewart Downing to occupy Liverpool's left wing but will 
turn to N'Zogbia if he fails, whileAston Villa will turn to N'Zogbia if he 
succeeds. Also in the running areTottenham, Sunderland, Juventus and Newcastle, 
whose transfer policy according to the Mirror can be summarised as "scouring 
the French league for bargains". Joining N'Zogbia on his way through the DW 
Stadium exit isMohamed Diamé, an £8m target for Sevilla.

The Star has won the competition to see which national newspaper could provide 
the least comprehensive coverage of the Europa League final, despite the 
strenuous efforts of their Fleet Street rivals, with six little sentences 
tucked on to the bottom corner of page 61.

Wayne Rooney's Twitter row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/18/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-twitter>
 with a Liverpool fan, which included him being called "a fat ugly lil nonse" 
[sic], and the England ace offering to "put u asleep within 10 seconds", has 
been branded "a bit of harmless banter" by a Manchester United source.Eidur 
Gudjohnsen's late-career tour of England looks set to continue with a stint at 
QPR, who also want former new-Diego-Maradona Javier Saviola, currently at 
Benfica.Wolves will spend £2.5m on Doncaster's Billy Sharp even if they get 
relegated, whileWest Ham want Cardiff's free-agent England ace Jay Bothroyd.

Arsenal, with their bumper transfer kitty soon to be boosted by Andrey 
Arshavin's exit, probably to Fenerbahce, have reignited their interest in the 
toweringBlackburn defensive dominator Christopher Samba, currently topping a 
want-list that also includesPhil Jagielka, Gary Cahill and Paris St-Germain's 
Mamadou Sakho. Meanwhile Arsène Wenger is to offer Robin van Persie a £20,000 
pay rise if he'll sign a five-year contract that will keep him in north London 
until he's 32. He currently earns 22% less than Craig Bellamy, and that's got 
to hurt.

Liverpool have won the race to sign 15-year-old Alex O'Hanlon, regarded as 
Ireland's most promising teen and also coveted by Real Madrid, Chelsea, Arsenal 
andManchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. 
On their way out of the city arePaul Konchesky, the Leicester-bound full-back 
flop, and Everton'sJoseph Yobo, Yakubu Aiyegbeni and James Vaughan, at least 
one of whom is also likely to join Konchesky and Sven-Göran Eriksson at the 
Foxes.

And finally, today's survey news: One in seven football fans – and fully 28% 
of Manchester United supporters – will not renew their season tickets because 
they're too expensive, according to a new poll. And in an entirely separate 
survey the Magic Roundabout in Hemel Hempstead has been voted the UK's 
favourite traffic island.
 