
In the 2013 book The Numbers Game, two American economists theorise that 
football is a weak-link sport; it is not about the quality of your best player 
but the fallibility of your worst. Buy Gianfranco Zola and he will light up 
Stamford Bridge, sure, but he won’t stop Frank Sinclair slotting home for the 
visitors. The research was put forward to Premier League owners, but co-author 
David Sally later revealed that the strategy didn’t capture the imagination of 
the “Russian oligarchs”.

However in a sign that Chelsea are now coming around, the Blues are willing to 
swap their all-frills wingerEden Hazard for Juventus’s no-frills centre-half 
Leonardo Bonucci, while signing Lazio’s right wingback Felipe Anderson so 
Antonio Conte can go all three-at-the-back on us and finally ditch poor ol’ 
Branislav Ivanovic. Though hasn’t Gary Cahill been looking rather weak-linkish 
recently? The Mill loses track. A stumbling block is Anderson’s long-term 
contract in Rome, but heartwarmingly the 23-year-old Brazilian has switched 
agents to aChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> favourite, 
Kia Joorabchian, raising hopes of a deal.

Steve Bruce confirms Aston Villa talks and says ‘it would be a terrific job’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/steve-bruce-aston-villa-managers-job>
Other Chelsea exits are imminent: Nemanja Matic is certain to be leaving west 
London having been photographed shopping with his agent inMilan, while 
summer-signingMichy Batshuayi has caught Milan manager Vincezo Montella’s eye. 
The Belgian striker will move to the San Siro in a January splurge along with 
Manchester United’s forgotten man,Matteo Darmian. José Mourinho has instead 
seen some confidence he’d like to shatter inEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> full-back Séamus Coleman – 
Manchester United will have to part with £16m to get their hands on him.

Bastian Schweinsteiger is likely to leave Old Trafford for MLS in January 
having kept himself trim and away from José Mourinho in the gym. Meanwhile his 
team-mate Zlatan Ibrahimovic has been playing scout, tellingJuventus and Paris 
St-Germain to snap up Swedish striking sensation Alexander Isak from AIK, 
though the 17-year-old is also beeping radars in Barcelona, Madrid, Munich, and 
Leicester.

Liverpool and Everton are preparing for a tug of war across Stanley Park for 
the Lille midfielderSoualiho Meïté, currently on loan at Belgian side 
Zulte-Waregem. The 22-year-old is thought to be worth around £6m.Tottenham are 
also scouring Ligue 1 and have spotted 20-year-old defenderEmanuel Mammana. The 
Argentina international has a £9m buy-out clause written into his contract at 
Lyon.

Out-of-work Chris Powell is leading the race to take over at out-of-manager 
Derby County, following the affable Nigel Pearson’s falling out with top 
brassthere. Steve Bruce will find out whether he has landed the top job at 
Aston Villa this week.

And former Southampton renegade and guitar strummer Dani Osvaldo could turn 
down a move toNapoli as he prioritises his music career. 

 