
Another day, another round of stories predicting the imminent demise of 
Francesco Guidolin, who signed a two-year contract at  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/swansea-city-francesco-guidolin-signs-new-contract>
Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/swansea-city-francesco-guidolin-signs-new-contract>
just four months ago and has since inspired his team to five league points out 
of a possible 21 – this morning the Sun say he is “rapidly running out of 
time”, the Mirror that he “may be just one game from the sack” and “could be 
facing mission impossible” – while the Independent reports that 
shortlist-topping former wing wizard Ryan Giggs is “open” to the idea of 
replacing him. If a manager is going to find himself one game from the sack, it 
would certainly be most unfortunate if that game is againstManchester City, but 
this is the unenviable position the Italian finds himself in.

Emmanuel Adebayor denies smoking and asking for whisky in Lyon meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/22/emmanuel-adebayor-denies-smoking-whisky-lyon-meeting>
Still, it will at least be a City side without their captain and heartbeat. 
Vincent Kompany’s latest injury might forceManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> back into the transfer 
market, with Juventus’sLeonardo Bonucci – courted unsuccessfully and still 
labouring under a £50m price tag – still their top target.


And talking of clubs already regretting contracts they only just handed out, 
Stokeare experiencing a serious case of buyers’ remorse – or at least loaners’ 
remorse – when it comes to summer signing Wilfried Bony, whose “attitude is 
being questioned” by team-mates who “believe is he is not providing value for 
money”.

Furious, hate-filled José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> once threatened to “break” 
Arsène Wenger’s “face” during a vitriolic rant. He didn’t do this to Wenger’s 
face – broken or otherwise – but instead to a journalist who’s just written a 
book about him, which with hindsight seems a bit unwise. “I will find him one 
day outside a football pitch and I will break his face,” he allegedly raged in 
2013.

The man who preceded Mourinho in the Manchester United dug-out, Louis van Gaal
, is ready to get back on the management bicycle at struggling Bundesliga side 
Werder Bremen, who sacked Viktor Skrypnyk after losing their first four league 
matches of the season.

Ronald Koeman spent last night in Holland, watching a promising 21-year-old 
Barcelona-born goalkeeper playing againstFeyenoord in the KNVB Cup. But Maarten 
Stekelenburg needn’t lose any sleep about this particular scouting trip – the 
keeper in question was Ronald Koeman Jr, gloveman for Dutch second division 
side Oss, whose side lost 4-1.

The dearth of genuine transfer gossip this morning is so extreme that the Mill 
is required to pad itself out with news thatSheffield United are to offer a 
contract to free agent Reece Brown. That’s the 24-year-old former Manchester 
United trainee and brother of Wes, not the unrelated but identically-named 
20-year-old Birmingham City midfielder. If they’re feeling particularly 
generous they may also give one to the 25-year-old former Manchester United 
trainee Cameron Stewart, most recently atIpswich, who is unrelated to the 
Browns but whose middle name is Reece.

Talking of Reeces, West Ham’s Reece Oxford is apparently unsettled – even more 
so since instead of being welcomed into the friends and family area of the 
London Stadium, his mum and another visiting Oxford were given tickets next to 
the away supporters for the EFL Cup match against Accrington Stanley. “The 
experience has led the family to believe they are being singled out because 
Reece has not committed to a new deal at West Ham,” reports the Mail.
 