
After almost a decade at Stamford Bridge Branislav Ivanovic will be used to 
hearing London Calling every time he plays in the capital, but this the week 
the Serbia defender has learned The Clash had more than one song. “Should I 
stay or should I go?”

Ivanovic is determined to stay at Chelsea and fight his way into Antonio 
Conte’s three-man defence having not started since the 3-0 defeat at Arsenal, 
prompting the manager to change his formation. They have won every game since, 
crucially keeping a clean sheet in all four. However,Crystal Palace are said to 
have firm interest in the 32-year-old and come January who is to say his mind 
will not have changed. “If I go there will be trouble. And if I stay it will be 
double,” he maybe did not say.

Not content with sharing a win apiece in the Champions League (though the 
aggregate would be 5-3),Barcelona and Manchester City are fighting it out to 
signYerry Mina, a 22-year-old defender at Palmeiras. He will cost a little 
under £10m and Barça are understood to have first call but on last night’s 
evidence both could do with reinforcements at the back.

David Squires on … José Mourinho's Manchester hotel woes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/nov/01/david-squires-on-jose-mourinhos-manchester-hotel-woes>
José Mourinho, concerned by the injury sustained to Eric Bailly and the 
deficiencies of his other centre-halves, is lining up a €50m bid for the
Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> 
centre-backJosé Giménez. The 21-year-old Uruguayan has not been finding life at 
the Calderón plain sailing, failing to get back into Diego Simeone’s team after 
an injury in September.

Sticking with defenders, reports in Germany suggest Schalke’s Sead Kolasinac 
is being courted by Chelsea, Liverpool and West Brom. That should be a no 
brainer for the 23-year-old left-back: a move to join notoriously wing-back shy 
Tony Pulis at The Hawthorns. Across the channel there are suggestions that
Marseille’s Maxime López is being eyed by Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> and Palace, while Jürgen 
Klopp’s team are also considering a bid for the Ipswich teenagerAndre Dozzell 
in January.
 