
Willian, one of the few Chelsea players who was actually good last season, is 
preparing for a reunion with the coach who coaxed those eye-catching 
performances out of him after news broke in this morning’s Star that he is 
wanted by José Mourinho’sManchester United. The paper exclusively reveal that 
the Portuguese dugout-botherer is “ready to make a move in January” for “the 
£40m-rated ace” – and he might not be the last member of the league leaders’ 
midfield to be plundered by a formerChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> manager, with André Villas-Boas 
desperate to bringMikel John Obi, whose contract ends next summer, to Shanghai 
SIPG.

Manchester City board could sanction buying central defender in January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/manchester-city-board-central-defender-vincent-kompany>
A Manchester City scout has quietly admitted to Danish media that the club are 
interested in theAjax sensation Kasper Dolberg. “We are keeping a very close 
eye on him,” Sebastian Arnesen – son of former Spurs director of football Frank 
– revealed. “He has huge potential. He is very special, so of course he is on 
the radar.” Unfortunately for City Dolberg’s performances have put him on a lot 
of radars, and also earned him a price tag of at least £20m. But if City are to 
sign anyone in the January transfer window it’s more likely to be acentre-back, 
with the Guardian (that’s us) reporting that targetswill be discussed at a 
board meeting in Abu Dhabi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/manchester-city-board-central-defender-vincent-kompany>
 this weekend.

Will Hughes, Derby’s improbably-still-only-21-year-old midfielder star, might 
soon make the move he’s been linked with ever since he burst onto the scene in 
(what feels like) 1972 (but was actually only 2012). The Mirror report that he 
“isunimpressed” with the new contract he has been offered, thereby putting 
“Premier League clubs on alert”. He is apparently valued at £15m.

Southampton’s Jay Rodriguez has emerged as Hull’s undisputed No1 January 
transfer target, despite a failed attempt to sign him on loan in the summer. 
The Hull Daily Mail report that Mike Phelan “wants to test Southampton’s 
resolve with a second bid”, heartened by the player’s lack of impact at St 
Mary’s Stadium this season so far. Phelan has also revealed that one of the key 
reasons why the club failed to sign Rodriguez in August was that Hull were 
doing “all our business in one day”, which forced them to waste time “dipping 
in and out of different hats”.

Talking of transfers that didn’t happen, and indeed won’t likely happen, the 
Galatasaray wingerBruma, for whom Tottenham have apparently been willing to pay 
£1m for every year of his life (that’s 22), wants to stay in Turkey. “I don’t 
think about the future,” he said. “I’m happy because everyone loves me here. 
The fans treat me well, sing my name. They already treat me like one of their 
sons.”

Another day, another story about Juventus buying someone on the front cover of 
Tuttosport. This morning it’s Genoa’sTomás Rincón, who the newspaper suggests 
will become “Juve’s muscles” in January. Staying at Juve, meanwhile, is 
16-year-old sensationMoise Kean, whose brother promises in the Italian press 
that, unlike Paul Pogba – whose agent he shares – “Mino Raiola won’t steal him 
away”.

Managerless German clubs can forget about tempting David Wagner away from 
Huddersfield, it is categorically not happening. “My future is here at 
Huddersfield. The right club for me at this time is Huddersfield Town,” he 
raged. In only vaguely football-related news,Little Mix ace Perrie Edwards has 
apparently been enjoying regular access to Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain’s private 
box. This is not a euphemism.

 