
Force India and Sauber have bitterly attacked the decision by Bernie Ecclestone
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> and Formula One’s main 
shareholders, CVC Capital Partners, to turn their backs on the smaller teams.

Struggling outfits have been told there is no more money on the table as the 
sport appears to move inexorably towards customer cars in 2016 when the major 
names will provide all the cars on the grid.

Before that it seems certain Ferrari and Red Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> will run three cars next year to 
fill the holes left by Marussia and Caterham, who have fallen into 
administration.

Bob Fernley, Force India’s deputy team principal, said at Sunday’s Brazilian 
Grand Prix: “We were given a clear direction there is no money on the table. 
There is a very clear programme coming in. The goal is to move to customer-car 
teams and the three cars will be the interim. That would allow them to keep the 
numbers while the customer cars are brought in.”

The new American team Haas are set to be Ferrari’s first customers next year 
as the sport increasingly comes under the control of the big five: Ferrari, Red 
Bull, Mercedes, McLaren andWilliams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>
.

It is likely to mean the end of teams such as Force India, Lotus and Sauber 
who have had their appeal for a more equitable share of the sport’s £1.6bn 
business turned down. The smaller teams are convinced a decision has been made 
to make F1 slimmer and more profitable before it is floated on the stock 
exchange.

Fernley said: “Again this comes back to short-termism for profit. Simply how 
much money can we generate for the shareholders of CVC. End of story. Sell it 
off and the consequences they don’t care about. They walk away from it, they’ve 
got the money in. It’s someone else’s problem. And the fans ? Irrelevant.”

Monisha Kaltenborn, Sauber’s team principal, said: “Basically it is the end of 
the fascination of F1. They are totally disregarding what the fans want. You 
are just destroying the whole series. It’s short-sighted business thinking. 
It’s going the way DTM [German Touring Car Masters] has gone and the fans are 
not interested in it. You will have five big teams and four losers, and maybe a 
team like ours, FI or Lotus can handle these situations better. One year good, 
one year bad. If that goes on for three years for them, they are out of the 
sport.”

Customers cars have no history in the sport and they would spell the end of 
the days when smaller teams such as Lotus – and even Jordan – were able to 
finish on the podium. From the point of view of those who run the sport it will 
be a lot easier to control. Asked if greed was killing F1, Gérard Lopez, the 
Lotus owner, said: “Gordon Gekko said ‘greed is good’ and look what happened to 
him. He ended up in jail. I’ve never threatened any kind of protest but this is 
a £1.6bn business and teams are going to the wall for the sake of a couple of 
tens of millions.

“Three-car teams will be the death of the championship. People just don’t seem 
to care enough about the sport to do something.”

The sport’s chief executive, Bernie Ecclestone, said: “The way forward is very 
easy – don’t spend as much. We are giving these teams collectively $900m and 
that’s enough.

“They have enough to survive but not in the way they are surviving. Start 
running the business like a business rather than a hobby.” He said there was no 
agreement on teams running a third car.

Before it comes in, the new shape of F1 must be approved by the strategy 
group. “They will get a clear majority there,” Fernley said, “then comes the F1 
commission which would have to be unanimous for 2015, which it would be 
unlikely to be, but it could be a majority decision in 2016.”

A defiant Fernley added: “All this has done is strengthen the resolve of Force 
India, for sure, and Sauber to remain as constructors.”
 