
The robot car wars moved up a gear on Tuesday when Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> announced it would produce a fleet 
of driverless cars for ride-sharing services, such as Uber and Lyft, by 2021.


Mark Fields, Ford’s president and chief executive, said the next decade would 
be “defined by automation of the automobile” and the switch to driverless 
travel would affect society as much as the introduction of the assembly line, 
allowing mass-produced cars, did a century ago.

“We’re dedicated to putting on the road an autonomous vehicle that can improve 
safety and solve social and environmental challenges for millions of people – 
not just those who can afford luxury vehicles,” he said in a speech to workers 
in Silicon Valley.

Ford, which last month warned it was considering closing factories in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/ford-considers-closing-factories-raising-prices-europe-brexit>
 due to concerns about the effects of Brexit, said it would double the size of 
its Silicon Valley testing and research facility to turn Fields’ vision into 
reality.

The company said its new cars would be fully automated – with no steering 
wheels or pedals – rather than producing a partly autonomous model like those 
made by Tesla, Audi and BMW that can self-steer and control speed via sensors 
on highways. In an effort to catch up with Apple and Alphabet (Google’s parent 
company), which have both been working on the development of driverless cars 
for some years, Fordannounced a series of investments in automation and sensor 
technology 
<https://media.ford.com/content/fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/2016/08/16/ford-targets-fully-autonomous-vehicle-for-ride-sharing-in-2021.html>
.

“Ford has been developing and testing autonomous vehicles for more than 10 
years,” Raj Nair, Ford’s chief technical officer, said. “We have a strategic 
advantage because of our ability to combine the software and sensing technology 
with the sophisticated engineering necessary to manufacture high-quality 
vehicles. That is what it takes to make autonomous vehicles a reality for 
millions of people around the world.”

The 113-year-old company said the new cars, which will be designed at its 
research facility in Palo Alto, California, were being “specifically designed 
for commercial mobility services, such as ride-sharing and ride-hailing, and 
will be available in high volumes”. The company did not state if it planned to 
go into partnership with Uber or Lyft, as other carmakers have, but said it was 
exploring all options.

It expects to have 30 test self-driving Fusion Hybrid cars on the road in 
California, Arizona and Michigan this year, and 90 next year.

The company, which opened its Palo Alto research facility just last year, said 
it would double the size of its development team to 260 by the end of 2017.

“Our goal was to become a member of the community,” Ken Washington, Ford’s 
head of research and advanced engineering, said. “Today, we are actively 
working with more than 40 startups, and have developed a strong collaboration 
with many incubators, allowing us to accelerate development of technologies and 
services.”
 