
Freddie Fletcher, the former chief executive of Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited>, has died. The 
71-year-old, who was diagnosed with an asbestos-related cancer in January, 
played a pivotal part in the club's transformation during the early 1990s when 
he had a key role in Kevin Keegan's appointment as manager.

Previously the commercial director at Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, Fletcher helped Sir John Hall 
launch a takeover of Newcastle in 1991. Once Hall had bought the 
administration-threatened club he appointed the fiery Scot – widely known as 
"The Rottweiler" on Tyneside – as chief executive in January 1992.

Working alongside the Hall family, Fletcher lured Keegan to the north-east, 
oversaw the modernisation of the club's commercial activities and helped 
develop St James' Park to its full potential. Along the way Newcastle rose from 
the foot of English football's second tier to within a fraction of winning the 
Premier League title.

Sir John Hall on Tuesday paid tribute to his long-standing friend and 
colleague. "He was instrumental to the success of Newcastle United," said the 
club's former owner. "It's sad to think we have lost a truly great friend. What 
he did behind the scenes was invaluable. My condolences go to his wife Margaret 
and family."

Freddy Shepherd, Newcastle's former chairman, also worked closely with 
Fletcher during the 1990s as the Scot followed up Keegan's recruitment with 
plans to turn St James' into the magnificent 52,000-capacity stadium it is 
today. "Sir John Hall and myself were the money men but Freddie was the real 
driving force behind the Newcastle United revolution in the early 1990s," said 
Shepherd. "He got Kevin Keegan in as manager to really put us on the map; it 
was totally his idea.

"At the time, Kevin was in Marbella playing golf with showbiz people like Sean 
Connery every day, but Freddie persuaded him off his own back to come back into 
football.

"Then he sat me and John Hall down and said: 'Listen, I've lined up Kevin 
Keegan. Ossie [Ardiles] could get us relegated so let's make the change.' We 
all went down to Hampshire to Keegan's house, flew Kevin back to Newcastle and 
did the deal. I'd never thought for one minute we'd get Keegan to come.

"Freddie came from a working-class background near the Greenock shipyards and 
he was determined beyond belief. His nickname at the club was The Rottweiler 
and he loved it. He wouldn't give up on anything. Newcastle's stadium as we 
know it now wouldn't have happened without Freddie."

One of Fletcher's last acts as chief executive before leaving Newcastle to 
pursue other business interests in 2000 was to help appoint Sir Bobby Robson as 
Newcastle's manager in 1999. "We all met Bobby in London," recalled Shepherd.

"Freddie was worried about how much it might cost but Bobby just waved him 
away and said: 'I'm not even going to talk about money. I'm coming. Just give 
me the best deal you can.' Freddie was shocked. He'd not experienced that from 
a manager before."
 