
Another former coach from Crewe Alexandra, described as a “long-standing club 
stalwart” because of his work with their youth-team players, has been suspended 
by the Football Association.

Paul McCann worked for Crewe in the 1980s and 90s and at one stage was the 
assistant coach in charge of the club’s youth team.

Dario Gradi, Crewe’s former manager and currently director of football, has 
already been suspended and the FA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/dario-gradi-suspended-fa-sexual-abuse-scandal>
 has now informed McCann that he is not allowed to work in the sport in any 
capacity until he receives further notification.

McCann was involved at Crewe during Gradi’s time as manager, working with the 
reserve team, the youth setup and sometimes refereeing matches involving the 
younger children.

He left his voluntary role in December 1991 because he was working as a human 
resources director for Shell UK and had been given a new post in the 
Netherlands. McCann spent four years in that role and in two decades at Shell 
he also had a three-year spell in Australia. He has since had similar roles for 
Centrica and ISG and lives near Chester, with another base in London.

McCann said: “I have not done anything wrong. This process is in place to help 
the investigation take its due course. I am collateral damage.” Speaking at his 
home in Great Sutton, Cheshire, earlier he said he had worked for Crewe only as 
a voluntary coach and never received any payment. He is not coaching currently. 
The FA has not confirmed the suspension or the reason for it.

McCann is not thought to have worked for another professional football club in 
England but was involved at Crewe during the years when they were building 
their reputation for having one of the best production lines of young 
footballers in the country. One book chronicling Gradi’s long association with 
the club describes McCann as a “talented coach”, a “long-standing club 
stalwart” and “one of the key men behind reserve and youth-team football at 
Crewe”.

Gradi, 75, has held a number of senior positions at Crewe since 1983 but was 
notified by the FA on 25 November that he was being suspended with immediate 
effect. It is understood that relates to issues involving Crewe rather than, as 
initially reported,allegations that he visited the parents of a Chelsea 
youth-team player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/fa-dario-gradi-chelsea> to 
“smooth over” a complaint of sexual assault against Eddie Heath, the chief 
scout who has been identified as a repeat offender in the 1970s.

Gradi, then in his early 30s, was assistant manager at Chelsea at the time and 
is said to have told the 15-year-old victim’s family that he knew Heath was 
“closer” to boys than he should have been. Chelsea never took any action 
against Heath and the FA’s independent inquiry intends to interview Gradi about 
what the club knew, and his own particular role.

Gradi has not commented on his suspension but he has always said he did not 
know of anything untoward at Crewe and the allegations involving Heath were put 
to him two weeks ago.

“Aside from denying any wrongdoing, it would be inappropriate and unfair on 
all parties to comment piecemeal through the media at this time in connection 
with historic allegations,” he said in a statement at the time. “Suffice to 
say, I will do everything within my power to assist all investigatory 
authorities into what is becoming a wide-ranging and important enquiry into 
historic sexual abuse.”

Another former Crewe coach, Barry Bennell, is due to appear at Chester Crown 
Court next Wednesday to face eight charges of sexual offences against a boy, 
aged under 15, from another club, from 1981 to 1985.

The FA inquiry will be led by the QC Clive Sheldon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/football-association-appoint-clive-sheldon-qc-child-sex-abuse-review>
 and a backup team of investigators to go through what has been described as a 
“tidal wave” of people coming forward since Andy Woodward’s interview in the 
Guardian on 16 November, followed by that of another former Crewe player Steve 
Walters, instigated what the FA’s chairman, Greg Clarke, has described as the 
worst crisis he can remember in the sport.

At the last count, from figures released on 21 December, 155 potential 
suspects had been identified in connection with possible attacks throughout the 
sport on 429 people. Of those, some of the victims were as young as four, and 
148 clubs from professional and amateur level have been named.

The allegations being investigated by police span more than five decades and a 
national sexual abuse investigation called Operation Hydrant is coordinating to 
avoid duplication and ensure that information about potential offenders and 
victims is shared across the 43 forces in England and Wales. Police say they 
have received a 819 referrals, with 605 coming from a hotline set up by the 
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children in tandem with the 
FA.
 