
A former football coach has been charged with a child sex offence.

Jim McCafferty, 71, who was involved in football in Scotland and Ireland from 
the 1980s, was arrested in Belfast by the Police Service of Northern Ireland 
after walking into a police station. McCafferty, who lives in Belfast, was 
formerly a kitman atCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>.

He was charged with sexual activity with a child and is due before a district 
judge in Belfast on Thursday morning.

Det Supt Deirdre Bones, from the PSNI’s public protection branch, said earlier 
on Wednesday: “A 71-year-old male has been arrested by detectives after 
presenting himself at a station in Belfast. He was arrested on suspicion of 
sexual offences against children in Northern Ireland.”

Meanwhile, Partick Thistle have said they sacked a physiotherapist in 1992 
over an abuse allegation. The club said they had been contacted anonymously for 
advice recently about concerns over “historic events”.

A statement from the Glasgow club said: “As part of a proactive response to 
the emergence of alleged abuse in football, Partick Thistle has identified one 
historic allegation of abuse made against a former club employee, who is now 
deceased.

“The employee worked for the club for two years as a physiotherapist. As soon 
as the alleged abuse was raised in 1992, the club dismissed the individual with 
immediate effect.

“As far as Thistle’s current management can ascertain, no other allegations 
were made to the club at that time with regard to him or any other employee. 
The club has contacted the SFA and Police Scotland to advise them of what they 
know to date and will fully comply with any investigation.

“In the meantime, Partick Thistle would urge anyone who may have been affected 
to contact Police Scotland, the SFA, the club or the NSPCC helpline 
(0800 023 2642) set up to support and advise victims of abuse.

“In the last 24 hours, we have been approached by an anonymous individual 
asking for advice on who to contact with concerns relating to historic events. 
No details were given. The club advised he ring the NSPCC hotline in line with 
SFA guidance.

“Thistle regards the safety and wellbeing of the children and young people who 
have contact with the club, at whatever level, as being of paramount 
importance. The club will continue to uphold the strictest standards of 
compliance with all safeguarding legislation.”

In Scotland police have received information about alleged historical offences 
and will investigate. A spokesman said: “Police Scotland has received a report 
of non-recent sexual abuse and will commence inquiries to establish the full 
circumstances surrounding this matter.”
 