
Dundee's horrendous problems could not be said to have been even slightly 
eased by a result that was secured after a serious scare. But the performance 
delivered by Jim Duffy's makeshift side at least temporarily ended the run of 
bad news.

Having gone behind to Derek Lilley's penalty kick, the visitors demonstrated 
admirable moral fibre to salvage a point through Mark Fotheringham's gleeful 
volley near the end of a match that was more engrossing than brilliant.

Faced with insistent, drenching rain and chilly wind buffeting the City 
Stadium, thoseDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> players 
whose services were retained after a week of mass layoffs may have been tempted 
to think redundancy was not such a bad idea.

It was entirely to their credit that they concentrated and persevered at a 
time when their club's appalling financial troubles are enough to dilute the 
commitment of even the most loyal worker.

But footballers are amazingly resilient when the whistle goes for kick-off, 
capable of shrugging off even the most disturbing of off-field events.

Without such luminaries as the paid-off Fabrizio Ravanelli, Giorgi Nemsadze, 
Fabian Caballero, Juan Sara, Craig Burley and Beto Carranza, it was always 
likely that manager Jim Duffy's much-changed side would depend more on 
diligence than artistry. But, with Nacho Novo in attack and Fotheringham, Barry 
Smith and Garry Brady in midfield, there was no shortage of willingness to try 
to play a controlled and thoughtful game.

For example, Novo's intelligent pass to his front-line partner, Steve Lovell, 
in the first minute could not have been bettered by Nemsadze himself. As Lovell 
ran into space on the right side of the area, he pulled the drive marginally 
wide of the far post.

However, Livingston's record of only one defeat in their previous nine outings 
was not without good reason. Often compact and fluent in their movement, the 
home side were, for much of the time, less obviously cavalier than their 
visitors, though no less dangerous.

Indeed, they should have ensured the first half did not remain scoreless when 
Burton O'Brien released Lee Makel into the right side of the penalty area. With 
only Julian Speroni to beat, the midfielder battered the ball wildly into the 
side netting.

Defender Oscar Rubio may have been slightly less culpable earlier, but, having 
received Marvin Andrews' downward header off a free-kick from the left, the 
Spaniard should have done much better than volley the ball over the crossbar 
from just six yards away.

Despite Dundee's territorial gains in the first half, during which they forced 
Roddy McKenzie to save from Novo and Brady - both quite easily done - the small 
band of followers who made the trip from Tayside would reflect anxiously on the 
unavoidable impression thatLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> had contrived the better 
opportunities.

That menace transferred itself to Dundee early in the second half, but they 
regretted their failure to exploit two golden opportunities when the home side 
took the lead later with Lilley's penalty kick.

Brady seemed momentarily taken by surprise when Smith's cut-back from the 
right passed a number of bodies and rolled out towards him, allowing Rubio to 
close in. Even so, the Dundee midfielder was there first and should have done 
better than side-foot the ball wide of an unprotected net from the edge of the 
box.

It was Brady's impeccably judged chip from the inside-right position that 
allowed the free-running Lovell to lean forward to make the header, but once 
again the ball was directed wide of McKenzie's right post.

Lilley showed a merciless streak in converting the penalty that was inevitable 
when Wilkie went for the feet of the jinking Makel. The striker drove the ball 
powerfully, high to the left of Speroni, with utter conviction.

Having seen his team rather undeservedly fall behind, Duffy withdrew a fading 
Tom Hutchinson - absent a long time with injury, his stamina seemed to have run 
out - and replaced him with Bobby Linn, who joined the attack in a 4-3-3 
formation designed to save the day.

Linn was vital to the rescue. His fierce drive blocked around the six-yard 
line, Fotheringham rushed forward to strike the volley high into the net with 
his left foot.

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 