
The first signs of unusual activity appeared on the M6. “Major event – evening 
of September 5th,” flashed the motorway warning, a couple of miles from the 
Ricoh Arena. It says a lot for Coventry City’s recent travails that a Friday 
night home match againstGillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> in the third tier was 
described as such but this 1-0 victory on a return to the stadium for the first 
time since April 2013 was a night to celebrate for supporters after a year in 
the wilderness.

It finished with a victory and with the Coventry manager, Steven Pressley, 
hailing the success of a fanbase that, in the end, forced the club back to the 
city following a season-long exodus in Northampton. What should have been an 
ordinary League One fixture was instead a Sky Blue carnival, a rare evening to 
savour for supporters who have endured too much misery of late.

A packed Ricoh can surely not have been louder at any time since Coventry’s 
ill-fated move from Highfield Road in 2005. City’s players had been used to 
playing “home” matches in front of a few thousand 35 miles away but here they 
were roared on by the vast majority of a 27,306 crowd. It sounded like double 
that when Frank Nouble opened the scoring early on and the ebullient atmosphere 
continued long into the evening.

That moment felt like vindication for the thousands of fans who stayed away 
from Sixfields when Sisu, the hedge-fund owners, moved the club out of Coventry 
following a protracted and bitter dispute with Arena Coventry Limited, the 
Ricoh owners. In July a High Court judge found that from April 2012 Sisu 
refused to pay the rent it legally owed to the stadium owners “quite 
deliberately to distress ACL’s financial position” so they could buy a share in 
the arena for a cut price. However, the two parties recently agreed a temporary 
two-year deal to return the team to the Ricoh on matchdays.

Shaun Harvey, the Football League chief executive, wrote extensively in the 
programme about the saga, insisting “the idea of local fans watching their 
local club in a local stadium is absolutely fundamental to the Football 
League”. His words will have been of little comfort to Coventry supporters, the 
majority of whom have expressed anger at the League’s stance, but for one night 
all the politics of this depressing tale were put to one side.

All the warring, all the sitting on a hill outside Sixfields, all the 
bickering of executives and lawyers in suits was forgotten just for a moment, 
with one stroke of Nouble’s boot, as the striker sent the ball into the bottom 
corner to roars befitting a proud and famous club dragged through the mire.

“What’s been evident over the last 14 months is that every person in the city 
has been affected by us not playing here,” said Pressley. “It was an emotional 
return and we showed the true potential of this club. I was exceptionally proud 
to be manager of this football club tonight.

“We would never have moved it [the club] on if we didn’t move back to the 
city. They [the supporters] voted with their feet and forced the club back 
where they belonged. At times the game has lost touch with supporters, from 
ticket pricing to decisions made on the strategy of the club. Our supporters 
have shown that football is ultimately about the people. The club can’t survive 
without the supporters. I hope it’s not a false dawn.”

The kick-off was delayed by 15 minutes due to the sheer numbers of fans 
flooding into the ground. Thin Lizzy’s “The Boys are Back in Town” blared out 
before the two teams emerged to a deafening roar and it diminished only during 
a brief period of opposition pressure in the second half.

Peter Taylor, the Gillingham manager, said: “If the atmosphere is the same for 
the next home game, teams could melt.”

John and Linda McQuillan were two of many fans that produced a banner for the 
occasion. “Without the fans this would not have been possible,” they said 
beforehand. “It’s fantastic, power to the people. We’re going to party all 
night.”
 