
Bayern Munich powered back to the summit of the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> with a 4-1 win at 
home toWerder Bremen. Franck Ribéry and Arjen Robben both scored twice as 
Bayern, who had lost three of their last five league matches before today, 
returned to form with a convincing victory over Bremen, who lost Aaron Hunt to 
an 80th-minute red card. Ribéry opened the scoring in the 22nd minute, with 
Markus Rosenberg equalising in the 52nd minute. Robben pushed Bayern back ahead 
with a penalty in the 69th minute and Ribéry struck for a second time in the 
77th to make it 3-1. Robben converted a second time from the spot in the 83rd 
minute.

Erstwhile leaders Borussia Dortmund were held to a 1-1 draw by fellow 
high-fliersBorussia Monchengladbach as both sides slipped behind Bayern at the 
summit. Robert Lewandowski put Dortmund in front in the 40th minute but Mike 
Hanke levelled in the 72nd minute.

Freiburg recovered from an own goal to secure a 1-1 draw against Hannover 
thanks to a second-half strike by Papiss Demba Cisse.Hannover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover> grabbed the lead in the 44th 
minute when Felix Bastians put through his own net, but Cisse spared their 
blushes with his equaliser in the 67th minute.

Kaiserslautern were also thankful for an own goal as they held on for a 1-1 
draw at home toHertha Berlin. The Hertha defender Roman Hubnik gave Lautern the 
lead with an own goal after just five minutes before Raffael equalised in the 
14th minute.

Mainz stormed back from a two-goal deficit in the final 20 minutes to earn a 
2-2 draw at struggling 10-manWolfsburg. Mario Mandzukic and Alexander Madlung 
gave Wolfsburg a 2-0 lead with goals in the 10th and 41st minutes, but Andreas 
Ivanschitz converted a penalty in the 70th minute to pull a goal back and give 
his side a chance. And Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting made sure they took it, 
equalising on 81 minutes. Any chanceWolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> had of regaining their lead 
ended five minutes from time when Makoto Hasebe was given a second yellow card.
 