
Freddie Fletcher, who has died aged 71 of asbestos-related cancer, once told 
an interviewer that the fictional character he most admired was Roy of the 
Rovers, and that he would have liked to score the winning goal forNewcastle 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> in an FA Cup at 
Wembley. His contribution to the success of the club, however, came off the 
field, and although Newcastle did not win any trophies while the Scot was chief 
executive, it was not for the want of effort, as he played a significant role 
in transforming the fortunes of the club in the 1990s.

He had already helped lift Glasgow Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> out of a long period of 
underachievement into a position of dominance in Scottish football when he was 
persuaded to become involved in Sir John Hall's takeover of Newcastle, who were 
then on the brink both of administration and relegation to the third tier of 
the league.

In eight years he increased their turnover tenfold but, more importantly, 
helped spark a footballing renaissance at St James' Park with the appointment 
as manager of the club's former forward Kevin Keegan. The Magpies challenged 
for the Premier League title and played in Europe thanks to an exciting, 
attacking team of star players financed by Fletcher's work.

"Three things make a successful football club," Fletcher said later. "A 
history of tradition in football, a population catchment area, and how well or 
how badly it's run. If you've got the first two, you've got a wee chance – you 
can't change them, but you can change the third."

Fletcher was born in Greenock, attending Greenock high school and studying 
business at Strathclyde University. He joined the John Lawrence group of 
companies, eventually rising to marketing director, but also pursued a 
political career, serving as a Liberal councillor in Greenock and holding the 
post of provost from 1977 to 1980. His other passion was football, and he 
became a director of GreenockMorton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/morton> FC in 1978.

When the Lawrence group acquired control of Rangers in 1985, he became the 
club's commercial director. Rangers had slipped behind not only Celtic but also 
Aberdeen and Dundee United in the Scottish hierarchy, with gates down to 
17,000, but Fletcher helped lay the financial foundations for a run of nine 
successive titles between 1989 and 1997. He also became treasurer of the 
Scottish Football League and a member of the International League Board.

In 1991, Fletcher was asked by Rangers' sponsors, Scottish & Newcastle, to 
consult on the situation at Newcastle, whom they also sponsored. "It was 
similar to Rangers, an enormous club underachieving," he said. "Newcastle were 
deep in financial debt with attendances of 11,000." However, there was a 
potential saviour in Hall, who offered Fletcher the job of chief executive if 
he could complete a takeover.

Fletcher moved to Tyneside in February 1992 and set about restructuring the 
club. Arguably his most important decision was to persuade Keegan out of 
retirement to replace Osvaldo Ardiles as manager. Under Keegan, Newcastle 
narrowly avoided relegation from the old second division in the 1991-92 season 
and set their sights on the newly formed Premier League.

The team flourished, finishing as runners-up in the Premier League and 
qualifying for the Champions League thanks to new signings whose purchase was 
made possible by Fletcher's efforts. He led the flotation of the club in May 
1997, and in 1999 became chairman of the resulting PLC. According to Freddy 
Shepherd, the club chairman, he revelled in his nickname there of the 
Rottweiler, and the growth that he was overseeing did not please everyone.

In 2000 an attempt to move 4,000 season-ticket holders to make way for 
corporate areas during the expansion of the stadium capacity from 29,000 to 
52,000 was settled only in the court of appeal, a battle that left bitter 
memories. "No person is bigger than the club," Fletcher said. "It doesn't 
matter who they are."

He left St James' Park in July 2000 to pursue other business ventures and 
interests that included construction, film, security, sports law, and social 
care charities, leaving Newcastle United unrecognisable from the club he had 
joined. It had reached two FA Cup finals, regularly filled its 52,000-capacity 
stadium and boasted a talented squad including Alan Shearer, the England 
centre-forward. It was now managed by Bobby Robson, whom Fletcher had brought 
back to his native north-east.

He retained close links with the club and was a member of the launch committee 
of the Sir Bobby Robson Foundation in 2008, the year before the death of the 
beloved former England manager from cancer. Fletcher's own cancer was diagnosed 
at the start of this year.

He is survived by his wife, Margaret, two sons and a daughter.

• Freddie (Alfred) Fletcher, football executive, born 20 March 1941; died 27 
August 2012
 