
Having spoken openly and honestly for 20 minutes, Freddy Eastwood steps away 
from his chair and strides over to the pool table at the back of the canteen at 
Southend's training ground. On a freezing morning in Essex he is ready to play 
and the shame for those in attendance is that they cannot witness him take on 
the opponent he defeated there last week,Phil Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/phil-brown>, the club's new manager.

"He likes to have a game of pool but I'm too good for him," Eastwood says with 
a smile. "To be honest, we've only played once. But I won." It is easy to 
imagine Brown and Eastwood, two less than shy characters, slugging it out over 
the green baize but for both of them now is a time to focus on Southend's 
meeting withCrewe Alexandra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crewealexandra> in Sunday's Johnstone's 
Paint Trophy final, the first time the League Two club will have participated 
in a showpiece occasion at the national stadium.

For Brown the trip to Wembley arrives in a whirlwind, given he has been 
Southend's manager for only 12 days and two games since replacing Paul 
Sturrock, but for Eastwood it represents another chapter in his glorious 
association with the club. His first spell with the Shrimpers, between 2004 and 
2007, lasted 135 games in which he scored 65 goals – the first of them after 
7.7 seconds of his debut and another knocking Manchester United out of the 
Carling Cup – and inspired the club in back-to-back promotions to the 
Championship. Little wonder then that, having returned toSouthend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> last July, Eastwood is in 
expectant mood.

"All the time I've been at Southend I've been involved with something good, so 
it's not a shock I've achieved something with Southend this season," he says. 
"Saying that, it'll be really nice to play at Wembley. I've never played there 
and as a local lad it's a stadium I've always dreamed of getting to."

Eastwood is bullish about Southend's chances of defeating Crewe who, despite 
sitting 22 places above them – Southend are 10th in League Two, six points away 
from the play-offs – are described as "no great shakes". The 29-year-old shows 
less conviction, however, when assessing his own chances of making Sunday's 
line-up, acknowledging this has been a "stop-and-start season", one that began 
with him having to overcome a calf injury before he then struggled to impress 
Sturrock, who despite bringing Eastwood back to Roots Hall following a loan 
spell during the last campaign lacked faith in the player. Eastwood made only 
six starts and scored four goals under him this season and so it is no surprise 
he was not upset to see the Scot depart and turn down the chance to lead 
Southend out at Wembley.

"I got on with Paul but I was disappointed with how few chances I got to 
play," Eastwood says. "He had 12 people who played every week – 11 starters and 
one sub – and he would only use the other lads if he had to. He had his 
favourites and I wasn't one of them. The new manager's come in and we've played 
one game away when I've come on a sub and then I've started the next game at 
home, so things are more positive."

Sturrock is not the only manager Eastwood has had issues with. He also fell 
out with Andy Thorn who, as Coventry manager, let him rejoin Southend, having 
accused him of being a "passenger" during the club's relegation to League One 
last season. Eastwood's response to that claim is equally scathing. "Coventry 
was Andy's first job as a manager and he made poor decisions. I hardly played 
for him so even though I have a relegation on my CV it didn't have anything to 
do with me. It was down to the manager."

Before his four-year spell at Coventry Eastwood endured a frustrating season 
with Wolves and overall there is a sense that a player who seemed set for great 
things never achieved his potential. The former West Ham trainee can turn to 11 
caps and four goals for Wales as proof that he reached the highest level and 
there is no denying that returning to Southend has also allowed Eastwood to 
enjoy his football again at the club where he "had the best part of my career".

It is the goal against United in November 2006 for which Eastwood is best 
known,a rasping 25-yard free-kick that knocked a team containing Wayne Rooney 
and Cristiano Ronaldo out of a competition in which they were holders 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jFysv6je59M>.

That 1-0 win remains a glorious memory for Eastwood but it "sparked off" 
interest in his Romany Gypsy roots. Suddenly everyone knew he lived on a 
Travellers' site in Basildon with his wife, Debbie, and children Freddy Jr and 
Chardonnay, and regularly exercised his horse on the A127. Abuse from 
opposition fans followed and, seven years on, has not ceased.

"I've learnt to deal with it," Eastwood says. "The way I see it, if people are 
shouting abuse at me, it must mean I'm doing something right on the pitch. When 
they don't shout my name it's because I'm having a bad game. I try not to let 
it faze me and the boys here help by giving me banter about being a Traveller. 
That's made it a more friendly issue."

Eastwood remains the only known Romany Gypsy playing professional football in 
this country and, back living among the Travellers' community in Essex, he has 
become an inspirational figure for younger members of a group rich in culture 
but lacking sporting heroes. "Whenever I go to travelling events everyone there 
knows me as the footballer," he says. "Traveller kids have always wanted to be 
boxers or golfers but after I broke through they realised they could play 
football too and now there are loads in academies across the country. There are 
some really good ones at Chelsea and Tottenham and my own boy plays for this 
club, as a striker."

So Southend could have another goalscoring hero called Freddy Eastwood? 
"Hopefully," Eastwood Sr replies as a smile returns to his face. "That would be 
nice." That is for the future, however. For now, Eastwood's eyes are fixed on 
Wembley.
 