
The French, it seems, know a thing or two. This week, six months ahead of the 
game, theHeineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> final 
was sold out. Now I'm sure there are some British and Irish who have snapped up 
some of the 54,000 tickets so far made available, but you sense that it is the 
French who have been the big buyers.

Rugby is big business in France as more money men get behind the clubs, but 
the selling out of Stade de France can be put down to French optimism that they 
will have at least one side, possibly more, through to the final on 22 May. By 
Sunday night we'll know better whether they might be right and whether a fallow 
period in French rugby is over. Since the all-French final of 2005 onlyToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> and Biarritz have made it 
through to the final, and both lost to Munster.

We like to think of the French as bad travellers and the stats tend to back up 
such thinking, but this weekend we'll see whether such assumptions remain true. 
Of the four big games, the French are on the road for three, and Leicester 
travel to Clermont.

Stade Français <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stadefrancais> at Ulster and 
Toulouse at Cardiff currently top their pools with nine points and play 
tomorrow, but it's Perpignan, the French champions, who kick things off at 
Thomond Park tonight against Munster and they could set the tone for the 
weekend.

We all know about Perpignan at home – that they've only ever lost twice and 
that was to Leicester and Wasps when they went on to win the cup – but their 
away form has been a mixed bag. Before this season they had lost 20 of their 33 
away matches and they wobbled horribly, going down 9-8 to Treviso in October, 
so Thomond Park against the double champions is a huge ask. In previous seasons 
you'd probably say "no chance" but France are starting to pickPerpignan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/perpignan> players, so their players are 
learning how to play big games on big stages. Much will depend on whether the 
Catalans can keep their discipline.

On to tomorrow and Stade at Ravenhill; pretty in pink at another of those 
grounds where you always reckon that the home side has a six-point start. With 
the rain and chill coming in off the loch some big sides have been blown away 
at Ravenhill – Leicester 33-0, Toulouse 30-3 – but Stade beat Ulster home and 
away last season and their showboating owner Max Guazzini would like nothing 
more than to pick up a first European title in his home city and at a stadium 
which has become his team's second home.

Stade have come away empty-handed from two finals. For Toulouse, Paris in May 
would be a fifth final and they have won three, but before they can think of 
that they have to get past the Blues – the side who bumped them out of the cup 
9‑6 in the quarter-final last season. Then Cardiff had a fantastic defence, 
whereas I'm not so sure about their form this season.

They may again be leaving the best for Europe, but only three wins from eight 
in the Magners League and five wins in 13 competitive matches is not the form 
to take into a game against a side of such pedigree. That said, Toulouse have 
had hiccups in the league as well, losing to struggling Brive on Sunday, but 
the swagger and ambition seem to have returned as has a rejuvenated Frédéric 
Michalak after his year in South Africa.

However, after watching a few clips of the Top 14 on television you have to 
wonder which Michalak will turn up – the one that drives defences to 
distraction or the one who is a bigger pain for his own coach, Guy Noves.

Finally, Clermont Auvergne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/clermontauvergne>
 against Leicester and another of those difficult stadiums. At the Stade Marcel 
Michelin not only are you up against a side of quality, but the fans – and they 
can be pretty noisy – are right on top of the game.

I know Clermont are targeting this match and guys such as Lewis Moody, who 
have played three Tests and a couple of hard league games, go into the game 
having played plenty of rugby this autumn. Having taken sides to Clermont and 
having seen the Tigers up close recently, I'd say a bonus point would be a good 
result.

It's horrid being on the sidelines looking in on the Heineken, but there are 
some fascinating matches taking place elsewhere in the Challenge Cup this 
weekend. For a start there is Saracens at Castres tonight – top of the English 
league versus top of the French – while we have Bayonne at Wasps tomorrow as 
the real French form horses Racing Métro, including François Steyn, Sébastien 
Chabal and Lionel Nallet, entertain Roma. It's hard to know where to look.
 