
World’s Best Restaurants
8pm, Good Food

Contrasting views on local produce in this instalment of the food porn show. 
At Ithaa, a restaurant in the Maldives, the mission is to bring top-class 
dining to an underwater location. Local lobster makes the cut, but everything 
else is flown in for the benefit of customers who must dine barefoot, but 
otherwise be well-heeled. In contrast, we visit L’Enclume, where Simon Rogan’s 
hyperlocal mission means that any ingredient from outside Cumbria need not 
apply.John Robinson

Love, Nina
9.30pm, BBC1

New Nick Hornby adaptation of Nina Stibbe’s book, set in a posh London 
crescent in the early 80s. Faye Marsay is Nina, a dungaree-clad girl from 
Leicester who takes a job as a nanny for George (Helena Bonham Carter) and her 
two verbose little boys. Nothing much happens, but gentle humour and sweet 
moments follow as Nina and the family settle into life together, singing 
football songs, worrying about nuclear war and discussing crabs around the 
dinner table.Hannah Verdier

Mum
10pm, BBC2

It’s February, and Cathy’s first Valentine’s Day since the death of her 
husband. Not wanting her to be alone, her brother Derek arrives, much to the 
chagrin of his partner, the spiteful tact-vacuum Pauline, who obviously had 
something a bit more spiffy in mind and makes sure everyone knows it. Lovelorn 
Michael also pitches up for the same reason, and finds Cathy in possession of a 
mystery Valentine’s card. It’s subtly brilliant work from writer Stefan 
Golaszewski.Ben Arnold

EMI: The Inside Story
10pm, BBC4

For the Sex Pistols, they were “stupid fools”; for many other artists, 
including Radiohead, who enjoyed a considerably longer relationship with them 
before marching off, they were simply incompetent number-crunchers, venture 
capitalists without a clue how to run a music business. How did this 
once-revered label, home to everyone from the Beatles and Pink Floyd to Queen, 
lose its way so badly? The likes of Neil Tennant, Nick Mason and Roger Taylor 
tell all.Ali Catterall

Bob’s Burgers
10pm, Comedy Central

The fifth season of Fox’s underrated animated comedy about a family-run 
fast-food joint finally makes it across the Atlantic, almost two years after 
its original airing in the States. In the first of a double bill, there’s 
sibling rivalry when Gene and Tina star in rival musicals. Then it’s time for 
an altogether spookier outing as Tina embarks on a relationship with Jeff, a 
ghost living in the family’s basement. Brilliantly deadpan fun.Hannah J Davies

No Such Thing As the News
11.05pm, BBC2

This new series is based on the popular podcast No Such Thing As a Fish, in 
which the researchers ofQI <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/qi> 
unearth and kick around their most interesting obscure facts of the week. This 
spinoff applies the treatment to current events: it takes a look at the week’s 
affairs, but in search of interesting gems, rather than taking the usual panel 
show satirical broadsides. With James Harkin, Andrew Hunter Murray, Anna 
Ptaszynski and Dan Schreiber.David Stubbs

Live sport

Test cricket: England v Sri Lanka The second day of the first Test match from 
Headingley. Can England build on their promising winter? 10.30am, Sky Sports 2

League One football: Millwall v Bradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> City The second leg of the 
playoff tie, with a place at Wembley – and a spot in the Championship – up for 
grabs. 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1

Film choices

Trainwreck (Judd Apatow, 2015) 3.45pm, 8pm, Sky Movies Premiere

Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> bursts on to the 
screen in her star/screenwriter debut as a boozy, sexually relaxed journo 
called Amy. Life is a carefree frolic until she develops feelings for sports 
doctor Aaron (Bill Hader). Sounds like a standard romcom, but Schumer’s writing 
and acting are subtler than that. Lots of laughs, too, and Tilda Swinton offers 
standout support as Amy’s bossy British editor.Paul Howlett

He’s Just Not That Into You (Ken Kwapis, 2009) 9pm, E4

An impressive coterie of top actors take a firm grip on this thoughtful film 
about love and sex. There’s control-freak Jennifer Connelly, seductress 
Scarlett Johansson, cyber-dating Drew Barrymore and Jennifer Aniston, who is 
painfully realising that lover Ben Affleck isn’t going to marry her. All are 
upstaged, though, by Ginnifer Goodwin’s Gigi, who can’t understand why she’s 
never asked on a second date.PH
 