
One of the most tantalising lost works of literature is an epic poem by Homer 
calledMargites, which, unlike the Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/30/odyssey-soldier-afghanistan-military-homer>
 andIliad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/30/iliad-war-charlotte-higgins>, 
has not survived and is known from a reference by Aristotle. So a cultural 
commentator seeking a neat historical contrast might be tempted to observe 
that, while Homer'sMargites has vanished from culture, Marge's Homer never will 
owing to the vast existing digital archive of episodes ofThe Simpsons.

However, a fascinating and provocative new American play – Mr Burns by Anne 
Washburn, which has just received its UK premiere at the Almeida theatre in 
London <http://www.almeida.co.uk/event/mrburns> – imagines a world in which 
Homer Simpson has, like his Greek first-namesake, been partly wiped out.

The opening act plays out on an almost dark stage, illuminated only by 
spasmodic flashlight and the flames of a campfire, around which huddle the 
survivors of a near-futuristic American catastrophe caused by the meltdown of 
nuclear power stations. This homeland Chernobyl has destroyed all electronic 
entertainment present and past, with the result that groups of survivors 
compete to recreate, through oral story-telling, favoured episodes of network 
TV shows such asThe Simpsons. 

Seven years on, in the second act, these broadcasting restorationists have 
organised into a primitive industry. Rival troupes of travelling players, with 
names such as The Prime-time Players, The Reruns and Richard's Couch, tour the 
scorched states, performing by candlelight reconstituted adventures of Homer 
and Marge and their children – though one group resurrects insteadThe West Wing
, with its now novel concept of national government – and buying extra lines of 
remembered dialogue from locals.

But, in one of Washburn's smartest touches, these mocked-up comedies are just 
a show within a show, framed by recreated scenes of the domestic life destroyed 
by the apocalypse – including coming home from work, baths, food and wine – and 
reenactments of old TV ads for domestic necessities that now seem as unlikely 
as unicorns. As one character comments of these pastiche commercials: "It's 
that fine line between tantalisation and torture."

A further 75 years have passed before the final section, which consists 
entirely of a performance of "Mister Burns", a one-act opera (composed by 
Orlando Gough and Michael Henry) in which Bart Simpson has become a 
Perseus-like hero, seeking to save his country from the evil central character, 
in a narrative that resembles a Chinese-whispered version of the Simpsons 
episode "Cape Feare" (Season 5, Episode 2, 1993), mixed up with snatches of
Gilbert and Sullivan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/gilbert-and-sullivan> 
operettas and early 21st-century pop songs, including Britney Spears' "Toxic."

As often happens to brilliantly original and provocative plays, Mr Burns has 
met critical hostility and mystification, although the main objection of 
detractors oddly serves to make what Washburn has written seem even more timely 
and apposite.

Tim Walker, in the Sunday Telegraph, accused the play of pointless obscurity 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/10897824/Mr-Burns-Almeida-Theatre-review-three-hours-of-utter-hell.html>
: "Theatre is always an opportunity to connect with an audience and never 
before have I seen the opportunity so wilfully squandered. Experimentation is 
one thing, but this is a play that can only possibly put people off theatre."
The London Evening Standard's Henry Hitchings also issued a warning to 
potential ticket-buyers 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/theatre/mr-burns-almeida--theatre-review-9534501.html>
: "If you're a fan ofThe Simpsons with an appetite for risk-taking theatre, its 
strangeness will be irresistible. Others are likely to find it impenetrable and 
pretentious." Though kinder, awarding three stars out of five,Michael 
Billington of the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/13/mr-burns-review>, concluded: "It 
feels like a cult show; one that will primarily appeal toSimpsons addicts."

What fascinates me about these reactions is that Washburn stands accused of 
writing a play with a narrow frame of reference, although the American cartoon 
she invokes has been seen by hundreds of millions of viewers, rather than the 
average thousands who attend a new play at a small theatre. Drawing on some of 
the most popular images and stories of our time, the dramatist is paradoxically 
charged with a sort of elitism by reviewers who either don't recognise or don't 
respect her references. So, inadvertently, the reviews are raising the question 
thatMr Burns itself asks: what constitutes a common culture?

Judging which allusions are universal (or at least broadly recognisable) is a 
recurrent dilemma for all sections of the entertainment business. The concern 
that an audience "won't get it" is the most usual justification for cutting TV 
and radio scripts, fictional and journalistic alike. Such comments can reflect 
an assumption that the consumers are less educated than the producers, but it 
is also becoming harder to assess what people know. Tom Stoppard has said that 
classical and literary allusions that seemed easily recognisable when his plays
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead and Jumpers were premiered in the 60s and 
70s often mystified theatre-goers at revivals decades later because of a shift 
in the definition of what it meant to be well educated.

The increased patchiness and shallowness of the collective cultural memory is 
one reason that Tudor history has become so popular, through the best-selling 
novels of CJ Sansom, Philippa Gregory and Hilary Mantel and the current 
blockbuster stage productions based onMantel's Wolf Hall and Bring up the Bodies
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/18/wolf-hall-bring-up-the-bodies-review-mantel-aldwych-theatre>
. Since Christianity ceased to be mainstream in Britain, the story of Henry 
VIII's uxoricides is one of the few narratives that a cross-section of society 
and generations could be expected to recognise. And Mike Poulton's theatrical 
adaptations of the Mantels also make canny use of one of the country's few 
other general points of reference – the comedy of geographical stereotype – 
with references to "Yorkshire" and "Stoke Newington" winning big and knowing 
laughs.

The critical reception for Mr Burns illustrates the increasing discrepancies 
in general knowledge. A teenager unfamiliar with theatre would findMr Burns 
easily comprehensible; but, to a theatre critic who doesn't watch much TV, it 
seems impenetrable. However, atTurgenev's Fathers and Sons at the Donmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/11/fathers-and-sons-brian-friel-donmar-warehouse-review>
, another recent London opening, reviewers would be more at home than most 
couch potatoes. But, at these two performances, which section of which audience 
can be regarded as dumb or cultish?
 Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
In this piece, I am tempted to say that the most suitable word of praise for 
Mr Burns is "excellent". If you know The Simpsons, you will know why; if you 
don't, you won't. But the fact that there is a third subset of readers who may 
have learned the catchword of Homer Simpson's boss through seepage from 
children or grandchildren is a further validation of Washburn's theme and 
thesis.

Mr Burns subtly dramatises the process of cultural transmission in a mass 
media era. In Washburn's post-apocalyptic world, the works of Joseph Conrad, 
William Shakespeare and Tennessee Williams apparently survive only in episodes 
ofThe Simpsons punningly titled "Bart of Darkness" , "Much Apu about Nothing" 
and "A Streetcar Named Marge."

So, although the playwright says in a programme note that the choice of The 
Simpsons as the show-within-the-play was "a lightly made decision" and she 
might easily have gone forFriends instead, her play gains an extra layer 
of meaning from the fact that Matt Groening's cartoon series is itself a 
complex web of references to art of the past.

As its title acknowledges, the "Cape Feare" episode is mainly influenced by 
cinema, although the thrillerCape Fear exists in both a 1962 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0055824/> version directed by J Lee Thompson and a 
1991 Martin Scorsese <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0101540/> remake; a 
distinction discussed by the play's characters. But, as well as the quotations 
from those films, the script also samples Gilbert and Sullivan'sThe Mikado and 
HMS Pinafore. Some critics seem not to have appreciated that the Savoy operetta 
references inMr Burns came via The Simpsons, rather than being a random 
artistic garnish on Washburn's stew, which again demonstrates how the reception 
of a show can be affected by what audiences know.

During the performance I saw at the Almeida, for example, there were two 
varieties of laughter: a communal guffaw at jokes that arise from the context 
of the play and a smaller giggle of recognition at theSimpsons references or 
Madonna or Chris Isaak lyrics. The reaction when a portrait of President 
Clinton is revealed on a wall of the set seemed to split between liberal 
theatregoers rippling with pleasure at the politician's image and those 
clocking yet another allusion to the "Cape Feare" Simpsons episode, in which 
a Clinton picture figures.

It is also possible to know things unknowingly. One of the cleverest moments 
is when a newly arriving survivor is able to fill in missing elements of the 
"Cape Feare" dialogue and the trio of three little maids fromThe Mikado, even 
though he admits he has never seen a whole episode ofThe Simpsons. One line had 
been drilled into his mind by a girlfriend annoyingly obsessed with the series, 
and he assimilated Gilbert and Sullivan through membership of a light operatic 
society.

That conversation shows a sophisticated understanding of how the diffusion of 
themes and ideas works. I remember an Irish writer at a literary festival once 
quoting the comment of a Dublin taxi driver on a Taoiseach of the time – "to be 
sure, he has a picture in the attic" – as evidence that even a hired driver in 
the city had read Oscar Wilde'sA Portrait of Dorian Gray. But, while Ireland 
would be a candidate for the nation with the most-literate population, it was 
equally possible that the cabbie had picked up the image of the artistic deal 
with the devil from everyday discourse, into which Wilde's story had long ago 
passed.
 The Simpsons. Photograph: Allstar/Fox/Sportsphoto Ltd 
And, while Washburn's detractors seem to have assumed that the author is 
endorsing a culture in which Bart is more significant than the Bard, she seems 
to me to be more neutrally presenting the way in which cultural history accrues 
through allusion, osmosis and confusion. The production (directorRobert Icke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/robert-icke>, designer Tom Scutt) includes a 
tremendous visual gag in which, in the climatic musical performance, the spiky 
hairdo of Lisa Simpson has become blurred in the visual memory with the barbed 
helmet of the Statue of Liberty.

In that respect, the play is subject to a final irony. In the published text 
of Mr Burns (Oberon Books) <http://oberonbooks.com/political-themes/mr-burns>, 
there are two places where stage directions – "Microbeat of Maria doubt" and 
"She might be near tears at this point" – have accidentally been printed as 
dialogue. This raises the possibility that, in future productions of the text 
without the author present, an actor may, in a version of the transcription 
errors with which Shakespeare's plays are thought to be littered, speak these 
puzzling lines, perhaps delivering them as knowing Brechtian asides to the 
audience. As a result,Mr Burns itself could suffer the sort of cultural 
mistransmission that is its subject.

And, according to Aristotle, the protagonist of the lost poem by the author of 
theIliad and the Odyssey was "an uncommonly dumb man". As, indeed, is the hero 
of a popular TV comedy 28 centuries later. So Homer'sMargites and Marge's Homer 
have more in common than we thought, but, if Washburn's pessimism about 
electricity is correct, may one day both be known only through 
flickering reminiscence.

• Mr Burns is at the Almeida theatre <http://almeida.co.uk>, London N1, until 
26 July. Box office: 020-7359 4404.
 