
The Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
resumes this week with four of the eight Last 16-ties taking place on Tuesday 
and Wednesday. How have the teams fared during the competition's winter break, 
who have they signed and what's the injury situation? Find out here …

Lyon v Apoel

Tuesday, 7.45pm

Odds (William Hill) Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> 4-9. Draw 
3-1. Apoel 11-4.

Prediction Lyon to win 3-1 on aggregate

Lyon are no longer the dominant force of a few years ago and needed a 7-1 win 
over Dinamo Zagreb to overhaul Ajax in the last Group D game to qualify for the 
last 16. Now they meet the tournament's surprise package, Cypriot side Apoel, 
who were winners of Group G and have an eclectic group of players. There are 
Cypriots, Greeks, Brazilians, Portuguese, Macedonians, Bosnians, Argentinians, 
Tunisians, Portuguese and Spanish players at coach Ivan Jovanovic's disposal.

They have a Kaká – though he is sadly not of the same calibre as the Real 
Madrid player – and they have an Aílton – though thankfullynot the overweight 
former Schalke player 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A%C3%ADlton_Gon%C3%A7alves_da_Silva>. The latter, 
who has just returned from a hernia problem, is the key up front for the 
Cypriots, having scored three goals already this Champions League campaign, and 
leads the line in a 4-2-3-1 formation. Apoel have, however, scored the fewest 
goals of all teams left in the competition and have had trouble creating 
chances domestically in 2012 as well. In addition, Jovanovic has problems in 
defence, with Marcelo Oliveira and Paulo Jorge struggling with injuries so the 
former Chelsea midfielder Nuno Morais has been playing at centre-back recently.

Not that Lyon have had an easy time either. Rémi Garde took over from the 
strict Claude Puel in the summer and was told he had no money to spend. The 
formerArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> player has been 
forced to introduce several youngsters this season and, although they are still 
in four competitions, they lost at home to lowly Caen at the weekend. Players 
such as Alexandre Lacazette, Clément Grenier, and Samuel Umtiti have emerged 
while Garde has run out of patience with the underperforming Yoann Gourcuff. 
The Croatia centre-back Dejan Lovren is still struggling with injury, but his 
defensive colleague Cris could return.

Bayer Leverkusen v Barcelona

Tuesday, 7.45pm

Odds Leverkusen 7-1. Draw 3-1. Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 4-9

Prediction Barcelona to win 4-1 on aggregate

"I have enjoyed preparing for this game. I have watched a lot of good 
football," joked theBayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> coach, Robin Dutt, at 
the press conference on Monday. He wasn't joking, however, when he said that he 
thinks Barça are a better team than Spain and that he believes his team will 
have 30 or 35% possession on Tuesday night. Injuries have not helped. Sidney 
Sam, Michael Ballack, René Adler, Eren Derdiyok and Tranquillo Barnetta are all 
out, although Renato Augusto returned at the weekend and Michal Kadlec is back 
after missing the defeat against Borussia Dortmund through suspension.

Dutt could try a 4-2-3-1 formation with Augusto the central of the three 
attacking midfielders, the wonderfully talented André Schürrle on the left and 
Castro on the right. Vedran Corluka, on loan from Spurs, could start in defence.

Barcelona had their 18-match unbeaten run ended on Saturday, losing 3-2 to 
Osasuna. However, it was only a second defeat in 47 games for Barça and Xavi, 
Andrés Iniesta and Cesc Fábregas should return after being rested or on the 
bench at Osasuna. Sergio Busquets has returned to training following a knee 
injury and Gerard Piqué should also be able to play after reportedly escaping 
unhurt from a car crash on Monday.

Zenit St Petersburg v Benfica

Wednesday, 5pm

Odds Zenit 8-5. Draw 21-10. Benfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> 9-5

Prediction Benfica to win 3-2 on aggregate

A tricky tie for Zenit who have not played a competitive game since November 
because of the Russian winter break. They have been in training since 12 
January, however, and spent a week and a half at the Italian national team base 
in Florence at the end of January and the beginning of February.

Their Italian coach, Luciano Spalletti, has had Domenico Criscito ruled out 
with food poisoning, the Portuguese international midfielder Danny sidelined 
with torn knee ligaments while Roman Shirokov (calf) and Aleksandr Bukharov 
(hamstring) both missed training the last week. Any good news? The defender 
Tomas Hubocan and the goalkeeper Vyacheslav Malafeev have recovered from knocks.

Benfica will aim to become the first side to have beaten Zenit at Stadion 
Petrovskiy in 20 games and have added Yannick Djaló, the experienced Joan 
Capdevila and André Almeida to their Champions League squad over the winter. 
Benfica, who eliminated Manchester United at the group stage, are unbeaten in 
the Portuguese league this season and have scored in all their 34 competitive 
games this season. The midfielder Javi García is the coach Jesus Jorge's only 
injury problem.

Milan v Arsenal

Wednesday, 7.45pm

Odds Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> 11-10. Draw 21-10. 
Arsenal 11-4

Prediction Arsenal to win 2-1 on aggregate

Arsenal will fancy their chances against a Milan side who are running out of 
steam amid all the injuries. Antonio Cassano, who had heart surgery in 
November, and Gennaro Gattuso, who has been diagnosed with a disorder 
associated with the nerve that controls eye movement, will not play again this 
season. Further injury worries include Mario Yepes, Alberto Aquilani (no 
surprise there), Kevin-Prince Boateng, Alexandre Pato, Alexander Merkel, 
Alessandro Nesta as well as the goalkeeper Christian Abbiati.

Abbiati, Boateng, Nesta and Pato could still feature against the Gunners. 
Zlatan Ibrahimovic, who often struggles in the knockout stages of the Champions 
League but who scored twice against Arsenal for Barcelona two seasons ago, is 
available despite serving a domestic ban for slapping a Napoli player. He is 
likely to play up front with the former Manchester City striker Robinho with 
Boateng, if fit, in a free role behind them.

Stephan El Shaarawy, the talented 19-year-old of Italian-Egyptian descent, is 
likely to be on the bench, as is Maxi López, the striker they signed from 
Catania when the Carlos Tevez deal broke down. He scored one and set up one as 
Milan beat Udinese on Saturday. Thiago Silva has been superb in central defence 
and his contest with Robin van Persie should be fascinating.

Arsenal have no new injury worries apart from Per Mertesacker, who injured his 
ankle ligaments against Sunderland. Gervinho is not expected to play despite 
the Africa Cup of Nations finishing on Sunday. He should, however, be in the 
squad to face Sunderland in the FA Cup on Saturday.

Follow Marcus on Twitter for all the latest news ahead of Euro 2012. 
<https://twitter.com/#!/m_christenson>
 