
While torrential rain lashed the Interlagos district of Sao Paulo after the 
Brazilian grand prix, Sir FrankWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> and his technical director Patrick 
Head huddled in the pit-lane garage, grinning at each other like schoolboys.

They knew that Juan Pablo Montoya's performance in Sunday's third round of the 
world championship had made an important point, suggesting that the head of the 
formula one field could soon be changing.

There is nothing surprising about the fact that Montoya is quick. His 
performances on the European F3000 and US Champcar scene had left that beyond 
question.

What was so startling about his Brazilian performance was the way he 
despatched Michael Schumacher to the grass, not merely overtaking him but 
making it clear that the triple world champion's reputation counted for nothing.

His impressive spell in the lead before an unfortunate early exit was 
confirmation that Williams had been right to take Montoya on after his two-year 
exile driving Champcars in North America.

"There were people who thought we were taking quite a risk bringing Juan 
over," said one Williams insider. "But we knew just how good he was from his 
testing programme with us three years ago. His performance came as no surprise."

The Colombian driver's dramatic emergence as a front-runner may come to be 
seen as a seminal moment in contem porary formula one history. Just as Ayrton 
Senna signalled his genius with a brilliant run to second place in the 1984 
Monaco grand prix at the wheel of an uncompetitive Toleman and Alain Prost had 
McLaren scrabbling to find a draft contract after barely half a dozen laps of 
formula one testing in 1979, so Sunday's race will be talked about in years to 
come as the moment a new star announced himself.

In many ways Montoya is like Senna. He has a cheerful insouciance which masks 
his iron will and determination. He appears to be relaxed and easy going but 
that is just a cover for his burning competitive spirit.

The combination of Montoya and the very competitive Williams-BMW - its other 
driver Ralf Schumacher qualified on the front row in Brazil - suddenly means 
that there is a third force in formula one.

No longer can the 2001 world championship battle be regarded as a private 
affair between Ferrari and McLaren-Mercedes. With 14 races left, Williams could 
yet challenge for their first title since 1997.

The BMW competitions director Gerhard Berger was also extremely impressed with 
Montoya's performance, which was accentuated by the fact that he had sufficient 
fuel aboard for a single pit stop. Schumacher, running with a lighter Ferrari 
on a two-stop strategy, could still do nothing about him.

"Young drivers like to leave their calling card," said Berger. "And Montoya 
certainly did that at Interlagos" - in Michael Schumacher's pocket.
 