
Five feet two, brilliantly talented with a passion for drink and mayhem that 
would ultimately lead to tragedy, Hughie Gallacher established the blueprint of 
the diminutive, wayward Gaelic football genius. Born in Lanarkshire in 1903, as 
a teenager he incensed his Ulster Orangeman father by supporting Celtic and 
marrying a Catholic. Swerving dribbles, incisive passes, thunderous shooting 
and utter fearlessness soon established Gallacher as a formidable force in the 
Scottish game (he hit 22 goals for the national team in only 19 appearances), 
but it was whenNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> signed him from Airdrie 
for £5,500 in 1925 that Wee Hughie fully emerged in all his considerable glory. 
Worshipped by the Toon fans Gallacher swaggered around Tyneside dressed like a 
Hollywood gangster in broad-brimmed hat, double-breasted suits and spats.

His football prowess was extraordinary (he captained the club to their last 
league title, hitting 143 goals in less than 200 matches), his drinking - often 
in the pub before the match - legendary, his temper volcanic. During his time 
at Newcastle he was arrested for fighting with his brother-in-law, kicked a 
referee into the St James' Park bath and was accused of being drunk and 
disorderly on the field of play during a pre-season game in Hungary (Gallacher 
claimed that he had simply "rinsed his mouth out with whisky" to rid it of the 
taste of foreign food).

Eventually Newcastle tired of the fuss and bother and Gallacher was sold to 
Chelsea for £10,000. In London the Scot carried on much as before, scoring 
twice in his first match, getting arrested for fighting with Fulham fans, 
enraging the board of directors by threatening strike action over wages and 
being pulled drunk from the gutter the night before a match withDerby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty>. By now Gallacher's life had 
started to unravel. Debts created by high living and a messy divorce from his 
second wife ended in bankruptcy. When he left Chelsea for Derby his signing-on 
fee was paid straight to the court. After that it was a slow descent through 
the divisions - Notts County, Grimsby Town, Gateshead. When his career in 
football finished Wee Hughie settled on Tyneside, working as a labourer and 
writing articles for the local press. He was struggling with alcoholism. His 
third wife, Hannah, had died of a heart attack and after a fight at his home in 
1957, his son, Matthew, was taken into care. Alone and in despair Hughie 
Gallacher walked down to the railway track in Gateshead and threw himself in 
front of a train. He was 54.
 