
It’s one of the most common gardening tips going: apply spent coffee grounds 
around your garden for amazing results. A quick internet search for “coffee 
grounds + plants” will draw up close to four million hits, with consistent 
claims they can add essential minerals to the soil, boost populations of 
friendly soil bacteria and even reduce the pH of growing media for acid-loving 
plants like rhododendrons. In fact, on a trip to an achingly eco organic coffee 
shop in San Francisco last year I saw big barrels of used coffee grounds with 
scoops and brown bags, free to customers to collect, under a sign detailing 
their many horticultural virtues. What a great idea!

Always keen to try out a quirky horticultural tip, and being a bit of a 
caffeine fiend, I decided to put the theory to the test this summer on two 
identical vegetable beds containing a mix of tomatoes, lettuce, herbs and 
flowers. Now, this was hardly a rigorous scientific trial, just a 
rough-and-ready experiment to satisfy passing curiosity. I’d just dump my daily 
coffee grounds on the surface as a mulch once they had cooled (the way books 
and blogs suggest), creating a beautiful dark inch-thick layer of coffee 
compost by the end of the summer.

The growth of pretty much everything in the coffee bed became noticeably worse 
in about two weeks.

And the results? Well, here’s the deal. The crop yield and growth of pretty 
much everything in the coffee bed became noticeably worse within about two 
weeks of application. Plant growth slowed, some developed leaf yellowing, 
others defoliated and died. Seedling germination in some cases was almost 
completely inhibited. While some species looked OK, none of the plants in the 
coffee group proved better than my basic control. But it’s just adding organic 
matter. What went wrong?

So I had a look at the scientific literature, and frankly I kicked myself. 
Coffee <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/coffee> grounds are of course 
a rich source of caffeine – in fact they can be richer than coffee itself, 
depending on brewing technique. One of the key functions of caffeine in the 
plants that produce it is allelopathy – the ability to reduce competition from 
surrounding species by suppressing their growth. Caffeine is packed into coffee 
seeds for the very function of suppressing the germination of other seeds.

There is a stack of studies to suggest it also stalls root growth in young 
plants, preventing their uptake of water and nutrients. Yet others have shown 
it has antibacterial effects (so much for boosting soil bacteria). And guess 
what? It isn’t even always very acidic. OK, its effects have varied widely 
depending on plant species, but it’s never shown colossal benefits that could 
outweigh the risks. I love a quirky piece of hort advice, and some are repeated 
so often you assume they are true, but often they call them old wives’ tales 
for a reason.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 