
As we water and weed our flower borders, we are often unwittingly tending all 
sorts of tasty treats that live secret double lives in other parts of the world 
as major crops. Lying hidden in plain sight, at this time of year my very 
favourite of all these edible ornamentals is the Japanese quince,Chaenomeles 
japonica. Despite its giveaway name and wild popularity as an autumnal delicacy 
in eastern Asia, it is virtually unknown as an ingredient in the UK.

To me, a greedy botanist, this is a huge shame for a number of reasons. First, 
it’s an extremely common shrub, with stunning spring blossom in dusky pink, 
vivid orange and even the purest white – like something out of a manga film. 
This means tens of thousands of fruit are produced in gardens up and down the 
country each year, all of which are essentially destined for the compost heap.

Quince will grow in areas where many other fruit won’t work as well

Second, it will grow in areas where many other fruit won’t work as well, like 
a low hedge or wall shrub, in poorer soils and cold, exposed sites, where a 
single plant can produce surprisingly generous yields. The shrubs are compact 
and will take heavy pruning too, so can fit easily into even smaller gardens.

Third, the beautiful golden fruit are essentially unavailable outside fancy 
Japanese supermarkets in central London where they are known as karin (flower 
pear), and turned into jams, jellies and liqueurs and candies sold at 
eye-watering prices.

Culinarily, the fruit is essentially interchangeable with a traditional 
quince, just a tad smaller, and can be used in all the same recipes – softening 
from rock hard and acid to sweet, fragrant deliciousness with a little sugary 
simmering. They are extremely rich in pectin too, containing far more than 
apples and ordinary quinces, giving jams and jellies a delicious unctuous set.

This high pectin content means they have long been a traditional Asian remedy 
for coughs and sore throats, helping soothe hoarseness and inflammation. Walk 
into any Japanese pharmacy and a range ofChaenomeles cough sweets will line the 
shelves, their equivalent to our honey and lemon.

The Japanese quince is also grown in the Baltic nations, introduced by Soviet 
scientists as a homegrown source of vitamin C, containing more gram for gram 
than many citrus – hence its old-school moniker, the Baltic lemon. And finally, 
as gardens get smaller and smaller, I simply don’t think we have the luxury to 
keep ornamentals and edibles separate – and why should we be forced to pick 
between the two?

Multitasking plants like Japanese quince taste as good as they look and in 
terms of effort, well, you probably have one already sitting in your garden – 
you just need to venture out and pick what it has to offer.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>

 