
I might as well come clean now. Sweeping up autumn leaves is one of the few 
things about gardening that I really don’t enjoy. The slipping on soggy 
foliage, the long monotony, those blinking sacks that never stay open, it feels 
too much like outdoor housework to me. Especially as it inevitably ends in a 
gust of wind blowing away every neat pile just before you get them to the 
compost heap. However, there is a silver lining to falling leaves.

Not only do they turn into the world’s best soil improver when composted down, 
but during this process they also make the perfect growing media for fancy 
oyster mushrooms. In fact, seeding these super easy-to-grow fungi through your 
compost heap can actually speed up the whole process, giving you faster 
results, plus some tasty homegrown harvests, too.

For people like me, with small gardens, this speedier turnaround can be really 
handy as with only a tiny area dedicated to composting there can be a tendency 
to generate waste faster than a small heap can break it down. Just as well then 
that if you fancy trying your hand at starting your own little mushroom colony, 
now is as good a time as any.

Oyster mushroom spores can be bought online for a couple of quid

Spores for oyster mushrooms are widely sold – both online for as little as a 
couple of quid, and in the seed section of larger garden centres all over the 
country. You’ll find there are several types of oyster mushrooms on sale in 
shades of yellow, pink and grey. For outdoor growing the traditional grey one 
is reputedly the hardiest, followed by the yellow.

The pretty pink ones hail from warmer climates, preferring temperatures closer 
to 20C, however the beauty of growing them on compost heaps instead of log 
piles or in sacks of sawdust is that the heat naturally generated by the 
microbes breaking it down means that even when bitterly cold outside the 
interior of larger heaps can be significantly warmer – in fact literally 
steaming. So experimenting with the pink strain might be worth a gamble 
considering their relatively modest price.

Pick a mild spell when no imminent hard frost is forecast and make a few small 
wells in the surface of your compost heap, about 15cm deep. Sprinkle the spawn 
or tip a few dowels into each well and cover over with freshly gathered fallen 
leaves. Water the whole thing well. Activated by the warmth and moisture of the 
heap your nascent colony should soon start devouring the leaves and twigs, 
spreading their white root-like mycelia throughout the pile.

They can start fruiting within as little as three months if sown right now. 
And provided you keep the heap regularly topped up with leaf litter and watered 
in the dry spells, once established they can carry on for years at a time.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 