
I am going to just come out and admit it, I love poinsettias. I love 
everything about them. I know they are virtually impossible to grow. I know 
they are currently in the doldrums of horticultural fashion – “a crime against 
good taste”, most of my gardening colleagues tell me. Yet to me the childhood 
memories I associate with their scarlet, holly-shaped bracts get me every time: 
an instant flashback to my uncle Joe’s barbeque turkey and unwrapping presents 
beneath a plastic tree when I was a kid in tropical Singapore.

However, as a seasonal winter houseplant in the rather more chilly UK, there 
are many often overlooked options that just might offer newbies a more 
practical, maybe even rewarding, alternative. In fact, any of the traditional 
Christmas favourites, from cyclamen and azaleas to hippeastrums andChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> cacti will be easier to 
grow.

This is because poinsettia is a subtropical plant from the wilds of Mexico and 
very sensitive to cold draughts – such as those in chilly rooms or the icy 
outdoor florist stands and market stalls from which they are often sold – which 
can cause their leaves to blacken.

Poinsettia is a subtropical plant and hates chilly rooms, florist stands and 
market stalls

They also hate the dramatic fluctuations in temperature when you bring them in 
from the cold. They aren’t even particular fans of hot, dry rooms either, as 
created by modern central heating, which may make them lose their leaves.

If you can avoid all of these factors, you are doing better than me! This leaf 
shedding might be problematic, too, as their foliage (although not highly toxic 
as is often claimed) does contain chemical irritants. Perhaps something to 
avoid if you have kids and pets running around, or maybe keep them off the 
dining table.

If you are after an easier seasonal houseplant to brighten up your home, pick 
a citrus or a jasmine. Both will handle chilly temperatures and (paradoxically) 
warm rooms far better. They are also non-irritant. If you are a good-taste 
snob, their glossy, dark green leaves and delicate white flowers are failsafe 
and will work in any decor.

Pick a calamondin orange and your little tree will come studded with tiny 
mandarin-like fruit, too. Unlike poinsettias, both can live for decades (not 
mere days) if treated well. Just remember to plant the jasmine outdoors come 
spring. But for me what really sets both these species apart from all others is 
the fresh, uplifting scent of their blossom.

They are traditionally believed to have relaxant properties, and there is even 
a growing body of scientific evidence to suggest that the constituents of these 
flowers can indeed help calm feelings of anxiety and improve mood. Something 
that might just come in handy when the relatives arrive.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 