
Who isn’t nostalgic about the 1980s – the era of mullets, electro pop, family 
sitcoms and, of course, acid rain? I used to sit up late to watch theNine 
O’Clock News, showing the ecological devastation that sulphuric acid raining 
down from the sky had on forests and waterways across the world. Yet the 
decline over the past 30 years in the emissions of toxic sulphur dioxide in air 
pollution that once caused this phenomenon has had an enduring impact on 
British soils, with far-reaching effects on agriculture and even our gardens — 
and not always a positive one.

Sulphur is a key plant nutrient vital to healthy growth, but UK soils are 
naturally deficient in this essential mineral. Back in the 1980s this was of 
little concern to growers as these levels were continually topped up by 
“atmospheric deposition”, ie acid rain.

Fast forward to 2016 and this is increasingly worthy of attention. One small 
survey conducted over 2014 and 2015, for example, found that only 13% of the 
crops sampled showed sulphur levels in the “normal” range, with the rest 
registering as low or slightly low. This is a concern as inadequate sulphur 
levels have been shown to slash farm yields of some (but admittedly not all) 
crops by as much as 50%. Surprising as it may seem, even acid rain clouds can 
have a silver lining.

As many plants also use sulphur pulled up from the soil to generate defence 
compounds to help ward off pests and diseases, this deficiency can also result 
in weak, vulnerable crops that require higher pesticide applications. These 
defence compounds also happen to be the exact same chemicals that give 
vegetables, like onions, garlic, broccoli and sprouts, their characteristic 
flavour and associated health benefits. Heard about the antioxidants in 
broccoli and garlic? It’s the sulphur chemicals, derived from the soil, that 
are doing the work.

If you soil is sulphur-deficient, try Epsom salts

While this effect is likely to be greater in agricultural soils, where crops 
are constantly taking sulphur from the soil only to be harvested and removed 
from the site, this can be an issue even in garden soils. Take lawns for 
example: years of continual mowing and disposal of the grass clippings 
essentially mimics that of agriculture – acting like a pump on a conveyor belt 
to suck up the sulphur.

If you suspect your soil is sulphur-deficient, there is a simple solution that 
offers all of the benefits without the damaging acidity: Epsom salts. This 
naturally occurring mineral combines both sulphur and another essential plant 
nutrient, magnesium, in a double whammy and can be bought for minimal cost at 
any garden centre. Simply sprinkle over the ground according to package 
directions for higher yields of tastier and more nutritious crops.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 