
My official title is "national collection holder", but I am thinking about 
getting a badge made, saying: "Rosalind Rosewarne – iris nerd." I am the 
conservation charity Plant Heritage 
<http://www.nccpg.com/National-Collections.aspx>'s custodian of almost every 
single variety of the rare but beautiful group of plants known as miniature 
tall bearded irises.

How did I earn such a title? Returning to my home town after many years away, 
a business idea flourished: a rare plant nursery to bring in curious 
plantspeople and potential customers. Plant Heritage has 630 national 
collections – "living libraries" that protect and preserve all kinds of plants, 
fromalchemilla <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alchemilla> to yucca 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yucca>. I set about deciding what I could collect 
and, eventually, bearded irises won out over peonies.

I was recovering from a debilitating stroke, so I had time on my hands and set 
out to uncover the process of gaining collection status. What makes a group of 
plants eligible is simple: three specimens of 75% of the varieties of the plant 
group as listed in the currentRHS Plant Finder 
<http://apps.rhs.org.uk/rhsplantfinder/> in the ground for two to three years. 
(Tree and shrub collections get away with one specimen.)

The collection can be a full genus (these larger collections are usually held 
by public gardens and the Royal Horticultural Society) or parts of a genus, 
which tend to come in more manageable sizes and are often held by individuals 
in their back gardens or, like me, on an allotment. The miniature tall bearded 
(MTB) iris category had only 36 varieties, which meant I had to grow 27 of 
them: I had taken possession of a weed-infested plot that could be hewed, 
sprayed and rotovated into something suitable for a collection this size.

The nursery idea fell by the wayside, but I continued to collect. Something 
sparked inside me at the first flowerings of my spoils. MTBs are jewel-like, 
delicately scented, long‑flowering blooms, daintier than their giant cousins, 
the tall bearded irises, and perfect for cutting. Best of all, they are rare as 
hens' teeth. I was hooked.

On my first plant hunt, I learned how elusive some varieties were going to be, 
and how often the requisite three plants were not available in one place. 
I sleuthed, tracked down, begged and picked brains, bought whatever I could lay 
my hands on and scoured plant racks at any nursery I visited. My day job is 
garden designer, so this was quite a few.

Luckily, MTB grow fast: the plants are uprooted and divided every three or 
four years to keep them flowering profusely. TheKent iris group 
<http://www.kentiris.org.uk/>, where the main British breeder Olga Wells is 
based, made several unexpected varieties available, and seed from theBritish 
Iris Society <http://www.britishirissociety.org.uk/> arrived. I hit another 
snag in my second year, with the advent of the updated RHS Plant Finder. Plants 
come and go, and my collection went from 80% of the listing to less than 20% 
overnight. I had the same number of plants in the ground, but they were no 
longer relevant because nurseries had delisted them. How could I have been so 
stupid? As a result, there are now 64 varieties in the ground at my allotment, 
and a "spare" collection 20 miles away, as a safeguard. I am not allowed to 
pursue commercial activities from the allotment, so I keep 200-odd plants in 
pots in my garden and barter them for services, at a rate of three plants for 
every half hour of weeding.

After Plant Heritage accepted the paperwork, the plants and I were visited by 
a regional coordinator, who checked I'd jumped through the required hoops: 
plant labels, three plants per variety, variety location plans, source list, 
acquisition date, acquisition numbering and knowledge of the genus. I am 
expected to know about iris diseases and optimum growing conditions, as well as 
collecting and maintaining.

So is the weeding, paperwork and hard graft of being a national collection 
holder worth it? I'd wholeheartedly say yes. I have met some incredibly 
knowledgable people and wonderfully supportive breeders and growers. "What 
next?" people ask. I glance at the miniature dwarf bearded irises that have 
crept on to the plot – I'd need only another 18 to get a second collection. And 
I've definitely earned my "iris nerd" badge.

• Rosalind Rosewarne's national collection can be viewed by appointment. To 
find out more, go tonccpg.com <http://nccpg.com>
 