
It was a victory that in many ways embodies the early days of the England 
reign of the man who has accidentally landed in the hot seat. Well meaning but 
hesitant. Full of good intentions but, as yet, far from wholly convincing. A 
curate’s egg that contained flashes of promise but plenty of familiar failings 
and nagging questions. Enough of the former to likely landGareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> a contract through to 
Euro 2020 but still too many of the latter to inspire much confidence.

As England’s players, eight of whom also started on that fateful night in Nice 
when Iceland struck the latest and among the most crushing of blows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 to the nation’s footballing psyche, gingerly and hesitantly continued their 
rehabilitation in the World Cup qualifieragainst Scotland at Wembley on Friday 
night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
, Southgate also sought to find his feet as an international manager. Both 
tottered like a baby giraffe at times but ultimately found some slivers of 
optimism. There are always slivers.

FA plucks Gareth Southgate for England job from a bare cupboard | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/12/fa-gareth-southgate-england-manager-candidates>
Yet if this clash with the Auld Enemy, for which the pre-match hype and 
nostalgia felt oddly half-hearted given the denuded status of both teams and 
the overshadowing effect of world events, eventually ended with the England 
fans chanting: “Olé!” at each pass, there was plenty for Southgate to ponder if 
they and he are not to follow the same old pattern. It underlined what we 
already knew. That under Southgate – likeFabio Capello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fabio-capello> and Roy Hodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson> before him and more so than 
ever in an era when qualifying groups are gamed in favour of the bigger nations 
– England are set to secure an easy path to qualification for a major 
tournament yet displayed little evidence that they could truly compete with the 
best once they got there.

Two once proud footballing nations were reduced to a sideshow in an 
error-strewn opening during which there was precious little quality on show: 
Scotland willing but lacking composure when it mattered,England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> sloppy and trying but too often 
failing to play according to the wishes of their soon presumably to be 
permanent manager.

If the bright spots to England’s performance were the sparky form of 
Liverpool’s Adam Lallana, the continuing rehabilitation of Raheem Sterling (a 
shocking open-goal miss aside), Daniel Sturridge justifying his selection with 
a fine opening goal and the extent to which Danny Rose and Kyle Walker were 
able to maraud up the wings from full-back, there was plenty for Southgate to 
ponder, too, as he prepares to inherit the eternal struggle to fashion a 
collection of fragile players into a coherent whole.

And no player seemed to embody that struggle more than Manchester City’s John 
Stones, the £47.5m man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-city-complete-signing-of-john-stones-from-everton>
 who could prompt groans one minute when he gave the ball away and swoons the 
next as he appeared to embody all the verbiage of the various coaching manuals 
and “DNA” projects that form the bedrock of the philosophy that the Football 
Association’s technical director, Dan Ashworth, oversees from St George’s Park 
and of which Southgate’s elevation will be styled as an integral part.

Southgate, himself a ball-playing centre-half, has – like Pep Guardiola – 
resolved that his teams should play out from the back. Yet, as inthe 0-0 draw 
against Slovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovenia-england-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
 last month, the jury remains very much out on whether these England players 
are able to carry out his instructions. “England teams aim to dominate 
possession intelligently, selecting the right moments to progress the play and 
penetrate the opposition,” says the so-called DNA mission statement. There was 
precious little of that on show in the first half at Wembley, as England’s back 
four produced several heart-in-mouth moments that against better opposition 
might have been punished.

Gary Cahill, who finished off the last of the triptych of headers that 
delivered England an ultimately comfortable 3-0 victory, confirmed Southgate 
had again mandated his defenders to play out from the back, while also 
conceding the execution had been lacking. The Chelsea centre-back said: “When 
the time’s right to play out from the back we’ll play out from the back. I 
think that’s something maybe we can look at. You don’t have to be fixated with 
one style or another. We’ve got the players to play out from the back and 
that’s the way we want to go. That’s the way the manager wants us to go and so 
we keep trying to adopt that.”

But as he also said, it had been expected of him at Chelsea for the past five 
years and was a prerequisite at the top level. At least, it could be argued, 
Southgate is showing signs of wanting to impose a recognisable style on his 
England side – even if it remains very much a work in progress. Part of the 
test will be whether he, and his players, can hold their nerve and make the 
right decisions when tournaments roll around and the pressure ramps up.

“Everyone has different opinions on the way they want to play out,” said 
Cahill. “But when you go to the big clubs ultimately they expect you to play 
out and try and keep possession of the ball. Especially when you’re at a top 
level like England, that’s how you should be doing things.”

Stones, said Cahill, had the talent, strength of character and ability to 
learn to make a success of that role at club and international level. “I’m sure 
he was aware the spotlight is going to be on you, for good and bad. I feel he’s 
a guy who can deal with that, who can be fine with that. He’ll learn from his 
mistakes and from the things he’s doing very well,” he said.

Gareth Southgate set for England job but the work has only just begun |Owen 
Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/england-world-cup-2018-gareth-southgate-scotland-wembley>
That internal battle within Stones – the bravery to stick to a 
possession-based approach while cutting out debilitating mistakes – may well 
define Southgate’s tenure, embodying as it does the same struggle captured in 
those earnest FA mission statements down recent years that crumble to dust when 
the players shrink at a major tournament. The FA’s chief executive,Martin 
Glenn, when he spoke to theObserver a few weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/martin-glenn-fa-england-sam-allardyce>
, insisted the somewhat derided DNA project was not an attempt to impose a set 
style of play.

“It gets misunderstood. People see it has a prescriptive style of play, like 
tiki-taka. It’s not that, it’s a performance plan to predict tournament 
success. Technically, DNA’s a hardwiring in your cells that determines a type 
of behaviour – that’s not what we’re trying to do,” he said, emphasising it was 
supposed to be more about mindset than style.

To no great surprise, England’s players were happy to talk up the influence of 
the man who will now in all likelihood be the next permanent inhabitant of the 
managerial hot seat. Cahill said: “I felt like the last meet up was under 
different circumstances. We were almost thrown together in a way. This meet up 
has been a lot steadier, a lot more normal and he’s starting to put his points 
across to us now on the training pitch. We worked a lot this week on final 
third entries and being a bit more ruthless in front of goal, which was 
something that has come to light in this game.”

Lallana, probably England’s best player on the night as he transferred his 
club form to the international stage, concurred. “He’s not had long in the job 
so credit to him and how he’s taken it on. We’re listening to him, we’re 
listening to what he wants to do. We don’t get too long to gather but we’re 
doing the best we can.”

The Liverpool player, like his international team-mates and their manager, 
know full well that they can only really be judged once they get to Russia in 
2018. In the wake of the shock to the system in France and the short-lived 
reign of Sam Allardyce that ended in such farce, Southgate at the least offers 
the chance for some continuity and some long-term thinking. Spain on Tuesday, 
albeit in a friendly, may tell us more about England’s progress.

“It was a massive knock for us confidence-wise to go out like that to Iceland. 
So, of course, it was going to take time to recover,” said Lallana. “The change 
of managers, that’s not helped as well. But, hopefully, we can gain some 
momentum now under Gareth.”

Given what has gone before, some hope would be a start.
 