
Gary Neville’s first game as a manager ended in defeat, Valencia’s fans 
heading for the exit with their team. It was not just that they were knocked 
out of the Champions League, slipping into the Europa League, wherethey could 
face Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-europa-league>
, it was that they did not even give themselves a chance to continue.

Their fate not entirely in their own hands, it was always likely to end but it 
was not supposed to end this way. Neville said he had “desperately wanted a 
victory”; instead, he got a 2-0 defeat toLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>, a side that had not won in the 
group before this game.

Olivier Giroud hits a treble at Olympiakos and it’s job done for Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
Neville insisted afterwards that Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> would take the Europa League 
seriously and that the possibility they might face United is “the last thing on 
my mind”. He had hoped to avoid playing in the competition, but always knew 
that was not going to be easy, the damage done before his arrival. His opening 
game was always an improbable rescue mission, although there were moments of 
hope here, which were all too swiftly extinguished.

Valencia faced a Lyon team that knew it would finish bottom, without even 
Europa League football to play for. But not only did they have to win, they 
also had to hope Ghent did not beat Zenit St Petersburg. Zenit, already group 
winners, travelled to Belgium without Hulk or Axel Witsel and with nothing to 
play for. “We will focus on what we can control,” Neville said. Ultimately, 
they controlled little. Above all they could not control Lyon’s counterattacks. 
Not least, the manager said, because the squad he has is an exhausted one.

“If the result in Gent does not go our way, that’s life,” Neville had said. 
The result in Valencia did not go their way either. That’s life too – the life 
that he has chosen. It will be a hard one, although he said that he felt no 
stress down on the touchline. Here, on a night when his goalkeeper Jaume 
Doménech prevented the scoreline being more damaging, when the performance was 
as disappointing as the result, Neville insisted that he could have “no 
complaints”, there was more evidence of that. Not only did Valencia lose the 
game, they lost yet another player to injury when Enzo Pérez was forced off. 
The list of players out is now 10 men long. Neville has work ahead; the good 
news is that he will not shirk it.

Neville called this the first day of the rest of his life. As the players 
warmed up, he took up a position in the top-right corner of his technical area. 
From there he watched his team start well, Shkodran Mustafi hitting the post 
with one header on eight minutes and having a goal disallowed two minutes after 
that. But soon news came through from Belgium, where Ghent had scored, and he 
first abandoned the position in the 36th minute, when Maxwel Cornet curled in a 
wonderful shot from the edge of the penalty area. He returned soon after but 
the balance had tilted. Had Mustafi’s goal stood it may have been different but 
the impetus had quickly changed, the pace dropping. Afterwards, Neville 
admitted that many of his players were tired.

The fans tired too and that the stadium fell quiet, the air punctured by 
occasional frustrated whistles, was significant as Neville had recalled how 
coming to the Mestalla as an away player was “horrible” and insisted that was 
something he wanted to recover. On Monday morning, the doors to the Paterna 
training ground were opened. Three thousand fans came. “It’s good to create 
that link and it motivates the players,” Neville said. Training, though, is one 
thing; this match was another. “They tried to get behind us but the deflation 
was normal,” Neville admitted.

Chelsea overcome nerves to top group and move into last 16 at Porto’s expense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/chelsea-porto-champions-league-match-report>
Although Paco Alcácer drew a save from Anthony Lopes, Lyon were the better 
side, allowed to travel a long way when they came forward, and it was not a 
huge surprise when Cornet scored. Momentarily, there was a roar to try to get 
Valencia back into the contest, an attempt to carry the side, but it was brief.

Valencia needed three goals: two here and another for Zenit. Álvaro Negredo 
was introduced as they sought them, finally returning from a 65-day ostracism 
imposed upon him by the former manager Nuno Espírito Santo, cheered as he ran 
on. João Cancelo and Javi Fuego both took shots from the edge of the box, 
Negredo and Alcácer almost carved open a chance too. Yet the truth was that 
Neville’s side drew only one real save from Lopes and a sense that there was 
little real chance took over… until, just as Lyon were preparing to take a 
corner, there was a huge roar.Artyom Dzyuba had scored for Zenit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/gent-zenit-st-petersburg-champions-league-match-report>
 in Belgium.

One down, two more to go and Valencia had 25 minutes to get them. Cancelo 
almost caught out Lopes at the near post and from the corner Dani Parejo’s shot 
slipped just wide. The risk, though, was that on the break Lyon were finding 
space behind and that Doménech wouldn’t be able to save them every time. And so 
it proved. With 15 minutes to go and Pablo Piatti having just been sent on, 
Alexandre Lacazette was sent racing through to end Neville’s hopes of a winning 
managerial debut. As if to make sure, a moment later, Ghent got a second.
 