



Gary McAllister has told Liverpool’s players they must overcome any anxiety 
they feel at Anfield and be brave on the ball to kick-start their season. 
Liverpool host League Two Carlisle United in the third round of the Capital One 
Cup on Wednesday seeking a first win in six matches and having faltered in the 
first of four successive home games,against Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/20/liverpool-norwich-city-premier-league-match-report>
.

Brendan Rodgers admitted after the 1-1 draw on Sunday that the anxiety he 
encountered on his arrival from Swansea in 2012 has returned to Anfield. But 
McAllister, who returned to the club as the first-team coach in July, says it 
is part of aLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> player’s 
job to handle pressure and believes the club have the characters to lead a 
recovery.

Liverpool’s Christian Benteke a doubt for Aston Villa reunion due to injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/22/liverpool-christian-benteke-aston-villa-injury>
The former Scotland international said: “They’ve got to rise above that 
anxiety and that’s where we come in as coaches, and hopefully where I do,” 
McAllister said. “I have played in front of frustrated crowds when things 
aren’t going well and I think that’s when you push your shoulders back and show 
that bravery.

“Bravery is not whacking into people and elbowing people. It’s getting on the 
ball in tight areas and taking responsibility. We have no fear in doing that 
and I don’t have any fears about us putting that right.

“The middle of the park is where you do need people to get on the ball and 
make play. I watch Philippe Coutinho, Lucas Leiva and James Milner. They don’t 
shy away from the ball and I don’t see them doing that. They will continue to 
prompt and probe to try to make things happen.”

Pressure also applies to Rodgers after a poor sequence of results stretching 
back to last season, but McAllister says the Liverpool manager and his 
back-room staff will always be in that situation, and thrive on it. “That’s 
part of the job here,” he said. “I always try to use that and I have always 
liked that. Going right back as a young boy, it was a fear of Jock Wallace as 
my manager [at Motherwell] that was the driver. Maybe that’s a generation thing 
but that little bit of fear is good if it’s channelled the right way for you to 
perform.”

McAllister also views it is a positive that supporters are voicing disapproval 
at results, believing it would be an alarming sign if the Kop suddenly accepted 
the club was not challenging for honours. “It impresses me that there are still 
those grumblings from the fans,” he said. “If you lose that and it does become 
accepted it not’s going to be right. And that won’t happen here. It will be 
driven through by the frustration of the fans.

“We’ve got to be competing right at the highest level. It’s how I see 
Liverpool. I just associate it with winning things. That [hostile reception to 
the Norwich result] has got to be a good thing and that’s got to be the driving 
force for our players and they’ve got to put that right.”

Rodgers will make changes against Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle>, who are 10th in League Two but 
have the leading goalscorer in England’s top four divisions in Jabo Ibehre. The 
32-year-old has scored 10 goals in 10 games in all competitions for Keith 
Curle’s side this season.

While resting players with the Premier League visit of Aston Villa on Saturday 
in mind, and Christian Benteke likely to miss a reunion with his former club 
because of a hamstring injury, Rodgers is expected to field several experienced 
first-team members as he seeks to avoid an ill-timed upset.

“It will be a strong squad,” McAllister said. “You’ve got to utilise the 
players you’ve got but we’ve also got to get momentum going too.”

Liverpool reached the semi-finals of both domestic cup competitions last 
season and McAllister believes the squad have the class to deliver the first 
trophy of Rodgers’ reign. “The players should be looking around the dressing 
room and seeing there’s a lot of quality and depth there,” he said. “If you 
looked at the bench at the weekend it was strong, so the nucleus is there to 
actually go on and be threatening to win.”
 