
Gary Mackay-Steven scored his first two goals of the season as Celtic restored 
their six-point lead in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a comfortable 
victory over St Johnstone.

Stuart Armstrong was also on target, regaining the lead for Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> after Steven MacLean had fired an 
immediate response to the ninth-minute opener.

The Celtic manager Ronny Deila praised Mackay-Steven and Armstrong for coming 
through the first difficult spell of their Parkhead careers.

Mackay-Steven hit his first two goals of the season either side of Armstrong’s 
volley as Celtic re-established their advantage over Aberdeen.

Mackay-Steven had made his first league start for three months during Tuesday’s
8-1 defeat of Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/celtic-hamilton-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 and Deila has been pleased with how he and Armstrong have progressed almost a 
year after joining from Dundee United.

“Gary has been out for a while and played two very good matches,” said the 
Norwegian. “Stuart looks very sharp so I’m very pleased with that.

“It’s tough here. We have many players who haven’t played for big clubs coming 
from smaller clubs. It’s one thing to come in when everything is positive and 
you are kicking on, but then the expectation is coming over you and it takes 
time to deal with that.”

Leigh Griffiths was strangely wasteful with his shooting after hitting seven 
goals in three games but he played a key part as Celtic scored with their first 
decent attack.

The striker turned away from Steven Anderson on the edge of the box and his 
blocked shot fell into the path of Mackay-Steven, who took a touch and drilled 
home from 12 yards. Alan Mannus was soon saving from Armstrong butSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> were level in the 12th 
minute after some good wing play from Michael O’Halloran, who was restored to 
the team after Rangers failed to follow up their two unsuccessful bids.

O’Halloran forced his way to the byline, cut the ball inside where MacLean was 
waiting at the near post to finish from close range.

Mannus stopped Nir Bitton’s long-range effort but Celtic were slow to respond 
to the equaliser and MacLean latched on to a long ball only for Craig Gordon to 
get down and make a comfortable save.

Celtic stepped up a gear and Kieran Tierney’s low cross found Mackay-Steven in 
space 16 yards out but he could not keep his shot down.

Mikael Lustig’s low cross was then just too far in front of Griffiths and 
Celtic were guilty of taking one pass too many on a number of attacks until 
Callum McGregor curled in a shot from 18 yards.

Mannus palmed it away but Celtic maintained the pressure and Armstrong met 
Lustig’s cross on the volley and guided the ball high into the corner of the 
net with two minutes left of the half.

Griffiths blasted over from 10 yards after Mackay-Steven’s powerful strike was 
parried but the winger was soon on target again in the 55th minute. He 
collected Stefan Johansen’s disguised pass just inside the box and slotted 
home, although the St Johnstone manager Tommy Wright claimed the Norway 
midfielder had handled before making the assist. Mannus saved from Armstrong 
and Griffiths but St Johnstone almost got back into it when Gordon punched a 
corner off a team-mate, Johansen clearing off the line.

Gordon then made a brilliant point-blank save from Liam Craig after 
O’Halloran’s low cross found the substitute unmarked eight yards out.

Mannus denied McGregor and Mackay-Steven before Griffiths skied another good 
chance.

Ryan Christie was given a late debut as Celtic saw out a win which reinforces 
their superiority over second-placed Aberdeen with the trip to Pittodrie 
looming on 3 February.
 