
A spot of opposition gegenpressing was never going to perturb Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> on Tuesday night – and 
particularly not with Gastón Ramírez in such an imperious mood.

Excellent throughout, the Uruguayan scored two goals and created the other as 
Boro further banished memories of their painful recent wobble. A third 
successive win kept the Teesside club in the second automatic promotion place, 
one point behind Burnley and one ahead of Brighton while suggesting that the 
brief but dramatic schism between Aitor Karanka and his dressing room last 
month had now been repaired.

“Gastón Ramírez was the difference, he changed the game,” said Boro’s manager, 
whose side have a game in hand on both Sean Dyche’s and Chris Hughton’s teams. 
“We’re arriving at an important part of the season in a good way.”

From a distance David Wagner, aka Jürgen Klopp’s best man, looked deceptively 
like Tony Pulis. It was a false impression created by the German’s tracksuit 
and baseball cap combination but the quickest glance at the action was 
sufficient to confirmHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> were most definitely not a 
Pulis team. Instead they played a brand of ambitious, high risk, football that 
would have reduced West Bromwich Albion’s manager to apoplexy and played 
straight into Karanka’s hands.

Granted, Wagner’s side – kitted out in an especially vivid shade of lime green 
– passed the ball attractively but they committed so many men forward that it 
seemed only a matter of time until Boro scored. Indeed it was mildy surprising 
that the visiting defence held out until the 32nd minute, when Grant Leadbitter 
beat Jed Steer from the penalty spot after Ramírez – who else? – turned Joel 
Lynch and the centre-half hacked him down.

The celebrations marking Leadbitter’s opener had barely abated when Ramírez 
scored a second. The technically gifted South American may have struggled at 
Southampton and flopped at Hull City but he is proving outstanding in the 
central role behind Jordan Rhodes in a 4‑2‑3‑1 formation on Teesside.

When Huddersfield, still regrouping, conceded possession awfully cheaply, 
Ramírez – blessed with a handy knack of reading situations and sensing 
opportunity seconds before anyone else – found himself one-on-one with Steer 
and proceeded to round the goalkeeper before dispatching the ball into the roof 
of the net from an awkward angle. “Going up,” the Riverside chorused. “The 
Boro’s going up.”

By now Karanka’s team were emphasising they were far too good to be deterred 
by the version of gegenpressing Wagner is implementing in West Yorkshire. 
Indeed Huddersfield’s principal problem was that, once they lost the ball, it 
was generally quite a while until they saw it again.

Moreover, a side still to banish slight relegation fears appeared petrified 
every time Albert Adomah accelerated down the right wing or George Friend 
slalomed forward from left-back.

Yet with both Adomah and Rhodes failing to make the most of chances to have 
given Boro an even more commanding half-time lead, there was a slight tension 
in the Riverside air as Huddersfield began the second period with a display of 
defiantly protracted possession.

If that boded well for the future of Wagner’s project – and a few cameos 
hinted at exciting times ahead – Nahki Wells remained largely isolated up 
front. Meanwhile Boro’s Dimi Konstantopoulos was only really tested by a weak 
shot from Joe Lolley and Adomah could have extended the home lead on the 
counterattack.

Eventually, deservedly, Ramírez registered the third, directing a fabulous 
free kick into the top corner with his left foot. “Middlesbrough were very 
strong, very concentrated, very focused,” Wagner said. “They were too good for 
us. It looks like their bad period is behind them.”
 