
Gastón Ramírez showed his Premier League class with two goals that helped 
Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> back to the 
top of the Championship with a 2-1 victory over Wolves.

The Uruguayan, who moved on loan from Southampton in January, headed the first 
in the 24th minute and added a fortuitous second 10 minutes after half-time to 
take his tally in a Boro shirt to three.

Wolves, watched by only 291 away fans because the majority boycotted the trip 
to Riverside to protest over ticket prices and Sky TV’s rescheduling of games, 
are still waiting for a first win on Teesside since 1951, even though the 
Middlesbrough defender Ben Gibson headed into his own net in the final minute.

Massimo Cellino’s sons abuse Leeds United supporters on social media
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/04/massimo-cellino-sons-leeds-united-supporters>
Aitor Karanka’s side are two points clear of Burnley, who play Blackburn on 
Saturday.

The victory was achieved without Stewart Downing, who was one of five changes 
to the team which lost at Blackburn in midweek after an ineffective spell.

Downing had not been left out since October, when he emerged as a second-half 
substitute to inspire Middlesbrough to a 3-1 win at Molineux when they had been 
trailing by a goal.

Ramírez, who had been unfortunate to lose his place at Blackburn, put 
Middlesbrough ahead midway through the first half. When his free-kick from the 
left was cleared he made his way unmarked to the back post to meet a delivery 
back into the box from Adam Clayton before heading low past the goalkeeper, 
Carl Ikeme.

Jordan Rhodes, without a goal to his name at the Riverside, looked as if he 
had increased the lead 30 seconds into the second half when he glanced a header 
from Albert Adomah’s cross towards goal before Ikeme, on loan with 
Middlesbrough earlier in his career, brilliantly tipped over.

Middlesbrough did not have to wait long for the cushion of a second goal, 
though. After George Friend’s pass dropped into his path, Ramirez’s cross 
flicked off the shin of Danny Batth and dropped inside Ikeme’s far post.

Dimi Konstantopoulos, the home side’s keeper, made a second-half stop to 
thwart Joe Mason but Rhodes could have added a third had it not been for Ikeme 
denying him.

Wolves pulled one back in the final minute when Gibson inadvertently glanced a 
header into the top corner from Matt Doherty’s cross but Middlesbrough had 
already done enough to win.
 