
The Italian club Genoa are facing potential Fifa sanction, which could extend 
from a fine to a points deduction or even relegation fromSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>, relating to their 
reluctance to fulfil a payment due to the Trinidadian side W Connection for 
Zaine Pierre’s transfer over three years ago.

Pierre, a St Lucia midfielder who had trials with Tottenham Hotspur, Arsenal 
and Manchester City as a teenager, leftTrinidad and Tobago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/trinidad-and-tobago> for Genoa in November 
2011 after two years spent primarily in the youth team at W Connection. The 
Italian club paid an initial €200,000 [£146,000] for the player, but agreed to 
meet a further fee of €150,000 when Pierre, who came highly rated, turned 
professional.

That amount, which was subsequently readjusted to €125,000 plus interest and 
costs, has been due since August 2012 with Fifa’s players status committee – 
for whom the former chairman of the FA and vice-president of Uefa and Fifa, 
Geoff Thompson, acted as a single judge – having ruled a year ago that Genoa 
should make the payment within 30 days. That deadline passed, with Fifa 
subsequently writing to the Italian football federation’s general secretary, 
Michele Uva, in September 2014 urging them to encourageGenoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> to pay the money that was due and 
resolve the matter.

Genoa’s subsequent attempt at a compromise, involving a revised payment of 
€62,500, was rejected by W Connection with Fifa duly advising the Italian 
federation that disciplinary proceedings had been opened against the Serie A 
club over “a violation of article 64 of the Fifa disciplinary code”. The 
governing body has granted Genoa a final deadline of 2 April to make the final 
payments and if they are not forthcoming, the disciplinary committee will meet 
on 16 April to determine the level of sanction to be imposed.

Genoa are currently ninth in Serie A, sandwiched between Milan and 
Internazionale, and 16 points clear of Cagliari and Cesena in the relegation 
zone. Yet Fifa’s correspondence with Uva confirms that its disciplinary 
committee’s sanctions range from “a fine, deduction of points or relegation” 
over a player who has never represented the first-team and is currently on loan 
at the Serie C club, SF Aversa Normanna. Now 21, Pierre has suffered injury 
problems since his move to Italy but has now been capped four times by St Lucia.
 