
The front page of Monday’s Gazzetta dello Sport 
<http://www.gazzetta.it/primapagina/> carries news of “A City in Crisis”. They 
have used that last word rather loosely. The pink paper’s reference was to the 
fact that both Milan and Internazionale had lost a day earlier, slipping to 
seventh and 12th in the Serie A table respectively. It is the sort of 
footballing catastrophe that most Italian cities would be happy to endure.

In Genoa, the simple fact of having two teams in the top flight is viewed in 
positive terms. Both the city’s leading football clubs have endured multiple 
relegations over the last couple of decades.Genoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> and Sampdoria have each qualified 
for Europe during that spell, too, but not regularly enough for fans to take 
such successes for granted.

Expectations for this season were modest. Genoa’s manager, Gian Piero 
Gasperini, told reporters in July that “our first objective must be getting to 
safety”. Sampdoria’s Sinisa Mihajlovic was slightly more ambitious, stating 
that he wanted his team to “play out this season in the left part of the 
table”. In Italian newspapers, the league standings are traditionally split in 
two, with the top 10 clubs shown in the left side of a column and the bottom 10 
on the right.

Even Mihajlovic, though, could not have predicted that both Genoese clubs 
would reach the middle of December looking down on their Milanese counterparts. 
For now Sampdoria sit sixth, one point clear of theRossoneri, and with an 
opportunity to climb up to fourth if they can beat Verona away on Monday night. 
Genoa are even further ahead, in third, after defeating Milan on Sunday 
afternoon.

This is not how the story was supposed to unfold. Despite starting the weekend 
behind Genoa in the table, Milan had still been favoured by the bookies to win 
at the Marassi. Buoyed by a 2-0 win over Udinese at the end of November, Pippo 
Inzaghi went so far as to say that it would difficult for any team to be 
stronger than his.

Genoa were not daunted. They rarely are under Gasperini. The manager 
encourages his teams to play high up the pitch, press the opposition and force 
mistakes. That approach has reaped rich rewards for theGrifone on their 
travels, where opponents do not expect such aggression. Only Juventus have 
collected more points away from home this season and even the champions’ lone 
defeat came against Genoa in October.

Gasperini has always seemed to raise his game against the best. José Mourinho 
famously named him as the toughest tactician he had faced in Italy, comparing 
their matches to games of chess – each move met with an immediate and 
intelligent counter. Genoa have shuffled through at least five different 
starting formations already this season and pulled a surprise by reverting to a 
four-man defence against Milan.

That shape allowed Genoa to mirror their opponents all over the pitch, pairing 
up almost man for man. Although they made mistakes – most notably when Juraj 
Kucka’s errant touch allowed Jérémy Ménez to run clean through in the 28th 
minute, only to shoot straight at Mattia Perin – Gasperini’s team wore their 
opponents down with endless pursuit. “We unravelled,” confessed Inzaghi 
afterwards. “Genoa pressed a lot and the [bad] pitch meant we couldn’t play it 
on the ground.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN2t5kp4eXHI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN2t5kp4eXHI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN2t5kp4eXHI&media=>
He is not the first to comment on the state of the turf at the Marassi, with 
even Genoa’s own Diego Perotti noting recently that the grass is far longer 
than he was used to from playing in Spain. However, Inzaghi could not use that 
as an excuse for the shoddy marking which allowed Luca Antonelli to head home 
the game’s only goal from a corner in the 32nd minute.

Antonelli is in many ways the embodiment of this Genoa team, a man who summed 
himself up in one interview last week as “a normal player, who plays with his 
heart and his balls”. Although he has seven Italy caps to his name, few would 
consider him elite. Yet what he lacks in talent, he makes up for with a great 
willingness to adapt and sacrifice for his team. Already this season, Antonelli 
has been deployed everywhere from the left wing to central defence. He is also 
Genoa’s captain and not short of ambition for his team. Asked about the 
prospect of facing Roma next weekend, Antonelli described the match as “uno 
scontro diretto” – an effective six-pointer between two teams chasing a place 
in next season’s Champions League.

In reality, the season is still young and Genoa have a long way to go in a 
race that is likely to take more twists between now and the end of May. But 
they are unbeaten in nine league games and their start deserves to be lauded. 
Not since the second world war had they held sole possession of third place 
this far into aSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
season. Never had they held 26 points after 14 games – even adjusting to three 
for a win – over the same period.

Gasperini can feel some rightful vindication. Hounded out of Inter after just 
six games in 2011, he was accused of being wedded to a singular tactical vision 
that could not work at such a big team. Three seasons later, he is closer to 
making a return to the Champions League than theNerazzurri are.

Sunday’s victory was his 100th in charge of Genoa – split between this tenure 
and his previous one at the club, between 2006 and 2010. He described it as his 
“highest moment” at the club. On this form, even greater ones could be on the 
horizon. But it will be no crisis if they are not.

Talking points

• There is no sense yet that Pippo Inzaghi’s position is under threat at 
Milan, but it is worth noting that his 21 points from 14 games are five fewer 
than Clarence Seedorf managed from the same number of matches to start his 
tenure. Inzaghi must hope that his team will continue to improve as Riccardo 
Montolivo returns to form and fitness. The midfielder started his first game of 
the season against Genoa, but showed as much rust as you would expect for a 
player who has been out for seven months with a broken leg.

• Inter’s game against Udinese was supposed to be a celebration, Roberto 
Mancini returning to the bench at San Siro for the first time in six years (he 
was serving a touchline ban during the Europa League game against Dnipro). 
Where the public announcer had not dared to read out Walter Mazzarri’s name 
toward the end, he shouted Mancini’s three times. Fans responded 
enthusiastically to those cries, and even more so to Mauro Icardi’s opening 
goal just before half-time. But they would leave with the same old sensations 
of bewilderment after Inter, who hit the crossbar at 0-0 and blew several 
chances to extend their lead early in the second half, contrived to lose 2-1. 
Without taking anything away from Udinese,whose equalising goal was a peach 
<https://vine.co/v/Or5aDFemHHM>, this was another ugly collapse from the 
Nerazzurri. “I am pissed off,” said Mancini afterwards, “even if I am happy 
with how we played in the first half. That was perfect, but in the end it 
doesn’t mean shit.”

• Is Parma’s misery finally at an end? The club’s general manager, Pietro 
Leonardi, confirmed that agreement had been reached for the Ducali to be sold 
to a Russian-Cypriot consortium, with the fee variously reported at somewhere 
between €5m-€8m (the new owners would also be taking on substantial debts). 
Incredibly, this news is understood to have been delivered to players in the 
changing room just moments before kickoff. It did not prevent them from losing 
2-1 to Lazio.

• Juventus might have assumed their lead at the top would be trimmed after 
drawing 0-0 away to Fiorentina on Friday. In the event, Roma were fortunate 
just to keep pace. TheGiallorossi, undermined by some calamitous goalkeeping 
from Morgan De Sanctis <https://twitter.com/SerieAFFC/status/541281506631897089>
, fell 2-0 behind at home to Sassuolo, but came back to grab a point with a 
pair of contentious late goals from Adem Ljajic. The first arrived from the 
penalty spot after a disputed handball decision (even with the benefit of 
replay, this was a tough one to call 
<https://twitter.com/Kasper_carlo/status/541338484146192385>) while there was a 
suspicion of offside in the build-up to the second (although this looked a lot 
closer on second viewing than it had at a first glance). Either way, this was 
not the performance Rudi García was hoping for ahead of his team’s Champions 
League showdown with Manchester City. Roma have not kept a clean sheet since 9 
November.

• Five goals in five games now for Paulo Dybala at Palermo, and the latest one 
involved a very tidy rainbow flick 
<https://twitter.com/JamesHorncastle/status/541345573132333057>.

• Pierpaolo Bisoli has become the third Serie A manager to lose his job since 
the start of this season, sacked by Cesena with his team 19th in the table. In 
one sense it seems unreasonable to expect any more, given the evident weakness 
in the Seahorses’ squad. Then again, perhaps this had less to do with overall 
performance than it did with conceding three goals to an Atalanta team who had 
previously scored five all season.

Results: Atalanta 3-2 Cesena, Fiorentina 0-0 Juventus, Genoa 1-0 Milan, Inter 
1-2 Udinese, Napoli 2-2 Empoli, Parma 1-2 Lazio, Roma 2-2 Sassuolo, Torino 2-2 
Palermo

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 14 25 35 
2 Roma 14 16 32 
3 Genoa 14 8 26 
4 Napoli 14 8 24 
5 Lazio 14 6 23 
6 Sampdoria 13 6 22 
7 AC Milan 14 5 21 
8 Udinese 14 -1 21 
9 Fiorentina 14 5 20 
10 Sassuolo 14 -3 19 
11 Palermo 14 -5 18 
12 Inter Milan 14 0 17 
13 Empoli 14 -5 15 
14 Verona 13 -7 14 
15 Atalanta 14 -7 14 
16 Torino 14 -7 13 
17 Cagliari 13 -4 11 
18 Chievo 13 -8 10 
19 Cesena 14 -14 8 
20 Parma 14 -20 6  