
Geremi's representatives are in talks with Besiktas after Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> agreed a £1.5m fee with 
the Turkish side for the Cameroon international. Joe Kinnear has told Geremi he 
can leave St James' Park while Dennis Wise, Newcastle's executive director, is 
anxious to shed the 30-year-old's £60,000-a-week wages from the club's payroll.

Signed by Sam Allardyce, Geremi, who has been withdrawn from the Newcastle 
squad for tonight's FA Cup replay at home to Hull City, has looked a player 
well beyond his best since arriving on Tyneside and rarely starts games under 
Kinnear. He has featured in just 13 matches this season.

"I'm nearing the end of my career and I don't want to be sitting on the 
bench," said the former Real Madrid, Chelsea and Middlesbrough midfielder 
yesterday. "There is a bid for me and I am deciding what to do but I really 
want to play."

Meanwhile, Kinnear is hoping to sign Stéphane Mbia, another Cameroon 
international midfielder, on loan from Rennes until the end of the season and 
is attempting to engineer a similar deal for theToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> right-back Albin Ebondo.

If the deals go through, they would be with the intention of making both 
transfers permanent during the summer.Rennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes>, though, are not keen to sell the 
22-year-old Mbia, who could cost up to £10m.

Kinnear demanded funds at a board meeting on Tuesday night but was revealing 
little. "I've given options for the directors to look at," he said. "I've given 
them a list of players and loan fees and raised the possibility of maybe buying 
one or two players.

"At present it's tight but I'm waiting to hear whether one player moves on 
from us. We do need funds to strengthen the squad. I know it won't be a massive 
amount but I'm still hopeful Mike [Ashley, Newcastle's owner] will release some 
money."

Liam Miller is poised to join QPR on loan from Sunderland until the end of the 
season with a view to a permanent transfer. Ricky Sbragia, the Sunderland 
manager, has told the former Manchester United midfielder that he does not 
feature in his plans.
 