
Don’t build your house on the sandy land, they said, don’t build it too near 
the shore. Except what if you really like the view? Yes it might slip into the 
sea during the first winter winds, but until then, it’slovely near the shore. 
Lemonade sun twinkling off the water as you sit out in the morning with your 
toast, the gentle plip of waves against the patio. What’s a little death for a 
life like this?

This is the conclusion I come to when I read the regular urgings to exit my 
echo chamber. To listen to opposing voices, to read the views of Trumpers and 
uncles, to pierce our conceited, content bubble. To live in the real world. 
Which if we’re being clear, I think, means, “one with racists in”. So I come to 
the conclusion that no, I don’t want to. This cosy echo chamber might not be 
perfect, but at least it’s home.

If we’re being clear, the real world means one with racists in it

I understand the argument. I see what John Oliver <http://iamjohnoliver.com/> 
meant when he talked about a “healthy media diet”, and whenBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> said that fake news online 
makes it “very difficult to have a common conversation”. I understand the 
concern that social media algorithms have fragmented society, and that as well 
as showing you slightly too manykitten gifs <http://giphy.com/search/kitten> 
they might be destroying democracy. And I’ve felt the shock that comes from 
believing only what I choose to click on.

I can remember at least three of those dusty mornings waking up to news on my 
phone that everything I’d thought before had been wrong. Three silent journeys 
into work, on tube trains of darting eyes asking, “Was it you?” Arguments as 
computers warm up about whether it’s too soon to joke. Three dawn text messages 
from my mum, still averse to text language even at times when only emoji will 
do. Three mornings of stunned surprise that I’d managed to rainproof myself to 
the extent that I had no idea what half the country wanted, or who they were. 
But I will say this for rainproofing – it’s cosy.

The walls of our echo chamber are tastefully decorated with limited-edition 
prints, and drawings by four-year-olds that make us chuckle: “Oh the wisdom of 
children!” There’s underfloor heating, and from a £20 candle, the smell of 
figs. We are all very considerate about how each other prefers to be addressed, 
and nobody buys goods from shops that advertise in theMail, even if we really 
want them. Our phones are charged, our hearts are full. A percentage of our 
incomes goes straight into a charity fund, which means we never feel bad saying 
no to beggars or when keeping the radiators on at night.

In an echo chamber the acoustics are amazing – our voices sound booming and 
tremendous, and even the most awful music sounds all right, especially when 
someone explains why you should like it in a chirpy online review. We are not 
compelled to debate for sport, to tear apart our long-held beliefs in snappy 
retorts unless we really fancy a workout. Some of us don’t even have opinions 
about politics, and that’s OK. The weather in here is always, if not warm, at 
least of sufficient drama to enable conversation when the communal dining room 
goes quiet. If news reaches us of a surprise president or explosion of racism, 
at least we have each other. And every episode of30 Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/feb/07/30rockisthebestshowonte>
 and a massive strudel.

But we have built this place for a reason. They say, educate yourself on the 
reasons people are rejecting the “elites”. We say, until a word can exist 
outside of its own quotation marks it is irrelevant. They say we can only feel 
empathy if we put ourselves in strangers’ shoes. But we end up walking around 
in bile. They say our problem is that we choose only to listen to voices that 
validate our own. Their answer seems to be “befriend the people who call you a 
‘libtard kike’.”

Rather than an ignorant default setting we find ourselves inhabiting, living 
in an echo chamber right now is like putting on a jacket before stepping 
outside. It’s self-care in an unholy storm. And no doubt soon our bubble will 
be pierced from the outside by a huge bayonet, so until then, until I’m forced 
to mingle with strangers and argue face to face about what it means to “do the 
decent thing”, I’m going to tuck myself in with my lovely mates and agree to 
just… agree.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 