
Now that the Guardian and Observer crosswords have been online as a free 
service for a while I am regularly getting questions that suggest some basic 
points may not be clear to newcomers. So here are a few tips on how to get more 
out of what is on offer.

1. How can I get the solution to yesterday's puzzle?

There are several routes open to you:

a) At the top of the home page there is the option to click on "Latest 
solutions" and to follow the trail to the puzzle you want.

b) If you call up the current version of any daily puzzle, at the top of each 
grid you are offered "Click here for a printable version of this crossword", 
which allows you to print out a PDF of the puzzle as it appears in the paper, 
including the solution grid to the previous issue's puzzle.

c) You can type the serial number of the puzzle that interests you into the 
archive search facility at the bottom right of the home page and, when that 
comes up, you can click on "Solution" at the top right-hand corner.

d) If you cannot wait until the next day, with the interactive version of that 
day's puzzle on your screen, you can use the "cheat" facility to be found below 
the clues (once, that is, you have chosen to "enable" yourself to cheat). None 
of the above applies to crosswords with prizes attached, where (I am afraid) 
you have to wait until after the deadline for entering has passed before all is 
revealed. Also, if using the archive search facility, please remember that the 
serial numbers must be entered without a comma (eg 12030 or 24555, not 12,030 
or 24,555).

2. What can I do if, even after seeing a solution, I still haven't a clue as 
to why it should be the right answer?

A possibility, of course, is that there is something wrong with the clue. This 
should not be so, but the only way to ensure that there is never a mistake in a 
Guardian crossword is to stop publishing them. However hard you try, from time 
to time a human or electrical mistake will get through the checking systems. An 
advantage, at least, of online over print is that a mistake, once pointed out, 
can be corrected after the event. Without wishing to sound either complacent or 
defeatist on this point, I would maintain that straight errors are fewer than 
some of my correspondents from time to time like to suggest. I treasure two 
emails on this subject. One called on me to resign as crossword editor as "You, 
sir, are unfit to run a whelk stall"; the other welcomed the odd error, as 
"knowing there might be an online mistake allows me to believe that the reason 
I can't solve a clue is because the clue is wrong, rather than me being a bit 
thick".

Assuming, though, that the clue is correct, there are a number of possible 
avenues to pursue. First, as - unlike Sudoku - doing crosswords is potentially 
a social activity, you could ask a friend; or you could ask a stranger, who 
might then become a friend. Second, with the solutions to all the prize puzzles 
you are provided with the option to "Click here for annotated solutions to this 
puzzle". Third, there are sites where addicts gather together to discuss clues. 
One is http://talk.theguardian.com (then select "Crosswords"), though this 
rather tends to be dominated by a group being rude about individual setters; 
another is http://fifteensquared.net where you will find annotated solutions 
and comment on Guardian and several other regular British crossword puzzles.

3. Does the site just publish puzzles that appear in the two papers?

No, in addition the online site offers you two extra puzzles. One is the 
weekly Quiptic (or quick cryptic), which is pitched either at beginners or at 
non-beginners who want a gentle five- to ten-minute exercise to fill a gap. The 
other is the monthly Genius, which was launched as something that would give 
even expert solvers something to chew on for a week or so. To our slight 
surprise, from the start we regularly got half a dozen correct solutions by 
lunchtime on the day of publication, but I think that most months it provides 
solvers with a more substantial bone to gnaw on than they get in the regular 
run of things in the paper.

In other news

Evidence that the Genius puzzle is still taxing people satisfactorily comes 
from the correct entry figures for November. Despite free access, there were 
only 177 correct entries by the deadline. The quickest from Ian was timed at 
12.32 on the first day.

As this is my December newsletter, may I wish all of you a festive season and 
draw your attention to a new three-dimensional crossword that has been 
developed by Sirius, a former teacher who is now registered as partially blind. 
It is to be found at http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk. As well as the normal 
across and down clues, it has away clues for the third dimension. It comes both 
online and in the form of a calendar, which is being sold to raise money for 
the Royal National Institute of Blind People and BBC Children in Need.
 