
Peter Taylor has been appointed Gillingham's interim manager while they search 
for a full-time appointment. Taylor has taken control at theLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> club following Martin 
Allen's surprise sacking on Sunday after 16 months at the helm.

Gills are 17th after claiming nine points from their 11 games this season. 
Allen led the Kent club back to the third tier by winning the League Two title 
in his first campaign in charge.

Taylor led the Gills to promotion during one season at Priestfield in 
1999-2000. Most recently he agreed a two-month contract to take charge of 
England's Under-20 side during what was a miserable World Cup tournament in 
Turkey this summer.

The Gillingham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> chairman, 
Paul Scally, told the club's website: "Further to the termination of the 
contract of Martin Allen as manager, I have received already a huge response 
from potential candidates such that the process of considering a replacement 
manager is clearly going to take some considerable time.

"With that in mind, and based on my view that the playing staff require some 
immediate assistance to prepare for up and coming games, I contacted Peter 
Taylor this afternoon [Monday] to ascertain whether he would consider coming 
back to the club on an 'interim manager' basis pending a full-time appointment 
to be made in the weeks ahead.

"I am delighted that Peter has accepted this role and he will take 
responsibility for the team with immediate effect, meeting the management and 
players on Tuesday morning, and taking charge of our game against Preston on 
Saturday and thereafter until a permanent appointment is made."

Taylor enjoyed a one-match caretaker spell in charge of England's senior side 
against Italy in November 2000 before which he handed David Beckham the 
captain's armband for the first time.

The 60-year-old has twice managed England Under-21s as well as Leicester, 
Brighton, Hull and Crystal Palace. He also took charge of Bahrain's national 
team between July 2011 and October 2012.
 