
At first glance this may look simply like the natural order being imposed, a 
Premier League club easing out a side from two tiers below even if they were 
forced to endure the irritation of extra-time in the process.Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>, however, will consider it 
an exorcism.

Confronted by their bogey team from a bygone era, Alan Pardew’s players only 
imposed themselves upon an impressively resoluteShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> Town in that added half-hour 
as Glenn Murray’s penalty edged them ahead and in the time that remained, 
quality in possession eventually told. This was a first win here against the 
Shrews since 1982, and only a third in 18 matches stretching back to Terry 
Venables’s first season in charge in the 1970s. The quirkiest of hoodoos is no 
more.

For a while, this had been an upset in waiting. Shrewsbury, without a win in 
League One this season but with five strung out across their back-line and Ryan 
Woods a bundle of energy in the centre of midfield, had hassled and harried to 
ensure the home side lacked any kind of rhythm. Within nine minutes they also 
led. Woods and Jean-Louis Akpa Akpro combined with the striker sending the 
right wing-back, Matt Tootle, galloping unchecked into the penalty area. His 
finish was crisp and low beyond Wayne Hennessey and those locals with long 
memories cursed a familiar sense of exasperation.

Scott Sinclair rescues Aston Villa in 5-3 thriller against Notts County
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/aston-villa-notts-county-capital-one-cup-match-report>
Pardew will have shared that anxiety having been in the previous Palace team 
to confront the Shrews, in 1989, when Steve Coppell’s side were actually on the 
charge to the top flight but, true to form, still sunk without trace at Gay 
Meadow. “We were dysfunctional in that first half, with a few rusty ones 
involved and nine changes [from Saturday],” admitted the Palace manager. The 
loss of his captain, Mile Jedinak, to a hamstring strain was worrying before 
Saturday’s trip to Chelsea.

Wilfried Zaha eventually won a penalty just before the interval, eking a foul 
from Jermaine Grandison. Dwight Gayle converted with ease though, even then, 
Town refused to wilt. A rusty Patrick Bamford and the livewire Zaha might have 
edged Palace ahead, but Mickey Mellon’s side remained resolute even as Gayle 
clipped the bar in stoppage time. As it transpired, the extra period would 
yield relief.

Murray won a penalty himself from Mat Sadler and converted, while Lee 
Chung-yong’s neat finish effectively killed off the visitors’ resistance. 
Zaha’s emphatic header from Pape Souaré’s centre gave the scoreline a deceptive 
feel, even if it capped his own excellent personal display.

“Zaha, that’s a freak of nature,” said Mellon. “I’ve not seen anything like 
that before live. He was sprinting as quick in the last minute of extra-time as 
he was in the first minute. That’s not a bad weapon to have in your armoury.”

Charlton Athletic await in the third round but in some part courtesy of their 
winger’s freakish energy, mention of Shrewsbury need no longer bring Palace 
fans of a certain age out in a cold sweat.
 