
When it comes to our psychological wellbeing and development I often wonder 
who got it right. Was it Freud, who insisted that our identities are fixed in 
infancy, so our adult lives unfold in the shadow of a formative psychosexual 
drama? Or Shakespeare, who popularised a staged developmental schema with his 
Seven Ages of Man – the implication being that when we leave infancy, then 
childhood, then adulthood behind us, we cast off the psychic yoke that fitted 
us to each developmental niche?

The question is particularly pertinent in midlife, so often thought of as a 
time of stagnation and not as an opportunity for self-reinvention. After all, 
it is all too easy to succumb to a backward pull, spurred by a sense of 
overwhelming loss (of youth, reproductive life, energy, libido, our figures, 
our parents, any sense of a protracted future) and seek refuge in clinging to 
our youthful past. Much harder to bury the ghosts of our younger selves, 
embracing all the uncertainty and fuzziness that brings, and head forth into 
the unknown

Shakespeare or Freud? I asked myself this question many times as I negotiated 
my changing relationship with my daughter, who arrived at puberty precisely as 
I was experiencing menopause. Things came to a small crisis. At opposite ends 
of the reproductive spectrum, we began to mirror each other. Her hormones raged 
as mine plummeted; she discovered sleep as I turned insomniac; both our bodies 
underwent alarming changes – hairs sprouting where you don’t want them, chests 
growing, in her case, and sagging in mine; her menses beginning, mine ending. 
Our household was trigger-happy, madcap, combustible.

My daughter and I continue to mirror each other as we chug along our separate 
paths in life

My challenge as a middle-aged woman wanting to move forward was to separate 
from her – or from the younger self of whom she so strongly reminded me – just 
as she needed to distance herself from any notion that she was my mini-me.

In both cases the lure was that of redefining oneself. Shakespeare beckoned. 
More accurately,Erik Erikson 
<http://www.erikson.edu/about/history/erik-erikson/> beckoned – the 
psychologist who formalised a multistage model of adult development in the 
mid-20th century after concluding that our identities, far from being fixed in 
infancy as Freud had insisted, were instead fundamentally malleable.

Erikson’s theories gave me hope, affirming that personal growth might be set 
against the losses of midlife. I needed to embrace what he called generativity, 
which included all kinds of giving back to society: the production of art as 
well as children; the support offered to younger generations; a deeper 
engagement with others. If we failed to do this, he wrote, we risked 
developmental arrest in midlife or, worse, falling into an atavistic 
narcissism. “An adult must become a numinous model in the next generation’s 
eyes, and… act as a judge of evil and a transmitter of ideal values.”

Erikson’s developmental theories have been given a boost in recent years by 
discoveries in neuroscience which suggest that the adult brain is plastic and 
thus capable of reconfiguring itself structurally in response to learned 
experience. This retrofitting of our neural circuits suggests that we keep 
growing, keep changing, and that life’s arc might trace an upward curve and 
plateau for many good long years before entering an eventual tailspin. It 
suggests, too, that development is relational, pummelled into shape by social 
interaction then burnished and polished by mirrors.

Just as my daughter’s brain undergoes the accelerated growth of adolescence, 
my midlife brain is adapting and maturing, becoming less fixed and more 
malleable. In the best of my forward-looking scenarios, she and I continue to 
mirror each other as we chug along our separate paths in life – she learning 
the lessons of her mistakes and me doing as much needful forgetting as 
generative self-inventing. Until, with Shakespeare in hand, I begin navigating 
the seventh age of man.

Marina Benjamin’s The Middlepause is published by Scribe, £14.99. To buy a 
copy for £11.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-middlepause.html>
 