
There’s so much that you’re not supposed to do when making choux: don’t add 
the flour too slowly, don’t add the egg too fast, don’t add too much of this or 
too little of that, don’t open the oven door ... So many don’ts make me anxious 
and I’m not convinced that choux is the goldilocks it’s made out to be.

Buttermilk recipes: The big tang theory | Ruby Tandoh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/02/buttermilk-recipes-doughnuts-blueberry-soda-bread-buns>
I’d rather consider choux in less authoritarian terms: as long as you stay 
true to the spirit to the recipe and add the flour, milk, butter and egg in 
more or less the right proportions, you’ll be fine. There are only these 
non-negotiables as far as I’m concerned: cook the choux paste on the hob for a 
good few minutes while you stir it, giving it a chance to dry out; whisk the 
eggs in really thoroughly to break up any clumps; try to give the buns a good 
uninterrupted stint in a hot oven to let the steam puff out those 
characteristic bubbles and allow the shell to set.

But it’s only pastry.

Classic chocolate eclairs

These simple chocolate eclairs are nothing new, but that doesn’t mean they’re 
not special: baked well, they’re crisp, soft, light and decadent all at once.

Makes 8
50g salted butter
80ml milk
80ml water
60g plain flour
2 large eggs

 For the filling
300g frozen fruit (I used raspberries and blackberries)
100g caster sugar
300ml double cream
 For the glaze
100g dark chocolate
100ml double cream
2 tbsp runny honey

1 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/gas mark 7. Line a large baking tray with 
baking parchment.

2 Combine the butter, milk and water in a pan over a low heat and cook until 
the butter has melted. Don’t let the mixture boil. As soon as the butter has 
melted and the liquid is scalding hot, add the flour all at once and 
immediately beat everything together. Cook the paste over a medium heat, 
beating it constantly, for 3-5 minutes. Leave to cool for 5 minutes.

3 Beat the eggs lightly together then add to the flour paste a little at a 
time, whisking thoroughly between each addition. Once all the egg has been 
added, the choux mixture should be golden, glossy and just thick enough to hold 
its shape when piped.

4 Spoon the choux dough into a piping bag with a 2cm nozzle and pipe eight 
10cm lines of the mixture onto the prepared baking sheet.

5 Bake for 20 minutes in the preheated oven, then turn the temperature down to 
180C/350F/gas mark 4 and cook for a further 15 minutes, until a rich golden 
brown and firm to the touch. Once they’re baked, transfer the buns to a wire 
rack, cut each completely in half along its middle and leave the top and bottom 
halves, cut side facing up, to cool completely.

6 For the filling, heat the frozen fruit with half the sugar until the fruit 
is softened and juicy. Whisk the remaining 50g sugar with the double cream 
until the cream holds soft peaks.

▲ Tip: You don’t have to use the fruit, but the sharp berries give these 
pastries an edge they really benefit from

7 For the chocolate glaze, chop the chocolate into small chunks and heat it, 
with the double cream, in a bowl set over a pan of hot water. Once the 
chocolate has completely melted into the cream, stir in the honey.

8 To assemble, spoon a little of the fruit into each of the lower halves of 
the choux buns. Top with cream (pipe it for neatness). Dip the bun tops in the 
warm chocolate glaze then place gently on top of the filled bottoms. Serve soon 
after assembling.

Dairy-free toffee apple choux doughnuts

These are dairy-free, forgoing the usual butter and milk in favour of soy or 
nut milks and a little olive oil. You needn’t worry that the taste will suffer, 
though: I found that these actually rose better than “normal” choux, and the 
flavour is great. You can, of course, use dairy ice-cream if you’re not fussy 
about keeping these milk-free, and swap in butter for the olive oil in the 
caramelised apples.

Makes 8
200ml unsweetened dairy-free milk
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp caster sugar
A pinch of salt
80g plain flour
3 large eggs

 For the caramelised apple
6 cox or braeburn apples
3 tbsp light olive oil
75g soft light brown sugar
½ tsp cinnamon
500ml vanilla dairy-free ice-cream
Icing sugar, to top

1 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/gas mark 7 and line a large baking tray with 
baking parchment.

2 To make the choux doughnuts, heat the dairy-free milk with the olive oil, 
sugar and salt over a low heat until scalding hot. Add the flour and 
immediately whisk together to fully combine. Keeping the pan over a medium-low 
heat, beat the flour mixture for 5 minutes, letting it thicken to a paste-like 
consistency. Once it’s ready, remove the pan from the heat and leave to cool 
for 5 minutes or so.

3 Beat the eggs together then very gradually add them to the flour paste while 
you whisk. You probably won’t need all of the beaten egg – just keep adding it 
until the mixture becomes the right consistency. You’re looking for a thick, 
glossy paste that won’t spread limply across the baking tray, but which is just 
slack enough to be piped. Once the choux is ready, you can shape the buns.

4 Pipe the choux mixture on to the prepared baking tray – pipe into eight 
doughnut shapes. Bake in the preheated oven for 20 minutes then reduce the 
temperature to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Cook for a further 15 minutes at this 
cooler temperature, then remove from the oven and cool for a few minutes before 
halving with a sharp serrated knife across their bellies. Leave to cool 
completely, cut sides up, on a wire rack.

5 To make the caramelised apples, peel and core the apples, then slice into 
wedges no thicker than 1cm at their widest edge. Heat the oil over a medium-low 
heat in a frying pan, then cook the apples for 8-10 minutes, turning them 
halfway. Add the sugar and cinnamon to the slightly softened fruit and cook for 
a further 2-3 minutes.

6 To assemble, dollop spoonfuls (quenelles, if you’re feeling fancy) of the 
ice-cream in a circle on the bottom half of each choux doughnut. Top with the 
caramelised apple slices and sandwich with the upper halves of the choux buns. 
Dust with icing sugar and devour straight away.
 