
For those who may have missed it, we published a tribute cryptic puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26118> on Friday 29 November to 
Araucaria (John Graham),who died on 26 November, aged 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/nov/26/araucaria-crossword-setter-john-graham-dies>
. It was set by Enigmatist, Paul and Shed, who for some years have together 
with Araucaria been setting an occasional series of puzzles under the byline 
Biggles, chosen because all four of them shared the same first name (John), so 
that collectively they were "we Johns", or W.E. Johns, the author and creator 
of Biggles. The lunches to celebrate these occasional puzzles were held, 
naturally, at Biggleswade in Bedfordshire, conveniently close to Araucaria's 
home near Cambridge.

On 27 November the Guardian's G2 also republished John Graham's first and last 
puzzles for the paper. The first, anonymously, was in the Manchester Guardian 
for 10 July 1958. The last, as Araucaria, was in the Guardian for 16 November 
this year. I have been asked why the first was only No. 165, as the Manchester 
Guardian had been publishing crosswords regularly since 1929 and as the 2013 
puzzle was No. 26,107. The answer is that the original numbering system was for 
each separate each calendar year. At some point John Perkin, my predecessor as 
crossword editor, put a wet towel round his head and computed how many daily 
puzzles had appeared since 1929 and then introduced our present numbering 
system.

One of Araucaria's best (and most quoted) long anagrams is "O hark the herald 
angels sing the boy's descent, which lifted up the world", which produces WHILE 
SHEPHERDS WATCHED THEIR FLOCKS BY NIGHT/ALL SEATED IN THE GROUND. I vowed to 
trace where it first appeared, while he still alive. And I have failed. John 
knew, of course, that it was one of his clues and he was even modestly proud of 
it. But he couldn't for the life of him remember where or when it had been 
appeared. And, unlike most other setters, he never kept any record of his past 
puzzles, let alone any index of his past clues. This way of working was why all 
his puzzles were so fresh. But it reduced to zero his usefulness as a research 
assistant into his past work. Many people have offered me helpful suggestions 
as to where to look, but so far to no avail. The search continues.

As the centenary date for the publication of the first-ever crossword puzzle 
in a newspaper nears (21 December 1913 in the New York World) the Guardian folk 
are doing their best to mark and publicise the occasion. First, our very own 
setter, Paul (AKA John Halpern), has just publishedThe Centenary of the 
Crossword <http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/0233003967> (André Deutsch), which takes 
you on a personal journey through his world of the crossword. Then our very own 
blogger, Alan Connor, has come out withTwo Girls, One on Each Knee 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B00DH4VYDI> (Particular Books), which explores in a 
new way the language of the crossword and the coding of clues.

Incidentally, Alan's title is taken from a clue set by our very own Rufus 
(Roger Squires): the two girls being Pat and Ella, giving you one PATELLA for 
each knee. This is the third time that a Rufus/Squires clue has been borrowed 
in this way. In 2002 Sandy Balfour published a personal memoir about his own 
actual and psychological journey from South Africa to England and the part that 
crosswords played in it. His title was a Rufus clue: "Pretty Girl in Crimson 
Rose (8)": answer REBELLED (BELLE in RED). And in 2008 Val Gilbert, then still 
crossword editor of the Daily Telegraph, produced biographical essays on and 
typical puzzles from her "six greatest Telegraph setters". She chose a cryptic 
Squires clue for the title of her book: "A display of lights (9)". Answer 
CROSSWORD, as a "light" is variously a blank space in a crossword grid, or all 
the letters of an answer to a clue.

Complaint of the month. The Quick for 12 November (No. 13,576 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/13576>, 17 down) had a clue 
"River rising in Derbyshire and flowing into the Irish Sea (6)" for MERSEY. Not 
so, came many voices, questioning my grip on geography is addition to other 
academic disciplines. The Mersey is formed of three tributaries, I was told, 
the Rivers Etherow, Goyt and Tame. The Mersey only starts at the confluence of 
the Goyt and Tame in central Stockport, it was asserted. But, falling back on 
my (modern) dictionaries, I found in: a) the Oxford Dictionary of English – a 
river in NW England which rises in the Peak District of Derbyshire; and b) 
Collins – a river in W England, rising in N Derbyshire.

It also appears (though I have not been able to check this) that some maps 
show the Mersey starting at Compstall, which is a few miles up the Goyt, while 
the 1911 edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica declares that the Mersey 
starts at the junction of the Goyt and Etherow, near Marple in Cheshire. It is 
all very confusing. How can the start of the Mersey be asserted with such 
authority to be in so many different places? I wonder if the constant 
reorganisation of local government over the years could have something to do 
with it.

Advance notice that this year's Christmas special puzzle will be published on 
Saturday 21 December. It is again being set by Maskarade. Also in that issue, 
as well as the regular Saturday Quick, the Guardian Review will be publishing a 
themed crossword to go with its Christmas literary quiz.

The November Genius (No 125 by Paul) caused difficulties when typing in the 
solutions, as on many browsers letters in the bottom half of the grid entered 
themselves twice per keystroke and it was tedious to have to delete the second 
of these each time. My apologies. We were not able to discover what was making 
this particular puzzle unstable in this way. It does not seem to be happening 
with the December puzzle. Despite this we had a high number of correct entries 
(327 by the deadline, with 43 of them on the first day). Dave H. was first in 
at 12.29 and "wat 5" second, 18 minutes later. Dave from Paderborn was the 
first overseas entry at 01:50.

Congratulations to Sheila Williams from London, who is the winner of our 
November Genius puzzle.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com> . 
For Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 