
Fleetwood has three lighthouses, more than any town in Britain. Only two 
played at the heart of Town's defence on Saturday: Nathan Pond, whose 10 years 
at the club have seen five promotions in eight years that carried them into the 
Football League for the first time last year, and Ryan Cresswell, the captain. 
For more than an hourExeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc>, the visitors to Highbury, 
seemed to acknowledge the warning signals. Then, no sooner had Fleetwood 
scored, in the 71st minute, than Exeter swept through with a fine disregard to 
win the match with two goals in four minutes. Fleetwood, starting second in 
League Two, slipped to fourth. Exeter rose from ninth to sixth, a point behind.

These are exciting times for Town and town. Over the years various clubs have 
gone to the wall in their name much as the local fishing industry collapsed 
with the '70s cod wars. (In one Frank Swift played for them.) The club was 
wobbling again in 2003 when Andy Pilley, chairman of BES Commercial Gas, bought 
it. The average crowd was 134. Last season it was 2,856. Pilley has put in £10m 
in expanding the capacity above 5,000 and creating 400 jobs. BES are sponsors 
and have offices there. And plans are afoot to turn disused farmland into a 
training ground. The energy, pride and ambition are palpable.

Last December, when they were sixth, they changed managers unexpectedly. The 
Cod Army – the team's nickname not its followers' – were sixth when Micky 
Mellon, responsible for their last two promotions, was replaced by the untried 
Graham Alexander, who took them to fourth in February before they tailed off to 
13th.

This was Pilley the entrepreneur, though Alexander had distinguished himself 
on the field, notably with Preston and Burnley, with whom he became in 2009 the 
oldest Premier League debutant at 37. He played more than 1,000 games for club 
and Scotland at right-back or defensive midfielder and on Saturday looked fit 
for as many again. He was in charge of youth development at Preston and came 
with a clutch of former playmates in Chris Lucketti (assistant), David Lucas 
(goalkeeping) and Youl Mawene (fitness). There were no complaints in Saturday's 
disappointment.

"It was a frustrating afternoon," he said. "We played some good football but 
not quite quick enough. Exeter nullified the space. At half-time we recharged 
thought processes to do things quicker but after we scored we took a backward 
step and lost our mentality of going forward. Half a yard back is all the 
difference. Exeter's approach was probably a precursor of what to expect if we 
stay near the top."

Exeter's 3-5-2 proclaimed an intention to frustrate, with wing-backs quick to 
retreat. Artur Krysiak in goal went high to tip over Steven Schumacher's drive, 
low to foil Cresswell's header, but that was all in a first half of prodigious 
and prodigal home possession. Aside from Antoni Sarcevic, as Mancunian as 
Schumacher is Scouse – no continentals here – Fleetwood's advances were as 
rigidly predictable as that of the trams north from Blackpool.

Matty Blair's introduction, coupled with Alexander's clarification, wrought 
instant response. A cross from the right-back, Conor McLaughlin – Fleetwood Mac 
no doubt – reached Blair, who dragged back and shot to the far corner. Paul 
Tisdale, Exeter's manager, flat-capped against the sun – not just for the trip 
north – looked ready to slip the whippets, except that they were mostly 
injured. So instead Scott Bennett, one of those centre-backs, infiltrated the 
Cod defences and steered home two striker's goals. Alexander threw on Jon 
Parkin, a slab of gingerbread, but the Grecians earned their victory.

For the moment heroes were hard to find but Fleetwood, on a finger of land 
pointing north across Morecambe Bay, may soon be famous for football as well as 
Fisherman's Friend lozenges and lighthouses.
 