
Gretna have been admitted to the Scottish League in place of Airdrieonians, 
putting an end to the hopes ofAirdrie United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/airdrie> and five other teams.

Scottish Football League secretary Peter Donald has admitted that the murky 
recent past of Airdrieoneans was the major reason why would-be replacement 
Airdrie United was strangled at birth by rival chairmen.

The club, set up by accountant Jim Ballantyne, existed only on paper but had 
been the hot favourite to be voted into the SFL's Third Division to fill the 
void left by Airdrieonians, who were shut down by liquidators KPMG at the end 
of last season.

A playing staff had been recruited ready to sign on the dotted line, 1,500 
fans had pledged to buy season tickets and many were sure also to travel to 
away games.

But the 27 SFL chairmen eligible to vote turned down the obvious financial 
benefits to instead welcome Gretna back to Scottish football for the first time 
since 1947.

Ballantyne had made strenuous efforts to disassociate himself from the 
financial mismanagement that had seen Airdrieonians disappear under a mountain 
of debt.

The accountant even offered to pay back some of it as a gesture of goodwill if 
the application were to be successful.

But the chairmen decided that to allow Airdrie United to emerge from the 
blackened ashes of Airdrieonians would be setting a dangerous precedent that 
might see cash-strapped football clubs disappear only to reappear under a 
different guise.

Donald said: "I think the potential precedent that may have been set may have 
been a major factor.

"There was certainly concern about that and I think it was certainly one 
element that went towards it."

Just days before the vote, Airdrie United tried to play a trump card by 
announcing it had secured an agreement with KPMG to use the vacant New 
Broomfield Stadium on matchdays.

But Donald revealed that such a deal was not enough to satisfy SLF rules as a 
five-year agreement was necessary.

He added: "Following the sad demise of Airdrieonians, there was very limited 
time for Jim Ballantyne and his team to prepare and they were almost victorious.

"I don't know what is going to happen to Airdrie United now but there may be 
an opportunity for the club to make an application in the future."

That depends, of course, on the willingness of the backers to continue and of 
securing a place in another league.

But Donald offered Gretna as an example that perseverance does eventually pay 
off as the club had tried before to be accepted into the SFL.

He said: "Their application proved they had learned from previous experience. 
They continued to improve facilities and had a reasonable playing record."

The voting went to a second ballot, with Gretna having won the most votes 
first time round but not enough to secure a majority of 14.

That was achieved in the second ballot, with UniBond League Gretna polling 16 
ahead of Airdrie United's 11.

Now Gretna will kick off their new career back in their homeland with a home 
match with Morton on August 3.

Gretna secretary Ron MacGregor declared: "It is a great day for Gretna 
Football Club. We can now come back to Scotland."

Airdrie United chairman Jim Ballantyne could not hide his disappointment and 
questioned whether the SFL chairmen had made the right decision.

He said: "I am adamant that Airdrie had more to offer Scottish Football than 
our rivals, but the Scottish League chairmen thought otherwise - and I have to 
accept that."

Ballantyne wished Gretna well as he pondered the future of football in the 
town. "I am desperately disappointed by this decision, not just for myself and 
my fellow directors but, most importantly, for the people of Airdrie.

"They wanted to continue the town's 124-year association with senior football, 
and the whole community - people in the street, politicians and businesses - 
were 100 per cent behind us.

"Yes, it's hurting but I do congratulate Gretna on their victory today and I 
genuinely wish them well in the Bell's Third Division."

Gala Fairydean, Preston Athletic, Cove Rangers, Huntly and Edinburgh City were 
the other disappointed candidates.
 