
Use of mobiles and tablets is increasing fast with almost 30% of visits to 
theguardian.com now coming through handheld devices. We want our mobile and 
tablet readers to have the best possible experience when using the Guardian 
website on smaller screens. Therefore, after several months of development, we 
are delighted to announce the launch of our new responsivemobile website 
<http://m.theguardian.com>. 

We have rebuilt our mobile site from the ground up, focusing on improving user 
experience, reliability and download speed. Our aim is to provide the best user 
experience for reading our content, whatever your device. The new mobile 
website is a major first step towards thatresponsive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/developer-blog/2012/oct/18/responsive-design-guardian-introduction>
 goal, though it is currently only optimised for smaller screens: smartphones 
and tablets up to seven inches. If you view the site on an iPad or anything 
larger, you will still see the desktop site.

Experience


The site is designed to provide a better reading experience, with a focus on 
simplicity. On any mobile device, you will be presented with a clear view of 
the news with minimal distraction.

On our new homepage and the main section pages, we hope providing more detail 
for each of the main stories in the form of a headline, explanatory text and an 
image will provide more context on the news and make it easier for you to find 
the stories you are interested in exploring further.

We've switched from standard webfonts to our bespoke Guardian Egyptian 
typeface and increased the size which we think provides a great reading 
experience. From each story you'll find related articles to allow you to easily 
continue your exploration of a specific story. Images within stories will also 
increase in size as you view with larger screens.

If you follow our live blogs, you'll find these now auto-update every minute 
and football fans will find we've improved ourlive scores 
<http://m.theguardian.com/football/live> page to update every 10 seconds. 

Speed and reliability


Overall you will find the site fast to use, as we've optimised the code to 
make it more efficient to download. We've used the very latest technologies to 
allow us to deliver content quicker, while also ensuring the site is accessible 
to all and functionally rich. Our new architecture allows the site to be much 
more robust during high-traffic periods.

Responsive across devices


Rather than designing one size for all mobile devices, you'll find our new 
site isresponsive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/developer-blog/2012/oct/18/responsive-design-guardian-introduction>
 and will scale up on mobiles and smaller tablets. The site is optimised for up 
to seven inch devices, but you can still use it at any size.

We're continuing to work on the design, functionality and user interface, and 
we are committed to learning from how you use the site so it evolves to best 
serve all web experiences. The site still sits at m.theguardian.com and 
m.guardiannews.com and will continue to do so for the near future, but our end 
goal is to have all platforms on the same web address.

Evolution of functionality


Rather than release a site with every feature built, you'll find this site 
will continue to grow and evolve. We've released beta versions of this site 
early and will continue to push out updates often to continue to test and 
improve it.

This means you're seeing the benefits as early as possible, but also means 
you're seeing just the first steps toward a much better overall experience. We 
are working hard to add features such as search and the ability to write 
comments to match desktop website functionality.

As an improvement to our old mobile site, you'll already find we now have much 
improved swipe-through photo galleries and you can watch videos on your mobile 
device.

Feedback


We'd really like your feedback. Please visit the link at the bottom of the 
page on a mobile and let us know what you think. You can also leave a comment 
below or tweet us at@guardianmobile <https://twitter.com/guardianmobile>. We 
hope you enjoy the site, but if you have any technical difficulties please email
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>.
 