
Ruud Gullit will produce his latest foreign signing at St James' Park today. 
Louis Saha, a French under-21 international striker, joined Newcastle United on 
loan fromMetz <https://www.theguardian.com/football/metz> until the end of the 
season with a view to making the move permanent.

Saha, who passed a fitness test yesterday, is said to be an imposing, athletic 
left-footed forward like the sidelined Duncan Ferguson but is currently out of 
favour at Metz because he does not fit tactically.

 "Newcastle play a more open game and that will suit him," said Metz's general 
manager Patrick Razurel, "and we have discussed an option for Newcastle to buy 
him. We have mentioned a figure to them but I do not want to say what it is."

 It is a timely fillip for Newcastle with Ferguson out of action until 
possibly the end of March, after surgery on his groin this week, and the 
purchase of Milan's Ibrahim Bahaving fallen through. Saha may soon be joined by 
another foreign import. Yesterday a spokesman for the Italian Serie B club 
Torino said that it was "almost certain" that Pietro Parente, a right-sided 
midfielder, would be joining Newcastle imminently and on the same loan 
conditions as Saha.

 Parente has been out of the Torino first team recently but was considered a 
major prospect when he joined them from Bari three seasons ago.

 In terms of positions the 20-year-old Saha and 27-year-old Parente would be 
direct replacements for Ferguson and the departed Keith Gillespie. Without any 
initial outlay Gullit would still be left with money to finance another major 
signing. Last night there were reports that Crystal Palace's Matt Jansen was 
the manager's next target.

 Jansen is a Newcastle fan and was disappointed that the former United manager 
Kenny Dalglish did not show more interest in signing him while h was still with 
his home-town club Carlisle. But Jansen played extremely well as a substitute 
against Newcastle last Saturday in the FA Cup and must have impressed Gullit.
 