
We all know the pain of a dodgy cut and blow-dry, or the hairdresser who never 
shuts up (or who never says a word, if that’s your thing). Less known is beauty 
parlour syndrome – or vertebrobasilar insufficiency – the term for a stroke 
thought to be caused by getting your hair washed at a salon. Experts believe 
that the process of tilting the neck backwards over a basin can, on extremely 
rare occasions, tear the artery, leading to blood clots and strokes.

This is what happened to Dave Tyler, who collapsed in 2011 two days after 
getting his hair cut at a Brighton salon andhas just won £90,000 in compensation
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4021282/Customer-wins-90k-hair-salon-shampoo-rinse-gives-stroke-Father-two-suffers-near-fatal-blood-clot-head-bent-backwards-basin.html>
. At London’s National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, he was 
reportedly asked by a consultant if he had had his hair cut recently. Beauty 
parlour syndrome wascoined in the Journal of the American Medical Association 
in 1993 by Dr Michael Weintraub 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/04/28/news/rare-threat-of-stroke-at-the-beauty-salon.html>
 after he saw five women who had developed serious neurological symptoms 
following shampoos at hair salons. Complaints included severe dizziness, loss 
of balance and facial numbness. Four out of five suffered strokes.

“I have never heard of it,” admits my Edinburgh hairdresser, Lesley Moses, who 
has been in the business for 25 years and has been washing and cutting my hair 
for nearly 10 of those. “I suppose it has to do with your basin: cheaper ones 
don’t give the right support. Mostly it’s about the consultation with the 
client. That’s the point where I assess what needs to happen at the basin and 
beyond.” Has he ever known anyone to get ill or injured after coming to see 
him? “No,” he says. “I have had the odd client who has made me aware of neck 
problems, but then we change the washing position.”

Hairdressing remains an unregulated industry and the UK is one of the only 
countries in the world that does not have a system of compulsory registration. 
Hairdressers do not need a formal qualification to shampoo hair. Put that 
together with sharp instruments, high heat and powerful chemicals and the salon 
starts to look less like an oasis of calm and more like a barbershop of 
horrors. Examples given by firms specialising in salon injury claims include 
chemical, electrical and heat burns, allergic reactions and anaphylactic shock, 
and poor application of chemicals. One spiel begins: “Did you know the peroxide 
used to bleach your hair in a high-street salon is the same chemical that was 
used to propel early rockets?”

On extremely rare occasions, effects can be fatal. In 2012, Julie McCabe died 
a year after she developed a severe allergic reaction to L’Oréal hair dye 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-31536027>, fell into a coma and 
never regained consciousness. At the inquest, the coroner said he believed it 
was only the second death in the UK resulting from the use of hair dye. The 
Guardian’s beauty columnist Sali Hughes has alsowritten about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/nov/28/could-hair-dye-kill-you> 
being admitted to hospital with a potentially fatal reaction after her hair was 
dyed at a salon.

“Clients can become allergic to products that they have not been allergic to 
before,” Moses explains. “All colour clients should have a regular skin or 
patch test every six months.”
 