
A few weeks ago I tweeted disapprovingly 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/jayrayner1/status/723796218883788800> about a 
restaurant which was machine-cutting rather than hand-slicing its premium 
Spanish ham. This is a crime against jamon. I thought the world should know. 
Swiftly someone replied with three entirely predictable words: “First world 
problems.” Oh god. Here we go. One whinge about a food issue, and it’s time to 
reduce everything to a blunt moral calculus. Your service was too slow? First 
world problems. Your coffee was lukewarm? First world problems. Your bread is 
stale, your milk has soured, your portion size was meagre? First world bloody 
problems.

Let’s ignore the fact that nobody working in developmental politics or global 
aid describes impoverished parts of the globe as the “third world” any more, 
because it’s so damn patronising. Let’s focus instead on the sanctimonious 
self-regard of those who feel the need to point out that, while I’m fretting 
over the mis-slicing of pig, there is suffering in the world. I am thinking of 
ham. They are thinking only of the plight of Syria’s refugees.

Well, here’s the big news. Some of us can hold more than one thought in our 
heads at the same time. We can be both outraged at the UK government’s 
treatment of migrants in the Jungle at Calais, and furious that we were 
over-charged for our steak; we can worry about the availability of clean 
drinking water in Nigeria and be outraged by wine mark-ups in restaurants. 
These things are not mutually exclusive.

Because life is complicated. Take Rwanda. The country has made great strides 
economically but remains one of the world’s poorest. More than 40% of the 
population lives at or below the poverty line. That said, it has a growing 
middle class. In the capital Kigali, a number of modest restaurants have opened 
to serve them. One of these is called the Great Wall of China. I’ve eaten there 
and I can tell you it’s awful, a place where approximations of Asian 
ingredients are defiled nightly.

The 12 things that restaurants must stop doing in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/14/12-things-restaurants-must-stop-doing-in-2016-jay-rayner>
But now I’m confused. Presumably those people who bark about first world 
problems don’t regard Rwanda as being in the first world. So is the crappy food 
at the Great Wall of China a first world problem or not? More to the point, are 
newly middle-class Rwandans allowed to be furious about how bad the food is, or 
should they suffer in silence, simply because so many of their neighbours have 
yet to move up the social scale?

For god’s sake, let them be furious. They’ve earned the right. Yes, a little 
perspective is important, but sweating the smaller stuff is important too. Not 
long ago, on a trip to Belfast, I became intrigued by the intensity with which 
people in the city argued over which restaurant was better. They really gave a 
damn. A local explained it to me. “We just want to be like the rest of 
Britain,” he said. “Arguing over who makes the best burger is so much better 
than arguing about politics and trying to kill each other.”

The same applies to those issues dismissed clumsily as first world problems. 
Being furious about the machine slicing of iberico de bellota is noble. Sure, 
if this is your biggest worry then life isn’t too bad, but it does still need 
to be highlighted, because Spanish pigs deserve better. And when you do get ham 
cut the way you want it, you’ll discover something amazing: you will still have 
the capacity to be concerned about bigger issues too.

Get Observer Food Monthly with the Observer this Sunday. Click here to get £1 
off 
<http://imvoucher.uk/Templates/register/go/2/register.aspx?utm_source=editorial%20&utm_medium=editorial%20&utm_campaign=Aprnewspaper_editorial%20>
 