
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> joined Kimi 
Raikkonen and Felipe Massa at the top of the formula one drivers' championship 
after a stunning drive in the wet gave him victory in the British grand prix.

Hamilton, under pressure after failing to score a point in his previous two 
races, was one of the few drivers to cope with the damp conditions in 
Northamptonshire. A superb start thrust the British driver from fourth on the 
grid into second position and he passed his team-mate Heikki Kovalainen, who 
started on pole, to take the lead as early as lap four.

As havoc ruled around him, Hamilton kept his cool and, despite early pressure 
from Raikkonen and a scare going across the grass on lap 37, took the chequered 
flag over a minute ahead of BMW's Nick Heidfeld in second.

"It is by far the best victory I've ever had," said Hamilton. "The conditions 
were bad and as I was driving I thought, 'If I win this, it will be the best 
race I've ever done'."

"On my last lap, I could see the crowd starting to rise to their feet, and I 
was just praying, praying, praying I could get the car round. I want to 
dedicate this to my family because we all know I've had some troubles of late, 
so this is for them."

Rubens Barrichello took advantage of Honda's intelligent tyre strategy to take 
third - his first podium finish in three years - while Raikkonen and Kovalainen 
picked up points in fourth and fifth. Fernando Alonso, Jarno Trulli and Kazuki 
Nakajima were also in the points.

"It's fantastic," said Barrichello. "I've never lost the belief I have in me. 
I've this great feeling. It's like I'm young, I just love the sport. It was 
obviously a lucky day with the weather, but I love the wet weather conditions. 
It was a perfect race."

Hamilton joins a list of illustrious British names to win his home race, 
including Sterling Moss, Jackie Stewart, Nigel Mansell, Damon Hill and David 
Coulthard, the last to triumph in 2000, who failed to complete a lap today.

Hamilton now shares the lead in the drivers' championship, with Massa, who 
after an eventful race finished out of the points, and Raikkonen all on 48 
points. Robert Kubica is two points behind in fourth.
 