
The weekend was all about Nipplegate at the House of Hanover, Part II. If the 
storyline seems familiar, there were just enough twists and changes to keep the 
insalubrious masses interested. Unlike the earlier instalment, the sequel was 
not set in the lush surroundings of a Provence villa but at the slightly 
draftier AWD Arena. And major offence was taken at the topless frolicking 
itself, not its subsequent depiction in the media.

But let's start from the top. The derby between Hannover 96 and Werder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen> on Saturday had not only 
promised goals but also an answer to the question of who's number one in the 
north – Hamburger SV, who could rightfully claim this unofficial title a while 
a go, are sadly no longer in the running after they lost 3-2 to Frankfurt on 
Sunday night, a defeat that sucked Mary Arnesen's Frank-enstein of a team 
further into the relegation struggle.

Hannover <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover> were determined to 
settle this matter quickly. Inside 11 minutes, Mirko Slomka's men were 2-0 up 
thanks to goals from Szabolcs Huszti and Leon Andreasen. But Werder's 
formidable front-line kept probing away until Aaron Hunt (penalty) and the 
Chelsea loanee Kevin de Bruyne had equalised 15 minutes from the end. A 
thoroughly spectacular game then took a turn for the controversial.

Twice Werder thought they had scored a winner, twice the referee Deniz Ayetkin 
thought otherwise. Thomas Schaaf accepted that Sokratis had strayed offside in 
the first incident but angrily "shuddered" when he saw a repeat of the second 
situation: Sokratis was adjudged to have impeded Karim Haggui before Assani 
Lukimya's header. "We are still looking for the mistake," Schaaf commented 
acidly.

The moustachioed manager's afternoon was ruined altogether when the 
irrepressible Huszti saw that a last-minute cross was coming down behind him. 
The Hungarian playmaker adjusted himself, took to the air and smashed an 
overhead kick via Clemens Fritz's back into the Werder goal to win the derby in 
the most thrilling fashion. And then IT happened.

The 29-year-old Hungarian jumped over the advertising hoarding, mounted a 
fence and took of his shirt in jubilation and the crowd went mad. His team-mate 
Jan Schlaudraff had tried to stop him but was too late. When Huszti got back on 
to the pitch, Ayetkin showed him a yellow card for the fence-climbing and 
another for exposing his breasts. Huszti was sent-packing, then Ayetkin blew 
the final whistle.

The referee admitted that the decision had troubled him – "It hurt me" – but 
added that he rulebook left him little choice: "As the executive, I need to do 
this. I don't have any other option".

"It was a little stupid on my behalf," admitted Huszti. "I didn't know this 
rule but now I have learned something new".

Ayetkin and the referees' chief instructor Lutz Wagner were quick to point out 
that Fifa is to blame for the overkill. But was there perhaps something 
specifically German in the law's stringent application? After all, the relevant 
passage explicitly demands the officials to apply "common sense" when it comes 
to punishing over-exuberant jubilations. "It's the most non-sensical 
sending-off in the history of theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>," declared Welt.

That silly piece of jobsworthiness aside, it felt like a momentous win for 
Hannover. Their stealthy ascent to the top of the Bundesliga tree in recent 
years is set to continue; they have quietly established themselves not only as 
the best side in the north of the country but they have left plenty of more 
illustrious and/or wealthier names behind to be become the fourth power after 
Dortmund, Bayern and Schalke.

It is a remarkable achievement made all the more remarkable since the smooth 
Slomka and the gruff sporting director Hans-Jörg Schmadtke are about as 
compatible as an iPad and a C64 tape drive – there's simply no common 
wavelength. A public dispute between the president Martin Kind and naughty 
ultras, who had been hoisting up a banner displaying the face of the 
Hannover-born serial killer Fritz Haarmann (27 murders from 1918-24), wasn't 
exactly helpful either.

Never mind, though – Slomka's men keep growing collectively and individually 
where others are faltering. The inspired €750,000 return of Huszti after his 
three less-than-successful years at Zenit St Petersburg looks like another 
masterstroke. He had already provided the assists for all four goals in the 4-0 
win at Wolfsburg the week before. "Szabi is of the best creative players in the 
league," said Slomka.

A few hundred Hannover fans camped outside the stadium to buy tickets for the 
Europa League game at Twente Enschede, such is the euphoria about a side who 
have developed their slightly dour counter-attacking from a couple of seasons 
ago into an expansive, entertaining attacking style. No wonder Schmadtke has 
been – somewhat reluctantly – forced into opening new contract talks with 
Slomka. The 45-year-old's deal expires at the end of the season and there are 
envious glances from a certain Bavaria-based club who are unhappy that they've 
been little more than "number one in the south" in recent years.

Talking Points

He likes the smell of Wurstsemmel (sausage bun) in the early evening: Henry 
Kissinger came to see Fürth's 2-0 home defeat against Schalke at the Trolli 
Arena. The 89-year-old American had been a fan of his hometown club before his 
family fled Nazi Germany in 1938 and had long promised to see a game if they 
were promoted. "The German government used to send me their results [in the 
70s]," he recalled. "And when they were unhappy with me, I'd only get the score 
on a Tuesday."

The former US secretary of state was introduced to the team by the manager 
Mike Büskens and soon spread plenty of optimism. "I now wish them for 
championship title," he said. An interesting take on Fussball Realpolitik.

Talking of dark, conspiratorial forces, there's a delicious – if slightly 
implausible – theory about Hoffenheim's descent to hell doing the rounds. Are 
the bad results in fact engineered by parties interested in moving Mario Basler 
into the managerial job? The former Bayern midfielder is the son in law of the 
agent Roger Wittmann, who has been able to get a fair number of his players 
signed up at the club. One of them, the goalkeeper Tim Wiese, had a veritable 
stinker in the 5-3 defeat at SC Freiburg, where the defensive half of the team 
were constantly undermining useful efforts by the other half.

As a consequence, the manager Markus Babbel has told the board he wants to 
concentrate on coaching and give up his duties as general manager. Kicker 
magazine has linked the former Schalke supremo Andreas Müller with the vacant 
post. He used to get on pretty well with Wittmann, too.

Results


Augsburg 0-0 Wolfsburg

Bayern Munich 3-1 Mainz 05

Greuther Fürth 0-2 Schalke 04

Dortmund 3-0 Leverkusen

Hannover 3-2 Werder Bremen

VfB Stuttgart 0-0 F Düsseldorf

Mönchengladbach 2-3 Nürnberg

Feiburg 5-3 Hoffenheim

Eintracht Frankfurt 3-2 Hamburger SV
 