
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> midfielder Harry 
Forrester again proved a thorn in Dundee’s side with an injury-time headed 
winner at Ibrox. Forrester scored his third goal in as many games against the 
Tayside club to secure a 1-0 victory.

Rangers had endured a frustrating 90 minutes as Dundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> became increasingly assured in 
their defensive play after their hosts failed to capitalise on a lively start.

The visitors also created some decent chances, Tom Hateley having two 
free-kicks saved and Marcus Haber missing a free header.

Rangers found an extra gear in the final 15 minutes but, with Martyn Waghorn 
unavailable because of a rib injury, their late pressure looked to have fizzled 
out.

However, Joe Dodoo turned on to his right foot on the left wing and delivered 
a cross which fellow substitute Forrester glanced into the far corner.

Rangers, who stay third in the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/brendan-rodgers-defence-celtic-scottish-premiership-kilmarnock>
, took the early initiative and created some openings with some sharp passing 
in the final third.

Joe Garner was at the centre of the action. The striker screwed a shot wide 
after a good turn and chipped just over from 30 yards before his diagonal ball 
almost found Kenny Miller.

Scott Bain saved from Jason Holt as the former Hearts man and fellow 
midfielder Josh Windass moved around to good effect. Dundee defender Kevin 
Gomis did well to clear Holt’s dangerous ball across the six-yard box before 
blocking Garner’s unconvincing attempt from a Windass cutback.

Dundee, again playing with a three-man central defence, restricted the Rangers 
chances as the half progressed and they threatened twice themselves in quick 
succession. Hateley had a free-kick pushed wide before his corner found Haber 
completely unmarked, but the Canada striker fluffed his header.

Bain saved from Windass from close range late in the half but Rangers found it 
increasingly difficulty to break the visitors down after the interval and the 
home fans showed their frustration when they booed Mark Warburton’s decision to 
take off Windass. Barrie McKay came on.

The visitors then had a particularly fruitful spell with Wes Foderingham doing 
well to tip over Hateley’s free-kick before the former Motherwell man found 
Gomis unmarked from another, but the French defender could not steer his header 
on target.

Clint Hill then slid to prevent James Vincent converting Haber’s low cross 
after Haber had shrugged off Andy Halliday.

But Rangers found an added edge in the final 15 minutes. Bain denied Holt with 
a brilliant diving save after Dundee lost the ball on the edge of their box, 
Garner was inches away from connecting with Dodoo’s cross, and the goalkeeper 
made another decent save from Halliday’s free-kick.

Dundee looked to have weathered the storm but Forrester had the final say.
 