
The football equality campaign Kick It Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kick-it-out> have warned Hartlepool 
supporters over a Bob Marley-themed fancy-dress day planned for their League 
Two trip to Carlisle on the final day of the season.

Officials from the anti-racism body say they have acted on complaints from some
Hartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> fans and urged 
Carlisle to refuse admission to any fans who might decide to “black up” for the 
occasion.

Jamaica’s multimillion-selling reggae artist was famed for his music and as a 
Rastafarian for his dreadlocked look. He died of cancer aged 36 in 1981.

A statement from Kick It Out said: “We have received a number of complaints 
from Hartlepool United supporters about the Bob Marley fancy-dress theme 
planned by a group of the club’s fans for their fixture againstCarlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> United at Brunton Park on 
Saturday 2 May.

“The main concerns raised have been over the potential of fans deciding to 
‘black up’.

“We have subsequently followed up on the complaints by contacting both 
Hartlepool United and Carlisle United on the matter. We clearly outlined that 
‘blacking up’ has historically been a way of acting out racist stereotypes, and 
while the theme planned by fans may be well-intended and chosen as part of an 
annual fancy-dress tradition, such behaviour, if it occurs, is likely to cause 
offence.

“We have provided guidance to both clubs on the matter, and advised Carlisle 
United of our own stance that if any fans do choose to ‘black up’ they should 
be refused entry to their stadium. We have also contacted the Football 
Association, the Football League, and the United Kingdom Football Policing Unit 
to inform them of the complaints we have received from Hartlepool United 
supporters.

“If we do receive complaints informing us that supporters have ‘blacked up’ at 
the fixture between Carlisle United and Hartlepool United, or that any 
incidents or disturbances of a discriminatory nature have occurred, we will 
follow our usual procedures by making the Football Association and the Football 
League aware for them to investigate.”

Neither Carlisle nor Hartlepool were immediately available for comment but the 
Carlisle manager, Keith Curle, told the local News & Star at a press conference 
this week: “I’ve been to fancy-dress parties when white people have dressed up 
as Bob Marley. I haven’t been offended.”
 