
Hartlepool have confirmed that they will not be signing the convicted rapist 
Ched Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans>. Ronnie Moore, the 
manager, suggested on Saturday that, should it be possible, he would like the 
former Sheffield United forward to sign, prompting an angry backlash from fans 
and Hartlepool’s MP, Iain Wright.

However, the club clarified the situation on Sunday with a statement on their 
official website, making clear that they have no plan to recruit Evans.

The statement said: “Following media reports relating to the possible signing 
of Ched Evans the Club wishes to make its position clear.

“1. Hartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> United do not 
intend signing Ched Evans and, for the avoidance of doubt, will not be doing 
so, irrespective of his obvious ability as a football player. 

“2. This story has emerged following an unsubstantiated internet rumour which 
the manager was asked to comment upon. The manager responded hypothetically to 
the situation by stating “if it could happen I would want it to happen”. This 
response was based upon the player’s obvious ability as a footballer and as 
such as then been headlined by the media without asking the Club for their 
official position.

“3. The club can fully understand the concerns of supporters and the general 
public and regrets any misconception portrayed.

“4. After a highly positive week at Hartlepool United following the takeover 
by new owners and the appointment of a new manager, the owners are saddened by 
this unfortunate turn of events and wish to draw a line under it immediately.’

Hartlepool’s chairman, Peter Harris, went on to say: “We are upset at the 
manner in which this story has escalated and wish to make it clear that the 
player will not be joining the club.

“All we are concentrating on is league survival and do not want anything to 
upset that goal. The club regrets any upset that may have been caused but we 
feel we must deal with this matter quickly and put the story to bed once and 
for all.”

Moore had been asked about the possibility of signing Evans after their 1-1 
draw with Oxford.

He said: “It’s a possibility. If it could happen, I would want it to happen. 
He is a proven scorer; he’s served his time and the boy wants to play football. 
If there is a chance he might come here, I don’t see any reason why he 
shouldn’t. He has made a mistake and maybe he hasn’t apologised in the right 
way – and I know he has an appeal case pending – but if he gets on the park, he 
would go a long way to getting us out of trouble.”

Wright said that signing Evans, who served 2½ years of a five-year sentence 
for raping a 19-year-old woman in 2011, would send the wrong message to young 
fans.

“I love my club, I love Hartlepool United,” said Wright. “There’s a reason why 
no other team in the Football League wants to sign him – he is a pariah. I was 
at the match and there were lots of young lads there supporting Hartlepool 
United. I just think it sends out such a wrong message to young men in terms of 
it being OK for a rapist to play football. It’s entirely wrong.”

Sarah Green, a spokeswoman for the campaign group End Violence Against Women 
Coalition, said: “Ched Evans is an unrepentant convicted rapist. Any club who 
sign him need to think hard about the message they are sending to their fans, 
to the local community and to all football supporters.”
 