
Paul Hartley completed a tremendous week with a double to seal a 4-1 
Premierleague win for Hearts atLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> yesterday.

The Scotland international had been commended for his displays in the World 
Cup qualifiers against Italy and Norway and he grabbed a brace at Almondvale to 
extend the Jambos' lead at the top of the table to five points.

Hearts' majority shareholder Vladimir Romanov had spent yesterday morning in 
Edinburgh, briefing the club's supporters on his plans to increase the capacity 
of Tynecastle Stadium, install a hotel at the ground and continue to bankroll 
signings whichHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> could never 
have dreamed of even a year ago. He then travelled to this easy win in West 
Lothian on a supporters' bus.

It was all routine fare for followers of Hearts these days and, if the 
Lithuanian banker was to tell them that Santa Claus really did exist, you get 
the feeling they would most likely believe it, perhaps with good reason.

These are not just heady times at Heart of Midlothian - they are verging on 
the incredible. George Burley's side have now won their opening six SPL 
matches, a feat not achieved by the Edinburgh club since rationing was in 
force. And at a time when Kofi Annan may be a necessary visitor to Burley's 
dressing room, it was heartening to see Scots to the fore in claiming three 
points after the Czech midfielder Rudi Skacel's early opening goal.

For it was Hartley and Andy Webster, two stars of their national team's 2-1 
win in Oslo, who cemented this victory. Craig Gordon, who rightly earned praise 
not only for his display in Norway, but also for nullifying the threat of Italy 
at Hampden last Saturday, confirmed his worth again by producing an early 
candidate for save of the season late in the second half.

After Rangers dropped two points at Falkirk on Saturday, Hearts hold a 
five-point lead over Gordon Strachan's Celtic and are eight in front of the 
Ibrox club. And with an impressive goal difference - Burley's team have scored 
19 goals and conceded only four in these opening matches - Hearts look in fine 
fettle before Alex McLeish takes his team to Tynecastle on Saturday week.

Skacel bundled home from two yards after a cute knockdown from Hartley during 
an opening period in which Hearts were utterly dominant against the league's 
bottom side. Webster, again the subject of English transfer speculation last 
week, had time and space to head a second goal past the despairing Roddy 
McKenzie as the game approached the half-hour point and the Edinburgh club were 
already on easy street.

Hartley's first goal of the afternoon, the culmination of the kind of fine, 
sweeping move which has been the hallmark of Hearts' season thus far, merely 
compounded Paul Lambert's side's agony.

Paul Dalglish had been a spectator at Parkhead for Celtic's comfortable 2-0 
win over punchless Aberdeen on Saturday and he was reduced to the same role for 
his 57 minutes on the field yesterday. He was on hand, though, to score from 
two yards just seconds before half-time, after Gordon had only managed to block 
Graham Barrett's 18-yard free-kick.

Perhaps unsurprisingly the second period was a low-key affair. Graham 
Barrett's shirt-tug on Jamie McAllister handed Hartley the chance to score his 
second of the afternoon, and the former Celtic target made no mistake as he 
buried the ball low to McKenzie's left after 62 minutes. From then on, it was 
party time for the visiting fans who had all but filled three-quarters of 
Almondvale Stadium. Six games down, 30 to go - and more people are beginning to 
believe the impossible.

Man of the match: Rudi Skacel (Hearts)
 