
Hartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> have expressed 
their extreme disappointment at the Football Association’s decision to hand 
defender Carl Magnay a six-match ban for spitting at a spectator.

Magnay, 26, denied a charge of misconduct at a disciplinary hearing but the 
FA’s Independent Regulatory Commission found him guilty of the offence 
following an incident during Hartlepool’s defeat at Wycombe last month and have 
also fined him £750.

Newport County appoint John Sheridan as successor to Terry Butcher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/02/newport-county-appoint-john-sheridan-manager>
Hartlepool said in a brief statement that the club were waiting for the IRC’s 
written report before deciding how to respond but would continue to back the 
player.

“The club is extremely disappointed by the decision of the Independent 
Regulatory Commission following the charge made against Carl Magnay,” the club 
said. “We will now await the written reasons for their verdict before deciding 
how best to proceed but would like to make it absolutely clear that Carl 
retains our full and unwavering support.”

Magnay, signed from Grimsby in the summer, was shown a straight red card for 
his challenge on the Wycombe substitute Ryan Sellers and the incident is 
alleged to have taken place after his dismissal.

An FA statement read: “Hartlepool United’s Carl Magnay has been suspended for 
six matches and fined £750 after he was charged for spitting at a spectator. 
“The incident occurred after his dismissal in the 85th minute of the game 
against Wycombe Wanderers on 5 September, 2015.

“The charge, which he denied at a personal hearing, was found proven following 
an Independent Regulatory Commission. The player’s suspension is set aside 
pending receipt of the Regulatory Commission’s written reasons for the 
decision.”

Magnay, who has featured prominently for Ronnie Moore’s side this season, has 
already served a three-match ban for his red card.
 