
When the call came Ronnie Moore had mixed feelings. A little voice inside his 
head counselled caution but even as several decades worth of bad memories about 
the place came flooding back, another part of him was already mapping out the 
first training session.

Hartlepool United were on other end of the line. It was December, they were 
six points adrift at the bottom ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and had just sacked 
Paul Murray. Unemployed for the previous eight months since being dismissed, 
harshly in his opinion, by Tranmere Rovers following a contravention of 
Football Association betting rules, Moore sensed he was unlikely to receive a 
better managerial offer. “To me, as both a player and a manager, Hartlepool was 
always a freezing cold Tuesday night,” he says. “The thought of those Tuesdays 
frightened me a bit. But I was out of work and it was a job.”

Even so, there are less challenging forms of employment. As the April sun 
streams through the canteen windows at Maiden Castle, the idyllic training 
facilityHartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> share with 
Durham University and the iPad their manager studies over a pre-work out 
breakfast confirms their latest, relatively healthy, position one point above 
the relegation zone, all seems serene but, in reality, Moore has endured weeks 
of struggle.

A recent run of four wins in five games has transformed the club’s landscape 
as they prepare for Saturday’s all important trip to their fellow relegation 
rivals York, but not so long ago Hartlepool were nine points from safety. It 
did not take Moore long to realise the weather was the least of his problems. 
“Shocked is probably the right word to describe my reaction when I got here,” 
says the 62-year-old, who remains a cult hero in South Yorkshire after guiding 
Rotherham to successive promotions. “Before you get started you think: ‘It 
can’t be as bad as people say,’ then you get here and you realise it really is 
that bad,” he says. “I remember in one of my first training sessions we 
literally took about 15 minutes to string six passes together.

“The whole club had a fear factor so we tried not put the players under too 
much pressure in training. I tried not to get too upset when they gave the ball 
away, which is hard sometimes and I talked to them, put my arm around them.

“I think they’d had a lot of size nines and 10s aimed at their backsides but I 
needed to find the ones to kick and the ones to love. I don’t want players 
sending me birthday cards but you have to get them on your side.”

As Marlon Harewood, Hartlepool’s most high-profile individual, and his 
team-mates happily eat breakfast surrounded by students spending the Easter 
holidays in Durham and wearing their distinctive Palatinate purple sports kit 
it is almost impossible to imagine how toxic the atmosphere had become.

“Our supporters have been unbelievable – we’re taking 2,000 to York,” says 
Moore. “But when I first came you heard ‘you’re not fit to wear the shirt’ from 
behind the dugout. At the time it was true. Only a few weeks ago we still 
weren’t getting a response and I felt like letting a couple of supporters into 
the dressing room to tell the players what it’s all about.”

Happily Moore’s brand of tough love – in between sustained bouts of 
encouragement he has informed his squad only one player would be good enough 
for League One while others are lucky not be working in the local supermarket – 
was set to pay off.

“The penny’s dropped,” he says. “Luckily we didn’t need the supporters in the 
dressing room. For the last month or so we’ve all been together, we’ve got a 
lot more commitment from the lads and they’ve got a bit of belief. With five 
games to go we know what we’ve got to do. We’re in a position where we don’t 
need help from anybody, wheras two or three weeks ago we were all on the prayer 
mat.”

A year ago he was sacked by Tranmere. Although Moore admitted breaching FA 
rules, he feels the issue was amplified out of all proportion. “It was nothing 
but a family syndicate,” he says, surveying the undulating fields and wooded 
hilltops outside the window. “And I didn’t get a chance to sit down and talk 
and put my points over to anyone at the club. I’m convinced if we’d been top of 
the league I’d still be there.”

It gives him no pleasure that Tranmere were relegated from League One last 
spring and now a point beneath Hartlepool, occupy the second of League Two’s 
relegation places. “When you’re sacked for gross misconduct there’s no pay-off 
so that was an easy way out of paying me £130,000,” he claims. “You try not to 
be bitter but I was bitter. It smells of something not right.”

He failed to relish his sabbatical. “You do the garden,” he says. “And when 
your missus goes out you do the ironing and the washing. I learnt what 
temperature to stick the whites on, I know all about cottons but there’s only 
so much of it you can do. You think this ain’t right.”

Managing Hartlepool has left him feeling properly alive again. “If we survive 
this will be better than the two promotions I had at Rotherham,” he says. “It 
will be my greatest season.”
 