
The base of League Two is proving a springboard. Early in September Exeter City
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> lay there, whereupon they 
drew one and won four to reach mid-table. Nine days ago Carlisle were bottom, 
won at Hartlepool and left The Pool in their place, prompting the manager, 
Colin Cooper, to resign. On Saturday, as Carlisle won again, Hartlepool were at 
St James Park and upheld the trend with a 2-1 victory. The soothsayer in front 
was not surprised. “I’ve been coming here for 70 years,” he said before 
kick-off, “and it’s always the bottom teams that beat us.” It was Hartlepool’s 
third win in four visits, not that they have always been bottom.

For the Grecians, if not ancient Greeks, it was not meant to be like this. 
Another win would have taken them to within a point of the play-offs. But 
Exeter live on short commons. Their ground is a throwback, though it has its 
own station – not a request stop, as some on the line are, but front carriage 
only – their manager, Paul Tisdale, a shoestring in human form. And the tiny 
squad was riddled with injuries.

Their fans do not complain much. After all, they own the club. Since 2003, 
after debt, fraud and demotion to the Conference, Exeter City Supporters’ Trust 
has been the majority shareholder. While it has stood by Tisdale through more 
than eight years he has refused other club’s approaches. Loyalty rides the ups 
and downs and provides stability. In the same timeHartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> have had six managers and 
Watford, at their present rate, will get through 319.

Tisdale enjoys being his own man and, second only to Arsène Wenger in unbroken 
league management, has lifted Exeter out of the Conference and, in 2010-11, to 
eighth in League One, two short of Hartlepool’s best just before.

He took defeat well. “Hartlepool had a simple purpose about what they tried to 
do, which on its day can work out, so well played to them,” he said. “In the 
first half our possession play and control of the game was as near as good as 
you’ll get. But is it any wonder we looked disjointed once or twice later? 
Players are tired and playing half-injured. We haven’t got the capacity to 
respond to these problems and had no opportunity to go into the game with some 
kind of energy and fluidity. In the end we didn’t have enough spark in us.” 
They could have done with Buffalo Bill, who played St James Park before the 
footballers.

It was a fair summary. Both sides had lost Johnstone’s Paint Trophy matches on 
Tuesday but two of Exeter’s, the goalkeeper Christy Pym and left-footed 
midfielder Matt Grimes, were rushed back from Thursday’s England Under-20 win 
over Germany in Heerenveen, with Tisdale’s thanks to the FA. He called it a 
“quality problem to have”. Exeter have forged a healthy youth stream and need 
to draw on it. The manager has only once paid a fee for a player, £50,000 in 
2010. He re-registered himself, at 41, earlier this season but Matt Oakley (37, 
Southampton and Leicester) and Danny Butterfield (34, Crystal Palace) provided 
the onfield experience. Oakley was an outstanding sweeper as Tisdale juggled 
his available resources positionally.

Grimes would have put Exeter ahead on the half-hour with a 25-yard shot but 
for a flying save by Scott Flinders before Hartlepool’s vigorous start to the 
second half decided the match. Michael Duckworth’s overlap and cross gave 
Michael Woods the opener and Charlie Wyke’s second confirmed Exeter’s loss of 
shape. Pym might have got something on that shot but otherwise showed a 
precocious command and fine agility. With 10 minutes left Christian Ribeiro 
forced home Grimes’ free-kick from Tom Nichols’ flick-on but The Pool could 
have felt aggrieved if the added-time header by City’s captain, Scot Bennett, 
had not been high.

Sam Collins, warrior defender and current caretaker, thought his “players were 
awesome”, no doubt endorsed by their 93 fans. Exeter’s, almost 600 up after the 
four wins, expressed their own awe for Jo Pavey, long-distance athlete, who 
made a half-time appearance.

As Hartlepool made their points on the field and Exeter confirmed theirs off 
it, this was a heartening afternoon for sport’s team ethic at the end of a week 
suggesting that, while there may be honour among thieves, there is none among 
sportsmen with personal agendas to pursue who are happy to sell a book – and 
their mates down the river.

Tranmere Rovers, meanwhile, now bottom, can look forward to the trampoline 
effect at Oxford on Saturday.
 