
Hartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> and Carlisle, 
each United, are in no position to havelocal derbies but Pools’ new chairman, 
Gary Coxall, writing in the programme and buoyed by three wins in their first 
four league games, was “hugely excited to be at my first ‘derby’ game”. These 
are the two most northerly clubs of the Football League’s 72 and Carlisle, 70 
miles west as the falcon flies, took home the spoils with their first League 
Two win of the season, by 3-2 coming twice from behind.

They, too, had lost only once but three draws left them in 20th place, the 
territory they occupied for most of last season, when they secured safety with 
two games to go. Hartlepool left it a game later after a more startling 
recovery. They were bottom for five months from late October, picking up three 
points from 12 games and, on 3 January, 10 points adrift of survival. Ronnie 
Moore’s arrival as manager in mid-December did not properly kick in until four 
wins running in March. On the last day at Brunton Park the clubs shared their 
relief in a 3-3 draw before major overhauls. Only three starters from each side 
then were in the initial XIs at Victoria Park on Saturday.

Capital One Cup matches on Tuesday had left Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> boosted by a 2-1 win at QPR and 
Pools grateful they did not have to face anything as slick as Bournemouth, who 
beat them 4-0. Andrew Boyce, their central defender on loan from Scunthorpe, 
was looking forward to seeing the ball back in the air. “If it’s up in the sky, 
there is more chance of getting to it,” he said.

Keith Curle, Carlisle’s manager since September, trying to manage 
expectations, said: “We need to embrace the success but we don’t let the tail 
wag the dog.” It is anyone’s guess what the dog is up to now but possibly 
barking.

In the event Boyce and his fellow centre-back, Scott Harrison, after a 
promising start were exposed in the air and on the ground. Pools enjoyed the 
benefit of an early goal when Carl Magnay made an overhit corner good for 
Harrison to whack in his return. Rakish Bingham, following tricky footwork with 
a flashing shot, hit a post when 2-0 would not have been undeserved.

Gradually, though, Carlisle came into the game through the overlapping of 
Danny Grainger and Tom Miller and vision of Bastien Héry, more so after the 
withdrawal of Magnay, Pools’ defensive guard in a 4-1-2-3, to injury. After 
Jabo Ibehre headed Carlisle level, the referee, Andy Haines, gave Pools brief 
heart and a penalty which Billy Paynter converted against the club he left in 
June. But his glee was short-lived as first Miller equalised, then Ibehre, a 
summer buy from Colchester, scored his seventh league goal in five games. Curle 
said they were a work in progress and so it proved through the game as 
Hartlepool became a work in regress, who looked in need of direction. “We were 
bullied,” said Moore. “We need people to be big and brave. We stopped winning 
the first headers. We soft-centred them.” Carlisle received five bookings, 
Hartlepool none.

The club changed ownership in June and Coxall promises development. It would 
be a shame if views of a church at one end and HMS Trincomalee, the world’s 
oldest iron-clad warship, were lost, though the defence could do with some of 
the ship’s qualities. JPNG, the new owners, are a recruitment agency. On this 
declining show that too could be handy. But Moore usually finds a way.
 