
Hastings United will be the lowest-placed club in the hat for the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> third round draw after their 1-1 
draw atHarrogate Town.

The Sussex side, struggling in the lower reaches of the Ryman Premier 
Division, secured a second-round replay against their Conference North 
opponents thanks to Jamie Crellin's goal in the second half.

Harrogate had taken the lead five minutes before half-time when Tom Platt 
headed in Shane Killock's cross. Hastings spurned a glorious chance to win it 
late on but Zac Attwood shot straight at Craig MacGillivray when clean through.

Probably the biggest surprise came at Gresty Road, where Burton of League Two 
won 1-0 away to League OneCrewe. Calvin Zola's fifth‑minute header gave the 
visitors the lead and a determined defensive display secured Gary Rowett's side 
a place in the third round.

A bigger upset looked in prospect at Bramall Lane, where League One 
front-runnersSheffield United trailed to Port Vale, a division below, until the 
last minute before Shaun Miller struck twice in injury time. Tom Pope had put 
Vale ahead in the 33rd minute.

The Blue Square Premier side Luton are the first non-league side guaranteed a 
place in the third round after goals from Andre Gray and Alex Lawless gave them 
a 2-1 victory over the Conference SouthDorchester at Kenilworth Road. There was 
to be no further upset for non-LeagueChelmsford, conquerors of Essex rivals 
Colchester in the first round, as they crashed out 3-0 atCrawley. The Blue 
Square South side's hopes were in effect ended when they had Donovan Simmonds 
sent off in the 35th minute. Liam Cooper gave League TwoChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> a surprise lead against the 
League One leaders Tranmere at Prenton Park but goals from Cole Stockton and 
Adam McGurk secured a 2-1 win for Rovers.

The League Two leaders Gillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> were not so fortunate, 
falling 2-0 at League One Preston whose goals came in the first half from 
Jeffrey Monakana and Stuart Beavon.

Oxford claimed a second chance against Accrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley> after a dramatic 3-3 
draw in which four goals were scored in the last 10 minutes. Lee Molyneux 
seemed to have won it for Accrington in injury time but there was still time 
for Michael Raynes to equalise.
 