
Hatem Ben Arfa will be forced to kick his heels in Nice until the summer after 
the formerNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> and Hull City creator 
was refused international clearance to play for the Ligue 1 side this season.

Ben Arfa, who joined Nice <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> as a 
free agent on an 18-month contract after Newcastle terminated his contract this 
month, will not be able to play in formal matches after the French League ruled 
on Friday that he had appeared in competitive games for two teams this season.

Fifa regulations state that “players may be registered with a maximum of three 
clubs during one season. During this period, the player is only eligible to 
play official matches for two clubs.”

Nice had contested this ruling because, although Ben Arfa played eight Premier 
League games for Hull during a loan stint at the KC Stadium, he did not feature 
for Newcastle’s first team.

He did, however, play in one game for Newcastle’s reserves, otherwise known as 
the under-21s or “development” side and, although Fifa regarded this as a 
competitive fixture, Nice felt it was an overly rigid interpretation.

After considerable debate the French Football League convened to make a final 
decision on the matter on Friday and decreed that, as the game for Peter 
Beardsley’s St James’ Park second stringers was part of an “under-21 
professional development league”, it had to be considered as “official”.

“In application of this decision … the LFP has no other choice but to ban 
Hatem Ben Arfa from playing official matches with Nice until the end of the 
season,” the League said in a statement, before confirming that Ben Arfa 
remains free to train with Nice and play in friendlies.

It represents a considerable blow for the 27-year-old former France 
international once described as a genuis by Gérard Houllier but whose career 
has spiralled downwards after fallouts withAlan Pardew at Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/11/hatem-ben-arfa-newcastle-unofficial-meeting-fans>
 and Steve Bruce at Hull.
 