
Hatem Ben Arfa has been left in limbo after Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> were prevented by Fifa from 
registering him. The playmaker, a free agent after his release from Newcastle, 
joined the French club last Monday but had been awaiting international 
clearance.

The problem was due to a clause in Fifa’s transfer regulations which states a 
player cannot play for more than two clubs in the same season. Ben Arfa made 
eight appearances on loan at Hull – and an appearance for Newcastle’s under-21 
side against Reading on 25 August has been ruled by Fifa to be an official 
match. Ben Arfa scored his side’s fourth goal in a 5-2 win.

Article 5.3 of Fifa’s regulations on the status and transfer of players 
states: “Players may be registered with a maximum of three clubs during one 
season. During this period, the player is only eligible to play official 
matches for two clubs.”

A statement on Nice’s official website read: “OGC Nice have received a copy of 
a correspondence sent by Fifa to the FFF [French Football Federation]. The 
international federation responded to the question posed by the French 
federation regarding a match played by Hatem Ben Arfa with Newcastle under-21s.

“Contrary to the position of the English [Football Association], it appears 
that for Fifa the match in the U21 Professional Development League ‘must be 
considered as official in the sense of the regulation’ and ‘must therefore be 
taken into consideration in determining the application of article 5.3 of the 
regulation’ on the status and transfer of players.”

Nice’s statement came after a Fifa spokesperson told Press Association Sport: 
“Our services received an information request from the French Football 
Federation concerning the player Ben Arfa relating to art. 5 par. 3 of the 
regulations on the status and transfer of players.

“We can confirm that today we have responded to the FFF regarding their 
information request.”

The development leaves Ben Arfa, who has 13 France caps to his name, in limbo.

Hull pulled the plug on his loan deal after he fell out of favour with the 
manager, Steve Bruce, and a Newcastle statement on 4 January read: “Hatem Ben 
Arfa and the club have reached an agreement to terminate the contract between 
both parties with immediate effect by mutual consent.”
 