
The coach pulls up outside an elegant Georgian mansion situated in extensive 
private grounds sweeping down to Lake Windermere. It looks like an expensive 
country-house hotel but Keith Curle’s players soon discover it is somewhat 
closer to an SAS induction facility. On this changeable July day,Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> United have arrived at Cassius 
Camps. A business specialising in outdoor challenges, staffed by instructors 
expert at “pushing the limits” and “wild fitness”, it is patronised by 
professional sports teams and high-achieving company executives.

The gruelling interlude Curle’s League Two squad are set to endure here is 
designed to produce long-term benefits. Seven months on, the resultant team 
bonding offers Roberto Martínez and hisEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> side extra reason to feel 
slightly nervous about Sunday’s FA Cup fourth-round tie in front of a capacity 
17,000-plus crowd at Brunton Park.

“Since the Lake District camp, nothing scares the players,” says Curle, as he 
relaxes after conducting training in the face of Storm Gertrude on Friday. 
“Mentally, they’re a very hard bunch now. They see Everton as another challenge 
to be overcome.”

Partly an exercise in surmounting fear, Cassius involved certain players 
initially quaking at the mention of Scafell, Helvellyn, Great Gable and the Old 
Man of Coniston. Others felt nauseous at the idea of jumping into Windermere’s 
freezing depths, but, by the end, everyone had scaled mountains and swam across 
lakes. “We had people being physically sick with fear before they got in the 
water,” says the former Manchester City and England defender.

“They had a genuine fear of water, but they mastered it. The unity in the 
group got them in and got them swimming – some players were using floats and 
being literally dragged along by team-mates, but they did it. We took them a 
long way out of their comfort zones but you could see them grow in stature and 
mental strength. Their sense of achievement was unbelievable.

“It’s emotional when you see players thinking they can’t climb any higher up a 
mountain but, then, you give them a rock or a boulder to carry and they all 
help each other to reach the top as a group. Their unity got them through. 
Unbelievable. They impressed themselves. The players were surprised by the 
things they could actually do as a team.”

The installation of this indefatigable mentality is a cornerstone of 
Carlisle’s ongoing transformation under Curle. When he arrived, early last 
season, the club were “staring non-league football in the face”; now they are 
talking about the possibility of a late play-off push, with reaching the 
Championship the ultimate goal.

More immediately, Everton must be confronted. Much may hinge on how Martínez’s 
squad copes with the culture shock in store. The December floods, which ruined 
homes, disrupted lives andturned the streets of vacated houses around Brunton 
Park into a ghost zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/19/carlisle-united-floods-fa-cup-replay-yeovil>
, dictate that the players’ facilities are currently rather primitive.

The damage – which necessitated the laying of a new pitch – has left much of 
the stadium’s interior, including dressing rooms and the manager’s office, 
requiring radical reconstruction.

It means that Everton must use cramped, temporary changing areas and showers 
placed just outside the ground. “There might be a queue in the car park to see 
Romelu Lukaku come out of the shower,” jokes Curle. “Might the conditions upset 
them? We don’t know.”

Curle was gratified to see first-teamers helping local residents remove sodden 
carpets and wrecked furniture from flooded homes. “Nothing was staged,” he 
says. “After the floods, the first thing the players would do when they’d 
finished training was get out there and try to help. It was really pleasing. 
The way we conduct ourselves in this community is massively important to me.”

So is getting his team to play an attractive, expansive passing game, not a 
million miles removed from Martínez’s footballing vision. Right now though, 
this philosophy remains a work in progress – which explains why a squad 
extensively rebuilt last summer is pleasing fans but conceding too many goals.

It would be intriguing to see how he and Martínez coped were they to 
temporarily swap jobs. Such “exchanges” between Premier League and League Two 
managers would surely make for a compelling TV reality show? Curle shifts 
slightly on his sofa at the Cumbrian rugby club where Carlisle have been 
training (with waterlogging rendering their normal practise pitches off limits, 
they have adopted a nomadic existence) and contemplates the idea.

“I think he’s an excellent manager, but I’d back myself that I could do his 
job and get Everton playing good football,” he says. “With the fantastic 
players Everton have, I wouldn’t mind being under the pressure Roberto Martínez 
is now facing. To be a good coach, you need good players.”

Like many of his British peers, Curle harbours mixed feelings about Premier 
League owners’ love of overseas bosses. “Certain foreign managers fit certain 
English clubs but I think there’s a level of frustration among British 
coaches,” he says. “It’s frustrating when you see foreign coaches taking 
positions that could be filled by emerging talent from this country. But part 
of the problem is that lower division managers aren’t given the time needed to 
implement change. Most only last about a year. If they were given two years 
plus in jobs, people might start seeing what they could really do.”

Thoughtful, intelligent, articulate and unafraid to court controversy, the 
52-year-old Curle is also that rare specimen – a non-white manager. He is not 
convinced that the introduction of the Rooney Rule – a stipulation that 
non-white candidates be interviewed for every managerial post – would alter 
much. “When I was out of work, I didn’t get as many interviews as I’d have 
liked,” he acknowledges. “But do I want to get interviews purely so someone can 
tick a box? No.”

He would revolutionise things differently. “First, I’d ask are there enough 
black, Asian and mixed-race people working within the Football Association? 
Then I would ask, are there enough [non-white] coaches with the right 
qualifications?”

At one stage last season, Curle memorab ly claimed that his – subsequently, 
significantly refreshed – side lacked the necessary “male genitalia” to 
succeed. The question on Sunday is whether Everton possess the correct 
mentality to avoid a giantkilling.

“Our pitch used to be like a bowling green but, although our groundsman’s done 
a fantastic job, the new one isn’t as true,” says Carlisle’s manager. “The ball 
deviates. Might that knock them out of their stride? We’ll see, but human error 
often plays a big part in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. No matter how much Everton’s 
players are paid, they’re still human. They can still make mistakes.”
 