
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> climbed off their sick 
beds to deliver a potentially fatal blow to Aberdeen’s Premiership title hopes 
as Juanma Delgado’s double earned the hosts a 2-1 victory at Tynecastle.

Hearts shut their training ground for two days after getting Tuesday’s trip 
Inverness postponed following an outbreak of gastroenteritis, and they looked 
set to suffer more pain when Simon Church netted inside three minutes during a 
dominant opening from the visitors.

But Juanma twice scored from close range to give Celtic the chance to move 
eight points clear when they face Motherwell at Fir Park on Saturday.

Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> also saw their 
captain, Ryan Jack, carried off on a stretcher and they could find themselves 
closer to third place than top spot on Tuesday when Hearts finally meet 
Inverness.

Rangers secure promotion to Scottish Premiership with win over Dumbarton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/rangers-promotion-scottish-premiership-dumbarton>
Hearts’ midfielder Sam Nicholson went close when his left-footed shot trundled 
just wide but Aberdeen soon hit their hosts with a flurry of chances and Church 
converted the first, getting in front of Neil Alexander and forcing the ball 
home as the goalkeeper waited on Graeme Shinnie’s cross reaching his arms.

Niall McGinn then stabbed Kenny McLean’s cross wide from six yards before 
seeing his shot blocked by Alexander after an Alim Ozturk error.

Hearts survived another scare when Igor Rossi completely sliced a clearance 
from Jonny Hayes’ corner towards his own goal, the ball falling kindly for 
Alexander.

Shay Logan and Craig Storie threatened after set-pieces, either side of a 
Hearts chance which saw Scott Brown produce a good one-handed stop from Blazej 
Augustyn’s header.

All that action came inside the first 15 minutes but Hearts, who had everyone 
back from illness, began to push the visitors back.

They failed to heed a warning after Ozturk’s free-kick was tipped over by 
Brown as they gave the defender time to line up a shot from almost 40 yards in 
the 32nd minute.

The shot swerved and dipped but Brown failed to push it to safety and Juanma 
was the only player to follow up, slotting home before checking there was no 
offside flag.

The Spaniard, who had only scored once since November, soon shot over after 
Nicholson’s cross before Jack came off worse in a 50-50 with Prince Buaben.

The break failed to halt Hearts’ momentum. Rossi fired a 20-yard strike off 
the outside of the post and Logan and Brown combined to stop Buaben netting 
from close range following good work from Juanma, although the hosts claimed 
the right-back had used a hand.

McGinn headed wide but Hearts continued to look more dangerous and they 
profited from a ball over the top on the hour mark as Jamie Walker got the 
better of Mark Reynolds on the left wing and whipped in a cross which Juanma 
nodded home smartly from inside the six-yard box.

Walker soon missed a good chance before he and Arnaud Djoum forced saves from 
Brown. Church flashed a shot wide of the near post but Aberdeen failed to 
sustain a comeback and the title, once again, looks destined for Parkhead.
 