
Heart of Midlothian will feel this is their finest chance to atone for a 
woeful record in Scotland's League Cup. Down to 10 men, and taken to penalties 
by high-flyingInverness Caledonian Thistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/invernesscaledonianthistle>, Hearts 
progressed to the final. Not since 1962 have the Edinburgh triumphed in this 
competition; twice on the run to the Hampden showpiece Hearts have won on 
penalty kicks. This time, by five goals to four.

In what soon regressed into an engrossing war of attrition, Andrew Shinnie and 
the Hearts debutant, Liverpool's loan forward Michael Ngoo, traded goals.Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> had Scott Robinson sent off but a 
missed spot-kick by the Inverness substitute Philip Roberts sent John McGlynn 
and his players into raptures. There was jubilation, too, for the vast majority 
of an Easter Road crowd.

A key ingredient of Inverness' success this season has been continuity. A lack 
of injuries and suspension has allowed Terry Butcher to call upon basically the 
same players for the entire campaign; a luxury afforded to few managers.

Yet within that group are a clutch of players who have been among the most 
impressive in Scotland in recent months. It was an embarrassment, then, for 
Inverness as a city, Caledonian Thistle as a club and Scottish football in 
general that such a pitifully low number of supporters arrived for the north 
for this game. It marked only a second appearance for Inverness in a national 
semi-final, at three o'clock on a Saturday and with tickets easily affordable; 
Butcher's work deserves greater recognition from the people of the Highlands .

In contrast, McGlynn surprised many with his selection for this tie. The 
youngsters Fraser Mullen and Callum Tapping made their first starts of the 
season with Jamie Walker, Jason Holt and Ngoo emphasising Hearts' fresh-faced 
appearance. Still, Hearts opened the semi-final as the brighter team. Another 
Liverpool loanee, Danny Wilson, forced Antonio Reguero into a low save before 
the Edinburgh team had a penalty claim denied as Walker tumbled over Graeme 
Shinnie's challenge.

A glorious Inverness chance was to follow. The Hearts defence to play offside 
as Andrew Shinnie lobbed a pass through for Billy McKay. The striker, who came 
into this match having scored 20 goals for his club this season, was unusually 
wasteful in allowing Jamie MacDonald to save. The encounter lacked nothing in 
niggle. With 24 minutes gone, Ngoo and Gary Warren received a caution apiece 
after a clash on the halfway line. For his part, Warren was fortunate not to 
escape more severe action having kicked out at the Hearts striker. Inverness's 
Richie Foran was similarly fortunate after a late foul on Walker, having 
already been booked.

Euan Norris was to offer a generally curious and erratic refereeing 
performance. Later in the match, McKay was strangely shown clemency when 
tugging back Andy Webster; again, a booking had already been issued. Ngoo, 
after that early caution, had half a dozen free-kicks given against him without 
another booking for persistent fouling .

Fittingly, given his prominence, it was Ngoo who came the closest to breaking 
the first-half parity. From Wilson's cross, the Ngoo headed off the inside of 
an Inverness post. Butcher's men went one better within five minutes of the 
restart. Andrew Driver was culpable in possession for Hearts, allowing Andrew 
Shinnie to drive into the penalty area. The midfielder, rightly courted by 
bigger clubs, supplied a fine, low and angled finish past MacDonald.

Hearts displayed admirable spirit to recover from that blow. Mullen's 
free-kick was knocked across goal and into Ngoo's path by Wilson; the forward 
volleyed beyond Reguero from close range. What had long-since seemed an 
inevitable red card arrived with 13 minutes of regulation time to play. 
Robinson lunged with two feet into Ross Draper, with Hearts' protests over 
Norris's dismissal in vain.

Extra time beckoned. In the first period of that, MacDonald supplied wonderful 
save from Andrew Shinnie, moments after McKay was again profligate in front of 
the Hearts goal. Roberts was similarly so, much to the cost of Inverness.
 