
It’s true what they say, Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> dinner is nothing but a 
big Sunday roast. What we so-called experts don’t add, however – lest you all 
decide to bin the turkey and go to the pub instead – is that it’s a Sunday 
roast where everyone is either half-cut or high on sugar, various relatives 
aren’t on speaking terms and it’s well-nigh impossible to get a takeaway 
delivered if it all goes wrong.

Not only that, but it’s happening on a day on which any inadvertent break with 
tradition, however minor, will pass into family lore, to be retold ad infinitum 
until everyone involved is long dead. In short, although I don’t want to stress 
you out, this is one meal it pays to approach with almost military precision 
and a watertight contingency plan should things start to unravel quicker than 
the plot of the compulsory Christmas Bond outing.

Consider this article that contingency plan. Rip it out and stash it in the 
kitchen with the emergency sherry, just in case – a kind of lucky charm, and my 
Christmas gift to you.

Help! The turkey won’t fit in the oven


More common than you might think – these are big birds. But it’s easy to solve 
without resulting to chainsawing the bird in half on the lawn. Instead, whip 
off the legs by using a sharp knife to cut through the skin at the point where 
they meet the body so you can see the joint, then pull the leg away from the 
body until it pops out of the socket. Cut between the joint to finish the job. 
The legs can be cooked in a separate roasting tin; put them in about half an 
hour before the bird itself, and you’ll end up with juicy breasts and perfect 
legs – and who wouldn’t want that for Christmas?

Seriously, the fridge won’t close


Trust me, however hard you slam the door, it’s not going to make any 
difference. Fortunately at this time of year you can get away with storing 
stuff in the garage, porch, conservatory, shed or even the car. As long as it’s 
somewhere dry and fox-proof, cheese, salad and veg, cooked meats, cream and 
other dairy will be perfectly fine outside for a few days. Once you get the 
turkey out on Christmas morning (allow at least two hours for it to come to 
room temperature before cooking), you can stock the fridge with wine, beer and 
soft drinks. And if there’s still no room, the quickest way to chill drinks is 
to stick them in a bucket with equal volumes of ice and water and a good 
handful of salt.

Bloody cousin Sam has just announced he’s vegetarian 


Special diets are easy to cater for with enough notice, but a last-minute 
announcement can throw even the best plans into disarray. Hopefully you’ll have 
olive oil on hand to roast a few goose-fat-free spuds for the wretched boy, but 
if you don’t happen to have any pastry in the freezer to knock up a freeform 
cheese tart then keep things simple with a chargrilled wedge of cauliflower, 
broccoli or cabbage, depending on what you have to hand. Cut through it 
vertically to give chunky cross-sections or wedges, then brush with oil and 
season with salt and pepper. Heat a griddle pan to very high, then chargrill on 
each side until they beginning to blacken and soften. Turn the heat down and 
cook until tender (about 10 more minutes), then squeeze a little lemon juice 
over and serve with the usual festive accompaniments, and a fixed smile.

I swear I only had one drink, and now the turkey’s overdone … 


If, even after a decent rest (leave an hour for the juices to be reabsorbed 
into the meat), the breast is still as dry as dust, then check the legs; as 
they cook more slowly, they might well be perfect. If so, remove the meat from 
them and arrange temptingly on a platter to encourage people to take that 
instead. Carve the breast into thick slices in the kitchen, away from 
prying eyes, then dip each in warm chicken stock for a couple of seconds before 
transferring it to a serving dish. Drizzle a ladleful of hot gravy artfully 
across the top and it will look like you always intended to serve the turkey 
this way.

How can the turkey still be raw? It’s been in for hours


We’ve all done it: proudly cut into a magnificently bronzed bird at the 
festive table only to recoil in horror at the lurid pinkness within. This 
shouldn’t be a problem if you’ve been sensible enough to invest in a meat 
thermometer, and not taken the turkey out of the oven until the thickest 
part of the thigh reaches 65C, but sadly, such hindsight is unlikely to butter 
any parsnips. Joint the bird, spread the pieces out on a baking tray and roast 
at 200C, checking their internal temperature every 15 minutes (but no more 
often, to avoid bringing the oven temperature down). Keep pouring those drinks 
in the meantime.

The sprouts are mushy and I’m losing the will to live


Just as sprouts were finally shaking off their sulphurous reputation, you’ve 
taken your eye off the ball and now the whole house smells like 1955. At this 
point, remember the cook’s mantra: cream makes everything better. Drain the 
sprouts very well then, if you were planning to sauté them with bacon, fry that 
on its own, and toss the sprouts in the pan to coat with the juices at the end. 
Bring some double cream (about 150ml for every 500g of veg) to a simmer in a 
small pan along with a crushed clove of garlic and a good grating of nutmeg. 
Stir in the sprouts, season and tip into an ovenproof dish and top with a 
handful of breadcrumbs and grated parmesan, if you have some handy. Grill for 
about five minutes until golden and bubbling, then serve up with some pomp and 
ceremony as sprout gratin.

I can’t bear it, the roasties are still pastier than a goth in February


As long as they are already cooked through, this one is easy to fix. While 
someone else is carving the turkey, melt a little more of whatever fat you 
cooked them in (if it’s not already liquid) and brush this over the top of the 
pallid potatoes. Toast them under the grill until they achieve your desired 
shade, then turn them over and repeat the process for golden perfection.

Oh my God! Are those lumps in the gravy?


Don’t panic: gravy can sense fear. Instead, calmly take a whisk to the 
roasting tin or pan and set about breaking down as many large lumps of 
undissolved flour as you can spot. Pass the gravy through a sieve into a jug 
and then reheat or, if it still doesn’t seem thick enough, whisk a couple of 
spoonfuls of warm gravy into a tablespoon of corn or plain flour until you have 
a loose paste, then very gradually whisk this back into the pan on the hob. 
Heat, stirring, until the gravy thickens to your desired consistency.

I tried to make custard but ended up with scrambled eggs


Take a few deep breaths. This happens when custard overheats, and is 
surprisingly simple to sort if you happen to have a stick blender to hand. Pour 
the custard out into a heatproof bowl as soon as you notice lumps forming, and 
then whizz it until smooth. Strain it back into the pan through a sieve and 
continue stirring until thickened. If you don’t happen to have such an 
implement, plunge the pan into a sink of iced water as soon as you spot the 
first lump, and whisk vigorously, channelling all your rage into your wrist. 
Remember to strain it before serving – if there’s not enough to go round, 
simply pad it out with more cream and call it crème anglaise.

The damn Christmas pudding won’t light


Although it goes without saying that your pudding ought to be hot, it’s also 
helpful to warm your booze of choice slightly, too, though obviously not enough 
to burn off the precious alcohol. You can do this by holding a metal spoon full 
of it above a candle (which gives you the advantage of being able to tilt the 
spoon into the flame to catch light as you pour it over the pudding) or 
alternatively by heating it in a small pan on the hob and using a match or 
lighter instead. Whichever way you go for, always start by ensuring the lights 
are off around the table and people are primed and ready to coo appreciatively 
over your achievement before the damn thing goes out. Happy Christmas, one and 
all!
 