
In Helmut Dietl's political satire Zettl <http://wwws.warnerbros.de/zettl/> 
(on general release in Germany now, but not for too much longer), Berlin is 
ruled by a manic-depressive chancellor. The prime minister of the nearby state 
of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern is an organ-playing Christian Democrat from Swabia 
who enjoys ogling the female form on his iPhone and the mayor of the city is a 
hermaphrodite – until a late, painful twist, that is.

Maybe Hertha BSC 2011-12, The Movie would have been more a successful project 
for the veteran film-maker: a more farcical, yet bleaker story of lies, 
counter-lies, incompetence and betrayal, starring another Munich-born 
protagonist (Markus Babbel) who was both perfect and perfectly miscast for the 
role.

Babbel, as you might recall, was sacked a week before Christmas after a public 
slanging match with sporting director Michael Preetz. Both men accused each 
other of misleading the public over the manager's decision to leave at the end 
of the season. (Babbel maintained the club had been informed months before, 
while Hertha claimed impatience with the former Bayer and Liverpool player's 
alleged stalling tactics.) Either way, Babbel's premature departure looked very 
much like the kind of self-destructive folly that only a select number of
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> clubs (1 
FC Köln, 1 FC Köln, maybe 1 FC Köln as well) can pull off on a regular basis.

Widespread indifference tinged with dread greeted the appointment of Babbel's 
successor, Michael "pudding bowl & puppy eyes" Skibbe. But even the pessimists 
underestimated the size of the malaise. Things have gone from bad to worse 
under the 46-year-old. On Saturday, Skibbe lost his third match in a row, 1-0 
at home to Hannover. "Since promotion in 1997, no Hertha manager has lost his 
first three games, not even Friedhelm Funkel," Berliner Zeitung noted wryly.

In "a very weak game at the lower level of the Bundesliga spectrum" (96 coach 
Mirko Slomka), the home side had actually not quite reached the depths of 
ineptitude of this year's earlier outings. Skibbe played a bad hand pretty 
well, re-arranging a back-four ravaged by injuries and suspensions and getting 
the midfield around Peter Niemeyer to harass the technically superior visitors. 
In the absence of influential forward-playmaker Raffael, Hertha created two, 
three decent chances in the first half but got punished when Mohammed 
Abdellaoue scored a goal of the month contender from the edge of the box.

"To doubt the team right now would be unjust," insisted Niemeyer, "the first 
half of the season has shown that our squad is of Bundesliga quality." In terms 
of points, that's certainly true: Hertha had 20 at the winter-break, double the 
tally of two years ago, when they crashed to the second division. And yet, the 
negative momentum is threatening to pull everyone down. Skibbe is a half-decent 
technocrat, the kind of coach that will keep a team ticking over or perhaps do 
even better if he's allowed to take a long-term view on team building. As a 
"fire fighter" tasked to get a disillusioned, broken squad to perform 
instantly, he's far from an ideal candidate, however.

It was telling that his (fairly innocuous) dressing down of Christian Lell 
after the 2-1 defeat at home to Hamburg last week – Bild alleged that Skibbe 
told the defender: "It's just as well you'll be suspended next game, you 
wouldn't have played anyway" – was leaked to the press. The problem has since 
been resolved according to Skibbe, who isn't helped by less than inspiring 
public persona. As far as authority figures go, he has the defeated air of an 
inner-city school caretaker who spends his days beseeching 10-year-olds not to 
throw half-eaten Currywürste at each other outside the toilets during the break.

A fall-out between (former) supporters' favourite Patrick Ebert and some 
sections of the fans has come at an inopportune, time, too. Tabloid Berliner 
Kurier reported an altercation after the 2-0 defeat at Nürnberg, where some 
fans were said to have made a "we'll kill you" gesture and Ebert allegedly 
responded with some obscenities. But it's also fair to remember that Hertha's 
decent run came to a halt much earlier, with the last league win (3-2 at 
Wolfsburg). In retrospect, it seems as if the good results were masking quite a 
high number of mediocre performances. Babbel, touted as a possible future 
Bayern coach at the time, has a history of dealing badly with downward spirals 
and must shoulder some blame for the unwelcome side-show that deflected 
attention from more pressing on the pitch matters. His abrupt refusal to sign a 
new contract and return home to Munich is yet to be fully explained. An 
insistence that the reasons were "not sport-related" has led to all sorts of 
salacious rumours on the internet.

Be that as it may, Skibbe has to get it right, quickly. He says he hasn't seen 
any signs of a "hectic" atmosphere after lengthy talks with president 
Gegenbauer and Preetz. No one believes him though, as Berlin doesn't work like 
that. Preetz even admitted as much, expressing a hope that Skibbe was 
experienced enough to deal with the unrest in the city. How had Babbel put it 
in the summer? "Berliners are latent megalomaniacs. They are loud, talk a lot, 
but often do very little at first." In contrast, his club had learned to become 
humble, he insisted. If they slip into the relegation zone next week, it'll be 
fascinating to see if and how that inherent contradiction can be resolved.

Talking points

• The Bundesliga weekend ended earlier than usual, as far as the title race 
was concerned, but that had little to do with the Ice Station Zebra-type 
conditions. Dortmund's 2-0 win at Nürnberg after a shaky opening on Friday 
night set a benchmark that the three other contenders could not meet. Bayern 
(1-1 at Hamburg), Schalke (1-1 at home to Mainz) and Gladbach (0-0 at 
Wolfsburg) only drew, along with almost everybody else.

The champions, unbeaten in the league since September, have retaken the lead 
in the table and are warming to the thought of winning back-to-back titles. 
Unlike Bayern, they have a game plan that works and feel little pressure. The 
Nürnberg win added further to the feel-good factor: striker Lucas Barrios, who 
was nearly transferred to Fulham last week, scored the second goal and claimed 
that the supporters had made him stay. That romantic narrative was somewhat 
undermined by Mainz sporting director Christian Heidel on Monday, however: he 
revealed that Mohamed Zidan's transfer from Borussia to 05 was only made 
possible by failed negotiations between Barrios and Fulham about the 
Paraguayans personal terms. "That's a lie," Jürgen Klopp shot back, a little 
too quickly perhaps. Robert Lewandowski, the man who's superceded Barrios, was 
meanwhile busy knocking back a largely imagined approach from Bayern. "I'm with 
the champions, why would I want to go to Bayern?" the Polish forward told 
kicker. It's not inconceivable that the very same question might be posed again 
in four months' time.

• Down south, they were also spinning. In the wake of another disappointing 
1-1 draw away to a not terribly convincing HSV side - ex-Chelsea reserve 
striker Jacopo Sala scored with a fine volley before Ivica Olic's bundled- in 
equaliser - Uli Hoeness resorted to desperate measures. Unable to talk up his 
side's credentials any longer, the Bayern president revealed that his club had 
given cash-strapped Dortmund €2m as a loan in 2003 to save them from 
bankruptcy. That kind of "we are rubbish but still a much bigger club than you" 
line of argument might have consoled one or two supporters in the Premier 
League but won't really wash in Bavaria or anywhere else in Germany, for that 
matter. News of an imminent agreement to sign Swiss pint-sized winger Xerdan 
Shaqiri from Basel could deflect somewhat better from the side's meekness but 
close observers have noted that the mood in and outside the camp has shifted 
markedly since the winter break. Not only was Franck Ribéry allowed to openly 
criticise the lack of quality on the bench ("the second team is not good 
enough"), CEO Karl-Heinz Rummenigge also made the point that coach Jupp 
Heynckes expressly denied the need for transfers in the break. This is 
Killer-Kalle code for "get a move on, gaffer".

• Zidan dedicated his goal against S04 to the 74 victims of the stadium 
atrocities in Port Said, his home town. "I wanted to wear a black armband, too, 
but it was too late (to get clearance from the authorities)," explained the 
Egyptian after his third debut for Mainz.

The Royal Blues fans seemed unsure what to make of the draw in view of an 
awful first half and very decent comeback with Chinedu Obasi's equaliser after 
the break. While sporting director Horst Heldt bemoaned "unrealistic" 
expectations of a championship in the stands, manager Huub Stevens insisted 
Mainz wasn't "FC Hüppelpüpp", in other words, not some obscure team. Or did he? 
According to news agency dpa, the Dutchman had in fact said "FC Hönnetöpp". 
Rival news-gathering organisation dapd reported yet another name, fittingly 
with one changed consonant: "We didn't play against Hüppelbüpp," they quoted 
the coach as saying. Hüppelpüpp, Hönnetöpp or Hüppelbüpp, it doesn't really 
matter that much. As Süddeutsche noted, Stevens should really be commended for 
enriching the football discourse with a term that makes a welcome change from 
the tired old "Laufkundschaft" (literally: passing trade) that gets rolled out 
on these occasions.

Results: Nürnberg 0-2 Dortmund, Leverkusen 2-2 Stuttgart, Hoffenheim 2-2 
Augsburg, Hertha 0-1 Hannover, Wolfsburg 0-0 Gladbach, Schalke 1-1 Mainz, 
Hamburg 1-1 Bayern, Freiburg 2-2 Bremen, Kaiserslautern 0-1 Köln.

• Latest Bundesliga standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 