
"Hey! Hey! Hey!" (as BZ put it) – Hertha BSC are back in the top flight. And 
so are the gloomy headlines. "Danger is lurking, the team's sense of reality 
could suffer a vestibular disorder," wrote Die Welt. The club's "well-known 
fundamental problem" had returned, attested Süddeutsche Zeitung. Berliner 
Kurier even feared that the newly promoted team might have swallowed "a drop of 
poison" on the first day of the season. If not quite deadly, the experience was 
so unnerving that their Dutch manager, Jos Luhukay, spent the night after the 
victory tossing and turning in bed, waking up at 5am. "I didn't sleep well at 
all," revealed the 50-year-old.

It was nothing new, of course. Hertha supporters are used to emotional turmoil 
and a fair amount of capital punishment after two relegations and two 
promotions since the 2009-10 season. Still, the exact nature of the weekend's 
worry was a huge surprise, as well as its accompanying numbers. In front of an 
ecstatic 54-000 crowd, Hertha beatEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> – last season's 
sixth-placed team – 6-1 to become the first league leader of 2013-14. "It's a 
wonderful day for [the city of] Berlin, a dream start for us and a fantastic 
atmosphere – that's living football," cheered Luhukay. It was the first time 
that Hertha had won their opening game as returnees to the league, the biggest 
win for any newly promoted team on match day one and the biggest 
opening-weekend win in any Bundesliga season since 1974.

So why the talk of problems, danger and poison? Neither the manager nor the 
players seemed in any real danger of getting carried away, after all. "It's a 
nice thing for the fans," shrugged the captain, Fabian Lustenberger, when asked 
about Hertha's top spot. "If we get stuffed 6-0 next week nobody will care any 
more." Some of the papers' concerns against an overreaction to the Frankfurt 
goal-feast were probably an overreaction themselves. But Hertha being Hertha, 
based in a city that has "a taste for megalomania" – as the former manager, 
Markus Babbel, put it – the general concern is quite understandable. BZ, for 
example, couldn't stop at hailing Hertha's performance as "a hurricane", they 
had to go the extra mile, too far: "6-1! Hertha can do [it like] Bayern, too," 
screamed Sunday's front page.

That remains to be seen. What they can certainly do is play a bit. All the 
pre-season talk had focused on Luhukay's perceived need to curb the side's 
attacking instincts. But rather than changing his tactical outlook, the manager 
has changed his personnel. Lustenberger, the inspiration behind a dozen blond 
curly wigs in the stands, has moved into the holding position from centre-back. 
In front of him, the new signings Alexander Baumjohann and the outstanding 
Japanese international Hajime Hosogai (bought from Leverkusen) pulled the 
strings masterfully.

In addition, the young US international John Anthony Brooks, – who scored the 
second – was composed at the back, Änis Ben-Hatira and Sami Allagui – who 
scored the third and fourth goals – were quick and incisive on the wings and 
the Colombian striker Adrián Ramos, – who scored the first and fifth – was 
clinical in front of goal. The game was already won when Luhukay brought on the 
attacking midfielder Ronny for a perfect end to the day. The attacking 
midfielder scored the game's last goal and was able to feel like an important 
part of the team again. In pre-season, Luhukay had openly criticised the 
27-year-old's fitness problems; last season's key player had come back from his 
summer holidays with enough kilos for two Ronnies. "I'm not able to put him in 
the starting lineup," the Venlo-born coach said. Hertha will need him to get 
into better shape very quickly.

Sleep might have eluded Luhukay after the final whistle but he is not a man 
who will start dreaming after this fairytale start. "When you hit the woodwork 
three times and score six, you got most things right, but not everything," he 
said. "Those who know me know that I won't be jumping on a table after a win." 
And the "champagne atmosphere" – as the Kurier called it – that engulfed the 
Olympiastadion on Saturday will probably intoxicate the city's media and public 
much more than the team itself. "Two years ago we had 20 points at the winter 
break, and we still went down," warned Lustenberger. "We know where we've come 
from. We will continue to work hard, the manager will make sure of that."

At the same time, positive momentum can play a very important role, especially 
in a league that looks every bit as unpredictable behind the big beasts of 
Bayern (3-1 win over Gladbach) and Dortmund (4-0 at Augsburg) as last season. 
Frankfurt, for example, know everything about the power of a good start and 
good vibes.

On Saturday, however, nothing went right for Armin Veh's team, the stats 
aside. The visitors came out on top in all categories – apart from goalscoring. 
The 52-year-old generously blamed himself for the defeat, and pointed to his 
formation change at half time. At 2-1 down – the veteran Alex Meier had halved 
the deficit with a penalty – Veh switched from 4-4-2 to last season's 4-2-3-1. 
It made things worse.

"I shouldn't have done that, it wasn't good, it didn't work out at all," he 
admitted. Next week, there's a chance for redemption when Pep Guardiola's new, 
altogether more vulnerable Bayern are coming to town. "Easy," joked Veh. 
Another defeat will tempt Frankfurt's papers to ship in some of the concerned 
Hertha headlines from this weekend, but without the "getting carried away" bits.

Four-fifths of this league seems so bereft of any natural order that last 
year's surprise package could well be this season's low-fliers. The notoriously 
dispassionate executive chairman Heribert Bruchhagen will certainly need no 
encouragement to raise a warning finger or two about local hopes being too high 
this season. If "Berlin could become the new Frankfurt," as Süddeutsche wrote, 
the opposite is true as well. Expectations and reality have not always seen eye 
to eye at the Commerzbank-Arena, either.

Talking Points

• Revelations about three West Germany players from the 1966 team testing 
positive for a banned substance – broken by Der Spiegel in October 2011 – have 
reignited the debate about doping in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>. On Saturday, Franz 
Beckenbauer admitted receiving "vitamin injections" as a player but distanced 
himself from a 1977 article in Der Stern, in which he had claimed that the 
lines between medical preparation and doping were blurred in German football. 
"I said that?" Beckenbauer wondered in Aktuelle Sportstudio, "maybe I have a 
doppelganger." Beckenbauer went on to say that he was never forced to take any 
unknown medication by a coach or manager but then contradicted himself: "I'm 
not a doctor, I have no idea. What is doping?" Rudi Völler also pleaded 
ignorance. "In the teams that I played for, these things didn't exist," said 
the former West Germany striker, who also played for Bernard Tapie's Olympique 
Marseille in the early 90s.

• "What was the Russian (Azeri) linesman on in 1966?" is perhaps the more 
pertinent question. Goalline technology – or the lack thereof in the Bundesliga 
was at the forefront of the debate again after Hoffenheim's Kevin Volland saw 
his perfectly good goal against Nürnberg not given. Call it: kein Vorsprung 
durch Technik. "It hurts me to see this," said TSG coach Markus Gisdol, "it 
would simply be fair (if we had electronic help)". Neither Volland nor the 
manager wanted to blame the referee Thorsten Kinhöfer or his assistant for the 
mistake. And in any case, Hoffenheim were the architects of their own downfall, 
having led 2-0 before Nürnberg rallied to snatch a point.

• Over in Munich, Bayern started with a 3-1 over Borussia Mönchengladbach. 
Trouble with the ultras made the atmosphere flat but the match was eventful 
enough. Two handballs by Alvaro Dominguez gave the home side two penalties 
within a minute or so – Thomas Müller had his attempt saved, David Alaba scored 
to win all three points for the home side. Before that, Arjen Robben and Mario 
Mandzukic had put Bayern two up within 16 minutes but a Dante own goal before 
half-time soon exposed the basic weakness in the current set-up. With Bastian 
Schweinsteiger holding the fort on his own, the back-four have very little 
protection and are forced into risky one-v-ones. "If we don't win these 
challenges, it's oh, oh, oh," said Dante. "We needed this win to have some 
quiet in the future," said Pep Guardiola, who seems to have picked up on some 
of the misgivings about his tactics.

• Almost as surprising as Hertha's demolition of Frankfurt was Hamburg's 
resistance at Schalke. Thorsten Fink's ramshackle outfit were 1-0 down within 
two minutes but fought back to gain a point with a draw. At the end of this 
"football festival with a spectacle of mistakes", Schalke could be thankful for 
the point; substitute Adam Szalai scored the equaliser to make it 3-3 after 
Rene Adler had spilled the ball.

• Borussia Dortmund kept their pre-season momentum with an emphatic win at 
Augsburg. New striker Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang was the star of the show with a 
hat-trick but BVB insider Freddie Röckenhaus concentrated on the Robert 
Lewandowski situation in his report for Süddeutsche. Apparently the club will 
voluntarily up his puny wages of €1.5m by another couple of million to keep him 
motivated for the rest of the season. Maybe an apology can be coaxed out of 
Luis Suárez in a similar manner?

Results: Bayern 3-1 Gladbach, Augsburg 0-4 Dortmund, Hannover 2-0 Wolfsburg, 
Braunschweig 0-1 Bremen, Hertha 6-1 Frankfurt, Leverkusen 3-1 Freiburg, 
Hoffenheim 2-2 Nürnberg, Mainz 3-2 Stuttgart, Schalke 3-3 Hamburg.
 