
Perhaps any triumph in the Scottish League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> should carry a health 
warning. In 2007, John Collins led Hibernian to success in the tournament 
courtesy of a demolition job on Kilmarnock. By the end of that year, Collins 
had left Easter Road. Kilmarnock removed those painful memories by lifting the 
trophy with a win over Celtic in 2012; Kenny Shiels, the Ayrshire club’s 
manager, lasted little more than a season.

Kilmarnock have been involved in routine relegation scraps ever since. St 
Mirren’s League Cup glory day, in March 2013, was the precursor to a slump that 
culminated in demotion at the end of last season.

Ross County threaten Ronny Deila’s Celtic future with League Cup win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/ross-county-celtic-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-match-report>
Any notion, then, that securing what bluntly is regarded as the lesser of 
Scotland’s two main knockout competitions will provide an automatic springboard 
for growth has firm evidence as a counter-point. The Scottish Cup is maybe no 
different, as highlighted by the loss of players and struggles to attract 
crowds as suffered by Inverness since they defeated Falkirk at Hampden Park 
last May.

There is an obvious explanation for this. Fiscal reality means Scottish clubs 
– particularly those not among the leading lights – face a constant battle to 
retain playing talent. A cup win catapults such personnel into the limelight, 
primarily of richer employers. The simultaneous rising of expectations carries 
added problems.

Such worries will not be the domain of Hibs or Ross County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> supporters on Sunday. Gala 
occasions epitomise everything that is strong about the Scottish game. For 
completely contrasting reasons, given the relative status and history attached 
to the clubs, both will garner an element of neutral support as they chase a 
League Cup triumph in the Hampden final.

That bookmakers regard Hibs as the favourites may seem incongruous, given 
their position in the second tier and Ross County well established in the top 
flight. There is the sense, though, that Hibs have a Premiership team in a 
disproportionate environment.

The necessary proving of that point means Alan Stubbs has cause to look beyond 
this showpiece. There is much talk of what level of achievement the former 
Celtic and Everton defender has presided over when the reality is simple; there 
will be none, in black and white, if Hibs are not restored to the top division 
at this, the second time of asking. Barring a highly unlikely collapse from 
Rangers, the Edinburgh team will need playoffs to reach that target.

Where Stubbs has impressed is by breathing fresh life into a club that was in 
tatters after the relegation presided over by Terry Butcher. It is an indicator 
of such progress that even striking financial results – Hibs lost £800,000 last 
year and have reported themselves likely to do so again – are glossed over by a 
support who were previously vociferous about a need for ownership change. Good 
results offer the finest public relations campaign a club cannot buy.

In this cup, Hibs have demonstrated their on-field strength. Aberdeen, Dundee 
United andSt Johnstone have been swatted aside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/hibernian-st-johnstone-scottish-league-cup-match-report>
. In the Scottish Cup, Hearts were knocked out at the last-16 stage. Pieced 
together, there is no cause whatsoever for Hibs to fearRoss County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/ross-county-celtic-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-match-report>
.

Yet the Highland team have made a habit of laughing in the face of reputation. 
Around 5,000 people inhabit Dingwall, with County not so much punching above 
their weight as drawing wonderfully upon a sense of community that is 
epitomised by their chairman and majority shareholder, Roy McGregor. This is a 
multi-millionaire who employs more than 4,000 based, true to McGregor’s roots, 
in the Highlands.

McGregor’s managerial hiring of Jim McIntyre to replace Derek Adams in 
September 2014 has proved a masterstroke. County’s previously erratic 
recruitment policy has waned, with McIntyre – by his chairman’s own admission – 
inevitably destined for a higher-profile job offer before too long.

County’s tale, from Highland League members as recently as 1994 to part of the 
full-time fabric, lacks only a major trophy as endorsement. This was not the 
primary goal of Stubbs before this season started but Hibs, as backed by almost 
30,000 fans, would cherish success all the same. Maybe the message for either 
winner should be in taking extra care in the planning of what happens next.
 