
The Hearts manager George Burley was proved correct in at least one of his 
judgments here last night as his much-changed Hearts line-up were bundled out 
of the CIS Cup by the Premierleague strugglersLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston>. Ramón Pereira, a Hearts 
player last season, did the damage with a goal after 54 minutes but overall the 
match bolstered suspicions that Burley's side lack the strength in depth to 
sustain a league title challenge this year.

That is a fear which Burley shares, as he admitted after the match. "There was 
no lack of effort from the boys, but I have said since the start of the season 
that we do not have the strength of squad to compete with the Old Firm.

"We were second best for large spells of the game, but we have to look at the 
distance we have come since the start of the season, which is amazing. It will 
take two or three years to have the kind of squad which can match Rangers and 
Celtic."

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> face their toughest 
challenge of a remarkable season so far when Rangers visit Tynecastle on 
Saturday and with this in mind, coupled with injuries to Julien Brellier, Roman 
Bednar, Edgaras Jankauskas and Takis Fyssas, Burley made five changes to the 
side that started the 1-0 victory in Inverness at the weekend, keeping his 
prolific scorer Rudi Skacel on the bench until Livingston went ahead

The home side made just one change to the starting XI for the weekend defeat 
to Dundee United, as Pereira replaced Gabor Vincze. Livingston have only two 
goals, and a single point, to show from their opening SPL games, making it a 
tough managerial baptism for Paul Lambert.

Hearts failed to create a chance of note in the opening 45 minutes and paid 
for it nine minutes after the interval as Pereira buried a pinpoint Derek Adams 
cross from six yards. The Scotland defender Andy Webster was pushed up into the 
attack late on as Hearts bombarded Roddy McKenzie's goal, but Livingston held 
firm.

"I thought the players were terrific," said Lambert. "Our general play was 
excellent. Although Hearts made changes they still had internationals on the 
pitch."

Livingston (4-4-2): McKenzie; Dair, Strong, Dorado, Mackay; Neil Barrett 
(Brittain, h-t), ·Walker (Vincze, 79), Adams (Scott, 90), Graham Barrett; 
Dalglish, Pereira.Subs not used: Roy, Boyd.

Hearts (4-4-2): Gordon; Wallace, Pressley, Webster, Neilson; McAllister, 
Hartley, Camazzola (Skacel, 60), ·Cesnauskis (Berra, 73); Mole (Elliot, 60), 
Simmons. Not used: Banks, Mikoliunas.

Referee: S Dougal.
 