
For a nation obsessed with discussing the weather, we're awful at dealing with 
it. A slightly chilly spell causes communications systems to collapse, the 
transport network buckles under three millimetres of snow, shops are forced to 
close by a sustained frost and we all end up eating decades old tins of 
Alphabetti Spaghetti.

Football is by no means immune to this wintry malaise. Obviously only the 
weird and twisted among us would want to watch players suffer horrific injuries 
on concrete-like surfaces, but for 18 of the 24 fixtures in the bottom two 
divisions to fall victim to an all-too-predictable cold snap and five 
Championship fixtures to be postponed as well seems absurd. It's not as if 
football is normally played in July. It's a winter sport. Shouldn't we be able 
to cope with a bit of sub-zero action from time to time?

There is an argument for league teams to install undersoil heating. It costs 
an estimated £150,000-200,000 and, of course, not all clubs can afford to shell 
out. But there is another way (he says, sidling behind a parapet and donning a 
tin helmet): artificial pitches.

The days when the plastic pitch at Loftus Road saw routine kicks bouncing off 
the surface and colliding with the moon are long gone. Last season I travelled 
to that temple of football, Ochilview, to seeStenhousemuir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stenhousemuir> take on Forfar. An 
excellent game took place on an artificial pitch, in ridiculously low 
temperatures. Isn't it time we started discussing this seriously?

• The seven games that did go ahead in the Championship produced a solitary 
home win – Sheffield United's 1–0 defeat of Norwich. Of the four away wins, 
Preston's 3–1 win over the leaders, Wolves, at Molineux was the most 
impressive. There were two goals for the Wolves old boy Steve Elliott, who 
managed only five in the entire 14 months he spent at Molineux. He has now 
scored four goals there in three games as an away player.

• Wolves' defeat allowed Reading to close the gap at the top to four points 
with their 4–0 demolition of Watford on Friday night. Reading are now the 
highest-scoring team in league football, and even the out-of-favour Leroy Lita 
bagged their fourth. Lita, a target for Norwich, where he has been on loan, 
announced that he intends to fight for a place at Reading. No surprises there, 
then.

• Elsewhere in the Championship, two unwelcome eight-match runs came to an end.
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> had gone eight 
without a win before David McGoldrick's header saw them beat Barnsley 1–0 at 
Oakwell. Meanwhile, Swansea put a winning end to their league record of eight 
draws in a row, taking all three points at Burnley courtesy of a Jason Scotland 
double.

• What were you doing on 4 October? Can't remember? Charlton fans can. They 
were watching their side beat Ipswich 2–1 – the last time they saw them win. 
This was one unfortunate run that did not come to an end on Saturday, the 
Addicks losing 2–0 at home to Forest. But it's not all doom and gloom at The 
Valley. Charlton's 16-year-old forward Jonjo Shelvey once again drew rave 
reviews, his skills standing out in a team desperate for form and confidence.

• To League One, where Walsall sacked Jimmy Mullen on Saturday. The club 
blamed poor form, particularly at home, which they said had caused dwindling 
attendances. True enough,Walsall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> 
failed to beat Brighton at home, and the crowd was indeed notable by its 
absence as the game had been called off. All of which begs the question, why 
did they wait two weeks since their last game, only to sack their gaffer 
following a postponement?

• The three League One clubs equipped to beat the weather were, predictably, 
the moneybags sides Leeds, Leicester and, er, Northampton. It was a case of 
another old boy enjoying a return to a former employer at Elland Road, where 
Michael Bridges scored Carlisle's second in a 2–0 win. Leicester moved five 
points clear of MK Dons thanks to a 3–0 defeat of Leyton Orient. Northampton 
had Adebayo Akinfenwa's injury-time goal to thank for a share of the spoils in 
a 1–1 draw against Huddersfield.

• Only three games took place in League Two and, according to Brentford's 
manager Andy Scott, that was one too many. He said the pitch at Lincoln was 
unplayable, and only pressure from the home club's chief executive saw the 
referee declare the pitch fit. "The ref said it was 50:50, and then the Lincoln 
chief executive starts sticking his key in the pitch and saying it was all 
right. I think he thought he was Geoffrey Boycott." Do people really fantasise 
about being Geoffrey Boycott?

• In a world of snide remarks and cynicism, a moment of rare sincerity here. 
Congratulations to Geoff Horsfield, who made his first appearance since surgery 
for testicular cancer when he played 80 minutes for Lincoln. He even set up 
Anthony Elding's equaliser in a 2-2 draw. Earlier, Marcus Bean had scored his 
fourth goal in five games for Brentford – a good return for a midfielder.

• Meanwhile, the cancellation of their home game with Rotherham means Luton 
are still stranded on minus one point. The rest of the country has snapped out 
of the cold spell, but it seems things will be below zero at Luton for a while 
yet.

• And so to the FA Cup ties this week. A number of league clubs are in action, 
with two potential shocks to look out for. Swansea travel to Histon, which has 
already been the graveyard for Swindon and Leeds' cup ambitions. Expect the 
Swans to receive a rough ride. Meanwhile, Peterborough host the Premier 
League's bottom club West Bromwich. A shock could be on the cards — Albion 
could snatch a win, don't you think?
 