
The big story in Germany was all about a man falling from grace and ruefully 
admitting to the authorities that he had sought an unfair advantage. But let's 
not dwell on Uli Hoeness's trial for tax evasion here - there'll be ample time 
to digest the rights and wrongs after the judgement comes in on Thursday.

Over in Nürnberg on Saturday night, Aaron Hunt was in a remarkably similar 
situation to Bayern Munich's president, whose criminal case went to court on 
Monday. Similar, that is, if you forget about the €18.5m that Hoeness has, by 
his own admission, failed to declare in various tax returns over the years, and 
about the possible jail sentence etc etc. But the basic moral question was not 
too dissimilar.

Hunt, you see, had successfully tricked the referee, Manuel Gräfe, into 
awarding a penalty in the 75th minute. He'd done so by performing a well-know 
Werder trick originally invented by Andreas Herzog (allegedly) called 
"Einfädeln": the artful stumbling into an opponents' leg. Javier Pinola did 
stick out said leg and the Argentine did warrant much worse than a penalty for 
his haircut ("not really a haircut, more of a memorial to the hairdresser who 
died half-way through the job," as the inimitable Arnd Zeigler put it  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c_5KUbwAIPA&feature=youtu.be> but Hunt 
recognised the error of his ways.

"I was looking for the contact but I realised it wasn't a pen. I struggled a 
bit with myself but I wanted to tell the truth. I didn't want to win the game 
like that". To Pinola's relief, Hunt did indeed tell Gräfe that he'd got it 
wrong and everything was right in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> for a brief moment or 
two.

"This shows us that Financial Fair Play is still written in capital letters," 
proclaimed Rhein-Post. (All nouns are capitalised, in German, to be perfectly 
honest.) But this tale of untypical Germans, as Sir Alex Ferguson would have 
it, would of course have been even more life-affirming if Bremen hadn't already 
been 2-0 up at the time. Would Hunt have done the same if the score had been 
0-0? "This question doesn't arise," Werder's coach, Robin Dutt, said 
unhelpfully. The player was honest enough to mumble something about that being 
"a difficult comparison". In capital letters, this spells NO.

Perhaps Gräfe should have still gone ahead and booked Hunt for simulation, as 
a few observers suggested. Apparently, the admission of guilt in this context 
does absolve the player from personal punishment but only if he comes clean 
early enough, naturally. Maybe Hunt was simply afraid that the media would find 
out what he had done after the event. Funnily enough, there's an interesting 
symmetry at play here. For Gräfe in Nürnberg, read judge Rupert Heindl in 
Munich: Hoeness's defence needs to convince him that his voluntary admission of 
tax evasion was indeed voluntary, not the consequence of an imminent magazine 
article about his Swiss bank account.

Fortunately for all neutrals and honest taxpayers who frequent this blog, the 
law of rather smaller numbers applies in the Bundesliga. On Sunday,Borussia 
Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> won 1-0 away 
to SC Freiburg to close the gap to leaders Bayern Munich to just 20 points. 
With only 10 games to go, Pep Guardiola's team will feel the Black and Yellows 
breathing down their neck. Bayern may still be unbeaten this season but that 
stat could well convey a false sense of security: they can't afford to slip up 
more than three times if Dortmund continue on their great run. This one could 
well go all the way to the wire - to the end of March. "Those who win these 
kind of games become champions," Jürgen Klopp said after the hard-fought result 
at the Mage Solar stadium. (He might have been joking. It was hard to tell.)

The game will be remembered for Sebastian Kehl's looping shot over the SC 
keeper Oliver Baumann but Christian Streich saw dark forces at work. "Every two 
weeks, we are the idiots," said the Freiburg coach. "At some stage, I'm fed up 
with watching that. It's a disaster how we get battered by some people. If they 
can't deal with me, they need to tell me. Then we can change that. Then there's 
less friction as far those people are concerned, and they won't treat the team 
like that anymore". Streich's quibble was with the referee, Peter Gagelmann, 
showing Sokratis Papastathopoulos a yellow card rather than a red one for a 
foul on Philipp Zulechner. Two weeks earlier, Streich had complained about his 
side missing out on a penalty in the 4-2 defeat by Augsburg. "Maybe it's about 
me?" wondered Streich. He can be a bit emotional on the touchline but if there 
really is a conspiracy, it's probably against little, inoffensive Freiburg 
rather than the highly-strung coach. He is box office, this year's Freiburg 
less so.

Talking of hot-heads, Matthias Sammer finally managed to prove all doubters 
wrong this week. Some of his detractors have often cynically wondered what the
Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> sporting 
director has been doing all this time but his job profile seems clear enough: 
Sammer is tasked with picking needless, childish fights when nothing else is 
going on.

The 46-year-old opined that Bayern's slender lead in the table - a 6-1 win 
against a pretty decent Wolfsburg side just about kept them in the race - might 
be a result of opposing teams not "training as if there was no tomorrow"? This 
wasn't meant as a criticism, Sammer insisted, only "a matter of consistency". 
Klopp dutifully took the bait. "Matthias Sammer should thank god that Bayern 
picked him up, I can't imagine that they would have one point less without 
him," said the Dortmund boss. "Highly arrogant," was the verdict of Dirk 
Dufner, the Hannover 96 sporting director.

Sammer will be relieved to hear that at least his colleague Fredi Bobic (VfB 
Stuttgart) agreed with him, to an extent. The Swabian did want Thomas Schneider 
to take training like there was no tomorrow, which is to say: not one day more. 
His 15th-placed team had only managed a 2-2 draw with basement club Eintracht 
Braunschweig after eight defeats in a row. The veteran Huub Stevens was brought 
in to save Stuttgart's season.

"It's one minute to midnight," said the self-declared "tough dog" from 
Kerkrade at his first presser on Monday. "But Huub Stevens can't do it alone, 
Fredi Bobic can't do it alone, the president can't do it alone and players 
can't do it alone either. All of us, the cleaning woman and the president, have 
to pull together." Yes, it's one of those dirty, rather hopeless jobs that just 
cries out for Third Person Football Man™.

Results: Hamburg - Frankfurt 1-1, Wolfsburg - Bayern 1-6, Hannover - 
Leverkusen 1-1, Stuttgart - Braunschweig 2-2, Gladbach - Augsburg 1-2, Nürnberg 
- Bremen 0-2, Freiburg - Dortmund 0-1, Mainz - Hertha 1-1.
 