
With considerable trepidation, I turn this month to the subject of political 
correctness.

 The Guardian, being a fine liberal newspaper, has strong views about the 
inappropriateness of certain words and phrases. Fashions change, and from time 
to time, the editor and his estimable colleague, the readers' editor, lay down 
house rules or give guidance as to what should or should not appear in the 
columns of the paper. In principle, such rules and guidance cover the crossword 
clues and solutions just as much as they cover anything else.

 Why, you might ask, did I seem to enter a caveat with the words "in 
principle"? The answer is that in a significant way the words in cryptic 
crosswords are not on all fours with the words in news stories, features and 
the rest. In the rest of the paper, phrases and sentences are supposed to make 
sense and to relate to some approximation of the real world. Crossword clues, 
on the other hand, relate to a parallel but quite unreal universe.

 For example, if the phrase "Glutton whose booze holds gun whence Rev must 
fly" appeared in a news report on page one, you would be forgiven for thinking 
that the time had come to write a letter to the editor and to try another 
morning paper. But from Araucaria or any other compiler, you accept it as an 
entirely reasonable and fair use of words.

 Let me give a few other examples. Every time some combination of Northern 
Ireland/NI/Ulster/overcoat appears in a clue, there are protests that Ulster is 
not the same things as the Six Counties. The protests are, of course, entirely 
correct so far as the real world is concerned, for the events of 1921 in no way 
altered the fact that the Irish province of Ulster consists of nine counties, 
three of which are in the Republic. All I have to say on this is that in our 
crosswords NI = an overcoat.

 While on the subject of the Troubles, there were protests about this clue: 
"Are they capped in Ulster? (5)" Solution: KNEES. The complaint was that it is 
offensive to joke about the ghastly punishment shootings. Clearly, since the 
clue appeared in the paper, I am reluctant to establish such "no joke" areas.

 Then there is the whole area of words considered offensive in relation to 
specific groups, which are banned from the columns of the paper. Abo and Paki, 
for example, both appear in the dictionary, but not in the Guardian. They would 
not now, I hope, appear in one of our crosswords. They might have in the past, 
but standards in these matters have risen.

 I am indebted to Logodaedalus for drawing my attention to a clue composed by 
the late great Afrit of the late great Listener, about which he can have had no 
qualms since he included it in his collection of puzzles Armchair Crosswords, 
published in 1950. Clue: "What do happen, Mose, if our gals lose deir heads? 
Oh, den you find de ways out! (8)" Solution: EGRESSES. I am 100% sure that 
Afrit, if he were still with us, would not contemplate writing such a clue 
today.

 But there are other less clear cut cases. Redskin no longer appears in the 
news columns, though it does on the sports pages, since the name of the 
American football team has not been changed to the Washington Native Americans. 
But should the word be banned from the crossword? And what of a clue based on 
the idea that farm worker = peasant? My reply, incidentally, to a letter of 
protest on that one was that, while all farm workers were certainly not 
peasants, all peasants certainly used to work on the land. Clearly, part of the 
Guardian's rural readership could be offended by such a clue. But, if you 
exclude everything that might possibly offend someone somewhere, life gets hard.

 Currently, by far the most difficult area relates to mental illness. The 
Guardian quite rightly regards this as a highly sensitive area. The house rule 
is that the greatest care should be taken in using words or phrases that derive 
their power from their association with mental illness, even when they are 
being used in a context that does not directly relate to it. This is a policy 
that no right thinking person would question. Guardian readers and groups 
concerned with mental illness are quick to jump on any even inadvertent slip in 
this area.

 Applying the policy mechanically to crossword clues, though, would be very 
constricting. You can, of course, avoid using a word such as "madhouse", even 
though it clearly has a respectable dictionary definition of "a state of uproar 
or confusion".

 The real problem relates to the fact that the anagram is a staple of the 
cryptic crossword and anagrams require indicators. I am not sure how we could 
stay in business if there was a blanket ban on all indicators, such as bats, 
bananas, crazy, cuckoo, deformed, deranged, diseased, disturbed, ill, lunatic, 
mad, mixed up, nuts, odd or peculiar.
 