
In the dark depths of winter, it can seem like the joy of sowing seeds and 
taking cuttings is a long way away. Yet there are two beautiful species you can 
propagate right now, that will give you instant houseplants in exchange for 
almost zero effort and which cost you essentially nothing: dracaenas and 
cordylines.

Both Dracaena marginata and Cordyline fruticosa are exotic houseplants that 
originate in the world’s tropical zones. Their vibrant foliage colour and 
elegant architectural forms have made them hugely popular in both the 
houseplant trade and floristry.

Both also happen to be among the easiest of all plants to take cuttings from. 
Indeed, as I discovered when working in flower shops when at university, the 
cut stems of both species (often up to 45cm long) will readily root even in the 
water of a vase.

These species will give great results for almost zero effort

While most florist greens fade to a brown mush that is destined for the bin in 
a week or two, these species will happily start to grow away, giving you plants 
for free. In fact, commercial growers of these houseplants will essentially be 
taking the exact same cut tips that are sold in floristry, and rooting them in 
compost for a just a few weeks in heated glasshouses before selling them at up 
to a quadruple mark-up.

For home growers, this makes buying them as cut stems always the cheapest way 
to get hold of these two species. They are so quick and easy to root from large 
stem sections, and they will look almost identical, giving you instant impact.

To get started, simply pick up a few of these stems, often sold as “ti plant 
tips” or “cordyline tips”, at your local florist. If they don’t happen to have 
them in stock, do ask, as most good florists will be able to order them in if 
given a week’s notice.

To root them, either pop them in a clean vase of water in a bright, warm room 
(my preferred option) or dip the cut end in rooting powder and plant them up in 
a small pot of well-drained cutting compost. The advantage, in my experience, 
of the vase technique is you won’t need to keep watering the newly planted 
cuttings to prevent them from drying out.

As long as you regularly change the water to prevent the build-up of bacteria 
or fungal rots, the success rate is extremely high. Using a clear glass vase 
will mean you can monitor the cleanliness of the water (and the root growth) 
easily.

Once roots are 5-10cm long the new plants can be potted up in any ordinary 
compost and grown on just like any houseplant. Ten years after graduating I 
still have some of mine from my uni days, adding a splash of year-round colour 
to my living room.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 