
The noble breakfast dish of kedgeree is a prime example of an Anglo-Indian 
culinary mash up, with its roots inkhichri 
<http://onehotstove.blogspot.com/2005/03/khichdi-kadhi-indias-comfort-food.html>
, a dish of spiced pulses mixed with rice which was already on the menu by the 
time the Moroccan explorer Ibn Batuta made it to Delhi in the mid-14th century.
The fish was a British introduction, as were the hard-boiled eggs. (Presumably 
we would have stuck some black pudding in there as well if Cook had happened 
across one in the cantonment stores.) Lizzie Collingham points out inCurry: a 
biography 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Curry-Biography-Dish-Lizzie-Collingham/dp/0701173351> 
that fresh fish was already a staple of the Raj breakfast table, as, she quotes 
anearly 19th century handbook 
<http://www.chaf.lib.latrobe.edu.au/dcd/williamson.htm> as saying, "in the hot 
season, fish caught early in the morning would be much deteriorated before the 
dinner hour." It wasn't until the dish travelled back to the country homes of 
Britain that smoked haddock put in an appearance.

Madhur Jaffrey points out that the wetter end of the kedgeree spectrum is 
rather like a rice porridge, so it seems unsurprising that this, amongst all 
local dishes, became popular amongst the colonists. Not only would it have been 
vaguely familiar, but presumably, "like the local people, they found it … good 
for invalids or those with hangovers", as Sri Owen puts it inThe Rice Book 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780711222601>
. Hear, hear – there's nothing better after a night on the sauce than a 
steaming bowl of comforting, lightly spiced rice, silky with butter and strewn 
with salty, smoky fish and fresh-flavoured herbs; it wakes up your palate and 
soothes the stomach.

It didn't take the Victorians long to adapt the dish to suit their own tastes. 
The 1885 edition ofCulinary Jottings for Madras 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/features/the-leisure-lounge/the-return-of-culinary-jottings-for-madras/articleshow/3006067.cms>
, a (recently reprinted) collection of cookery articles from the Madras 
Athenaeum and Daily News by an Indian Army colonel, gives a rather unappetising 
sounding recipe for kegeree (sic) of "the English type", "composed of boiled 
rice, chopped hard-boiled egg, cold minced fish, and a lump of fresh butter … 
tossed together in the frying-pan, flavoured with pepper, salt, and any minced 
garden herb such as cress, parsley, or marjoram, and served smoking hot." Not a 
spice in sight.

Plain

Interestingly enough, The Complete Indian Housekeeper and Cook, an 1888 
publication quoted inThe Road to Vindaloo 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Road-Vindaloo-Curry-English-Kitchen/dp/1903018579/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1298300994&sr=1-1>
, an utterly fascinating study of the British love affair with curry, includes 
a plainer recipe, rather like a spiced paella, in its chapter on "Native 
Dishes" – but then its author, the redoubtable Flora Annie Steele, wasn't your 
average memsahib.

I fry sliced onions in a generous amount of "boiling ghee" then remove these 
from the pan and put in 4 tbsp "well-washed" rice and 4 tbsp dal (I used some 
surplus ready-cooked moong dal, but dry lentils should work just as well). Once 
these have absorbed the remaining butter, I add ginger, peppercorns, cardamom, 
cloves and a cinnamon stick, cover the lot with water, and leave it to simmer 
until almost dry. The dish is served with the fried onion scattered over the 
top – delicious (and quite a revelation for anyone who thinks themselves 
daringly modern for liking a bit of spice at the breakfast table), but 
definitely "kidgeree", as Mrs Steele has it, rather than kedgeree.

Wet kedgeree

I find a recipe for "wet kedgeree" in The Prawn Cocktail Years 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780718149802>
, which Lindsay Bareham and Simon Hopkinson claim is "slightly controversial", 
possibly because it marries rice with a distinctly European white sauce.

While the rice cooks, I poach smoked haddock in milk, and then use this liquid 
to make a sauce thickened with flour and flavoured with cream, lemon juice, 
curry powder and sautéed onion. This is folded into the cooked rice and smoked 
fish, along with a small bunch of chopped chives, and the whole thing is topped 
with parsley and sliced boiled egg. It's undeniably comforting, but I think the 
cream dulls the spice and makes it into a fishy porridge, which, however 
authentic it may be, seems a shame. I like my kedgeree to have a bit more of a 
kick.

Thrifty kedgeree

Despite saying one should be "generous with the butter and cream" in the 
preamble to her kedgeree recipe, Jane Grigson doesn't use any dairy products to 
actually make it – after poaching the smoked haddock in water, she uses the 
same liquid to cook the rice, flavoured with sautéed onion and curry powder. 
The two are then mixed together, with a knob of butter, and topped with lemon 
slices, egg, parsley and prawns.

It's a clever and economical technique, but again, the flavours of the 
finished dish are not as vivid as I would like. Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall and 
Nick Fisher use a similar method in their River CottageFish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fish> Book (while suggesting smoked 
pollack instead of the more popular haddock), poaching the fish in milk 
instead, but again, I find this slightly bland.

Fish fried rice

The Leiths Fish Bible version is very different, and more in the spirit of the 
original Raj dish, designed to use up leftover rice, than the others. After 
poaching the haddock, I fry a chopped onion in an impressive amount of butter 
until soft, add turmeric, green chilli, curry powder and chopped fresh ginger, 
sauté them briefly, and then stir through the cooked rice fish and eggs. The 
flavours are striking, and the generous amount of butter makes the rice rich 
and moist.

Flavours

Sautéing pre-cooked rice in butter and spices keeps the flavours fresh, and 
the texture fluffy, rather than mushy. Leiths add fresh ginger, which I don't 
like with smoked fish, but their fresh green chilli adds a nice touch of 
freshness to the dish, as does a garnish of finely chopped coriander, rather 
than the more usual parsley. The chives used by Simon Hopkinson and Lindsay 
Bareham contribute a savoury, tangy quality that works particularly well with 
the eggs. On that subject, it'svery modish 
<http://lizzieeatslondon.blogspot.com/2009/12/kedgeree.html> to substitute 
soft-boiled or poached eggs, but I prefer a distinctly Victorian solidity on 
this occasion.

Despite what many modern chefs seem to believe, old-fashioned curry powder is 
an absolute must here – a couple of separate spices, as used by Nigella, just 
doesn't create the same effect. Salmon, scallops, mackerel – even prawns, all 
seem wrong to me: the fish should be white, smoked, and sustainable. This is a 
breakfast that leaves you in no doubt you're alive and well: silver chafing 
dish optional.



 <>Perfect kedgeree
 Perfect kedgeree. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Serves 4

450g basmati rice
500g smoked haddock
120g butter
1 large onion, finely chopped
1 green chilli, deseeded and cut into thin rings
2 crushed cardamom pods
1 tbsp curry powder
2 hard-boiled eggs, peeled and cut in half
Small handful chives, chopped
½ lemon, cut into 4 wedges
Small bunch of coriander, chopped

1. Toss the rice briefly under running water and then put it in a large pan 
and cover with cold water. Leave for at least half an hour.

2. Drain the rice and discard the soaking water. Put it in a large pan on a 
medium heat with 585ml fresh water.

3. Bring to the boil, and give it a good stir. Cover tightly and turn the heat 
down very low. Cook for 25 minutes then take off the heat – don't take the lid 
off! – and place on a wet tea towel. Leave for five minutes then fork through 
to fluff up.

4. Meanwhile, put the fish, skin-side up, in a shallow pan over a low heat, 
and cover with boiling water. Allow to sit for 10 minutes, then take out of the 
water and, when cool enough to handle, pull the skin off and break into large 
flakes.

5. Melt the butter in a large frying pan over a lowish heat, and add the 
onion. Fry gently until softened, then stir in the chilli, cardamom pods and 
curry powder. Cook for a couple of minutes, then tip in the rice and stir to 
coat. Add the fish flakes and heat through. Taste and season.

6. Put the eggs on top, scatter with chives and coriander, and serve with 
slices of lemon to squeeze over.

Is kedgeree the breakfast of kings, or an aptly malodorous reminder of 
colonialism? Are there any other Anglo-Indian favourites which deserve to be 
better known – and can it really be true that kedgeree has its origins in
Scotland <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dal> rather than Shimla?
 