
Gourmands! Pedants! Human dustbins! How to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> is back, back, 
back onWord of Mouth <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> 
and, this month, we're trying to nail the perfect version of fast food's rising 
star: the burrito. Purists may despair at the ongoing maltreatment of this 
historic Mexican dish – one blithely supersized in California and, as you read 
this, probably undergoing further indignities involving kimchi in east London – 
but you cannot deny that the modern, mongrelised burrito is stillmuy bueno. 
More filling than a burger, lighter than fish and chips, as sprightly in its 
flavours as a pizza or kebab, little wonder Britainis clutching the burrito to 
its bosom 
<http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-05-09/chipotle-finds-for-u-dot-k-dot-burrito-fans-its-not-all-about-the-food>
. Remember: spicy views are welcome, but if the conversation becomes too hot 
below the line, wrap it up. Or you will look like you have a chipotle on your 
shoulder.

When

The breakfast burrito (commonly loaded with chopped sausage, sausage meat or a 
frankfurter, spicy scrambled eggs, onion, tomato, bacon etc) sounds brilliant 
in theory, but is beset by the same mushy textural problems and the kind of 
haphazard flavour amalgamation, that ruins that other all-in-one breakfast, the 
Full English in a can. Those ingredients need separating out so they can shine 
properly. The burrito is not breakfast material.

Instead, it is best eaten at lunch or early evening, and comes into its own 
when you are rushing to meet your mates after work for a drink. Why? Because it 
is sufficient to line your stomach without leaving you bloated, and, if eating 
in a burrito bar, you will be done and dusted in 10 minutes. It is the perfect 
pre-beer food.

NB. Please enjoy alcohol responsibly and, if you are going out dancing later, 
hold the refried beans. Otherwise, at 1am, you are highly likely to clear the 
dancefloor with a bout of near-fatal flatulence.

Where and how

It may be categorised as "street food", but eating a burrito while walking is 
hazardous. We've all been there: you take a bite from one side of the burrito, 
which leaves a quivering "lip" of rice-loaded tortilla on the other, and, like 
a slow-motion shot in the world's most boring action film, it falls to the 
ground or down your shirt, before you can whip your head down and around to 
snaffle it to safety. Then there is the issue of leakage from the bottom of a 
too-loosely-twisted foil wrap, and also the delicate procedure of prising that, 
by now sopping wet, last mouthful from the final cup of foil - itself now 
overflowing with juices - and transferring it to your mouth without any 
spillage. It's a task that requires focus and concentration. You walk with a 
burrito once, twice maybe, before you either a) get knocked-down on a busy road 
or b) realise – standing outside the pub trying to wipe meat juices off your 
trainers with an old tissue – that eating and walking is a false economy, 
time-wise.

Even just standing to eat a burrito, is fraught with debris-danger, so, 
instead, take a seat. But, very specifically, take a seat in a fast-turnover 
burrito bar (one that serves burritos from a San Francisco Mission 
District-style assembly line), where you eat with your hands, unpeeling your 
burrito like a banana/Cornetto/packet of Polos, but crucially retaining its 
tinfoil wrapper until the last mouthful. Only a lunatic takes the whole burrito 
out to eat it, and only a very elderly aristocrat or someone with serious 
hygiene phobias would eat a burrito with a knife and fork. Even sitting down, 
burritos can get messy. Get involved or eat elsewhere.

Some might argue that eating in a proper restaurant, where your burrito will 
be cooked-to-order, rather than constructed from pre-cooked items, opens up 
another realm of exotic fillings, but does it? Really? Duck, prawns or battered 
fish have their place, but that place is not on a burrito.
 Mind that quivering lip of tortilla. Photograph: John E Kelly/Getty 
Price

If you eat a burrito in a restaurant, however, what will find is that you end 
up paying around £10 for it. Which is utterly un-tenner-able (do you see what I 
did there?). Ultimately, this is just a hot wrap, right? A quick and easy 
snack. If it breaks the £6.50 mark, your antennae should start twitching. And, 
no, cutting my burrito into halves on the diagonal and arranging them on a 
plate with a little salad and some nachos, does not justify a £4 surcharge.

You could try and make them at home, slashing the cost. But as anyone who has 
attempted to make anything with tortillas at home will attest, life really is 
too short for the sloppy, half-arsed results that emerge. There are certain 
foods which benefit enormously from being, slow-cooked en-masse, and, 
particularly,folded 
<http://www.thekitchn.com/how-to-wrap-a-burrito-so-it-doesnt-fall-apart-when-you-eat-it-cooking-lessons-from-the-kitchn-189756>
 by someone who hasalready knocked-out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2010/apr/14/how-to-fold-burritos>
 a couple of hundred burritos today. This is one of them.

Size

They say size doesn't matter. That certainly isn't true of burritos. The fat, 
four-inch stumps; the curiously boxy briquettes you get; even, thin, wizened 
eight-inchers: they are all aesthetically off-putting and unsatisfying to eat. 
You want a solid, cylindrical six inches with a filling-girth of around three 
inches. Basically, it needs to impress without intimidating, it needs to feel 
solid in your hand but not be too big to handle.

Fillings

Meat Fundamentally, a burrito is a primary meat component seasoned with choice 
condiments (salsa, sour cream, cheese etc) and, while it isn't the most elegant 
phrase, a burrito needs "wet meat". That is, meat moist with fat and cooking 
juices making it is tender enough for you to take a smooth, clean bite from 
your burrito, getting a good mouthful of the meat and a little of each of the - 
if it has been assembled correctly - evenly distributed secondary ingredients. 
We're talking meat rubbed-down with smoky chipotle and spices, then 
oven-roasted surrounded by liquid and repeatedly basted or, alternatively, 
slow-braised for hours, then shredded down into its own juices. Meat which will 
taste glorious even after a significant wait on a service line. Think 
variations on pulled pork or "barbacoa", which,originally 
<http://mexicanfood.about.com/od/mexicanfoodglossary/g/Barbacoa.htm>, was a 
method of smoking and steaming beef, simultaneously.

Chopped meats Whether grilled or flash-fried (such as chicken breast, pork 
loin), chopped meats are, in contrast, regularly dry and tough, particularly 
after sitting on the line for a while. Some fattier meats may work roasted or 
barbecued, then chopped (sticky, charred pork belly, chicken thigh), but they 
are not commonplace. Poor-quality, over-cooked sliced steak, which you have to 
violently chew and tear at, in such a way that the burrito begins to fall apart 
under the strain, is particularly bad. Having to pull the steak out of your 
mouth because it contains irritating bits of sinew will ruin your burrito.

Everything else There is a serious textural problem (ie a significant lack of 
bite and resistance) with most seafood in burritos and similarly vegetables and 
cheese as a main ingredient. You can spice it, dice it, jazz it up any which 
way, but butternut squash, chargrilled courgette, feta et al, are salad 
ingredients, which don't really work on a burrito. Where's the crunch? The 
variation in mouthfeel?

Extras: Yes! 

Cheese (preferably a strong mature cheddar, but not too much of it); a 
generous dollop of sour cream; salsa (mild, spritzy pico de gallo – the meat 
should, ultimately, be the star of the show); rice; chopped baby gem lettuce. 
These should come as standard. If charged extra for any of them, eat somewhere 
else next time. Pinto or preferably earthier, distinctive black beans. And that 
is pretty much it.

Extras: No! 

Guacamole, fine in other circumstances, but overwhelms a burrito turning it 
into indistinct mush for no palpable flavour benefit. Refried beans, for 
similar reasons. If I want to attach heat-resistant tiles to a satellite or 
secure a rivet on a suspension bridge, I will use refried beans. But that 
musty, thick gloop is not an edible substance. No fried onions and definitely 
no fried peppers, a slimy, acridly mineral vegetable as welcome in my burrito 
as one of the chef's severed fingers. No cheese sauce, of course. No pickled 
jalapenos (too spiky), no ludicrous pineapple or similarly off-piste salsas, 
and definitely no obliterating hot sauces packed with naga and habaneros. Need 
to test yourself to prove your masculinity? Then take up boxing. Don't ruin a 
perfectly good burrito.
 Burrito lovers attempt to walk and eat at Whitecross Street market, London. 
Photograph: Karen Robinson 
The burrito bowl

A classic example (see also, wholemeal base pizza, grilled fish and chips, 
cottage cheese, any low-fat dessert), of a foodstuff retooled for the health 
conscious in a way that offers only a distant, pathetic echo of the original. 
The ingredients in a burrito need to beheld together by the tortilla, so you 
get a bit of everything in each bite. That is the whole point. It is impossible 
to eat a burrito bowl without, deep down, thinking: "Mmm… this is just some 
random things on a bit of rice, isn't it?" It's neither as satisfying as a 
burrito, nor as energetically tasty as a great salad.

Drink

Your burrito should be a complex baton of flavours that requires light, 
unobtrusive company, with a bit of sparkle to thoroughly scrub your mouth clean 
and refresh your palate. The obvious stuff (cola, fizzy water, lemonade etc) 
works. The more exotic and in-yer-face soft drinks less so (Irn Bru, orangeade, 
Dr Pepper). The bubbles are crucial, though. Swilling down rice with, for 
instance, still water or orange squash produces a unique dead sensation in the 
mouth, a sudden feeling that you are swallowing down watery grit, like an 
accidentally gulped gobful of muddy river water.

The perfect accompaniment would be a cold, pointedly crisp pilsner-style 
lager, but, unfortunately, in the likes of Sol and Corona, the Mexican brewing 
industry has contrived to produce some of the world's worst beers. Pacifico is 
the least worst option (it is has a certain sharpness), but, generally, 
Mexico's sweet, vapid beers, denuded of almost all hop flavour, are not worth 
the money, calories or alcohol units. In desperation, you may order a Negra 
Modelo, but it won't deliver half the flavour its colour suggests. There must 
be some good beers brewed in Mexico (it has a small microbrewing scene), but 
good luck finding any of them in your local burrito joint.

So burritos – how do you eat yours?

• Follow Tony Naylor on Twitter: @naylor_tony <https://twitter.com/naylor_tony>
 