
James Meek’s book on the privatisation of Britain, Private Island 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=9781781682906>, 
highlights the perverse outcome of an energy industry sell-off that saw vast 
tracts of our power infrastructure fall under the ownership of the French 
government-owned EDF. “France in effect renationalised the industry its 
neighbour had so painstakingly privatised. Renationalised it, that is, for 
France,” he writes.

If privatisation was designed to introduce the rigor and efficiency of the 
market to the operation and ownership of public infrastructure – with the 
private sector generating profit for its constituents in exchange – then the 
presence of EDF in our energy landscape is a rebuke to that notion. EDF is a 
state-owned business making money from an industry that started out under state 
control and is perhaps better off staying there given its strategic importance.

A similar inversion has been taking place in the transport arena, which is now 
dotted with fiefdoms carved out by state-owned European bus and rail operators 
whose domestic governments lock up their own markets to outsiders while 
availing themselves of opportunities here.

The latest example last week saw Abellio, a unit of the Dutch national rail 
operator, win the 10-year ScotRail franchise for running train services in 
Scotland. Arriva, which is owned by Germany’s Deutsche Bahn, runs five UK rail 
contracts, including CrossCountry and Arriva Trains Wales, while Keolis, 
controlled by the French state rail company SNCF, is the joint operator of four 
franchises, including Southeastern and London Midland. The latter is also 
shortlisted for the London-to-Edinburgh east coast route in a joint bid with 
SNCF-backed Eurostar.

For a snapshot of how a public asset has inadvertently transferred profit to 
taxpayers elsewhere, it is worth looking at areview of the industry’s 2013 
finances 
<http://orr.gov.uk/publications/reports/gb-rail-industry-financial-information-2012-13>
 published by the Office of Rail Regulation. Northern Rail, a joint venture 
between Serco and Abellio, paid £36m in dividends to its owners after receiving 
government subsidies totalling £713m. Transpennine returned £21m in dividends 
to owners FirstGroup and Keolis, having received £52m from the government, 
which also paid £145m in track grants.

Since the railways were privatised in the early 1990s, punctuality and safety 
have improved from the chaos of the Railtrack era. That cannot be ascribed to 
the risk-taking and innovation of franchise operators, but to the billions of 
pounds invested by Network Rail, a government-controlled entity. London’s 
world-class transport system is the consequence of a multibillion-pound 
investment programme funded by the government and carried out by the publicly 
ownedTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London authority.

Depending on where you stand on the privatisation issue, there can be a debate 
over how you describe a privatised rail system that has been renationalised by 
fellow EU states. Ironic is probably too generous. An ideological failure, 
certainly. The most tangible results achieved under rail privatisation – 
improved safety and punctuality – are down to a government-funded investment 
programme under the auspices of Network Rail.

If we follow the logic of what is happening to the franchise system to its 
conclusion, then nationalised rail operators are the most efficient owners of 
rail routes. In that case, there is a solution already waiting. Directly 
Operated Railways, owned by the Department for Transport, has been running the 
east coast line since 2009 and hasreturned £1bn to the taxpayer since then 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/04/east-coast-mainline-fury-reprivatisation-plan>
. It has not been entered for the auction of the new east coast franchise, 
unlike its close relative SNCF. If SNCF wins the east coast auction, then 
voters will be justified in asking whether, as with all the franchises awarded 
to Abellio, Keolis and Arriva, the government should not just hand the lot to 
DOR. From ScotRail to CrossCountry, the state evidently knows best.

Banking regulators must stand firm


Seven years on from the onset of the financial crisis, no one has gone to jail 
for the events that led to the banks needing multibillion-pound bailouts. The 
reason is simple. No one broke any laws. The court of public opinion may not 
like that, but it is the harsh reality.

This frustration was seized on by Andrew Tyrie MP and the rest of his 
parliamentary commission on banking standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/07/hsbc-directors-quit-jail-bank-crises>
. The commission, set up in the wake of the Libor scandal, recommended the 
creation of a new offence of reckless misconduct, under which a banker could be 
jailed for seven years if it can be proved that they knew their decisions could 
cause the bank to fail.

The City regulators – the Financial Conduct Authority and the Bank of 
England’s Prudential Regulation Authority – are aiming to bring in a new 
licensing regime next year that will require bankers to prove they had acted 
appropriately when things went wrong – in a reversal of the burden of proof 
duty. These are both sensible solutions to a problem that is still facing the 
City seven years on.

Tyrie was right when he said last week: “The crisis showed that there must be 
much greater individual responsibility in banking. A buck that does not stop 
with an individual often stops nowhere.”

This came after it emerged that at least one director (and possibly two) on 
the UK board of HSBC – not its main board – was stepping aside in protest at 
the new regime. This was the right thing to do if they do not have the appetite 
to take a seat around the table of a banking operation. But their decisions 
should not be used by the banking industry as a bargaining chip to water down 
changes already in train.

Regulators and politicians need to hold their ground. Now more than ever. The 
good times are returning to the City. The CBI reckons financial services are 
growing at their fastest rate since the crisis. At times like these the threat 
of severe sanctions might just keep any overexuberance in check.

Progress on equality, but no cigar

Hear that? It is the sound of backs being slapped by chaps congratulating each 
other on the appointment of a few women to the boardrooms of Britain’s biggest 
companies. After all, as Vince Cable’s Department for Innovation, Business and 
Skills announced last week,22.8% of directors of FTSE 100 companies are female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/30/vince-cable-ethnic-minority-board-members>
, which means the target of 25% by 2015 just might be reached.

It is a much better picture than that pertaining in 2011, when Cable set 
businesses on their mission: then just 12.5% of the seats in boardrooms were 
held by women.

Progress, it seems. But the total percentage hides a harsh reality: 61 of the 
companies in the FTSE 100 are still falling short of the 25% target. It was 
only in June thatGlencore – the last bastion of the all-male board – gave a 
women a seat at its boardroom table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/26/glencore-male-board-patrice-merrin-woman>
. In the FTSE 250 more than one in 10 companies still do not have a single 
woman director. It really is too early to celebrate.
 