
The dilemma I am in my early twenties and my boyfriend of two and a half years 
is eight years older. We have a great relationship, he makes me laugh 
constantly and we’re pretty much on the same page about everything in life. The 
only thing I’m struggling with is his lower sex drive. We’ve spoken about it 
loads and he’s promised it’s just how he is and it’s not me, but my self-esteem 
has taken a massive knock and I’m finding it hard to believe the things he says 
are true. I know I’m not as attractive as his last girlfriend so I can’t help 
feeling maybe he’s just not as attracted to me. It’s so hard when the internet 
is full of stories of men having higher libidos, but never women. Is there 
anything I can do to help myself just get used to it?

Mariella replies Put up and shut up, that’s the spirit! Why am I not surprised 
that this letter is from a woman? A century of crawling at snail’s pace towards 
true emancipation and yet we still haven’t managed to crack the hardest nut of 
all, our own self-esteem. Whether it’s choosing boys who don’t want us or not 
demanding equal pay for equal work, we’re still failing to properly value who 
we are. What’s worse is we’re fast getting to the point where we have no one to 
blame but ourselves.

Two 13-year-olds were chatting near me the other day and I overheard one tell 
her friend that she didn’t like boys who liked her. That comment aside they 
were wonderful embodiments of youthful zest and beauty, chatting 19 to the 
dozen as they meandered their way through a multitude of topics, expressing 
confident opinions about most other aspects of their lives. Yet when it came to 
self-image, seeing themselves as anything other than inferior was a hurdle too 
high to jump.

If the physical side of your relationship can’t be sorted out now, it’s 
unlikely that it ever will be

Now here you are writing to me and asking how to learn to live with your 
boyfriend’s less than satisfying sex drive. It’s tempting to say, “Why should 
you?” and naturally there’s a part of me that thinks exactly that. Yet I’m all 
too familiar with that internal voice you have got in your ear, telling you 
that you’re less attractive than his ex and suggesting that if only you were 
“better”, he would want you more. I’m not buying it and neither should you.

You need to stop blaming yourself and understand that while this issue with 
the physical side of your relationship is neither your problem nor your 
responsibility, perhaps it is something you and he can improve on if you work 
together. An imbalance of desire in a relationship can be a 
confidence-crippling thing for both parties and one of the toughest iniquities 
to resolve. It’s a topic that’s hard to discuss and even harder to live with, 
and there’s certainly a point at which words lose their positive power and 
start contributing to the problem.

As a youngster you might presume he’s old enough at 30 to have been struck by 
the sort of failure of desire that occurs among the more mature. I can assure 
you that you are both still at your sexual peak and if the physical side of 
your relationship can’t be sorted out to your mutual satisfaction now, it’s 
unlikely it ever will be. Compatibility isn’t simply measured by the topics you 
agree on and the number of times you enjoy a laugh, though both are important. 
It’s also about finding a partner who works for you sexually and making that 
one of your priorities is nothing to be ashamed of. I’m hoping it’s not your 
boyfriend who makes you feel less appealing than his ex, although as a woman I 
suspect that it’s far more likely to be a self-inflicted sense of inferiority.

Happily in these emancipated days, it really is up to you. Are you prepared to 
compromise on the physical side of the relationship? Is he prepared to try to 
resolve his low libido? If so, there are plenty of specialists who can help a 
willing patient. Try theSexual Advice Association 
<http://sexualadviceassociation.co.uk/>. Or are you resigned to feeling 
sub-standard to his ex and assuming responsibility for his lack of passion for 
as long as this relationship lasts?

My advice may seem simplistic, but centuries of spectacular failure on the 
part of us women suggest it’s hard to put into practice. You are a gorgeous, 
clever, witty, intelligent capable young woman with your whole life stretching 
ahead. There will be compromises and heartbreak along the way, but if you set 
your own standards, assume responsibility for your ambitions and desires and 
focus on realising them, you’ll have every opportunity to lead a full and 
rewarding life. Only you can identify what’s non-negotiable for your personal 
happiness, but once you have, don’t compromise or take the burden of blame when 
others fail to live up to your standards. He’s a lucky guy to have you and he 
may just need to sharpen up his act if he’s going to keep you.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 