
I’m looking at two photographs of the main street of the small town in which I 
was born. Both are taken from the same vantage point – looking up the hill to 
the T-junction at the top. The two photographs are separated by nearly a 
century: the first was taken in the 1930s, the second sometime in the last few 
years.

Topographically, the street remains largely unchanged: it’s a straight road 
with two- or three-storey shops and houses on either side. But the two 
photographs show completely different streets. The 1930s one shows a spacious 
thoroughfare, with people walking on the pavements on both sides of the street: 
here and there, two or three individuals stand in the road, possibly engaged in 
conversation. The contemporary photograph shows a narrow, congested gorge. The 
pavements are crowded with pedestrians, but there are no people on the road. In 
fact, in some places, one cannot even see its surface.

Why the difference between the two photographs? You know the answer: cars, 
vans and traffic. Both sides of the contemporary street have got lines of 
parked vehicles, effectively reducing the width of the road by 12ft. And 
there’s a traffic jam, which means that even the vehicles that aren’t parked 
are stationary.

What most people want is affordable mobility without having to purchase, tax, 
insure and fuel a four-wheeled millstone

This picture is repeated in millions of towns and cities worldwide. A visiting 
Martian anthropologist would conclude that humans worshipped the automobile. 
Actually, you don’t have to be a Martian to marvel at it. Just open your front 
door. “Next time you walk outside,” writes John Zimmer in his essayThe Third 
Transportation Revolution 
<https://medium.com/@johnzimmer/the-third-transportation-revolution-27860f05fa91#.bxurjbcbr>
, “pay really close attention to the space around you. Look at how much land is 
devoted to cars – and nothing else. How much space parked cars take up lining 
both sides of the street and how much of our cities goes unused covered by 
parking lots. It becomes obvious – we’ve built our communities entirely around 
cars. And for the most part, we’ve built them for cars that aren’t even moving. 
The average vehicle is used only 4% of the time and parked the other 96%.”

Mr Zimmer has a dog in this fight – he’s co-founder of Lyft 
<https://www.lyft.com/>, a ride-sharing outfit that competes with Uber, so the 
usual caveats apply. Nevertheless, his essay is a thoughtful reflection on how 
the automobile transformed – and destroyed – our cities and towns. He invites 
us to imagine “what our world could look like if we found a way to take most of 
these cars off the road. It would be a world with less traffic and less 
pollution. A world where we need less parking – where streets can be narrowed 
and sidewalks widened. It’s a world where we can construct new housing and 
small businesses on parking lots across the country – or turn them into green 
spaces and parks. That’s a world built around people, not cars.”

Zimmer thinks that fleets of self-driving cars will be commonplace in the 
relatively near future and that their availability will give us most of the 
advantages of private car ownership without the financial and environmental 
drawbacks. Although some people will always want the status and other 
satisfactions of owning a car, what most people want is affordablemobility 
without having to purchase, tax, insure, park and fuel a four-wheeled 
millstone. In the well-planned cities of continental Europe, that kind of 
mobility is provided by efficient and affordable public transport. But in more 
benighted places (like most British towns and cities), autonomous vehicles are 
an obvious alternative.

Self-driving car design needs to involve regulators more, US government argues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/20/us-government-regulators-self-driving-car-proposal>
For readers of the Daily Mail this will seem crazy. Fleets of self-driving 
cars? In Britain? Incredulity on this scale suggests that our media haven’t 
been paying attention. On Tuesday, for example, the US government issuednew 
federal guidelines 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/21/business/in-backing-autonomous-cars-us-tells-automakers-to-figure-it-out.html?_r=1>
 that are clearly designed to speed up the development of self-driving cars. 
The only stiff requirement is that the vehicles should be safe, otherwise the 
government will pull them off the road. But it’s up to the manufacturers 
themselves to decide how the requisite safety is to be achieved.

In the same week, Uber started offering rides 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/uber-driverless-car-in-pittsburgh-review-photos-2016-9>
 in self-driving cars in Pittsburgh, a notoriously demanding urban environment. 
At the moment, there’s always a “driver” sitting in the front, but the obvious 
intention is to dispense with the human as soon as it’s deemed safe to do so.

The clear messages from these developments are, first, that this technology 
will become mainstream much faster than people expected, and second, that the 
US government wants it to happen as soon as possible. (Nearly 100 people die 
every day on US roads.) Transport planning is about to get really interesting 
again. And we might even be able to reclaim our streets from all those empty, 
idle parked cars.
 