
In 2017, it’s not enough to be fit and healthy: you need to be strong. The 
cruel twists and turns of the fitness world: once, you were meant to be lean, 
limby, elegant, perhaps a ballet dancer. Then you had to prove you could swim 
for miles or run a marathon (or two). But the latest must-have isn’t just a 
slim waist: it’s rock-hard abs. You don’t merely run for the bus without 
breaking a sweat; you could push the bus if it broke down.

In many ways this is just another type of body-shaming, in a more muscly form, 
but I have to admit it appeals to me. I’ll never be winsome; I’ve never done a 
second of ballet and I don’t plan to start now. But I do have grit, I like to 
sweat and I love the idea of knowing that, were push come to shove… well, I 
could do some efficient pushing and shoving.

All I have to do is add an hour to the beginning or end of a working day, and 
I’ll have found time for a workout

I sign up with Fran Finbow <https://moveyourframe.com/instructors/fran-finbow>
, a personal trainer atFrame Gym <https://moveyourframe.com/> in London. She is 
going to get me strong. I will know what to do in the scary weights section of 
the gym, where men grunt at mirrors. And, hopefully, I’ll look really great in 
jazzy leggings, just like Fran does.

Happily, the gym is opposite my office. This is crucial to starting a new 
routine: logistically, it is incredibly easy. All I have to do is add an hour 
to the beginning or end of a couple of working days, and I’ll have slotted in 
two workouts. Step two is having someone waiting for you who charges by the 
hour. Staying in bed and postponing a workout is not an option (depending on 
how many sessions you book, Fran costs between £55-70 an hour).

We meet to discuss goals and do some basic flexibility analysis, so she can 
see what she’s working with. I learn a few things: I can do just one proper 
press-up (chest all the way to the floor and back up again), and I have a “very 
lean” chin. Yes, chin.

My new trainer seems anxious that I’m vegetarian: eating adequate protein 
alongside weight training is key to rebuilding muscle (as is good nutrition in 
general). And, no, she says, lifting weights doesn’t make you big and muscly. 
Do it right, and you will be leaner, with a smaller waist and firmer, toned 
legs. Plus it helps stave off osteoporosis, boosts the immune system and 
improves balance.

After our first proper session, I worry I might actually pass out; Fran has to 
trail me into the toilets to check that I haven’t. I think my body might be in 
shock. Until now, my training routine has been enthusiastic but haphazard: 
apart from my weekly bootcamp in the park with colleagues (which may be more 
than most do, but is woefully short of the government recommended minimum of 
150 minutes’ exercise a week), I might do a burst of 10-minute YouTube video 
workouts, go on the odd run or swim with friends, or do three days in a row at 
the gym, followed by weeks where I do very little at all. With gym memberships 
spiking in January and attendance typically fading by March, will a personal 
trainer help me stick to a routine?

First Fran focuses on my mobility: we go over very basic moves such as squats, 
push-ups and lunges, and she looks at how everything is moving. She makes me do 
a very slow bear crawl across the fitness studio, my hands and toes on the 
floor, my knees lifted. It appears simple, but it is utter hell. “Just turning 
on your core,” she sings merrily. When Fran asks if something hurts and I say 
yes, she cackles with delight. I like her approach: I can’t stand trainers who 
say, “Do this, and you can have another chocolate this weekend.” I want someone 
who takes it seriously and pushes me hard.

Every session starts with moves for muscle activation, mobility and technique, 
and some of them finish with some high-intensity cardio (swinging a kettlebell, 
or slamming a heavy rope on the floor). Otherwise, we focus on lifting. Weights 
are all about reps and sets: rep (short for repetition) is one complete 
movement (for example, one bicep curl). A set is a group of reps. Before I 
start each set, Fran will tell me what we’re going to do (eg, “three sets of 
eight to 10 reps”) and check I remember how to do it.

Each week, she ups the ante and encourages me to lift more. And I’m amazed to 
find that I do: in week one, I manage eight reps of chest presses with two 8kg 
dumbbells; by week four, I can do sets of 10 reps using a 25kg barbell. I start 
by doing a deadlift with the 20kg bar on its own, to master the technique; I 
end up doing 10 reps at 60kg.

I love the endorphin rush that comes from this kind of exertion: Fran teaches 
me how to breathe properly and how, if I hold my breath, I can use the 
exhalation effort to help push a heavy weight. It’s also therapeutic; thinking 
about my technique in such close detail (engage core and bum, and keep my chest 
high, and breathe, etc) means I cannot possibly think about anything else, such 
as work stress or to-do lists. It’s just as satisfying as the feeling after a 
sprint or spinning class.

About four weeks in, I realise that I’m generally feeling really good; in 
control, fitter and, yes, stronger. I sleep deeply at night and feel calm under 
pressure. The scribblings in Fran’s book back me up: all weights lifted have 
gone up. In week eight, she measures me: the shift is not dramatic, but my body 
fat is down, my muscle mass is up, and my waist and arms are leaner. It’s by no 
means an end point, but I feel as if I’m on to something. Time to find myself 
some jazzy leggings.

Start here

• Book at least one hour with a trainer (most gyms offer a free taster 
session) who can show you the right way to do the basics: squats, deadlifts and 
presses.

• Your muscles will tighten up, so stretch often, to improve mobility

• Start with light weights (or no weight) and master your technique before 
increasing the load
 