
Bare, exposed soil isn’t part of nature’s master plan. How many examples can 
you think of where soil is naturally found bare and with no plants at all 
growing in it? Good examples are beneath freshly uprooted trees, landslips, or 
where the ground has been charred following a heathland fire. In these 
situations bare soil isn’t bare for long; within days seedlings begin to appear 
and cover the ground with a miniature green forest. In a few months’ time the 
scar is barely noticeable. A year later you would never know it had been there 
at all.


Contrast these natural examples of bare soil with those created by man: 
ploughed fields and freshly dug gardens and allotments are obvious examples. 
But, left to nature, even these vast expanses of bare soil soon turn green with 
a multitude of tiny seedlings. Think of those wild, overgrown allotments or 
that jungle-like abandoned garden – these too were once bare earth. In fields, 
gardens and allotments, on lawns, roadside verges and sports fields, along 
streets and on paths and pavements, we are constantly battling to stop weeds 
from growing. All we are doing is keeping the healing powers of nature at bay.

Gardens: the truth about online gardening tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/hit-or-myth-garden-advice-pinterest-facebook>
Weeds act like a kind of living “plaster” whenever soil is exposed, either by 
natural or artificial causes. As far as nature goes, bare soil is out. When 
soil is exposed to sunlight it’s not only the earthworms that quickly burrow 
back into the darkness. Millions of microscopic soil organisms are also exposed 
to the potentially harmful rays of the sun, so the sooner plant growth covers 
the soil over again, the better. Once you appreciate this perfectly natural 
reaction by nature, you start to see that weeds aren’t there to deliberately 
frustrate our gardening efforts; they are simply doing their job. Just as new 
skin forms after we’ve caught ourselves on a rose thorn, weeds help heal wounds 
in the earth. Look at it another way: it’s us who are causing the problem by 
insisting on bare, neat-looking soil – open wounds, if you like.

Left to their own devices, weeds also help to improve the fertility of the 
soil. They do this in several ways. Their roots bind the soil together, helping 
to improve its structure and create a more stable environment in which soil 
life can flourish. Those weeds with a deep taproot, such as curled dock, draw 
up plant nutrients from deeper in the ground, making them available to plants 
growing near the soil surface. Above ground, the stems of weeds help trap 
fallen leaves and other organic matter, which break down into the soil or are 
dragged underground by earthworms. And when the weeds themselves finally die – 
after weeks, months or years depending on the type of weed and its life cycle – 
both the leafy tops and the roots decompose into valuable humus.

As the soil becomes more and more fertile, different kinds of plants start to 
replace the “pioneering” weeds. In the UK a typical succession might see shrubs 
moving in to oust the pioneers by gradually shading them out, followed in turn 
by trees, which eventually push up through the shrubs, finally shading them out 
too. The leaves that fall from the shrubs and trees carry on the job of 
building soil fertility that was begun by those very first weeds that sprang up 
on the bare soil. Then, when one of these mature trees is uprooted in a storm, 
ripping open a wound of bare soil in the earth, the whole process starts again.

 * Weeds: An Organic, Earth-friendly Guide to their Identification, Use and 
Control is published by Earth-friendly Books at £15 (plus £3 P&P). Guardian 
readers can get it for £14 (plus £3 P&P) by visiting
earthfriendlygardener.net/guardian 
<http://www.earthfriendlygardener.net/guardian>. This offer is only available 
online.
 