
Matthew Bourne, creator

I had daydreamed through many performances of Swan Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/swan-lake>, thinking the dancing tutus only 
ever conveyed one aspect of swans: their beauty gliding on water. I wondered 
what it would be like to use male dancers and bring out swans' aggressive, 
muscular side.

I don't come from a ballet background, so big classical works were never on my 
agenda. I realised that, because I was taking on such a familiar work, I had to 
come up with something original, with its own identity, for modern audiences – 
there's a power and violence in the music that doesn't come across in classical 
productions. Tchaikovsky was a troubled man who, partly because of his 
homesexuality, couldn't be the person he wanted to be. That made me think of 
royalty: they are forbidden by duty to be themselves. At the time, the early 
1990s, royal scandals were making the papers day after day. The original story 
involves a queen trying to marry her son off against his will, so I used that 
as a starting point to explore the psychology of a prince trapped by royal 
protocol.

To capture the essence of the swans, I spent hours watching them in parks and 
on film, reproducing their often ungainly movements in my choreography. I was 
very influenced byAlfred Hitchcock's film The Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/jul/31/my-favourite-hitchcock-the-birds>
, particularly the scene in which one bird lands on a climbing frame and, when 
the heroine turns, has suddenly turned into a menacing flock. I used this idea 
in a bedroom scene in the palace.

Lots of people couldn't accept the concept of male swans. My first choice of 
designer turned it down, and potential sponsors refused to put up funding.Adam 
Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/14/adam-cooper-sarah-wildor-shall-we-dance>
, the Royal Ballet dancer, took a huge gamble in agreeing to play the Swan. 
People assumed it would be a sendup, with men in drag. But – although I wanted 
quirky, funny elements and there is a scene that parodies classical ballet at 
its worst – I knew it had to be moving. It's been interpreted as a homosexual 
story, but that wasn't the explicit intention. The prince's relationship with 
the swan is more about a repressed young man's need to be loved, rather than 
about any sexual desire.

On the first night I was terrified. After being clapped on to the podium 
before curtain-up, the conductor turned on his heel and walked out. There was 
an agonising limbo. But it transpired he'd just forgotten his score!

Lez Brotherston, designer

I was doing Highland Fling 
<http://www.scottishballet.co.uk/highland-fling/highland-fling.html> with 
Matthew and knew he was planning a Swan Lake. I'd recently designed one for 
Northern Ballet. He thought that would put me off, but collaborations can lead 
to widely different things so I leapt at the chance. The only concept he 
brought to the table was that the swans would be men. I'd worked in film, 
theatre and dance so was used to radical interpretations, unlike many people in 
the ballet world. The idea seemed perfectly natural to me.Because we wanted the 
male dancers to bring out the swans' aggressive masculine side, it seemed 
stupid to cover them up, so we left their feet and torsos bare, to show their 
muscle movement. We thought of shorts for the lower half but then Matthew found 
a picture of an Indian dancer in baggy fringed trousers and he liked the motion 
of the fabric. So I took it away and came up with the idea of yards of shredded 
chiffon in the same style.

It was the most expensive production Adventures in Motion Pictures, Matthew's 
company, had ever undertaken and we were working to a tight budget. This meant 
we had relatively few dancers, so when men started getting injured in 
rehearsals we didn't have stand-ins.

At the first dress rehearsal, there were so many camera crews in the stalls 
they blocked views of the stage so we missed our first chance to see the show 
in its entirety. I remember standing alone in the dress circle thinking that, 
even if it was a flop, I'd achieved a gear change and wouldn't regret it. But, 
as it happened, it created such a buzz that I felt compelled to be there for 
every performance and drink it in.

• This article was amended on 15 October 2013. The original referred to an 
all-male cast. This has been corrected.
 