
Language can influence and reframe your perception of what you experience. 
Take a very simple example: are you a glass-half-full or a glass-half-empty 
type? The common attitude is that to see the glass half-full is more positive 
than seeing it half-empty. To put it another way, half-full is what you have 
got and half-empty is what you are missing. Reframing is simply taking a 
situation and changing the way you look at it by changing the frame of 
reference around a statement without changing the facts. By using different 
words you can change the meaning, and as a result change how you feel. The 
ability to reframe a situation will support your effort to feel excited rather 
than anxious.

When a footballer is told not to miss their mind is polluted with the idea of 
missing

Effective use of language can influence an attitude of performance 
improvement, and a collective attitude in turn creates a culture – be it among 
a sports squad, a team in your business or even in the family. While it is easy 
to see how a collective attitude can create a culture within a group, in my 
experience it is harder to appreciate just how important language skills are in 
creating the right attitude. Language can be a tool both for good and ill, and 
it’s often easier to be aware of its misuse than it is to see how effective it 
can be, especially in the sporting world. Some of the most passionately 
delivered misuses of language are bellowed from the touchline at the weekend in 
all levels of sport – be it a Premier League football fixture or a youth game 
of cricket on the village green:

“No missed tackles!”

“No dropped passes!”

“Don’t lose concentration!”

“Make sure you don’t get out too early!”

These are all, of course, examples of the “Don’t miss!” mindset, in which the 
power of thinking about what not to do pollutes the brain with the idea of 
missing, filling it with that which you want to avoid. If you have a coach or a 
manager telling you what not to do, they are planting the idea in the exact 
same way.

Language is so powerful that even a hint of what you are trying to avoid can 
be fateful, as demonstrated by John Bargh’s experiment. When someone on the 
golf course tells you: “This is a simple par three, but you don’t want to go 
right because there’s water there and you don’t want to go in the water”, it is 
said helpfully, but guess where the first shot goes? The water becomes a magnet 
to the ball, as your brain is full of thoughts of what not to do and what to 
avoid.

Even when the words are being used as something not to do, our brains take 
them on board and we’re subconsciously drawn to this very thing. As a well-worn 
example, how about if I ask you not to think of a purple elephant. OK? What are 
you thinking about now?

Conscious thought about what you want to do, supported by basic mental cues on 
how physically to do it – the process – is a much more effective and productive 
mindset. Language then becomes important in communicating in a way that 
highlights the effective aspects of the process.

A lot of coaches might say: “But the players know what I mean.” I don’t doubt 
for a second that they do, but it’s more about the mental image you’re 
projecting through your choice of words. If you say: “No dropped passes”, the 
player’s brain will conjure up an image of a dropped pass and then adjust to 
see it as something not to do. Wouldn’t it make sense to project only the image 
of what you want to achieve into the player’s mind?

The Pressure Principle by Dr Dave Alred is published by Penguin Life at 
£12.99. To order a copy for £11.04, go tobookshop. theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385676/s/the-pressure-principle/>
 