
Buenos dias, amigos. This month How to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> – the Word of Mouth
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> series debating the 
best way to eat our favourite dishes – is going down old Mexico way … kind of. 
Advocates for Mexican food must despair that a dish created on-the-fly bya 
harassed maître 'd <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nachos> is one that defines 
Mexican cuisine for a global audience, but such is the popularity of nachos. A 
matter of assembly rather than cooking, which is a big part of its appeal, 
Ignacio Anaya's creation is, in many ways, the definitive, filthy fast food. 
One that is as big in Britain's bars, cinemas and student halls as it is in 
Ohio baseball stadiums, with just as many interpretations available. Which 
can't be right, can it? Because, as regular readers of this series know, there 
is only one acceptable way to eat nachos, and that's this way.

Tortilla chips

Like tomato sauce or (sorry, Felicity Cloake) baked beans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/may/01/how-to-cook-perfect-baked-beans>
, life is too short to make your own tortilla and then fry up batches of chips. 
When conscientious cooks do, in fact, the results are often too big, too thick 
and rather greasy. The boffins of industrial food processing have spent years 
perfecting the tortilla chip, so let them have this moment. If using 
proprietary snack foods in your cooking is good enough forFerran Adria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/jul/09/ferranadriaelbullibook>
, it is good enough for me.

That said, be sensible. The chips are meant to be a background canvas of 
toasted, corny carbs and salty twang. They are not meant to be a distinct 
flavour in their own right. Therefore, avoid any sour cream and chive or 
chilli/lime-spiked chips and choose a bag from a point on the spectrum between 
"lightly salted" and Doritos Cool Original.

Plating

Yes, despite the ubiquity of the "nacho bowl", use a plate. A bowl might be an 
economic way for professional kitchens to serve nachos, but obviously, given 
the bowl's depth, it always results in your being left with a thick sub-strata 
of dry, naked nachos. Instead, lay your nachos out to an uneven depth of 
one-three nachos across a dinner plate, top liberally with grated cheese and 
(as some will fall into the cracks and divots), you will achieve a thorough 
horizontal cheese coverage and partial vertical penetration. The result is 3D, 
surround-sound cheese. Whichever way you attack it, thereafter, you will get 
some in each mouthful. Being ultra-fastidious, you could layer your chips and 
cheese a couple of times, grilling at each stage, but, frankly, that seems OTT. 
Particularly when a certain hit'n'miss variety (a naked, grill-charred nacho 
here; a cheese glut there; a blob of Monterey Jack melted to the plate that you 
have to scrape off last), is all part of the fun.

Cheese

No cheese sauce. Ever. Got that? And, by that, I don't just mean that 
skinning-over, chemically processed, glow-in-the-dark gloop you get pumped over 
your nachos at the local cinema. You could make the most elegant bechamel 
cheese sauce with a fine artisan mature cheddar and the contrast of hot, silky 
sauce on, alternately, brittle, woody and now sopping-wet tortilla chips, would 
still be deeply unpleasant texturally. Save your cheese sauce for pasta.

You want some resistance, the pleasure of pulling apart gooey strings of 
cheese between clumps of nachos. So, instead, use a grated mix of three 
cheeses: Monterey Jack (for meltability), red Leicester (for colour) and 
cheddar (for flavour). Don't waste good cheese here, though, and don't use a 
bullying, overly tangy cheddar. It should be a layer of flavour, not the star 
of the show.

Toppings

As with pizza, you can put anything on nachos. But that doesn't mean you 
should. On the fringes of sanity you will see people dressing their nachos with 
everything from kimchi to jerk chicken. Of the more commonplace toppings, I am 
saying a firm "no, gracias" to the following: refried beans (great adhesive if 
you are tiling a kitchen floor, otherwise mystifying); olives; mayonnaise; 
sweetcorn (perennially unwelcome); lettuce (see, "lighter nachos"); fried 
onions; a spritz of lime (sounds right, sounds Mexican, but in reality a 
jarring idiocy when used so haphazardly); any herbs; chorizo; pepperoni. In 
fact, I find any meat in this context (ground beef, BBQ chicken, bacon, even 
the pulled pork which people insist on putting everywhere, these days), 
unnecessary if not actively off-putting: often unwieldy, dried-out, too filling.

Beef chilli is the exception of course, but I would argue that, ultimately, it 
is better served over rice. Line a bowl of chilli with tortilla chips – much 
less pour the chilli over a plate of nachos - and they soon get waterlogged. 
Some limp chips is great, for variety. All limp chips isn't. Personally, I say 
forgo meat altogether. The undisputed Holy Trinity of toppings is guacamole, 
salsa (a fresh, clean blitzedpico de gallo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pico_de_gallo>, preferably) and sour cream. Top 
with sliced jalapenos to taste. In terms of complementary textures, contrasting 
temperatures and a to'n'fro of deliciously fatty, zingy and hot, pickled 
flavours, you have everything you need, right there.

Note: while nachos is the lazy cook's cop-out, it will benefit enormously from 
homemade fresh salsa and guacamole. The long-life jarred versions are an 
abomination.

Topping distribution

There are people – frigid, sexless husks of humanity tormented by issues of 
taste and decorum – who insist that guacamole, salsa and sour cream should be 
served on the side, in little pots, so that a) you can get an equal little dip 
of everything, as you see fit, and b) you won't get messy. What next? Eating 
nachos with a knife and fork?

Making sure that every nacho is covered with a dab of each component is not 
the aim. Instead, spoon the guacamole etc, into three "pools" on top of your 
cheese-topped nacho mound. You can then move and dip between them as you see 
fit, before, finally, revelling in the intensity, the gastronomic multiple 
orgasm of, how, as you finish your plate, that leaves three small nacho zones 
drenched in cream, salsa or guacamole. Each is different, each is a sensational 
pay-off.

And how do you eat it all? With your fingers, of course. It's pig-out food. 
Grab the kitchen roll and get stuck in, digging into and prising apart nachos 
with your bare hands. If you don't end up sucking delicious debris from your 
fingers, you haven't been doing it right.

Sharing? 

In a parallel universe – one populated by the attractive young professionals 
you see in Old El Paso adverts – it would be possible to convivially share 
nachos. In real life, it is fraught with tension, as the combatants (that is 
the only way to describe them) jockey for position, hog the sour cream, try to 
distract their adversary from the most cheese-laden nachos and then, in a way 
that disgraces us all, end up squabbling over – of all things! – the last dregs 
of the salsa.

Instead, you need your own plate of nachos. You may, like a UN special 
observer, want to be present in the kitchen to watch over the initial cheese 
distribution, to ensure that it is fair. That is your right, but, after the 
breakdown of my last marriage, I try not to interfere too much.

When

This is an evening meal. A Sunday special for those nights when, after 
manfully struggling through the day on little sleep and with a chronic 
hangover, you need to fall into the warm loving embrace of stacks of fat and 
far too many carbs. Sat in front of the telly on the sofa. Basically, when the 
existential horror of Monday morning is bearing down on you like a 57ft 
projection of Edward Munch's The Scream, only nachos (and alcohol) can blot it 
out.

A note on light nachos

No such meal exists. Grilled tortilla, half-fat creme fraiche, no guacamole 
and a handful of cheese, do not nachos make – no matter how much (woo!) salsa 
you treat yourself to. With nachos, you've got to be in it to win it. You've 
got to go lard or go home. Only eat it twice-a-year if need be, but go all-out.

A note on etiquette

If you are British, please avoid the phrases, "loaded nachos" or "all the 
fixings". You are not a character in American Pie.

Drink

Wine would be wasted and water's a vibe-killer. There is a hell of a lot of 
grease on that plate, so you need something carbonated, a tongue-scrubber: diet 
Pepsi or Coke (full fat's too sickly) or a lighter, paler beer, a good lager or 
blonde ale. This is no time to break-out and waste your big hop-bomb IPAs.

So nachos, how do you eat yours?

Follow Tony Naylor on Twitter @naylor_tony <https://twitter.com/naylor_tony>
 