
Gourmets! Gastronauts! The unfeasibly greedy! Gather around in as tight a 
huddle as our bulging stomachs will allow, forHow to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> is going where 
others are too complacent to tread. Yes, we are opening a Tupperware pandora’s 
box and taking a large bite out of the humble cheese sandwich. Identifiedlast 
month 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/foodanddrinknews/11537804/Britains-favourite-lunch-The-humble-cheese-sandwich.html>
 as the nation’s favourite weekday lunchtime repast, this is not just a snack 
but one of the building blocks of the British identity. One that, thankfully, 
has recently been exonerated after accusations it had played a principal rolein 
starting the first world war 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/gavrilo-princips-sandwich-79480741/?no-ist>
. As ever, below the line, please choose your words caerphilly. Do not turn the 
air blue. If necessary, brie the feta man.

Cheese 

Call me a militant, but I feel it is essential. No matter how vigorously 
vegans dispute that point. But what cheese should you use and should it be 
sliced or grated? These are questions which go to the very heart of what you 
want, not just out of this sandwich, but life. Do you want frivolous novelty? 
Do you crave impractical continental ingredients which, somehow, make you feel 
more sophisticated? Or do you want proven, steadfast flavour combinations?

Fundamentally, there are very few cheeses that truly work in a sandwich. If 
you wish to avoid creating a dry, claggy sanger of a muddled, indeterminate 
character, you need to use something hard, waxy and tangy in the lincolnshire 
poacher or mature cheddar line, which you may want to augment with a little red 
leicester or double gloucester. Wonderful as they may be elsewhere, a sandwich 
is no place for the crumbly and/or dense likes of feta; wensleydale; almost all 
Lancashire cheeses; goat’s cheese (that is a salad cheese, no matter how you 
moisten it with beetroot); brie (especially when paired, egregiously, with 
cranberries); any of the blue cheeses; cream cheese*; cheshire; stinking bishop 
or any other gooey cheeses which must be sealed in a lead Hazmat container in 
your fridge, to stop your neighbours complaining about the smell.

Of course, manchego, Parmesan and halloumi are not sandwich cheeses. Nor, 
unless you want to spend half the sandwich spraining your tongue, trying to 
dislodge a wad of bread and cheese that has welded itself to the roof of your 
mouth, are processed cheese slices and (my beloved) Dairylea. Any added fruit 
or added herb cheeses are, naturally, disqualified because they are an offence 
against god.

If you are wondering about mozzarella’s absence, it only plays a serious part 
in hot sandwiches, often partnered with pesto. In a cold sandwich, it is a 
curiously rubbery, often slightly granular interloper, which delivers scant 
milky flavour.

* Unless that cream cheese is on a bagel with smoked salmon of course, but, 
then, that is more a smoked salmon sandwich than a cheese one.

Slice or grate? 

If creating a “cheese savoury 
<https://www.greggs.co.uk/menu/sandwiches/cheddar-cheese-savoury-/>” filling 
with celery, carrot, onion etc, then grating the cheese is necessary to ensure 
that all the ingredients are thoroughly intermingled. If you bind that mix with 
something (mayonnaise), and diligently press the mix into the bread with a fork 
as you fill the sandwich, any spillages should be minimised. However, a grated 
cheese sandwich without that binding agent is a nightmare. As you will have 
observed at weddings and funerals, after returning from the buffet table, every 
time you pick up your sandwich, a bit of grated cheese falls out on to your 
plate, shirt, the table or floor. You end up picking most of the cheese up with 
your fingers in between bites of your, by now, almost empty sandwich. After a 
while, it really grates.

Slicing is eminently preferable. It ensures complete crust-to-crust coverage 
and eradicates spillage. However, be aware that anything above a thickness of 
5mm is overkill. Constructing a cheese sandwich is a delicate balancing act. 
You must ensure flavour but also that the drier constituents of the sandwich 
(bread, cheese), do not dominate in a way that makes that sandwich a chore.

Bread 

Whether you prefer to call it or “doorstep” or “doorstop”, my message is this: 
please cut your slices thinner. A great hulking sandwich appeals to us in an 
intuitive way. It is aesthetically pleasing. It evokes a prelapsarian past of 
bucolic rural plenty, a merrie England which probably only ever existed in the 
minds of the fiendish admen who created it. However, that fat sandwich is also 
a major pain in the posterior to eat. Unless you are using a bread so fresh it 
is still warm from the baker’s oven (which in cafes and pubs or at home, 98.9% 
of us are not), that is a massive wad of carbs and solidified fat to chew on. 
It takes some serious masticating. I do not want to swig tea or beer with each 
mouthful (thus, washing away the flavours of the sandwich), in order to get it 
down. Moreover, the primary flavour of a cheese sandwich should be cheese not 
bread – that is the star of the show, let it shine. Restrain yourself to slices 
of no more than 1cm in thickness.

A good-quality soft, white, impeccably fresh loaf is the ideal, although 
ordinary supermarket white sliced is entirely serviceable (Warburton’s toastie 
is How To Eat’s recommended brand). Indeed, that is one of the joys of the 
cheese sandwich. It is one of those food items, like ice-cream or bacon, which 
can never be truly bad. From the cheapest block cheese to the finest 
small-batch, extra-matured cheddar, from the woolliest white sliced to the 
priciest artisan sourdough (its lactic piquancy always welcome), all cheese 
sandwiches tickle the pleasure centres at some level. So long, that is, as you 
haven’t made it on worthy wholegrain or the kind of seeded loaf that is like 
chewing through the leg of a wicker chair. Brown and darker rye breads have 
their place, but certainly not on a cheese sandwich where a lack of moisture is 
a constant threat.

A short note on soft baps … 

Ordinarily, not the go-to sandwich bread. But if out for a picnic or 
travelling, there is something uniquely brilliant about a cheese and tomato bap 
that has been wrapped in Clingfilm for hours, and allowed to come to room 
temperature, so that the cheese begins to sweat out its oils and the juice from 
the tomatoes has had plenty of time to soak into the bread. Add a little salt, 
and even the blandest British tomatoes and the dullest processed cheddar will 
amalgamate into a flavour bomb that is so wet at its centre you can almost 
slurp it down.

That point about temperature is a key for all cheese sandwiches, of course. 
Get all the components out of the fridge and let them warm up before 
constructing your sandwich. As Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstallrightly observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jun/11/sandwich-recipes-hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>
 in reference to chilled supermarket butties: “Who wants bread, butter and 
cheese at 3C?”

Desirable extras 

Raw onion (preferably red or mild Spanish, to limit halitosis); spring onion; 
caramelised onion; Branston Pickle (I am a late convert, but yes); pickled 
gherkins; good homemade coleslaw with cabbage; baby gem or iceberg lettuce for 
sweet, refreshing crunch. Please note: you generally only need one of those 
extrasplus iceberg lettuce. That is, in order to retain the structural 
integrity of your sandwich and to ensure that all the ingredients can fully 
express themselves.

Borderline extras 

Celery (banal on its own, but acceptable in a cheese savoury mix; see also 
carrot); tomato (ripe and salted); apple chutney (not overly sweet); a handful 
of crushed ready salted or cheese-and-onion crisps, for texture (but only on a 
very liberally, mayo-moistened sandwich).

Undesirable extras 

Ham, chicken or tuna (what you have there is a ham, chicken or tuna sandwich, 
in which the cheese has been relegated to a “seasoning” role; see also fish 
fingers); piccalilli; cucumber (beyond pointless); beetroot; egg; horseradish; 
Marmite; and also Worcestershire sauce, tabasco, cayenne pepper or any other 
pushy, sharp-elbowed sauce and seasoning which people occasionally and 
idiotically use to try to jazz-up “cheese savoury”.

Spreads 

Butter. Real butter. Not margarine. Not a low-fat spread. Not that voodoo 
ersatz butter that is spreadable straight from the fridge. Life is short. 
Accept no substitutes. Oh … and, of course, every cheese sandwich needs a 
dollop of mayonnaise. For moisture, for slick mouthfeel, for a little vinegary 
tang.

The cut 

Horizontally through the middle of the bread. Never diagonally. Eat the less 
enjoyable “square edged” bottom half first, as it has the larger, drier crust 
area, and then sit back and savour that relatively luxurious, rounded top-half.

Drink 


A huge, Sports Direct-sized mug of brick-red tea, or a zippy, lightly bitter 
golden or pale ale.

When 

Dinner or tea. Although, I find the cheese sandwich is a reasonably effective 
breakfast hangover remedy, for those light-to-moderate days of fuzziness, when 
you still have the wherewithal to actually make yourself a sandwich.

So, the cheese sandwich – how do you eat yours?
 