
In February, that bleak nadir of the British winter, the body demands edible 
insulation. We need food for the furnace which, simultaneously, elevates the 
soul. Which is why, this month,How to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> (the Word of Mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> blog trying to establish 
the best way to enjoy our favourite dishes), is serving up a big bowl of – what 
else? –beef stew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/feb/03/how-cook-perfect-beef-stew>
 (or casserole, if you're cooking it in the oven). It is time to take stock, my 
little dumplings. So, what's your beef?

Consistency

A stew is not soup. It should be a thick jumble of chunky XL ingredients, a 
mouthful, something you rummage through. Not drink. Or slurp off a spoon. There 
should be no need to play hunt the beef in a thin, watery liquor.

Good things to put in beef stew

Gelatinous, sinewy cuts (shin, cheek, oxtail etc), that, in addition to 
braising steak, are going to bring a lip-smacking, unctuous, pearlescent gloss 
to the gravy. Tiny onions; carrots; relatively hardy, fresh-out-of-the-ground 
celery, for flavour but also because you could cook celery for 10 hours and, 
remarkably, it would still retain its texture; a little pearl barley; red wine/ 
Worcestershire sauce/soy/stout (anything that will add savoury depth and 
complexity to that simmering liquid). See also, bay, thyme, even garlic. 
Purists may argue that such additions are a betrayal of the traditional John 
Bull British stew, a capitulation with the French beef bourguignon, but so 
what? You can't get all Nigel Farage about food. The only people hung up on 
such distinctions are grim, thin-lipped Daily Mail readers projecting decades 
of supressed anger accumulated over endless bowls of joyless, frigid, 
ration-card stew. Mushrooms invariably add little in flavour, but their silky 
texture is welcome.

Bad things to put in a beef stew

Bacon, limp, flobby bacon; potatoes, the core reactors of the vegetable world, 
big chunks of which seem to retain a thermonuclear temperature whilst 
everything else cools (see also, tomatoes) and which, even in otherwise tasty 
stews, will always just be a bum note of, well, boring boiled potato*. 
Parsnips, which, no matter when you add them (and isn't life too short to be 
adding the vegetables to a stew in stages?), end up inedibly raw or ungodly 
mush (see also, butternut squash); beetroot, a noncommittal nod to borscht; 
jerusalem artichoke (a swanky veg, wasted here); chorizo (which, like paprika, 
adds a slightly discordant note of smoke and heat); turnip. Ask yourself, have 
you ever eaten anything and said: "That was great, but what it really needed 
was ... more turnip!"

I am also deeply ambivalent about a little orange peel in your bouquet garni 
or grated lemon zest on top. I get the idea (that it adds a clean, light zing 
at the stew's edges), but if you're cooking a beef stew on the Anglo-French 
axis, I don't think that tokenistic nod to the Levante, no matter how subtle, 
fits the stew's flavour profile. I'm all for fusion, but those citrus notes sow 
confusion. If you want such flavours in your stew, go the whole hog, and cook a 
more aromatic and headily spiced tagine.

* Before I am deluged with comments, along the lines of: "Oh, it's all right 
for you Guardian writers, with your Islington townhouses and hotlines to Ocado, 
have you seen how much beef costs out here, in the real world? Eh? Eh? We need 
those potatoes for cheap bulk, you smug bourgeoisie scumbag. "I am not saying 
swap potatoes for beef. Carrot, onion, more barley, whatever … anything beats 
potato.

Herbs

"Mmm ...," says a chef, who lacks the courage of his own tastebuds, "that 
looks like a bowl of unappetising brown mulch. What it needs is some parsley 
scattered on top, or two pieces of chive artfully crisscrossed on the bowl, to 
give it some colour." But it doesn't, folks. It really, really doesn't.

Dumplings

Yes, yes and thrice yes. And get that lid off at the end, so they form a nice 
golden crust. Crustless dumplings are like Morrissey without Marr, the 
Godfather III. Nice enough, in their own way, but very much second best. 
Wasabi? Horseradish? Not on my watch. Mix in a few herbs, season it well and a 
good suet dumpling speaks for itself; it doesn't need wild amplification.

Bread

Bread and dumplings? How many carbs can one man need? To which the only answer 
as a northern male is: how many have you got? The bread, however, shouldnever 
be fat wedges cut from a larger round loaf. That "rustic" affectation, usually 
encountered in pubs attempting to evoke a sense of farmhouse honesty (or is it 
grinding rural poverty?) in their cooking, is massively flawed for the one 
obvious reason: it minimises the surface area of the bread that you can butter. 
Insanity. Slices, you say? That is the answer but it needs to be robust real 
bread. In the right circumstances (eg bacon or tuna butty), I am the biggest 
advocate of white, sliced Chorleywood, but try dunking that in stew. It 
collapses, folds, swoons, turns to soggy cotton wool.

With good bread, a stew becomes a two-course meal. You butter and dip as an 
appetiser, and, when you've taken the edge off your initial hunger, tuck in. 
There is no need to jazz your stew up further with outsize herb croutons or 
even, as I once encountered, a huge, floating island of cobbler, drenched in 
grilled cheese. That is a layer of fat that this dish doesn't need. It is not 
French onion soup.

Serving

There are two groups of people that cookware manufacturers can sell any old 
tat to: chefs and middle-class foodies. That is why, ludicrously, batch-cooked 
stew is now regularly decanted into individual, warmed "oven-to-table" 
casserole dishes, which means not only does your stew fail to cool naturally, 
but you risk third-degree burns plucking the lid off, and are left with the 
dilemma of where to stick it, on an already crammed table. How is that an 
improvement on (sit down, this may shock you) a bowl? It is a receptacle with a 
proven history in stew delivery since Adam was a lad. Something nice and deep 
with a wide rim, for bread balancing, is perfect.

You may, of course, choose to serve your stew on a plate (get you!), with 
(celeriac) mash or even extra vegetables. All of which, to me, smacks of 
unnecessary overelaboration, and more washing up – the point of a stew is that 
it's a self-contained one-pot meal – but who am I to judge? Don't answer that.

When

After dark. It is a well-known fact that stew evaporates on contact with 
sunlight. Preferably on a Wednesday night, when the world has it in for you, 
and the rain is battering against the windows. NB Given that stew takes a few 
hours to cook and tastes better the day after you have made it, it pays to 
always have some in the freezer. Like plasters, alcohol, Savlon and cigarettes, 
it is one of those emergency supplies that every household needs ready access 
to.

Drink

Weirdly, with plainer stews and plenty of bread, a big tannic brew works. With 
more complex creations: red wine; crisp bitters; darker beers. Never water (or 
the stew dies in your mouth) or, indeed, any soft drink. This is about comfort, 
an attempt to blot out the world, remember?

So, beef stew, how do you eat yours?
 