
Hot diggety, folks! It's 2014, a new year, a new start and for How to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> – the blog that is 
all about the mostawesome ways to eat your favourite blue-collar classics – it 
is time to get back to the business of smart-asschow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> pedantry. As you may 
have guessed, dudes (unless you imagine I typed this drunk, in Albuquerque), 
we're chewing over a US import this month, thehotdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/feb/21/street-food-hot-dog-haute-dog>
.

Please remember that while, below the line, a franks exchange of a opinion is 
welcome, dogs' abuse is not. If someone doesn't agree with you, don't be a 
little wiener about it, it only makes things wurst.

Sausage

To be clear, we're talking about what a Brit would understand as a 
frankfurter: a relatively smoothly blended pork sausage. There arepeople 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jul/15/frankfurter-hot-dog-recipe>
 who would try and convince you that a hotdog sausage should be all beef, aka 
the "tube steak", but they are as wrong, albeit for different reasons, as those 
who would try and sell you a frankfurter made entirely from mechanically 
recovered chicken.

Due to the rise of the gourmet hotdog (surely, an oxymoron?), beef dogs are 
making inroads in the UK, but, certainly historically, compared to pork, I have 
found beef dogs too tightly compacted, too meaty and – as with many upmarket 
sausages knocking on for 100% meat content – a bit dry. You can't make sausages 
from just lean, prime cuts. Sausages need the sort of lubrication that pork 
readily supplies.

In fact, you have to be careful in jazzing up the hotdog (you want to be able 
to take a clean bite of sausage with each mouthful), that you don't ruin this 
simple pleasure. If too dense, too coarsely ground, sausages can be a chore to 
eat. If they're not prepared or cooked with care, natural casings (in 
principle, far preferable) can be problematically chewy. If you have to wrestle 
with and tear at your dog, much less resort to a knife and fork, something is 
badly wrong. No, you do not want to eat a bland "frankenfurter" emulsion of 
gummy, minimum-meat-content material, rendered inert by sodium nitrate and 
ascorbic acid, bulked out with soya protein and potato starch, but, despite the 
hype, not every "haute dog" eats better than its factory-made equivalent.

Fundamentally, you want a fat, sensitively smoked (it anchors and adds a bit 
of depth to the flavours) pork frankfurter. Its bouncy inner should be 
semi-coarse – so there's a dense texture to it, but you don't get lockjaw 
chewing it – its casing taut enough that, when grilled, it delivers a pleasant 
(as the German would have it)knack or crack, as you bite into it. Size isn't 
everything, but I find 18cm satisfying, with a girth around 4cm. That dog must 
fill that bun and then some. There should be at least a 1.2:1 meat-bread ratio 
or it looks and tastes all wrong.

Go easy on the spices, too. Chilli-laced dogs (as opposed to dogs topped with 
chilli), are usually more raw heat than tasty meat, and a heavy handed use of 
cayenne pepper, garlic, mace etc, can be equally offputting. The predominant 
true and smooth flavour of that sausage should be pork. And is there a 
vegetarian alternative? Not personally. I've never met a vegetarian sausage 
that I liked.

The current popularity of the corn dog – essentially, a battered sausage for 
people who wouldn't be seen dead eating a battered sausage – is mystifying.

Buns

In terms of practicality, the Austrians have this nailed. They serve small or 
half baguettes – tip cut-off and then hollowed out – into which the sausage is 
dropped. That is a serious amount of bread to go at, which may explain why it 
has never caught on here. Instead, as in the US, the bun choice is between a 
side-split/hinged bun or a top-loader. The New England top-loader (lightly 
grilled to give it backbone, but please, no steaming) is far preferable, both 
aesthetically – everything sits up nicely, in the bun – and because, trusting 
it is of sufficient depth, it can absorb a reasonable amount of moisture 
without collapsing. Structurally, that "hinge" on a side-split bun is a 
notorious weak spot which, when wet, splits all too easily.

While, but of course, you now see places serving brioche hotdog rolls, it is 
curious that, unlike with burgers, there hasn't beenmore tinkering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/mar/06/onion-seed-hotdog-roll-recipe>
 with the hotdog bun. Surely, the perfect hybrid roll is yet to come, 
amalgamating the strength and durability of a higher-gluten bread on the 
rustic-sourdough axis, with the easy eating of the fluffy, white original.

Toppings & condiments

In many ways, your attitude to sauces and toppings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/jul/23/david-cameron-hot-dog-mustard>
 will be defined by how you eat yours. Have you have remained true to the 
original concept of the hotdog as a mobile, hand-held meal? Or are you a 
fashionable flibbertigibbet, happy to sit and eat one at a table?

The integrity of the hotdog as a portable product can only be maintained if 
key rules are observed. 1) All toppings must be secured either under a layer of 
grilled cheese or, on a top-loader, by making sure said toppings are firmly 
tucked deep into the bun's cleft. It may look appealing, but anything you stack 
in a teetering pile atop a hotdog, will end up on the floor as soon as you take 
a bite. 2) It is all too rare, but sauces should be applied under the sausage 
so they don't end up all over your top lip and nose. 3) The bun must not be 
sopping wet. Anything moist, ie. beef chilli, pulled pork, should be placed on 
top of the sausage, not just poured all over the bun.

But which toppings and condiments do and don't work? You can put anything on a 
dog, but should you?

Yes: butter-braised or, at a push, boiled/ steamed onions; bacon (Bubbledogs 
<http://www.bubbledogs.co.uk/> do a bacon-wrapped dog that sounds like a stroke 
of genius); mild mustard; dried, fried flakes that adhere well (chicken skin, 
onion flakes, bacon bits); ketchup; gherkins; cheese; sauerkraut (shredded 
items conveniently mould themselves around the sausage, see also coleslaw); 
pickled cucumber; tomato relishes; a bit of beef for contrast (eg. not overly 
hot chilli, chopped pastrami etc); macaroni cheese. NB: combine no more than 
three.

No: fried onions (bitter, stringy, a Zantac attack!); squeezy cheese; pulled 
pork, chopped ham etc. (pork on pork, why?); chorizo is too domineering; 
likewise hot jalapenos carpet bomb any food they are served with; mayonnaise, 
sour cream, thousand-island (cold, smooth, unctuous sauces taste wrong against 
a grilled bun); fried egg, chips; olives; mango chutney, BBQ sauce (the devil's 
goo); sweetcorn, peppers, mushrooms; guacamole; brown sauce on "breakfast" 
sausages; out-of-context mozzarella; raw onion or fresh tomato – does this look 
like a salad?

Sides

The only thing you want with a hotdog is another hotdog. Unlike a burger, 
which if it's a good one, should be greasy and running with juices, there isn't 
the moisture in a dog that would make fries a wise side. With the bun, it just 
ends up a carb overload. What's that? Onion rings? Ha ha. Very funny. No one
really likes onion rings ... do they?

Drink

There is a minor trend in that, there London for cocktails and champagne with 
hotdogs. I offer that fact without comment. It doesn't need any. Given that it 
and the hotdog were both stars of the 1904 World's Fair in Louisiana, you could 
argue that Dr Pepper and dogs are historical bedfellows. But that would be 
forgetting that Dr Pepper is horrible. No, stick with cola, fizzy water (the 
carbonation will help "scrub" your mouth clean) or a dry beer with a sharp, 
hoppy lick, which will further cut across the dog's flavours.

So, hotdogs, how do you eat yours?
 