
Loosen your belt, Britain! How to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> – the blog seeking 
to establish an informal code of conduct for Britain's favourite dishes – is 
back, and this month (with apologies to myWord of Mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> colleague Sejal 
Sukhadwala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/oct/10/calling-time-on-the-curry-house>
), we're having a curry.

Of course, "curry" is shorthand for a vast, complex food culture, not a dish 
per se, but given the unique way it is enjoyed and eaten in Britain, it made 
sense to cover it as one. Below the line, please keep the chaat civil, the tone 
korma. Rogan joshing is fine. Gobi argy-bhaji will not be tolerated.*

* Puns writer's own. The Guardian cannot be held responsible for their poori 
quality.

Choosing a curry house

No, the supermarket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/may/21/supermarket-curries-taste-test>
 won't do. And who among non-Asians has ever cooked a satisfying curry at home? 
However, identifying a curry house that is cooking fresh, clearly 
differentiated dishes is difficult. There are no hard and fast rules. These 
pointers, though, may help.

Encouraging signs:

• It's south Indian. Bad south Indians must exist, but I've yet to eat in one. 
Instead, the sensitivity of the spicing in most Tamil or Keralan eateries is 
revelatory. From light, interesting rices cooked with curry leaves, cashew 
nuts, mustards seed and lentils, to the thali – the ultimate meal for the 
indecisive diner – you can't go wrong.

• There are women in the kitchen. A sign that you're in good (often Gujarati) 
hands.

• It is vegetarian and, therefore, will be working that bit harder to maximise 
flavour.

• It is a basic, no-frills cafe. It will be cheap at least, and with nothing 
going for it but the food, likely brilliant.

Warning signs:

• There is a waiter outside touting for business.

• No one has bothered to blanch the onions for the "kachumbar", which is just 
raw onion, ketchup and chilli powder served with thin, cold poppadoms. 
Conversely, if your poppadoms arrive hot and glossy with a mint chutney, sour 
with anardana pomegranate powder, you are on to a winner.

• The menu includes innumerable curries both historic (biryani, dopiaza) and 
bastardised British (korma, tikka masala), with identical descriptions for 
each. No kitchen is that good; particularly one that sticks king prawns in a 
rogan josh and chicken in its vindaloo. Everything will arrive in the time it 
takes to cook some meat and add a jarred sauce.

• XXL naans; hot curry challenges; healthy emphasis on lean chicken breast; 
monomaniacal ghee reduction: all signs that a venue is – albeit in different 
ways – pandering to a know-nowt British audience. Give me a gaff cooking 
scraggy mutton on the bone and chicken thigh in rich gravies enriched with ghee 
over some modern, halfway (curry)house.

• Also, beware the award-winning Indian restaurant. There seem to be 
thousands, many touting gongs from unknown bodies, which date back years, if 
not decades.

Curry house v takeaway

I'm happy to eat in a curry house, of course. But there are significant issues 
that make takeaway preferable. For instance, there is the ubiquity of crap 
beers in many Brit curry houses – not just Kingfisher and Cobra, but Tetley 
Smoothflow too. Also, the bizarre way that, in restaurants that insist on 
serving everything in dinky metal bowls, you often get a far bigger portion, 
for lower prices, if you take away.

It is also a matter of comfort. Curry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/curry> makes pigs of even the most 
self-disciplined diner. If, by the end of the meal, you still want to walk, 
rather than have someone cart you out in a wheelbarrow, then you really haven't 
got involved, have you? Which is why, until curry houses start introducing 
chaises longues for fattened guests, it will always be preferable to eat at 
home and – as you scarf the last mouthful of now cold lamb kulcha – flop back 
on the sofa, sated and burping gently.

Debrett's dictates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2013/mar/04/takeaways-acceptable-dinner-parties-debretts>
 that a takeaway should be served in china dishes with warmed plates (wide 
shallow bowls, surely?). But Debrett's can fu … sorry, I'm forgetting my 
manners. Debrett's can do one. Clearly, the authors of its Guide to 
Entertaining Etiquette have never had to bath the kids, tidy the lounge, put a 
load of washing on, phone for the takeaway and pick it up in the 90 minute 
window before [insert your favourite TV programme] starts. Next they'll be 
telling me I've got to use napkins, not kitchen roll, and can't start by 
scooping up bits of curry with a poppadom (it's an Asian taco!).

When to eat it

There is a common misapprehension that the best time to eat a curry is when 
you're drunk. In fact, the best time to eat a curry is when you'rehungover. 
There are several reasons for this: you can't be arsed to cook; you're craving 
carbs; the piquant flavours of a good curry will penetrate the muggy fug in 
your head like few other foods; eating something with a decent chilli heat 
feels restorative (erroneous endorphin claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/jan/15/chilli-pepper-hot-for-you>
 or not); and it's a great excuse to crack open what you really want, which is 
a belated hair-of-the-dog beer. The existential gloom will lift rapidly and (as 
it's probably Sunday night), an hour later you will be having a heated debate 
about why are we still watching this bloody nonsense Homeland?

Meal flow

Curry is a two-and-a-half-course meal. Poppadoms, starters, main course, rice, 
maybe a side daal. But dessert? Who ever has room for dessert? In fact, it's a 
fascinating chicken and egg: which came first, bloated British curry eaters or 
the sad pineapple fritters and bought-in ice-creams which, in a curry house, 
make passing on dessert so easy?

Notwithstanding an early experience with Indian sweets in Rusholme (I'm still 
recovering from the sugar rush), I am aware there is a fine Indian dessert 
tradition of semolina puddings, halwa and shrikhand variations. But will I ever 
forgo that second seekh kebab to make sure I've still got room to try them? 
Never in a million years.

A note on sharing …

Don't do it. Sounds good in theory – various main courses, so you can all try 
new dishes – but it never works. First, it leads to a mess of mismatched 
flavours/textures on your plate. Second, deep down, even supposedly adventurous 
British curry eaters are pretty conservative. Most people have one or two 
"safety dishes" that they order habitually and, even when they're meant to be 
exploring off-piste, people always want a core of those familiar dishes on the 
table as security.

Those dishes are then hotly fought over as people panic-eat, while the exotic 
stuff goes cold. Choose your own main, unless you're happy to be left with that 
paneer and aubergine/one-pot duck/hot'n'sour monkfish curry that no one was 
quite sure about.

Cost

It is not the case that with curry you get what you pay for. In many 
"contemporary" Indian restaurants, you're paying for the flashy lighting and 
high-back leather chairs. Moreover, I have little interest in the polite 
refinement of, say, Atul Kochhar's Michelin-starred food. But there are 
serious, authentic Indian restaurants out there where – hold on to your hats! – 
the food does justify topping £10 for a main course. Good curry is not 
necessarily thecheapest curry.

Brief menu highlights …

Proper lamb rogan josh in a rich, glossy sauce fit for a Kashmiri prince. 
Expertly marinated adraki chops and juicy seekh kebabs. Pretty much any use of 
spinach and kasoori methi. The staggering depth of savoury flavour that a 
conscientious kitchen can draw out of something as simple as sambar (see also 
channa masala; various daals, particularly daal makhani; many chicken and 
lentil curries). Vadai and idli. Masala dosa: pancake of the gods; and its 
close cousin, topped uthappam. Revitalising rasam. The light, sweet'n'sour, 
singsong joys of bhelpuri and other Gujarati chaat snacks, such as 
cinnamon-spiked kachori. Keralan cabbage thoran or "beef chaps". Tawa-fried 
seabass. Keema curries – go on, admit it: it is the easy, unsophisticated 
option, but that minced lamb is like filthy, curried crack.

… and the lowlights

Okra: never welcome. Raisin- or date-studded, fruity peshwari naans, an unholy 
marriage of sweet and savoury. Likewise, rogue pineapple chunks in a dhansak. 
Dried-out chicken tikka with the obligatory desultory, never eaten side salad. 
Almost all meek'n'mild, creamily inoffensive curries in the tikka masala, korma 
and (snigger) nut-sauce field. Biryani: the deluxe curry, supposedly, but there 
is never quite enough sauce, is there? A handful of Goan restaurants 
notwithstanding, all those vindaloos that swap garlic and vinegar-based 
complexity (and pork!) for raw heat.

What to drink

Beer. Nothing too complex, just a proper lager or a pale, dry, crisply hoppy 
ale. It may be called India Pale Ale, but that big hop-bomb wasn't designed to 
be drunk with curry. Pineapple juice and tonic's cutting edge works, too. 
Water. No wine. Lassi I'll take the fifth on. I can't stick yoghurt.

Etiquette

If you've been to India and the food there was just ah-may-zing, and, like, 
totally different to what we get here, yeah? Please shut up about it.

So, curry: how do you eat yours?
 