
The newly confident Bury Football Club dispatched non-league Hemel Hempstead 
3-1 in the FA Cup first round on Sunday and, despite losing to Tranmere Rovers 
in the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy quarter‑final on Tuesday night, have made a 
formidable start to theLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> season, a 
transformation in the club’s fortunes since new owners arrived last summer.

Under Stewart Day, a 33-year-old property developer from Burnley, and his 
colleague, Glenn Thomas,Bury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury> have 
revamped the Gigg Lane pitch and stocked the manager, David Flitcroft, with new 
signings including the quality lower-division trio of Ryan Lowe from Tranmere, 
Nicky Adams from Rotherham United and Danny Mayor from Sheffield Wednesday to 
become genuine competitors for promotion.

But these happy days are tempered with memories, still raw, of administration 
in 2001. That crisis of over-borrowing was followed by promises that despite 
the club always struggling in Manchester’s shadow, directors would never again 
gamble with Bury’s future. The trauma was precipitated by a £1m loan secured on 
Gigg Lane at 15% annual interest which the club had argued was excessive and 
which court documents described as “a true lending of the last resort”.

Yet publicly filed Companies House documents show that since taking over Bury, 
Day’s company has borrowed exactly the same amount, £1m, also secured on Gigg 
Lane, but at an exponentially higher interest rate: 10% per month. That is a 
cumulative annual rate of 138%, meaning that after one year, £1m borrowed in 
August will, with interest, amount to £2.38m to be repaid. Bury Football Club 
themselves, formed in 1885 at the dawn of professional football and Football 
League members for 120 years, are guaranteeing this high-interest £1m loan.

It was taken out by Day’s company, SG Sports Management Limited of Rainbow 
House, Burnley, on 11 August. By then SG Sports Management had already borrowed 
£450,000, at the same rate of interest, 10% per month, from a company called, 
somewhat unpromisingly, Cash4Assets Limited. Day’s company borrowed twice from 
that company: £200,000 on 14 May, around the time the club signed Lowe, Adams 
and Mayor, then another £250,000 less than a month later, on 9 June.

Bury FC have guaranteed both those loans; the security is stated in the 
mortgages to be “a first legal charge … over the freehold property at Bury 
football ground and stadium, Gigg Lane”.

Just two months later, on 11 August, SG Sports Management borrowed £1m from 
Goldmann and Sons Limited, a company with a single shareholder, officially 
classed as “dormant”. The loan included the £450,000 already borrowed from 
Cash4Assets, plus a further £550,000, to make £1m. Like the previous two, this 
loan was stated to be for one month, at interest of 7.5% if the whole loan were 
repaid within a month, then, if it were not, at 10% per month. As the mortgage 
is still registered against Bury and Gigg Lane, it appears it was not 
immediately repaid, so interest is running at £100,000 for the first month, 
then at 10% per month of the outstanding loan; 138% per year.

In October 2013 SG Sports Management took out a mortgage, for unspecified 
loans, from another company, Datum Finance Ltd, registered in Burnley. The 
agreement envisages that SG Sports Management would lend money in turn to Bury 
and Datum would have a mortgage on that loan.

Bury’s most recent accounts are for the year to 31 May 2013, before Day’s 
ownership, when the club had income of £2.7m but made a £724,688 loss. The 
principal owner, Brian Fenton, a local man and fan, called time after lending 
£191,043 to bankroll the club’s losses and the club faced another financial 
crisis before Day stepped in.

The auditors stated that Bury’s directors considered the club had only 
“adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable 
future” because Day’s company was making available “up to £2m revolving credit 
facility”. SG Sports Management had already lent the club £335,000; the 
accounts do not say what the rate of interest was.

After the 2001 crash Bury were saved from ruin by thousands of donations from 
people nationwide and even overseas who did not want a venerable English 
football club to fold. In return donors’ names were affixed to the back of the 
Gigg Lane seats and the old ground still has them, bearing witness to this 
generosity.

Stuart Cook, spokesman for a concerned group of small Bury shareholders, said: 
“We are lifelong fans whose parents and grandparents attended Gigg Lane; we 
want a successful club but based on sustainable spending. Whilst the 
improvements of the last year are encouraging, we are worried that the spending 
appears to be from money borrowed against the ground, at very high cost. There 
is a lack of transparency and accountability which would give us assurance 
about this.”

A club statement when Day took over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/25/bury-future-chairman-directors-takeover>
 said: “The new board will be bringing in key individuals to assist in bringing 
new ideas and business models to ensure financial security.”

The Guardian sent detailed questions to Day via the club, principally asking 
where the £2m credit facility from his company to the club had come from, 
whether the borrowed money was used to finance the player signings, what the 
club’s wage bill now is and what plan they have to make sure interest of 10% 
per month, 138% per year, can be met. He did not reply.
 