
Crunch, crunch, crunch, rustle, crunch, crunch, scrunch … Sorry, *licks 
fingers, wipes hands on jeans*, where were we? Oh, yeah, how to eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> crisps.
That's right, the series <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth>
 that tries to establish informal rules of good conduct for the nation's 
favourite foods, is, this month, biting down on one of the biggies: the potato 
crisp. Given that we consume 10bn packets of crisps and savoury snacks each 
year, it is one of the few foods that you could genuinely describe asa national 
obsession <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/01/crisps-british>.

You know the drill below the line. Don't get too chippy, fry off the handle or 
use too much salty language. And if you are going to give it out, make sure 
your argument is the real McCoy's.

What is a crisp?

We all know what a crisp is. It's all those things on the, erm, crisp aisle in 
the supermarket, right? But is it? Obviously, there is no disputing that a bag 
of Walkers cheese and onion contains crisps: potatoes, thinly sliced, deep 
fried and seasoned (even if Walkers does, famously, colour-code its crisps – 
blue for cheese and onion, WTF?! – in a way that makes you wonder if anybody in 
Beaumont Leys has the first clue about crisp culture).

But what about Doritos-style corn chips? Or Wotsits and Monster Munch, both 
made from corn and baked, not fried? Are they crisps or "puffs"? And what of a 
product that, because it has rice flour and wheat mixed into its dehydrated 
potato base, seems to bring a lot of people out in a fit of indignation – 
Pringles?

It's a minefield, isn't it? So I devised a scientifically rigorous checklist 
to sort crisps from non-crisps:
• Are they sold in the crisp aisle?
• Would you eat them in the pub?
• Would you ever think about putting them in a sandwich?

To qualify, crisps have to meet all three criteria. For instance, they are 
sold in the crisp aisle and eaten in pubs, but you would never put Mini 
Cheddars or Scampi Fries in a sandwich … would you? Tell me you wouldn't. See? 
It is completely failsafe. Unless you are a stone-cold weirdo.

Good and bad flavours

We live in a crazy world, the rise of the gourmet crisp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/feb/01/walkers-crisps-gourmet-chipsnk>
 being but one egregious example. Like many of you, I was initially dazzled by 
the fact that Burts, Pipers and Tyrrells could produce crisps that actually 
tasted, often in a remarkably true way, of their advertised flavourings. But 
that novelty quickly wore off. Why? Because if I want a roast dinner, I'll make 
one. If I want a salmon-and-cream-cheese bagel, likewise. I don't need someone 
to mimic that in a packet of crisps.

In fact, it runs counter to crisps' whole appeal. They are brilliant precisely 
because they deliver wholly alien, artificial flavours at a wholly unnatural 
intensity. That is what we want: the hit, the thrill, the instant high of 
concentrated, industrialised otherworldly flavour-esque-flavour. I don't want 
to taste actual cheese or prawns in a packet of crisps, I want their bizarre, 
electrifying analogue.

These days, even crisp manufacturers are pushing the – cough! – provenance of 
their ingredients. Wotsits, we are reassured, are coloured with paprika and 
made with real cheese. Walkers cheese and onion are made with Somerset cheddar. 
Me? I don't care about any of that. In fact, I actively prefer the mysterious, 
futuristic ingredients listed onDoritos <http://www.doritos.co.uk/products.aspx>
 – disodium 5'-ribonucleotide, anyone? – as part of its tangy cheese flavour. 
Not that I want to be looking at the ingredients at all. They are crisps for 
Christ's sake. Is that crisp making my mouth explode? Yes. Then, what more do I 
need to know?
 Crisps should be eaten straight from the packet Photograph: Alamy 
I have a similar issue with sophisticated and/or ludicrous flavour 
combinations in the vein of Sensations. There is a place for Thai sweet chilli 
(well, maybe not), aromatic chicken with thyme, peri peri, or mozzarella and 
pesto, but that isnot in a packet of crisps. I don't want complexity. I don't 
want to have to think about how the layers of flavour "work". Crisps need to 
deliver simple, powerful flavours: saltiness, something sharp and piquant, 
something incredibly umami and savoury, or preferably a combination of all 
three. That is why tangy cheese Doritos,as Tim Hayward once wrote on this very 
blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/jun/18/cheese-powder>
, are the crack cocaine of savoury snacks.

Beyond that, everything else is irrelevant. That is why salt and vinegar and 
cheese and onion are the undisputed kings of crisp, and why, of the posh 
crisps, Tyrrells salt and cider vinegar are clearly the most successful 
creation. It is also why the following are all classics:
• Doritos, tangy cheese flavour, of course
• Cheese and ham Toasties, Director's Cut range. Rare, but profoundly tasty
• Pickled onion Monster Munch
• Salt and vinegar Pringles. Pure power
• Wotsits
• Seabrook prawn cocktail
• Salt and vinegar Chipsticks 
• The European paprika crisps you had on holiday
• Salt and vinegar French Fries
• Skips

You will notice there are no meat flavours in there because they are 
universally disgusting. Eating any flavour on the spectrum from roast chicken 
to roast beef is like sucking a stock cube. Yes, they are intense, but compared 
to the sprightly, zingy flavours above, they have a dense, muggy intensity. A 
slog. Spicy tomato is a similar crisp-tastrophy.

As for good old ready salted – reliable, steady ready salted; humble and 
dignified, traditional ready salted – I can say only this: have you completely 
given up on life? Seriously. Ready salted. Why bother? It is not worth the 
calories.

Issues of texture

What do you want out of a crisp? Well, it depends to a large degree on how you 
eat them – at speed, walking back from the corner shop, as hastily stuffed-in 
fuel (a waste); or at a more leisurely pace, where you attempt to squeeze as 
much pleasure out of the process as you can (the right way).

If you are eating them in the right way, you are looking for crisp that boasts 
a clean snap and crunch, enough resistance that you can suck hard initially to 
get that full hit of flavour, and, finally, a smooth, swift melting away (at 
all three, Pringles excel). You might think that rules puffed snacks out of any 
connoisseur's diet, but, obviously, taste can trump texture. A standard bag of 
Walkers, for all that it hits the mark texturally, will never beat Wotsits. 
Whereas the ineffectually lightweight (both in taste and body) Quavers are very 
much a division two crisp.

Like gussied-up flavours, the rise of extra-thick premium crisps is an 
appalling trend. Kettle Chips (overly thick, overcooked, weirdly seasoned) 
started it, while McCoy's and its ridged brethren took it to almost inedible 
extremes. I don't want to a) end up hospitalised with jagged shards of fried 
potato in my soft palate; b) spend most of the packet picking great claggy 
lumps of crisp out of my molars; c) have to drink a litre of liquid to get the 
bag down.

If you eat McCoy's "man crisps", it's because you are insecure about your 
manhood. Fine. Go ahead. But the real crisp heads know Seabrook nailed the 
ridged crisp years ago. Everything since is just marketing bull for gullible 
idiots.

Consumption and sharing

Crisps should be eaten straight from the packet. The only time they should be 
dispensed into a bowl is at home, if you have guests.

If you are mobile, it is fine to offer someone a crisp from the packet. 
However, if you are stationary, in the pub, the packet must be ripped open and 
laid flat so that it is clear that these are sharing crisps.

When eating solo, feel free to constantly lick your salty fingers clean. When 
sharing crisps, it would obviously be totally boakingly unhygienic.

The crushed debris of tiny crisp shards and flavour-powder at the bottom of 
the packet belongs to whoever paid for the crisps. It is far too precious to 
share.

Disposal

In public, where you might not bin it immediately, fold the packet lengthways 
into a narrow strip and then tie a knot in it. People who fold the packet into 
a tight, precise triangle are psychopaths.

Auxiliary uses
 If you wouldn't put them in a sandwich, they're not crisps. Photograph: Alamy 
I am agnostic about adding crisps to a sandwich. I have tried it and enjoyed 
it but feel that I have yet to fully realise its potential. In much the same 
way as I have only dipped into jazz and bondage (not at the same time).

I am, however, firmly against crisps served on the side of a sandwich, 
generally with some tokenistic frisée salad in a garden centre cafe. It is 
awkward (which one do you eat first, do you alternate, what if the flavours 
clash?) and ugly (in naked daylight, crisps on a white plate look anaemic).

Serving suggestion

Have you ever tried a mixed-crisp salad? Possibly the ultimate party food, and 
one that works with pretty much any combination of crisps/savoury snacks. For 
ultimate pleasure, combine ready salted Hula Hoops, salted peanuts, salt and 
vinegar crisps and Wotsits in a large bowl. Seriously, it's the nuts. If you 
haven't eaten a peanut in a Hula Hoop jacket, you haven't lived.

Root vegetable crisps …

… are not crisps. Sorry. Oh, and for the record, I would rather eat a carpet 
slipper than 99% of the baked or healthy crisp-not-crisp alternatives on the 
market.

When to eat

Disregarding children who – from the school bus in the morning to smuggled 
packets under the duvet – are always eating crisps, there are two major adult 
"occasions" when crisps come into play. In the car – when you need something to 
see you through a reasonably long journey, but don't want to give a penny more 
than is strictly necessary to Moto – and in the pub. If you find yourself 
augmenting your lunch with a packet of crisps (unnecessary gilding), grabbing a 
bag at 3pm, or rooting through a multipack as Newsnight comes on, then it is 
probably timeto get on those scales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/28/crisps-pack-a-day> and 
have a stern word with yourself.

Drink

A cold drink is imperative. Beer* or cola, possibly lemonade. Wine is more of 
a pretzel drink. Tea or coffee are vile.
*A pale, easy-drinking beer. You don't want to drink a £5 bottle of Nøgne Ø 
IPA with cheese and onion stuck in your teeth.

So, crisps – how do you eat yours?

• Follow Tony Naylor on Twitter: @naylor_tony <https://twitter.com/naylor_tony>
 