
The Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> is very 
much an international affair these days and it took a Dutchman’s goal to 
maintain the smile on his German-American manager’s face and deliver a first 
English defeat for the Italian in the opposite dugout.

Rajiv van La Parra’s opportunism in the sixth minute, sweeping home his first 
Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> goal against 
his former club, massaged the club’s fine start to the season into their best 
in 64 years.

Unsurprisingly, they are accepting David Wagner as one of their own after such 
an unexpected surge out of the blocks, but this victory over Walter Zenga’s 
Wolves was not so much about their attacking verve as their defensive tenacity.

While their flowing football won plaudits on the road at Newcastle and Aston 
Villa, it was the ability to protect a lead that saw Wagner’s men surpass the 
start made by the Huddersfield vintage of 1969-70. That season ended in 
promotion to the top flight. Not since December 1999 have they sat on top of 
the second tier, and their stay at the summit will last another fortnight at 
least owing to the international break.

Football clockwatch: Leicester 2-1 Swansea, Watford 1-3 Arsenal and more – as 
it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/27/football-clockwatch-leicester-v-swansea-watford-v-arsenal-and-more-live>
“There are different ways to win – this was a different one to our others this 
season and I will take every victory I can,” Wagner said. “The first half was 
outstanding, one of the best 45 minutes we have played. We were very sharp, 
organised behind the ball and quick in our reactive pressure.”

Huddersfield is hardly a sporting mecca, but they are getting accustomed to 
toasting successes with unapologetic fervour. At half-time, there was a rousing 
reception for another of their own, Ed Clancy, the gold medal-winning cyclist. 
Then, there was the post-match roar to signify another significant scalp.

Wolves have invested heavily since their Chinese takeover this summer with 
Zenga intent on having two players for every position. Nine players have 
arrived – the Dutch striker Paul Gladon, a £1m signing from Heracles, was 
signed too late to feature here – with a deal also in place for the Angers 
midfielder Romain Saiss.

Here, the charismatic Zenga – in his 16th managerial job in 18 years – 
maintained the core of the team he inherited from Kenny Jackett, with the 
Iceland striker Jon Dadi Bodvarsson the one new recruit to start. But they 
could not live with Huddersfield’s energetic opening: Kasey Palmer, the on-loan 
Chelsea youngster, provided the intricate pass that teased its way between the 
feet of Danny Batth, Nahki Wells took it into the area and guided the ball wide 
of Carl Ikeme. Although it rebounded off the base of the post, Van La Parra 
reacted first.

The squally showers around kick-off greased up the playing surface, suiting 
Huddersfield’s slick passing, and it looked likely more goals would follow. 
Palmer, who lasted 57 minutes before going off, was full of invention and 
occasional audacity, such as the 20-yard clip with the outside of his right 
boot that forced Ikeme into action.

Nigel Clough haunts Derby as Jackson Irvine seals win for Burton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/burton-derby-county-championship-match-report>
At that point, Ikeme’s opposite number, Danny Ward, had watched a couple of 
George Saville efforts sail off target. However, although Joe Mason had the 
ball in the net at the end of the first half, only for an offside flag to scrub 
it off, Wolves’ attacking threat was improved by the introduction of João 
Teixeira at the start of the second.

Ward was forced into his first save seven minutes after the restart when Matt 
Doherty, the left-back, bundled his way through the Huddersfield defence and 
rasped in a cross-shot. Soon afterwards, Teixeira clipped the outside of the 
post from 20 yards.

Try as they might, Wolves could not force the ball the other side of it – 
although a stupendous reflex reaction from Ward played its part when 
Bodvarsson’s header from a 68th-minute corner was repelled low to the 
goalkeeper’s left.

Mason then had a penalty claim dismissed when he hit the turf under a 
challenge from Hudson.

“In the second half there was only one team on the pitch without doubt,” Zenga 
said. “We lost the game, but we didn’t deserve to lose.”
 