
Huddersfield Town missed out on the chance to go level on points with the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> leaders, 
Newcastle United, as Paul Gallagher inspiredPreston North End to a 3-1 win, 
their fourth successive victory at home.

Gallagher teed up Tom Clarke and Alex Baptiste in the first half before 
scoring with a free-kick himself after half-time to extend Preston’s unbeaten 
run to five games. Nahki Wells grabbed a late consolation forHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield>, who have not won at 
Deepdale since 1969.

Nottingham Forest owner asked buyers for £1m salary plus player bonuses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/nottingham-forest-owner-hasawi-salary-player-bonuses>
Simon Grayson’s side took an early lead with the first chance of the game 
after six minutes. Gallagher’s whipped free-kick was met by Clarke, whose 
header from six yards was too strong for Danny Ward to keep out. Ward, however, 
was on hand with a terrific stop after 23 minutes, leaping to his right to tip 
Jordan Hugill’s looping header over the bar, before keeping out Clarke’s fierce 
drive from the resulting corner.

Huddersfield began to see more of the ball approaching the half-hour and 
threatened when Jack Payne broke in behind the Preston midfield, but his 
powerful shot was deflected wide by Clarke. However, David Wagner’s side were 
undone by another magnificent delivery from Gallagher after 42 minutes. The 
midfielder produced a curling, first-time cross from the right which was met by 
a towering header from Baptiste, who powered the ball past Ward from 12 yards. 
It was the first time the Terriers had conceded more than one goal in the 
league this season.

Huddersfield, now attacking the end packed with their relentless away 
supporters, came close five minutes after the break when Payne’s free-kick from 
the edge of the area whistled over the bar. Three minutes later the points were 
wrapped up for Preston when Gallagher’s whipped free-kick from the left evaded 
everyone and nestled into the far corner.

Huddersfield were determined not to lie down, though, and Payne had two 
opportunities in the 56th minute. He saw one shot parried away by Chris Maxwell 
and, as the ball dropped back to him, he volleyed it against his own face. 
Huddersfield deservedly scored after 81 minutes, as Payne’s free-kick was 
headed across goal by Christopher Schindler and Wells nodded home from four 
yards.

Sheffield Wednesday moved into the Championship play-off places by coming from 
behind to draw 1-1 and ensureCardiff City did not make it two wins from two 
under Neil Warnock. Cardiff made an energetic start and were rewarded when 
Peter Whittingham gave them an early lead with a superb free-kick.

A win would have moved the Welsh club out of the relegation zone but the 
visitors had the better of the second half and deservedly levelled through 
Daniel Pudil’s first goal since December. Bad news for the Owls, however, was 
an injury to their goalkeeper, Kieren Westwood, who was forced off in the first 
half after treatment following a wayward clearance.

Cardiff went close to taking the lead from the opening play of the game. 
Rickie Lambert tried his luck from the kick-off and Westwood was forced to 
back-pedal to tip the ball over the bar. But there was nothing the Wednesday 
keeper could do when Whittingham put the hosts ahead in the ninth minute. Sam 
Hutchinson brought down Craig Noone on the edge of the area and Whittingham 
stepped up to curl the free-kick into the net.

Rotherham sack manager Alan Stubbs with club bottom of the Championship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/rotherham-sack-manger-alan-stubbs-bottom-championship>
Wednesday recovered with a good spell of possession but they looked 
uncomfortable dealing with set pieces and it was a weakness Cardiff were 
prepared to prey on. It did not help their cause when Westwood needed treatment 
having pulled up after taking a goal-kick and he had little respite. Twice the 
Republic of Ireland international came to try to claim long balls into the area 
and twice he got nowhere near. The third delivery, courtesy of Aron 
Gunnarsson’s long throw, ended with Lambert controlling and swivelling in one 
movement, only to fire over with the goal at his mercy. Westwood was soon 
gingerly walking off to be replaced by Cameron Dawson before the visitors had 
their best spell of the half.

Ben Amos in the Cardiff goal had not had a save to make during the opening 
half-hour but he was called into action to hold Gary Hooper’s volley and to 
parry Adam Reach’s shot round the post. Yet Cardiff should have gone in with 
their advantage doubled as Sol Bamba and Sean Morrison failed to convert from 
close range in a goalmouth scramble from another Whittingham set piece.

Carlos Carvalhal sent on Fernando Forestieri for Almen Abdi having seen his 
side create little despite having 70% of possession and Wednesday briefly 
thought a penalty was set to come their way when Pudil got away from Noone and 
went down as he attacked a deep cross but the flag was up for offside. At the 
other end Junior Hoilett forced Dawson into a sharp low save after bringing 
down a loose ball and getting away from two defenders.

Wednesday drew level 10 minutes into the second half when Hooper found space 
down the right side of the area and Pudil converted from close range. The 
visitors took control and Hooper fizzed a shot narrowly over the bar from a 
Forestieri lay-off as the pressure increased but neither side could find a 
winner.
 