
Steve Evans was left bemoaning some of his Leeds side’s defending after a 4-1 
home defeat toHuddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> 
in which Stuart Dallas had given Leeds the lead, and was left once again 
fending off criticism of his position.

Three straight wins had given Evans some much-needed credit in the bank since 
the dreadful 4-0 defeat at Brighton, after which he was banned from speaking by 
owner Massimo Cellino. United are never longer than 90 minutes from a crisis, 
though, and this game was played against the backdrop of more protests about 
Cellino’s ownership, with the Massimo Time To Go group hiring a cinema screen 
on which to play a film calling for his exit.

Evans cited this as a different kind of four-goal defeat and batted off 
questions about pressure, saying he had done what was asked of him. 
“Huddersfield wanted it more than us in certain areas,” he said. “When I joined 
the job was to keep Leeds in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> and that gets forgotten. We 
have become a mid-table side.

“It is easy to talk and harder to deliver, but I have a track record that I 
deliver. Days like today teach you more than the days when you beat Bolton and 
Cardiff.”

David Wagner saluted Nahki Wells’s recovery from a poor start. The Bermudan 
got off on the wrong note when his penalty was saved by Marco Silvestri but he 
ran Leeds ragged from there on in and ended the afternoon with the crowning 
fourth goal. Before that he had laid on a wonderful assist for Karim Matmour 
and ran the Leeds centre-halves Sol Bamba and Giuseppe Bellusci off their feet.

With his and Matmour’s goals added to by Mark Hudson and Harry Bunn, it was a 
day to remember for Town and their travelling fans, and, according to Wagner, 
Wells will look back on it in years to come.

“Everybody who works with him knows that this is not the first time he missed 
a chance or chances and stayed focused in the game,” Wagner said. “He created 
the goal of Matmour, which was high class, and what he did in this moment, he 
will speak about after his career. He missed a penalty, got a great assist.

“This was a fantastic day. A brilliant three points, a massive three points, 
but I think we have played better games.

“We were very clinical. We always moan that we are not clinical enough but the 
story of this game was something special. We missed the penalty, conceded a 
goal, but in the second half we were too quick and closed them down well.”

It was an even sweeter afternoon for Wagner given his first game at 
Huddersfield – albeit not in direct charge – ended in a 3-0 defeat at home by 
Leeds.

“We have been able to make a lot of people in Huddersfield very happy,” he 
said. “We knew this was a massive game for all the Huddersfield supporters. We 
knew we had to repair and correct the 3-0.” . 

Marcus Olsson strikes late to help Derby County beat rivals Nottingham Forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/derby-county-nottingham-forest-championship-match-report> 