
Michael Hefele’s freak goal grabbed Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> a deserved 1-1 draw at 
Aston Villa after their goalkeeper Pierluigi Gollini’s gaffe. The substitute 
had been on for a matter of seconds when the Villa No1 clattered an 86th-minute 
clearance straight off his back and helplessly watched it fly into the net.

Sergio Agüero grabs hat-trick after penalty misses as Manchester City cruise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/steaua-bucharest-manchester-city-champions-league-play-off-match-report>
It was just reward for the Terriers after a spirited second-half fightback 
following Ross McCormack’s opener for the home side. The striker, signed from 
Fulham for £12m this summer, scored his first Villa goal but it was not enough 
to spare Gollini’s blushes at the final whistle.

Nahki Wells also hit a post for the visitors who capped a fine few days, 
following their 2-1 BetChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> win at Newcastle on 
Saturday.

Mile Jedinak, preparing for his proposed move to Villa from Crystal Palace, 
watched on helplessly as they blew a fine chance to record back-to-back 
victories.

They dominated the start and Jordan Ayew forced Danny Ward into an early save 
before Ashley Westwood blazed Jack Grealish’s corner over.

Aaron Tshibola also had a goal disallowed after five minutes when he headed in 
McCormack’s lobbed cross but the midfielder was rightly ruled offside. Away 
from the action the home fans rose to applaud the former striker Dalian 
Atkinson in the 10th minute after the 48-year-old died when he was hit by a 
police Taser in Telford on Monday.

Huddersfield offered little resistance and the home side deservedly took the 
lead after 25 minutes, with McCormack’s first of the season.

Tshibola delivered a deep cross which found Grealish and the midfielder’s 
miscued volley looped to the far post for McCormack to head in.

Huddersfield failed to respond and Ayew should have doubled Villa’s lead a 
minute before the break when he swapped passes with Grealish but his shot was 
cleared off the line by Mark Hudson.

Despite bossing the game Villa’s lead remained slender and Huddersfield began 
to wrestle the momentum after the second-half introduction of substitute Wells.

First he forced Gollini to rush out and save at his feet before the goalkeeper 
parried Elias Kachunga’s acrobatic volley away after 63 minutes as the home 
side began to live dangerously.

They almost wrapped the game up with 19 minutes left, when Rudy Gestede 
powered a header straight at Ward but Huddersfield continued to pin Villa back.

And Wells was inches away from an equaliser when his 81st-minute free kick 
shuddered the post with Gollini beaten.

But they got their leveller in bizarre style with four minutes left when 
Gollini tried to launch a routine clearance upfield only to hit Hefele and the 
ball ricocheted into an unguarded net.
 