
For Hugo Lloris the homecoming was always likely to be emotional. The 
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
captain hails from Nice; he made his way into the professional game at his 
hometown club and he has long considered Monaco – a little further up the Côte 
d’Azur – as a rival to be respected. He even has a family tie to the 
principality. Lloris is a white-collar kind of guy and his father, Luc, 
continues to work as a banker in Monte Carlo.

Lloris, though, is preoccupied with a different kind of comeback story. Spurs 
are in a Champions League mess of their own making, after the Wembley defeats by
Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 and thenBayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/tottenham-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league-match-report>
; the second rather more grisly that the first. Lloris mentioned how “the fact 
is we are struggling at Wembley stadium” and the likelihood is that Tottenham 
will need an away win against Monaco on Tuesday night simply to stay alive.

It is a tall order. Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> have 
improved since last season, when Tottenham took four points from them at the 
Europa League group phase, and there is a vibrancy about their attacking play. 
They lie second in Ligue 1, three points behind the leaders, Nice, and they 
have scored 39 goals in their 13 matches in the competition so far.

Harry Winks gives Tottenham hope for Champions League survival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/harry-winks-tottenham-hotspur-hope-champions-league-survival>
Radamel Falcao has six in his past five appearances in all competitions, 
suggesting that he has finally put his injury difficulties behind him while 
Lloris was quick to namecheck the contributions of Bernardo Silva, Joao 
Moutinho and Thomas Lemar, who made his debut for France against the Ivory 
Coast last week. Monaco need only a point against Tottenham to ensure their 
qualification to the Champions League’s last 16.

In this town of high-rollers Lloris accepts that he and his team-mates are in 
the last-chance saloon but he has known worse in his career and he has come out 
on the other side. In December 2011 Lloris and his former club, Lyon, needed a 
win on the final night of the group phase at Dinamo Zagreb – plus a seven-goal 
swing over Ajax, who were at home to Real Madrid.

At half-time in Zagreb Lyon had trailed 1-0 but they would revive in 
sensational fashion to win 7-1 while Ajax lost 3-0 against Real. The Dutch club 
complained to Uefa about what they felt was a suspicious result but nothing 
untoward was proved and Lloris said it merely went to show that nothing was 
impossible in this crazy sport. The miracle of Zagreb, to his mind, offers hope.

“We need to believe in ourselves and be ready for any eventuality,” Lloris 
said. “It is difficult to compare [to 2011] as Zagreb had no chance of going 
through whereas Monaco just need a point to progress. But it does show you that 
we are not out of the competition yet and, in football, anything is possible.”

Lloris went on, in his quietly spoken manner, to ratchet up on the pressure on 
Monaco. “There is a feeling in France that Monaco are in such a good position 
they have more to lose than us,” he said. “We cannot be in a worse situation 
and they know it is in their hands. They will be under pressure to take the 
game to us and sometimes that responsibility can do funny things to a team.”

Tottenham’s confidence has been lifted by the dramatic result against West Ham 
United on Saturday evening, when Harry Kane scored in the 89th and 91st minutes 
to secure a 3-2 win. Had they failed to complete the comeback, it would have 
been eight games without a win and the mood in the dressing room would have 
been different. Lloris mentioned how Kane’s return from an ankle ligament 
injury had brought “a lot of positive energy”.

Nonetheless the defender Danny Rose was not guilty of understatement when he 
described this as a “massive week for the football club”. After Monaco comes 
the visit on Saturday to Chelsea – the scene of the end of their Premier League 
title hopes last season, whenthe game finished 2-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 and Tottenham had a record nine players booked.

“The feeling after the Chelsea game last season is one that I never want to 
feel again,” Rose said. “There were people upset, crying in the changing room. 
I hope that everyone has learned from that.” Rose will miss the game at 
Stamford Bridge through suspension, after he was booked for the fifth time this 
season against West Ham, and he said he was “gutted” about it. “The Chelsea 
game was the first fixture I looked out for in the summer,” Rose said. “But 
I’ll be there, either travelling with the team or in with the fans.”

There were other side issues, including Lloris’s new contract talks, which he 
has placed on hold while he concentrates on what is a defining period on the 
pitch. “There is no need for anybody to worry,” Lloris said. “I want to repeat 
that my commitment is to the club and there is no rush. I am under contract 
until 2019.”

The focus was on the Monaco tie and nothing more. Chelsea could wait. Mauricio 
Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> talked 
about being clever and patient – as they were against West Ham – but he agreed 
Monaco had enjoyed a slight advantage by having played their league fixture at 
Lorient on Friday night.

They won 3-0 while Spurs needed stoppage time to see off the 17th-placed team 
in England. Consequently there are one or two tired, suspect limbs. Pochettino 
said he would have to assess the readiness of Kane, Mousa Dembélé and Dele Alli 
to complete 90 minutes. Tottenham have it all to do.
 