
Goals from Abel Hernández and Sam Clucas propelled Hull back into second spot 
in theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> and 
increased the pressure on the Cardiff manager, Russell Slade.

The embarrassing FA Cup exit to League One strugglers Shrewsbury had 
reportedly left Slade on the brink, with online polls showing many Cardiff fans 
want a new manager.

The pressure on Slade will only increase after an uninspiring display at Hull, 
who usurped Derby with a win more comfortable than the scoreline suggests.

It was a 10th home win of the season for Steve Bruce’s men and a result that 
always looked likely after Anthony Pilkington clipped over Cardiff’s best 
chance midway through the first half.

Hernández’s penalty five minutes before the break give Hull an advantage they 
would not relinquish, with Clucas volleying home the hosts’ second shortly 
after the restart to wrap up victory.

It was meek response to the 1-0 home defeat to Shrewsbury and a result that 
looked likely once Hull found their feet, with Bruno Ecuele Manga denying the 
dilly-dallying Hernández an early opener.

Charlton Athletic sack interim manager Karel Fraeye
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/13/charlton-athletic-sack-karel-fraeye>
David Marshall should have been tested at the very least and the same went for 
Mo Diamé shortly afterwards, with his curling effort flying well over the 
Cardiff goal.

Only a timely Matthew Connolly block prevented Hernandez directing home an 
exceptional Clucas cross as City continued to control proceedings, with Cardiff 
finally mustering their first attempt after 27 minutes.

A wonderfully-weighted ball from Craig Noone put Pilkington through on goal 
and the winger’s clipped effort rippled the net, only for it to quickly dawn on 
the travelling support it had landed on top of the goal.

It was a great chance that Slade’s men were made to rue five minutes before 
half-time, when Lee Peltier wrestled Harry Maguire to the ground from a corner. 
Scott Duncan pointed to the spot and Hernández converted, hitting a powerful 
effort out of Marshall’s reach.

Hull’s lead never looked in danger from that point onwards and Marshall did 
well to prevent the impressive Maguire scoring an unlikely effort at the far 
post shortly after half-time.

Clucas’ free-kick created that danger and the winger himself soon added Hull’s 
second, keeping composed after his initial effort ballooned off a defender to 
volley home low past Marshall.

Pilkington and Joe Ralls had efforts on rare voyages forward as Cardiff 
attempted to peg back Hull, but nearly went further behind when Diamé and 
Hernández linked up. Marshall did well to deny Clucas when Hull next attacked 
and substitute Tom Huddlestone twice tried his luck from distance.

Marshall again denied Clucas in stoppage time and, much to the relief of the 
162 visiting fans, prevented David Meyler making it three with the last effort 
of the match.
 