
Steve Bruce believed a “bit of class” was the difference as Hull City 
maintained their position at the top of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> with a 1-0 win at Ipswich. 
Mohamed Diamé’s cool finish gave Hull all three points – although the visitors 
were more dominant than the scoreline suggests.

After making nine changes from the side who drew 0-0 with Arsenal in the FA 
Cup, Bruce was left delighted with his side’s form on a nightwhen all their 
main rivals also won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/championship-roundup-burnley-middlesbrough-brighton>
.

Championship roundup: Sam Vokes keeps Burnley up with the pace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/championship-roundup-burnley-middlesbrough-brighton>
Bruce said: “It was a case of job done. We were up against a really committed 
team in the first half, which mirrored their manager [Mick McCarthy] in terms 
of effort and endeavour. But we had that bit of class in the second half and we 
could have put the game to bed but we didn’t take our opportunities.

“When you are top of the league, you know teams are going to have a go at you 
and you have to earn the right to play. Mo was man of the match for me, it was 
a wonderful goal.”

Chances were at a premium in a tight first half, with Robert Snodgrass 
free-kick brilliantly pushed away by the Ipswich keeper Bartosz Bialkowski 
before Daryl Murphy struck the inside of the post as the home side went 
agonisingly close to taking the lead.

Their misfortune was compounded just after half-time when the left-back Andrew 
Robertson strode inside and his precise through-ball found Diamé, who calmly 
chipped it over the diving Bialkowski.

Hull began controlling the game and they should have sealed the points when 
Jake Livermore’s shot was saved and the midfielder could only strike the 
rebound against the outside of the post.

Ipswich offered little in response but still almost claimed an unlikely point 
when Freddie Sears had Allan McGregor scrambling to turn his scuffed shot 
around the post in the final minutes. From the subsequent corner, Tommy Smith 
could only turn the set piece over the bar from close range.

After seeing his side lose their last three matches, McCarthy admitted 
Ipswich’s chances of making the play-offs were slipping away. “We were beaten 
by a better team on the night. We actually could have taken the lead in the 
first half but that is the fine margins of the Championship.

“The talk in the dressing room at half-time was not to concede an early goal 
but that is what we did – although it was a fantastic goal. They could have 
scored more but the Championship is so bonkers that we almost notched in the 
last few minutes. We have now lost three on the bounce but we have to try to 
remain positive.”
 