
Derby was bouncing with balloons and ticker tape before this game but the mood 
at the end was one of deflation. They had been Hull City’s bogey team in the 
Championship yetDerby County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty> 
could not muster any semblance of attacking dynamism and will need a 
spectacular performance on Humberside to overturn a three-goal deficit and 
reach Wembley.

Hull did not need to be brilliant but Steve Bruce’s team were efficient in 
defence and grew in confidence as the match wore on. Abel Hernández gave them 
the lead and an own goal from Jason Shackell meant they were sitting 
comfortably before half-time. Andy Robertson finished a fine counterattack in 
injury time as Derby desperately searched for a lifeline.

The winner of this play-off semi-final will face either Sheffield Wednesday or 
Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/sheffield-wednesday-brighton-championship-play-off-match-report>
 for a place in the Premier League and the abundant riches that a new TV deal 
will provide all clubs in the top division. Wednesday overcame Brighton 2-0 on 
Friday and, as Derby’s meek fightback petered out, Hull’s fans chanted: 
“Sheffield Wednesday, we’re coming for you.”

It is not over but without the injured George Thorne in midfield Derby 
appeared anodyne and cries of “shoot” from the home crowd could be heard 
regularly throughout a frustrating match for them. A Yorkshire derby in the 
final beckons.

“We’re all bitterly disappointed in that dressing room,” said the Derby head 
coach, Darren Wassall, after a game where Harry Redknapp, the football adviser, 
sat in the stands. “To lose 3-0 in the first leg is certainly your worst 
nightmare. We can throw the towel in which is not what we’re going to do, or in 
the next 72 hours show some character and resilience. We can’t end the season 
on a performance like that.”

Derby had controlled much of the tempo before conceding. However, they failed 
to test Eldin Jakupovic in the Hull goal, who was deputising for the injured 
Allan McGregor, throughout a first half that provided much possession but 
little precision.

Despite neat interplay in bursts from Will Hughes and Johnny Russell, Derby 
floundered in the final third and Chris Martin was left to feed off scraps. Tom 
Ince was not at his best while Bradley Johnson struggled to find his rhythm in 
midfield.

It was Johnson’s poor touch that led to the game’s first goal after half an 
hour, with Hull having begun to edge their way into the match with Robert 
Snodgrass and Hernández looking dangerous. Yet the opening goal could have been 
prevented, a simple long ball forward and a heavy touch from Johnson allowing 
Ahmed Elmohamady to nip in and feed Hernández, who fired in low with his left 
foot from 25 yards for his fifth goal in six matches.

“In a big game like today, the first goal is hugely important,” Bruce said. 
“Sometimes in big games all of a sudden you can’t put one foot in front of the 
other. We’ve all been there. It was difficult for Derby but I’d rather say it 
was the excellence of our side. In big games you want your big players to turn 
up and all the lads’ experience in the Premier League certainly showed.”

Hull were on top and their right-back, Moses Odubajo, was enjoying a pivotal 
role. The athletic young defender was a handful throughout the first half, 
often flying down the wing and causing Marcus Olsson, booked early on, no end 
of problems. With the half drawing to a close, Odubajo’s deflected strike gave 
Hull breathing space. He had hung a left-footed cross to the far post and, when 
Snodgrass retrieved and the ball found its way back to Odubajo on the 
right-hand edge of the penalty area, his shot took a significant ricochet off 
Shackell to wrong-foot Carson and fly in.

With 10 minutes remaining Derby registered their first shot on target – a tame 
effort from distance – and the ironic cheers said it all. They pressed in 
injury time but a deadly counter from Hull surely puts this tie beyond doubt. 
From a Derby attack, the Tigers swept forward and the substitute Chuba Akpom 
laid the ball off for Robertson to strike beautifully into the bottom corner 
with seconds remaining.

Bruce: even I could have played in goal

Steve Bruce quipped even he could have played in goal during Hull City’s 3-0 
play-off victory at Derby County, such was the comfortable nature of the win 
and performance of his defence, but the Hull manager said his side would not be 
complacent before the reverse fixture on Tuesday. “I think I could have played 
in goal today, you could have wedged me in somewhere,” he said.

“Overall I don’t recall my goalkeeper having to make a save. We were 
comfortable and worthy winners. It was important we stayed disciplined, as a 
team we defended magnificently well. We must guard against complacency to put 
in a performance like that on Tuesday night.”

Darren Wassall, the Derby head coach, said: “We’ve given ourselves a massive 
mountain to climb. Nothing in life is impossible and we have to believe that. 
We have to restore some pride and produce a better performance than we did 
today. We’ve just got to regroup now and we need to make sure we show some 
character.”
 