
Steve Cotterill backed Hull City for promotion despite seeing Steve Bruce’s 
team to drop two points against hisBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> side in a closely fought 
Championship encounter.

A swirling wind and lively pitch provided testing conditions for the players 
but both managers emerged satisfied and full of praise for their opponents.

Cotterill said: “Before the game I was tipping Hull for promotion and nothing 
I saw changed my mind.

“They have a great spirit about them at the moment, which, combined with the 
quality of their players probably makes them an even better team than they were 
in the Premiership last season.

“We knew it would be a huge test for us and I felt we came through it well. We 
scored against Hull, which no one had done for a while and stopped their 
winning run. While we didn’t deserve to win the game, we didn’t deserve to lose 
it either. Both teams deserve credit because those conditions are the worst you 
can face as a player.

“Our goalkeeper didn’t have many saves to make, which was pleasing and we can 
take a lot from the game going forward.”

Kieran Agard put the hosts in front after 39 minutes after Andrew Robertson 
brought down Elliott Bennett on the right side of the area.

Luke Freeman’s in-swinging free-kick caused havoc and the Robins appealed for 
handball, before Agard pounced on the loose ball to score with a left-footed 
short on the turn.

Hull had to wait until the 73rd minute to equalise. The substitute Shaun 
Maloney raced clear on to a Mohamed Diamé flick and shot emphatically past 
Frank Fielding.

Bruce said: “An away point is never bad, but I wasn’t happy with our 
first-half performance because we gave the ball away too cheaply and conceded 
too many free-kicks, which invited pressure.

“That is what led to their goal. I warned the players beforehand that Bristol 
City are in a false position and I believe they will be comfortable in the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> by the end of 
the season.

“Steve Cotterill has been around the block as a manager and learned his trade. 
I knew his team would be positive and they defended tremendously, but in the 
second half we were more like ourselves and played with a bit of purpose.

“I feel I’m talking like a cricket captain, but I was sorry we lost the toss 
and had to play with the sun in our faces in the first half because it was very 
difficult.

“We elected to let (Abel) Hernández get a bit of extra sun on his back after 
the international break and if we had lost I would have left myself open.

“But he faces 16 hour flights back and forth to Uruguay and we hope that 
freshening him up will mean he is lively against Derby next week.”
 