
"Outraged of Cairo" was on the warpath this month. He (or it may be she, for O 
of C's first name is Pat) took me to task about my "sloppy word division". 
Whatever happened to the hyphen, he/she asks.

As long-suffering subscribers know only too well, letter counts, which are 
correct when the puzzles are proofread, have an annoying tendency to get 
changed by the existing program that uploads them for the website. (Thanks, by 
the way, to all those who wrote to me after my newsletter last month to say 
nice things about the puzzles. There were those who also wrote to say that my 
words were simply further pathetic proof that I am unable to take criticism and 
should get out of the kitchen. It all serves to remind me of a lesson I learned 
a long time ago as a journalist: that attempts at irony in print are fraught 
with the danger that they will be misread.)

But in this case the computer program was for once not the culprit. The letter 
count in question was as intended. The solution to a clue was HOOKNOSED (9). 
The issue raised comes up quite regularly. For example, Paul's Saturday prize 
puzzle No 24,373 for April 26 with the theme of fictional villains had as a 
solution: ARCHENEMY (9). "Archbishop or archduke, yes; archenemy, no" was the 
protest cry. In fact, HOOKNOSED and ARCHENEMY is how both words appear in the 
latest edition of Collins.

When I started to edit the Guardian crosswords over a decade ago, my 
predecessor, the late John Perkin, indicated to me that Chambers was his bible 
in these matters. And it is true that, in the latest Chambers, the arch-enemy 
is still hook-nosed. Quite soon, though, I came to the conclusion that a lot of 
the hyphenation in Chambers was rather old fashioned (or, rather, 
old-fashioned). In particular, it continued to hyphenate words which, in the 
Guardian and elsewhere, had become two separate words or had been run together. 
Thus frog-eater was tending more to become frog eater and co-operate to become 
cooperate. The trend was particularly marked with prefixes such as pre-, trans- 
and inter-, where the hyphen was fast disappearing. Also, the modern way seems 
to be to drop the hyphen from compound adjectives when they appear after their 
noun. Thus: "He gave me an old-fashioned look, which I found old fashioned".

For my money the dictionary that best reflected this trend was Collins. Apart 
from the odd exception (or by mistake), I have for well over five years been 
basing letter counts for solutions and editing words in clues to be as as they 
are in Collins. In this, as in everything, I am open to argument and 
persuasion. Perhaps, the Oxford Dictionary of English offers a compromise 
between Chambers and Collins. The only thing that I am sure about is that there 
needs to be consistency. You would not, I think, be happy if we were having 
BIRD-WATCHER one day and BIRDWATCHER or even BIRD WATCHER the next.

_____

It is with great sadness that I have to report the sudden death on May 14 of 
Eric Burge at the age of 81. He had been a physics lecturer in London and then 
a senior education officer with Gloucestershire Country Council. He set puzzles 
as Quantum for the Guardian from 1970 and also for many other publications (for 
example, as Phiz for the Listener, Quota for the Sunday Telegraph, Quasar for 
the Oxford Times and Quark for the Financial Times). An obituary by Don Manley 
should appear in the paper shortly. His widow is happy that his unpublished 
puzzles should appear posthumously.

_____

The May Genius set by Lavach seems to have been popular. There were 202 
correct entries, with the first from Leeds timed at 1725 on the first day. The 
fact that this was the May Day bank holiday may explain why there was only one 
other correct entry sent in that day, though there were two incorrect entries, 
one earlier. These both made the same mistake, which others also did later, of 
putting TABULATE at 1 down, instead of SATURATE. As it was clue No 1, 'A' was 
clearly the missing letter(s). But I can't quite see where TABULATE might have 
come from in the rest of the clue.
 