
The dilemma My husband and I have been together for 10 years. During this time 
I have watched my stepdaughter who lives with us part-time (we have no children 
of our own – my choice) turn into a self-obsessed, lazy adolescent who is too 
busy taking selfies to help with chores, like setting the dinner table. I feel 
like a slave cooking and clearing up after her while she flicks her hair and 
pouts into a screen. I am getting bitter and resentful. Of course I want us to 
be a happy family, but I feel so out of control. The one time I did rebuke her, 
I ended up being told off by my husband that it was not my place to do so. I 
now avoid being around her when she stays over. I’m afraid I’m beginning to 
dislike her.

Mariella replies Perfectly possible. The presumption that because you love a 
partner you’ll unreservedly love their offspring has always seemed a mite 
unrealistic to me. It’s certainly easier when the child in question is young, 
unformed and less complicated in their needs and opinions. Once they start 
morphing into adults and causing havoc with those tasked with raising them, 
they do briefly become creatures that only a parent can love. You mustn’t take 
it personally.

Turning into a “self-obsessed, lazy adolescent” is evolution and your 
stepdaughter’s selfie habit only confirms her as part of the flock. Becoming 
impossible to live with is what teenagers are meant to do. How else do we let 
them go out into the big wide world and away from us in just a few short years’ 
time? Watching Harry Enfield’sKevin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/apr/19/artsfeatures> character is 
helpful to restore your sense of humour and confirm the lack of originality in 
a teenager’s bad behaviour. Our family favourite is thesketch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dLuEY6jN6gY> where he metamorphoses from 
happy-go-lucky child into depressive, myopic, malcontent at the stroke of 
midnight on his 13th birthday.

Hormonal surges and uncontrollable emotional peaks and troughs cause mayhem 
for those committed to parenting and for those on the inherited peripheries 
where maintaining cordial relations must feel like an insurmountable 
expectation. You’re lucky you’re only having to cope a couple of nights of the 
week – imagine what her poor mother is going through.

Becoming impossible to live with is what teenagers are meant to do

That said, if you’re less vulnerable to the shifting tectonics that are 
causing rifts, you’re well placed to provide the voice of reason and score 
approval from all concerned. In the hormonal storm, an emotionally detached 
adult can be a safe haven and there lies an opportunity for you to help steer 
your stepdaughter through these troubling times. Part-time, how much housework 
can she create? How about, instead of confronting her about her lazy lifestyle 
choices you use your time together to befriend her? Let your husband do the 
dishes and you two settle down to some tacky TV, or scroll through Instagram 
together. You can afford to be lenient, creating a friendship you two can enjoy 
for decades, rather than just a pyrrhic victory when her Dad gets her to clear 
the table.

It’s tough being a stepparent, but there’s a big difference between struggling 
to find easy affection and failing to summon up empathy and kindness. A 
baseline expectation has to be to behave like a compassionate adult, accepting 
that your relationship choices have led to you inheriting a degree of 
responsibility for a life whose existence in yours wasn’t directly chosen. The 
residue of guilt that seems to be a staple of separation will also be 
exacerbating the situation. Parents often try assuaging their own feelings of 
culpability for a relationship breakdown by allowing a damaging degree of 
leniency. Just because there’s a vacancy doesn’t mean you should take over as 
bad cop.

You say you two don’t have children because you didn’t want them. It’s 
interesting that you should feel so comfortable with that unilateral choice if, 
as seems the case reading between the lines, your husband might have made a 
different decision. It’s admirable that you know your own mind so well, but I 
do get a sense that you are used to running things your way and there’s nothing 
like a teenager to make a house feel overcrowded. So is your frustration born 
of something other than this child’s laziness? You say you feel “out of 
control” and there’s quite a build-up of tension and frustration in your 
letter. More often than not that springs from somewhere other than the target 
of your ire.

Your stepdaughter may well be metamorphosing into an unbearable, lazy, 
superficial adult, or she could simply be behaving like the rest of her 
contemporaries. Either way disliking her won’t help, but improving your 
relationship with her certainly might. Meanwhile, for help with the housework 
maybe it’s time to tackle your husband…

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 