
The dilemma I spent last summer with my first real boyfriend and his parents 
at their house. They have a beautiful home and really great jobs. They are 
never in need of anything, always travelling and spending lots of money on 
clothes and restaurants and adventures. I pretended this was my life for the 
summer. When I came home to my mum in our tiny home with little food and 
terrible air conditioning, I started to conjure up hate for her because it 
reminded me of my depression and suicide attempt. It’s been like this my whole 
life, always worrying about what we were going to eat and where we were going 
to sleep. It’s not her fault, but around her I feel cold. When I talk to her 
I’m emotionless or angry. I constantly disagree with her. I don’t know what to 
do. I try not to be nasty but it just keeps coming out. I might be bipolar 
because my absent father is. I need tips on how to just be myself with her. I 
keep having dreams that she dies before I learn to become better.

Mariella replies I’d show her your letter. After reading it I think she’d 
understand pretty clearly what you are wrestling with and the fact that despite 
your outward behaviour you do appreciate her. To your mother’s credit she’s 
managed – against considerable odds, it sounds – to raise an articulate, 
thoughtful daughter whose life has every chance of being less of a struggle 
than that of her parents.

As you ably illustrate, in particular with your tear-inducing last line, you 
are fearful of losing her and deeply attached, but rather than communicate your 
vulnerability in a constructive way you are expressing it by treating her like 
the “enemy”. I’m glad to say that doesn’t make you devil’s spawn but simply a 
normal human being – and possibly a teenager. There are few reading this letter 
(myself included) who haven’t at one point dumped responsibility for their woes 
on to undeserving shoulders. It’s human instinct to blame those you are closest 
to – perhaps because no matter how badly you treat them, in most circumstances 
you’ll be forgiven.

It’s certainly tough to live in a world where the gap between those who appear 
to have it all and those struggling feels unbridgeable. Your childhood has 
brought you face to face with particular hardships so it’s no wonder that 
bearing witness to the ease with which others go about their seemingly 
privileged lives can be pretty enraging. But blaming others is a losing game, 
while forging your own forward path is much more rewarding and likely to bring 
joy. As you mature it’s really important that you take responsibility for your 
own destiny and instead of inertia in the doldrums or forever looking back, you 
cast your thoughts and aspirations toward creating a different future. 
Festering and fuming are sworn enemies of forward momentum and your greatest 
obstacles to achieving the lifestyle you slipped into so seamlessly during that 
spoiling summer.

There’s little in your letter to suggest that you are bipolar but of course 
you need to seek medical advice, not guesswork from an unqualified stranger. 
Fortunately it is a condition for which there is plenty of help (seemind.org.uk 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/information-support/types-of-mental-health-problems/bipolar-disorder/bipolar-moods-symptoms/#.V2A_OjYrJMM>
). I know that shaking the legacy of penury and struggle in childhood is a 
tough call, requiring determination and resilience, and both are hard to dredge 
up if you are suffering from depression – so do please go to a GP and get 
yourself a diagnosis.

Most of us will apportion blame on someone we might do better to appreciate at 
some stage in our lives, moving from parents and teachers in adolescence to 
lovers, partners, bosses, colleagues and so on in later life, before reverting 
back to Mum and Dad! I can assure you, based on personal experience, that 
there’s no great skill in identifying where others have gone wrong. The tough 
challenge is to take responsibility in our own lives. It really makes no 
difference how much our suffering is shaped by others’ mistakes if we’re busy 
making our own with impunity.

It sounds to me like you’re depressed and at a stage in life where the road 
ahead looks pretty intimidating. Right now your mother is the magnet for your 
anger but think how much better you’d both feel if you could snuggle up and 
talk together instead. It won’t be long before you are independent and in 
control of your own life – and developing the skills to power yourself toward a 
different destiny needs to be your priority. Appreciating and encouraging 
support from those around you is indispensable.

I’m sorry for your absent father because it sounds like he’s missing out on 
knowing a great girl, with the wisdom to recognise when it’s her own behaviour 
that is causing her harm. The world is neither equal nor fair but it is a place 
of endless opportunity where taking advantage of what you’ve got, rather than 
bemoaning what you lack, is the way to make a better future.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 