
The dilemma I’m a 38-year-old single mother to a wonderful six-year-old girl. 
I was on my own for three years before meeting someone who I’ve since been 
seeing for eight months. Now I’ve found out that I’m pregnant – it was 
unplanned. I’m terrified this relationship isn’t stable enough to last raising 
a child. To make things worse, I had been contemplating ending it because, as 
kind, smart and lovely as he is, I’m not sure I enjoy his company enough. I 
dearly want another child – and a sibling for my daughter. I know my chances of 
conceiving are diminishing and if I met someone else it would take time to get 
to know them. Should I take this chance of having a baby and run with it?

Mariella replies I can’t dissuade you. Nor would I want to. The depth of your 
desire for a second child isn’t for me to gauge and so my opinion is 
irrelevant. If you’re ready and willing to do it again, there’s little I can 
say to convince you otherwise.

Let me instead lend context to your dilemma. Pregnancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pregnancy> can happen by accident, 
but with most mature adults an element of choice goes into that “unexpected” 
discovery. Only teenagers, virgins and strict Catholics can get away with 
feigning surprise that they are “with child”. For the rest of us enjoying even 
a sliver of a sex life, finding that you (or your partner) are pregnant can’t 
credibly be received with astonishment. It’s particularly true for you, already 
a single parent. Placing yourself in a position of vulnerability to a repeat of 
that experience only makes sense if you were throwing your dice in the air, so 
to speak. Your relationship with this man sounds less than satisfactory in 
terms of potential longevity. Then again, I have no way of knowing if you’re 
being harsh on him.

Teenagers and virgins can feign surprise. In maturity, unplanned pregnancy has 
less of an authentic ring to it

Having spent much of my own dating life dodging nice, reliable guys, I’m 
convinced that happiness lies in eventually coming to see those qualities, so 
undervalued in youth, as virtues. It certainly takes the levels of angst in 
life down a notch or two if you’re not perpetually in fear of your partner 
ditching you and moving on.

Let’s not forget, too, that deciding whether or not to have children is a 
choice we are lucky enough to be at liberty to make. You can ensure you never 
become a parent or push out your own football team, based entirely on that most 
irrational of compulsions – what you feel like. Plenty of people with no 
natural ability or urge to parent end up conceiving or contributing to the 
conception of babies that they will raise badly, if at all.

Nevertheless, as basic human rights go, having the ability to choose is surely 
one of the most important. Further afield than our own emancipated society, 
witnessing the experience of women without our choices, for whom the birth of 
one child only heralds the imminent conception of another (all too often 
coupled with the threat of infant mortalities) is a salutary reminder of our 
own good fortune.

Contraception, equal rights and education have all contributed to the now 
widely embraced right we take for granted – of whether to have sex for fun, 
procreation, or both. That’s why, in maturity, unplanned pregnancy has less of 
an authentic ring to it than it does in youth. Impetuous decisions and the rush 
of hormones that make rational choice a struggle are condonable when your mind 
and body are out of tune, hostage to hormones and fairly innocent to the ways 
of the world. You on the other hand are a grown up, with one child already, and 
as such can be expected to display responsibility for the decisions you take.

Choice, if we don’t take advantage of it, becomes a redundant tool. Mistakes 
do happen, but with the wealth of knowledge and contraceptive devices 
available, they really shouldn’t be as common or as easy to shrug off as they 
remain. In a relationship, both adults have responsibility for ensuring that a 
healthy sex life doesn’t necessarily mean a family and your boyfriend is as 
culpable as you.

He now has a right to be consulted and his thoughts considered in the decision 
you’re about to make. His response should assist your conclusions on what 
should most be preoccupying you: what prospects there are for joint 
responsibility for your unborn child; whether you’re ready to go it alone for 
the second time; and whether this guy deserves longer tenure in his trial as 
partner material.

Having babies isn’t a divine right; it’s a responsibility that should be 
weighed up, where possible, with a degree of clarity that I appreciate isn’t 
assisted by the ticking of your biological clock. I’m sorry I can’t provide a 
solution to your conundrum, but I do hope I’ve given you fuel for further 
thought.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 