
The dilemma I am 26 years old and three years ago I was going through a 
difficult period in my life following my parents’ divorce after a long 
marriage. I was befriended by a work colleague, a lovely older woman who is now 
50. We have become very close, but not in a physical way. I’m a virgin and have 
never experienced physical intimacy. That said, I am and have always been 
attracted to her, but I’ve known from very near the beginning of our friendship 
that the feeling isn’t mutual, I think because of our respective ages.

Recently, she met a man who she has told me she is in love with. This has been 
painful for me. I’ve had a physiological reaction as well as an emotional one. 
Thinking about her with him brings tears, a pounding heart and sleepless 
nights. I want to remain a close friend, but I feel an overwhelming sense of a 
lost love. How do I combat these feelings of grief and loss, deal with my 
jealousy without harming her, and replace my selfish feelings with selfless 
ones?

Mariella replies Start your own life maybe? It sounds to me like you’ve been 
treading water for too long and this just might be the event to propel you into 
a more rewarding interaction with those around you. I’m not convinced you ever 
wanted a romantic relationship with this woman, although it’s perfectly likely 
that you entertained the idea of a physical one. Then again, until she found 
romance elsewhere, the lack of a physical side to your friendship seems to have 
been of relatively little importance to you.

You don’t explain why you are still a virgin at quite a mature age. That 
leaves me with an awful lot of unanswered questions. Is it for religious 
reasons? Or perhaps you are not interested in women. Is the alternative 
difficult for you for cultural reasons? Or do you simply not have much interest 
in sex?

Let this be the catalyst for a sexual relationship with a suitable partner. 
Your imagination is running overtime

These are all questions that you could and should be asking yourself. Honest 
answers will offer you illumination on your current situation and be conducive 
to ensuring greater future happiness. I appreciate this latest twist of fate is 
taking its toll on you, but to recover you need to understand why you feel so 
bereft. I’m pretty sure that’s not as straightforward as you think.

Putting questions about your romantic life aside, isn’t it typical of the 
perversity of human nature that you should be fixating on your loss rather then 
celebrating the friendship you’ve enjoyed? We’re bad at counting our blessings, 
but this is definitely a scenario where you should focus on your good fortune 
in having this woman in your life at a time when you really needed her, rather 
than what might have been. She’s still there after all, sharing her news and 
keeping you up to date. Her new relationship doesn’t seem to be a threat and 
has had no discernible impact on your friendship, so celebrate her good fortune 
and be as much of a friend to her as she has been to you.

What a lucky guy you are to have discovered her shoulder to cry on when you 
were at an emotional low. In that situation, vulnerable and insecure, it would 
have been all too easy to fall into an unsuitable but convenient set of arms. 
Instead, you found safe harbour. In the intervening years if there was more 
than companionship between you I’m sure you would have unearthed it. It sounds, 
however, like you need someone to take the reins and she may indeed be a lost 
opportunity on that score.

Could it be that rather than get over the upset of your parents’ divorce you 
found alternative parenting with this mature friend? If so, you may be reliving 
the abandonment fears your parents’ separation precipitated. Put things in 
perspective: separate irrational responses from rational fears and most 
importantly start thinking about a relationship of your own.

Remaining a virgin is a choice you’re entirely justified to make, but it is 
unusual. Letting this upset prove the catalyst for a sexual relationship with a 
suitable partner is writ large on my prescription pad. Your imagination is 
running overtime, but what you’re missing is not nearly as elevated or exciting 
as you imagine. Take comfort from the fact that if you’d had an affair it would 
have been very unlikely to last as long as your friendship has.

You have a great buddy. Try to be open with her. Tell her you’ve been upset 
about what you feel is a loss. Ask for her help as you take your first steps 
toward seeking a lover of your own. I imagine she will be just as supportive as 
she was when you had to face up to your parents’ inadequacies. Take pleasure in 
the fact that she confided in you about her relationship; take advantage of her 
maturity and wisdom, and let her guide you on the path to your own passion.

Spending your days regretting things you haven’t done is a waste of oxygen. 
It’s far healthier to acknowledge those feelings and then use them to ensure 
your future expands in tandem with your increased understanding.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 