
The dilemma I left my ex for someone I fell instantly in love with on a night 
out just over a year ago. We’re together now and I feel like a different 
person. I feel I’ve rediscovered a version of myself I like. Our relationship 
is in full, beautiful, vivid bloom and our intimacy is rare and genuine. The 
problem is I am now developing anxieties about him leaving. I’m haunted by the 
idea that love is rarely everlasting. I feel I may as well brace myself for the 
end and that it will be he who eventually leaves. It’s absurd. Of course I 
can’t guarantee he will never leave (we’re in our mid-20s) and it makes me 
uncomfortable to crave such reassurance. How can I reconcile loving and 
trusting fully with accepting uncertainty?

Mariella replies Now that’s a big question. Ultimately all life is founded on 
uncertainty. We have no idea whether we’ll be here tomorrow and, frankly, with 
the current level of political uncertainty in the world, it’s hard not to feel 
insecure. You’re asking me to zoom in on the vagaries of love, an emotional 
state defined by its ability to elicit moments of unadulterated happiness, or 
bring us to our knees in pain. Love is exalted because, at its best, it’s an 
emotion that shows human nature at its most attractive.

You describe rather poetically that with this man you’ve “rediscovered a 
version of yourself that you like” and that to me is where your attention 
should be. There are many ways to find your best attributes; qualities you 
didn’t know you possessed. Often such discoveries are about our potential for 
resilience in times of adversity but, happily, as in this case, the way we 
blossom when we’re truly loved can also be revelatory. Establishing what it is 
about your relationship that brings out the best in you would be wise. That way 
you can seek out those elements in future, rather than waste time on lovers who 
fail to elicit a similar state of wellbeing.

Having a great relationship is to be relished. It teaches you what good love 
is all about

That’s not to say you are destined to part, but statistically it’s up there at 
the “likely” end of the scale, as are your chances of finding someone who makes 
you equally, or increasingly, happy. That’s why having a great relationship is 
something to really relish. It teaches you what good love is all about, instead 
of survival tactics to combat the opposite experience. I wish I’d had a similar 
blueprint when I was your age. It certainly would have helped me focus better 
on what I needed for myself in a relationship, rather than simply the 
adrenaline of romance itself.

Love makes us, however briefly, less self-centered and far more giving. It’s a 
rare opportunity to taste and understand the possibilities of such benign 
goodness. Whether the relationship lasts a year, a decade or a lifetime is 
something you can’t predict. No matter what efforts you put in to prolong or 
police it, what will be will be, as the tune goes. It’s why the best and 
longest-surviving relationships involve partnership in the best sense, where 
two people pull together with each other’s best interests at the forefront of 
their minds, but their individual freedom intact. Trust is imperative and 
probably the greatest gift you can give another person; the belief that they 
will behave well, act in your best interests and not betray you. That requires 
strength and the ability to walk the world with confidence knowing that on your 
own you’re a survivor and in partnership your potential may be even greater.

You say you worry about the relationship ending and as you’ve established 
yourself, that is not a healthy way to proceed. Partners will come and go, just 
as will friends and jobs. What seem like core beliefs to you today will evolve, 
alter and adapt. We are nourished in fluid during our earliest beginnings and 
it’s a state we do well to maintain – the ability to drift with life’s currents 
rather than continually trying to force a set path through unknown territory. 
The surest way to propel a relationship to its conclusion is to begin cementing 
it into a permanent, unalterable shape.

I know it’s hard to resist the compulsion to mount barriers around what is 
good, but without getting all existential can we agree that nothingis 
permanent? We adapt every day to shifting sands and in the process uncover our 
greatest strengths and our worst weaknesses. You’ve found yourself in an 
environment in which you flourish. Learn from it, enjoy it and be grateful 
you’ve experienced it. How long it endures is far less important than making 
the best of it while it lasts. That way there will be no regrets, just 
gratitude for the tenure it had in your life. Shakespeare put it succinctly in
Cymbeline when he said: “Golden lads and girls all must, As chimney sweepers 
come to dust.” We’re not permanent here, so it’s a crime to allow fear to 
diminish you while you’re still very much alive.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 