
The dilemma I met my partner at the age of 28 and we had two children in quick 
succession. I took a couple of years off work while they were small and then 
worked part-time. I have always had clear career goals, and wished to share 
childcare a little more equally with their father than actually happened. By 
the time I was 40 I was in a fairly good position professionally, but I had to 
relax a bit on the domestic front. My older child started playing up, my 
relationship with my husband suffered, and he left the family for a younger 
colleague three years ago. During this time he had been pretty much absent from 
the lives of the children, which coincided with their pre-teens.

In the past year I was getting to where I want to be professionally, and then 
suddenly, at 47, perimenopause has kicked in with a vengeance. I feel like the 
rug has been pulled from under me once more, my work performance is being 
affected, and I’m questioning whether it’s all worth the effort.

Is this just a normal woman’s life? What can I really expect from the 
menopause? Is it merely another blip on the route map? Or do the symptoms 
continue indefinitely? Where does one find the energy to keep ploughing on?




Mariella replies No idea! You seem erroneously to think I’m some kind of 
expert (perhaps because of my picture byline), when actually I’m just another 
flawed human being stumbling and staggering through life as best I can.

You’ve posed a lot of questions, so I’ll try to work my way though them 
methodically. Like my approach to housework, I’ll go for the easy ones first.

“Is this just a normal woman’s life?” Yes is the short answer. Divorce may not 
be on everyone’s to-do list, but there isn’t a working mother I know who hasn’t 
experienced career upheaval after having had children, who hasn’t been 
disappointed by the disparity between men and women the moment childcare duties 
kick in, and who hasn’t found it a particular challenge to stay on top of home 
life while trying to forge ahead at work.

I appreciate that there are plenty of men out there shouldering their share of 
the burden of parenthood and struggling to get back on the career ladder after 
their two weeks of paternity leave, but they seem to entirely elude my social 
circle. Note to self: must make more emancipated male friends. Instead I’m 
surrounded by exhausted mothers, either married or parenting solo, and aware of 
an absence of women in the highest echelons of most businesses, because at some 
point or other they feel like you do now.

What’s to be done? Well, first and foremost: medicate! The menopause for far 
too many of us arrives with little warning and a multitude of symptoms we’re 
entirely ignorant of. I expected hot flushes and rage; what I got was 
sleeplessness and despondency. Other friends had their own individual 
experiences. They sweated their way though the night, started putting on 
extreme amounts of weight, felt close to murder most days, lost their libido… 
And, trust me, in that short summation I’ve far from exhausted the myriad forms 
in which the menopause alerts us to its arrival.

You are surrounded by like-minded women experiencing similar challenges and, 
as we both know, giving up is not an option

How can you know what to expect when even the experts are still feeling their 
way in the dark – an indication of how low it was on the medical agenda until 
relatively recently. After all, as my health insurance company told me when it 
declined funding treatment: “It’s natural!” (Unlike all the other afflictions 
we throw research money at then?)

So go to your GP and ask for whatever help on the medicinal front they have to 
offer. HRT, in my case, really has helped.

I know solidarity isn’t what you’ve written to me for, but at this point in 
our history there’s not much else I can offer. AsTammy Wynette 
<http://tammywynette.com/> trilled: “Sometimes it’s hard to be a woman,” but I 
certainly wouldn’t swap. Here we are, airing our dirty linen in public, 
expressing our emotions and working together to find a solution. It’s exactly 
what our sex does best. You are surrounded by like-minded women experiencing 
similar challenges and, as we both know, giving up is simply not an option.

Soon your kids will be out on their own and you’ll need some knotty work 
issues to distract you from the silence. Meanwhile, try not to see your 
experiences as a list of personal affronts and instead as simply part of the 
undulating path along which we all journey, with its ups and downs, good days 
and bad days, unfair burdens and memorable moments of light relief.

There are lives much worse than ours, and a minuscule minority who have it a 
lot better – but even they have to live through the menopause. Seek out your 
good friends or make some new ones and focus on ensuring that yours is a 
valuable life. After all, the alternative is nonexistence, which really has 
nothing to recommend it.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 