
The dilemma I’m dating this amazing guy. The problem is he is my best friend’s 
ex. She and I were soul sisters, spoke on the phone for hours, had sleepovers 
all the time. She was my rock. She started to date this guy and four months 
after they broke up we started to see each other. She was not impressed at all, 
and I don’t blame her. She cut our friendship off straight away and, as much as 
I respect her decision, I’m finding it very hard to move on from hurting her. 
But I’m also glad I’ve met such a great person. It’s starting to come between 
me and my partner because I can’t forgive myself. Also, I knew so much about 
their relationship. I’d love some advice on how to move on from this situation.

Mariella replies Move on, or backpedal a bit? I know the world we live in now 
is based on the principle of forward momentum – eyes to the fore, sights set on 
future goals and opportunities. We are alert to anything that tries to buffet 
us backwards. But it’s simply not possible to keep moving relentlessly up, up 
and away.

To stretch the metaphor, it can feel like you’re scaling Everest in 
flip-flops, shorts and without oxygen. Too much focus on distant and elusive 
peaks, and it can get pretty messy on your path. You can find yourself with 
little to cling to when the occasional downward slide occurs. All too often our 
mistakes do lie behind us. Now and again, revisiting the scene of the crime, 
rather than marching resolutely in the opposite direction, makes a lot of sense.

If you’ve told the truth, your friend doesn’t have the right to be angry. We 
don’t own the rights to our old lovers

You say you are wracked by guilt for what you’ve done to your friend and want 
advice on how to move on. How about some advice on how to make amends? If 
you’ve told me the whole truth then you may be guilty of handling things badly, 
but certainly not of wholly unreasonable behaviour. I’ve never understood why 
we aren’t more generous with past lovers. Once we’ve established that a girl or 
a guy isn’t for us, is it not then just an act of friendship to look around, 
identify a grateful recipient with potential chemistry and pass them on? Your 
friend doesn’t have the right to be angry because you are dating her ex. We 
don’t own the rights to our old lovers. Only if she was deceived or betrayed 
when they were dating should you have major misgivings. As you describe it 
you’ve done neither so it’s all down to how you’ve handled what is a situation 
fraught with sensitivities and issues of pride and discretion.

The tone of your letter suggests you have done her a great wrong so if that’s 
not the case your unnecessary guilt could be fuelling her misplaced sense of 
injustice. Four months may not have been long enough for her to get over him, 
but it certainly doesn’t count as slipping between the sheets while they’re 
still warm.

I suggest you focus less on how your feelings are impairing your present 
romantic relationship and more on how to repair what was clearly an important 
past friendship. They’re often more valuable than romantic ones. Staying still 
is judged harshly in today’s world, but slipping into reverse gear to smooth 
out any lumps and bumps you’ve created is definitely worth attempting. I wonder 
how many people have hooked up with a new, exciting lover only to miss the 
mundanity of their ex, or married and had kids only to hanker after their 
singleton days, or even moved to a better paid job and felt nostalgic for the 
camaraderie of the less lucrative one.

Once you start questioning our exhausting focus on upward mobility you can’t 
help but wonder if we’ve invested a little too much in escalation and advance, 
simply mountaineering our way though life without pausing to take in the view. 
We humans have the ability to travel between our own two ears, come up with new 
ideas, imagine alternative worlds and encounter imaginary people. There’s a 
whole universe on offer and by always “moving on”, we’re speeding past 
nourishing riches in the present.

I’d stop thinking of putting distance between you and your problem friend and 
actively engage with her instead. Insist on a rendezvous and listen 
sympathetically to what your friend has to say, explain how bad the situation 
has left you feeling and try to establish new and workable ground rules for how 
you can return to being soul mates. Whatever she told you about the 
relationship should remain between the two of you and, as it will have been 
wholly subjective, isn’t worth dwelling on anyway. If you shrug off the guilt 
and set your sights on restoring your friendship I suspect at least two of you 
will be far happier. Men on the other hand do like a cat fight, so it could be 
your boyfriend who’s next to be annoyed if you and his ex are reconciled.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 