
With the home victory at Silverstone making it four wins from five races, 
Lewis Hamilton believes he has the impetus he needs to continue his recovery 
from a difficult start to the season as he attempts to secure his fourth world 
title. Yesterday’s win from pole at theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> has narrowed the gap to 
his Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg to just one point from the 43 he trailed by 
after Monaco, and the momentum is now firmly behind the British driver.

Having secured the world championship in Austin, Texas, in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
, Hamilton went eight races without a win, a run which included two identical 
technical failures in qualifying in China and Russia, some poor race starts and 
an accident inBarcelona with Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp>
 that knocked both drivers out. However, an emphatic victory here confirmed 
that he had put the season’s difficult opening behind him.

Lewis Hamilton the rock star connects with his adoring fans | Giles Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/10/lewis-hamilton-rock-star-british-grand-prix-silverstone>
“This weekend felt pretty awesome,” he said. “Last year I was driving 
exceptionally well, but was more chilled at the end. The last race in Austria 
and this race has the fires fully lit, I’m firing on all cylinders and I want 
that to continue.

“That rough patch I was going through, it’s hard to handle when you want to 
win the world championship as much as I do. After that low at Barcelona I was 
able to get a strong and positive mental attitude and that’s why I’ve won four 
races since thenand I plan to continue.”

As well as showing his appreciation for the British fans at Silverstone, 
Hamilton was also fulsome in his praise for the circuit. It was, he believed, 
“bigger balls” that made him quicker than Rosberg through Silverstone’s fast 
corners.

“That middle sector is the best in the whole season for me,” he said. “That 
combination of corners is phenomenal, particularly after Copse. Maggots, 
Becketts, an unbelievable set of corners, when you get the car right and know 
where to position the car – it’s the greatest and I was able to hit that 
whenever I needed.”

The Mercedes executive director, Toto Wolff, was relieved to have his cars 
return a one-two with no internecine struggles in a race where Hamilton clearly 
had the upper hand. The British driver, as he had at Monaco, enjoyed a clear 
advantage in the wet opening laps over Rosberg. “Lewis stormed away at the 
beginning and had the right pace, he walked over the water,” Wolff said. “Today 
we saw a Lewis that was very confident, extremely focussed and calm. On a day 
like thisLewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> is 
unstoppable.”

With Rosberg having taken a penalty that demoted him from second to third for 
what was adjudged to have been team instructions, Wolff said regulations on 
radio communication needed to be looked at. “Those rules currently need 
clarifying between the FIA and the teams,” he said. “To go more into what is 
allowed or not, because not communicating at all we might as well throw the 
radio out of the car. It needs to be discussed.”

Rosberg, who took the booing from a small portion of the crowd with very good 
grace acknowledging that “they love their British drivers but they appreciate 
passionate drivers who are out their battling and fighting for the win,” was 
also attempting to stay positive after the remarkable turn of fortune since 
Hamilton’s first win of the season at Monaco five races ago. “It has been a 
very good first half of the season,” he said. “I am leading the world 
championship, so its been a damn good start and there is still such a long way 
to go. I’m feeling great, the battle is on with Lewis.”

Hamilton, in turn, was eager to take to the field again. “I’m really happy 
today,” he said. “It’s really easy to come in with the wrong energy. To come in 
feeling fresh, powerful, strong and confident is what I plan to have every 
weekend. This has been the best week of the year, without a doubt.”
 