
I will be 28 at the end of this year, and I am feeling very anxious about the 
next stage of my life.

I am generally very sociable, and have built a wide circle of friends. 
However, lately, I have found that many of my friends are in committed, settled 
relationships, and I worry that I have nothing in common with my peers any 
more. I am grateful to have had three romantic relationships in my 20s, 
although none of these have worked out. I have considered dating, but I find 
that a lot of men my age and older are more interested in women who are in 
their early 20s. This has surprised me and made me feel insecure about 
searching for a partner.

I lived in a different city when I went to university, and I have been lucky 
to have visited several countries all over the world throughout my life, but 
now I am working in a career in the city I was born in, and I feel very 
restless and unmotivated. I have considered moving abroad, but I am lucky to 
have the job that I have and I am not sure it would be productive to leave it.

I am also concerned that I would face the same challenges abroad, such as 
having things in common with peers who are in settled relationships. I am not 
sure that I am happy with the way that my life has gone over the past decade, 
and I am worried it is too late to do anything meaningful or exciting. I can 
appreciate that I have my health and that I have a lot of life left to live, 
but I can’t shake this feeling of dread and anxiety about what is coming next.

It’s not uncommon when friends go through stages you are not sharing with them 
(new job, relationships, new baby, etc) to feel a bit adrift, left out, left 
behind – no one likes this feeling. And I think your 20s is when this happens a 
lot, and it can leave you feeling really disoriented. But unless the friendship 
is very transient (and some friendships are, but that doesn’t mean they’re not 
valuable for the time they last), you should be able to meet one another on the 
other side. After all, you will one day go through a life stage that your 
friends aren’t going through andthey may feel like this. What’s important is to 
look for the landmarks of similarity, rather than where you diverge.

I consulted Andy Cottom, a psychotherapist (ukcp.org.uk 
<https://www.psychotherapy.org.uk/>), who wonders “who made up the rules that 
you’re trying to follow? The expectations of stages in life: school, 
university, buy a house, settle down? You seem to be at a stage where your 
friends are settling down, but perhaps you don’t want to?”

If I were to tell you that, actually, you will get all the things you want 
(whatever they are) later, what would you do with this stage of your life? Of 
course, I can’t guarantee anything, but it’s a useful exercise to think like 
this. Because if you could be sure you would, for example, settle down (this is 
the thing you seem to have mentioned the most, that other people are doing and 
you are not) – how would you view this period in your life now? Would you not, 
actually, be able to enjoy the freedom and independence more, instead of 
worrying about what will happen next. Are you not, perhaps, more worried and 
anxious about whatwon’t happen, rather than what is happening?

You mention being back in the city you were born in – was that a fall-back 
decision or a positive one? You present this as if it were a step backwards, as 
if everyone else is moving forward but you are not. I don’t think that’s 
accurate because you are not comparing like with like. Can you pinpoint why you 
are unmotivated? Did you feel unmotivated before “all your friends started 
settling down” – have their choices made you look more acutely on your own? It 
is hard not to be swayed by what’s happening around you but I wonder what 
grounds you? (Family? No mention of them.)

If you could tap more into what makes you feel safe – in this period of what 
you feel to be instability – it might give you a chance to zone into what it is 
that you really want. Maybe moving cities and jobs is the right thing to do, 
but you should do it because you want to, because it’s right for you – not as a 
reaction to what is happening with your friends.

Did something particular trigger this feeling of dread and anxiety? Can you 
trace it back to a particular event and, if so, could you examine what this 
represents to you?

You know, there may be someone in your circle right now looking at you and 
thinking how much you’ve got going for you, because nothing is ever as it seems 
and all those people around you who seem to have it so sorted – they haven’t. 
You are not quite 28; you say yourself that you have a lot of life left to live 
– you do! You have the whole of the rest of your life to do something 
“meaningful and exciting” or just meaningful and very ordinary, if that’s what 
you choose to do.

Cottom advises you to “have more confidence in your abilities. Don’t be 
frightened by the freedom you have.”

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB 
<https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>
 