
The dilemma I’m a 27-year-old receptionist, engaged to a really wonderful guy, 
but I don’t know what I want to do with my life. I am interested in history and 
love National Trust places, but you have to work weekends there, and I don’t 
see the point of this when my partner works weekdays. There are no 
opportunities to progress in my organisation without a degree. Is it wrong to 
be in a low-paid job that is two miles from home and have a three-day weekend? 
I am neither career-minded nor family-minded. I spend my day off with my 
parents as they have both had cancer. Can I be happy earning a low wage and 
having a good work/life balance?

Mariella replies Good question! If you’re asking if you can be happy without a 
high-flying career, the answer is definitely yes. Those who have reached the 
heights of success may be celebrated in the media, but their mistakes and 
mishaps are often cruelly exposed, too, all the more so because of their 
proximity to the spotlight. There are also millions of people across the world 
whose lifestyles will never come close to the affluence most of us enjoy – yet 
many of them will die having led equally full lives.

There is a good life to be lived without pursuing material gains, even in what 
was once referred to as the west. Elsewhere in the world the debate is 
polarised between two extremes: those who would return us to being 
superstitious, religiously dominated feudal villagers and those whose only 
understanding of the meaning of life depends on the balance of your bank 
account and the label on your shoes.

I’m not trying to encourage you to hurl yourself into the rat race, but I 
would recommend you develop some options

As always, real life exists between those extremes. Most of us struggle to 
infuse purpose and meaning into our secular lives and those of a more religious 
bent try to maintain faith despite living in a seemingly godless world.

If you were simply asking me whether it’s OK to amble through your life 
putting the care of the sick and the harmony of your relationship first, I’d be 
tempted to say yes. Such ideals in a world so tied up in less savoury ambitions 
are certainly a breath of fresh air. But as many women can attest – having been 
left out of the push and thrust of work and society for so many millennia – 
fulfilment and pleasure are to be found in the liberation that comes with being 
able to make your own choices. The ability to choose and direct your destiny is 
priceless.

If you decide to stay in your current job, already boring you before you’ve 
hit 30, with retirement another 40 years hence, what room do you leave yourself 
to manoeuvre? So many things that seem certain now will be ancient history by 
the time you are half way there.

Your relationship may presently be strong, but it doesn’t come with a 
guarantee. You may not want children now – and at your age I would have agreed 
with you, but now I have two. I’m not trying to encourage you to hurl yourself 
into the rat race, but I would recommend you develop some options.

You’re thinking about a degree because I suspect you instinctively already 
understand the need to control your own destiny. The current cycle of your life 
may not feel as nourishing in five years’ time as it does now, with your 
wedding approaching.

Having confronted your parents’ mortality during their recent illness, you’ll 
be well aware they won’t be around for ever, and caring for them will at some 
point no longer be an item on your daily to-do list. So what harm would there 
be in pursuing a degree, not for the sake of material gains, but further 
qualifications and greater knowledge? This may be your best option: one that 
leaves you with the right to choose your future path not on the basis of what 
you haven’t done, but by expanding your choices through what you have achieved. 
As you readily admit, your current job passes the time but fails to excite in 
any other way.

That may well turn out to be your perfect lifestyle choice, but without 
further investment it will become your only one. Loving someone and throwing 
your lot in with them “till death us do part” takes enormous courage and a 
great leap of faith. Commitment and compromise may bless your union and 
protract it, but plenty of relationships fail to run the full term. How much 
more satisfying to stay together not because you need his pay packet to make up 
the balance of yours, or because your career choice has eroded your 
self-confidence, but because you love each other enough to make independent 
decisions that make you happy individually and content together.

The bigger the horizon, the better the view, but what you choose to focus on 
is another matter entirely.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 