
The dilemma I’m a 17-year-old girl and I like my stepbrother. My mum starting 
seeing his dad a while ago and we used to hang out all day, then he would sleep 
in the same bed as me. We are the same age and I know I can’t feel this way 
because he’s my stepbrother, but I can’t help it. We sleep together every night 
and talk until 10 in the morning when he goes back home and my mum goes to 
work. He’ll hold my hands for the entire night and play with my face until I 
fall asleep because he knows I love those things. He told me not to go on top 
of him because he gets boners, saying it’s not uncomfortable for him but it 
might be for me. He has never kissed a girl before, but I have lost my 
virginity. After I said it’s OK he started putting me on top of him, and 
sometimes touching himself. What should I do? I don’t want things to stop, all 
I want is for it to go further, but I still don’t even know if he likes me.

Mariella replies I’d like to talk to your mum! It sounds like you two have 
been thrown together by circumstance at an extremely vulnerable age. No wonder 
you have feelings for him – that was almost inevitable – although they could 
have been negative rather than positive, which might have been easier.

I’m shocked you’ve been left to your own devices and tempted to get you to 
call in the authorities. However, your email doesn’t really offer me enough 
detail to establish whether you are in real danger of a very inappropriate 
relationship, or simply falling for a boy who has recently and emphatically 
been thrown in your path. That your parents are in the early throes of dating 
doesn’t make you family, but you give me little sense of how long this has been 
going on. If you do have serious worries about the nature of your connection to 
each other you need to callChildline 
<https://www.childline.org.uk/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=UK_GO_S_E_BND_Grant_Childline_Pure_Brand&utm_term=childline&gclid=CJjAgtbO684CFSEW0wodkswFbQ&gclsrc=aw.ds>
 (0800 1111) for professional advice.

Embarking on a relationship needs to be a choice made with your options open, 
not simply because you’ve been shoved into the same room for the convenience of 
the adults in your lives.

Passions can escalate at speed. It’s irresponsible of your parents to throw 
you together in a bedroom

While you feel, not unreasonably, that you want something more with this boy, 
you both need the space to work out whether those feelings are real or simply 
inspired by your circumstances. I’m really surprised that your parents haven’t 
had a chat with you and I’m hoping it’s a topic you could raise with your mum. 
If not is there another mature adult in your life with whom you could confide? 
My advice may be hard to put into action, but I feel certain that some distance 
between you is what you need to in order to work out your real feelings for 
each other. Your parents’ affair has made it all too easy to develop an 
unhealthy level of intimacy, and it will be much more difficult to extract 
yourselves if it goes wrong.

No matter how great this boy is, your presence in his life is involuntary and 
what you don’t choose you often treat with less care. I wouldn’t want you 
taking things further sexually just to find there was only physical familiarity 
to keep the affair afloat. Both of you are at an age where passions can 
escalate and evaporate at dizzying speeds. It’s wholly irresponsible of your 
parents to have thrown you together in one bedroom. As far as I can tell what’s 
occurred so far is not a disaster – it’s by mutual consent, you are not related 
and you are no longer children – but that doesn’t mean the relationship is a 
good idea. The freedom to make that choice can only come when you are not 
cooped up together every night.

It’s essential that you have time to reflect in order to establish the 
credibility of those impulses. You sound like the more experienced of the two 
of you, certainly physically, so maybe you need to take the helm and help steer 
you both clear of these murky waters. There are so many hurdles to creating a 
happy coupledom, and the fact that your parents are romantically involved is 
definitely not an asset.Relationships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/relationships> are forged not simply 
from mutual attraction but a host of other extremely tangled emotional impulses 
and you may well need help to work out whether that’s occurring in both your 
rational and emotional brain.

Complex and overwhelming impulses are unavoidable at your age, but your 
situation greatly escalates the level of difficulty of negotiating this. My 
sense is that this boy is a recent entry to your life and calling him your 
stepbrother is more of a hopeful claim to a connection than a reality.

I really would discourage him from staying over and I think you should ask him 
to back down from the relationship until you have taken advice and established 
that it’s appropriate to pursue it, if that is, in fact, what you both want. 
I’m certain of one thing – taking the heat out of this liaison will save you a 
lot of heartache in the future.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 