
The dilemma I am a 30-year-old man in a professional job. My career is going 
well, but the one thing in my life I am not enjoying is my relationship. My 
girlfriend, 25, has a beautiful five-year-old daughter, who I adore, and a job, 
but is restricted due to being a single mother. I am no longer in love with 
her, but when I try to finish the relationship she cries, and it breaks my 
heart. I end up taking it back and telling her I’m just stressed by work. She 
is a very anxious woman, and clingy, which I hate. If I don’t text her back she 
sends me messages which appear normal, but I can sense the panic in them. She 
constantly needs reassurance and it’s now becoming very annoying. What do I do?

Mariella replies I’m so glad you wrote. Generally the contents of my mailbag 
on this topic emanate from rejected lovers. But who spares a thought for the 
often brave architect of a separation? We know what becomes of the 
broken-hearted, but what of the heart-breakers? It’s rare to hear pity 
expressed or support shown for the unfortunate (usually vilified) person who 
takes on the responsibility of initiating a break-up, no matter how inevitable 
it is.

Breaking up is definitely hard to do, and not just if you’re the one clinging 
on to the shattered dreams of unity and harmony. Calling a halt to a loving 
union for fun may be a sport favoured by a small cluster of sadists but for 
most of us, hurting another person, particularly one you once loved, is really 
difficult to do. Like anyone of my years, I’m a veteran of traumatic 
rejections, but the split I remember most acutely was initiated by me, with the 
nicest man I ever dated (no offence to my husband). It was a crash course in 
extraction by abstraction. I talked about how perfect he was, how much I was 
going to miss him, but how I just knew in the end we wouldn’t make it and that 
I was definitely the loser. All of which was true. Our gentle demise left us 
friends to this day, so I’d say kindness is the key element in any break-up, 
coupled with the courage of your conviction. A spurned lover will look for any 
glimmer of hope, so you need to be emphatic while showing empathy for their 
vulnerability. There’s no need to be cruel or point out seeming inadequacies in 
your soon-to-be-ex-lover. Such outbursts only aggravate the situation.

There’s no need to be cruel or point out seeming inadequacies in your 
soon-to-be-ex-lover

Even the vocabulary does the ending of a love affair a disservice – all the 
words commonly associated with separation are brutal: chucked, dumped, 
rejected. They suggest a victim and a perpetrator. Yet love, as we all know in 
our lucid moments, is a wholly irrational, hormonally driven state of mind and 
that it should waft away as inexplicably as it arrives shouldn’t be a mystery 
to us, or indeed an affront. Choosing to disentangle our affairs isn’t really a 
rejection, but simply the natural culmination of time spent in close proximity. 
In a rational world, you’d accept that we can’t have one without the other. 
Nevertheless, endings generally aren’t a specialist skill for human beings. 
Just look at the way we dodge death, refusing to even contemplate the prospect 
until the grim reaper bangs on the door.

In terms of life skills, learning to separate is up there with regular 
exercise and personal hygiene. The announcement that Gwyneth Paltrow and Chris 
Martin were “consciously uncoupling” may not have been as ridiculous as it 
sounded. Judging by her gleeful presence on the Coldplay stage at Glastonbury 
this year, as their children sang backing vocals, she and Chris Martin have 
achieved what for most of us remains elusive: the seemingly harmonious 
disentwining of two lives. Breaking up well is a skill that will be required 
more than once in our lifetimes, and I wonder if we should start appreciating 
those who, despite the waning of passion, manage to do it with flair.

We do have a pretty brutal attitude to love affairs. With lives generally 
occupied with plenty of grey, a break-up is always harshly cast in black and 
white: someone has to be wrong, someone right. So much of the pain of 
heartbreak for those who want a relationship to continue is in the sense that 
we’ve failed to live up to expectations, to be funny, clever, sexy, loving, 
charming, sensitive, empathetic or good looking enough to keep our lover 
enthralled.

The only advice I can give you is to try to quiet the voices that are focused 
on your girlfriend’s failings and extricate yourself with good grace, kindness 
and a commitment to remaining a small part of her child’s future life. We all 
know how painful rejection can be, so softening the blow and summoning all our 
best qualities, rather than unleashing our worst, in a break serves both 
parties far better. Sail forth, by all means, but with conviction, loving 
kindness and in hope of future friendship. Life is long and leaving victims 
scattered in your wake rather than gathering friends is the fool’s way forward.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 