
The dilemma I’m 18, I think I’m pretty and I am not sad all the time. But from 
time to time I feel a big hole inside myself. Then I feel sad and I cry. I 
really want to become a famous and great singer but I can’t. I am not rich and 
my family want me to become a doctor. I never can be famous or go to Hollywood. 
I live in Iran so it’s really, really far from me but I’m always dreaming, 
seeing myself on stage. I used to play guitar and sing, but I don’t play any 
more, and now I’m going to study medicine in Italy but I’m a little afraid of 
studying abroad alone. I’m sorry for taking your time. I never told this to 
anyone but I think I can’t handle this any more.

Mariella replies Thank you for sharing your secret with me. It was a welcome 
reminder of one of the few big benefits of maturity: the lessening of that 
terrifying sense of angst that permeates so many young people. It’s perfectly 
natural to feel overwhelmed by the dizzying array of choices and unwelcome 
pressure from those around you who feel they know best. Having to settle on a 
path for the future at the same time as negotiating one of the two most 
turbulent hormonal periods of a woman’s life (puberty is just a practice run 
for menopause, I’m afraid) seems like too much pressure when you are so 
emotionally vulnerable.

That big chasm you refer to is one of the most common symptoms of anxiety, but 
if it becomes overwhelming it can also be an indication of depression. If 
you’re feeling really debilitated by it, I urge you to talk to your parents and 
seek medical help. There is so much that can be done to mitigate and even cure 
such mental anguish. It’s an illness, not a permanent state of mind. Before 
you’ve stepped out into the big, wide world the choices can be very daunting. 
The other night I lay with my 10-year-old son looking at the stars and we 
talked about that terrifying sense of our own minuscule presence in our vast 
and mysterious universe.

I used to visit Los Angeles a lot when I was in my 20s, working in the music 
business doing public relations. I bring it up because you mention Hollywood. 
For me, unless I was kept very busy with my endlessly delinquent bands, it was 
the loneliest place on earth, a city entirely devoted to surface value – 
whether in terms of fame, fortune, bodily perfection or the giant, flawless 
fruit and vegetables they sell in supermarkets that promise so much and taste 
of so little.

At about the age you are now I borrowed a friend’s apartment down on Venice 
Beach, thinking it would be a great adventure to spend a couple of days on my 
own, exploring. That night as I looked out of my window at the bright lights of 
that vast, shallow sprawl of city and imagined the millions of residents all 
scurrying around trying to bring their big dreams down to earth, I felt reduced 
to the size of a dust mite and suffered an existential crisis of confidence 
that I’ve thankfully never endured again. I tell you all this to help you see 
that the feelings you are having now are simply growing pains.

I admire your singing ambitions and certainly would encourage them, but being 
famous isn’t what makes you a singer: singing and writing music does. Having 
watched so many artists struggle to squeeze their heads above the parapet, I 
think there’s no harm in a bit of career insurance, too. Some of the happiest 
musicians I’ve known have been those who practised that passion as a hobby, or 
at least had alternative sources of income.

Some of the happiest musicians have alternative sources of income

Becoming a doctor is a pretty big commitment in terms of academic investment, 
particularly if it’s not an ambition you are excited by; but for now it’s also 
a perfect stepping stone to freedom and financial independence. Italy is a 
wonderful country. What an exciting thing to escape the confines of home and 
discover what you really feel and want for yourself. To secure that I’d take a 
few steps in the direction your parents want you to go, or identify an 
alternative academic route that will make them feel you are doing the right 
thing. Then step away with their blessing into the wider world where your 
secret dreams may become a reality, or some other aspect of an unimagined 
future presents itself to you.

Being a teenager can be one of the most challenging periods in life but it’s 
also an incredibly exciting time because of all the possibilities that stretch 
ahead of you. In your darkest moments you must remember that everything is up 
for grabs, so summon up the confidence to keep doors open. Whatever you do, 
singing is part of who you are and the great thing about it is you can do it 
anywhere and it can exist happily alongside other dreams.

Welcome that big hole. Living your life to the full is how you go about 
filling it.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 