
No amount of spin or legal obfuscation can reconcile the UK government’s 
clamour for shale gas with its obligations as enshrined in the Paris climate 
change agreement. Consequently, when the UK’s communities secretary, Sajid 
Javid, gave the go-ahead for fracking in Lancashire (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
, 7 October), he was making a clear statement that the government has no 
interest in abiding by either the spirit or the maths of the Paris agreement.

Shale gas is a high carbon energy source. When used for generating electricity 
its emissions of carbon dioxide are about 30-90 times higher than the full 
lifecycle emissions of either renewables or nuclear. Given the rapid phase-out 
of the UK’s existing coal power stations, shale gas will not be produced at 
sufficient scale and in the necessary timeframe for it to be a substitute for 
coal.

Even assuming that carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies work at scale 
– and the UK government recently reneged on its manifesto promise to develop 
CCS – the emissions from a shale gas power station with CCS will still be 10 
times more than that of genuine low carbon power generation.

The Paris agreement’s most ambitious aspiration is to hold the rise in global 
temperature to no more than 1.5°C. The global energy-only carbon budget for 
1.5°C is set to be used up in 3-13 years of current global emissions; ie by 
2030 at the latest. This would mean a UK shale gas industry having barely five 
years of meaningful production. Surely the huge cost of clinging to the last 
vestige of a fossil fuel industry could be better invested in a low carbon 
transformation?
Kevin Anderson
Professor of energy and climate change, Universities of Manchester and Uppsala 
(Sweden)

• Malcolm Cohen (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/10/stances-on-fracking-called-into-question>
, 11 October is missing the point. As we generate electricity by solar power, 
we can use it locally. Currently those of us with solar panels can heat our hot 
water tanks before exporting to the grid. Soon we will charge batteries, either 
in our own home or at a local community site, to power our homes when it’s dark 
or too overcast. There will be no need to increase the electrical transmission 
network; in fact there will be no need to even maintain it. This brings with it 
the added benefit of security from local failures from say storm damage, and 
making it far more difficult for terrorists to disrupt the supply network.
Richard Bull
Woodbridge, Suffolk

• I was disappointed that the letters on fracking (11 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/10/stances-on-fracking-called-into-question>
) did not mention the vast amounts of shale gas and oil known to exist under 
the South Downs national park. Why is this not being exploited? It may be that 
it is assumed that national parks are protected from industrial development. 
However, permission for a new potash mine within the North Yorkshire national 
park was given on the basis of national priority. Could it be that too many 
influential people live in the vicinity of the South Downs?
Howard J Curtis
Liverpool

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 