
As Wolves sloped off at half-time amid an atmosphere that verged on the 
poisonous, the greatest encouragement forPaul Lambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-lambert> might have been that it was 
not too late to reconsider. By the end, with Derby County clinging on to a 
victory that should never have become this complicated, there was at least 
evidence that his new job need not be a hiding to nothing. Lambert’s 
appointment as Wolves head coach, replacing Walter Zenga, was confirmed on 
Saturday evening and he will be presented with more questions than answers when 
he comes to unpick a dramatically two-tone performance that resulted in their 
third home defeat in a row.

The measure of Wolves’ improvement was that it was the officials, rather than 
the home players, who were booed off after the final whistle. Their fans felt 
Wolves should have been awarded at least one penalty in the latter stages but a 
fluent Derby had earned their win, two goals by Tom Ince and an expert volley 
from Darren Bent continuing their sense of renewed momentum since Steve 
McClaren’s return last month.

Molineux had been fractious at the outset. Six winless games before Saturday 
and Zenga’s swift departure had dispensed with early-season hopes of a new dawn 
under the Chinese owners Fosun International and the evidence of the early 
stages was that there would be scant tolerance for mistakes.

When Wolves found themselves two down within 15 minutes, then, the mood seemed 
to have plummeted irretrievably. While Derby’s supporters were delighting in 
Ince’s simple finish after a Will Hughes header had been saved and then, far 
more memorably, Bent’s thrilling over-the-shoulder volley from Hughes’s 
ingenious lofted assist, the home faithful took the cue to hound their team’s 
every move.

Amid such a climate Wolves were ripe to be blown away, and they should have 
been. McClaren has Derby playing at the tempo of his first spell in charge of 
the club but barely a finger was laid upon them by the home side: Bent, Johnny 
Russell and Jacob Butterfield – the latter denied by Andy Lonergan’s tip on to 
the post – came close and it was no shock when Wolves’ interim manager, Rob 
Edwards, replaced midfielder Joao Teixeira with George Saville after just 32 
minutes. Equally unsurprising was Teixeira’s decision to trudge slowly off the 
pitch.

“It doesn’t help,” said Edwards of the local unrest. “But the crowd need to be 
able to bounce off the players as well and I think if we’d have put that 
second-half performance in during the first half they’d have been with us.”

Relations certainly improved and Wolves deserved the lifeline they were given 
when Hélder Costa, profiting from the good work of Jon Dadi Bodvarsson, swept 
past Scott Carson after 61 minutes. They were pressing for an equaliser when 
Ince, who made the chance himself when controlling a Carson clearance 
beautifully, went down softly under Ivan Cavaleiro’s challenge 13 minutes from 
time and scored from the penalty spot.

That appeared to have restored the previous order but immediately Cavaleiro, 
perhaps trying too hard to make Ince pay, went down under the winger’s 
challenge in the Derby penalty area, only to earn nothing but a reprimand from 
the referee, Paul Tierney. Cavaleiro then crossed for David Edwards to reduce 
the deficit again but, despite the Sir Jack Hayward Stand’s renewed energy and 
another penalty shout from Matt Doherty, it was not enough.

Lambert has two weeks to get a further measure of his squad before a 
tricky-looking debut at Preston. “First and foremost, Paul is a very 
experienced coach, and, as many people know, is a real student of the game,” 
the Wolves sporting director, Kevin Thelwell, said after his arrival had been 
confirmed.

“He understands modern structures at clubs, has worked and been successful in 
the Premier League, and has also secured promotion from theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> which is a league he knows 
very well,” Thelwell added.

Edwards, a highly rated young coach who came across well here, will join 
Stuart Taylor in assisting Lambert. If Wolves begin any more Championship 
matches as they did this, their new hope will need all the help he can get.
 