
Arsène Wenger will stick to his policy of picking David Ospina in the 
Champions League after the Colombian goalkeeper’s inspired display frustrated
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> and 
ensured Arsenal emerged from the trickiest trip of the group with an 
encouraging point.

Ospina’s excellence frustrated PSG, and their striker Edinson Cavani in 
particular, and justified what had appeared to be a risky selection in place of 
Petr Cech after his toils in this competition at the same stage a year ago. 
Yet, despite the visitors trailing to Cavani’s header after 42 seconds, they 
clung on to the contest courtesy of their goalkeeper and Alexis Sánchez’s 
equaliser 12 minutes from time secured the draw.

Arsenal behind after 42 seconds but Alexis Sánchez rescues point at PSG
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/psg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
Olivier Giroud and the hosts’ Marco Verratti were sent off in stoppage time 
but, while the Hungarian official’s decision to flash second yellow cards at 
both those players prompted widespread bemusement, Wenger could rejoice in 
Ospina having proved his pedigree.

Asked whether he thought that was the former Nice goalkeeper’s most 
influential appearance for the London club, Wenger said: “Maybe. At decisive 
moments, in one‑on‑ones, or when he came out with a good header at the start of 
the second half.

“David played very well and showed his detractors, those who doubted him, that 
he is a very good goalkeeper. Last year he made a mistake in theChampions League
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> [against Olympiakos] 
and everyone jumped all over him. He showed what he’s about tonight. I have two 
world-class goalkeepers. I can give them both games. If they do not play, you 
can’t keep two world-class goalkeepers.

“But we have an in-house rule that the keepers know. It’s important to have 
clear rules like that. They know what the rules are for the season and, if they 
change, I’ll tell them. It’s down to performances whether he stays in the team 
but, on what he delivered tonight, David has the right to stay in the team for 
the next Champions League game.”

Giroud will be absent for that match, against Basel at the Emirates Stadium in 
two weeks’ time, following his dismissal after he squabbled with Marquinhos and 
Verratti near the touchline in stoppage time. The incident did not appear 
serious and Marquinhos, who shoved theArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> striker, escaped without any 
sanction at all. Giroud intimated on television post-match that he thought the 
referee, Viktor Kassai, had taken the decision to book the two players despite 
not having seen the incident. “The ball was on the other side so I didn’t see, 
but the first yellow card shown to Olivier was very harsh, and not even a 
foul,” said Wenger, whose decision not to start with Granit Xhaka in midfield 
actually ended up feeling more significant than the omission of Cech, given the 
dominance PSG enjoyed in that area over the first hour.

“For the second, he tells me he has done nothing at all. Olivier is honest so 
I believe him. Verratti also told me he did nothing. I told them both to go to 
the referee and tell him they’d done nothing.

“But, overall, we played against a good PSG team who started much stronger 
than us. We have experience in the Champions League and were resilient. When 
you start so badly against a team of that quality, if you have no experience or 
too young you can be caught. We didn’t panic. Overall we were resilient enough, 
and the resilience is linked to experience. I told the players at half-time 
that if we kept the ball, we’d come back because we were dangerous when we had 
good possession of the ball. That is what we did. We got a good point.”
 