
Michele Birch knows the exact moment she became a full-blown dark interiors 
addict. “I went on a course held at interior designerAbigail Ahern 
<http://abigailahern.com/>’s house in London two years ago. As soon as I walked 
through the door I thought, wow, this is so dramatic,” says Michele. “Before 
that I’d only done the odd dark wall here and there, but it gave me a massive 
push to go further.”

Buoyed on by a like-minded group of Instagrammers, Michele started covering 
the walls, floors and ceilings of her four-bedroom Victorian terrace in 
Wallasey, Merseyside, with black, brown and grey paint shades – her favourites 
being Farrow & Ball’s Railings, Down Pipe and Off Black, as well as Abigail 
Ahern’s Crosby.
 Shades of grey: the staircase. Photograph: Katie Lee for the Observer 
“Dark colours make such a great backdrop for lots of different textures and 
colours, such as the coloured glass I collect from charity shops or theSue 
Timney <http://www.suetimney.com/> wall hanging in my living room,” she 
explains.

Dark colours make such a great backdrop for lots of different textures

One of the few areas to escape the dark treatment is Michele’s meditation 
room. Formerly the smallest bedroom, it’s now the domain of Michele’s husband 
John, a practising Buddhist who teaches meditation. He appreciates a calm space 
to counterbalance his hectic job as an electrical engineer. “He’d probably 
prefer an all-white house,” admits Michele. “But luckily he’s very easy going 
and let’s me do what I want with the decor.”

The house has been continuously re-decorated since Michele inherited it from 
her aunt 24 years ago, even though she only intended to live there for six 
months as a stop-gap after graduating.

As a fashion student at the University of Central Lancashire in the early 
1990s, she always imagined she’d end up in London instead. “I’d worked at M&S 
in Liverpool for six years before going to university, then designed sportswear 
for Pineapple on my work placement and had a great time living in Finchley,” 
says Michele, who met her first husband, a graphic designer, while studying. 
“But when I got pregnant with my son, Redd, we decided to stay in Liverpool.”
 Tiles with style: the kitchen. Photograph: Katie Lee for the Observer 
Even in her 20s, Michele’s eclectic taste veered towards dark colours. “My 
style was very 1950s-inspired, with fitted suits and big hair rolls,” she says. 
“I loved the bold designs of Biba andBarbara Hulanicki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/sep/07/barbara-hulanicki-biba-fashion-interview>
, whose wallpaper I’ve now got in the hall and back room.”

I loved the bold designs of Biba and Barbara Hulanicki

Motherhood put Michele’s career on the back burner, but now she now works as 
an art technician at a local grammar school, teaches dressmaking in her spare 
time and sells handmade felt cushions under the name Shell Birch Textiles.

“Over the years I’ve become more interested in interiors than fashion,” she 
says. “I love books by the likes ofHans Blomquist <http://hansblomquist.com/> 
and I love homeware shops like Rockett St George, Beetle & Wilde and Curious 
Egg. Travelling always inspires me, too, whether it’s the architecture in 
Copenhagen or staying at an old riad in Marrakech and visiting the beautiful
Majorelle Garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/09/around-africa-10-buildings-architecture>
.”

The house has been subject to various alterations – including knocking the 
breakfast room through to the kitchen – many of the original features are 
intact from when Michele’s aunt’s father-in-law, a printmaker, bought the house 
new in 1904. These include doors, architraves, floorboards and a very steep 
staircase.

They’ve also kept the blue 1960s bathroom suite that Michele remembers from 
her childhood visits. “I love the huge cast iron bath and can’t imagine ever 
replacing the suite with a modern white one, even though the basin’s cracked,” 
she says.

Although the two reception rooms were knocked through in the 1960s to make one 
large room, Michele and John rebuilt the wall so everyone can have their own 
space when John’s grown-up children visit, and Redd returns from university.
 Her dark materials: a comfy corner. Photograph: Katie Lee for the Observer 
Michele’s latest project is turning a corridor off the landing into a study 
area with built-in desk and shelving for her extensive collection ofVogue 
magazines. “I bought my first copy in 1979 when I was 16 and have bought every 
issue since then,” she says.

Next, she plans to banish the last few remaining “white bits” before building 
a workshop in the garden for her new textile business.

Michele’s look may not be for everyone, she’s refreshingly blasé about the 
naysayers. “You need to be confident and just go for it,” she says. “Don’t be 
put off by people who say it’ll look awful. If you don’t like it, you can 
always paint over it.”

Michele’s cushions are available through facebook.com/Shellbirchtextiles 
<https://www.facebook.com/Shellbirchtextiles>
 