
Doubles from Adam Rooney and Richie Foran helped Inverness cruise into the 
quarter-finals of theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> with a 5-1 demolition of 
First DivisionMorton.

The Northern Ireland international goalkeeper Jonny Tuffey was among six 
changes to the Caley Thistle starting line-up who lost 2-0 to Aberdeen in their 
last fixture.

The shot-stopper, who was selected for his country's squad to face Scotland in 
the Carling Nations Cup on Wednesday, made his fourth start of the campaign as 
he was included ahead of Ryan Esson.

Starting debuts were given to the new signings Aaron Doran and Chris Hogg, on 
loan until the end of the season from Blackburn and Hibernian respectively, in 
place of Jonny Hayes and Grant Munro.

Foran, the Inverness captain, opened the scoring after 19 minutes with a 
12-yard drive and Rooney's shot from the edge of the area doubled the lead 
seven minutes before the interval.

The defender Chris Hogg headed home from the edge of the area after 62 minutes 
before Rooney headed in from close range three minutes later. Derek Lyle scored 
a consolation after 83 minutes before Inverness responded in devastating 
fashion when Foran found the net from a similar distance after being picked out 
with a long ball from Lee Cox to seal a place for his side in the last eight.

David McKenna and Rory McAllister booked Brechin's place in the quarter-final 
draw with a 2-0 win over the Highland League championsBuckie Thistle.

McKenna floated the ball high over the head of the Buckie goalkeeper, Kevin 
Main, for his seventh goal of the season after 18 minutes.

McAllister gathered the ball from Kevin Byers before floating the ball into 
the net for his 19th goal of the season on the half-hour mark as the Division 
Two side moved into the last eight.

Steve Jones and John Sutton scored late in each half at Stair Park to steer 
Motherwell past Stranraer and into the last eight of the Scottish Cup.

The Steelmen failed to hit the heights of their recent displays against 
Rangers and Kilmarnock and the victory came at a cost, though, with Keith 
Lasley and Steven Saunders both suffering injuries and Steve Jennings picking 
up a suspension.

The manager, Stuart McCall, who is set to complete the signing of Francis 
Jeffers despite playing down the chances of a deal for the former Arsenal 
striker on Friday, again freshened up his team.

Tom Hateley and Sutton were recalled and the on-loan Blackburn defender Gavin 
Gunning was handed a first start in place of the injured Stevie Hammell.

Jones scored with a scuttler in first-half stoppage time after the Steelmen 
remained resolute under pressure from the hosts.

Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> were more 
comfortable after the interval and Sutton removed any doubts over the outcome 
when he scored the second goal from close range.

Hateley came reasonably close with two free-kicks and his interception and 
through-ball set up Sutton, but the striker took too long to shoot.

The substitute Jonathan Page inspired the visitors' second in the 83rd minute. 
Page fed Chris Humphrey, whose low cross was forced home at the near post by 
Sutton, and the striker and Gavin Gunning also both missed late chances to give 
the scoreline a flattering sheen.

A Craig Dargo double gave St Mirren a 2-1 victory against Second Division side 
Ayr United in their fifth-round tie at Somerset Park.

The SPL side began the game with purpose and in the seventh minute Dargo took 
a pass from David van Zanten at the edge of the penalty area before spinning 
and driving low past David Crawford.

Saints missed several chances to clinch the tie – and Dargo should have had a 
hat-trick – before a Mark Roberts penalty in the 57th minute led to what had at 
one point looked like an unlikely fightback.

However, the part-timers ran out of steam towards the end although Danny 
Lennon and hisSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> players 
were content to survive to take their place in tomorrow's draw.

St Mirren controlled most of the game and in the final minute Dargo scored the 
second goal in a breakaway attack to seal victory for the Saints.Nial Briggs 
 