
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> crashed out of the 
Scottish Communities League Cup to Inverness who booked their place in the 
semi-finals with a 3-0 win, thanks to goals by Gary Warren and the Shinnie 
brothers, Andrew and Graeme.

Hearts joined Inverness in the last four after beating Dundee United 5-4 on 
penalties after the match finished 1-1 after extra-time at Tannadice.

Rangers were out of the traps quickly and Dean Shiels sent an angled drive 
across the face of goal and just past the post as the home side pushed for an 
early opener.

But Inverness also looked up for the tie and a full-stretch Neil Alexander 
just managed to gather from an Aaron Doran shot, before blocking low at the 
near post from Billy McKay.

Having survived the double scare, Rangers set about cranking up the pressure 
and Lewis Macleod forced a decent save from Antonio Reguero. But for all the 
home side's industry, it was Inverness who surged into the lead after 27 
minutes through Andrew Shinnie.

The former Rangers youngster pounced on a pass from Doran before rifling past 
Alexander. Rangers passed up the chance to level before the break when Chris 
Hegarty threw himself at Lee Wallace's free-kick, only to nod over.

Ross Perry was swapped for Anestis Argyriou at the break before Lee McCulloch 
squandered a great chance to haul Rangers level when he blasted wide from a 
lovely Little ball.

The Highlanders doubled their lead after 59 minutes. Graeme Shinnie floated a 
corner into the box and the Gers defence failed to react as Warren was allowed 
a free header.

There was no way back for the Light Blues when the referee pointed to the 
penalty spot, ruling Argyriou had fouled Andrew Shinnie in the box. Graeme 
Shinnie stepped up for the spot-kick and sent Alexander the wrong way.

Sean Dillon's miss in the penalty shootout took Hearts into the last four, 
along with Inverness, Celtic and St Mirren. Callum Paterson put the visitors in 
front after 20 minutes and hit a post in the second half after Johnny Russell's 
35th-minute equaliser.

The Hearts midfielder Darren Barr was sent off for a second bookable offence 
after 78 minutes and United went closest to an extra-time winner when John 
Rankin hit the post in the 119th minute.

The semi-final draw is on 8 November.
 