
There are many worthy of praise for the part played in the meteoric rise of 
Inverness Caledonian Thistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/invernesscaledonianthistle> over 21 
years. The Scottish Cup final class of 2015 have suddenly jumped to the top of 
that list, after securing the Highland club’s first piece of major silverware. 
On Sunday the Highland capital will give way to an open-top bus parade – a 
barely conceivable scenario when two Highland League clubs amalgamated in 1994.

Any glance back at this game will show victory for Inverness as barely 
deserved. Peter Houston, the defeatedFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> manager, will agonise over that 
fact. For Houston’s opposite number, John Hughes, there is a place in history. 
Hughes’s redemption is complete. Not so long ago he was on the managerial scrap 
heap after a sacking by Hartlepool United. How he and Inverness have been a 
mutually beneficial partnership.

Inverness Caledonian Thistle beat Falkirk to win Scottish Cup final – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/may/30/falkirk-v-inverness-caledonian-thistle-scottish-cup-final-live>
Marley Watkins handed Inverness an interval lead, with Peter Grant hauling 
Falkirk back into the game. At that stage, and with Inverness having suffered 
the dismissal of Carl Tremarco, there appeared only one winner: the team from 
Scotland’s second tier. Instead the substitute James Vincent, once of 
Kidderminster Harriers, claimed victory in the 86th minute of 95.

“I said to the players: ‘Milk it, enjoy it and get every photograph and take 
every single minute in,’” said a jubilant Hughes. “Once again the spirit in the 
team with 10 men, they dig it out. And to do it in aScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final is remarkable. We 
didn’t half make it hard for ourselves.”

Scottish football is good at weird and wonderful scenarios. One of them 
related to Falkirk’s approach to the cup final. They finished their 
Championship campaign on 2 May and therefore had almost a month’s break before 
this showpiece occasion.

In the early stages here that plan looked to have worked. Falkirk were the 
quicker to the ball, pressing their opponents high on the field. Football 
common sense, though, suggests teams must score when in the ascendency.

The closest Falkirk came to the opening goal was via Will Vaulks, who fired 
narrowly wide of Ryan Esson’s upright from 22 yards.

Inverness had been sloppy for half an hour. Their awakening brought instant 
reward. The goal was a fine one, Aaron Doran playing a perfect through-ball to 
the feet of the advancing Watkins. The forward skipped past Jamie MacDonald, 
the Falkirk goalkeeper, who was seeking to win a third Scottish Cup with a 
third club, before supplying a cool finish.

The advantage could have been doubled before the break. Instead, Grant 
supplied a terrific last-ditch tackle on Doran, 18 yards from goal.

Perhaps Grant’s intervention roused Falkirk. They started the second period 
even stronger than the first, with Vaulks twice again going close. Blair Alston 
should have done better with a 60th-minute chance but shot over the bar.

Conscious of the flow of play, Hughes removed one of his main attacking 
threats, Ryan Christie, when introducing Vincent. It was a nod towards 
Falkirk’s second-half dominance. Hughes later said his team’s performance after 
the break was unacceptable.

Falkirk hope was soon to increase. Tremarco got himself into an almighty 
fankle when trying to deal with a routine clearance. Alston nipped in to 
capitalise and Tremarco’s denial of a scoring opportunity earned him a red card.

Falkirk screamed in vain for a penalty moments later after the ball struck the 
arm of Ross Draper. If there was an offence, it may have happened outside the 
penalty area in any case. Either way the referee, Willie Collum, was not 
interested but 10 minutes from time the goal Falkirk richly deserved duly 
arrived. Inverness conceded a needless free-kick just inside their right 
touch-line. Alston’s pin-point delivery found the head of Grant, who made no 
mistake. Falkirk had momentum, the numerical advantage and now parity. What 
could possibly go wrong?

A counterattacking goal, as it transpired. David McCracken was beaten to the 
ball by Watkins, who offered a tame shot which MacDonald could still only 
parry. Vincent, introduced for another reason entirely, found himself with the 
simple task of tapping in the rebound.
 