
Hospitality companies belonging to Ipswich Town’s owner, Marcus Evans, are 
among those being sued by Uefa for allegedly selling unauthorised packages of
Euro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> tickets.

As at every major sporting event a game of cat and mouse has been playing out 
in France between those offering unauthorised packages and the official 
hospitality provided by Uefa and its partners.

Uefa has stepped up its efforts to clamp down on unauthorised vendors and it 
said that among the companies it was suing were several that were part of the 
Marcus Evans Investment group, whose reclusive owner made his fortune from the 
burgeoning sports hospitality industry.

England v Russia violence: who is going to discipline Uefa? | Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/england-russia-violence-uefa-scheduling>
“In order to protect consumers Uefa has repeatedly taken action against 
unauthorised sellers both in France and abroad,” it said in a statement. “Uefa 
has previously obtained orders against other rogue sellers and Uefa is 
confident that it will obtain orders against these companies on this occasion 
as well.

“Continuing its policy of taking vigorous action to prevent unauthorised 
sales, Uefa has today announced that it has commenced proceedings against a 
number of companies alleged to be involved in the sale of unauthorised packages 
for Uefa Euro 2016 matches. Among the companies sued are British companies 
which are part of the Marcus Evans Investment group of companies which is owned 
by Marcus Evans, the owner ofIpswich Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> Football Club.”

Uefa said before the tournament that tickets were 99% sold out and targeted a 
number of unauthorised websites before the tournament. Police also warned 
against buying tickets through unofficial channels.

“Uefa hopes to stop such unauthorised activities which it believes are 
detrimental to consumers and to the event,” it said. “The illegitimate sale of 
tickets at vast mark ups takes tickets away from ordinary fans and also breaks 
the chain of custody for tickets that is indispensable for safety reasons.”

That last point is likely to be controversial in the wake of the complaints 
over segregation at the England v Russia, marred by a charge from Russian fans 
towards their English counterparts at the final whistle.

Some have blamed Uefa’s policy of selling large numbers of tickets to 
neutrals, which then find their way into the hands of fans of the competing 
teams.
 