
Brighton’s bubble has burst. Ten days after Middlesbrough ended the unbeaten 
run of Chris Hughton’s side Daryl Murphy’s first-half goal condemned them to 
another defeat in front of the biggest crowd of the season at the Amex Stadium.

Mick McCarthy’s Ipswich Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown>
 are coming into some good form of their own and this was their fifth 
successive away win, equalling a 40-year-old club record from the days of Bobby 
Robson. The visitors deserved their victory and, on their form over Christmas, 
suggest they and not Brighton could be challenging for a Premier League place 
next spring.

David Squires on … 2015 in the Premier League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2015/dec/29/david-squires-on-2015-in-the-premier-league>
“We have managed to beat one of the big boys,” said McCarthy. “I felt they 
were a bit depleted and that we had a good chance to win tonight. I thought we 
were the better team and had the best chances.”

Brighton are without a goal in their three games over the Christmas period but 
their transformation under Hughton has been remarkable. When the manager headed 
down to Sussex on New Year’s Eve last year the side were in the relegation 
zone. But injuries are mounting at a crucial time.

Seven of their leading players are out of action, their veteran captain Gordon 
Greer the latest man to be left on the sidelines after injuring a hamstring in 
the Boxing Day draw at Brentford. Hughton is now considering a loan move for 
Liam Ridgewell, the former Aston Villa and West Bromwich Albion defender, now 
playing in the States for Portland Timbers.

James Wilson, the young striker on loan from Manchester United who has made a 
big impact in the last month, was on the bench after the illness that forced 
him to miss the second half at Griffin Park. Hughton hopes Wilson and Greer 
will be fit to face Wolves here on New Year’s Day.

Kevin Bru’s early dipping shot was an early warning for Brighton. It rattled 
David Stockdale’s bar and although Dale Stephens scrambled the ball into the 
Ipswich net after good work on the right by Tomer Hemed Ipswich scored the 
decisive goal. Lewis Dunk slipped and Murphy hit an angled shot across 
Stockdale’s goal which hit the far post and trickled over the line.

Brighton were rattled and Ryan Fraser, a dangerous threat on the Ipswich left, 
sent over a cross and Bru again struck the woodwork. There was some respite for 
Brighton when Jamie Murphy broke clear with only Dale Gerken to beat but the 
goalkeeper saved bravely at Murphy’s feet.

After the break Rajiv van La Parra, the Dutch winger on loan from Wolves and 
playing his last game for the Seagulls, began to look lively on the left for 
Brighton but Stockdale, whose saves at Brentford had kept Brighton in the game, 
had to be at his sharpest to smother a shot from Jonathan Douglas.

Van La Parra struck a shot wide but it was no surprise when Hughton introduced 
Wilson and Bobby Zamora in an attempt to spark his stuttering attack. Gerken 
frustrated Van La Parra with an acrobatic save and Brighton’s fans sensed it 
was not going to be their night when Zamora hit the bar with a stinging 
half-volley from a Bruno cross.
 