
Mick McCarthy hailed the impact of his substitutes after Brett Pitman and Luke 
Varney combined to grab a precious late winner in the 2-1 home victory over
Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>.

Pitman slid in to convert Varney’s precise 89th-minute cross to send Ipswich 
back into the top six of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> after a largely dismal 
encounter at Portman Road.

Ryan Fraser, the best player on the pitch, opened the scoring in the 57th 
minute and while Ipswich were pegged back by Garath McCleary’s penalty, Pitman 
was on hand to continue Ipswich’s amazing winning record at home on a Tuesday – 
now stretching to 16 matches.

McCarthy said: “It was a great win and it is brilliant when your subs come on 
and contribute like that. I am chuffed for them and chuffed for everyone. It 
wasn’t a great game but I think Reading are a really good side. It was one of 
our hardest matches of the season.

“I said at half-time that we needed to keep grinding away, even if we nicked 
it in the last minute. It was not a cunning plan, it was a tough and rather 
scrappy match. But we showed endeavour and resilience and Brett Pitman showed 
what a fantastic finisher he is.”

The first 45 minutes was largely forgettable with the Reading striker Matej 
Vydra and Fraser sharing half chances.

Ipswich took the lead in the 57th minute when Freddie Sears was set clear down 
the right wing and his low cross was controlled by Fraser who then showed great 
composure to coolly find the net off the inside of the post.

It took Reading 12 minutes to get back on level terms after a moment of 
madness from Cole Skuse in bringing down Hal Robson-Kanu in the area with the 
ball going away from danger. McCleary made no mistake from 12 yards, striking 
the ball hard down the centre of the goal.

Just as it looked like it would be honours even, the clinical Pitman struck at 
the death to give Ipswich all three points.

The Reading manager Brian McDermott said: “It is tough to take, but that is 
the Championship for you. We got a couple of details wrong in the game and got 
beat.

“It was a real sickener but I can’t complain about the effort and guts of my 
players in coming back. The problem is our away form and we have to look at 
that and do whatever we need to do to put that right.

“They have had a fantastic run of wins on a Tuesday night which have put them 
right among the top six.”
 