
Eddie Irvine's firm grasp on the realities of the formula one business 
yesterday enabled him to shrug aside a fusillade of media criticism about his 
performance as Jaguar's team leader when he arrived to prepare for practice for 
Sunday's Austrian grand prix.

He rejected recent accusations that he has too much of a taste for the social 
life, is brusque to his team-mates and lacks the level of commitment required 
to help drag the struggling British team out of the second division.

Irvine also took a swipe at an unnamed Jaguar team insider who he thinks may 
be attempting to undermine his position and provide a reason for ending his 
£5m-a-year contract, which lasts to the end of 2002.

"There are so many inaccuracies, it's incredible," he said. "I've probably 
done more testing than Mika [Hakkinen] and David [Coulthard] this winter, so 
it's just incredible. It may be someone within the team, but I know what I'm 
doing within that team and some people probably don't like it but that's the 
only way we're going to get to the top. You know, they either join us or they 
don't - and it won't be me that's leaving next year, put it like that."

Irvine, who scored the best of his four career victories at this circuit two 
years ago when he doggedly kept his brake-troubled Ferrari ahead of Coulthard's 
McLaren-Mercedes, also expressed regret that Jaguar had chosen to fire their 
test driver Tomas Scheckter after his conviction for kerb crawling.

"It's a shame for the boy," he said. "It's a big penalty to pay for something 
which, in the 21st century, is quite ridiculous, really. But I think that cream 
always rises to the top and I think he's good enough; if you look at his record 
in the lower formulas, he's a talented guy. He might be a bit upset now but in 
the long run it won't even be a blip."

Irvine made it clear that it was difficult to expect much in the way of 
results for Jaguar this season but held out hopes for the aerodynamic changes 
scheduled to be fitted to the car for the Canadian grand prix on June 10.

Hakkinen's hopes, meanwhile, have not been helped by a bout of flu. "It's not 
a very good feeling at the moment," he said. "It's definitely going to be 
really, really hard."
 