
"We don't deserve this catastrophe," is all Michael Oenning could muster in 
the post-match interview. The Nuremberg coach had just seen his struggling 
team's best performance of the season, against an in-formWerder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen>, but a two-goal lead and 
plenty of good work had all become undone in stoppage time, when Aaron Hunt 
controlled beautifully on his chest and then smashed the ball into the top 
corner. "We didn't make plans for that," said a dejected Oenning after the 2-2 
draw at the easyCredit Stadion.

On another day in another season Hunt might well have hit the video board, but 
everything's going right for Werder Bremen at the moment. The point kept them 
one off the leadersBayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> and extended their 
unbeaten run to 17 matches in all competitions. For a side who had become 
notorious for seeing fewer clean sheets than a maid in a dingy Las Vegas motel, 
this is an incredible achievement.

The switch to a more defensive formation after Diego's move to Juventus is 
only partly to blame – individually they are all doing better than expected, 
too. Torsten Frings has found his bite again, Claudio Pizarro cannot stop 
scoring, Mesut Özil is a phenomenon, and Marko Marin is improving all the time. 
And then there is Hunt.

No one had great hopes for the 23-year-old before this season. Regular knee 
and groin problems had checked his progress in recent years, and despite coming 
through the youth ranks and making his debut as the youngest ever Bremen player 
in the league, he was never popular at the Weserstadion. Body language that can 
make even Tim Borowski look busy and energetic did nothing for him when he was 
given the chance; Hunt often looked downright bored on the pitch.

Off it, he kept getting into minor scuffles in provincial nightclubs. He once 
traded handbags with Diego in training 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=1&ved=0CAsQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fafp.google.com%2Farticle%2FALeqM5gFGHleig1QVCNCjleIaKIop6PVDw&rct=j&q=Diego+Aaron+Hunt+training&ei=BLjuSqy6AYHE-Qbh_PTtCw&usg=AFQjCNE0n64pZMKhWLVnQLRhBxfxGEx7Dg>
 and then there was also an incident of alleged racism when he played against 
England with Germany's Under-21 team in 2006. Anton Ferdinand and Micah 
Richards accused him of calling them "monkeys"but there was insufficient 
evidence to prove the charge 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/sport/football/article.html?in_article_id=28588&in_page_id=43>
. Hunt vehemently denied it, but the whiff remained.

Somehow, Thomas Schaaf and Klaus Allofs still believed in him. Hunt hired a 
private fitness coach and the extra shifts seem to have made a difference. "I'm 
injury-free, really fit and feel well," he said last week. On Saturday Bremen 
missed almost their entire strike force (Pizarro, Hugo Almeida, Marcelo Morena) 
along with their captain, Frings (hamstring). They produced their worst half of 
the season but still did not lose: Hunt's header narrowed the gap before he 
equalised with his wonder goal.

"It fell on my chest and I hit it; I'm happy they go in from time to time," he 
said. Schaaf had ordered the attacking midfielder/second striker to go up front 
in the final 20 minutes. "He's young, he's brave and he deserves getting called 
up by Germany," said Allofs.

Five goals this season and consistently good performances have indeed put him 
on course for a cap or two in the upcoming friendlies against Chile and the 
Ivory Coast. "I'd be happy if it happened," said Hunt modestly. "I will 
certainly leave my mobile switched on."

Germany's goalkeeping coach Andreas Köpke, however, was apparently not the 
only admiring scout in the stands. This morning Bild reported that Stuart 
Pearce had submitted a glowing report on Hunt's progress to Fabio Capello and 
alleged that "the English want to steal Hunt from us".

As a son of an English mother and grandson of a man who played alongside Bobby 
Charlton in a school team, the uncapped Hunt – "I love English football" – is 
in fact eminently eligible to miss the odd penalty in an England shirt. Even a 
call-up for the Germany friendlies would not be enough to fend off Capello: 
Fifa regulations allow a switch of allegiances up until the first competitive 
match. In Hunt's case, not before the World Cup.

It's hard to know how much substance there is to the story but it did give 
Bild the opportunity to re-publish thoseshots of Capello with the exotic dancer 
from the Italian TV show 
<http://www.corriere.it/foto_del_giorno/inglese/09_gennaio_28/fotoeng_4742d4b4-ed1b-11dd-b7f1-00144f02aabc.shtml>
 in a clever attempt to prove his penchant for a roving eye."The neighbour's 
cherries always taste sweeter," goes the German saying. True or not, it's all 
terribly exciting and a very novel sensation: no one's ever wanted our players 
before.

Talking points and results

• "We lost 2-2," was Rudi Völler's blunt verdict after seeing his Leverkusen 
side squandering a 2-0 lead at Schalke. Bayer outclassed the home team in the 
first half but then failed to kill them off; Kevin Kuranyi, clumsy and 
dangerous in equal measure, pulled one back before he turned provider for 
Vicente Sanchez's 88th-minute equaliser. The rousing match was exemplary for 
draw-tastic Matchday 11, when only TSG Hoffenheim registered a win of the top 
teams. Off the pitch Schalke hit the jackpot, however. A loan of €25.5m (£23m) 
from a local energy company will keep them going until the end of the season.

• House of pain, thy name is Hertha. Bottom of the table with four points. Ten 
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> games 
without a win and 351 minutes without a goal. Friedhelm 'pudding bowl' Funkel 
in charge. Somewhere in the capital, a bunch of middle-aged men will be 
desperate for Hertha's misery to continue: they could eclipse Tasmania Berlin's 
all-time negative record – two wins and eight points from 68 – from 1966 as the 
worst ever top-flight side.

Funkel experimented with a new three-pronged attack not worthy of its name 
against Dortmund; "We don't have the quality," he admitted after the 2-0 
defeat. Hertha's president Werner Gegenbauer wants to raise €10m for new 
players – Rafael Benítez can probably expect an Andriy Voronin-related phone 
call soon. "The mood's better than our position in the table," insists Funkel. 
Reassuring.

• Before last week's forgettable derby between Gladbach and Köln (0-0), 
endless repeats of Günter Netzer's winning goal for Borussia in the 1973 cup 
provided a bit of relief. Netzer, benched by the coach Hennes Weisweiler, 
famously took off his jogging suit and decided to bring himself on before 
scoring the winner.

The opposite happened at Hamburg on Saturday: the German international Jerome 
Boateng was badly limping – only "running on one leg," said his team-mate Ze 
Roberto – but he kept telling the coach Bruno Labbadia that he could continue. 
The HSV manager inexplicably failed to register the obvious, did not replace 
the immobile defender and then saw Gladbach come back twice before snatching a 
late winner through Rob Friend. Boateng was finally substituted with six 
minutes to go, but too late to avert Hamburg's first defeat of the season and 
serious questions about Labbadia's judgment.

It would have never happened with Dr Felix Brych in charge. The referee is a 
qualified lawyer, not a medic, but even he could see that Dortmund's Dede was 
badly concussed and stumbling around the pitch after breaking his jaw following 
a clash of heads. Brych signalled to the Dortmund bench that the Brazilian had 
to come off on Friday; thus Dede became the first ever player to be 
"substituted by the ref", as Spox put it.

• "A cat can bounce unexpectedly in a confined space," was Louis van Gaal's 
interesting take on the wounded animal mentality he expected to encounter in 
the Mercedes-Benz Arena. VfB Stuttgart, with the vocal support of their 
remarkably patient fans, did indeed fight tooth and nail against their southern 
rivals and managed to turn the match into a very nervy encounter. Bayern once 
again created little without Arjen Robben (rested for Bordeaux on Tuesday) and 
Franck Ribéry (still injured) but 0-0 was a result both teams could live with. 
Mario Gómez's return to Swabia was low-profile. The striker ran around a lot, 
mostly aimlessly. "I played him because he knew the stadium, the pitch, the 
changing room," explained Van Gaal. "And I thought he might get the support of 
the crowd." What? "Humour," they say in Germany, "is the ability to laugh 
regardlessly."

Results: Dortmund 2–0 Hertha, Stuttgart 0-0 Bayern, Nuremburg 2–2 Bremen, 
Leverkusen 2-2 Schalke, Wolfsburg 3–3 Mainz, Köln 0–1 Hannover, Hamburg 2–3 
Gladbach, Freiburg 0–1 Hoffenheim, Frankfurt 2-1 Bochum.

Latest Bundesliga table 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 