
The dilemma My mother died two years ago – she was in her 60s. To my limited 
knowledge, my father started pursuing women a number of months after her death. 
I feel hurt because he has not been open about what he is doing. Rightly or 
wrongly, I feel like the onus is on him to have some sort of open discussion 
with me. It would be appreciated if he let me know what he and my mother 
discussed about him “moving on with his life” after she was gone and to let me 
know that he is “pursuing” something and what it is that he is “pursuing”. Am I 
expecting too much of my father? Do I have any “right” to be made privy to 
discussions between him and my mother? Is it any of my business what he chooses 
to do?

Mariella replies I’m afraid not. As much as you feel you have a right to 
illumination on your parents’ private arrangements and your father’s recent 
romantic excursions, there’s no obligation on him to disclose either. In both 
areas he may be trying to protect you or claim some emotional territory for 
himself. Both are absolutely fair and understandable.

You two have been through a difficult time, and sharing the pain of your 
mother’s illness and death has no doubt fostered a degree of codependency. 
Mixing that up with a role as overseer of your father’s affairs (quite 
literally) is a mistake and wouldn’t lend itself to happiness for either of 
you. You may be united in your sense of loss, but you can’t lay claim to the 
intricacies of your parents’ marriage. Both of you will have had your own 
unique relationship with this woman you both loved. Her shared role in your 
lives, however, gives neither of you licence to define each other’s future.

Your parents will have had all kinds of secrets and enjoyed many experiences 
you might even be surprised by

Grief may propel us into premature attempts to replace the person whose 
absence creates a hole in the fabric of our lives. Bereaved children grow up 
and rush into the arms of inappropriate partners, desperately seeking a father 
or mother figure to replace the one they’ve lost (as I know from personal 
experience). The same is true of those who lose a partner, who can be swiftly 
sucked back into the dating world by their all-pervading desire to replace the 
companionship they’ve been robbed of. Sometimes such impulses will be followed 
by a relapse into grief and loneliness, but others are able to step with 
renewed enthusiasm towards the future. Neither route is confirmation of a 
greater grief or diminished feelings for the deceased. It’s just that sometimes 
loss serves to fuel us with a dread fear of our own mortality. Sometimes it’s 
just a timely reminder to make full use of what we have. Your father may be 
trying to assuage the pain in the only way he can think of, but you have no 
more right to steer your father’s relationships, or demand details of them, 
than he has to steer yours.

Your parents will have had all kinds of secrets shared over their time 
together and no doubt endured, and enjoyed, many experiences you’re unaware of 
and might even be surprised by. Marriage doesn’t become a group-run democracy 
the minute you have kids, and nor should it. The healthiest long-term 
relationships I’ve witnessed have been those where couples insist on a degree 
of autonomy for their partnership and regular nourishment in the form of time 
alone as adults, making the health of their union as much of a priority as the 
wellbeing of their children. It’s very easy to slip into a pattern where your 
mutual focus is only what you’ve created between you and not what drew you 
together. It’s a slippery slope when your eyes only meet over a family meal.

I appreciate you are still hurting and, while your mother’s premature death 
will have hit you both hard, that doesn’t mean your future lives must always be 
dictated by it. There is no right or wrong path when it comes to grieving, just 
the one that makes sense at the time. Your relationship with your mum will have 
had its own secrets and been different from the one she and your father shared. 
The details of your parents’ past discussions or your father’s unresolved 
romantic status are far less important than nurturing a healthy degree of 
communication between you now. Your father is probably terrified of your 
judgement and that may well be why he isn’t sharing the full extent of his 
widowed life with you. You can nudge open that door by showing that you are 
open to hearing things you may not want to hear, making it easier for your 
father to share things he’s perhaps embarrassed about. Your debt to your 
mother’s memory is to remember her, not to force her husband to live as if she 
were still alive.

Finally, it’s perfectly possible that your mother left no instructions. She 
probably knew in her heart, as all the wisest people do, that life without us 
goes on, so the greatest challenge we have is making the most of what we are 
left with. As someone who lost a parent very prematurely, I truly understand 
how you must be feeling, and I can only say that time will eventually lessen 
that pain. Not inspired, I agree, but true.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 