
If Isaac Hayden required proof of the benefits of “Rafaology” he received it 
after rejoining the England Under-21 squad during the international break. “The 
England staff have really picked up on the change in me,” reports theNewcastle 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> midfielder. “They 
say that, compared to last season, my ‘game understanding’ is massively 
different. They say it’s obvious it’s down to Rafa’s tutelage.”

Rafael Benítez’s transformative impact in the north-east can hardly be 
overstated and hisChampionship topping side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship/table> will arrive at 
promotion rivals Leeds United on Sunday seeking to an extend an eight-game
winning run. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/newcastle-united-preston-north-end-efl-cup-match-report>
 Hayden attributes much of Newcastle’s success to their manager’s alliance of a 
forensic eye for detail, an assured grasp of broader strategy and excellent 
communication skills.

“The England coaches want you to come up with ideas about how we’re going to 
beat varying types of opponents,” explains the 21-year-old Arsenal academy 
graduate, who spent last season on loan at Hull City. “They seemed really 
pleased with me this time, they said: ‘You’re coming up with different ideas 
from everyone else.’ Again, that’s down to working with Rafa. He loves his 
little details and they transfer to us players.”

Aleksandar Mitrovic double caps knockout Newcastle rout of Preston
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/newcastle-united-preston-north-end-efl-cup-match-report>
The cult of the manager can sometimes be overplayed but it is no exaggeration 
to say that, at St James’ Park, the Benítez effect has been extraordinary. 
Indeed after simultaneously “taming” Mike Ashley, Newcastle’s maverick owner, 
bonding the club with its previouslydisillusioned fans  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2016/may/13/newcastle-fans-react-relegation-championship>
and revitalising a squad which had looked lost as ittumbled out of the Premier 
League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/newcastle-united-devastated-relegation-managing-director-lee-charnley>
 last season, it would be no surprise were the Spaniard to be spotted walking 
on the Tyne.

Although undoubtedly a consummate politician who, crucially, commands the 
respect from both boardroom and dressing room which Steve McClaren, his 
predecessor, lacked, the manager has surprised many people with his consistent 
warmth.

“You might think a manager of his calibre might not be like that – some 
high-level managers and even some top players can be quite distant – but the 
gaffer’s warm,” says Hayden with the thoughtful intelligence which 
distinguishes his tactically articulate game. “Rafa’s so easy to talk to, you 
can speak to him about anything and he’s the same with everybody: players, 
support staff, fans. It doesn’t matter who you are, he’s as friendly as 
anything and that’s really helped the lads.

“He’s reconnected this club to the fans and the city and united it. There’s no 
unrest anywhere. The manager, players, staff, owner and supporters are all 
pulling in the right direction and, at the minute, that’s having a massive 
impact on our football. Everyone’s united and it shows on the pitch.”

Arsène Wenger has imbued Arsenal with similar dignity and class but Hayden, 
who parted with the Frenchman on excellent terms and admires him immensely, 
feels the pair could not be more different. “They’re polar opposites,” he says. 
“Two totally different people. Arsène doesn’t really say much, when he’s at 
training he just watches and you might hear his voice three or four times a 
session. Max. He sees absolutely everything, though, every mistake you make.

“The gaffer here is much more hands on. He talks us through sessions and helps 
us out. I prefer that style of management. It gets the best out of me; I know 
exactly how he’s feeling about me and what he wants me to improve on.”

Hayden fully buys into Benítez’s love of squad rotation – something which 
proved controversial in his early days at Liverpool before winning the 
Champions League. “The big difference between being here and at Hull last 
season is that no one’s certain to play any game under this manager. Everyone’s 
on their toes, there’s a lot of competition for places, everybody’s fresh, 
working hard in training and doing the right things and, touch wood, we haven’t 
had many injuries.”

Last season Hull started strongly, with the side under Steve Bruce looking 
near certainties for automatic promotion before suffering an alarming February 
wobble andgoing up via the play-offs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/steve-bruce-hull-city-assem-allam-premier-league>
. “The difference was that Steve essentially utilised the same players all the 
time and it got to February and March and then the lads who’d played 
Saturday-Tuesday all season hit a brick wall,” says Hayden. “They were 
knackered.”

Meanwhile the understudies were losing heart. “In October and November Steve 
played the same starting eleven nine games in a row. It got to the point where 
some players didn’t even bother bringing their wash bags any more – you knew 
you weren’t going to get a game.”

Even so he enjoyed working with Bruce, now Aston Villa manager, who helped him 
grow up. “Steve’s easy to talk to. You could knock on his door and chat to 
him,” he says. “But he had a lot more of an old school mentality and was very 
demanding.

“Hull’s training was vigorous. It wasn’t uncontrolled but it was very intense, 
less controlled than here or Arsenal. We had lots of double sessions, lots of 
gym work and running. It was my transition to the real adult professional game 
and it taught me the importance of a hard-working mentality.”

On top of that are the benefits of harmony. “Steve was very good at setting us 
up to deal with different opponents but it didn’t help that Hull’s owners 
wanted to sell and the fans didn’t like the owners and would show their 
disgruntlement,” says Hayden. “That filtered through to the manager and on to 
the players. At times it wasn’t the nicest feeling. In April, when we played 
Brentford at home and were still in with a chance of finishing second, only 
15,000 turned up and they were waving placards and shouting ‘Allams out’.”

With the days of anti-Ashley and anti-Alan Pardew protests a receding memory, 
Newcastle is very different. “We get more than 50,000 every home game,” says 
Hayden. “It helps that we’ve got the biggest crowds in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, the best atmosphere and 
the best fans. They’re so loud some of our away games feel like home matches.”

Elland Road is a 38,000 sell-out on Sunday. “It’s a hostile ground, not the 
nicest place to go,” he acknowledges. “But I don’t think it’ll be a problem for 
us.”
 