
Most of you will need no persuading that solving crosswords is in and of 
itself a pleasure and a good thing to do. But, for those who missed the news 
last month, a team of psychologists at Harvard has produced research to show 
that doing crosswords also significantly reduces the risk of nursing a long 
grudge against one's loved one after an argument.

We all know that it is best not to go to sleep still angry after a row, but 
this research claims to show that crossword solving is clearly associated with 
feeling better in the days following a domestic rift. According to the team's 
report in the journal Biological Psychiatry, it all has to do with a part of 
your brain called the lateral prefrontal cortex. This is the part associated 
with problem solving and decision making and the study, involving healthy 
couples who had been in a relationship for at least three months, found that 
those with higher levels of lateral prefrontal cortex activity are better at 
controlling their emotions than those with lower. To be honest, the study was 
measuring the effect of doing all kinds of puzzles, including Sudoku. Also, as 
this was a Harvard study, it says nothing about whether the more developed 
British-style of cryptic crossword puzzle has greater therapeutic value than an 
American-style crossword puzzle. But I pass on the findings in case you want to 
use them to persuade others to do crosswords or to ease any slight feelings of 
guilt you may have at the proportion of the waking day you devote to this now 
medically endorsed pastime.
_____

At regular intervals I get splenetic emails complaining about the level of 
fundamental ignorance displayed in clues and solutions. Last month saw an 
unusual concentration of such messages. Among them were: that there is only one 
't' (not two) in chapati; that there is no such thing as a koala bear, as it is 
not a bear; that a helix is not the same as a spiral; that compound is not a 
synonym for mixture; and that a toadstool is not "a plant akin to a mushroom".

To tackle first the spelling question. Even if you have always spelled a word 
in one way only and/or if your dictionary gives it as the sole correct way of 
doing so, the assertion that there is only one true way is surprisingly often 
unfounded, especially with words that have entered English directly and 
relatively recently from a foreign language, in the case of the chapat(t)i from 
Hindi. Both Chambers and Collins, in fact, give the one- and two-t versions as 
equally valid alternative spellings, while the Oxford Dictionary of English 
gives chapatti (and, to complicate things, chupatty) but not chapati.

The other complaints about misuse of words fall into the class of terms which 
have a precise meaning for the specialist, who writes to me to complain, but 
which have also acquired a more general meaning, long since endorsed as correct 
by usage and by the compilers of reputable dictionaries. Zoologists are, of 
course, correct in asserting that the koala is not a bear and should not be 
classed as one. But, as a note in the Oxford Dictionary of English says, the 
term koala bear is accepted and in general use as an alternative to koala. 
Further, it tells us that in Australia the koala is also called the "native 
bear". Given where the animal comes from, this is at least a factor to be 
weighed in the crossword balance.

And so with helix. In geometry, obviously, a helix is not a spiral, for a 
spiral is a plane figure where the radius increases with angle, whereas a helix 
is a three-dimensional thing advancing as if round the outside surface of a 
cylinder (eg a car spring). But when Collins, for example, gives as a second 
(non-geometrical) meaning "a spiral shape or form" it is difficult to say that 
spiral and helix cannot in general be used as synonyms. In my book the same 
reasoning applies to "compound/mixture". As every GCSE chemistry student knows, 
a mixture is something that can be separated by physical methods, whereas a 
compound can only be separated into its components chemically. But when, for 
example, the Oxford Dictionary of English defines compound as "a thing that is 
composed of two or more separate elements: a mixture" is the crossword not in 
the clear?

The toadstool/mushroom issue is more complicated as, for botanists, they are 
both fungi, which have now been given their own separate kingdom, distinct from 
the kingdom of green plants. (The main difference, of course, is that fungi 
lack chlorophyll and are therefore incapable of photosynthesis.) But, aside 
from this (relatively recent) taxonomy of botanical kingdoms, Chambers starts 
its definition of plant as "a vegetable organism". And on a menu mushrooms 
would be listed under veg. But I feel on less confident ground about this one.
_____

Ian of London N14 came in first once again with a correct solution for last 
month's Genius puzzle (March, No 81 by Paul). His entry was timed at 02.02 on 1 
March. There were 11 more correct entries on that first day and 307 in total by 
the deadline.
 