
In terms of achieving harmony, the disparate entities who run Scottish 
football could hardly be described as The King's Singers.

Indeed, the SFA president George Peat seems as likely to encounter as many 
difficulties in securing agreement among the 10 board members of his own 
organisation as he will in persuading those in charge of the Scottish Premier 
League and the Scottish Football League that co-operation, which could extend 
as far as merging the three bodies into one, would be in their interests.

When Gordon Smith succeeded David Taylor as chief executive of the SFA just 
under 18 months ago, he confided that the aspect of the job causing him the 
most apprehension was having the implementation of his ideas for change 
delayed, or even rejected, by procedure. Despite the recent streamlining of the 
association from the old, 49-member council to the present management 
structure, it is still, in essence, run by committee.

'The irritating thing about that lack of autonomy,' said Smith, 'is that the 
general public, by and large, don't understand how the system works. I know 
I'll be blamed for everything under the sun, including issues which have 
nothing to do with the SFA.

'Everything still has to be approved by the board and, although I know things 
have improved greatly over the past few years, it can still be a lengthy 
process. Still, that's no reason not to take the job or to give up. I would 
hope to exert an influence that will benefit the game. Getting the support at 
times will almost certainly be a problem.'

Smith, for example, has advocated summer football, one of the issues Peat has 
included in his agenda for future discussion. In his days as a respected BBC 
football pundit, however, he was regularly heard arguing the case for a 
schedule similar to those in northern Europe - Scandinavia, Russia, the Baltic 
republics - that includes a complete winter shutdown.

Now, however, he has modified his views - most probably to appease the 
fiercest opponents - to a closure limited to January and February, with the 
season starting in early August and ending in June. The problem with the summer 
football argument in Scotland has always been the unpredictability of the 
climate.

If the first two months of the year have tended to bring the severest weather, 
there have been enough instances of comparative mildness - in fact, throughout 
entire winters - to support the case of those opposed to a complete shutdown.

When the SPL experimented with a suspension of fixtures 10 years ago - it 
involved a three-week hiatus in January - the move was initially welcomed by 
the club managers as an ideal break, when players could benefit from a period 
of rest and return refreshed. It did not take long for the drawbacks to become 
apparent. The treasurers fretted over lost income, while some managers of clubs 
in the middle-to-lower orders discovered that teams who had gathered momentum 
in the weeks before the break had lost impetus on their return.

There is, of course, nothing new about Peat's intention to discuss league 
reconstruction, as it has been taking place in Scotland on a semi-regular basis 
since the abandonment of the old 18-team Scottish Football League First 
Division and the introduction of the 10-team Premier Division in 1975.

The SFL clubs, however, would welcome amalgamation of the present three 
governing bodies into one. They have been in decline since the leading 10 clubs 
defected just over 10 years ago to form the SPL. There will surely be much 
discussion in the weeks and months to come and many will embrace the principles 
of the proposals. Whether the talk will produce concerted and productive action 
is considerably less certain.
 