
Shed got the 2009 Genius season off to a fairly gentle start, judging by the 
number of correct entries received on the first day (21) and the total by the 
deadline (293), both numbers being records. I suspect that Paul's February 
offering will see the figures drop. The first two correct January entries were 
both from Australia: Jeremy from Canberra at 04.08 GMT getting home 32 minutes 
in front of Peter from Queensland. Of entries from people actually living in 
the Greenwich time zone, the first came in at 09.20 GMT.

_____

Following last month's story about the five Daily Telegraph crossword puzzles 
published just before D-day, which contained five Top Secret code words 
relating to the coming invasion, I got this from Martin F. "I cannot believe 
that in the pre-invasion atmosphere of late spring 1944 MI5 would simply have 
written off the series of events you related (even without Dieppe) without 
taking some action. What happened?"

My source for all this is a book by the last-but-one Daily Telegraph crossword 
editor, Val Gilbert: 80 Years of Cryptic Crosswords. Under severe grilling, 
Leonard Dawe managed to persuade a very trustful MI5 that the appearance of the 
code words in his puzzles was pure coincidence and nothing further came of the 
affair. What had actually happened did not emerge until long after the war.

Dawe was headmaster of the Strand School, which had been evacuated to 
Effingham in Surrey. According to one of his charges, Ronald French, who was 14 
years old in 1944, Dawe would sometime invite favoured boys into his study and 
encourage them to fill in for him the blanks in the grids of puzzles that he 
had under construction. Not until he was in his 50s did French reveal that boys 
living locally mixed with the American and Canadian soldiers stationed in the 
area and heard the various D-day code words being used, without knowing what 
they meant. French, who was fascinated by the coming invasion, wrote them down 
in a notebook and from there they found their way into the Daily Telegraph.

According to French: "Soon after D-day, Dawe sent for me and asked me point 
blank where I had got the words from. I told him all I knew and he asked to see 
my notebooks ... He was horrified and said that the books must be burned at 
once ... He then gave me a very stern lecture about national security and made 
me swear on the Bible that I would tell no one about the matter."

Dawe's cover-up, it seems, held for 40 years. Today, of course, a setter does 
not need children to help fill the grids because computer programs will do it 
for them. History does not relate whether MI5 subsequently drew the fairly 
obvious lesson that, when investigating teachers in connection with a prima 
facie breach of national security, it is probably a good move to ask questions 
also of the children in their direct charge.

_____

It is quite difficult when close to something to be objective and quite easy 
to be over-influenced by complaints that may not reflect the general view. So 
this month I have two questions.

First, the weekly online Quiptic puzzle, when it was introduced at the end of 
1999, was intended to be an 'easy cryptic', suitable either for those who 
wanted a 10-minute exercise or for beginners. It has been suggested that they 
have steadily become more difficult and are now, as a result, not doing what 
they were supposed to be doing. I would welcome feedback.

Second, it is said that the Quicks have become too quirky of late. One 
particular complaint relates to clues not being the obvious definitions of the 
answer, but a less obvious one (eg 'Entrance (5)' not leading to FOYER, LOBBY 
or PORCH but to CHARM. Another is when the clues on any one day contain a 
series of words that rhyme (eg 'Hall', 'Fall', 'Ball', 'Call'), requiring some 
slightly less obvious words as solutions. Again, feedback would be very welcome.
 