
Ivan Perisic’s stoppage-time equaliser denied Milan victory as Internazionale 
salvaged a 2-2 draw.

Two maiden San Siro goals from the Spanish schemer Suso had put Milan on a 
course to claim second place in theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> table but, with Antonio 
Candreva grabbing Inter’s first leveller at the start of the second half, 
Perisic put the brakes on theRossoneri.

The point will mean a lot to the new Inter head coach, Stefano Pioli, hired to 
fix the mess left behind by Frank de Boer, who departed with Inter languishing 
in the bottom half of the table.

“My players can sleep well as they showed excellent spirit and gave a good 
performance, even if they didn’t get the win,” said theMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> coach, Vincenzo Montella. “I 
think the glass is half full, because the standings look good from our point of 
view.”

Inter dominated the first half and should have gone ahead when Antonio 
Candreva’s mis-hit shot found Mauro Icardi unmarked in front of goal but the 
Argentine, who has never scored against Milan in the derby, completely 
miskicked.

Milan took advantage in the 42nd minute when Giacomo Bonaventura broke out of 
his half and found Suso who cut inside his marker and scored with a low shot 
into the far corner.

Inter levelled eight minutes after the restart when a quick throw-in found 
Candreva who unleashed an unstoppable shot that flew past Gianluigi Donnarumma 
from 30 metres. The formerGenoa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> 
and Liverpool forward Suso put Milan back in front five minutes later with 
another superbly taken goal. The Spaniard collected Carlos Bacca’s pass, 
skipped past Miranda and slipped the ball into the far corner.

Hot on Milan’s heels are Lazio and Atalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta>, whose impressive runs 
continued on Sunday courtesy of home victories over Genoa and Roma respectively.

A seven-game unbeaten streak had helped Simone Inzaghi’s Lazio climb the table 
and goals from Felipe Anderson, Lucas Biglia and Wallace proved too much for
Genoa in a 3-1 triumph in the capital. Lucas Ocampos scored for Genoa, who next 
face the leaders, Juventus.

Franck Kessie’s late penalty fired Atalanta into the race for Champions League 
football asRoma suffered a 2-1 defeat.

Diego Perotti’s penalty put Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> 
on the right track in Bergamo, only for Mattia Caldara to snatch a second-half 
equaliser.

Just when Roma looked ready to settle for a draw the Ivorian midfielder Kessie 
secured a fifth straight Atalanta win and their seventh in eight matches.

Juventus, who beat Pescara 3-0 on Saturday, lead the table with 33 points from 
13 games, with Roma second (26) and Milan third on goal difference. Inter are 
ninth with 18 points.

Further down the table Federico Bernardeschi made it five goals in his last 
five games, with Josip Ilicic also scoring twice, asFiorentina thumped Empoli 
4-0 to reach eighth place.

Sampdoria produced a brilliant comeback to seal a remarkable 3-2 win over 
Sassuolo at Stadio Luigi Ferraris.

Sassuolo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> led 2-0 with six 
minutes left, thanks to Federico Ricci and Antonino Ragusa, but Fabio 
Quagliarella pulled one back before Luis Muriel’s brace secured a stunning 
turnaround.

Bologna broke their barren run of seven league games without a win thanks to a 
comfortable 3-1 home triumph overPalermo.

Ilija Nestorovski tapped in an early goal for the Sicilians before Mattia 
Destro equalised. After the break Blerim Dzemaili and Federico Viviano 
completed the comeback.

Andrea Belotti scored a late double to give Torino a 2-0 victory, and second 
consecutive win, at the bottom club,Crotone.
 