
The path of Ivan Jovanovic's career was determined by a fighton a dusty field 
in a low-key competition in East Germany in 1988. He wasn't even on the pitch, 
having been substituted 10 minutes from time of an Intertoto Cup tie (in the 
days when it consisted of eight groups of four, with no knockout stage and no 
winner) between his side, Rad Belgrade, and Carl Zeiss Jena. He played no part 
in the brawl but when Uefa handed out punishments his role as captain was taken 
into account and he was banned from European competition for two years.

It was a costly penalty. Jovanovic had a move to Metz lined up but the French 
club pulled out when they heard about the suspension. So Jovanovic instead went 
to the Greek side Iraklis. Three times they made it to the Uefa Cup. The first 
two times, Jovanovic could not play. The third time, in 1996-7, he did but 
Iraklis were eliminated in the second qualifying round by Apoel. Fifteen 
seasons on, Jovanovic leads Apoel against Real Madrid in the quarter-finals of 
theChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.

Jovanovic describes the tie as "an honour" but it's not a game he's overly 
happy about. "After a long and extremely difficult effort since the second 
qualifying round till today, we all expected something better, more luck in the 
draw," he says. That perhaps hints at the seriousness of the man: for him a 
quarter-final against Madrid is not a fitting end to an astonishing season, 
it's a major obstacle to reaching the last four. Jovanovic was a straight A 
student at school and made a deal with his parents that allowed him to keep 
playing football so long as he maintained his grades. He made it to university 
to study transportation before, aged 22, committing to a career with Rad. When 
his playing days came to an end, his academic nature made coaching an 
inevitability.

After a season with the Greek second-flight side Niki Volou, he took charge of 
Iraklis in 2002 and, in November 2003, he moved to Apoel for the first time, 
winning the championship in his debut season. The next year, fans and players 
turned against him and, on 5 March, he was sacked after the first defeat of the 
season left Apoel two points behind Apollon, who were their next opponents. 
"You've taken the right to a second title away from me," he said at the time. 
He returned in January 2008. He has won two league titles since and, in 
2009-10, took Apoel into the group stages of the Champions League, making them 
only the second Cypriot side to reach that stage (after Anorthosis Famagusta in 
2008-09). This year, he broke new ground by guiding them into the knockout 
phase.

"This season is no accident," he says. "Remember 2009 when Apoel first played 
in the group stage and performed admirably against Chelsea, Porto and Atlético 
Madrid, missing out on the Europa League spot only on goal difference? The year 
after we were unlucky to go out of the Europa League to Getafe. For three years 
we've been building a good and reliable squad. I don't think people have 
realised what we've achieved so far. For us, for a club from Cyprus, to play in 
the group stage is likeReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> winning the competition."

The contrast with Madrid is striking. The lowest-paid player in the senior 
squad at the Bernabéu is Adan, the reserve goalkeeper, who makes around 
€550,000 (£460,000) a year. Apoel's best-paid player is the Brazilian striker 
Ailton, whose salary is €450,000s. "Everything is based on a good spirit inside 
the squad, on good, constant and daily work and on a healthy football 
mentality," Jovanovic says. Stability – not common in Cypriot football as he 
found out – has clearly helped.

And much is also down to his management. Jovanovic is religious and 
superstitious, but his success is mainly down to hard work. His devotion to 
football is almost monastic. His wife and two sons live in Thessaloniki, 
leaving him alone in Cyprus to focus on management. His attention to detail is 
staggering, fuelled by cigarettes, coffee and Coke.

For instance, the referee for the second leg against Lyon was the Spaniard 
Undiano Mallenco. Jovanovic watched every game Mallenco had officiated in La 
Liga this season so he could learn his habits and instruct his players 
accordingly. When the last-16 tie against Lyon went to penalties, Jovanovic's 
goalkeeping coach, Goran Gumic, had – of course – studied every Lyon penalty 
for the last three years and was able to advise the goalkeeper Dionisis Chiotis 
which way to dive. Only with the first taker, Kim Kallstrom, did Chiotis go the 
wrong way.

"We showed everyone that we are a team capable of defending and attacking with 
the same efficiency and unity," Jovanovic says. "We base our playing style on 
constant pressing and when attacking, trying to utilise every free area in the 
field. In every game, apart from the last one of the group stage, we covered 
around 6km more during the 90 minutes than our opponents."

Hard work and organisation may not be enough to overcome Madrid, particularly 
with the Brazilian forward Gustavo Manduca, who scored twice against Porto and 
against Lyon, suspended for the first leg. But in a sense it doesn't matter; 
Apoel have struck a blow for the little man, and offered a model for smaller 
clubs across Europe. "This is the only solution," says Jovanovic. "Building a 
reliable team with little money is not easy, but success isn't certain even if 
you're spending a lot of money. Money is not a guarantee to success if you 
don't have any plan and clear ideas of what you want to do and what you want to 
achieve."
 