
Although he was arguably the world’s best known cosmetic surgeon, Ivo 
Pitanguy, who has died aged 93, never felt the need to undergo any of the 
procedures he pioneered. “The most important thing is to have a good ego and 
then you don’t need an operation,”he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/brazil-loves-nip-tuck-plastic-surgeon-ivo-pitanguy>
. With a mind as sharp as his scalpel, the Brazilian understood just how 
important it is for people to feel comfortable with the way they look.

He cashed in on the vanity and insecurity of the rich and famous so 
successfully that he was able to buy himself a private island from the proceeds 
of facelifts, tummy tucks and breast enlargements for global tycoons and 
Hollywood stars. But he also established teaching clinics and he and his 
students worked for nothing on those who could not afford reconstructive 
surgery for burns, cleft palates and deformities.

In a speech at a global conference of plastic surgeons two years ago, Pitanguy 
blurred the difference between remedial and cosmetic work. Ultimately, he 
claimed, both were a form of healing. “One day, it will be clear that aesthetic 
surgery brings the desired serenity to those that suffer by being betrayed by 
nature,” he told delegates, many of whom he had trained and inculcated with the 
ethos of a “human right to beauty”.

His ideas remain controversial. Critics call them a marketing ploy. Supporters 
say Pitanguy helped his patients overcome low self-esteem and other 
psychological ailments. Regardless, these ideas – and the many techniques 
introduced by the surgeon – are now the basis for a burgeoning global industry. 
They have taken particularly deep root in his home nation. Two years ago,Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> overtook the US as the world leader 
in cosmetic operations.

One of five children of a general surgeon, Antônio de Campos Pitanguy, and his 
wife, Maria, Pitanguy was born in Belo Horizonte, north of Rio de Janeiro, and 
followed his father into medicine. As a student in the 1940s, he was quick to 
see the potential of cosmetic surgery, which was then still in its infancy but 
developing fast as a result of groundbreaking treatments of scarred, burned and 
disfigured troops and civilians in the second world war. To learn more, he 
studied in London with Harold Gillies andArchibald McIndoe 
<http://www.nzhistory.net.nz/people/sir-archibald-mcindoe>, who were experts on 
skin grafts for burn victims, and Paris with Marc Iselin, a leader in 
reconstructive bone surgery.

On his return to Rio, Pitanguy worked initially on trauma surgery but soon 
created a plastic surgery department in the Santa Casa da Misericordia public 
hospital. It came into its own in 1961 after a fire tore through a circus tent 
in the nearby city of Niteroí, leaving many children disfigured with horrendous 
burns that his skin grafts helped to alleviate. Pitanguy said later that the 
incident taught him the importance of appearance to emotional wellbeing.

It also projected him into the national spotlight and went some way towards 
softening negative public perceptions of plastic surgery, as did his work on 
the burns suffered by the Formula One driver Niki Lauda in a crash in 1976.

His work for the poor over the coming decades gave him subjects for honing and 
demonstrating new techniques. He later opened his own private clinic, where he 
trained 586 plastic surgeons in the craft of face lifts, breast enhancement and 
liposuction, as well as accepting thousands of others for short-term courses 
and visits. Many of his alumni went on to found their own schools and clinics 
in an industry that mushroomed from the 1960s onwards.

Pitanguy tweaked so many famous faces, including those of the actors Sophia 
Loren and Gina Lollobrigida, that he became a celebrity in his own right. His 
lavish lifestyle – helicopter commutes, luxury yachts and charity events – were 
to be a staple of Brazilian gossip magazines for more than half a century. He 
was an internationally renowned art collector and was once painted by Salvador 
Dalí.

Pompous and self-important at times, Pitanguy argued that cosmetic surgeons 
were “artists of the living form, dealing with body and soul,” though the 
effects of his work were often derided as superficial and reinforcing a 
stereotype of Brazil – and Rio in particular – as being unhealthily concerned 
about looks. Despite Pitanguy’s pro bono work, the cosmetic industry was 
primarily geared towards wealthy clients. The many aesthetic surgeons 
contrasted sharply with the shortage of medical staff working in primary 
healthcare.

Cosmetic surgery <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cosmetic-surgery> 
is more popular than ever and has now expanded far beyond nips and tucks to 
buttock enlargements, vaginal rejuvenation, penis extensions, pectoral 
implants, industrial-scale quantities of fat being removed by liposuction and 
reality TV makeover shows.

Pitanguy was too proud of his work and too aware of its positive effects to 
ever say he had created a monster, but in his final years, he warned that his 
“art” was at risk of becoming trivialised. “What is important is being content 
with your own image. Plastic surgeons shouldn’t banalise that. It should be 
treated as a specialised field like any other field of surgery.”

In recent months, his health had deteriorated. Since September, he had been 
undergoing dialysis after being diagnosed with a kidney problem. In June he 
went into hospital to be treated for an infection. He died from a heart attack, 
the day after taking part in his wheelchair in the Olympic torch relay in Rio 
de Janeiro.

That was a final moment in the global spotlight for a surgeon who – for better 
or worse – helped shape the way humanity sees itself and what it might be. For 
him, surgery was never purely cosmetic. As he said: “I tried to show that it 
goes deeper than the skin, that it goes inside the soul.”

He is survived by his wife Marilu Nascimento, four children, Ivo, Gisela, 
Helcius and Bernardo, and five grandchildren.

• Ivo Hélcio Jardim de Campos Pitanguy, surgeon, born 5 July 1923; died 6 
August 2016
 