
Jürgen Klopp bemoaned the very existence of FA Cup replays two weeks ago but 
his tune changed along with Liverpool’s superiority overExeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> at Anfield. Youthful 
promise and wise heads combined for a comfortable win over the League Two side 
who, as suspected, missed their best chance of an upset at St James Park. 
Calculated Klopp’s selection may have been, risky it was not.

Sheyi Ojo became the youngest goalscorer in Liverpool’s FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> history with a majestic curler 
into the top corner of the Kop net, Joe Allen delivered the early lead that 
Anfield craved and João Carlos Teixeira completed the scoring on an encouraging 
night for the young prospects. Jon Flanagan’s long-awaited return from injury 
made it a perfect night for Klopp.

“A few days ago I could not have imagined I’d enjoy an FA Cup replay but I 
really did, so thank you FA Cup,” beamed theLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager. West Ham United await 
in round four on Saturday week.

Exeter flew into John Lennon Airport enthused by their 2-2 draw with the 
Premier League side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
 on home soil but never came close to repeating that performance or scaring 
Liverpool for a second time.Simon Mignolet marked his new five-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/18/liverpool-simon-mignolet-signs-new-contract>
 with the most comfortable outing of his season. The only frustration for 
Anfield lay in the ponderous touch of Christian Benteke, a striker clearly 
struggling for confidence, yet even he ended the contest after telling 
contributions for Allen’s and Teixeira’s goals.

Greater understanding, a better pitch and more guidance produced an immediate 
improvement from Liverpool’s makeshift FA Cup team. Benteke started against 
Paul Tisdale’s team, as in the first meeting though not in the subsequent 
Premier League games against Arsenal or Manchester United, and the striker was 
joined by Allen, Jordon Ibe and Mignolet as a shortened injury list increased 
Klopp’s options. Liverpool did not make the mistake of allowing Exeter to 
establish a rhythm for a second time.

Anfield’s youngsters trained together for only 40 minutes before the draw in 
Devon. They had three full training sessions before the replay and what little 
rapport developed at Melwood told as Liverpool’s senior and inexperienced 
players combined for an early lead. Brad Smith, the Australian who secured the 
replay with a late equaliser at St James Park, was instrumental in the 
breakthrough. Liverpool’s left-back exchanged passes with Benteke on the edge 
of the penalty area and showed great awareness as he sprinted towards the 
byline to cut the ball back for Allen to score from close range.

The Wales international started in a more advanced role with the composed, 
intelligent Kevin Stewart operating as the holding midfielder and the licence 
to venture forward paid dividends. Benteke’s part in the opening goal also 
merited praise. His return pass to Smith was perfectly weighted behind the 
Exeter right-back Christian Ribeiro and helped Liverpool settle while 
puncturing the optimism of the 6,000 away fans who had impressively made the 
long journey north.

Liverpool 3-0 Exeter City: FA Cup third-round replay – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/20/liverpool-v-exeter-city-fa-cup-third-round-replay-live>
Exeter’s goalkeeper Bobby Olejnik was busy throughout, in contrast to Mignolet 
who had one cross to catch before half-time with the visitors unable to find 
any time or space on the ball to supply Clinton Morrison. Olejnik denied 
Teixeira, Cameron Brannagan and Ibe as the youngsters shot from range before 
the interval.

Ibe also clipped the top of the crossbar with an angled drive while Brannagan 
was inches away from extending Liverpool’s lead from the edge of the box. The 
best chance of a second for the home side fell to Benteke, who met Teixeira’s 
inviting left-wing cross with a clean header but failed to hit the target from 
six yards. The visitors made too many unforced errors and only after the hour 
mark exerted any pressure on the Liverpool defence. By that stage it was a 
defence containing Flanagan, given a rapturous ovation when he replaced Connor 
Randall for his first senior outing in 20 months. Flanagan has endured nothing 
but torment since the end of the 2013-14 season, when his contribution to 
Liverpool’s title challenge resulted in a place on England’s standby list for 
the World Cup in Brazil. Instead of establishing himself for club and country 
Flanagan underwent two operations on a serious knee problem and, with his 
Liverpool contract due to expire at the end of the season, the full-back’s 
return was well timed and received.

Ibe almost doubled Liverpool’s lead when he hit a powerful left-foot shot that 
struck the underside of the bar and bounced on the goalline. Most, but not all 
of the ball was over the line and Exeter were reprieved a second time when 
Stewart was pushed over as he attempted to convert the rebound only for referee 
Neil Swarbrick to ignore the penalty appeals.

Victory was ultimately secured in sublime fashion. Ojo impressed as a 
substitute at Exeter and had been on the pitch for only nine minutes as a 
replacement for Allen when he scored his first Liverpool goal. The 18-year-old 
took possession on the corner of the Exeter area and, with left-back Craig 
Woodman backing off, he accepted the invitation to shoot and curled a wonderful 
shot into the far, top corner. Benteke continued to test Anfield’s patience but 
created the third with a measured pass to Teixeira, who made no mistake from 12 
yards.

Liverpool’s second string proves uncomfortable for Christian Benteke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/20/christian-benteke-liverpool-exeter-fa-cup-replay-anfield> 