
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 


I went to see Seinfeld in Vegas, which is where you should see Seinfeld. He’s 
just the most polished and consummate standup I’ve ever seen. Every pause and 
breath and joke and word has been carefully crafted.

The funniest sketch I’ve ever seen 


It’s probably from The League Of Gentlemen: either the Dentons’ house rules or 
the one where Harvey Denton drinks his own urine. I’ve always thought all of 
those sketches with the Dentons in were so funny.

The funniest meal I’ve ever eaten 


I went to that Heston Blumenthal restaurant, and for one course they bring out 
a gas canister so they can spray something on it. I saw one by someone, and 
thought that the person was ill. And then I looked to my right and saw another 
person with a gas canister and I was like: “Wow, what are the chances of two 
people who are quite badly poorly eating in the restaurant at the same time?” 
When they kept popping up around the restaurant I realised it was something to 
do with the dish. I just thought I’d chanced upon a day when they’d brought in 
everyone who was very ill.

The funniest heckle I’ve ever had 


I did a gig at a pub in Putney and I was doing a joke in which I accidentally 
deployed the phrase “I switched on the Aga”. A man at the back shouted out: 
“You can’t switch on an Aga, that’s the point”, which is the poshest thing 
anyone has ever said. Only at one of my gigs could you have a man heckle you 
about an Aga.

The funniest book I’ve ever read 


Those Alan Partridge books that the Gibbons brothers wrote. I read one on the 
plane; I had to stop because I couldn’t read it quietly, which I think is a 
good sign.

The funniest film I’ve ever seen 


It’s been hijacked by dickheads – of which I may be one – but it’s Withnail 
And I. The other is a Danish film called Klovn. It is so funny. Someone told me 
about it and I had to call them up and sincerely thank them for putting it into 
my orbit

The funniest item of the clothing I’ve ever owned 


When we finished Bad Education, Mat Horne gave me a T-shirt as a gift which 
had the slogan “If you see da police, warn a brother”, with the Warner Bros 
logo. He liked going to Camden Market to find the most embarrassing slogan 
T-shirts he could for his character, and he gave me a few of them at the end. 
I’ve never worn it, nor will I ever.

The funniest hairstyle I’ve ever had 


I dyed my hair blond at school and then was desperate to keep it blond for as 
long as possible, so I had some quite terrible roots. It ended up more like 
frosted tips. It was quite ‘NSync.

The funniest word 


Bamboozle. It just sounds really nice. Another quite funny word is clubbable, 
used to describe someone. It sounds like you’d like to hit them, but it 
actually means they’re the sort of person you’d want to be a member of your 
club. It sounds like an insult but apparently it’s meant to be a compliment. 
I’ve never been described as clubbable – well, probably in the other sense.

Jack Whitehall At Large is touring 5 January to 28 February 
<http://www.jackwhitehall.com/>
 