
Cup shocks tend to be the product of a loss of purpose by the victims, as 
opposed to the creativity of the perpetrators. In this regard,Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts>, the 2-1 on favourites, were the 
very essence of professionalism.

The Premier League side eliminated the lurking notion that they could be 
vulnerable to the energetic commitment of the Second Division leaders before 
this fourth-round tie was 10 minutes old with the kind of certainty that had 
marked the late stages of their last appearance, the 3-2 victory at Celtic Park.

Clearly suffused with a sense of superiority after that extraordinary 
performance, the trip to the outskirts of Glasgow to face the well-organised 
and enthusiastic part-timers ofClyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/clyde> brought no signs of apprehension.

Instead, there was an impetus about the Edinburgh side's performance from the 
earliest moments that suggested a conviction that the most effective method of 
disrupting their opponents' daydream of a place in the quarter-finals was to 
deprive them of hope.

This was achieved even more quickly than the Hearts players or their followers 
could have imagined, Darren Jackson laying the foundation stone with only 90 
seconds gone. The goal was begun by Colin Cameron on the right, the busy 
midfielder twisting and fighting to retain possession before delivering a 
wickedly screwing and bouncing cross.

It was the kind of ball that puts terror into goalkeepers and defenders, and 
even Hearts striker Gary Wales hit only fresh air as he tried to make contact. 
But Jackson, a former Scotland player, breezed in at the far post to drill the 
ball in with his left foot from six yards.

Such a blow guaranteed to plunder the spirit of the home side and put them on 
edge, the evidence of this effect arriving with their uncertainty at the second 
goal. It was a long ball from Fitzroy Simpson that seemed to interfere with the 
home defence's tracking system, leaving Wales free to contest the chase with 
David Wylie.

The goalkeeper always looked second favourite, although Wales was slightly 
fortunate when the ball broke kindly, allowing him to continue his run and push 
it home as Bryan Smith tried desperately and vainly to make the block.

That opening goal had an appropriate scorer, as Jackson emerged as the most 
accomplished player in a largely bland match until tired legs brought his 
replacement by Gary McSwegan in the 82nd minute.

The lengthy periods of inactivity around both goal areas after Hearts' early 
strikes were attributable to a resurgent diligence from the Clyde players and a 
composed determination from their visitors to retain control of their cup 
destiny without taking undue risks.

Clyde's opportunities were strictly rationed, although Allan Grant might have 
done better with a free shot after a challenge by Tom Woods on Antti Niemi had 
left him clear on the left side of the goalmouth. The feeble drive was blocked 
by Steven Pressley.

Despite adopting a what-we-have-we-hold policy, Hearts contrived more 
convertible chances, and even as late as the final minute McSwegan should have 
scored a third. The substitute was released on an incisive pass from Wales that 
left him with only Wylie to beat, but he drove the ball off the goalkeeper's 
leg and away for a corner kick.

In the rehabilitation process, every victory is therapeutic, and Hearts will 
surely derive further benefit from a comfortable passage into the 
quarter-finals. They may even be permitted to dream themselves of repeating 
their success in the competition in 1998, even if only three of the team who 
beat Rangers in the final that year are still around.
 