
Norwich ground out a hard-fought 3-1 win over a battling Burton side to move 
to the top of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> table for the first time 
this season.

A well-taken first-half effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/24/premier-league-swansea-man-city-middlesbrough-spurs-live>
 from left-back Martin Olsson put the Canaries ahead at the break, only for the 
Brewers to hit back seconds after the restart through Lucas Akins. But the 
hosts restored their advantage from the kick-off through Jacob Murphy’s 
deflected effort and could afford to miss a penalty before Ivo Pinto struck two 
minutes from time to confirm the win.

Aston Villa rescue point against Newcastle with Aaron Tshibola strike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/aston-villa-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
With four straight wins behind them, three in the league, Norwich were quickly 
into their stride and it needed a good early block from John Brayford to deny 
Murphy. But Burton’s first visit to Carrow Road was by no means a one-sided 
affair in the opening stages, with Lloyd Dyer cutting inside and firing just 
over on 14 minutes.

The Canaries were struggling to create openings, with the visitors defending 
well, and Hamza Choudury was in quickly to snuff out the danger when Robbie 
Brady tried his luck from inside the box. A Brady free-kick that slammed into 
the Burton wall summed up a frustrating first quarter for Alex Neil’s side but 
they finally got their noses in front on the half-hour mark with a typically 
well crafted goal.

Graham Dorrans was the architect, picking out an advanced Olsson in the area, 
and the Swedish defender showed admirable composure as he took a touch before 
firing high into the roof of the net.

As half-time approached Norwich were firmly in control and they should have 
doubled their advantage following a bad mistake from keeper John McLaughlin. He 
let a harmless-looking ball drift past him when he realised he was out of his 
area, leaving Cameron Jerome with an open goal, albeit from a tight angle, but 
the big striker could only find the side-netting.

The Brewers made a sensational start to the second period, equalising within 
40 seconds of the restart. A poor defensive header from Russell Martin let in 
Akins and when his effort was blocked the ball fell kindly to Choudhury whose 
close-range header was tapped in by Akins.

Norwich needed a response and they got it almost immediately. They attacked 
from the kick-off and Murphy played a one-two with Jerome before sending in a 
shot that took a huge deflection off John Mousinho to deceive McLaughlin.

Burton had another glorious chance to peg Norwich back again on 56 minutes but 
after rounding Michael McGovern, Jamie Ward chose to try and pick out a pass 
rather than trying to slide the ball home and ended up picking out a yellow 
shirt.

Ward then fired straight at McGovern as Burton continued to threaten in an 
entertaining, end-to-end game, Norwich should have made the points safe on 77 
minutes when John Flanagan’s handball to keep out Dorrans’ goal-bound effort 
was punished with a red card and a penalty. But McLaughlin produced a 
magnificent diving save to keep out Brady’s spot-kick.

Norwich had plenty of chances to stretch their lead after that and with Burton 
shorthanded at the back they finally took one on 88 minutes when Pinto fired 
high into the roof of the net from a tight angle to register his first goal for 
the club.
 