
The top and bottom ranked teams left in the Capital One Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/capital-one-cup> go toe to toe in the 
last 16, with fans of Shrewsbury Town hoping their striker James Collins can 
continue his knack of scoring against top-flight opposition when Chelsea arrive 
at New Meadow. Despite a career spent largely pottering around the lower 
leagues after being deemed surplus to requirements at Aston Villa, the 
23-year-old opened the scoring in a League Cup defeat against Arsenal during 
his first spell at Shrewsbury.

The following season, Collins went on to prove he can hack it where some feel 
Lionel Messi might be found wanting, scoring a hat-trick in a seven-goal 
thriller to send Swindon Town into the third round of the competition at 
Stoke’s expense on a cold night at the Britannia. Now back in Shropshire 
following a fruitless season with Hibernian, Collins will have the chance to 
grab more headlines with the arrival of José Mourinho’s league leaders to take 
on the League Two side who have already eliminated Blackpool, Leicester and 
Norwich.

“It’s not as frantic on the field and it’s more calm,” says Collins of the 
difference between playing top clubs compared to the kick and rush of League 
Two. “But in the stands it’ll be more frantic because the crowd get behind you 
a lot more when it’s a bigger stage, which is always good. I thinkChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will probably be the best game 
I’ve played in terms of opposition, so it’ll be another good test for me and 
the boys.”

Under the stewardship of Micky Mellon, Shrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> have passed recent tests 
comfortably and four consecutive league wins have left them fourth in the 
table, three points behind the leaders, Luton Town. A week ago they put five 
past Bury without reply, following up with a weekend victory over Portsmouth in 
which players could have been forgiven for getting lost in a Chelsea-related 
reverie and taking their eye off the ball. Collins insists it was an obvious 
trap in which they were wary of becoming ensnared. “You should enjoy these 
moments but if you dwell on them too much they can bounce back to bite you,” he 
says.

Despite Bradford City having proved as recently as two seasons ago that while 
unlikely, it is not beyond the wit of a League Two side to make it to the 
Capital One Cup final, all available evidence suggests these particular Shrews 
should not take a great deal of taming by the mixture of first-team stalwarts 
and reserves likely to be fielded by Mourinho.

“In their previous game in the Cup [against Bolton] they played some big names 
and some not-so-big names, but whoever they play it will obviously be a tough 
test because they’re all Chelsea players,” Collins says. “Personally, I’d 
rather the really big-hitters play because then you’ve got something to 
remember the game by and hopefully get a shirt afterwards.”

Asked to imagine what might happen in a hypothetical situation where his side 
are losing 3-0 in the dying minutes and his manager is offered one of his 
opposite number’s famously premature handshakes, Collins laughs.

“Jesus, I dunno,” he says. “I think you’ve have to have that much respect for 
Mourinho you’ve probably got to shake his hand. I don’t know what the gaffer 
would do in that situation, to be honest. Hopefully we’ll be beating them and 
won’t get to find out.”
 