
Tony Pulis is prepared for three more weeks of speculation surrounding Saido 
Berahino after playing down the striker’sFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> goal celebration.

The 22-year-old’s future has been uncertain since he handed in a transfer 
request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/23/tottenham-saido-berahino-clinton-njie>
 at the start of the season – West Brom rejected several bids by Tottenham – 
and he began the third-round tie against Bristol City on the bench for the 10th 
successive game.

Berahino was introduced after 63 minutes and took only four minutes to score, 
curling a low shot off the greasy surface and into the bottom corner. The 
striker celebrated by running over to the touchline to shake his manager’s hand 
but Pulis downplayed its significance after the 2-2 draw.

“Yes, I owe him some money,” the West Brom manager joked. “He was just 
grateful for taking a couple of quid off me because he’d scored. I’m pleased 
for Saido.”

Stoke are reported to be the latest club to express an interest in Berahino, 
who is now cup-tied. Pulis added: “We’ve got two or three weeks of speculation 
left to keep you journalists happy.”

It all looked rosy for West Brom when Berahino struck, but Bristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> turned the tie on its head 
with goals from Jonathan Kodjia and a substitute, Kieran Agard, who had been on 
the pitch barely a minute. The Championship club seemed set for a famous 
victory but James Morrison scored in the fifth minute of injury time to spare 
the Baggies’ blushes and break City’s hearts.

“It’s tough on them but I thought between the two boxes we played some good 
football and got in some wonderful positions, but our quality in the final 
third was just lacking,” Pulis said.

“We got into some great crossing positions but we couldn’t deliver what we 
wanted, often hitting the first man. But then we have taken the chances that 
have dropped to us.

“I’m pleased that we kept going and the players are fantastic in that respect, 
they’re a fit group of lads. But we will certainly have to manage them now in 
that respect with the number of matches in the coming weeks.” West Brom go to 
Stamford Bridge on Wednesday to play Chelsea, who are three points below them 
in the Premier League.

Steve Cotterill, the Bristol City manager, was angry with the referee, Graham 
Scott, after feeling the official played too much added time, allowing Morrison 
to score. “Four minutes was held up on the board – time was up,” Cotterill 
said. “It was over.

“I know we are splitting hairs here but when you’re 2-1 up away from home 
against a Premier League team you need the referee to be right on it.

“Time was up and he knows it. He probably thinks they’ll get a cross in and a 
header or something will go over the bar then he can blow after the goal-kick. 
But you don’t need to add any more. The bottom line is it’s time.” Cotterill 
could name only six substitutes and had to bring on his replacement goalkeeper, 
Max O’Leary, at half-time after an injury to Frank Fielding.

Cotterill added: “It was a great performance from us but often you don’t get 
two opportunities against a Premier League team and I felt for our second-half 
performance we did deserve to win the game.

“That would have done wonders for our season in the second half of the 
Championship, it’s so disappointing. It was important for us.”

Pulis had a different view, saying: “He’s got to buy himself a new watch. 
That’s the best thing he can do.”
 