
James Beattie puffs out his cheeks as he reflects on the realities of life at 
Accrington Stanley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley>, a 
club with the lowest attendances and smallest playing budget in the Football 
League and where the manager’s duties include cleaning dog’s muck off the 
training pitch and ringing hotels to negotiate the cheapest rate for the 
occasional overnight stay. “If there’s a tougher job in league football I would 
like to know where it is,” Beattie says, smiling. “But I’ve not gone grey yet.”

Beattie looks, and sounds, remarkably chipper in the circumstances, especially 
as Accrington are in 92nd place, bottom ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> after picking up only 
one point from their opening five matches. It is exactly the same position 
Accrington were in this time last year, when they went 12 league games without 
a win before Beattie, in his first season in charge, engineered a remarkable 
turnaround that saw them climb to 15th place. “If you had started the season in 
October, when we won our first game, we would have finished sixth,” Beattie 
says.

It will always be a constant battle to make ends meet at Accrington. On 
Wednesday night they lost 3-1 at home against Carlisle United in the 
Johnstone’s Paint Trophy in front of only 818 people. The average player wage 
at the club is around £400 a week, and there are times when the pay cheque 
fails to arrive on time. “That’s why I’ve got so much respect for these 
players, because every week they come up against lads on much more money, but 
they give me everything,” Beattie says.

It is also why Beattie was so dismayed last month when thieves broke into the 
club and stole the players’ boots. “The only thing worth any value in the 
changing room is the players’ boots,” he says. “You’ve just heard the weekly 
wage, and some of those boots are £160 and more. The lads can’t afford them. 
Well, they can. But they’d have to save. Thankfully, Sky Bet [the league 
sponsor] were unbelievable and they paid for a new pair of boots for every 
player. That’s the sort of support a club like Accrington needs.”

This is the other end of the football spectrum, a million miles away from a 
world where Premier League clubssplurge £835m in the summer transfer window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/02/premier-league-transfer-deadline-day-record-spend-850m>
, signing players on mind-boggling salaries. “The fact we’re a Football League 
club is a miracle,” Beattie says. “If you strip it all down, the annual playing 
budget is under £500,000. [Radamel] Falcao’s wages are £300,000 a week – that’s 
how much Accrington Stanley lose a year. It doesn’t seem right, really.”

Beattie, 36, acknowledges that he was once aboard that gravy train, signing 
for Everton and Sheffield United in multimillion-pound deals, earning tens of 
thousands of pounds a week, driving a Lamborghini and generally living the good 
life during a distinguished playing career where he won five England caps and 
scored 91 Premier League goals. Working at the bottom of the pyramid, however, 
has opened his eyes to the huge disparity that exists in our game.

“There is something fundamentally wrong with the way money is spent and 
distributed in football. I’m not saying flood the Football League with loads of 
money but there are Football League clubs who are struggling like mad. 
Everything is geared towards elite football –all the TV money – and not enough 
filters down. You can go on about England – our players come from grassroots 
football. You don’t see many people playing on a Sunday now because all the 
nets have been torn down and there’s no funding.”

At Accrington it is about trying to beg and borrow to survive. “We only found 
a training ground last week,” Beattie says. “We were at QEGS [Queen Elizabeth’s 
Grammar School in Blackburn, where Beattie was educated] but we got moved off 
there because they can’t have a professional team on their property – if they 
did, they’d have lost a grant. So we were using council pitches in Accrington. 
Well, I wouldn’t even call them pitches, they were just grass areas.

“Me and Paul Stephenson [the Accrington assistant manager] had to check for 
dog shit on a morning and move it. We only had an area 40x40 yards, so you 
can’t do any team shape or 11 v 11 – and it shows. Last year it was no 
coincidence that when we went to QEGS and started to do the passages of play 
and team shape, the results picked up.

“Now we are training at Boothstown FC, which is a junior football club that 
has had good funding from the Football Foundation. It’s a great facility. I’ve 
had some really good help from the Manchester FA, they helped me source it. 
That restores your faith, because everyone says they’ll help you but when the 
chips are down, do they really want to help? It’s tough everyday, there’s loads 
of stuff apart from that that I have to do. But I do it because it’s a great 
introduction into management for me – I’m right up against the coal face.”

Beattie, in fairness, is not moaning about his lot and there is not a trace of 
resentment that he has had to start his managerial career at the bottom while 
others, including his good friend Garry Monk, who was an usher at his wedding 
and is now in charge of high-flying Swansea City, have got their first step on 
the ladder much higher up. “I think good luck to them all,” Beattie says. “For 
Monksy, it’s an amazing opportunity. But I know he’ll be good at it because he 
was always passionate about coaching.”

With Beattie, who played in the Premier League for Blackburn, Southampton, 
Everton, Stoke and Blackpool, there is no financial imperative to work, but it 
is a measure of how much he wants to prove himself in management that he took a 
job 280 miles from the family home in Dorset, where he returns once a week to 
see his wife, Sarah, and their three children.

“That’s the hardest thing, not seeing my family,” Beattie says. “I don’t have 
to do this, and it’s probably costing me money to be Accy manager, because my 
family live on the south coast. But I can’t walk out on the lads. I can’t give 
up on them. And I want to make it succeed, because I’ve been told by every 
manager I’ve spoken to that if I can do it here, I can do it anywhere.”

Beattie admits that some of his former team-mates, as well as ex-managers, are 
probably surprised that he opted to become a manager, although he is quick to 
stress that he was not high maintenance as a player. “I never caused trouble in 
any dressing room. I was always well liked, popular and respected because of my 
character. I speak to a lot of lads that I played with and I still speak to a 
lot of my old managers. I was never a difficult player. Even with what happened 
at Stoke [when Tony Pulis is alleged to have headbutted him after a game at 
Arsenal], that wasn’t my problem, that was someone else’s problem.”

He still speaks to David Moyes, who took him to Goodison Park, and remains 
close to Gordon Strachan, whom he played under at Southampton. “Strachan’s the 
best manager I had, he had such a good relationship with the players,” Beattie 
says. “He rang me the other day and said: ’How you feeling?’ I said: ’I’m 
feeling good.’ He said: ’Keep going, son.’ Strachan was brilliant. He described 
me in his book as a ’radiator’. He said you get certain people who are 
’sappers’, who draw energy from people. But he said: ’James was always a 
radiator. Whenever he walked into a room everyone was lifted.’ And he said that 
was how he used to see me on the pitch.”

Deep down, there is a sense that is where Beattie wishes he could still be, 
banging in goals and giving centre-halves a hard time. “Nothing will ever beat 
playing,” he says. “The first game last year, at Newport, I’d done pre-season 
with the lads and it was great, we were fully prepared, and then the lads went 
out and the dressing room was quiet. For 20-odd years I had been the one that 
was walking out the door onto that pitch. I hated it. It was awful. I was 
nearly crying. I didn’t know what to do with myself. It wasn’t something that I 
was used to and I didn’t like it. But I’ve got my head around it now.”

Beattie is still registered as a player and, with such a small squad at 
Accrington, he has not ruled out pulling his boots on at some stage this 
season. For the moment, though, he is channelling all his thoughts into 
managing and getting Accrington Stanley punching above their weight again.

“It’s testing. But I’m not down about it. I hate it when people whinge when 
they’re healthy; there are people who are seriously ill, lads fighting for us 
out in Afghanistan,” he says. “People ask me about the club and if they want to 
know honestly, I’ll tell them and I’ll tell you. But I don’t want to be 
labelled as someone who moans about it. I tackle it head on, as I have done 
with everything in my career.

“I know people will ask me why did I take the job - but what an opportunity. 
There are only 92 positions in the Premier League and the Football League, and 
how many people want to manage a professional football club? How many people 
would want to be in my job, despite what I’ve told you? So who would I be to 
not give it my best shot?”
 