
It was ugly to watch at times yet the Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland>, thanks to the game’s 
solitary slice of beauty, claimed not just their first competitive away win 
against a team seeded higher than them since 1967 but, more importantly, three 
invaluable points that leave Martin O’Neill’s team excellently positioned to 
reach a first World Cup since 2002.

James McClean, who had come into the game nursing a back problem, scored the 
only goal early in the second half, finishing off a splendid counterattack to 
inflict more woe on a desperately poorAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria>. Wales and Serbia will both have 
plenty to say about which nation qualifies automatically for Russia but 
finishing 2016 with 10 points from the 12 available has left O’Neill’s team 
full of belief.

Austria v Republic of Ireland: World Cup 2018 qualifier – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/12/austria-v-republic-of-ireland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-live>
Wales travel to Dublin when the action resumes on 24 March and despite Chris 
Coleman’s team being the group’s first seeds, on the evidence thus far Ireland 
may well be favourites for that Celtic collision.

O’Neill, forever coy, was not going to get carried away by this battling win, 
though.

“Austria will be disappointed because they’ve dropped three points but 
something tells me they still have a chance and while we’ve always believed 
this group would be tight I think teams will still take points off each other,” 
he said. “I’m genuinely pleased we won the game and have 10 points on the board 
but there’s still a long way to go.”

Losing here may not have been fatal for Austria but they have plenty of ground 
to eat up and Marcel Koller had a pained expression on his face at the end of 
his side’s fifth defeat in seven. A team that was predicted by some to do 
serious damage at the European Championship now looks devoid of self-belief and 
will need the three teams above them to trip over each other to progress.

“We know it’ll be difficult but we will do everything we can to be 
successful,” Koller said. “Ireland played compact and ran a lot, so it was 
difficult for us.”

They had started promisingly – Marko Arnautovic forced a corner in the first 
minute, while Marc Janko was denied by Darren Randolph after spinning Shane 
Duffy – but anxiety soon pervaded their play and Ireland effectively stymied 
them. David Alaba, in particular, looked too eager to force things and was 
uncharacteristically wasteful with possession through a mostly dire opening 
half. “We lost a lot of balls in midfield,” Koller said. “And we were not calm 
enough during the game to score goals.”

The game did spring into life towards the break. Séamus Coleman brilliantly 
blocked Arnautovic’s shot from about eight yards and Marcel Sabitzer struck the 
bar having chipped Randolph from a tight area. At the opposite end Robbie 
Brady’s cross from the left was perfect for Jonathan Walters but the Stoke 
forward could not connect cleanly, shooting over the bar from about six yards.

O’Neill said that miss “could have left us deflated” but if anything Ireland 
were buoyed and three minutes after the resumption the game’s only real piece 
of quality put the visitors in front. David Meyler, introduced midway through 
the opening half for the injured Glenn Whelan, stole possession deep on the 
right and galloped forward before cleverly picking out Wes Hoolahan near 
halfway. His threaded pass was perfect for McClean, who controlled the ball 
before shooting ferociously between the legs of Ramazan Özcan.

Wales v Serbia: World Cup 2018 qualifier – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/12/wales-v-serbia-world-cup-2018-qualifier-live>
Too often in these situations Ireland have sat back and tried to conserve the 
lead only to be finally broken down. O’Neill describes it is a “natural 
tendency” but with Austria evidently against the ropes and swaying, Ireland 
continued to attack. Walters thought he had landed a knockout blow when heading 
another Brady delivery past Özcan two minutes after McClean’s strike, only to 
be correctly flagged for offside.

In response Koller removed Alessandro Schöpf for Louis Schaub, whose first act 
was to warm the gloves of Randolph with a fizzing drive from 25 yards. Alaba 
curled a free-kick narrowly wide to the right approaching the hour and landed 
another speculative long-range attempt on the roof of the net soon after.

Gradually Ireland did drop deeper but they remained menacing on the break and 
the hosts became increasingly frustrated. All Austria could muster late on was 
a tame Martin Harnik effort that was easily held by Randolph and a poor miss 
from Janko, who headed wide under precious little pressure three minutes into 
injury time. “We’ve shown great strength of character in the past couple of 
years,” O’Neill added. “And that was epitomised tonight.”
 