
Fresh from scoring the goal that took Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> into the Champions League 
semi-finals, Javier Hernández struck twice as they beat Celta Vigo on Sunday to 
stay two points behind the La Liga leaders, Barcelona.

Hernández’s first effort put Real Madrid ahead after they had come from behind 
and the second from the player on loan from Manchester United completed the 
victory.

Celta had surprised Real, who were without the injured Gareth Bale and Luka 
Modric, by taking a ninth-minute lead through Nolito. It was a mistake by Asier 
Illarramendi, making a rare appearance for Real, that led to the goal. He lost 
the ball in attack and sprinted back only for Nolito to dribble between him and 
Dani Carvajal before finding the net with a low drive.

Real responded swiftly. James Rodríguez set Ronaldo free and his pass 
deflected off a Celta defender to Toni Kroos, who fired a shot into the corner 
of the net in the 16th minute.

Rodríguez also had a hand in the second goal, Hernández exchanging passes with 
the Colombian before slotting the ball under the Celta goalkeeper, Sergio 
Álvarez, after 24 minutes.

But before the half-hour Celta were level. Fabián Orellana found Santi Mina 
with a perfectly timed pass and the 19-year-old striker scored on the rebound 
after his initial shot had hit the post.

Ronaldo hit a post before finding Rodríguez arriving unmarked in the area just 
before the interval and the midfielder struck a shot that grazed the inside of 
Andreu Fontàs’s leg and trickled inside the upright.

Celta pressed hard in the second half but in the 69th minute Hernández, whose 
winner against Atlético Madrid on Wednesday had earned Real a Champions League 
semi-final with Juventus, superbly controlled a pass from Sergio Ramos before 
firing home.

Afterwards Rodríguez said: “When Celta play like that they leave open a lot of 
space and when Madrid has space it is much more dangerous. I think we are the 
deserved winners. These three points put us in the position to fight until the 
end.”
 