
Your body clock is set to the time you were born. It’s a theory I heard years 
ago. I was born at 10pm and tend to be more alert late in the evening. Getting 
up at 5.30am for work is absolutely not natural to me.

I refuse to even acknowledge that retirement is a word. Shirley Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/jeremy-corbyn-reelected-infighting-left>
 andBaroness Mary Warnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jul/19/society1> are in their 80s and 
90s, and when I met them a few years ago they had brains like razors. That’s 
where I’m looking right now.

The smelliest place in the world was the factory where I worked packing 
slightly gone-off coley for cats. The fishermen’s wives who worked there were 
great. They would smoke in the toilets on their breaks, telling filthy jokes 
and howling with laughter. Life was tough, but they just got on with it.

I want to see how women run the world. Maybe we will make as much of a mess of 
it as men have, but for goodness sake give us a chance.

Health has been one of the most important subjects on Women’s Hour  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007qlvb>since it started in 1946. I announced 
my breast cancer treatment on air to listeners, as I couldn’t possibly hide it 
from an audience who I feel really close to. It’s important to share this 
information.

My dad was the nicest man on God’s earth, but he would return from work, come 
to the table when supper was ready, then go and sit down again by the fire. I 
didn’t think that was fair. When I first lived with my husband, he offered to 
iron my shirt while I was rushing to leave the house. I think that might have 
been the moment I fell in love with him.

Small portions are the answer to the obesity problem. I’ve lost seven or eight 
stone since I had an operation to remove part of my stomach last year. I can 
eat anything I like, just not too much of it. I feel fitter and more mobile 
than I have in a long time.

I’ve been trying to rationalise the Brexit vote. When I spent a year in Paris 
as a student, I had a blue passport but I got there without any kind of hassle; 
so maybe it’s not going to be quite so awful. As a child of people who lived 
through the Second World War, for me the EU was about unity. It breaks my heart 
that we’re narrowing things down rather than opening them up.

My mother and grandmother saw cooking wonderful food as a duty. If you didn’t 
eat everything on your plate, they were upset and disappointed. But that 
attitude can be dangerous.

If you tell me it’s 32C outside, or that somewhere is 10km away, I’ve got no 
idea what you mean. I am part of the generation that never quite accepted 
continental measurements and temperatures. I still prefer pounds, shillings and 
pence, which is a ridiculous thing to say.

The secret to a happy relationship is freedom. My parents had it: they did 
what they wanted to do, and spent their time together enjoyably. David and I 
have slept in separate beds since our first son was born and all we wanted was 
a good night’s sleep. It’s great. I was an only child and had always had my own 
room. There are other times of day when you can be romantic.

Woman’s Hour celebrates its 70th anniversary this year
 