
Still struggling with an off-the-pace and recalcitrant car, Jenson Button 
knows a podium place is almost certainly beyond his McLaren-Honda at theBritish 
Grand Prix <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> this weekend. 
However despite still having not managed a top-three finish in 14 starts there 
since his Formula One career began in 2000, the race unsurprisingly remains 
special for the British driver and one in which he still revels.

“We’re not going to be fighting for a podium as we haven’t been anywhere near 
this season,” he said, but acknowledged the support the race attracts. “You 
have to put on a great show for the fans, they are here whatever the condition, 
whether there is a British guy at the front or at the back or no British guy at 
all. They will be here to love the sport and there has been so much support 
over the years it has been fantastic. It really helps when it’s tough, when 
you’re fighting as far back as we are right now.”

Nico Rosberg: ‘With a good weekend at Silverstone, I can beat Hamilton’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/01/nico-rosberg-silverstone-lewis-hamilton-mercedes->
Button is currently on a one-year contract with McLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>, so this may yet be his last race 
at his home grand prix. “I’d be pretty happy if I retired right now with my 
career in terms of achievements but I would love to win the British GP or even 
be on the podium,” he said. “It’s a shame because I can imagine it is an 
unbelievably emotional experience that you share with all the fans. I look 
forward to this race every year. Out of all the races here and Suzuka stand out 
as special for me in terms of crowd support and love for the circuit. I really 
enjoy it, it’s a great place to drive.”

He has scored the team’s only points this season with an eighth place at 
Monaco and has been stoical all season about the task that developing a new car 
in partnership with a new engine from Honda would be. His opinion was echoed by 
the former world champion John Surtees this week. “Sometimes you have to make 
an investment,” he said. “Jenson and Fernando have found that out this year. I 
can quite understand what they’ve done because I entered some projects because 
I thought they were worthy of investment.”
 