
Jenson Button <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jenson-button> got his 
apologies in early at Silverstone this year. The McLaren driver has not been 
required to climb the podium at his home circuit in an unlucky 13 years of 
trying and nothing will change here on Sunday.

"I come here excited because I love seeing the union flags and the support 
from the British fans and I want to give them a result they deserve because 
they have been so fantastic," he said. "But it's not going to happen. We are 
not going to be on the podium. If we do, it would be a miracle."

Button is not the only British driver struggling to bring cheers from the home 
fans. The four British drivers have failed to produce a win or a runners-up 
drive in the seven races so far. There have been three podiums – the three 
thirds won by Mercedes driver Lewis Hamilton in Malaysia, China and Montreal.

Patriotism is the last refuge of the scoundrel, as Samuel Johnson told us, but 
you also have to be fundamentally nuts to expect too much from the British 
drivers this weekend.

The two great British names in Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> over the past 30 years, McLaren 
and Williams, are also in the doldrums. McLaren, sixth in the constructors' 
championship and falling further behind Force India, are coming to terms with 
life as just another midfield team. Williams, meanwhile, are one of only three 
teams not to score a point all season – the other two, Marussia and Caterham, 
were always expected to be the backmarkers.

Hamilton, an 8-1 punt to repeat his memorable 2008 win here, is favourite to 
emerge as the top British driver on Sunday afternoon but the favourites are 
championship leader Sebastian Vettel and Fernando Alonso.

For the first time in his admittedly short career, Paul di Resta is nurturing 
hopes of becoming the leading Brit in his home race. Force India represent a 
model for how a small, ambitious mid-table team should be run and Di Resta has 
not disappointed with points finishes in every race apart from Malaysia, and a 
fourth place in Bahrain, to give him eighth place in the championship, two 
places ahead of Button.

"I've had good starts to previous years but this one has been a level up," he 
said. "A win would be the icing on the cake but a podium is the realistic 
target for this year. Jenson and Lewis are two world champions and I have got a 
huge amount of respect for both of them and what they have achieved.

"Jenson has been in Formula One a long time, as has Lewis now. They are 
fighters, but equally I am. I want to be in front of them."

"I couldn't challenge them last year because they were way out of my league. 
But this year it is great to be racing against them. I am sure they would 
probably rather be racing at the front. When I am training with Jenson [in 
Monaco] we can be best mates, go out and have a laugh. But on track you want to 
be in front of each other.

"It is getting to the point where it is realistic to think about finishing 
above McLaren in the constructors. We are punching above our weight."

Marussia's Max Chilton, meanwhile, is just happy to be here. "It's an 
extremely exciting moment. To be racing in Formula One is amazing. Australia 
[where he made his F1 debut in March] was very special but this is the one I've 
been waiting for.

"To be in front of the home crowd, with all the flags around the circuit, it's 
going to be a moment not to forget.

Favourites' odds to win British Grand Prix


Vettel 7-4

Alonso 13-5

British odds to win


Hamilton 8-1

Button 50-1

Di Resta 100-1

Chilton 5,000-1
 