
In a match of almost hallucinatory qualities, Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> stretched the boundaries of 
credibility. There were nine goals and nine minutes of injury time and the 6-3 
scoreline in Sunderland’s favour – including a Jermain Defoe hat-trick – is 
practically a walk-on part in the story of the game.

Glenn Murray spares Crystal Palace blushes after Shrewsbury threaten upset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/crystal-palace-shrewsbury-town-capital-one-cup-match-report>
A first-half performance in which Dick Advocaat’s incoherent defence turned a 
comfortable 2-0 lead after 16 minutes into a 3-3 draw at the interval 
threatened to churnSunderland’s season from bad to farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/24/sunderland-dick-advocaat-new-players>
.

Advocaat had focused on his side’s basic defensive inadequacies in training 
and the Dutchman gulped at least three times as Exeter City’s Emmanuel Oyeleke 
and David Wheeler first made it 2-2, then again as Tom McCready made it 3-3. On 
each occasion, the defending was culpable.

Against the team currently eighth best in League Two, Advocaat had named a 
near full-strength home side. His stated aim was to help a quaking group of 
players try to find some rhythm.

Going forward, Advocaat was given some reward, but as Sebastián Coates was 
exposed for Exeter’s first goal, and John O’Shea was outjumped for their 
second, the Dutchman was offered further ammunition in his upstairs argument 
with the board that Sunderland need fresh quality fast. “I’m happy with the six 
goals,” Advocaat said afterwards. “I’m unhappy with the goals we gave away. The 
players must improve and they know it. Three goals, three crosses, that’s a 
worry. And it’s not the first time.

“I never had the feeling they would beat us, with respect, but I’m still 
concerned about defensively how we gave the goals away.” His two centre-halves, 
Advocaat added, are “not in the best shape”.

An interest in the Manchester City defender Jason Denayer looks to have ended 
with the player set for Galatasaray or Marseille. Advocaat instead mentioned 
the injured Younès Kaboul. If Kaboul is the cavalry, Wearside should be as 
worried as Advocaat said he was during a first half in which at least Defoe 
stood out.

It was his precise pass to Patrick van Aanholt which set up – via Danny Graham 
– Jack Rodwell to score the first of his two. From Rodwell’s clipped pass, 
Defoe then made it two, looping the ball away from Exeter’s goalkeeper Bobby 
Olejnik before lashing it in from close range.

To their credit, Paul Tisdale’s players remained composed. This was Exeter’s 
sixth game in 17 days but in Oyeleke they had an energetic forager and he ran 
on to Danny Butterfield’s floated pass to make it 2-1 in the 19th minute. 
Twelve more had passed, during which Adam Matthews made a last-ditch tackle on 
Oyeleke, when Wheeler met Lee Holmes’ cross to place a firm header beyond 
Costel Pantilimon.

The 14,000 at the stadium sighed. But the play was five-a-side to-and-fro and 
quickly Defoe came again. Collecting a Lee Cattermole pass, the striker drilled 
the ball low past Olejnik.

That should have been the moment Sunderland’s experienced players shut down 
play. But they could not. The game was still all over the place. Holmes found 
space on the left, crossed to Wheeler and his headed knockdown was belted in by 
McCready.

Arsenal handed trip to Tottenham in Capital One Cup third-round draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/arsenal-tottenham-capital-one-cup-third-round-draw>
Advocaat replaced Graham with Steven Fletcher but the Scot lasted only a few 
minutes before taking a blow to the throat – the reason for so much 
injury-time. Off he went. Then Adam Matthews went down. Advocaat could have 
been forgiven for thinking Sunderland were coming apart.

Holmes had a chance to make it 3-4 with a diving header but it flew over. And 
on 64 minutes Rodwell scored his second to give Sunderland a lead that this 
time they held on to. The midfielder’s header from a Seb Larsson corner was 
straightforward on a night when few other things were.

The substitute Duncan Watmore brought some verve and he chased down John 
O’Shea’s pass to nick the ball from in front of the hesitant Olejnik and score. 
Defoe then swept in his third, from a Larsson cross, to set up a home tie with 
Manchester City in the third round.

“Bittersweet,” was Tisdale’s verdict. “It was game-on at half-time.”

It was and will be every time Sunderland defend like this.
 