
Good, clean, family comedy. That’s what US audiences have come to expect from 
Jim Gaffigan, who is a big deal Stateside, with his own autobiographical 
sitcom, a new special due on Netflix, and a plum recent gig opening for the 
Pope. So is this America’sMichael McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/08/michael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv>
? There are certainly similarities, as Gaffigan riffs on airport security, his 
wife’s taste for uncomfortable shoes, and life as a father of five. But there’s 
a gruffer edge to the humour, from a comic who’s bluer around the collar than 
McIntyre and who wouldn’t be seen dead skipping on stage, or anywhere else.

His jokes aren’t going to frighten the horses – the only Donald Trump lines 
all evening, for example, come from his excellent support act Ted Alexandro, 
who quips drolly about “our 45th and final president”. Gaffigan keeps things 
more domestic, opening with routines about going to the gym – well-charted 
comic territory – and his fear of doctors. The latter builds to a delightful 
climax in which Gaffigan is consulting his GP by proxy through the medium of 
his sick child.
 ‘A spoonful of butter helps the bug meat go down’ … Jim Gaffigan on seafood 
His persona is that of the put-upon midlife schlub: a sucker for junk food 
(his most celebrated routine, reprised here, hymns an American snack called the
Hot Pocket <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hot_Pockets>), a doormat at home, a 
flabby “pale white guy” and resigned to it. That’s not a new character in 
comedy, but Gaffigan gives it a bleary new lease of life. He plays henpecked 
while keeping “’er indoors” chauvinism at bay. There’s a deft story about 
Gaffigan and his wife watching a movie about a man who leaves his partner for a 
younger woman, the trick of which is to let the audience join the joke’s dots 
while our host heads straight for a night on the couch.

There’s plenty more where that came from, but not so much as to give 
Gaffigan’s 70-minute show anything resembling a theme. Instead, he rambles – 
from massage (he’s a sceptic) to the metric system (ditto), from fashion to his 
distaste for seafood, which not only tastes bad but looks and smells awful too. 
Cue curdled facial expression: “What’s that smell? Oh it’s me, I’m a fish.” He 
turns a neat phrase, usually of the blunt and unromantic variety. But there are 
weaker gags: the bid to ridicule his wife’s footwear habits by transposing the 
same behaviour on to underwear lands with a bit of a clunk.

But such occasions are few: Gaffigan’s hit rate is high, and he makes a virtue 
of the show’s magpie nature, flitting omnivorously from Viking raids on Ireland 
to revolutionary America. His voice is an expert comic instrument – 
movie-trailer rich when he wishes; then tremulous, as if the effort to relate 
this next indignity is too much for him; then tightening the focus around 
punchlines with a conspiratorial whisper. He makes no claims to be 
groundbreaking, but Gaffigan’s touring set showcases a highly capable comic 
whose self-mockery and scepticism about almost everything mean there is plenty 
to laugh about.
 