
Two late goals from substitute Joe Dodoo - the second with almost the last 
kick of the game - gaveRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> a 
dramatic 2-1 win over Partick Thistle at Firhill.

The Jags edged the goalless first half against a ponderous Rangers team who 
bucked up after the break and were denied what looked like a penalty when Harry 
Forrester was tackled in the box by home captain Abdul Osman.

The Partick <https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> Thistle forward 
Kris Doolan opened the scoring for Thistle in the 76th minute before Dodoo, on 
for Joe Garner on the hour mark, levelled with a volley in the 81st minute and 
then drove in the winner in the fourth minute of stoppage time.

The goal took the Light Blues above Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/aberdeen-partick-inverness-scottish-premiership>
 into second place in the Scottish Premiership, with the Dons playing Celtic in 
the Betfred Cup final at Hampden Park on Sunday.

Thistle boss Alan Archibald can be pleased with his side’s performance but he 
was left to rue the lost opportunity for his club to record their first victory 
over Rangers since 1993.

The home side gave as good as they got, and more, in the first half.

In the ninth minute David Amoo’s low drive was parried by Rangers goalkeeper 
Wes Foderingham to the feet of Chris Erskine, who returned it towards goal only 
for it to be blocked by defender Rob Kiernan for a corner, which came to 
nothing.

Doolan then raced clear of the Rangers defence down the right and was crowded 
out after hesitating and moments later a Kiernan tackled took the sting out of 
the lively attacker’s shot after he raced into the Gers box.

Rangers, with Danny Wilson in defence for the first time since October as a 
replacement for the injured Clint Hill, were lacking ideas.

However, in the 24th minute it took a fine save down at his left from the 
Partick goalkeeper Thorsten Stuckmann to keep out Kenny Miller’s header from a 
James Tavernier cross following a short Rangers corner.

Doolan had a shot on the turn from 12 yards saved by Foderingham as the hosts 
reminded Rangers of their threat.

At the other end a close-range drive from Garner was blocked by Thistle 
defender Liam Lindsay and, when the two players clashed just before the 
interval, the Ibrox striker was booked by referee Nick Walsh, when it looked 
like he had led with his arm in an aerial clash.

Winger Barrie McKay replaced Josh Windass for the start of the second half, 
and moments later the Govan side might have had a penalty.

After Lindsay lost possession, Forrester raced into the box before being 
barged to the ground by Osman but referee Walsh enraged the travelling fans and 
the Rangers players by awarding a corner.

But Partick responded and Foderingham made saves from Christie Elliott and 
Erskine while at the other end Stuckmann smothered an effort from Forrester, 
who had again broken through the home defence.

Rangers picked up the pace as the second half unfolded further with drives 
from Dodoo and captain Lee Wallace but it was Doolan who struck when, after 
getting a second bite at a cross from substitute Steven Lawless against 
Tavernier, he knocked the ball past Foderingham from only a few yards out.

Rangers were stunned and moments later Partick substitute Ryan Edwards clipped 
the bar with a long-range effort.

However, after latching on to a Miller pass, Dodoo eased growing nerves among 
the huge travelling support when he volleyed in from 14 yards.

Rangers pressed for a second goal and, with seconds remaining, Dodoo took a 
pass from Miller, who had got away from Osman, and drilled the ball low past 
Stuckmann for a winner which left the home side understandably distraught.
 