
Paolo Di Canio's Swindon moved six points clear at the top of League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and heaped more woe on 
rock-bottomDagenham and Redbridge with a 4-0 win at the County Ground. Billy 
Bodin, Joe Devera, Luke Rooney and Paul Benson scored for Swindon but the 
result was barely in doubt after the visitors had Josh Scott sent off just past 
the half-hour mark for violent conduct.

Second-placed Cheltenham led through Darryl Duffy's early strike at Morecambe 
but collapsed to a 3-1 defeat. Kevin Ellison's double and another from Izak 
Reid gave the Shrimpers the points.

Shrewsbury missed the chance to move into the automatic promotion positions 
but escaped with a point after a stoppage-time equaliser from Matthew Richards 
at home toOxford. The visitors twice led through a Lee Holmes brace but Mark 
Wright hauled them back early in the second half and Richards's last-gasp 
strike kept the Shrews fourth, one point behind Southend.

Rene Howe's seventh-minute goal helped Torquay make ground with a 1-0 home win 
overAldershot.

Second-half goals from Dennis Oli, Jordan Obita and Charlie Lee gave Gillingham
 a 3-1 win overBarnet, who had taken a surprise 39th-minute lead through Clovis 
Kamdjo.

Port Vale stayed in the play-off hunt after cruising to a 3-0 win over Burton 
Albion. Marc Richards opened the scoring two minutes before the interval and 
Louis Dodds added a late brace.

Northampton took a big stride towards safety with a 3-2 win over Bristol Rovers
at Sixfields. Two goals from Adebayo Akinfenwa and another from Kelvin Langmead 
put the Cobblers 3-0 up inside 20 minutes. Craig Stanley and Lee Brown 
responded late.

Plymouth continued their clamber towards safety with a 2-1 win at AFC Wimbledon
. Onismor Bhasera gave Plymouth a first-minute lead and, after Jack Midson 
equalised, Nick Chadwick hit a 49th-minute winner for the Pilgrims.

Hereford remain in the danger zone after blowing a 2-0 lead at Macclesfield. 
Will Evans scored twice in the opening 26 minutes but Sam Wedgbury and Matthew 
Hamshaw responded for the hosts.

Rotherham and Crewe drew 1-1, with a Harry Davis penalty cancelled out by 
Lewis Grabban for the Millers, andAccrington Stanley secured a 1-1 draw at 
Bradford, Will Hatfield equalising in stoppage-time after the Bantams went 
ahead through Nahki Wells.
 