
Stuart Gray will be able to enjoy Sunday's fifth-round draw as the permanent 
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> 
manager, his appointment having finally been confirmed around after they 
negotiated "a proper FA Cup tie" on a proper Rochdale afternoon.

Gray confirmed that negotiations have been completed with the Wednesday owner 
Milan Mandaric to remove the caretaker status he has held, as at several other 
clubs in his career, since succeeding Dave Jones at the start of December.

"It's been going backwards and forwards to the lawyers," he said, having 
agreed a contract until the summer of 2016. "Talks were finalised on Thursday 
and hopefully I'll just get my signature on it tomorrow [Sunday] when we're in 
training.

"It's dragged on but the pleasing thing is the players deserve all the credit 
because it's the players who end up getting me the job with their effort, their 
performances, the commitment – and you could see it out their today especially 
when we went down to 10 men."

Mandaric watched from the Spotland stand, with longer-term Wednesday stalwarts 
including Roy Hattersley and David Blunkett, as Joe Mattock, the former England 
under-21 left back, scored his first goal for the club, set up another but was 
then dismissed for a second yellow card – all this in the space of 15 
second-half minutes to leave the Owls with 10 men for a nervy half hour.

"Joe's a little bit disappointed because he didn't think there was contact on 
the second yellow, but it was given and you have to get on with it," added 
Gray. "For us to go down to 10 men, suddenly it was anFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie, every fan was woken up."

Rochdale's captain, Michael Rose, had already halved Wednesday's advantage 
with a spectacular left-footed volley, but their manager, Keith Hill, admitted 
they rarely threatened to equalise, their cause hindered by the gale blowing 
into their faces in the second half.

Hill, who cut an unusual touchline figure in green jacket and rust cords, 
preferred to praise Wednesday for the quality of their set plays rather than 
blast his defenders for their inability to defend them. Mattock's goal came 
from Chris Maguire's accurate delivery as he pounced on a header from Glenn 
Loovens, and 11 minutes later the left-back was the provider for Oguchi Onyewu, 
who also scored his first Wednesday goal.
 