
Joe Hart <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joe-hart> faces competition as 
Manchester City’s goalkeeper due to the impending arrival of Willy Caballero 
from Málaga, with Manuel Pellegrini having assured the Argentinian there will 
be a chance to dislodge the England No1 should he repeat the mistakes that led 
to him being dropped last year.

While Hart begins the new season as the firm first-choice for the champions 
after a strong showing in the second half of last season, Caballero has not 
been bought solely to fill the role as Hart’s back-up vacated by the departed 
Costel Pantilimon.

Pellegrini wants Hart to be challenged by Caballero, who should cost about 
£6m, in order to ensure the England man maintains focus and continues to 
elevate his game. Last season the manager was moved to leave Hart out after a 
series of mistakes that culminated in a blunder at Stamford Bridge that allowed 
Chelsea to claim a 2-1 win in the dying moments of a league match at the end of 
October. Hart was dropped until late December, when he was reinstated for a 
trip to Fulham and went on to offer near-flawless displays as City won a second 
title in three seasons.

Pellegrini signed Caballero for Málaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> in February 2011 and worked with 
him until moving to City last summer, so the Chilean is well aware of the 
32-year-old’s qualities.

Caballero was initially reluctant to join City as he did not want to see his 
chances of first-team football limited having been Málaga’s No1 since his move 
from Elche, a second division Spanish club, for around £750,000. But the City 
manager has offered Caballero assurances that he would be given a fair chance 
to establish himself should Hart slip up once more and the size of the fee – 
which could rise to around £9m due to appearances and other clauses – reflects 
the role Pellegrini wants him to occupy.

Caballero travelled to England on Monday to undergo a medical and finalise 
terms for a transfer the club are hopeful of announcing over the next 24 hours.

While Caballero will be City’s third signing of the summer – after the £12m 
purchase of Fernando from Porto and Bacary Sagna’s free transfer after leaving 
Arsenal – the unsettled Álvaro Negredo will be allowed to depart only should 
the striker ask for a move and the club’s asking price of about £25m be met.

Negredo is wanted by Atlético Madrid, who are thought to have initially valued 
him at €15m (£11.9m). City’s valuation is at least double this amount, so 
whether the 28-year-old will be prised away remains in the balance.

The striker enjoyed a flying start at City after a £16.4m move from Sevilla 
last summer – with 23 goals in his first 33 appearances – but then failed to 
score after 21 January, a 16-match sequence.

Those members of Pellegrini’s squad not involved in the World Cup had their 
opening day of training at the club’s Carrington training base on Monday, with 
the first pre-season friendly taking place at Dundee on Sunday. City then 
travel to Hearts on 18 July before flying to America on 21 July to start the 
club’s US tour, on which they will compete in the International Champions Cup.

In the States Pellegrini’s side face Kansas City on 23 July, Milan four days 
later and Olympiakos on 2 August and may have an extra game if they reach the 
final, in Miami on 4 August.

Marcos Lopes, an 18-year-old forward who made four first-team appearances for 
City last season, has signed a one-year loan deal at Lille. The Portuguese was 
chosen as City’s academy player of the year two years ago.
 