
Burnley closed the gap on the top three as a scintillating first-half display 
helped them to a 3-1 win against strugglingBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> at Griffin Park.

The outcome was never in doubt after a one-sided first 45 minutes in which the 
Clarets bossed the game in every area of the field. It took them only 11 
minutes to break the deadlock when the former Bees striker Andre Gray teed up 
Scott Arfield to curl a stunning shot into the top corner from the edge of the 
box.

By the half-hour Joey Barton’s exquisite dipping free-kick had cleared the 
wall and the goalkeeper David Button’s outstretched arm to find the net. The 
first-half footballing lesson continued eight minutes later when a half-hearted 
headed clearance from Jack O’Connell was returned with interest on the volley 
by George Boyd to nestle in the bottom corner.

Brentford’s James Tarkowski refuses to play in match against Burnley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/15/brentford-james-tarkowski-burnley-championship>
The only surprise was that Gray, who left Griffin Park for £9m in the summer, 
failed to find the net in the opening 45 minutes. He was at the heart of 
everything positive in the first 15 minutes, firing narrowly wide and setting 
up Arfield for an early effort which flashed just wide.

Brentford, who had to wait until the 37th minute for Alan Judge’s first 
bobbling effort on goal, were booed off at the break.

The Bees’ cause was hampered before kick-off when James Tarkowski, a target 
for Burnley days before the game, failed to appear on the teamsheet. A 
Brentford club statement saidhe had asked not to play against his potential 
future employers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/15/brentford-james-tarkowski-burnley-championship>
.

But that was no excuse for an abject performance in which Dean Smith’s side 
should have gone in at the interval at least five or six down. Gray squandered 
two gilt-edged chances just before half-time as Brentford struggled to get 
anywhere near tir opponents’ more physical and creative midfield.

But it was a different story after the break as Brentford emerged the brighter 
while Burnley sat deep and tried to kill the game off. Judge, also aBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> target, flashed a shot wide of 
the upright to signal his side’s intent as the hosts pressed higher up the 
field.

All too often, though, the final ball lacked quality and when it did reach the 
danger area Brentford looked toothless in front of goal. The half-time 
substitutes Sam Saunders and Lasse Vibe sharpened things up and it was no 
surprise when Judge cut in from the left to fire a low drive under Tom Heaton.

Judge teed up Saunders on the hour but the midfielder’s glancing header 
drifted wide of the far post as Brentford surged forward in waves. Judge and 
the Bees right-back Maxime Colin both found the side-netting with sharp drives 
but it was always going to need something special to breach a resolute Burnley 
rearguard. In the end it was a comfortable win for Burnley, who closed the gap 
on the leaders, Middlesbrough, to four points.

The Brentford manager Dean Smith refused to blame his side’s poor performance 
on the situation surrounding Tarkowski. “I’m not going to make an excuses or 
blame our first-half performance on that,” he said.

“I told him I thought he was making a mistake and that he may be misguided. I 
like the lad but we sometimes make decisions we regret and I think he may 
regret this one.

“He is a good kid and he surprised me but it is one of those things. The 
timing of the bids was also not great. It’s a disappointing saga but people 
have to remember we are not running a January sale here. Players will only go 
if the players’ valuations are met.”

The Burnley manager Sean Dyche said: “There has been a conversation between 
our owner and the Brentford owner over Tarkowski but as a club we always try to 
do business in a correct and straightforward manner. What Brentford choose to 
do is down to them.

“I don’t know whether his absence affected Brentford and to be honest I’m only 
really interested in what we do and not other clubs.”

Dyche was delighted with his side’s first-half showing, which he said was 
among the best in his time at the club.

“In the first half we showed real quality, mixed the play up and scored three 
goals of real quality. It’s hard to keep that up for 95 minutes but I thought 
that in the second half we coped fairly well with them. We expected a reaction 
from them and we got one,” he said.
 