
Just because Hibernian are pressing rigorously for a return to the top 
division, they have not abandoned all hope of alternative glory. Alan Stubbs 
will lead his team into the League Cup final as just reward for a run that has 
seen off Aberdeen, Dundee United and nowSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone>.

Tommy Wright, the St Johnstone manager, should have few quibbles with the 
outcome a frenetic semi-final. Save a brief spell early in the second period, 
Hibs were superior. That Wright took to firing abuse at an assistant referee 
when the full-time whistle blew was a disappointing case of misplaced ire.

Hibs will not be remotely intimidated at a Hampden Park meeting with Celtic or 
Ross County. Nor should they be; Stubbs’s reputation is rising partly on 
account of a fearless approach. If the Liverpudlian leads Hibs to League Cup 
glory, he will have backed up continued confidence with tangible reward.

St Johnstone had entered this tie still harbouring an understandable 
grievance. While the handing of the vast majority of tickets to Hibs made 
sense, the Perth outfit believed they had a deal in place to receive extra 
seats if, as transpired, they sold out Tynecastle’s school end. No such briefs 
were forthcoming, with the area in question instead, and belatedly, given to 
Hibs. The Scottish Professional Football League, a highly unimpressive body at 
the best of times, were guilty of shoddy treatment towards a member club once 
again.

The setting was thereby curious, with Hibs’ followers packed into three sides 
of the home of their greatest foes. Those of maroon persuasion would point to 
an historically poor Hibs record here, but this was a one-off scenario, 
featuring a team in strong second tier form and a mid-ranking Premier League 
side. It was hardly a leap of faith to suggest the sides may essentially be 
evenly matched.

Hibs’ plans had been hampered by an injury sustained by Anthony Stokes, the 
striker signed on loan from Celtic with the aim of increasing Stubbs’ artillery 
in the promotion battle with Rangers. The Irishman’s back problem was 
problematic enough for him not to even feature as a substitute.but any sense of 
disruption was offset by a fine Hibs opening. Those in green and white 
instantly adapted to troublesome conditions, thereby playing with a pace and 
purpose that clearly panicked St Johnstone.

If there was a shortcoming, only a Hibs failure to endorse territorial 
dominance with opportunities could be highlighted. When a clear one did come 
John McGinn’s way, the midfielder dragged his shot wide from 12 yards. St 
Johnstone had earlier failed to clear a Lewis Stevenson cross, an illustration 
of their fragile state.

Anger was soon the prevalent St Johnstone emotion. They were adamant Liam 
Henderson dived under a challenge from Chris Millar, thereby winning a penalty 
that Jason Cummings calmly converted. What could not be reasonably disputed was 
that Hibs thoroughly deserved their advantage or that Millar had found himself 
in an unenviable position on the wrong side of his midfield opponent.

What happened next was thereby quite the surprise. Joe Shaughnessy, in the 
team for his defensive ability, rose to meet a David Wotherspoon cross. 
Shaughnessy’s header was terrific, looping beyond Mark Oxley in the Hibs goal. 
The scale of St Johnstone’s jubilation seemed to resonate partly in surprise.

Wright had surely spent much of the opening half bemoaning the ineffectual 
performance of Michael O’Halloran, who has been one of Scotland’s stand-out 
domestic players for a concerted time. O’Halloran’s pace alone is a wonderful 
asset but he spent 45 minutes here on the periphery, unable to challenge a Hibs 
defence that has not always convinced.

Hibs had endured no such worries. In midfield particularly, they had the most 
effective players on display until the interval. It was a stranglehold Hibs 
could not maintain. St Johnstone opened the second half in far more efficient 
fashion than the first, unsettling their opponents in the process. Simon Lappin 
came within the crossbar’s width of sending his side in front after drastic 
action had been taken towards the marauding Murray Davidson.

That incident seemed to rouse Hibs. Cummings, who could ordinarily be depended 
upon to keep his composure, wastefully shot straight at Alan Mannus after the 
ball fortuitously broke into his path. Within seconds, Cummings’s strike 
partner, Chris Dagnall, had come agonisingly close to a second Hibs goal.

It was left to McGinn to restore the Championship team’s advantage. In the 
immediate aftermath of a scrappy spell of play on the edge of the St Johnstone 
penalty area, the midfielder cracked home a low shot. Mannus, who initially 
seemed to be unsighted, could only offer a despairing dive.

Dagnall should have settled matters after a sublime, dinked pass from McGinn. 
The forward could not defy a tight angle, leaving St Johnstone to breathe 
again. For Hibs, deservedly, this was soon immaterial.
 