
John Still just cannot let Dagenham & Redbridge go. No sooner had he been 
dismissed by Luton a week before Christmas than he was back at Victoria Road on 
New Year’s Eve for a third stint as manager. This was his third match but first 
at home and, thoughNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> won 2-1 to stay on 
Plymouth’s tail at the top of League Two, the side Wayne Burnett had left in 
bottom place three days after Still became available showed enough of the new 
old man’s blueprint to suggest relegation will not be an issue.

With two away wins since then – one under caretakers – the Daggers are already 
22nd, above Yeovil and York, but they have not won at home this season – 16 
games including cups. There is no word yet of a Gypsy curse but fewer than 
1,500 home fans were there to welcome Still back; the Borough of Barking and 
Dagenham has a population of around 200,000. Northampton brought 892 and are 
taking almost 7,000 to MK Dons on Tuesday for their FA Cup replay.

In September Dagenham took 121 to Northampton and won 2-1. Their four away 
wins surpass those of Leyton Orient in 11th place, who sacked their manager, 
Ian Hendon, on Saturday, and match those of Carlisle, Dagenham’s next visitors 
and higher in the top half. By the time Yeovil and York arrive on successive 
Saturdays in five or six weeks the spell should have been broken.

Chris Wilder, Northampton’s manager, knew what to expect. In Still’s last 
match at Luton they scrambled home 4-3 and here again Dagenham gave them a run 
for their money if they have any. On that score, since the arrival from Oxford 
United of Kelvin Thomas as chairman two months ago, Northampton have settled 
their differences with HMRC and, through land surrounding their Sixfields 
stadium, the council. Local rumours are of raids in the offing, though these 
may be cobblers.

Still is not rushing but his team were. His signatures are speed and width and 
an eye for unconsidered talent and loans. “This week I’ve been getting to know 
the players more, their strengths and weaknesses, and in the next two or three 
I should know as much as I need to,” he wrote in the programme. His captain, 
Joss Labadie, said: “He’s a great talker and the boys are binding into his 
philosophies.” The trouble is remembering them for 90 minutes.

Dagenham could have won the match in the first half, when the Cobblers were 
dozy to the last. Set up in 3-4-1-2 shape, the Daggers carved out chances which 
they failed to convert. Still said his return was “like putting on an old pair 
of slippers”. Sadly his strikers seemed to be wearing them. Christian Doidge 
lobbed over when put in by Ashley Hemmings and Ashley Chambers potted a header 
when offside but blazed over when onside in added time. The cost seemed 
inevitable, Northampton reappeared with vigour and, though Doidge forced in 
Josh Passley’s cross, two corners undid Dagenham in the final quarter – the 
first bundled in by John-Joe O’Toole at the far post, the second cleared to 
Ricky Holmes who volleyed it back into a top corner.

“The difficult thing is in the games I’ve been back we’ve conceded five goals 
from restarts, none from open play,” Still said. After his trademark post-match 
huddle, a five-minute conductor’s show for the squad and more, he broke off 
from an interview as Wilder passed to say, with broad smile and loud intent: “I 
thoughtthey were really lucky.” If the League issued green cards as Serie B 
intend, Still would soon have a fistful.

He took Dagenham from Conference to League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> in 2007 and to League 
One in 2010. He has since restored splintered Luton to the League. With Still 
going strong at 65 it is hard to see Dagenham going down.
 