
Jolyon Palmer is fighting for Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> survival at Renault – but his 
father, Jonathan, believes he should be given another chance after impressive 
drives in his past two outings.

Palmer is having a difficult rookie season at the troubled Renault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/renault> but scored his first F1 point when 
he finished 10th in the Malaysia Grand Prix at the start of the month, and he 
followed that with an impressive drive to finish 12th in Japan a week later.

Jonathan Palmer, 59, who competed in F1 between 1983-89, said: “It was a great 
performance to come 12th in Japan because everyone finished the race. The 
Renault management told me that was his best performance of the year.

“He certainly deserves to be in Formula One next year, and with a competitive 
team. And if he is he could be another British Formula One star, someone who 
could take over from Jenson Button.”

The seat of the former GP2 champion Palmer fell in danger after Renault 
confirmed Nico Hulkenberg will move across from Force India and lead the team 
next year in 2017. That means the remaining drive is between Palmer and his 
team-mate Kevin Magnussen – and it is further complicated because Renault are 
thought to be keen on their former reserve driver Esteban Ocon, now with Manor.

In the run-up to Sunday’s US Grand Prix, Palmer Sr added: “I thought the way 
Jolyon drove in Japan, to beat both McLarens and both Toro Rossos, as well as 
both Saubers and Manors, was really something. And he was quicker than Kevin, 
and to beat his team-mate was an important part of survival. And remember that 
Jolyon is a rookie, while for Kevin is in his second year in Formula One.

“The results we’re getting now are far better than expectations, and in Japan 
he was within a couple of tenths a lap of the Williams cars, which really 
shouldn’t have been the case.

“Remember, this year’s Renault is very much an interim car. They only took 
over the team in December after a very late deal with Lotus. And under the 
Lotus era there was very little money spent. Then they had the complication of 
putting a Renault engine inside it, instead of a Mercedes.”

“It’s difficult with the pressure because we’ve got to show what we can do, to 
try and show the bosses,” added Palmer Jr. “You can’t make any mistakes, but 
you can’t be too safe either, or you’re too slow, so it’s a compromise. It 
would be nice to be a little bit more relaxed. There’s always pressure in F1, 
but I know my career is on the line.”
 