
ROUNDUP

Two goals from Jonny Hayes sent Aberdeen into the League Cup final in 
convincing fashion with a 4-0 victory overSt Johnstone at Tynecastle. Hayes 
scored either side of strikes from Peter Pawlett and Adam Rooney to send the 
Dons into their first major cup final for 14 years.

Both sides had lost five semi-finals in the previous six seasons and it was 
the Dons who always looked like ending their run when Hayes opened the scoring 
in the third minute, although they had to withstand some concerted pressure 
before doubling their lead through Pawlett. Aberdeen, filled more than 
three-quarters of the 16,761 capacity crowd at Tynecastle, threatened even 
before the opener when Steve Banks scooped over Rooney's shot following a Barry 
Robson cross. The 41-year-old goalkeeper, who was continuing to deputise for 
the suspended and injured Alan Mannus, contributed to his side's early blow 
when he sliced a goal-kick 40 yards out on Aberdeen's right flank. Rooney 
latched on to it and raced down the line before delivering a square ball that 
Hayes guided just past the outstretched hand of the keeper. Aberdeen were 
struggling to relieve the pressure, but they broke to effect in the 32nd minute 
when Hayes won the ball from Croft and sprinted up the line. The Irishman 
initially only had Niall McGinn for support and his crossfield ball was cut 
out. But Pawlett ran on to the clearance and burst into the box before 
squeezing the ball inside Banks' near post. Aberdeen soon went further ahead in 
the 62nd minute following another counter-attack. Pawlett dispossessed Dave 
Mackay 10 yards inside his own half and threaded a ball between theSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> central defence for Rooney 
to chase. The Irishman kept his composure and fired home from 18 yards to score 
his second goal in two games since his move from Oldham. Aberdeen were now 
firmly in command and Andrew Considine headed off the bar before Hayes 
completed the rout in the 79th minute when he ran at the Saints defence and 
fired a left-footed shot into the bottom corner from 16 yards..

In the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>, a controversial 
equaliser from Kris Boyd a minute into injury time earnedKilmarnock a share of 
the points after a hard-fought match on a poor pitch. Two first-half goals from 
Yoann Arquin and Yann Songo'o appeared to have putRoss County on course for 
their fourth win in their past six games. But after Boyd scored his 14th goal 
of the season two minutes into the second half, County were left clinging on 
with 10 men for the final 13 minutes after Filip Kiss was sent off, and Boyd 
took advantage at the death as County players protested for a foul.

Partick Thistle are still searching for their first home victory of the SPFL 
season after goals fromDundee United's Farid El Alagui and the home side's Gary 
Fraser ensured a 1-1 draw at Firhill. El Alagui finished off a good United move 
just before the half-hour but Fraser restored parity in the second half after 
his corner was returned back to him.

In the First Division, Rangers beat Brechin 2-1 at Ibrox with first-half goals 
from Dean Shiels with 14 minutes played and a header from Jon Daly after 25 
minutes. But the home side had to withstand the visitors pulling a goal back 
seven minutes after the interval and defender Bilel Mohsni being sent off after 
61 minutes to maintain their 23-point advantage at the top.
 