
Middlesbrough remain second in the Championship table after a frustrating draw 
with Ipswich dented their promotion hopes. Having ceded top spotto Burnley on 
Friday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/22/preston-burnley-championship-match-report>
, Aitor Karanka’s side were unable to reclaim it as they failed to break down 
the visitors. Jordan Rhodes came closest to scoring, but the striker, who had 
scored three goals in his previous two games, could only direct a second-half 
shot against the post.

Rhodes and Emilio Nsue also failed to convert decent opportunities in the 
first half. Rhodes shot too close to Ipswich keeper Bartosz Bialkowski after 
breaking clear, while Nsue was denied by a last-gasp tackle from Paul Digby. 
But while things could hardly be tighter at the top of the table, with three 
teams all on 87 points, Boro will still be promoted if they win their final two 
games, away to Birmingham and at home to their fellow promotion hopefuls 
Brighton.

Karanka insisted they remain extremely well placed despite a second successive 
draw. “We have to be positive. I said a month ago that we were in a good 
position and I would say that we are in an amazing position now,” he said.

“We have two games to go, one at home, and we are more mature now and have a 
better squad[than last season]. We are going to be more rested than we were 
today. For that reason, I have to be positive and transmit a positive message.”

Substitute David Nugent also went close with a stoppage-time header but Boro 
were unable to break through against a dogged Ipswich side who are unable to 
make the play-offs.

Karanka said: “I don’t know how many chances we need to score a goal because 
the score today should have been three or four-nil. We had a lot of clear 
chances, but we couldn’t score.

“When it is not your day, the ball hits the post and doesn’t go in. But I am 
really proud of all the players. We have played seven games in 23 days, and in 
this period, to win five and draw the other two games when everybody is tired 
is really good.”

The Ipswich manager, Mick McCarthy, was happy to give a helping hand to his 
friend and Brighton counterpart, Chris Hughton, with the south coast side now 
behind Boro only on goal difference. McCarthy said: “If I’ve done one person a 
favour it’s Chris Hughton, because he’s a mate and he’s such a wonderful guy. 
So Chris, that’s a point for you. I hope we’ve helped him get promoted.

“I haven’t got a clue who is going to go up though. I tipped Derby when they 
beat us, I tippedMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> when they beat us at our 
place, I tipped Burnley at one stage, Hull when they beat us – all of them 
slapped us. Hull are nowhere near it now, so I ain’t got a clue.”
 