
The Copa del Rey final was into extra time and still nothing could separate 
the league champions from theEuropa League  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/liverpool-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
winners when Lionel Messi played the most perfect of passes and Jordi Alba 
scored the goal that took Barcelona towards the double. As elated and exhausted 
bodies piled up in the corner of the pitch, supporters in yellow, red and blue 
celebrated at the other, south end of the Vicente Calderón. Their team were 1-0 
up against Sevilla and on course to become the first side to win the double two 
years in a row for more than 60 years.

Barcelona v Sevilla: Copa del Rey final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/22/barcelona-v-sevilla-copa-del-rey-live>
There were still 23 minutes of extra time left and nervous moments ahead in a 
game so intense, so long, that even the referee got cramp butBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> were closer than ever now. 
And, when Messi slipped another gorgeous ball to Neymar to make it two in the 
last minute, they were there. For much of the night it had not looked as if 
they would get there. They had been down to 10 men for an hour and had to do it 
without Luis Suárez.

They had had to do it against a superb side too. Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla>, winners of three consecutive 
Europa League titles, never know they are beaten. This was the first time in 
seven finals over the last decade. When the final whistle went, Sevilla’s 
supporters gave their players a gigantic reception at one end while Barcelona’s 
celebrated at the other.

“Since when does anyone win a final without suffering?” Luis Enrique had asked 
before this game. He knew. They had suffered from the start and the more so 
from the 35th minute when Javier Mascherano was sent off for pulling down Kévin 
Gameiro. It was only Barcelona’s second red card since Gerard Piqué was sent 
off in the Super Cup last August. Both have been shown to Mascherano and both 
by this referee, Carlos Del Cerro Grande.

The Argentinian watched from by the tunnel as Ever Banega’s free-kick was 
saved sharply by Marc André ter Stegen and an already difficult game seemed to 
shift further Sevilla’s way.

Until then this had been close but Sevilla might have been more satisfied, 
quick into the challenge and quicker to spring forward. The threat was clear 
when they broke and the first half’s best opportunity had fallen to Coke 
Andujar, but he could not finish from 10 yards.

The red card prompted Barcelona momentarily to shift Sergio Busquets to 
centre-back before, at half-time, putting on Jérémy Mathieu at centre-back and 
withdrawing Ivan Rakitic from midfield. The second period began with Banega 
striking the post, the ball travelling across the face of goal. Suárez then 
pulled his right hamstring and withdrew. Down on the bench he was in tears, 
with his participation in the Copa América at risk. Uruguay’s first game is 
only a fortnight away.

Out on the pitch Sevilla kept coming. “When you’re playing for a title your 
legs no longer feel heavy,” Vitolo had said before their 63rd game of the 
season. He was running at Barcelona, his team-mates too, and in two minutes 
Busquets blocked from both Gameiro and Gregorz Krychowiak. Piqué was 
everywhere, tackle after tackle after header. Sergio Escudero’s looped ball hit 
the bar, Gameiro sprinted into the area on the right and again Piqué went to 
ground; again the tackle was impeccably timed.

Yet it was not always desperate and at times it felt as if Barcelona were 
managing this well, notwithstanding being a man down. As the game went on that 
sensation grew. A Sevilla goal no longer seemed imminent and Neymar, Iniesta 
and Messi carried forward when they could, which was increasingly often. They 
took responsibility and occasionally took control too. Fleet of foot, the touch 
impressive, their runs usually ended with a tumble just as they threatened to 
get beyond Sevilla.

Barcelona grew frustrated at how few were blown as fouls as Sevilla stopped 
them any way they could. From one that was, on Iniesta, Sergio Rico saved 
Messi’s free-kick. Rico had to save another in the very last minute after 
Neymar had been brought down on the edge of the area by Banega who, like 
Mascherano, was then sent off.

Extra time beckoned, 10 against 10. It began with Gameiro’s shot blocked but 
then Messi saw Jordi Alba racing up the left. From near the centre circle he 
curled a wonderful delivery left-footed into the area; the ball bounced once 
and Alba put it beyond the reach of Sergio Rico.

There was more and it was mostly from Barcelona now. A Messi free-kick was 
pushed away, Piqué’s header saved and Rico made a double stop from Dani Alves 
and Busquets. Another red card followed, too, as Daniel Carriço was sent off 
for a wild challenge on Messi, who had been down often but never out. Messi 
then did it again, finding Neymar to score the second. The cup was heading back 
to Catalonia again.

How Barcelona lost La Liga, then won it all over again | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/16/how-barcelona-lost-la-liga-title-then-won-it-again> 