
One thing more tedious than slow play in golf is people who constantly drone 
on about the topic.

Which is a shame; aside from the broader issues of society and sport, the two 
aspects that stunt golf’s development above all else are cost and the time a 
round takes. In this age, we do everything quickly. The concept of spending 
five hours on a golf course holds little appeal to many.

Last week in Abu Dhabi, the European Tour found itself at the centre of a 
storm relating to aslow-play warning issued to Jordan Spieth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/21/rory-mcilroy-abu-dhabi-championship-golf>
. And that was essentially it: a warning. It was perhaps an indicator of the 
quest for controversy that this incident blew up so spectacularly.

There were two significant subtexts. Spieth himself, the world No1, was one. 
The other related to fresh “monitoring” powers bestowed on referees after a 
three-hour discussion at a players’ committee meeting. It must be remembered 
that, as a members’ organisation, the Tour is never going to impose heavy 
sanctions on players for slow play. Turkeys and Christmas spring to mind.

And yet, this group is deserving of credit for at least tackling an issue that 
has seen 20 minutes added to tournament rounds within a relatively short time. 
Taken to a further degree, that can impact on the size of the field and 
therefore opportunity for players to compete. As a spectacle for tournaments, 
it causes unquestionable harm.

First, to the Spieth case. The 22-year-old readily admitted he took in excess 
of a minute over a putt on the 8th green but did so deliberately, having 
checked there was no group waiting behind. That, to many of us, constituted 
common sense. If not holding anyone up, what’s the problem?

Closer inspection reaches the point that the European Tour are rightly 
focusing on. Thesizeable Abu Dhabi crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/rickie-fowler-hsbc-championship> 
and, pertinently, television audience has no real interest in where Spieth’s 
group is in relation to others. What they see is a player taking extended time 
over a shot, a matter that impacts directly on how youngsters – and middle-aged 
club players in the midst of their £1 Wednesday matches – behave. The message 
has to resonate that this form of deliberation over shots isn’t helpful and 
damages the perception of the game.

People suddenly think taking more than a minute over putts is the norm or even 
an advantage. It must be, the top guys in the world do it. A glance at any club 
medal on any given weekend will reveal shades of the same approach. Those medal 
numbers, meanwhile, struggle because people can’t give up their time.

Whether Spieth, as a visiting player from the United States, should have been 
pinpointed is an interesting point. The Tour’s chief referee, John Paramor, is 
about the straightest individual in sport; any sense he would deliberately 
target Spieth, thereby sending a message to others, is a flawed one. But 
inadvertently, this incident could have the effect of making all players 
realise they are susceptible to a warning, or penalty, if they are slow. Which 
is good news, surely.

The notion that the potential fine of £2,000 for monitored players who repeat 
the offence within a tournament won’t actually serve as a deterrent was offset 
by the attitude of Spieth. He was clearly annoyed to have been caught in this 
situation; he didn’t want any reputational harm on account of being deemed 
slow. This irked him, which was pleasing to see.

To his credit, Spieth also took a wholly mature attitude towards the brush 
with officialdom before departing the Middle East. He had seen no need to seek 
further talks with Paramor.

“I understand it,” Spieth said. “I was given a rule sheet before the 
tournament started. Michael [Greller, Spieth’s caddie] was told to make sure I 
read it because it’s changed and the policies over here are different.

“With the adjustment in the rules over here, it’s all based on timing. And I 
understand I took too long on the shot and I was given a warning, which is 
exactly what would have happened in the States.

“The positioning [of groups] is what was different from my perspective. So I 
have nothing to really talk about. I deserved it and it was based on a rule 
sheet that I was given before the week started. It’s hard for me to understand 
when you’re back in position with one hole to go, why is it even a factor, but 
there shouldn’t be any special treatment. I certainly wouldn’t want any, so it 
is what it is.”

For their part, the Tour isn’t indulging in a money-making exercise or token 
gesturing. Senior officials have spent time with professionals who have issues 
with slow play, talking them through pre-shot routines in a bid to help. 
Sometimes, players simply over-think to the point where they are almost scared 
to hit shots. More often than not, professionals don’t even realise how slow 
they are until it is pointed out.

Statistics from Abu Dhabi suggest monitoring had a swift impact. In round one, 
18 groups were monitored. By rounds two, three and four, that figure had been 
slashed to eight, four and six, respectively. The message, it seemed, hit home. 
When Daniel Brooks was issued with a warning on Friday after taking excessive 
time over a tee shot, he embarked on a run that saw him take 20 seconds or 
fewer – in one occasion just nine – before hitting.

There are other ways in which golf’s ruling bodies could quicken tournament 
play. Abu Dhabi is an example of a course with ridiculous rough just a short 
hop from fairways, which is necessary to keep scoring down because, simply, 
equipment allows the ball to travel far too far. If that scourge was properly 
looked at, there would be a knock-on effect and courses could be set up 
differently.

Such matters are beyond the control of the European Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour>. On the basis it was rightly 
criticised time and again for doing nothing to prevent slow play, which verged 
on the unwatchable at times, it is nonsense to castigate them again now. Spieth 
was unfortunate to be caught in the early crossfire but this is a policy with 
merit. Good on the Tour for implementing it.

Masters 2013: Guan Tianlang hit with one-shot penalty for slow play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/12/masters-2013-guan-tianlang-penalty> 