
José Mourinho is set to be appointed the new Manchester United manager in the 
next few days after agreeing a deal to take over from Louis van Gaal. The 
Dutchmanwon the FA Cup with a 2-1 victory over Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
 on Saturday and seemed to be under the impression that he would still be in 
charge next season, but is now certain to be replaced by Mourinho.

Manchester United win FA Cup as Jesse Lingard sinks Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
The Portuguese manager, who left Chelsea under a cloud in December last year, 
turned down an offer from Paris Saint-Germain in the hope that United would 
come calling – and negotiations took place in the last few days after United 
had missed out on fourth place in the Premier League and therefore a Champions 
League berth. Mourinho has already agreed a salary and has discussed possible 
transfer targets with the club and is likely to be presented as United’s new 
manager once his agent, Jorge Mendes, has finalised the finer details of the 
contract.

Van Gaal leaves United after two seasons in charge. United finished fourth in 
the league in his first campaign and won the FA Cup on Saturday but went out in 
the group stage of the Champions League and were then eliminated by Liverpool 
in the Europa League.

United’s plan had always been to keep Van Gaal in the job for three years 
before handing over to someone younger, such as Ryan Giggs. But the lack of 
progress on the pitch and the fact that many of the club’s new signings failed 
to improve the team meant that the club decided to end the deal with one year 
remaining.

However it seemed Van Gaal was unaware of the news as rumours started to swirl 
round Wembley last night and his final press conference turned into something 
of a farce.

The FA Cup-winning manager turned up to speak at Wembley with the trophy in 
his hands, and placed it on the table in front of him. “I show you the Cup, I 
don’t discuss my future with the media,” he said defiantly. “Some of you have 
had me sacked already.”

Reports were still emerging at that point that the club had drawn a line under 
Van Gaal’s reign, with William Hill shortening their odds on United for the 
title next year on learning of Mourinho’s appointment, but the Dutchman was 
having none if it.

“I don’t want to talk about leaving,” he said. “I am proud that I am the first 
United manager after Sir Alex Ferguson to win a trophy. I have had a picture 
taken with Sir Alex, because that is history.”

Even before Saturday night’s developments it was common knowledge that United 
would not be satisfied with just an FA Cup win. Champions League qualification 
has always been their main aim and Van Gaal could only manage a fifth-place 
finish. Yet when asked if he had plans for next season Van Gaal replied in the 
affirmative.

“The aim will be the same, we need to improve further and we need to sign new 
players,” he said. “How much we improve is dependable on the players we can 
buy. I have said on several occasions I would like a fast winger. I believe in 
refreshment of my squad, you cannot always use the same players.”

So confrontational was Van Gaal’s mood it was difficult to remember a Cup 
final had just taken place and he was the winning manager. “We showed we can 
still fight to the end, and I am very proud as aManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> manager,” he said of 
the game.

“We had spirit, even after injuries and going down to 10 men [after Chris 
Smalling’s red card], and it was a beautiful goal from Jesse Lingard that 
decided the match.”

He then went on the attack again, complaining about media coverage of his 
decision to leave Memphis Depay out of his Cup final squad. “I had to make a 
hard decision, and it is true that Memphis did not travel to Wembley with the 
team,’ he said. “He just came down on a later train, that’s all. We did not all 
travel together because I want focus in my squad.”

Louis van Gaal was doomed at Manchester United by refusal to adapt | Amy 
Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-sack>
Alan Pardew was a disappointed runner-up, as might be expected, though at 
least he did not have to face questions about not being in the same job next 
season.

“With a bit more help with the referee we might have done better,” the Crystal 
Palace manager said. “I thought it was a penalty when Rooney brought down Wilf 
[Zaha], but I was most disappointed with the Connor decision [not to play 
advantage when Wickham recovered from a foul to put the ball in the net]. You 
could see he was going to get up first and the advantage was still with us.

“When we took the lead so late in the game I thought we might see it through 
but Rooney came up with a great moment to put them back in it. Not many other 
players could have done that, and the winning goal was a wonder hit. It was a 
great final, it could have gone either way, but in the end it didn’t go ours.”
 