
José Mourinho accused his Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> players of lacking 
commitment and said they deserved to lose against Fenerbahce for treating 
Thursday’s Europa League group game as a “summer friendly”.

United went behind after 69 seconds when Moussa Sow gave Dick Advocaat’s side 
the lead with an spectacular overhead kickin a 2-1 defeat for United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/fenerbahce-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
. Fenerbahce’s second goal came from an equally impressive Jeremain Lens 
free-kick in the 58th minute before Wayne Rooney scored a late consolation.

An awful night for Mourinho and his team was compounded by Paul Pogba limping 
off before the half hour and his availability for the trip to Swansea City on 
Sunday is in doubt.

Manchester United sunk by stunning strikes from Fenerbahce’s Sow and Lens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/fenerbahce-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
Mourinho, though, was clear where culpability lay for a shambolic display. 
“They deserved to win,” he said. “Football is not just about quality – it is 
about effort and commitment, it is about playing to your limits. In an 
atmosphere like this, to concede an early goal gives the opposition exactly 
what they want. The opponent can then defend and counterattack us with a lead 
and that is our fault for letting them be in that situation.

“They were playing a Champions League final and we were playing a summer 
friendly by the way the game started. After their second goal we reacted and 
could have got a different result but I didn’t feel we deserved more as over 
the 90 minutes we didn’t play well enough. We didn’t fully play to our maximum.”

Mourinho was unhappy United did not heed his pre-game message. “I am 
disappointed as I have quite a big experience of playing against Turkish 
teams,” he said. “I pass to the players all my experience, and my experience is 
that when you play against them at home it’s easy always – 2-0 or 4-0. You come 
to Turkey and it’s a completely different story. I told them to wait for that 
and not be focused on an easy game – be ready for completely different game but 
we started the game sleeping.”

Rooney’s goal was only his second in four games for United. Mourinho said: “We 
are not scoring goals, that’s the reality, but we produced, we create. We had 
enough chances. We had great positions to score, headers not going in direction 
of the ball, bad passes in the final third, shots that could hit the target and 
didn’t.”

Mourinho pointed to injuries to Eric Bailly and Chris Smalling at centre-back, 
saying the combination of Daley Blind and Marcos Rojo as their replacements 
hampered the team. “It is difficult to cope, having to play with two left-backs 
at centre-back,” he said. “This makes it tough to cope with the physicality of 
the game.

“I know we have a problem and especially away from home – it’s difficult to 
play with two proper central defenders. Football starts with a goalkeeper and 
two strong central defenders. We are playing with two left-backs and Blind is 
having to play central defender on the right side [which hampered him even 
more].”

The defeat leaves United third in Group A with six points, one behind 
Fenerbahce and Feyenoord. If they are to guarantee passage to the knockout 
stage United must win their last two games – against the Dutch team at Old 
Trafford and away at Zorya in Ukraine.

Of their qualification hopes, Mourinho said: “We don’t depend on the others, 
we depend on ourselves. If we win both games we qualify. Even with four points 
we could qualify, since Feyenoord play Fenerbahce and both sides cannot get 
maximum points.

“Honestly I think we are in a better situation than Fenerbahce. Fenerbahce 
have seven points – even if they beat Zorya at home we go to the last game. 
It’s impossible for Feyenoord and Fenerbahce to win the same match [when they 
play each other]. We depend only on us. We don’t need to wait for results or 
know what is going to happen.”

Henrikh Mkhitaryan came on in the second half for a first appearance since 
being taken off at half-time during the defeat against Manchester City at home 
on 10 September. The Armenian failed to make an impact. Asked of his thinking 
regarding the forward, Mourinho said: “He has to do more. It’s as simple as 
that.

“We have big expectations in the club and lots of players for these positions. 
He has to play better than Juan Mata, Jesse Lingard and Anthony Martial, and 
it’s as simple as that. Every manager in the world wants to win matches and 
play the players he thinks can help the team and I’m no different.”
 