
The death of Jules Bianchi at 25 is a jolting shock to Formula One, even 
though many in the sport doubted his chances of survival after his horrific 
crash inthe Japanese Grand Prix at Suzuka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/05/lewis-hamilton-wins-japan-grand-prix>
 last October.

Death in F1, once so commonplace, had not occurred as the result of a crash 
since Ayrton Senna, perhaps the greatest of all champions, died at Imola in 
1994, on a weekend that claimed the life of another driver, the Austrian Roland 
Ratzenberger in his debut season.Senna’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/30/ayrton-senna-death-funeral-formula-one>
, like that of Jim Clark in 1968, was a reminder to lesser drivers that even 
the very finest were mortal in this most dangerous of environments.

Since then the FIA, the sport’s governing body, has moved a long way towards 
eliminating serious accidents inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, but there will always be 
crashes – and casualties – where competitors travel in close proximity to each 
other at speeds of 200mph.

Bianchi may never have gone on to become one of the great champions, such as 
Ayrton Senna and Jim Clark or, in modern times, Fernando Alonso and Lewis 
Hamilton, but he had been described as the “real deal” by those who had worked 
closely with him. He was fast and competitive, even driving for the smallest 
team in the paddock, Marussia,for whom he won their only points, at Monaco in 
May 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/25/nico-rosberg-wins-monaco-f1-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-mercedes>
 – two points that pushed the team up to ninth in the constructors’ 
championship. He regularly defeated his team-mate Max Chilton, the most 
reliable single barometer of a driver’s capabilities.

The Frenchman had already been fully measured, and not found wanting. In death 
it is common to be talked of in glowing terms but it happened throughout 
Bianchi’s short F1 career. As well as being manifestly talented he was 
cheerful, friendly and immensely popular. As Marussia’s president, Graeme 
Lowdon, said in Russia: “Everyone in Formula One loves Jules. Just everyone.”

One of the people who knew him best in the paddock was Force India’s deputy 
team principal, Bob Fearnley. Bianchi was a reserve driver with Force India in 
2012. Fearnley said: “Jules had a phenomenal junior career and he proved 
himself, clearly, with us in his year as a reserve driver. More recently he has 
been the shining star for Marussia. There is no question that he was on every 
team’s radar.

“Marussia did the right thing with Jules. They took him for his talent, rather 
than looking for money from a pay driver and he had huge talent. But he was one 
of those rare exceptions in life. Not only was he exceptionally talented he was 
also a wonderful person.

“He was always smiling and was an absolute delight to have in the team. 
Drivers in F1 are so focused on performance, so it was nice to have someone who 
was a genuinely good human being. It’s tragic, and a wake-up call for Formula 
One, where we push the boundaries a bit.”

Bianchi was the richly gifted legacy of a proud dynasty of racers. He was the 
grandson of Mauro Bianchi, and nephew of Lucien Bianchi. Mauro was a prominent 
figure in motor sport in the 1960s, a leading driver in F3 and endurance 
events, particularly in Alpine-Renault. Uncle Lucien won Le Mans in 1968, the 
year he was also third in the Monaco Grand Prix, the only time he finished on 
the podium in 17 grands prix.It was Le Mans where Lucien lost his life 
<http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1873&dat=19690329&id=PbQtAAAAIBAJ&sjid=ocsEAAAAIBAJ&pg=3773,7729860>
 as the Alfa Romeo he was driving struck a pole, bursting into flames upon 
impact.

Jules Bianchi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jules-bianchi> first drove a 
kart at the age of three and was racing by five. His father, Philippe, once 
managed the Brignoles karting track in southern France and it was here that 
Bianchi made his debut. He was signed up by Maranello Karting in 2003. In 2006, 
his talent now beyond any argument, he came under the influential wing of 
Nicolas Todt, son of the FIA president, Jean. “I knew Jules since he was 15, so 
this is all very hard for me,” Jean Todt said in Sochi during the Russian Grand 
Prix a week after Bianchi’s accident in Japan.

Bianchi moved up to cars in 2007 and was an immediate success, winning the 
French Formula Renault 2.0 series. He was promoted to the Formula 3 Euro Series 
a year later and finished third overall with two victories, as well as a 
victory in the Masters event at Zolder.

In 2009, with eight wins, he won the title with a race to spare – he went on 
to win that final round at Hockenheim, too. By now he was already being talked 
about as a possible future F1 star. At the end of 2009 he represented Ferrari 
at the young drivers’ test in Jerez, joining the team’s famous driver academy.

By 2010, he was a star of the GP2 Series, and was fourth in the championship 
when he was badly injured at Hungaroring, but surprisingly recovered in time to 
take part in the next round.

In November 2010 he was named by Ferrari as their test and reserve driver for 
the 2011 F1 season. In 2012 he was loaned to Force India, as that team’s test 
and reserve driver, and was deeply impressive in the nine practice sessions in 
which he took part. He looked set to join Force India’s full team in 2013, 
alongside Paul Di Resta, but lost out to the more experienced Adrian Sutil.

Instead, he was taken on by Marussia where he was consistently impressive, 
despite driving an inferior car. In Marussia’s fifth season and 83rd grand 
prix, Bianchi finally produced the team’s maiden top-10 finish with ninth 
position, dragging his generally uncompetitive MR02 into meaningful combat with 
faster cars on the grid.

He was adored at Marussia, who viewed him as a future star, in all probability 
with a bigger team. That was always most likely to be with Ferrari, where he 
had a good relationship with the double world champion Alonso. A fitness 
fanatic, Bianchi and Alonso often trained together at Maranello and the 
Frenchman ran his first half-marathon in Toulon last September.

If anyone could have possibly survived that sickening crash into a recovery 
vehicle at Suzuka, it was Jules Bianchi, but he never regained consciousness.
 