


Jules Bianchi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jules-bianchi>, the Marussia 
driver critically injured in the Japanese Grand Prix last month, has come out 
of his induced artificial coma and is breathing unaided, his family said on 
Wednesday.

The 25-year-old Frenchman suffered a diffuse axonal injury to his brain, which 
involves widespread damage, in an horrific crash involving a vehicle attempting 
to recover another car. He underwent immediate surgery on his arrival at the 
Mie general medical centre in Yokkaichi.

After weeks of little change in his condition, Bianchi’s family were finally 
able to issue a positive update. “Almost seven weeks after Jules’s accident at 
Suzuka, and following a challenging period of neurological intensive care, we 
are able to announce that Jules has made an important step,” said Philippe and 
Christine Bianchi in a statement.

“Jules is no longer in the artificial coma in which he was placed shortly 
after the accident, however he is still unconscious. He is breathing unaided 
and his vital signs are stable but his condition is still classified as 
critical. His treatment now enters a new phase concerned with the improvement 
of his brain function.”

The statement continued: “Jules’s neurological condition remains stable. 
Although the situation continues to be serious, and may remain so, it was 
decided that Jules was sufficiently stable to be repatriated to his native 
France. We are relieved, therefore, to confirm that Jules was transferred 
aeromedically from the Mie Prefectural general medical centre in Yokkaichi, 
Japan, to Le Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, where he arrived just a 
short time ago. Jules is now in the intensive care unit of Professors Raucoules 
and Ichai, where his care will also be monitored by Professor Paquis, head of 
neurosurgery service.

“We are thankful that the next phase of Jules’s treatment can continue close 
to home, where he can be surrounded and supported by his wider family and 
friends. We have nothing but praise for the outstanding care provided by the 
Mie general medical centre since the accident.”

In the Russian Grand Prix, which followed the race at Suzuka, the Marussia 
team ran just one car before later last month going into administration.
 