
Not so long ago, Julian Nagelsmann turned up in the Munich suburb of Giesing 
for a job interview with a difference: he, the twenty-something coaching 
prodigy, was sounding out FC Bayern, not the other way around. The German 
champions, eager to appoint Germany’s most promising youngtrainer as their U23 
team manager, pulled out all the stops. Chairman Karl-Heinz Rummenigge and 
sporting director Matthias Sammer welcomed him personally at Säbener Strasse. 
Pep Guardiola, too, dropped in on him, offering kind words and a nice pat on 
the back. Nagelsmann wasn’t swayed by the Red’s charm offensive, however. He 
preferred the clear path laid out for him in Kraichgau to the glamour of 
Bavaria. After taking TSG Hoffenheim’s U19s to theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> championship in 
2013-14 and another appearance in the final a year later, the powers at 1899 
secretly made up their mind that the Landsberg-born former TSV 1860 player 
would take over the seniors ahead of the 2016/17 season.

The rise of TSG Hoffenheim: from ninth-tier amateurs to the Bundesliga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2016/feb/26/hoffenheim-bundesliga-germany-julian-nagelsmann>
However, Hoffenheim’s carefully laid plans for his career progression were 
scuppered by a horrible drop down the table and experienced coach Huub Stevens 
having to resign with a heart complaint after the winter-break. Nagelsmann 
promotion wasfast-tracked to the first-team job in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/hoffenheim-appoint-julian-nagelsmann-youngest-coach>
, to a combination of universal disbelief and doubt. He was 28 years old at the 
time, and the team sponsored by software magnate Dietmar Hopp – 17th place in 
the table, five points adrift of the relegation play-off spot – were well on 
their way to a firstabstieg (descent) from the top flight. Local paper 
Rhein-Neckar-Zeitung dismissed the appointment of the Bundesliga’s youngest 
full-time manager as a “public relations stunt”. “A crackpot idea” was
Frankfurter Rundschau’s verdict. 

The idea has turned out a pretty good one though. After saving Hoffenheim from 
the drop in May, Nagelsmann has continued to find success at a rate (39 points 
in 22 games) that’s only bettered by the Bundesliga’s big two. A 3-0 win at 
ten-man Bayer 04 Leverkusen on Saturday saw him leapfrog Roger Schmidt’s team 
in the “Nagelsmann table” of points won since his appointment eight months ago. 
“There’s a hint of Champions League in the air,”Kicker magazine wrote last week.

The rather straightforward win against a Leverkusen team was depleted within 
six minutes at the BayArena – TSG old boy Kevin Volland brought down Kerem 
Demirbay with an ill-timed tackle outside the box – lifted unbeaten Hoffenheim 
into fourth spot in the table, four points behind leaders Bayern. Their 
unexpected position chimes with the main story of the season so far, the 
surprising rise up the table by lesser lights such as newly-promoted RB Leipzig 
(second), Hertha (third), Köln (fifth), Frankfurt (seventh) and Freiburg 
(eighth) at the expense of the establishment. That doesn’t make it any easier 
to explain, however. Hoffenheim lost Germany international Volland, their best 
attacking player, in the summer, and spent relatively little on journeymen such 
as Kerem Demirbay and Lukas Rupp, as well as €3m (plus bonuses) on striker 
Sandro Wagner, previously of Darmstadt. There’s no Roberto Firmino, Carlos 
Eduardo or Luiz Gustavo in a squad that screams mid-table.

What they have, though, is fantastic togetherness (“we’re a super unit,” said 
Demirbay) – and a young man on the touchline who’s been able to supplement 
technical know-how with a well-developed sense of man-management. “Thirty per 
cent of coaching is tactics, 70% social competence,” he told Süddeutsche 
Zeitung in August, “every player is motivated by different things and needs to 
be addressed accordingly. At this level, the quality of the players at your 
disposal will ensure that you play well within a good tactical set-up – if the 
psychological condition is right.”

Nagelsmann was forced to the sidelines early on. Aged 20, he picked up a knee 
injury that ended his career while playing for Augsburg’s second team, coached 
by Thomas Tuchel. Tuchel got Nagelsmann involved scouting the opposition, 
before appointing him as coach to 1860’s U17s. At Hoffenheim, he worked as 
assistant coach of the first team before taking charge of the second side and 
finishing a degree in sport science.

The self-avowed chocaholic admits to having been nervous ahead of his first 
team talk back in February but has since worked out that pre-match words should 
be short and few. The real coaching happens during the week, as he constantly 
tries out new things (“we will only repeat one specific exercise a few times 
every year”) and finds out which buttons need pushing. “I work like a baker,” 
he said, “I mix things, put them in the oven and see if I like what comes out.”

Hoffenheim appoint 28-year-old Julian Nagelsmann as head coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/hoffenheim-appoint-julian-nagelsmann-youngest-coach>
Consequently, his brand of football is hard to pin down. Like all coaches of 
his generation, he’s been heavily influenced by Ralf Rangnick’s pressing game, 
but he’s not dogmatic. “Rangnick’s] Leipzig themselves underwent an interesting 
development in the second division (last season),” Nagelsmann toldspox.com 
<http://spox.com/>. “In the beginning, they almost provoked situations where 
they lost the ball, in order to win it back again (in dangerous situations). 
But most opponents were so deep that they didn’t have a chance to do that. They 
had to adjust. I put a lot of emphasis on our behaviour when we don’t have 
possession but I will never provoke a loss of the ball. You need both things 
today, solutions with the ball, as well as well as without it.” His Hoffenheim 
have enjoyed the sixth-highest possession stats (53.7 per cent on average) in 
the league, a departure of the radical transition football played under most of 
his predecessors.

He considers formations largely irrelevant – “it’s a question of five or 10 
metres whether it’s a 4-4-2 or a 4-3-2-1; you only see teams adhering to that 
at kick-off and perhaps eight times during the game” – but doesn’t let much on 
by way of specifics, beyond the revelation that his staff collect 
highly-specialised data, for example the time players spend in the
deckungsschatten(literally: the shade of marking), unable to receive a ball 
because the opponents are blocking the passing lane.

Nagelsmann’s profile has risen so rapidly that not everybody’s enamoured. 
Roger Schmidt was sent off on Saturday after shouting at his colleague to “shut 
up and sit down”, with a snide-y “you think you’ve invented football, do you?” 
thrown in for good measure. Nagelsmann accepted Schmidt’s apology (“we talked 
about it, it’s over”) with characteristic confidence.

His employers are under no illusions as to how this chapter will end. 
“Hoffenheim will be too small for him soon,” Hopp said a couple of weeks ago. 
Maybe another job interview at Säbener Strasse is not too far away either.

Talking points to follow.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Bayern Munich 8 16 20 
2 RB Leipzig 8 9 18 
3 Hertha Berlin 8 5 17 
4 TSG Hoffenheim 8 6 16 
5 Cologne 8 7 15 
6 Borussia Dortmund 8 10 14 
7 Eintracht Frankfurt 8 5 14 
8 SC Freiburg 8 -2 12 
9 Mainz 8 -1 11 
10 Borussia M'gladbach 8 -2 11 
11 Bayer Leverkusen 8 -1 10 
12 Augsburg 8 -4 8 
13 Darmstadt 8 -7 8 
14 Schalke 04 8 -1 7 
15 Werder Bremen 8 -11 7 
16 Wolfsburg 8 -6 6 
17 FC Ingolstadt 8 -10 2 
18 Hamburg 8 -13 2  