
The nights are drawing in, the temperatures are dropping and the trees are 
heavy with fruit. That can only mean one thing. Once again the hedgerows are 
going to be full of pasty-faced young men and women, wearing jumpers over their 
chefs’ whites, stumbling about looking for produce. Not for these guys the 
mundane business of phoning up suppliers and getting ingredients delivered. Oh 
no. They are living life on the edge. They are suckling at Mother Nature’s very 
teat. They are foragers.

In terms of self-marketing the appeal is obvious. Foraging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/foraging> turns restaurant cooks from 
mere stove jockeys into horny-handed earth children who can rock a cable-knit 
sweater. They aren’t merely making dinner; they are celebrating the wellspring 
of creation. What they are making is no longer just food. It is the earth and 
the sky and the sea. A dish with foraged ingredients immediately gains a patina 
of virtue regardless of how it tastes, simply because of how the ingredients 
were obtained.

Or not, as the case may be. It’s built on a false premise: that getting 
ingredients through farming is dull, boring and a less authentic experience. As 
the writer and broadcaster Tim Hayward once tweeted: “5,000 years of 
agriculture and now we’re all foraging. I bet the Mesopotamians wonder why they 
bothered.” Indeed. It’s farming – the mass production of food via an organised 
system – that allowed civilisation to flourish. The first plantings of wheat on 
the banks of the Nile thousands of years ago did not make us less ourselves but 
more so.

Then there’s the damage foraging does. If it really is such a marvellous thing 
everybody should be encouraged to do it. And yet if everybody surged out to 
pillage the woodlands, the impact would be disastrous. Already warnings are 
issued each year over the damage done tothe eco-system of the New Forest 
<http://www.thenewforest.co.uk/mushrooms.aspx> – the very eco-system those 
foragers are meant to be celebrating – by people plundering it for wild 
mushrooms. It’s the same story in parts ofEpping Forest in Essex 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/2013/11/truffle-trouble-and-mushroom-mafia> and 
Ashdown Forest in Sussex 
<http://www.eastgrinsteadcourier.co.uk/Ashdown-Forest-devastated-wild-mushroom-pickers/story-19941742-detail/story.html>
. Too many of the leather-hatted professional foragers have become enemies of 
the countryside, rather than its custodians.
 Foraging for wild mushrooms. Photograph: Cecilia Drotte/Getty Images 
But the biggest argument against it is the lacklustre and uninspiring food 
that so often results from all that clomping about down in the woods. Very few 
chefs know how to use those ingredients. René Redzepi at Noma in Copenhagen is 
one, David Everitt-Matthiasat Le Champignon Sauvage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/oct/20/champignon-sauvage-ofm-award-2013>
 in Cheltenham another. If Everitt-Matthias puts musty wilted ground elder on a 
dish, or offers you an acorn panna cotta it will be for a reason. Just as 
fusion food was fine as long as it was done by Peter Gordon, so foraged 
ingredients are fine as long as they are used by chefs with intelligence, wit 
and good taste.

Too many others merely end up chirping about how one foraged ingredient tastes 
of lemon and another of liquorice and a third of aniseed. To which I want to 
shout: so why don’t you leave the poor bloody wild plants alone and just use 
lemon, liquorice and aniseed instead? Going out into the fields to pick 
ingredients you either don’t need or don’t know how to use doesn’t make you a 
better chef. It won’t improve your food. But it’s guaranteed to make you bloody 
annoying.
 