
His appointment protested against, Massimiliano Allegri won over any last 
doubters asJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> clinched a 
fourth successive Serie A title on Saturday with four matches to spare and a 
treble in sight.

Juventus were rocked when Antonio Conte quit last summer, and further stunned 
when he was replaced by Allegri, who was fired by Milan months earlier and 
appeared to be the antithesis of the beloved former coach.

However, Juve won 1-0 at Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> on Saturday to claim the first 
of potentially three trophies – they face Real Madrid in the Champions League 
semi-finals starting on Tuesday, and Lazio in the Italian Cup final.

After dominating the entire season, Juventus needed just a point to 
mathematically seal a 31stSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> title. A first-half 
header from Arturo Vidal gave them all three.

“The first days here were good. I only had five or six players and we lost a 
friendly against Lucento!” Allegri said with a smile after the game. 
“Afterwards, the lads were at my disposal and I tried to create a group, we 
started to work without ruining the work done in three extraordinary years.

“The players have great human qualities as well as technical ones, as to win 
four consecutivescudetti is extraordinary. Now we have to put this crazy 
evening to one side and think of the cups. I thank everyone who has helped me 
on this path, from the staff, to the club, to the players.”

Allegri was also the last coach before Conte to win the league, with Milan in 
2011 also in his first season in charge. Andrea Pirlo was part of that team, 
and has now won his fifth successive Serie A crown.

Although the title was never really in doubt, the relief and joy at the final 
whistle was clear, although the club has put its trophy celebrations on ice 
with a crucial Champions League match in just three days.

Vidal, who also scored in a 1-0 win against Palermo which clinched the league 
crown in 2013, admitted he had “never seen a title celebrated so little”.

“They gave us 10 minutes,” Juventus’ captain and goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon 
said. “Also because the thought of Real is pulsating through us. Our joy is 
inevitable, also because we have sealed it as soon as possible, allowing us to 
dedicate our body and soul to this challenge.”

Buffon admitted the change of manager was difficult for the players as well as 
the fans. “This title has a particular taste for me, for the group too,” he 
said. “It’s the proof that the squad has a very exceptional mentality, a spirit 
of self-sacrifice which I don’t think has an equal.

“Certainly, when we changed coach in July many people, including us, could 
have had doubts, but it was also a push to show that we also had an important 
worth, on a human level as well as technical.”

The defeat was Sampdoria’s first at home this season and left them in fifth 
place. Juventus knew even if second-placed Lazio were to beat Atalanta on 
Sunday, a draw at Sampdoria would leave them 12 points clear with four matches 
remaining and the better head-to-head record.

Allegri rested his key playmaker Pirlo, defender Giorgio Chiellini, and 
forward Álvaro Morata ahead of Tuesday’s Champions League semi-final first leg 
at home to Real Madrid.

Sampdoria had the better of the early opportunities, but Vidal broke the 
deadlock in 32nd minute as he was left unmarked to head Stephan Lichtsteiner’s 
cross from the right over goalkeeper Emiliano Viviano and in off the inside of 
the far post.

In 34 games, Juventus have a record of 24 victories, seven draws and only 
three losses, scoring 64 goals and conceding just 19.

Elsewhere, Sassuolo moved a point closer to mathematically securing their 
Serie A status with a 0-0 draw against Palermo, lifting them 13 points above 
the relegation zone.
 