
Juventus threw down the gauntlet to their Serie A title rivals Napoli by 
pulling four points clear at the top with a convincing 2-0 victory over
Internazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale>.

February has seen the reigning champions catch up to and then finally overhaul 
free-scoringNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, but they were 
only one point clear of the southerners heading into the 27th round of games.

Chelsea sound out Italy coach Antonio Conte as managerial option
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/chelsea-italy-coach-antonio-conte-manager-massimiliano-allegri-diego-simeone>
It took second-half goals from Leonardo Bonucci and substitute Alvaro Morata – 
the latter scoring a late penalty – for Juve to earn a breather, safe in the 
knowledge their status as Scudetto favourites cannot be touched by Napoli when 
the Azzurri visit Fiorentina on Monday.

Roberto Mancini’s Inter, the former table-toppers who were distinctly 
ineffective in Turin, only deigning to threaten their hosts at the death, now 
face the unenviable task of attempting to overhaul Juve’s 3-0 lead in the Coppa 
Italia semi-finals when the Italian giants meet again on Wednesday.

The results of Sunday’s earlier games transformed the make-up of the 
relegation battle, withSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria>, Palermo and Carpi making 
gains while Genoa, Frosinone and Hellas Verona sank further into the mire.

Vincenzo Montella’s Samp were previously without a win in eight attempts but 
snapped that bad run to pull five points clear of the bottom three after goals 
from Fernando and Fabio Quagliarella settled a 2-0 home victory over Frosinone.

The promoted southerners are four points behind Palermo, who ground out a 
point from a goalless draw with Bologna in Sicily, thanks largely to the 
heroics of stand-in goalkeeper Josip Posavec.

Simone Verdi’s second-half penalty earned 19th-placed Carpi a valuable point 
from a 1-1 draw with Atalanta. The mid-table Bergamo side took the lead through 
Jasmin Kurtic but a first victory in 12 attempts eluded them as Verdi levelled 
from the spot with 15 minutes remaining.

Basement boys Hellas look increasingly doomed. After winning twice in February 
to recover a lost sensation of hope, a 2-0 defeat at Udinese means they are now 
nine daunting points behind Palermo.

Emmanuel Agyemang-Badu and Cyril Théréau scored the goals for a team who, 
sitting in 14th place, are still not totally assured of top-flight football.

Also facing a late scrap to ensure they avoid the drop are Genoa, with Gian 
Piero Gasperini’s men submitting to upwardly mobile Chievo after Lucas Castro’s 
diving header clinched a 1-0 win for the Flying Donkeys.
 