
"I'm a derby manager," Bayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> coach Robin Dutt had 
confidently predicted during the week. His sporting director Rudi Völler, 
buoyed by the side's decent showing at Stamford Bridge, had been even more 
bullish. "We lost last season, that's enough for the next few years," said 
Germany's best-loved bubble-perm aficionado.

Alas, Saturday's epic 4-1 home defeat against their bigger, less successful 
neighbours from Cologne showed that Dutt wasn't quite enough of a derby 
manager, and that Völler's prediction was off by a decade and a half. Instead 
of maintaining their fine head-to-head record at the BayArena, theWerkself 
(company team) lost their first game in 15 years on home soil against the club 
from the other side of the Rhine.

In one sense, it was a typical Köln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> game, the mirror image to last 
week's 2-1 defeat at Nürnberg. "We're either very bad or very good here, 
there's nothing in the middle," said the manager Stale Solbakken, who is slowly 
coming to terms with the extreme mood swings within the city and his dressing 
room. Lukas Podolski (two goals) and Milivoje Novakovic (one), in particular, 
combined to devastating effect on the counter, and despite wholesale changes at 
the back, the two rows of four protecting Michael Rensing's goal were almost 
impenetrable. Leverkusen, on the other hand, were so poor that no one even 
tried to come up with excuses. "This was beyond bad. I'm sorry for inflicting 
this on the supporters," said Dutt.

Süddeutsche Zeitung called it "a historic win"; "the best win of my life", was 
Novakovic's verdict. Even if you take away hype and emotions, the result still 
has the potential to go down as one of the more important three points in 
recent years – considering that Solbakken had become precariously close to be 
seen as the problem after a dodgy start to the season.

The idea of marrying his technocratic ways to Köln's ego-infested squad and 
the town's pressure-cooker environment is ambitious to say the least. The 
Norwegian desperately needed results to get the players to buy into methods 
that are unprecedented by the standards of his predecessors: a 
highly-disciplined zonal marking system all over the pitch. "I believe they 
think that we're practising tactics too much, but I feel that we need practise 
more of it," he revealed about the mindset inside the camp. "Too many players 
want individual roles in the team, rather than to do the necessary jobs for the 
group."

It wasn't necessary to point to the two strikers in that respect but Solbakken 
made sure to mention their names, alongside the wide midfielders Adil Chihi and 
Slawomir Peszko, who'd also done very well, for a change. The rather excellent 
Podolski naturally lionised the tabloid coverage – "Poldi humiliates Ballack" 
was Bild's predictably nuanced take – and also improved his chances in the 
national team, albeit in a rather underhand manner. Shortly before the break, 
he'd taken out his heir-apparent in the Germany side, the mercurial André 
Schürrle, with a nasty tackle. The referee Günter Perle must have been afraid 
of committing lèse majesté – inexplicably "Prinz Poldi" was let-off scot-free 
under the watchful eye of Jogi Löw. Everything might have changed at that 
moment but it didn't. No one would have talked much about the foul if the 
frustrated Schürrle hadn't mowed down Christian Eichner in the last minute and 
received his marching orders by the ref. "That's inconsistent," thundered 
Völler. "A joke!"

Podolski wasn't keen to discuss the matter in great detail afterwards but 
dismissed Völler's rant. "It was a normal foul," he said. "If Völler wants me 
to get a red, he should grab one and give it to me." Unfortunately, the German 
FA doesn't subscribe to the idea of vigilante justice. Schürrle, who was 
taunted by Köln fans on Sunday – they stuck up a big "thank you for the derby 
win" letter with a red card outside his apartment in Cologne – will thus miss 
next week's trip to the Allianz Arena, while Solbakken's valiant efforts to 
drag Köln into the 21st century will continue at home to the in-form 
Hoffenheim. The 43-year-old knows it won't be easy, especially in light of the 
fact that the dressing room's is traditionally about as tight-lipped as a 
police horse's rear-end. "If I have secret, I know it'll be in Express before 
my wife knows," said Solbakken, only half-jokingly.

Talking points

Terrible news of Germany's nascent twitter scene: @MichaelOenning 
<http://twitter.com/#!/MichaelOenning>, the loving, satirical take on Michael 
Oenning's buffoonish utterances, is bound to lose some of its cult appeal 
following Monday afternoon's dismissal of the 45-year-old Hamburg coach. The 
club was forced to swing the axe after Saturday's 0-1 defeat at home to 
Mönchengladbach, the fifth loss in six league matches. "It's pitch black for 
us," captain Heiko Westermann said after his sides's shambolic performance had 
left them bottom of the table and the butt of a very popular joke: "What's the 
difference between Hamburg and an Ü? The Ü has two points."

The board didn't find that funny at all, of course. "After many intensive 
talks in the two days after [the defeat], we've come to the view that this 
decision is necessary." Oenning, who is quite possibly too nice a man to 
succeed in this particular job, was characteristically good-natured about his 
dismissal. "I can understand why the club made this move in the current 
situation," he said. Former HSV player Rodolfo Cardoso will take charge for 
Fridays's tricky away match at Stuttgart, before the director of sport Frank 
Arnesen appoints a permanent successor. Dermot Drummy, the Chelsea reserve team 
manager, looks the logical appointment but Lothar Matthäus,newly relieved from 
his Bulgaria duties 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2011/sep/19/lothar-matthaus-fired-bulgaria>
, will no doubt link himself by the time you've read these lines.

• Oenning's Waterloo shouldn't take away from the increasingly excellent work 
of Lucien Favre, however. Borussia Mönchengladbach's Swiss coach once again 
showed that he's a master at setting up a side. "The Foals" are well on course 
to be this year's over-achievers and will warrant much closer inspection in 
weeks to come.

• The other Borussia are having a more difficult time though. Two goals in as 
many minutes helped Hannover 96 to an unlikely win over the champions, who had 
led and controlled the match at the AWD-Arena until the 87th minute. "This 
cannot happen," said Borussia defender Neven Subotic, "because of five bad 
minutes, we're leaving here with a bad feeling." Manager Jürgen Klopp admitted 
feeling "the pressure" ahead of the home game against Mainz, when Dortmund have 
to win to escape the mid-table tristesse.

• The Bundesliga's penchant for Japanese players experienced an all-time-high 
on Saturday, when Wolfsburg coach Felix Magath put Makoto Hasebe in goal away 
to Hoffenheim. "Japanese [players] are reliable and good in all positions," 
explained the manager afterwards. Truth be told, Hasebe didn't exactly appear 
an insurmountable barrier before Roberto Firmino's goal to make it 3-1 five 
minutes before the end. The 27-year-old is a midfielder by trade, after all. 
Magath had been forced to rely on the reluctant stand-in when Marwin Hitz was 
sent off in the 81st minute for insulting referee Marco Fritz over the need to 
retake a goal-kick. The manager had already made three substitutions. "I said 
something but it wasn't a swear word," the keeper insisted later on, to no 
avail. Hoffenheim, meanwhile, are looking great under the stewardship of Holger 
Stanislawski, who's obviously managed to unlock some of the potential within 
the squad thanks to his more down-to-earth man-management style.

• Manuel Neuer's return to Schalke had dominated the headlines for the whole 
week and, if the banners in the stands were anything to go by, quite a few art 
lessons in secondary schools in and around Gelsenkirchen too. The 25-year-old 
keeper was variously depicted as a greedy so-so, as a lederhosen-wearing lady 
of the night and in an, ahem, unorthodox position at the feet of a red devil 
called Uli Hoeness. A hail of boos and jeers descended on the Bayern keeper 
during the match, but you wouldn't have heard much of it on TV. TheBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> remains world-class 
when it comes to making an exciting product sound and look ordinary – they film 
the game from the vantage point of migrating storks and turn down the stadium 
noise to a dull, ambient rumbling.

As it turned out Neuer had little to do while Bayern toyed with Schalke to 
chalk up their ninth clean-sheet win in 10 games (in all competitions). The 
search for more difficult opponents continues.

Results: Freiburg 1-2 Stuttgart, Hamburg 0-1 Gladbach, Leverkusen 1-4 Köln, 
Nürnberg 1-1 Bremen, Hertha BSC 2-2 Augsburg, Hoffenheim 3-1 Wolfsburg, 
Kaiserslautern 3-1 Mainz, Hannover 2-1 Dortmund, Schalke 0-2 Bayern.
 