
Lukas Podolski is poised to join Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> from Köln at the end of the 
season after the clubs reached an agreement in principle on a £10.9m transfer. 
The Germany striker is expected to sign a four-year contract worth £100,000 a 
week, according to sources in Germany.

Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> has been 
under pressure to bolster his attacking options because the cover behind Robin 
van Persie, the captain, has looked thin, with neither Marouane Chamakh or Park 
Ju-young having convinced.

Van Persie, who is close to the final 12 months of his Arsenal deal and has 
placed new contract talks on hold until the summer, must also be persuaded 
about the club's ambition.

Podolski's arrival would represent a coup and it reinforces Wenger's shift in 
transfer policy towards more established players. Still only 26, the 
Poland-born forward has played at the highest level since his late teens, when 
he broke into the Germany squad. He has enjoyed a positive season, with 16 
Bundesliga goals so far, but he has grown disillusioned at Köln's direction. 
They languish just above the relegation places, with 25 points from 24 games.

Podolski, who was at Bayern Munich from 2006 to 2009 before rejoining his 
former club, has been quiet about his possible move to Arsenal but theKöln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> manager, Stale Solbakken, 
admitted last month that he feared he was set to lose the forward to the London 
club.

Lokomotiv Moscow and Anzhi Makhachkala were also understood to have been 
chasing Podolski, and could have offered bigger money, but he said recently his 
move would not be determined by the highest bidder. "Money is not the most 
important thing for me," he told Sport-Bild. "What is crucial is the 
development of my game."

Per Mertesacker, a Germany team-mate who moved from Werder Bremen to Arsenal 
last summer, told German television on Wednesday that Podolski had been asking 
him about life at the Emirates. "He has been very interested for the past few 
weeks," Mertesacker said. "He has sent me a number of text messages, and I have 
told him this is a great place to work and Arsenal are an amazing club."
 