
Where does fatigue come from? It doesn’t come from the body. Even when people 
exercise to exhaustion, studies have shown that there is fuel left in the tank 
– one found there was enough energy left in muscle tissue for participants to 
have kept going for another seven or eight minutes. The brain puts the brakes 
on, stepping in to stop us from over-exerting and injuring ourselves long 
before we reach our actual limits.

According to the latest research, our physical endurance is determined by our 
“perception of effort” – how much work the brain thinks that the body has done. 
But the brain can be tricked. In Brazil, a group of scientists improved power 
output in cyclists by 10% by running a small electric current through the 
brain. Elsewhere, it has been shown that giving athletes incorrect information 
about the temperature can help them maintain their performance in hot 
conditions, and that lying to them about their split times can help them break 
personal bests.

In one study, Professor Samuele Marcora and colleagues asked people to pedal 
an exercise bike at a fixed pace for as long as possible. Unbeknown to the 
participants, a screen in front of them was flashing up subliminal images for 
1/16th of a second at a time. Cyclists flashed images of sad faces rode for 22 
minutes and 22 seconds on average. Those shown happy faces reported less 
perceived exertion, and rode for three minutes longer. Marcora now wants to 
develop a pair of goggles that could flash up this kind of image at athletes 
while they are out training.

Mo Farah drinks a couple of espressos before a race, to reduce mental fatigue

Forcing ourselves to keep going also means ignoring all the signals from our 
body telling us to stop. This “response inhibition” is very mentally taxing, 
and it causes a substance called adenosine to build up in the brain. Adenosine 
is associated with the feeling of mental fatigue – it builds up when people run 
marathons or work on boring spreadsheets, or if they haven’t had enough sleep. 
Adenosine increases perception of effort. It is the enemy of endurance.

Caffeine blocks adenosine. This is why Mo Farah drinks a couple of espressos 
before a race, and why caffeine pills and gum have become an essential part of 
the long-distance runner’s pre-race preparation. You can also train your brain, 
by doing monotonous response- inhibition tasks before or during exercise. In 
the short term, this will make your performance worse, but in the long run your 
brain will learn to produce less adenosine, which will reduce perception of 
effort and increase endurance.

In one study, Marcora asked two groups of soldiers to do a time-to-exhaustion 
test, where they were asked to ride at a fixed percentage of their maximum 
until they couldn’t any more. After 12 weeks of training the control group’s 
time-to-exhaustion had improved by 42%. The other group performed a mentally 
fatiguing task alongside their physical training sessions. Their time to 
exhaustion improved by 115%.

Auditory versions of these tasks for smartphones are in the works, but you can 
replicate the effect simply by changing your training patterns. For your brain, 
running five miles after a hard day’s work feels like the last five miles of a 
much longer run. It offers a much better workout for your willpower. It’s mind 
over matter, and fortunately for athletes – from the elite to the amateur – the 
mind is much easier to manipulate.

Amit Katwala is the author of The Athletic Brain (£16.99, Simon & Schuster) 
out on 11 August. To order a copy for £13.93, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/athletic-brain.html>
 