
Rochdale feared the worst and got it. The floodlights blazed down on Spotland 
on a brilliant autumn afternoon. Keith Hill, their most successful manager 
ever, took a back seat behind his assistant, Chris Beech. AndBarnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley>, where he was less successful, 
ran off with all three points, scoring early and defending stoutly. Hill was 
not going to let the huge visiting support see his pain. “It was frustrating,” 
said Beech. “We weren’t quite on our ‘A’ game.”

Barnsley were on their ‘A star’. Danny Wilson, his opposite number, said: “I 
think you’ve seen a better reflection of who we are today.” At kick-off 
Barnsley were in League One’s relegation places andRochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> fifth, four places higher than 
their best finish to a season. Now Dale are ninth and Barnsley four points 
behind with a game in hand. The days, getting shorter, are still early.

Hill got Rochdale out of the fourth tier for the first time in 36 years in 
2010. It was his first managerial post, third full season and followed two 
play-off disappointments. After narrowly keeping Barnsley in the Championship 
in his first season he left them in last place in December 2012, which is where 
Wilson picked them up a year later without immediate effect. Hill was back at 
Rochdale in a month and repeated his feat there in 16. Wilson, also a returning 
hero, has more of a challenge to match his main achievement at Oakwell. In 1997 
he took Barnsley to the top tier for their only season there.

A stream of strikers has recently passed through Rochdale to higher places – 
Rickie Lambert, Grant Holt, Adam Le Fondre, Glenn Murray – many with gratitude 
to Hill’s tuition. The manager took Matty Done to Barnsley and back and the 
current partnership with Ian Henderson has produced 12 goals out of 19. But 
Dale have scored only six at home and, for all the good movement of the front 
pair, little headway was made on Saturday. The midfield support, epitomised by 
the terrier Stephen Dawson and described by Beech as “a congruent effort far 
stronger than an individual”, seldom suggested penetration from elsewhere as 
Barnsley, marshalled by Peter Ramage on fresh loan from Crystal Palace, cut off 
all avenues before real danger. Ramage also headed the goal from six yards at a 
corner, asking questions of the keeper, Conrad Logan, all in yellow. The answer 
looked like a lemon.

Textiles rather than football established Rochdale on the map. When the Third 
Divisions North and South were reformed in 1958, the club were put in the Third 
and lost no time in being relegated. In 1959 the town’s Gracie Fields had a hit 
with Little Donkey, possibly inspired by an inside- forward, and Dale have 
seldom left the fourth tier since. With Hill back as part of the fabric they 
deserve more than home support of 2,500. The chairman, Chris Dunphy, locally 
born and wealthy through church heating, brings stable ambition.

Spotland is an ancient miniature and modern gem with three even stands and a 
covered end terrace, backed by hardwoods. The crown green bowlers deliver their 
woods elsewhere now but children still stoop to conker and pubs have evocative 
names like the Clog and Shawl and the Cemetery. The game’s pace was hectic. If 
only Hill had seen the measured spin of the wind turbines up on Scout Moor.
 