
Kenny Jackett was relieved to get back to winning ways after his side earned a 
2-1 victory against promotion-chasing Derby at Molineux. Wolves had not won for 
seven games, losing their past three, before a double from George Saville – 
either side of a Chris Martin equaliser– gave Jackett the winning feeling again.

The manager said: “I’m pleased with the performance. I felt that it was a good 
response after losing at Brentford on Tuesday. With losing the last three 
games, you are quite often looking to scrap out a draw to try and stop the rot 
and turn the tide, and then build on that. The response of the players after 
Tuesday night was very good. You could see the passion that they had to play 
and hopefully now we can build on this win. We want to try and close the gap 
between ourselves and the top sides. We will be looking up the table and trying 
to draw back some very good teams.”

The win has eased the pressure on Jackett after he had come under fire from 
disgruntled fans, and he added: “I am aware of it and you can’t bury your head 
in the sand and say you don’t know it is there. I am determined to turn that 
round and you only do that with good performances and good results.”

Saville, who had not found the net since his arrival from Chelsea in August 
2014, opened the scoring in the 14th minute when he beat Scott Carson with a 
low drive after collecting a pass from Nathan Byrne.

Martin drew Derby level two minutes before the interval, scoring from a 
20-yard free-kick after Saville had fouled Bradley Johnson. But Saville had the 
last word when he headed home Matt Doherty’s cross in the 86th minute – shortly 
after Wolves’ striker Bjorn Sigurdarson had hit the post.

The defeat, coming after back-to-back wins, dealt a blow to Derby’s promotion 
hopes but their interim manager Darren Wassall remains upbeat: “I think that we 
certainly deserved at least a draw and it would have been a brilliant week if 
we had got a result, whether it was a win or a draw, as we wanted to remain 
unbeaten over the week. So it is bitterly disappointing as I don’t think we 
deserved that. Full credit to Wolves as they kept going but two shots on target 
from the home side is tough to take. We have to take it on the chin and take 
the positives out of the week. I would have taken six points from the week. We 
would have liked seven or nine but it was not to be.

“But we have to take the positives as team performances over the last three 
games have been excellent. The biggest disappointment of today is that we have 
conceded late on.”

Despite the setback, Wassall remains confident that Derby can figure in the 
business end of the promotion race: “Everybody knows where we are in the table, 
everybody knows what we have to do to get in the play-offs or the top two, so 
the best thing for all of us is to concentrate on each performance. We have 12 
games left and if we keep playing as we have done in the last three games, I 
think we will be fine for the rest of the season.”
 