
The recently appointed Morton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morton> 
manager, Kenny Shiels, says he will not conduct matchday interviews with the 
press after claiming he has been advised against it by his doctor. The Northern 
Irishman was appointed last month but has so far refused to speak to the media 
after matches. He now says it makes him "emotionally imbalanced".

He was forced to watch his first two matches in charge against Falkirk and 
Hamilton from the stands after serving a touchline ban hanging over from his 
spell in charge at Kilmarnock.

Shiels was sacked by Kilmarnock in June just days after he was given a 
four-match ban, with two of the games suspended, for bringing the game into 
disrepute for questioning the impartiality of the Scottish Football 
Association's judicial panel and the integrity of Celtic.

But now he says his doctor has told him to stop giving interviews after games 
for the good of his health.

"I have spoken with the doctor and you get emotionally imbalanced," the 
57-year-old told BBC Radio Scotland. "It's important I don't compromise my 
position as manager of Morton Football Club.

"There's a name for it – you can't help it. If someone asks you a question, 
you're emotionally imbalanced at that time and you feel an urge to tell the 
truth.

"And, if you feel hard done by, you want to tell the truth about something 
that happened in the game and you become a victim of that. There are people out 
there waiting for you to drop your guard.

"It's my nature that's the biggest problem and Neil Lennon has that problem 
too at Celtic. He will tell you he is the same – when you are passionate about 
something and you put all your energies into it.

"I am probably not intelligent enough to deal with that because journalists 
can catch me. I don't think it's fair to condemn Scottish football. It's not 
their fault, it's my fault."

Shiels says he will continue to meet journalists at other times but has handed 
over post-match duties to his assistant, David Hopkins. He added: "Journalism 
in promoting the game is so important and the Scottish journalists are 
brilliant at it.

"Every decision I make must be in the best interests of Morton and I'm very 
susceptible to being controversialised and it's happened to me in the past. I'm 
not going to go down that road anymore."
 