
Khaled Hosseini's debut novel, The Kite Runner  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408824856>
(2002), was an unusual bestseller about a friendship between a young man and a 
servant, set against a violently unravelling Afghanistan and written in the 
early mornings before Hosseini went to work as a doctor. It was followed byA 
Thousand Splendid Suns 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408824856>
(2007), another affecting book rooted in friendship, this time between two 
Afghan women. In his latest, And the Mountains Echoed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/23/fiction>, a brother and sister 
are separated as children – it is his most intricately ambitious so far 
(together, at last count, his novels have sold a staggering 42.5m). What they 
have in common is that they told by a master storyteller. They make you feel 
you are sitting at his feet listening.

Hosseini has been creative in another sense too, using his earnings to 
establish theKhaled Hosseini <https://www.theguardian.com/books/khaled-husseini>
 Foundation, a charity that helps marginalised people in Afghanistan, offering 
humanitarian assistance in collaboration with the UN.

How important a role does storytelling play in your life?

I used to tell stories to my kids. They are 13 and 11 now, but I used to put 
them to bed and they loved it when I made up folk tales. I'd make sure there 
was a cliffhanger every night. It was a powerful tool to get them to clean 
their teeth and go to bed. I improvised every night and loved it. My 
grandmother and father were gifted storytellers. The opening fable in And the 
Mountains Echoed – although I made it up – pays homage to the stories I heard 
growing up. It may be the blinding light of nostalgia but there used, I think, 
to be more appetite in those days – and longer attentions spans – for sitting 
down to a story.

When did your family leave Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> for the US?

We left Kabul in 1976. My father had a diplomatic post in Paris. After the 
Soviet invasion, we applied for political asylum in the US. It was 1980, I was 
15. For my parents, who had always been on the giving side of things, it was an 
affront to live on state benefit – charity. My dad found work as a driving 
instructor, my mother [formerly a teacher] as a waitress and then a beautician 
– she learned to cut hair and worked in a salon for two decades. My father, 
ironically, later became an eligibility officer, dispensing welfare to newly 
arrived immigrants. He was very good at it because he had compassionate 
understanding.

And you became a doctor? Do you miss medicine now you've given it up?

I went into it because it would supply security, because I knew I would not be 
adrift. It is the most important job – people are entrusting you with the most 
sacred thing. But it was never a lifelong passion – writing was.

Was it disorienting when you first realised The Kite Runner was flying high?

After publication, nothing much happened for over a year. I didn't have much 
hope. Then I began to notice people reading it – even on aeroplanes when I was 
travelling. It was everywhere, it was surreal. I was proud of it yet it was so 
dark and its central character so spineless and set in a country people in the 
US knew little about… I didn't think this was what bestsellers were about.

Did you do much kite flying in Kabul?

We all did. It was for fun, a winter pastime. The school shut down and the 
vacation lasted three months. There was no television – they'd show the same 
film for months [laughs]. Kite flying remains the central image of my childhood.

What are the advantages/disadvantages of writing about Afghanistan from 
California?

I have not lived in Afghanistan since the mid 1970s so my perspective is 
skewed. I take a leap of imagination in writing about those who have lived 
through difficult times.

I notice you're careful not to set yourself up as spokesman for Afghanistan…

You must not believe your own PR, it would be grotesque. Yet I spent my 
formative years there. I care about what happens there. For years, medicine 
took over my life. It was physically gruelling, emotionally challenging. 
Afghanistan receded. Since writing the books, Afghanistan has become a big part 
of my life. I have reconnected with it in an intimate way.

Tell me about the Khaled Hosseini Foundation 
<http://khaledhosseinifoundation.org/>.

It's a charity that reaches women, children, the elderly – marginalised groups 
in Afghanistan. We do many different things, including trying to organise jobs 
for women, building shelters for refugees who are returning to Afghanistan 
after the fall of the Taliban and we have programmes to help children with 
education and to help women who want to study medicine.

Is it possible to predict what will happen in Afghanistan?

I regard predictions with suspicion. The next few years will be a time of 
anxiety and uncertainty, with the Nato/US withdrawal. Some believe civil war a 
fait accompli. I am hoping – maybe naively – that cooler heads will prevail and 
that lessons have been learned from the conflicts of the 90s. I am emboldened 
by what happened withthe elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/26/afghanistan-election-lack-majority-run-off-abdullah>
. People defied stereotypical notions of Afghanistan, saying: we are interested 
in democracy.

You have a moving sense of the interconnectedness of human lives. Where does 
this come from?

I am tremendously interested in family and how people operate within this 
complicated, powerful, messy organism. They hurt each other yet perform acts of 
altruism and sacrifice and feel bound together. I grew up with the idea of 
family as an essential unit. In Afghanistan, you do not live as an isolated 
person. You are somebody's son, grandson, brother…

Yet your latest novel is about separated siblings, a brother whose sister is 
sold in Kabul. You have said the plot was inspired by a news story about poor 
families selling their children. Not common, surely?

I'd thought it a freakish one-off when I read about it in 2008. But 
Afghanistan is the poorest nation on Earth. My father told me it happened all 
the time when he was growing up in the 50s.

Is your wife American?

No, she is Afghan, though raised in the US. Her parents moved here in the 60s.

Your books have shapely plots – does structure come easily?

Structure is the most difficult decision, a deciding factor. My books never go 
where I think they're going. This one is like an oak tree: a big trunk with 
stories branching out. The easier something seems to read, the harder it is to 
write.

One of your characters says that you never have as much time as you think. 
What is your relationship with time?

In my 20s, life seemed endless. At 49, I've had a chance to see how dark life 
can be and I am far more aware of the constraints of time than when I wroteThe 
Kite Runner. I realise there is only a limited number of things I can do.

And what are you doing? Are you having a well-earned rest?

I hate resting. I feel restless. My preference is to be working. I don't want 
to be coy but I had better leave it at that: it takes me a good while to decide 
whether a book is stillborn or will stand.
 