
The season was 10 games old and the early signs were worrying for 
Kidderminster Harriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kidderminster-harriers>. Five straight 
defeats, followed by five successive draws, left the Midlands club anchored to 
the foot of the Blue Square Premier, 17 points behind the leaders and with 
promotion to the Football League a million miles from anyone's thoughts. What 
followed over the next seven months has been nothing short of remarkable.

Kidderminster go into Saturday's final league fixture, at home against 
relegation-threatened Stockport County, on the back of an extraordinary run in 
which they have won 24 out of their past 28 league matches, propelling the club 
to second place and within two points of the leaders, Mansfield Town. With only 
the champions guaranteed promotion, Kidderminster may have to settle for a 
place in the play-offs, but anything less than aMansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> victory over Wrexham at 
teatime on Saturday will leave the door open for Steve Burr's players to 
complete a stunning turnaround.

Burr chuckles at the suggestion Kidderminster's season got under way 10 games 
later than everyone else. "I wish we had started in October," the Harriers' 
manager says. "To be honest, the way we started off, we weren't playing too 
badly, we were just losing by the odd goal. So our first win, at Cambridge, 
felt just around the corner. I remember Jez George [Cambridge's manager] at the 
time, said: 'You won't be far away with that team.' And it turns out he wasn't 
far wrong.

"I can't praise the lads enough. I was always confident that the team would 
gel and do well. I probably never thought for one minute, though, that from the 
way we started, we would be where we are now because that would take some 
doing. But we've just kept winning and kept the pressure on Mansfield, who've 
been on a terrific run themselves."

It all seems a far cry from late September, when Burr rang Mark Serrell, the 
Kidderminster chairman, to discuss the club's poor results. Serrell's support, 
however, was unequivocal. "It's never, ever been a consideration [to get rid of 
Steve]," he says. "We knew, because of what Steve had done in the previous two 
years, when we finished sixth, that he was the right man. We believe in what he 
does. I think he is one of the hottest properties in lower-league football."

Kidderminster, a town synonymous with carpets rather than football, first won 
promotion to the Football League from what was then the Conference in 2000, 
when Jan Molby was in charge. They lasted five seasons in League Two, finishing 
no higher than 10th, before being relegated.

In an area well served with professional clubs, Kidderminster struggle to get 
people through the turnstiles – this season's average gate is 2,003, the 
ninth-best in the league – and by the time Serrell became involved, 22 months 
ago, the club's financial position was parlous.

"There was a lot of debt and we were literally hours from administration," he 
says. "It was a dark time for the club. But we've got a fan group called Khist 
[Kidderminster Harriers Independent Supporters Trust], who had a Twitter 
campaign that raised £36,000. In the end it was a problem getting the money out 
because it was someone's personal account and they only had a £500 limit on 
PayPal.

"Some benefactors came in to clear some of the debts as well, and from there 
Steve Burr has managed to work with what we've got and never complained, 
because we're not competing with the big boys. We're a provincial town, we 
haven't got the support base and we certainly haven't got the playing budget. 
No player comes to Kidderminster if they want to earn massive money. What we 
are more than anything is a shop window."

That much was clear in January when Fleetwood paid £300,000 for Jamille Matt, 
who had scored eight goals in as many games for Kidderminster. It was the 
highest initial fee they have ever received, exceeding the £200,000 West 
Bromwich Albion paid for Lee Hughes in 1997. "Although it was fantastic 
business for the club, as a manager you don't want to lose your main striker," 
says Burr, who took over at Aggborough in 2010. "But Jamille hasn't been missed 
because selling him helped me to strengthen the squad and we've kept winning."

With Serrell predicting League Two football would be worth up to an extra £1m 
to Kidderminster, the financial incentive is huge. Their hopes of winning 
automatic promotion may not have been helped by Wrexham's plan to field a 
weakened side at Mansfield to rest players for the play‑offs but Serrell 
refuses to be anything but positive about Kidderminster being in a position 
that would have been unimaginable earlier in the season. "It's an amazing 
story," he says. "We're probably outsiders to complete the job but we've still 
got a chance."
 