
This may have been the most significant Ayrshire derby in history but it was 
also one of the ugliest. In proving the old adage about semi-finals rarely 
being entertaining contests, Ayr United and Kilmarnock served up a 120-minute 
encounter that in spells could have made the eyes bleed.Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> will regard that as 
irrelevant; they earned an opportunity to break a League Cup final hoodoo 
thanks to Dean Shiels's extra-time winner.

More pertinently, that intervention earned Kilmarnock bragging rights over 
their local foes. The only visible battling thereafter was of the verbal kind, 
between the managers.

In Kilmarnock's defence, they offered elements of enterprise. Ayr's policy 
from the early minutes seemed perfectly clear; to make it to a penalty 
shoot-out and take their chances. Kenny Shiels, the victorious manager, was 
unimpressed. "I'm relieved because football was the winner," he said.

"Football is about entertainment, people pay money to be entertained. The 
easiest thing in the game is to defend, anybody can do that. It was a negative 
approach. I have never played like that, ever. I'm not hammeringAyr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ayr> United, I'm just saying it would 
have been a better game if they had come out."

There is a debate to be had about the motivation behind Ayr's tactic, whether 
or not they were forced upon the manager, Brian Reid, due to a lack of resource 
or the First Division team were deliberately defensive. Scots can hardly be 
prissy about the approach, given the national team has profited and been 
praised for similar against superior opposition.

It made for an unattractive spectacle. Even more frustrating for any neutrals 
was the fact Ayr actually caused worry in the Kilmarnock defence after the goal.

"Kenny should keep his opinions to himself," said Reid. "He should comment on 
his own team, not other teams. Nobody would be saying that if we were through 
to the final."

A crowd in excess of 25,000 – the majority from Kilmarnock – turned out for a 
game that epitomised the spirit of what has been renamed the Scottish 
Communities League Cup. Families descended en masse on Hampden from Ayrshire, 
youngsters therefore indoctrinated into the fierce dislike these two sides have 
for each other, if they were not already aware. Only the dismal acoustics of 
Scotland's national stadium blunted the atmosphere.

The first 20 minutes would be described only through necessity. Kilmarnock 
wasted a series of first-half corners, the Ayr defender John Robertson 
subsequently heading a Garry Hay cross clear from just in front of his own 
goal. Shiels and Ben Gordon passed up Kilmarnock chances before the break but 
it was after the interval that the Premier League team stepped up their 
pressure. In spells, it resembled an attack versus defence training game.

James Dayton, Paul Heffernan, Hay and Gordon spurned Kilmarnock opportunities. 
The Ayr goalkeeper, Kevin Cuthbert, is also due credit for a superb save from 
Gary Harkins's close-range shot. Andy Geggan made sure Cameron Bell in the 
Kilmarnock goal was still awake with a long-range effort, seven minutes from 
the end of normal time.

Fittingly, the breakthrough arrived in untidy circumstances. Shiels and 
Heffernan saw shots blocked by Cuthbert before the manager's son stole back in 
to slam home. A Mark Roberts cross offered Ayr their best hope of a recovery, 
Kilmarnock's David Silva heading inches wide of his own goal amid panic.

Kilmarnock have lost all their previous five appearances in a League Cup 
final. On 18 March, either Celtic or Falkirk stand between Kilmarnock's class 
of 2012 and making history.
 