
The football community has a habit of behaving clumsily in times of tragedy. 
There can be contrived, false outpourings of emotion. Similarly perspective 
regarding the various, significant ills of the world is routinely lost amid 
focus of what happens at a football ground.

A strong counterpoint to such matters is the coming together of football, and 
sport, when tragedy occurs. The sense of shock surrounding events at the end of 
yesterday'sScottish League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> final between Celtic 
and Kilmarnock has developed into global, heartfelt sentiment towards Liam 
Kelly.

The Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> midfielder 
should today still be celebrating the finest achievement of his career. The 
22-year-old was an integral part of the team which secured the League Cup for 
the first time in Kilmarnock's 143-year history.

Instead fate has issued Kelly and his family the cruellest of hands in front 
of his very eyes. The player's 59-year-old father, Jack, suffered a heart 
attack right on full-time at Hampden Park and his death at a Glasgow hospital 
was confirmed hours later.

If Kelly, a fine young player, ever had aspirations of receiving a message of 
support from Sepp Blatter, he would have wanted it in virtually any other 
circumstance than it arrived on Monday afternoon. Fifa's president said: 
"Tragic news about Liam Kelly's father passing away after Kilmarnock's cup 
final win. My deepest sympathies to Liam and his family."

It is, in fact, almost impossible to quantify the size of the psychological 
challenge Kelly will now face when he eventually contemplates stepping back on 
to a football pitch.

It was clear from the immediate aftermath of the game, even to an untrained 
eye, that something was amiss in the Kilmarnock camp. Exactly what remained 
unclear only briefly.

Kelly did not collect a winners' medal or lift the trophy with his team-mates. 
Kilmarnock's manager, Kenny Shiels, also shunned the presentation to monitor 
the scale of the pitchside medical treatment being administered to Kelly Sr.

Kilmarnock's players went ahead with an open-top bus parade through the town 
on Sunday evening, with many of them made aware of Jack Kelly's death during 
that tour.

The squad's celebrations thereafter were muted, although many of Kilmarnock's 
supporters would not have been aware until the morning of the tragedy that had 
befallen a popular member of their team.

As Kilmarnock's own website states: "All the big emotions, Cammy Bell's 
heroics, Garry Hay's and James Fowler's first medals after long and 
distinguished careers, Dieter van Tornhout's first goal for the club on his 
birthday, all are dwarfed when real life butts in."

Celtic's manager, Neil Lennon, added: "All of the management team, players and 
backroom staff wish to offer our thoughts and prayers to Liam Kelly's family.

"Myself and the entire team are shocked and saddened with this news and our 
heartfelt condolences go to Liam."

Through no fault of anybody an historic moment for Scotland's oldest 
professional club will forever be tainted by a shocking turn of events. An 
old-fashioned cup upset, typified by strong spirit and a smart tactical 
approach, is rightly regarded as irrelevant against such a desperately sad 
backdrop.
 