
The idea of replacing the most outspoken driver in Formula One – Mark Webber – 
with one who is about as loquacious as a Trappist monk –Kimi Raikkonen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kimi-raikkonen> – would appeal to the 
mischievous humour that bubbles inside Christian Horner.

But the Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> team principal 
was wearing his most serious countenance when the scenario was put to him at 
Claridge's – after all, there are few things more serious than afternoon tea at 
the most quintessentially English of hotels.

Webber's contract is up for renewal. It always is, for since becoming half of 
the most successful partnership in the F1 paddock, with Sebastian Vettel, he 
has operated on a one-year deal.

Unthinkable though it may be for fans of this popular anglophile, who has 
lived in England for most of his professional life and won two of the last 
three races at Silverstone, this weekend'sBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> could be his last outing 
at the famous old airfield in Northamptonshire.

The Australian will be 38 next year and has not been a championship contender 
since 2010, while his relationship with Vettel – which even at the best of 
times appeared similar to that between Punch and Judy – has been even more 
strained this season; the smart money says he won't be at the Milton 
Keynes-based team next year.

The 33-year-old Raikkonen, the world champion of 2007 who has been outstanding 
since making a comeback with Lotus last year, would be the obvious replacement 
and Horner did not demur. But the independently-minded Raikkonen had problems 
when he drove for big teams – Ferrari and McLaren – before finding a happy home 
at Lotus. The suspicion lingers that those issues may resurface should he join 
another leading team.

Horner does not agree. "Red Bull is a great environment for any driver," he 
said. "Perhaps it's a bit more relaxed than some of the more corporate teams. 
Any driver would enjoy that environment. Our focus is to get the best out of 
them as drivers and athletes and not bog them down with clutter. Any decisions 
we would make will be made on the merit of the driver."

Horner says he is not necessarily looking to split a partnership that has 
delivered three straight constructors' championships, in which time Vettel has 
picked up a hat-trick of titles. "Mark has contributed a huge amount. Without 
his points we wouldn't have won any of the three constructors' world 
championships. He's won nine grands prix for us so far. All his podiums bar one 
have come in a Red Bull car.

"He's a hard worker. He's worked very well with the technical team. The 
problem for him is that his team-mate has been somebody pretty special. And so 
week in week out he's being measured against a driver that is pretty underrated.

"With Mark it's always been very straightforward. We've agreed year-on-year 
deals with him as we did with David Coulthard at a similar stage in his career.

"First of all, we need to sit down and discuss the situation with Mark. He's 
done a great job for the team he joined in 2007 and before making any decision 
it's important to understand what his intentions are. We've only completed 
seven races. It's still pretty early in the year."

Webber and Vettel, though never close on a personal level, have usually 
maintained a professional working relationship. But there has been that 
unmistakable whiff of decree nisi around the pair since theMalaysian Grand Prix 
in March, when Vettel – who has just signed a new contract – ignored team 
orders and deprived leader Webber of a well deserved victory 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/mar/24/sebastian-vettel-wins-malaysia-gp>.

Horner added: "There is a professional relationship but there's nothing beyond 
that between them. They both know what they're employed by the team to do and 
there are no pretences."

When Vettel was asked about Webber, he said: "I respect him very much as a 
driver. I think he is very quick. He has certain very, very strong areas where 
I am struggling to match him and to beat him, such as around Barcelona in the 
last sector.

"I am not really keen on talking about Malaysia. I respected Mark a lot before 
that and I still respect him after that. We never had a fight and we have never 
screamed at each other. We always treat each other with respect and that's the 
relationship I have had since I joined."

Horner says it is Vettel's mental strength that impresses him most. "He's 
totally insular in terms of his focus and concentration," he said. "He doesn't 
allow anything to distract him. Like all great sportsmen, when the pressure 
points come that's when you see them rise to the challenge. And on each 
occasion Sebastian has done that, whether it's Abu Dhabi in 2010 or Brazil last 
year, or Abu Dhabi again last year. He has a mental resilience that marks him 
out compared with some of his rivals."

Vettel said: "I think some part is experience and certain routine, but maybe 
I'm just not clever enough to think what could go wrong. In Abu Dhabi in 2010 
[when he won the last race of the season to take his first title] we had a 
strategy meet before the race.

"Certain numbers were flying around about the percentage of Fernando [Alonso], 
Lewis [Hamilton] and Mark [Webber] scoring so many points, and I wasn't really 
paying attention because it wasn't what we should have done.

"Normally when you prepare for a race it's what you think is the best to do 
and just because you are in a special situation doesn't really require special 
actions because if it would, then it just means your normal system is quite bad 
and you haven't really thought what you need to do."

When asked whether he felt he was underrated by Alonso and Hamilton, he said: 
"Well, I'm not relying on their opinion." He also said he did not know how many 
points his main rivals had in the world championship.

Horner might be able to replace Webber but he will never find another 
Sebastian Vettel.
 