
Kimi Raikkonen hobbled away from his crumpled Ferrari following a dramatic 
first-lap crash at theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>.

Raikkonen, who stated 18th, was fighting his way through the field in the 
opening corners when he ran wide at turn five, Aintree.

As the Finn kept the power down through the run-off area, he caught the lip of 
the track as he attempted to return to the circuit, which promptly sent his car 
sideways.

As Raikkonen fought to control his Ferrari, the 34-year-old ploughed 
nose-first into a barrier close to the bridge that spans the Wellington 
Straight.

In bouncing off the metal guardrail and on to the track, Raikkonen spun on 
several occasions in the middle of the cars behind him.

The Caterham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/02/tony-fernandes-sells-caterham-formula-one-team>
 driver Kamui Kobayashi clipped the front of the Ferrari before swerving on to 
the grass, while Felipe Massa braked heavily in hisWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/williams-british-grand-prix-silverstone>
 in attempting to avoid Raikkonen.

That sent Massa’s car into a tailspin, with the rear hitting the front of the 
Ferrari, with the domino effect then sending Raikkonen – now without three 
wheels – into a further spin.

After nudging another barrier on the opposite side of the track, Raikkonen 
came to rest on a grassed section by the bridge.

Raikkonen had to be helped from the car, using a marshal as a crutch as he 
tried to walk away from the damage.

It is understood Raikkonen sustained hip and heel injuries, with his first 
words over the in-car radio to his team enquiring as to whether Massa was OK.

The safety car was introduced, however after a matter of moments, race 
director Charlie Whiting decided to red flag the race.

It soon became apparent the barrier, sporting a sizeable dent where 
Raikkonen’s Ferrari impacted, was in need of significant repairs before the 
race could continue. It took an hour to complete the work and restart the race.

Massa was able to drive back to the grid where the cars had reformed but was 
forced to retire owing to the damage sustained.

On the occasion of his 200th grands prix, Massa said: “I made a bad start and 
was last but I passed two cars before corner four. I then saw Kimi spinning and 
crashing on the right. I turned to the right but I hit his car with my left 
rear and the car is badly damaged. It is really a shame to finish the week like 
that. I’m fine, but I hope Kimi is fine because he had a big crash.”
 