
Television magnate Leo Kirch yesterday paid out $550m to support beleaguered 
EM.TV, the German media group whose recent spending spree gave it rights to
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> motor racing and the 
Muppet Show but helped push its debts up to 2.2bn marks (£700m).

The news failed to arrest EM.TV's share price slump, which has sent tremors 
through the whole of Germany's Neuer Markt.

The deal involves Kirch Gruppe buying half of EM.TV's 50% stake in SLEC, the 
holding company for Formula One, from EM.TV. The other 50% is owned by promoter 
Bernie Ecclestone.

An EM.TV spokesman confirmed that talks had also taken place about the 
possibility of selling some of the SLEC shares to car manufacturers and Formula 
One teams. DaimlerChrysler, which has financial troubles of its own, is thought 
to be one of the companies involved in the talks though the EM.TV spokesman 
declined to provide names.

Kirch will also exchange its share in the two companies' existing joint 
venture, a programme library of children's and family entertainment, for around 
16.7% of EM.TV. Kirch will also get voting rights to just over 8% of EM.TV 
shares held by the company's chief executive, Thomas Haffa.

That will give Mr Kirch just over 25%, amounting to a potential blocking stake 
in the music-based company.

EM.TV also said that Sesame Workshop, the non-profit company that has produced 
the Sesame Street children's series since 1969, had acquired the rights to the 
programme.

Despite the flurry of activity, EM.TV's shares fell 40% to just over €9 
yesterday in the wake of Friday's profits warning. The group admitted that 
earnings before interest and tax for the full year would total DM50m, compared 
to the "planned" DM525m. The group also said it would undershoot its sales 
target by a modest margin.

Among those affected by the plummeting EM.TV share price is Morgan Grenfell 
Private Equity, part of Deutsche Bank asset management, which sold a stake in 
SLEC earlier this year to EM.TV in exchange for EM.TV shares.

Last night Deutsche Bank declined to comment on the fall in value of the EM.TV 
holding, which was given a price tag of around $450m when the deal was done, 
against the $275m Morgan Grenfell Private Equity paid for the SLEC holding.

Deutsche Bank also refused to comment on exactly how many shares Morgan 
Grenfell Private Equity had acquired or the price per share it paid.

One report suggests, however, that it could be sitting on paper losses of as 
much as $270m.

Yesterday, alongside its nine-month figures, EM.TV detailed the financial 
performance of both the Jim Henson Company - the Muppet business which it 
bought at the beginning of April - and Formula One.

According to EM.TV, the Henson business made a loss of DM40.5m in the six 
months from April 1 while Formula One - in which EM.TV acquired its stake in 
May - made a profit of DM283.6m in the first nine months of the current 
calendar year.
 