
A week after displaying defensive obduracy in the Camp Nou, Celtic grasped an 
opportunity to express themselves at home. Last year's beaten finalists claimed 
a place in the League Cup's last four at the expense of aSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> team who arrived in Glasgow 
on excellent form but departed with a hammering. With Rangers facing Inverness 
in a quarter-final on Wednesdayevening, the prospect of an Old Firm tie remains 
very much alive.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> were inspired by Kris 
Commons, who believes he scored a hat-trick. It remains to be seen whether or 
not his first is officially recorded as an own goal.

"Kris is claiming it and rightly so," said Neil Lennon, the Celtic manager. 
"That typifies his season so far: excellent, bright, alert and he has always 
been a good finisher. Tonight will have done him the world of good."

Scotland's League Cup is often denigrated but Celtic hardly lacked motivation 
ahead of this tie. Lennon had been scathing of his players' performance in 
losing 2-0 to Kilmarnock on Saturday with St Johnstone also victorious the last 
time they faced Celtic, on Scottish Premier League business last month.

"I got everything that I wanted," added Lennon. "We were back to our best 
tonight. From start to more or less finish we were dominant."

The hosts enjoyed territorial dominance during the early stages, with the 
opening goal seeming inevitable. Commons came the closest to settling Celtic 
nerves, with two long-range efforts that were scrambled away by Alan Mannus. 
There was little surprise, then, about Commons manufacturing the Celtic 
breakthrough. The midfielder had meek resistance from Dave Mackay when cutting 
inside the penalty area, with Commons firing in a low shot which was deflected 
past Mannus by the unfortunate Liam Craig.

Four minutes later, Celtic's advantage was doubled and St Johnstone's 
semi-final aspirations seemed fatally wounded. Mikael Lustig's pass infield was 
played into Commons's path by Gary Hooper. As the St Johnstone defence appealed 
in vain for offside, the Englishman lashed home a low shot.

Victor Wanyama – who hit the crossbar – and Lustig both came close to heading 
a Celtic third by the interval. In the latter case, Mackay was forced to head 
from his own goalline. Instead Hooper struck. This time Commons turned creator, 
with a low cross which the striker clinically converted with just a single 
touch.

The second half always had a damage limitation context for St Johnstone but 
Grégory Tadé passed up a decent opportunity to at least earn the Perth side a 
goal before Commons struck again. To Tade's credit, he stayed on his feet when 
apparently fouled inside the Celtic penalty area by Kelvin Wilson.

At the other end Tony Watt did tumble when pulled back by Steven Anderson. 
Commons instantly grabbed the ball and thumped the penalty past Mannus. In the 
former Derby County man's mind, at least, he had claimed a first hat-trick in 
Celtic colours.

Charlie Mulgrew, on as a half-time replacement for Hooper, scored Celtic's 
fifth as St Johnstone's defensive disarray was confirmed. This time, the Perth 
side failed to deal with a routine ball across their goal area.

"Celtic were a class apart," said Steve Lomas, St Johnstone's manager.
 