
Rubén Suárez scored a wonderful free-kick deep into injury time to give Levante
 a 3-2 home win overReal Sociedad, which took them back to the top of La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>.

Daniel Estrada had given the visitors the lead in the fourth minute and 
Sociedad could have been further ahead by half-time but Alberto de la Bella and 
Iñigo Martínez struck the bar. However, Levante roared back at the start of the 
second half and scored twice in five minutes either side of the hour mark 
through Nano and Valdo. Martínez brought Sociedad level with a fine finish from 
the edge of the box with four minutes remaining before Ruben's fierce strike 
from 30 yards gaveLevante <https://www.theguardian.com/football/levante> all 
three points.

Real Madrid are a point behind the leaders thanks to a 3-0 victory over 
Villarreal. Karim Benzema put them ahead after five minutes with Kaká adding a 
second six minutes later. Angel Di María then rounded off the scoring on the 
half-hour to lift Madrid aboveBarcelona – who won 1-0 away to Granada on 
Tuesday night – in the league standings.

A late goal from Jordi Alba earned Valencia a 1-0 win at Real Zaragoza which 
took them into the top four. The 22-year-old, who is reportedly a target of
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> and Manchester 
United, scored eight minutes from time to give Unai Emery's men their fifth 
league win of the campaign.

Sporting Gijón enjoyed only their second win of the season, a 2-1 victory at 
Real Mallorca which lifted them off the foot of the table. The hosts went in 
front through a 16th-minute goal from Gonzalo Castro but the substitute Mate 
Bilic replied four minutes into the second half. An own-goal from João Victor 
after 65 minutes completed the comeback for Sporting who climb out of the 
bottom three on goal difference.

Rayo Vallecano earned their third league win of the season, beating 10-man 
Málaga 2-0 at the Campo de Fútbol de Vallecas. Pedro's seventh-minute goal put 
Rayo in control and Málaga's chances of getting back into the game were dealt a 
blow when Eliseu was sent off 10 minutes before half-time for a professional 
foul. Raúl Tamudo then sealed the win for the promoted Rayo.

Getafe and Osasuna played out a thrilling 2-2 draw at the Coliseum Alfonso 
Pérez with Dani Güiza and Ibrahima Baldé each scoring twice. Ibrahima putOsasuna
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> ahead as early as the seventh 
minute and Getafe had to wait until the 62nd minute to get level through the 
substitute Güiza. Ibrahima restored Osasuna's lead four minutes later but Güiza 
equalised again 14 minutes from time.
 