
Henrik had a little help from his friends, but, on days like this, it is 
difficult to escape the inference that the extraordinary Larsson could have won 
the match on his own. By the time Alan Thompson made up for a penalty miss by 
sending a ferocious free-kick from the right past Alan Main to complete the 
rout, theCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> striker's 
hat-trick had been eloquent testimony to his capacity for putting an end to 
speculation about his powers.

A Larsson drought is like a Tiger Woods slump; two matches without a goal is 
enough to cause questions to be asked. Like the incomparable golfer, the goals 
machine invariably responds with something spectacular and deadly.

On this occasion, Larsson's failure to score in the league match against 
Partick Thistle the previous Saturday and against MTK Hungaria in the Champions 
League qualifier last Wednesday slipped into oblivion as the result of a 
characteristically ruthless finish that would be merely the start of his own 
multiple strikes and Celtic's push towards the three points.

It would be immensely satisfying to Thompson that he should create the 
opportunity after his earlier faux pas . Taking a short pass from Jackie 
McNamara out on the left, the Englishman delivered a cross of searing pace and 
pinpoint accuracy. Larsson, setting himself in precisely the right spot around 
eight yards from goal, bulleted the header to the right of Main.

If there was an element of relief mixed in with the elation of the home 
support, it was only because the home side should have been at least two ahead 
before the Swede did his number. There was, of course, no more blatant 
opportunity than the penalty awarded when Shaun Maloney was tripped by Oscar 
Rubio.

Thompson, usually a blaster, this time tried to slide the ball to the right of 
Main with the inside of his left foot, but sent it wide. The wide midfielder 
probably had not regained his concentration less than a minute later when 
Larsson's incisive pass put him clear on the left and he completely miscued, 
sending the ball weakly over the bar from close range.

Stilian Petrov gave a similar demonstration of physical and mental imbalance 
when Larsson's cut-back, from Maloney's cross on the left, gave him the chance 
to drive the ball into an unprotected net. But the Bulgarian stretched, toppled 
and simply fell against the ball, which trundled to safety.

But, with the pressure on the Livingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> defence unrelenting - 
Larsson's beautifully-struck free-kick from 25 yards thudded against the bar - 
there was little doubt that more damage would be inflicted.

Once again, Larsson was at the core of the move, supplying Thompson once again 
on the left side of the penalty area with a precise stab of his right foot. 
This time, Thompson's powerful drive was pushed into the air by Main and, as it 
dropped, Maloney was alert enough to be there before anyone else, heading it 
over the line virtually from under the crossbar.

The difference in pace, strength, inventiveness and ambition between the two 
sides made Livingston quite pitiable, like lambs who had strayed too close to a 
wolf pack. Unable to break free, the visitors were remorselessly under attack.

The third goal came from the free-kick that was awarded for a foul on Petrov 
for which Fernando Pasquinelli was cautioned. Thompson played it short to 
Petrov, who, from the left, delivered the centre to Larsson's head. Main 
stretched and made contact with his right hand, but the ball crawled over the 
line.

The goalkeeper also managed a touch on the drive that completed Larsson's hat- 
trick, but there was never much likelihood of his preventing it from crossing 
the line. The Swede took possession around 20 yards out and his waist-high shot 
was so purely and powerfully struck that it would have required more than 
tangential contact to stop it.

Main had, only a minute earlier, been shown some mercy by John Hartson, the 
big Welshman having been given another opportunity by Martin O'Neill to gain 
some much needed match practice when he replaced Petrov after 58 minutes. Set 
up by Larsson, Hartson's cleanly-hit 18-yard drive flew straight to the 
goalkeeper.

All of this made Lilley's late goal for Livingston something of a shock. The 
substitute striker finished off a surging run from Marvin Andrews by dragging 
the defender's through-pass wide of Magnus Hedman, left-footing a sweet shot on 
the turn into the empty net. On a day of torment, it was a rare moment of 
relief.

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 