
Two more goals from the irrepressible Henrik Larsson moved Celtic back to the 
top of the Premier League yesterday but they left Almondvale hoping that their 
victory overLivingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> had 
not come at too high a price.

The Swede's early penalty and late solo effort ensured Martin O'Neill's team 
leapfrogged their old rivals Rangers, but an injury to Stilian Petrov in the 
build-up to the penalty left the Bulgarian needing 16 stitches in a facial 
wound.

O'Neill is hopeful his influential midfielder will be fit for Thursday's Uefa 
Cup tie against Celta Vigo.

"He certainly looks a bit dazed at the moment," said the Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager. "He had seven stitches 
on the outside of his mouth and nine inside and we now have to hope there will 
be no infection.

"Stilian, though, is as brave as a lion and he is already hoping to be in 
contention for the first leg."

So it was good and possibly bad news for the champions, who never looked 
entirely at ease at Almondvale.

Livingston hit the bar through Marvin Andrews after 78 minutes and Robert 
Douglas made a decent save to deny substitute Rolando Zarate three minutes 
later when a goal could have given the home team a point.

Instead of making it 1-1 however, Livingston gave Larsson time and space to 
run at Oscar Rubio, who helped the Swede's cause by slipping at the crucial 
moment. Scotland's top scorer dispatched the ball beyond Javier Sanchez Broto 
and the game was up.

Celtic on balance deserved the three points after a first half in which they 
impressed.

They opened the scoring in controversial circumstances after just five minutes 
when a careless clearance from Broto allowed them to advance in numbers. Petrov 
managed to get the ball across to Paul Lambert despite the sickening collision 
with Andrews and the Parkhead captain scored only to realise that referee 
Stuart Dougal had already awarded a penalty.

There was consternation as medics treated Petrov but as the fuss died down 
Larsson stepped up to put Celtic ahead.

With Jackie McNamara on for Petrov, Celtic could have added two or three more 
goals but for Broto's agility. The goalkeeper made amends for his mistake with 
fine saves from Momo Sylla and Larsson after a wonderful turn and shot.

It was all very untidy otherwise, and there were bookings for Gus Bahoken and 
Chris Sutton, as well as a lengthy lecture for the Livingston man agement duo 
of Jim Leishman and David Hay.

Things changed after the interval as Livingston had far more of the play and 
troubled Celtic to the extent that Ulrik Laursen and Joos Valgaeren were both 
booked. But just as the home team attacked, Larsson dashed their hopes with a 
second goal after 83 minutes.

"I don't think the Celta Vigo spy would be quaking in his boots because we can 
play much better," conceded O'Neill.

Leishman admitted Larsson made the difference and added: "We gave away the 
first goal cheaply and although we were much better in the second half Henrik 
had one chance and scored while we had four and didn't."

 Man of the Match: Henrik Larsson (Celtic)
 