
It may not always be evident, but (as a general principle) I think that, while 
the definition bit of a cryptic clue can legitimately be a bit allusive, in the 
Quick crossword the sole or main definition of the answer ought to be pretty 
well exact. So I was brought up standing by a complaint about the following 
clue for LASER, which appeared on December 16: "Device for concentrating light 
(5)"

The complaint was clearly not trivial since it came from someone working in 
the Quantum Optics and Laser Science Group in the Blackett Laboratory at 
Imperial College. But first a digression. "Laser" is an acronym of "Light 
Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation". But, my complainant tells 
me, the way the devices work is by oscillation, not amplification. For some 
reason it was felt that "light oscillation by stimulated emission of 
radiation", or LOSER, was not an ideal name for the invention.

The point at issue hinges on whether amplification (or oscillation) can 
properly be described as concentration. By analogy, it was argued, an ear 
trumpet (passively) concentrates sound, whereas a hearing aid with a battery 
(actively) amplifies it. Concentration makes something stronger by removing the 
extraneous (as in reducing soup by boiling), while amplification makes 
something stronger by addition (as in putting a stock cube into a soup). A lens 
may be said to concentrate a beam because it takes in all the light provided 
and simply emits it in a different (concentrated) form.

I thought of replying that, if scientists were willing to monkey around with 
the English language and describe oscillation (which is the process of 
fluctuation about a mean value, position or state) as amplification just to 
please the marketing people, then people in glass houses ...

But that seemed a bit feeble and un-Christmassy. So I sought a defence in the 
dictionaries. It is clear that, in physics, amplification and concentration are 
not the same thing. But, of a laser, Chambers says: "a device ... producing an 
extremely narrow and intense monochromatic beam"; while the OUP dictionaries 
are even more helpful, having variations on the theme of: "a device that 
generates an intense and highly concentrated beam of light or other 
electromagnetic radiation".

"Concentration", it seems, means one thing in physics and another in plain 
English. Not much appears to have changed in the almost half century since CP 
Snow gave his lecture, Two Cultures, calling for closer contact between science 
and literature.

· As well as physics, geography caused problems last month. From every corner 
of the globe came helpful messages pointing out that, while [Quick crossword 
December 12] either Tbilisi or Atlanta would do as answers to "Capital of 
Georgia", neither is (8). On the other hand, Tashkent, which is (8), is the 
capital of Uzbekistan. My apologies for letting this howler through.

· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor
 