
Favourites

Uwe Rösler's Brentford should be strong once more, although their season 
hinges on whether they can shake off the psychological scars of last season. 
The impressive Harry Forrester has departed to Doncaster Rovers(a particularly 
painful sale given what happened in May) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/27/brentford-doncaster-league-one>
, while the goalkeeper Simon Moore has jumped into the Premier League with 
Cardiff City. David Button, the itinerant former Spurs and Charlton keeper, is 
the new No1, while Will Grigg has been given the job of replacing Forrester up 
front. If he can replicate last season's form, if the trauma of last season has 
not deprived the Bees of their buzz, then the best footballing side in the 
division should get over the line this time around.

Kenny Jackett is charged with the task of turning around Wolves' errant 
supertanker and it will be interesting to see whether he puts his faith in the 
club's younger players – Danny Batth, David Davis and Jake Cassidy are all 
deserving of a prominent role this year – or if the parachute payments the club 
still receive after their relegation from the Premier League will allow 
financial scope to recruit more experienced hands. On paper, they should 
comfortably finish in the top six, but on paper they were not one of the worst 
three sides in the Championship last season. The job Jackett did in keeping 
Millwall upwardly mobile in the Championship was the equal of any manager's at 
that level over the past three years, and the suspicion remains that only his 
lack of up-and-coming glitz kept him from the clutches of clubs higher up the 
food chain. He has his work cut out to repeat his magic at Molineux, though 
history gives hope to Wolves fans – Jackett has reached three play-off finals 
in three full seasons at this level.

Peterborough United will also be looking to make an immediate return to the 
Championship. Promotions from this level in 2008-09 and 2010-11 have been 
followed by relegations back to it in 2009-10 and 2012-13 – and the yo-yo club 
are well equipped to complete the upward leg of the journey once more. They 
have lost Dwight Gayle but the £6m Crystal Palace forked out for the striker is 
already burning a hole in the pocket of the chairman, Darragh MacAnthony – Posh 
have broken their transfer record to bring in Britt Assombalonga from Watford 
(though worryingly their previous record signing, Tyrone Barnett, proved a flop 
last season). More signings are imminent, while Lee Tomlin has the talent to 
tease defences in this division.

Dark horses

Leyton Orient finished last season in rampant form – only Bournemouth picked 
up more points over the final 17 games than the Os. But unlikeWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall>, who also thundered home, Orient 
have kept their squad together. Russell Slade's stint in charge has been 
reminiscent of that of Jackett at Millwall – solid overachievement largely 
overlooked thanks to a lack of pizazz. If they can get off to a better start – 
last season they were 20th in mid-November – then the play-offs are a 
possibility.

Sheffield United should make the play-offs for the third successive season, 
although David Weir remains an unknown quantity. He has added much-needed pace 
to the squad and if the club can keep hold of Harry Maguire (one of only three 
players from the 2012-13 League One team of the year who will start the season 
in the division – Swindon's goalkeeper Wes Foderingham and theCoventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> striker Leon Clarke being the 
others) and the goalkeeper George Long, then defensive solidity should again be 
a feature at Bramall Lane. To avoid more post-season misery the Blades will 
need Febian Brandy, Lyle Taylor, Kevin MacDonald and Jamie Murphy to click in 
their revamped frontline.

The exit door at Bristol City's Ashton Gate has been spinning quicker than the 
entrance, but the signings of Aden Flint fromSwindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon>, the England Under-21 goalkeeper 
Frankie Fielding from Derby and particularly Jay Emmanuel-Thomas from Ipswich 
look exciting. Marlon Pack could soon be added to that number. Having described 
himself as "embarrassed" by his £50m outlay on the club, the City chairman, 
Stephen Lansdown, outlined a change in strategy with the words: "The 
satisfaction over the next few years will be seeing our players develop and 
grow with us." That does not sound like a war cry for promotion but Sean 
O'Driscoll's side have the talent to challenge. And they also have Sean 
O'Driscoll.

Kevin Davies is a fascinating acquisition for Preston North End and hopes are 
high at Deepdale that he can spearhead a play-off push, whileMilton Keynes Dons 
have made some smart purchases and, despite the loss of the very handy 
full-back Adam Chicksen to Brighton, will be there or thereabouts if the Dons' 
manager, Karl Robinson, continues to commit himself to the club in the face of 
interest from elsewhere.

Outsiders

What to make of Walsall? Only Bournemouth and Yeovil (both promoted) earned 
more points than the Saddlers after 1 January last season. But for a run of one 
win in their last eight games they might well have forced their way into the 
play-offs and gone in as the form team. They just missed out, though, and those 
exploits did not go unnoticed: Will Grigg (Brentford), Febian Brandy (Sheffield 
United) and Jamie Paterson (Nottingham Forest) have all departed. The bottom 
half may beckon this year.

The mirror image of Walsall's 2012-13 season could be found at Prenton Park. 
On 19 JanuaryTranmere were top of the league. Three wins, two draws and 12 
defeats in their final 17 games saw them finish 11th. In their last nine 
matches they failed to score on eight occasions. Ronnie Moore has brought in 
Akpo Sodje and Ryan Lowe in an attempt to reinvigorate that toothless attack 
but Rovers are unlikely to be prominent frontrunners this time around. The same 
is true forSwindon, who after a tumultuous 2013 that has seen the departure of 
two managers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/18/paolo-di-canio-swindon-resigns>
, Kevin MacDonald just three weeks ago, will be hoping simply for a season of 
stability.

Despite the strength of the sides relegated from the Championship there is 
definitely a play-off spot or two up for grabs and it would not be a huge 
surprise to see one of the clubs entering the division from the other end carry 
their momentum through the season. Martin Allen has concentrated on adding 
goals to aGillingham side who scored fewer than 12th-placed Rochdale last 
season, despite taking the League Two title.Bradford City have a strange, 
otherworldly momentum following theirLeague Cup exploits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/feb/24/bradford-city-heroes-swansea-city-final>
 andplay-off victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/18/bradford-city-northampton-town-league-two>
, whileRotherham United's sound financial footing has been displayed by the 
signings of Michael Tidser from Morton and David Worrall from Bury. They will 
look to the on-loan Matt Tubbs for goals.

For Crawley, the return of Kyle McFadzean, who missed more than half of last 
season through illness, is a huge boost and will shore up a defence that was 
too leaky at times last season. A lack of goals might prove problematic, 
though, even if Town keep hold of the talented midfielder Nicky Adams and a 
repeat of last season's 10th place seems a long shot.

Stevenage will be desperately hoping that Graham Westley will be able to 
repeat the alchemy of his second, hugely successful stint in charge. Plenty 
outside the club are tipping them for the drop but there seems to be genuine 
confidence among the regulars at Broadhall Way.Notts County have lost their 
diminutive schemer Alan Judge to Blackburn but in the Martinique international 
Yoann Arquin, who has had a more competitive pre-season than most having 
featured inthe Concacaf Gold Cup 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2013_CONCACAF_Gold_Cup>, they have a player 
capable of doing stuff like this <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TV3X9SCprkQ>.

Strugglers

Coventry City's shambolic summer has been well documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> and though the door back to the 
Ricoh Arenamay still be ajar <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/23515733>. 
Portsmouth showed last season what off-field strife can do to a club and the 
fear is that the Sky Blues are destined to follow the same path.Colchester, who 
survived on the final day of last season, will be hoping Sanchez Watt 
rediscovers some of the talent that led to his making a goalscoring debut for 
Arsenal as an 18-year-old. Four years of increasingly underwhelming loan spells 
mean it is a hope rather than an expectation.

Port Vale's Tom Pope almost tripled his goal tally from the previous four 
seasons combined in helping Vale to promotion and Micky Adams, who somehow just
worksat Vale Park, will need his striker to prove that was not just a flash in 
the pan. Of some historical hope to Vale fans – the last time Wolves and
Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> were in 
this division together (in the Steve Bull- and Brian Deane-inspired sides of 
1988-89) Port Vale finished third and were promoted through the play-offs.

Crewe have had their annual summer wonderkid sale with Luke Murphy joining 
Leeds for a cool million. Steve Davis will again face a battle to keep Alex in 
the division, as willCarlisle's Gregg Abbott, now the third longest-serving 
manager in English football and in need of all that experience.Shrewsbury 
surged clear of the drop with two wins in their final two games but are likely 
to be battling at the wrong end once more, whileOldham have lost four players 
to the division above – Matt Smith (Leeds), goalkeeper Alex Cisak (Burnley), 
Dean Furman (Doncaster) and Jean-Yves Mvoto (Barnsley) – and could be in for a 
struggle.

New managers

Somehow, amid the rubble left by the final days of the 2012-13 season and 
after a manager search that didn't so much verge on the farcical but build a 
300-room hotel and casino right in the middle of the farcical, the Sheffield 
United board conjured the impossible – an appointment that united United fans. 
And not (this time) unite them in anger or in boggle-eyed incredulity but 
actually unite them in a kind of relieved 
that-could-have-been-a-lot-worse-let's-give-this-bloke-a-chance 
spring-in-the-step optimism (not to mention unite them in surprise that the 
powers-that-be at Bramall Lane were able to come up with an appointment in 
David Weir capable of uniting them in a kind of relieved 
that-could-have-been-a-lot-worse-let's-give-this-bloke-a-chance 
spring-in-the-step optimism).

While Jackett, the other managerial newbie in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, undoubtedly has the 
more daunting job on his hands to turn Wolves' fortunes around, the challenge 
facing Weir at Bramall Lane is no less intriguing. The embryonic managerial CV 
looks solid – his apprenticeship has been served under David Moyes and Walter 
Smith – the Blades have gone unbeaten in pre-season, the oh-so-last-century 
4-4-2 has been ditched (Weir is set to become the first Sheffield United 
manager since Nigel Spackman in 1997 to forgo 4-4-2 as his stock formation) and 
while the deck-clearing has not gone far enough in the eyes of some fans in his 
recruitment he has added the two things that were desperately needed – pace and 
attacking threat.

The lack of experience at this level is a concern, though, and his decision to 
appoint two assistant managers – Adam Owen as assistant manager (performance) 
and Lee Carsley as assistant manager (technical) – may be boldly progressive 
but may also be one of the hallmarks of his tenure fans remember with rolling 
eyes and weary sighs should it all go wrong. And the pressure is on – a fourth 
season at this level would test the (limited) patience of those in S2.

Seven other managers – Graham Westley (Stevenage), Joe Dunne (Colchester), 
Sean O'Driscoll (Bristol City), Simon Grayson (Preston), Chris Kiwomya (Notts 
County), Steven Pressley (Coventry) and Lee Johnson (Oldham) begin first full 
seasons at their respective clubs. O'Driscoll and Grayson have both led sides 
out of the third tier before, while Johnson watched his dad Gary do so with 
Yeovil last season. With Coventry this year's basket case, Pressley has 
arguably the toughest job of the lot, although Dunne faces a battle to keep
Colchester <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> in the division, a 
battle that he won last season.

Players to watch

Leigh Griffifths (Wolves) 

Strikers heading south of the border on the back of prolific form in Scotland 
have not had a great time of it of late: just ask a Middlesbrough fan for his 
or her opinion of Kris Boyd, a Blackburn supporter theirs of David Goodwillie 
or one of the regulars at Bristol City's Ashton Gate about David Clarkson. 
Having been a Wolves player for two years, Griffiths is not quite in the same 
category but he has yet to make an appearance at Molineux following his move 
from Dundee in 2011 – the 22-year-old returned to Molineux in January this year 
to allow Dean Saunders the chance to assess his qualities but he was dispatched 
back to Scotland almost immediately following an ill-judged (to put it very 
mildly)comment on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/11/leigh-griffiths-wolves-racist-tweet>
.

With Sylvan Ebanks-Blake gone and Kevin Doyle, a striker who has gone missing 
in a Wolves shirt so many times over the past couple of seasons it's a wonder 
his face doesn't adorn milk cartons in the West Midlands, likely to follow at 
some point this month that is set to change. He was the second highest scorer 
in the SPL in 2012-13 and has been handed the No9 shirt by Jackett. 
Interestingly, the other big beast in the division, Sheffield United, will also 
be pinning their goalscoring hopes on a player who impressed in Scotland last 
season – Lyle Taylor, second in the Division One goalscoring charts with 
Falkirk. Griffiths, though, seems likely to carry the heavier burden of 
expectation.

Will Grigg (Brentford) 

Perhaps the most painful of the trio of exits from the Bescot Stadium within 
the space of 10 days in June and July, Grigg has swapped a solid League One 
side for arguably one of the best and certainly the most aesthetically pleasing 
in the division. Walsall's player of the season and players' player of the 
season will be the central attacking pivot for Rösler's side. It would be a 
surprise if he does not exceed the 20 goals in scored for the Saddlers last 
year.

Jay Emmanuel-Thomas (Bristol City) 

In 2010, Arsène Wenger said he was "outstanding" and "knocking very hard on my 
door – with two hands" 
<http://arseblog.com/2013/03/lots-of-youth-potential-but-few-will-make-the-grade/>
. Two years ago, Jack Wilshere tipped him to follow him into the Arsenal first 
team. This season Emmanuel-Thomas begins life in League One, having left 
Ipswich as part of a straight player-for-player swap with City's Paul Anderson. 
The talent is unquestionable, the attitude otherwise. City have offered the 
winger a chance to rebuild his career – it's an opportunity he needs to take.
 