
Carlisle United squandered the opportunity to put daylight between themselves 
and seventh-placedNotts County in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> when they conceded a 
last-minute equaliser at strugglingWycombe Wanderers.

Carlisle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> took the lead 17 
minutes into the second half. Jon-Paul McGovern produced a sidefooted shot 
which hit the bar and the home defender Grant Basey was the last person to 
touch the ball for an own goal.

Carlisle appeared to be heading for all three points but the Chairboys scored 
what could prove to be a vital equaliser in the final minute.

Stuart Beavon played a ball to Stuart Lewis who drilled a ball from 20 yards 
into the top left-hand corner of the goal.

The draw means Wycombe are only one point into the relegation zone while 
Carlisle are two ahead ofNotts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> in the final play-off place.

Notts County enjoyed a 3-0 win at Leyton Orient although the scoreline 
indicates victory was more emphatic than was the case.

County went in front with 20 minutes remaining against the run of play as they 
took advantage of a mistake by the Orient goalkeeper Jamie Jones.

Jones dropped the ball and Damion Stewart made sure, slotting home with the 
Orient defence looking on.

The visitors doubled their lead six minutes later when Lloyd Sam's cross found 
Jeff Hughes in the six-yard box and he made no mistake.

Sam then turned scorer with the final goal into the bottom right-hand corner 
of the goal in the last minute.

Colchester United and Hartlepool United drew 1-1. The visitors took the lead 
when Evan Horwood's cross was headed home by Antony Sweeney in the 17th minute 
but their hosts drew level with nine minutes to go.

Paul Murray was penalised for a challenge on Gavin Massey in the penalty area, 
with Freddie Sears putting the resulting spot-kick low into the bottom 
left-hand corner of the goal.

Stevenage's fading play-off hopes were dealt another blow when they went down 
to a 3-0 defeat atTranmere Rovers.

Tranmere made an ideal start by going ahead in the second minute. Ash Taylor's 
header was parried by theStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> goalkeeper Chris Day, with 
on-loan Jake Cassidy first to pounce and slotting home from close range.

The hosts doubled their lead nine minutes later and again it was Cassidy, this 
time heading home Andy Robinson's corner. They then sealed the points with a 
third goal 13 minutes from time when Lucas Akins fired home John Welsh's cross.

Scunthorpe United moved further towards mid-table with a 1-0 win against 
Exeter City, who remain deep in trouble.

Jon Parkin scored the only goal of the game with a little under a quarter of 
an hour remaining, firing home after collecting the ball from Jamie Reckord.
 