
The first day of the season is supposed to be a time of cheery optimism. Just 
try telling that toCoventry City fans. They have known nothing but misery over 
the past few months, watching helplessly as they have been forced to endure 
indignity after indignity, and on Saturday they made their feelings known 
during theLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
match atCrawley Town.

With the club under a transfer embargo, given permission to play their home 
matches in Northampton, deducted 10 points and facing liquidation, a handful of 
the 1,080-strong travelling contingent caused a three-minute stoppage during 
the first half when they ran on to the pitch to aim protests towards the 
directors' box. To make matters worse, Steven Pressley's side were then beaten 
3-2 by Crawley, conceding an 84th-minute winner by Michael Jones after they had 
fought back from two goals down.

After two successive relegations, Wolverhampton Wanderers will take anything 
they can get and although a 0-0 draw atPreston North End, for whom Kevin Davies 
made his debut, was an underwhelming start to life in the third tier, their 
manager, Kenny Jackett, could at least take heart from a solid defensive 
display. However, the former Millwall manager admitted he wanted to see more 
conviction in the final third. "We got in good positions down the field but 
didn't let our quality show," he said.

Unlike Wolves, Leyton Orient had no problems in front of goal, Russell Slade's 
side underlining their promotion credentials with a thumping 5-1 win atCarlisle 
United, while last season's beaten play-off finalists, Brentford, had to settle 
for a point after letting a 1-0 lead slip atPort Vale.

In League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>, 
Newport County enjoyed a joyous return to the Football League with a 4-1 win 
overAccrington Stanley, whose new manager, James Beattie, was shown how tough 
being the main man can be. "We've made a bit of history," Chris Zebroski, who 
scored twice on his Newport debut, said.

Portsmouth have been heavily tipped to win the title but they were given a 
reality check at a packed Fratton Park, collapsing to a 4-1 defeat byOxford 
United, while Phil Brown's Southend United triumphed 1-0 over Plymouth Argyle 
at Roots Hall.
 