
Favourites

Too big for League Two, Andy Awford’s Portsmouth team are surely capable of 
escaping it this term. The Fratton Park crowds – at 15,460 they enjoyed the 
division’s best average attendance last season and attracted League Two’s 
biggest audience (18,181) whenOxford United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united> visited – can only help. 
With their financial woes increasingly behind them England’s biggest 
supporter-run club is ready to consign the errors of past regimes to history 
and rise again. And Awford’s team displayed title winning form following his 
installation last spring.

Bury finished last season on an upward trajectory following David Flitcroft’s 
appointment as manager in December. Flitcroft did an awful lot right despite 
difficult circumstances in his previous job at Barnsley and seems one of the 
game’s brighter managerial prospects.Bury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury> should be strong enough to make it 
back into League One. And quite possibly in style. Better, much better than the 
pre-season odds suggest.

Teams that finish strongly generally start the next campaign well and York 
have been on the way up since Nigel Worthington’s squad was reinforced last 
January. They should do much better than the pre-season odds suggest. Although 
they stumbled in the play-offs to miss out narrowly on promotion, York averaged 
two points a game in the second half of last season suffering only two defeats 
in 23 league fixtures as they displayed title-winning form. Throw in 
Worthington’s experience and they could be quietly formidable.

Dark Horses

Granted Luton have only just returned to the league but newly-promoted teams 
often arrive with the sort of momentum capable of sweeping them straight up 
through the divisions and, in John Still, Luton boast a highly experienced 
manager. Kenilworth Road should also house some of the division’s bigger crowds.

Micky Mellon, Shrewsbury’s manager, says his radically re-shaped side are 
“good to go” after a manic summer during which he signed 16 new players. The 
bookies seem to believe this is a recipe for instant promotion on the part of a 
club only relegated from League One in April. But gelling so many players so 
quickly will not be easy.

Like York, Southend missed out on promotion via the play-offs last spring but 
Phil Brown is optimistic they can be second time lucky. Brown is likely to be 
the manager with the best sun-tan inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> but the man who led 
Hull into the Premier League and kept them there for a season should not be 
underestimated.

Strugglers

Morecambe, Accrington, Wycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe>, 
Exeter

New managers

Michael Appleton (Oxford United)

The one-time Manchester United youth player is still only 38 but has managed 
four clubs –Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth>, 
Blackpool, Blackburn Rovers and now Oxford in the space of three years. 
Appleton’s coaching is much vaunted but now is the time for him to walk the 
walk.

Rob Edwards (Tranmere)

It is the 41-year-old, one-time Bristol City defender’s first managerial 
position but the Cumbrian-born Edwards impressed enormously during a stint as 
assistant manager at Exeter. If he hits the ground running,Tranmere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tranmere> could well be part of the 
promotion mix.

Micky Mellon (Shrewsbury)

The 42-year-old Scot has a mixed managerial record – although he generally did 
very well at Fleetwood – but has been given carte blanche to sign virtually an 
entirely new squad. It could be promotion or bust.

Players to watch

Ricky Miller (Luton Town)

The 25-year-old striker has joined League Two Luton Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown> from Conference North Boston 
United after scoring 28 goals last season. John Still, who has a knack of 
turning semi-professionals into full-time league players, says he reminds him 
of the recently retired, uber-prolific, one-time European Golden Shoe winner 
and Premier League top scorer Kevin Phillips.

Adebayo Akinfenwa (AFC Wimbledon)

League Two defences beware; big units do not come more sizeable. Akinfenwa, 
aka the strongest man in football, has swapped Gillingham – where he scored 10 
goals in 34 appearances last season – forAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon>. Dubbed “the Beast” this 
16-stone powerhouse of a centre-forward can bench-press 180kg – almost twice 
his bodyweight – and recently gave John Terry an extremely testing workout 
during a friendly against Chelsea.

Luke Chadwick (Cambridge United) 

The former Manchester United winger/midfielder could not be happier after 
helping Cambridge back into the league last season. Chadwick grew up in a 
Cambridgeshire village and says he is much happier at the Abbey Stadium than he 
ever was at Old Trafford.
 