
For a long time it looked as though everyone would go home miserable from the 
Western Homes Community Stadium. A draw would have done nothing for either side 
but in the end it was onlyPreston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> in despair after George Moncur’s 
late goal for Colchester ensured their League One survival and helped MK Dons 
to leapfrog North End and steal automatic promotion to the Championship.

“We’re all devastated,” said Preston’s manager, Simon Grayson, for whose side 
the defeat ended a 19-game unbeaten streak at the worst possible time. “It’s 
difficult to take for everybody.”

Grayson’s side began the day knowing that they had only to match the Dons’ 
result against already relegated Yeovil to joinBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> in the second tier next 
season. By half-time there was no question that Milton Keynes were holding up 
their end of the bargain – a 4-0 lead meant that nothing but a win would do for 
North End.

But they were well beaten by a Colchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> side who began the day in 
22nd and who themselves came into the game requiring nothing short of a win – 
and a little help from elsewhere – to stay in the division. The opportunity 
appeared to have slipped through their fingers when Chris Porter blazed a 
second-half penalty over the bar just before the hour but the striker redeemed 
himself brilliantly eight minutes before time, providing the assist for Moncur 
to sweep home a goal that was simultaneously heartwarming and heartbreaking.

The help duly arrived thanks to defeats for Crawley and Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty>, results that relegated 
those sides and allowed Colchester to pull off a great escape, while MK Dons 
ended up walloping Yeovil 5-1, an emphatic way to pip Preston and the end of an 
astonishing late run – nine wins and a draw in their last 10 fixtures.

It means Preston take a 10th shot at the play-offs and they have every reason 
to feel trepidation.Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> have lost four finals, 
Lincoln memorably lost in five play-offs in a row between 2003 and 2007 but no 
one has tried and failed nine times, as Preston have. Chesterfield await with 
every intention of making it 10 out of 10. “Everybody will question our record 
but records are there to be broken,” said Grayson, who is aiming for a fourth 
promotion from this level after successes with Leeds, Blackpool and 
Huddersfield. “We’ll embrace it and be confident. It’s a second opportunity to 
go and get promoted.”

Another worry, though, will be the anxious manner in which North End 
approached this tie. They only truly hit their stride for a spell after the 
penalty miss but Sam Walker in the Colchester goal was rarely stretched. That 
was down to some remarkable last-ditch defending from United but also some 
wayward finishing. Paul Gallagher missed perhaps their best chance eight 
minutes after the interval, skying an effort over the bar after Chris 
Humphrey’s pull-back, and while the home side played like they had nothing to 
lose and everything to gain, the opposite was true for their visitors.

At half-time 23rd-placed Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> seemed the side set to 
write a famous last-day survival story, and at the time of Porter’s missed 
penalty both Crawley and Notts County led, but late goals meant Moncur’s effort 
was enough to keep the U’s up.

“It’s a great achievement for the football club,” said the Colchester manager 
Tony Humes. “Credit to the players out there, because they were absolutely 
brilliant.”
 