
The club record signing Britt Assombalonga enjoyed a competitive debut to 
remember forPeterborough as he struck the winner against Swindon on the opening 
day of theLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
season. The 20-year-old striker, a summer capture from Watford, scored the only 
goal with a fierce right-foot shot early on.

The victory sees Peterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> claim an early advantage 
over the promotion favouritesWolves, who played out a goalless draw at Preston.

Coventry's problems continued as, after fighting back from two goals down to 
draw level at 2-2, they conceded a late goal to lose 3-2 atCrawley.

The Sky Blues, who started the new campaign with a 10-point deduction, had 
looked to have salvaged a point when second-half goals from Callum Wilson and 
Franck Moussa cancelled out early efforts from Jamie Proctor and Joe Walsh. But 
the visitors were left empty-handed when Mike Jones scored an 84th-minute 
winner for Crawley.

Bristol City, who came down from the Championship with Wolves and 
Peterborough, drew 2-2 at home to promotedBradford. Scott Wagstaff and Jay 
Emmanuel-Thomas twice put the hosts ahead but Nahki Wells and Rory McArdle 
earned Bradford a point.

None of the four sides who were playing in League Two last season managed to 
start with a win as the championsGillingham were beaten 1-0 at home by 
Colchester, the substitute Andy Bond scoring the winner late on. Rotherham and 
Port Vale both drew. Rotherham did well even to get a point after trailing 3-1 
atCrewe with five minutes to go, goals from Ben Pringle and Lee Frecklington 
salvaging a 3-3 draw for the visitors. Crewe were 2-0 up in the first nine 
minutes through Anthony Grant and Max Clayton, and Harry Davis made it 3-1 
after Frecklington had pulled a goal back.

Vale drew 1-1 at home with last year's losing League One play-off finalists 
Brentford, who went ahead through Shaleum Logan's fine first-half solo goal, 
only to be pegged back by Doug Loft's equaliser moments later.

Leyton Orient took advantage of Lee Miller's first-half dismissal to run riot 
in a 5-1 win atCarlisle, with goals from Kevin Lisbie, Scott Cuthbert, David 
Mooney and Dean Cox (two). David Amoo replied with a penalty for Carlisle.

There were also plenty of goals at Stevenage where visiting Oldham claimed a 
4-3 win. Jose Baxter scored a late penalty to clinch the points.

Darius Charles put Stevenage ahead before goals from James Tarkowski, Baxter 
and Christian Montano made it 3-1 to Oldham. The home side hit back through 
Greg Tansey and Filipe Morais, but Baxter slotted the winner four minutes from 
time.

Craig Westcarr struck twice and set up Chelsea loanee Milan Lalkovic for 
another goal asWalsall earned a 3-1 home win over Tranmere, who replied through 
Andy Robinson's free-kick. Shrewsbury and MK Dons shared a goalless draw.
 