
Accrington Stanley

How's it going? Better than we'd have you believe. Despite a start to the 
season which you'd be hard pressed to describe as anything but "grim", we're 
actually heading in a positive direction. Believe it or not, we're in a better 
position than we were last season when we achieved unthinkable things. At the 
time of writing we're unbeaten in six league games having won the last three, 
heading into the biggest local derby in recent years. Boxing Day's fixture away 
atMorecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> could signal our 
intentions for the second half of the season and fire a warning to the top half.

Who's been the star? From the start of the season, on-loan defender Kevin Long 
has been outstanding.

Biggest disappointment? The lack of interest from the town itself despite how 
far we got last season and the type of football we played. Hopefully with 
recent results, they'll start coming out of the woodwork.

Grade B+

Andrew O'Mara, andrewomarafootball <http://andrewomarafootball.blogspot.com/>

AFC Wimbledon

How's it going? Promoted clubs normally do pretty well in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>, but having battled 
out of the Conference on a limited budget and without the funds to replace key 
players sold during the summer, this season was always going to be a challenge. 
Despite our current two-month winless streak, a decent start means we still 
have a healthy points advantage over the bottom two. Fears we may get drawn 
into a relegation struggle will be eased by a return to form, but with 
difficult games over the Christmas period that might be later rather than 
sooner, as the paranoid among us visualise a Lincoln-esque slide from the 
play-off positions to relegation.

Who's been the star? Christian Jolley's pace and trickery have terrified 
League Two defences this season. Coming from park football to the Football 
League in three years, the Dons fans' biggest worry is someone might take a 
punt on his impressive career curve continuing at a higher level in the near 
future.

Biggest disappointment? The sheer number of points dropped through basic 
errors. The insane handball that cost us our opening game turned out not to be 
the unfortunate one-off incident we hoped it would ...

Grade C

Neil Lord-Smith, The Anonymous Don <http://anonymousdon.wordpress.com/>

Barnet 

How's it going? Not too bad – on the pitch anyway. There was plenty of 
optimism two games into the season (this "run" included the defeat of 
Portsmouth away in the Carling Cup), but any talks of a push for the play-offs 
quickly vanished after some fairly inept displays, especially at home. With the 
team taking some impressive scalps in the JPT, a two-legged Southern Section 
final againstSwindon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> Town stands 
between the Bees and Wembley. Off the pitch things have been complicated, as 
you may have seen in the national media. Media-friendly boss Lawrie Sanchez 
seemed a little desperate to be considered for the Northern Ireland position a 
while back, but ruled himself out of the running earlier this month. While 
there may have been issues of management loyalty, this problem pales into 
insignificance when you consider Barnet do not have a home from the start of 
next season.

Who's been the star? You can't really look beyond the league's top goalscorer, 
Izale McLeod. After committing himself to theBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> cause in the summer, the pacy 
striker has netted 14 goals that have kept the Bees just above the relegation 
zone.

Biggest disappointment? The home form has been poor in recent years and has 
continued in similar fashion this season – with a particular lowlight being a 
6-3 reverse againstBurton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion>. Matters on the field 
almost pale into insignificance with the future of the club potentially in 
doubt. The need to find a new home (almost definitely outside the borough) in 
time for next summer is a constant worry for anyone associated with the club.

Grade C

Toby Pratt, Keeping Barnet at Underhill 
<http://www.ipetitions.com/petition/keeping-barnet-fc-at-underhill/>

Bristol Rovers 

How's it going? It has been a disappointing first half of the season for the 
blue team in Bristol as Rovers haven't met the pre-season expectations. 
Currently sitting in the bottom half of League Two, the favourites for 
promotion are now looking like a bad bet. After an inspired win on the opening 
day of the season atAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon>, inconsistency has rocked 
the Pirates' boat and they continue to look for their first back-to-back wins 
of the campaign. If fortunes on the pitch don't turn around soon, Paul Buckle 
will find himself on very thin ice and Rovers could be looking over their 
shoulders after the busy Christmas period.

Who's been the star? A handful of players have stood out so far this season, 
including Mustapha Carayol and Joe Anyinsah. Most notable though has been Lee 
Brown. He has been consistently solid in defence and a strong threat going 
forward, while featuring on the scoresheet on more than one occasion too.

Biggest disappointment? One of the biggest disappointments so far this season, 
aside from failing to deliver the expected results, has been the manager. He 
has clashed with players and continues to feed the press a host of excuses to 
paper over the cracks in our team.

Grade C. It could be a little bit worse.

Maria Hudd, Bristol Rovers fan (@MariaHudd <http://twitter.com/#!/@MariaHudd>)

Burton Albion 

How's it going? With summer panic rife among supporters due to our failure to 
beef up a threadbare strike force, it is testament to manager Paul Peschisolido 
that we now boast one of the most feared frontlines in League Two. The shrewd 
acquisitions of Justin Richards days before the season's curtain-raiser and 
Billy Kee for £20,000 from Torquay in August blended brilliantly with Calvin 
Zola's big man presence. The trio have netted a staggering 29 goals between 
them. And it's been Albion's ability to nick a goal when performances haven't 
always been vintage that has lifted us from flirting with non-league to 
dreaming of promotion. Even the most partisan of Brewers fans could not have 
foreseen us occupying a play-off spot at Christmas so, it's fair to say, we've 
exceeded all expectations.

Who's been the star? Billy Kee. His impact has been gargantuan – 11 goals in 
10 starts – and has earned him recognition from the Football League, twice, 
with two awards to enhance his mantelpiece. Bargain of the season.

Biggest disappointment? Our sheer ineptitude to win by a comfortable 
margin/kill games off. It's not good for the heart!

Grade A

Luca Gallone, burtonfootballnut <http://burtonfootballnut.wordpress.com/> (
@lucabafc <http://twitter.com/#!/lucabafc>)

Cheltenham Town 

How's it going? Put simply, it's been nothing short of an incredible first 
half of the season forCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> fans. Written off as 
relegation fodder by just about everybody, we go into Christmas lying third in 
the table, having already won as many games as we did in the whole of last 
season. In all competitions, we have lost two of our last 15 games, and are 
unbeaten away in nine – and have an FA Cup trip to Spurs to look forward to 
early in the new year. Heady days indeed. The team are playing some of the best 
football seen at Whaddon Road in years – now the test is to carry it on for the 
second half of the campaign ...

Who's been the star? Difficult to pick one – I could say Sido Jombati, Jack 
Butland, Marlon Pack, Darryl Duffy or Alan Bennett – but I am going for Russ 
Penn. His drive and energy in midfield has inspired the rest of the side.

Biggest disappointment? The attitude of certain opposition managers after we 
have played them off the park. Oxford's Chris Wilder, Swindon's Paolo Di Canio 
and, as expected, Crawley's Steve Evans to name but three have been churlish in 
defeat. Give some credit where it is due. Evans called us "a poor side" after 
we won 3-1 at Whaddon Road. Message for you Mr Evans: this "poor side" are only 
four points behind you, so watch out.

Grade A+

Mark Halliwell, Cheltenham Town Chatter <http://www.markhalliwell.blogspot.com>

Crawley Town 

How's it going? We've got to be happy with the season so far. Sitting four 
points clear at the top of the table at Christmas is something I don't think 
anyone could have expected at the beginning of the season. We had a couple of 
shocking results early on but the team have turned it around and are now on a 
15-game unbeaten run. January should be an interesting month. Hopefully we 
won't lose any players to the preying eyes that have been watching our 
progress, and we can add some more quality to push on. Andy Drury signing 
permanently would a great bit of business.

Who's been the star? Tyrone Barnett has been key to our success. His work rate 
is immense and the goals he's scored invaluable. It was a real loss when he was 
injured.

Biggest disappointment? Losing 6-0 to Morecambe. We knew the side was 
decimated with injuries, but even so it was still a major shock.

Grade A-

Peter Bellamy, CTFC.net <http://ctfc.net/>

Crewe Alexandra 

How's it going? As expected, I think it's fair to say. With Dario finally 
taking a step away from the dugout and Steve Davis taking over in November I 
think all Alex fans are happy to accept that this is a season to consolidate 
and look forward. Mid-table isn't really where anybody wants to be but we're 
closer to the play-offs than the relegation zone while still playing some of 
the most attractive football in the division.

Who's been the star? For some frankly ridiculous goals and one of the funniest 
Twitter accounts going, it has to be Nick Powell. Here's hoping that the 
rumours regarding his imminent departure remain just that for now. The fact he 
was born in 1994 is frightening, mind. A notable mention has to go to Adam 
Dugdale also – another one off the production line who has become a massively 
reliable and important part of the side.

Biggest disappointment? I'm not one for criticising referees week after week 
but the performance of Stuart Attwell in the 1-1 home draw with Crawley was 
absolutely woeful. "It seems like he wants to be the centre of attention," said 
defender Dave Artell after the game and that's certainly how it came across. 
Still, it's nice to be reminded that even the so-called top referees can drop 
clangers wherever they're officiating. And we did get a point against the best 
team in the league, so I'm not quite sure what I'm moaning about.

Grade C+

Jonathan Birchall, Crewe fan (@jonbirchall <http://twitter.com/#!/jonbirchall>)

Gillingham 

How's it going? The Gills started the new season like a train with 10 points 
from their first four games, but soon hit the buffers in September as the goals 
dried up. The arrivals of Frank Nouble and Jo Kuffour on loan helped get the 
season back on track, and securing their services beyond December could prove 
crucial to future success. Currently on our best run of form this season, 
having claimed 11 out of the last 15 points in the league and a place in the FA 
Cup third round, the Gills are finally starting to show the consistency that 
could see them force their way into the top three.

Who's been the star? Ross Flitney in goal has perhaps been our most consistent 
performer yet our strength has been in attack where responsibility has been 
shared, with our 37 league goals being divided between 12 different scorers.

Biggest disappointment? Niggling injuries, suspensions and playing out of 
position have meant that star signings Andy Frampton, Charlie Lee, Chris 
Whelpdale and Danny Kedwell have been solid rather than spectacular, but have 
still shown glimpses of what could be in store for the second half of the 
season.

Grade B

Tom Clee, Gills365 <http://gills365.co.uk>

Hereford United 

How's it going? Deja vu. After 10 games last season we sacked the manager, and 
we appeared to be dangerously close to the same this term. We have instead 
acquired the veteran head of Gary Peters as director of football, who 
immediately called us the worst team in the division. He's changed the 
footballing philosophy to be more direct and results picked up almost 
immediately. His blunt honesty is quite refreshing at the moment, but the 
locals are used to better football and the purists are already moaning at the 
"hoofball" on offer. Safety seems likely, but a looming transfer embargo may 
cause problems.

Who's been the star? Harry Pell was nicknamed the "Essex Socrates" during his 
loan spell last term. It's a good comparison, except he's far too young to grow 
a proper beard.

Biggest disappointment? The central midfield partnership of Kenny Lunt and 
James McQuilkin guided the Bulls to safety last term. We've hardly seen them in 
recent weeks.

Grade D-

Martin Watson, Bulls News <http://bullsnews.blogspot.com/>

Macclesfield Town 

How's it going? More or less as expected. The Silkmen are a team of two halves 
– one of the tightest defences in the league combined with one of the least 
effective forward lines. Since November, injuries have hit hard, and form has 
suffered. If the Silkmen can score more often, a top-half finish is possible, 
and a big striker should be top of manager Gary Simpson's shopping list. 
January will be interesting, especially if teenage prodigy Elliott Hewitt makes 
a big-money move to a Premier League club. There's also the small matter of an 
FA Cup tie against Bolton at the Moss Rose.

Who's been the star? Shaun Brisley and Nat Brown give a weekly masterclass in 
central defensive play.

Biggest disappointment? Injury problems have kept too many key players out, 
especially promising strikers Ben Tomlinson and Waide Fairhurst.

Grade B-

Matthew Brown, matthewbrownwrites.com <http://www.matthewbrownwrites.com/>

Morecambe

How's it going? After a fantastic start to the season and a month of sitting 
in first place, we have hit an inevitable sticky patch which we need to 
overcome as soon as possible. From scoring a goal in every game since the 
opening day we have now gone three games without a goal. Most fans are happy 
enough on the improvements since last year, but our inconsistent home form is 
still a frustration. With a busy festive period coming up, we will be looking 
to regain some of that early-season momentum and make a push for a play-off 
place once again.

Who's been the star? Kevin Ellison has been a great acquisition scoring seven 
key goals and bringing much needed character to the team.

Biggest disappointment? The inability to hold on to a lead at home, throwing 
away 13 points from leading positions so far.

Grade B

Jack Steer, Morecambe fan (@morecambejack <http://twitter.com/#!/morecambejack>
)

Northampton Town

How's it going? The season began with so much promise. Certainly the rhetoric 
from the club was, customarily, positive. Promotion was promised. In Gary 
Johnson we (some of us) trusted. Some of us didn't. It quickly became apparent 
that all was not well. No proper left-back, multiple players out of position, 
lack of organisation, confidence, lots of poor performances getting steadily 
worse. Johnson blamed everyone but himself. Eventually he had to go. His 
legacy, a 7-2 mauling at home byShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> and a 4-1 hammering at 
Plymouth. Now Aidy Boothroyd is at the helm promising it'll get worse before it 
gets better. Can it?

Who's been the star? There have been no real stars. Bayo Akinfenwa and Michael 
Jacobs get the plaudits, but for me Lewis Young has been the brightest spark in 
a team of damp squibs.

Biggest disappointment That it seems like another season is down the tubes (at 
best) already, meaning (at best) another season in the fourth division. If 
things don't improve it could end up much worse than that.

Grade F, G, U or whatever the lowest grade possible is

Haydon Spenceley, Northampton Town fan (@haydonspenceley 
<http://www.twitter.com/haydonspenceley>)

Oxford United 

How's it going? After an impressive start to the season, including an 
eight-match unbeaten streak, Oxford's form quickly gave way to a dire run of 
five losses in a row. It's hard to say with authority where the team will 
finish, but pre-season predictions of play-offs still look the most likely 
outcome. The fans are behind the boss Chris Wilder, though the usual moaners 
have had their say too. The fact remains that he has dragged us out of the 
Conference and looks likely to get us out of League Two at some point as well, 
though whether it's this season remains to be seen.

Who's been the star? We all agree Leven is better than Beckham. Peter Leven 
scores spectacular goals, including strikes from the halfway line that top 
anything, ever.

Biggest disappointment? It's often unjustified to single individuals out for 
criticism, but surely Deane Smalley himself would admit he has disappointed, 
often resembling a lower-league version of Fernando Torres devoid of confidence 
on the pitch. More goals please Deane.

Grade C – solid yet unspectacular

Tony Fallows, RageOnline <http://www.rageonline.co.uk/>

Plymouth Argyle 

How's it going? The last five months of 2011 were no easier than the first 
seven for Argyle fans, as the club continued to fight for its life on and off 
the pitch. August and September were dark days indeed, as Peter Reid's youthful 
side were battered from pillar to post while the administrator's apparent 
determination to complete a doomed takeover deal with Truro City chairman Kevin 
Heaney's Bishop International consortium looked set to condemn the club to 
liquidation. Thankfully, Heaney and co were sidelined in favour of Devon-based 
businessman James Brent, who finally purchased the club at the end of October. 
The Pilgrims emerged from administration with Carl Fletcher installed as 
player-manager, the former Welsh international taking the reins after poor old 
Reidy was given the boot by acting chairman Peter Ridsdale (who has since 
departed for Deepdale). Results have slowly started to pick up over the past 
couple of months, although Saturday's 1-1 draw withHereford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hereford> leaves Argyle second from 
bottom, three points from safety and facing an almighty battle to secure their 
Football League status.

Who's been the star? All of the players and non-playing staff who worked for 
months without proper pay while the club stared down the barrel of liquidation. 
Many are still suffering with the consequences, although supporters' groups 
such as the Green Taverners are working flat-out to ease their financial 
struggles. The fact that we still have a club is due to their sacrifice.

Biggest disappointment? A run of 10 straight defeats is never pleasant; losing 
away to Southern League Premier side Stourbridge in the FA Cup was another low 
point. Watching Joe Mason, Bradley Wright-Phillips and Craig Noone, all sold 
for a pittance during the past 12 months, tear it up in the divisions above 
only served to compound the misery.

Grade The staff: A++. On the pitch: D

Mark Anderson, Argyle Outsider <http://argyleoutsider.blogspot.com/>

Port Vale 

How's it going? It's been a worrying season for Vale, as on-field matters have 
been well and truly overshadowed by yet more off-pitch controversy this time 
involving the club's CEO and chairman. What sort of issues? Promissory notes 
for shares (that's buying lots of shares through IOUs to me and you), threats 
of lawsuits, broken promises, failed investment and excessive salaries. Most 
Vale fans are rallying behind the supporters' club who are committed to 
removing the pair from the club. For Vale's sake, I hope it's sooner rather 
than later …

Who's been the star? Vale have been a study in inconsistency this season, but 
striker Tom Pope had won most fans over with some hardworking performances. Off 
the pitch, my sincere thanks to the supporters' club and the Sentinel for 
revealing Vale's off-pitch goings-on.

Biggest disappointment? Yes, it's the same old theme … but most Vale fans are 
bitterly disappointed with the current board and would like to see the back of 
them as soon as possible.

Rob Fielding, One Vale Fan <http://www.onevalefan.co.uk/>

Shrewsbury Town 

How's it going? Club legend Graham Turner made his intentions for this season 
clear. He wanted promotion. Consistent performances from Shrewsbury have seen 
us go fourth, with hopes high for a top-three finish. Pass and move football is 
again being adopted by Turner this season. Town are undefeated at home thus 
far, although away form could be improved. There are frustrations at times, as 
the final ball or finish has often been lacking when we've been dominant. 
However, most fans are optimistic about promotion this season, and the 
atmosphere around the club remains positive. A Carling Cup run saw Shrewsbury 
beat Derby County (3-2) and Swansea City (3-1) and take a memorable lead at 
Arsenal. Town are also still in the FA Cup, with a tie at Middlesbrough to 
come. As a Shrewsbury fan, there really isn't that much to complain about. 
However, I can't believe chips aren't being sold at the Greenhous Meadow!

Grade A-

James Walker, Shrewsbury fan (@STFC_1886 <http://twitter.com/#!/@STFC_1886>)

Southend United 

How's it going? Two weeks ago, all was rosy at Southend United. The Shrimpers 
were top of League Two, unbeaten in 17 matches and still in both the 
Johnstone's Paint Trophy and the FA Cup. Fans were dreaming of a Wembley final 
and, after a favourable FA Cup draw, a trip to Anfield. Two league defeats and 
two cup exits later,Southend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> 
and their supporters have returned to a comfortingly familiar feeling of 
disappointment. However, 42 points after 21 matches and second position in the 
league table has exceeded all expectations so far, and promotion is still very 
much an attainable possibility as the club heads into 2012.

Who's been the star? Ryan Hall. With nine league assists and five league 
goals, he is hugely important to Southend's attacking potency and must remain 
at the club for any chances of promotion this season.

Biggest disappointment? The JPT area semi-final defeat to Swindon – it ended 
the unbeaten run and Southend seem destined never to play at Wembley.

Grade A

Lew Carey, Another Northern Sky <http://lewcarey.wordpress.com/>

Swindon Town

How's it going? Paolo Di Canio has taken Swindon on a bumpy ride, but for the 
large part, it has been enjoyable. Poor signings ensured a slow start but 
things have turned round nicely, with Swindon not unbeaten in ten league games. 
Away from the league, Swindon are still in the FA Cup after two League One 
scalps, as well as being just a regional final away from Wembley in the 
Johnstone's Paint Trophy. The side is ever improving and on course for 
automatic promotion, but Di Canio eill need to keep hold of his stand-out 
performers - Paul Caddis, Aden Flint, Matt Ritchie and Simon Ferry - beyond 
January.

Who's been the star? A few contenders but Paul Caddis gets my vote. A 
consistent performer, who has been an integral part of out attacking from 
right-back and a captain fanstatic.

The biggest disappointment? Losing at home to Oxford left me in a bad mood for 
a week or two.

Grade A- but on track for an A*.

Rosie MacGillivray, Swindon Town fan

Torquay United

How's it going? Not too badly, all things considered. This was always going to 
be a transitional season with a new manager at the helm and several key players 
having moved on, but after a frustrating start we appear to have settled into a 
respectable position and remain outside bets for a play-off place. Our 
attacking play isn't always decisive enough to capitalise on the scoring 
opportunities we create and a club of our size will always lack squad depth, 
but with a youthful, promising side and an intelligent manager in Martin Ling 
it's a good time to be a Gulls fan.

Who's been the star? There are several fans' favourites at the moment but I'd 
have to choose Bobby Olejnik in goal: his confident presence and frequent 
heroics have given us a formidable last line of defence.

Biggest disappointment? Our first-half performances: too often we've stuttered 
hesitantly through the opening 45 and had to play out of our skins in the 
second half in an attempt to repair the damage.

Grade B

Ben Mayhew, Greenwich Gull <http://greenwichgull.wordpress.com>

This will be updated with the remaining teams ...
 