
Sarah Wigglesworth looks a bit shocked. I've just told the architect that her 
latest building, the Siobhan Davies Studios, reminds me of a bus garage in 
south London. Wigglesworth says it's more like a loaf of bread rising from a 
baking tin. But are we really so at odds? I'm thinking about the way light 
pours through the arches of the undulating roof of the building's superb top 
floor studio; Wigglesworth is thinking of the view of the same roof as seen 
from surrounding London streets. We're both right: the voluptuous grey-blue 
glass, reinforced plastic roof of the studio is indeed rather like a loaf of 
bread hot from the oven, while its underside, a sequence of beautifully 
resolved birch-ply arches, has something of the baroque adventure and finesse 
of the listed Stockwell bus garage, built in 1952 to the adventurous designs of 
Adie, Button and Partners.

The underside of the studio's roof matters a lot to the trained dancers poised 
beneath it. They look at it much of the day, and especially when they first 
come in for rehearsals. Siobhan Davies's style is for dancers to limber up 
while lying on the floor. In this studio there are no bars on the wall, as 
there are in classical dance studios. No mirrors, either. These, says Davies, 
hinder and distort natural movement. Some dancers work on the floor for up to 
an hour and a half at a time: they are all too aware of the modern baroque roof 
above their stretched bodies. This, in part, is why Wigglesworth has designed 
it this way. Daylight filters through the eye-like rooflights set into the 
sides of the arches, so that the feel of this lofty, 5m high studio changes 
continually. Daylight is controlled, so it never dazzles, nor does it play 
dramatic games by casting deep shadows across the floor or walls. A joy in 
another building, these would distract dancers, throwing them literally as well 
as metaphorically off balance.

It has taken Davies 10 years to find the right location for what is the first 
permanent home, in 24 years, for her celebrated dance company. Throughout that 
time she has stuck by her architect. This is, in fact, the third scheme in 
London Wigglesworth has designed for Davies. First, the Studios were to be in 
King's Cross, then in Whitechapel and now in a 100-year-old school building in 
Southwark. This is an area where it is still relatively cheap to buy, rent or 
build; surrounding the Studios - originally a school - are a rag-bag of 
late-Georgian terraces, several unresolved experiments in postwar housing, the 
Imperial War Museum and the towerless St George's Cathedral, an accidental home 
to down-and-outs asleep in its pews.

Both client and architect liked this extreme city patchwork, and enjoyed 
working with rather than against it. So, rather unexpectedly, Davies's 
headquarters is reached through a bit of old school playground. Here, 
Wigglesworth has knitted together, in big bold clicks of her architectural 
needles, three well-worn buildings dating from 1898, 1908 and the early 1930s. 
These had all been bashed about by generations of schoolchildren and by 
makeshift additions and repairs. Wigglesworth has left these marks of previous 
occupation. So a handsome and serenely calm waiting room, or "parlour" as 
Davies likes to call it, leading off a welcoming triple-height lobby, is a cosy 
marriage of walls lined with crazed and slightly foxed tiles, plush new leather 
sofas, soundless timber floors, smoothly sliding doors and gently fashionable 
lamps.

Back in the lobby, walls stretch up to the underside of the rooftop studio, 
baring every last scratch, lesion and indentation made by what were once 
stairs, chimney breasts and floors, all of which had to go to make way for 
Davies's dancers. The result is an intriguing patchwork of materials, patterns 
and shadows, quite the opposite of the typically gleaming new city academy or 
arts venue, all pristine white walls and blond wood floors.

Wigglesworth, whose best-known work, with Jeremy Till, is the unlikely and 
delightful Straw House north of King's Cross - parts of which really are made 
of straw, and mud - is a mistress of unexpected materials, positively enjoying 
the sorts of mottled and curious surfaces most architects are at pains to hide. 
This pronounced characteristic of her work has the unusual effect of making the 
new spaces at Southwark seem somehow lived in and welcoming, even though brand 
new. In practice, it also means that dancers use the school in ways that a prim 
architect might well consider to be promiscuous. They exercise anywhere they 
can find a convenient space. The building is alive with the spirit of dance.

The tautly poised, suspended steel and wire-trussed staircase that rises from 
the back of the lobby to a rehearsal room, treatment rooms and a playful 
exercise balcony overlooking the entrance, is delightfully odd, and very 
effective. It takes up little room. It absorbs little light. It makes a 
cats-cradle play of wires across the rear-facing glass facade, cleverly 
breaking up views into the building from the playground of the school. And 
dancers use it to stretch.

The balcony reached halfway up the stair is a curious bolt-hole. Lined in 
plump red leather, it's a place to meet, rest, exercise and lean over to see 
who is coming into the building. It ends in a sudden prow in which just one 
person can strike an attitude, or gaze out across the main road. Davies likes 
to stand here; it makes her feel like the captain of her own ship.

The walls and arches of the studio are lined throughout in birch-ply and the 
sprung timber floors in linoleum. For years, Davies's dancers have practised in 
makeshift accommodation, jarring their joints against concrete floors in rooms 
better suited for car maintenance than dance. This, in comparison, is a 
dancer's paradise. It is at once a calm and exhilarating space, rather like the 
interiors of the best baroque churches. These, too, play a deft game in which a 
sense of the highly theatrical is reconciled within the spirit of the numinous.

It is a difficult trick for architects of any generation to pull off, yet 
Wigglesworth has done it here. She takes particular pleasure in the 
17th-century Italian churches of Borromini, Brunelleschi and Guarini, and shows 
how it is possible to imbue a new building with the spirit of old architectural 
styles without aping the forms of the past. Wigglesworth's budget in Southwark 
of £2.4m was not exactly the financial foundation of the grandeur of 
Counter-Reformation Rome. Still, she has achieved a design ambition here: she 
wanted a place where it might seem as if performers and architecture were 
dancing together into the sky.

Dance, as both architect and client say, is about applying narratives, told by 
the human body, to space. While it is possible to build neutral or featureless 
performance spaces for dancers, architecture can offer inspiration and even 
provocation. In the world of classical dance, outside the training and 
rehearsal studio, this has traditionally meant voluptuous wedding cake design. 
With the Siobhan Davies Studios, Wigglesworth offers what feels like just the 
right balance between raising the spirits through architecture, and an 
architecture that does not determine or define the nature and style of the 
creative process it protects.

· In Plain Clothes is at the Siobhan Davies Studios, London SE1, May 2-17. 
Details: 0870 730 1414.
 