
By the time you read this I will have celebrated my 49th birthday and, while I 
hope I don’t look a day over 48, I know it will be a moment for reflection. As 
I enter my 50th year, it will be a time for acknowledging all the things I have 
never done, especially in the kitchen. I like to think of myself as a competent 
cook, one who can roast and grill and simmer. I can make terrines and reduce 
sauces and knock up onion tarts from scratch. I know how to use spices from 
North Africa, India and Asia in ways that make sense, and anybody who has tried 
my braised lamb shoulder will talk of nothing else. As long as they’re sitting 
in front of me and I’m asking them repeatedly “HOW WAS IT?” and refusing to let 
them leave until I feel better about myself.

But I’ve never made a soufflé. It’s not that I’ve tried and failed. I’ve never 
even started. Don’t get me wrong. I adore a good soufflé. It’s just never 
struck me as something I should make for myself. By the same token I have never 
made a béarnaise sauce or, come to think of it, a hollandaise. Though I have 
made mayonnaise. It was a mildly satisfying process, but left me wondering why 
I’d bothered when I could have used the time making an onion tart, given how 
serviceable shop-bought mayonnaise is.

I’ve never whipped up a sabayon, hand cut steak tartare, blitzed salmon with 
cream and chives to make a mousse or rolled my own puff pastry. Short crust of 
course, but puff no. I’ve never made lobster thermidor, jugged a hare or 
prepared a woodcock in the classical style, its breast speared by the long beak 
of its bisected head. And I have never, ever made vichyssoise. There is a good 
reason for the latter. I really dislike vichyssoise.

At this point I believe I’m meant to do the whole carpe diem thing; to bellow 
that I have so much life ahead of me and that really I must knuckle down and 
fill all these gaps in my repertoire. But really, balls to all that. When I 
turned 40 I realised that one of the pleasures of seniority was all the things 
I no longer had to apologise for: if I want to drink rosé instead of beer I 
can. Likewise, if Inever see another production of King Lear ever again  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/26/choosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington>
that will be just fine by me. (If I want to hear about old people losing their 
marbles and bugging their grown-up kids, I can ask my middle-aged friends round 
for dinner and get them to talk about their elderly parents.)

If anything, my position has hardened through experience. I don’t need to make 
a soufflé at home, because there are an awful lot of people elsewhere who will 
continue to do so far better than me. Ditto a sabayon and a béarnaise. I should 
concentrate on the things I’m already good at and work out from there. Just as 
I don’t feel the need to, say,shoot a baboon dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/26/aa-gill-shot-baboon> to get some 
sense of what it might be like to kill a man, so I don’t need to stress myself 
with a technical culinary procedure I haven’t so far felt the desire to master. 
This isn’t lack of ambition. It’s not laziness. It’s prioritisation. Look, I’ve 
just turned 49 and time isn’t the resource it once was. Frankly, the poor old 
soufflé just doesn’t even get a look in.
 