
From liquidation to boardroom coups, the Rangers captain, Lee Wallace, has 
seen it all when it comes to off-field strife during his Ibrox career. Which is 
why the left-back can say with a straight face that theJoey Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/joey-barton> storm has barely made him 
blink.

Barton is currently serving a three-week suspension following the 
training-ground row that is threatening his future at the club. That matter has 
still to be resolved but Wallace is adamant that whatever happens it will not 
affect a squad that has grown accustomed to dealing with adversity in recent 
years.

“We put all that stuff into the background,” Wallace said. “That’s just how we 
operate. For any game we have, the buildup is purely focused on the football. 
Unfortunately, over the years we’ve had a lot go on outside the footballing 
side. We’re used to it now. The only way we know how to react as professionals 
in that dressing room is to come in here and work hard every day.”

Wallace and his team will have to work even harder just to make themselves 
heard when they come up against a wall of hostility on Sunday. Gers are set to 
make their first visit toAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> in four years for a match that 
could effectively decide whether they remain in the Premiership title race 
seven games into the season. Mark Warburton’s team have managed just two wins 
and already suffered the humiliation of a 5-1 defeat to Celtic.

Wallace, however, feels there were signs of recovery were evident in last 
Saturday’s draw with Ross County and Tuesday’s Betfred Cup quarter-final win 
over Queen of the South. That could be threatened, though, as the Dons’ support 
look to create an atmosphere with as much venom as the one that crashed down on 
Gers heads at Celtic Park this month.

Wallace said: “I’ve got more experience of Pittodrie from being a Hearts 
player but we know there’s a fierce rivalry between the clubs. We know that 
historically but it’s going to be something new for this group of players. It’s 
just another game of football for us. Aberdeen are just another opponent 
standing in the way of us and three points. We do feel that when we go away 
from home, the opposition fans are gunning for us – but we’re used to it.

“These are things we can’t control. As a professional you just need to shut it 
off. Of course it can affect the noise levels but all we can do as players is 
control what happens out there on the park. I think we’ve got the players in 
our dressing room who can deal with that hostility and the tension that will be 
apparent.” 
 