
Rangers recorded their biggest win of the Scottish Premiership campaign and 
climbed to second place and nine points behindCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/aberdeen-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 after a comfortable home win.

Captain Lee Wallace fired Rangers ahead after 16 minutes before an Andy 
Halliday penalty just before the half-hour mark gaveRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> a two-goal interval lead.

Joe Garner added a third soon after the restart to give their under-pressure 
manager, Mark Warburton, some welcome respite. His side were booed off after 
their midweek draw with St Johnstone but victory puts them on 19 points, 
leapfrogging Saints, Aberdeen and Hearts.Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> were hoping for a victory 
that would have moved them into the top six but they stay in seventh.

Warburton has faced increasing scrutiny with his side’s disappointing start to 
the campaign but Rangers set out with a snappy tempo.

The hosts were holding their annual Remembrance memorial and rolled out a 
light artillery gun to mark the end of a minute’s silence. The smoke from its 
ear-cracking blast had barely cleared when Jason Holt fizzed wide the game’s 
first chance while Michael O’Halloran had the Kilmarnock defence in a panic as 
he darted to the byline before sending a dangerous ball across goal.

The Kilmarnock striker Jordan Jones looked just as lively as his Rangers 
counterpart as he skipped past James Tavernier before whipping a shot beyond 
the far post. But it was the impressive O’Halloran’s turn again soon after as 
he collected a sublime cross-field pass from Windass. The winger sped into the 
box but Jamie MacDonald was out smartly to block his shot.

It was another fine pick-out from the former Accrington Stanley playmaker 
Windass that created the opener. The 22-year-old turned away from Luke Hendrie 
on half-way with a clever dummy before rolling the ball beyond the Kilmarnock 
back-four for the galloping Wallace, who gave MacDonald the eyes before beating 
the keeper at his near post.

The second came after 29 minutes when Stevie Smith’s clumsy challenge on Jason 
Holt left the referee, John Beaton, with no choice but to point to the spot. 
MacDonald correctly guessed Halliday would go to his right but was beaten by 
the pace of his strike.

Rory McKenzie had to head clear from under his own bar to prevent Clint Hill 
giving his side the third goal.

There was a fight and sense of belief in the Rangers ranks that has rarely 
been seen this term and they made sure of just the points two minutes into the 
second half.

Windass scuffed his volley on the corner of the area but it made its way into 
the six-yard box, where Garner was lurking to tap home his second goal in two 
games.

Kilmarnock sent on the former Ibrox striker Kris Boyd as they sought a 
lifeline but it was the man wearing his old No9 shirt Kenny Miller who came 
close to a fourth for Rangers, with MacDonald forced into another diving save 
to keep out the veteran’s 25-yard effort.
 