
Lee Hodson scored his first goal for Rangers as a much-changed home team beat 
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> 2-1 at Ibrox.

The right-back, in for the dropped James Tavernier, finished emphatically with 
20 minutes left to handRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> a 
first victory over their top-four rivals.

After a tight first half, Aberdeen‘s Jayden Stockley missed a glorious chance 
and Kenny Miller showed him the way to goal in the 52nd minute as he converted 
a Joe Garner cross.

Rangers showed the passion that was missing during their midweek defeat by 
Hearts as they ended a run of three defeats against last season’s top three 
teams in front of a noisy 50,003 crowd.

A bad-tempered game boiled over in added time when Rangers defender Clint Hill 
and Aberdeen captain Ryan Jack were sent off and Andrew Considine headed 
Aberdeen’s goal in the dying seconds.

Mark Warburton made five changes with Tavernier a notable omission from the 
starting lineup after Robbie Muirhead got in behind him to net both goals at 
Tynecastle.

Danny Wilson, Matt Crooks, Harry Forrester and Joe Dodoo also made way as Hill 
returned from injury and Hodson, Barrie McKay, Michael O’Halloran and Garner 
came in.

Rangers employed their normal 4-3-3 formation with Miller dropping into 
midfield while Aberdeen moved to a 3-5-2 and brought in Mark Reynolds for 
Anthony O’Connor following their disappointing 3-0Betfred Cup final defeat by 
Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/27/aberdeen-v-celtic-scottish-league-cup-final-live>
.

The visitors threatened early as James Maddison’s free-kick bounced just wide 
and they soon got a weak effort on target through Jonny Hayes, who lined up 
alongside striker Stockley. Rangers got on top and Garner’s deflected shot 
trundled just wide.

There were only two clear chances in the first half, one for each team. Wes 
Foderingham clawed the ball away after Stockley got a foot to Graeme Shinnie’s 
low cross and Lee Wallace dragged a shot wide after aMcKay pass opened up the 
Aberdeen defence. There was plenty of effort in the subsequent 20 minutes of 
the half but nobody showed the ability to carve another opportunity.

In the second half, Hill got away with a risky challenge on Shinnie inside his 
own box before Stockley missed a sitter.

Hayes beat his man on the left and delivered a cross right to the striker six 
yards out in the centre of the goal but he somehow sent a free header wide.

The visitors were made to pay for their tardy play seven minutes after the 
restart when they failed to cut out Garner’s speculative right-wing cross. It 
eventually found its way to Miller at the back post and he finished first time.

Rangers doubled their lead on the 70-minute mark. McKay had the composure and 
vision to find Hodson inside the box amid a spell of pressure and the Northern 
Ireland international lashed a shot into the roof of the net.

Aberdeen pressed hard but Rangers came close to a third goal when Joe Lewis 
saved from Forrester.

Hill was sent off in added time after being booked twice for fouls on Maddison 
and Jack joined him down the tunnel after a lengthy spell of mass pushing as 
Maddison lined up a free-kick.

Considine headed home when the set piece finally came in to play but there was 
barely time for Rangers to restart.
 