
Marco Silvestri was the hero as Leeds beat Norwich 3-2 on penalties to reach 
the quarter-finals of theEFL Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup> 
after a thrilling fourth-round tie at Elland Road. Silvestri saved spot-kicks 
from Alex Pritchard, Steven Naismith and Robbie Brady before Ronaldo Vieira 
scored the winner.

Leeds striker Marcus Antonsson had cancelled out Pritchard’s opener before the 
break and after Nelson Oliveira had put Norwich back in front in extra time, 
Chris Wood struck in the 109th minute as the game ended 2-2.

Daniel Sturridge double sends Liverpool through against Tottenham Hotspur
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/liverpool-tottenham-hotspur-efl-cup-match-report>
Garry Monk’s side, who had used all three substitutes, played the whole of 
extra time with 10 men after the defender Lewie Coyle limped off injured in the 
90th minute. But they forced the shoot-out and, despite Kalvin Phillips seeing 
his effort saved by John Ruddy and Matt Grimes firing over, Vieira held his 
nerve to clinch Leeds a place in the quarter-finals.

There was a minute’s applause prior to kick-off for the former Leeds 
goalkeeper Gary Sprake, who died last week aged 71. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/gary-sprake-obituary> The 
Welshman made more than 500 appearances for the club under Don Revie in the 
1960s and 70s and his tribute was warmly observed.

Sprake would have approved when Silvestri prevented Norwich from taking the 
lead in the opening seconds as the Italian smothered Naismith’s shot.

Leeds were not so lucky the next time Norwich swept forward down the left as 
the unmarked Pritchard stooped low to head home in the 14th minute from Brady’s 
cross.

Leeds defender Kyle Bartley had a goal disallowed when he clearly handled Alex 
Mowatt’s corner into the net, but Monk’s side eventually found their equaliser 
in the 43rd minute. Kemar Roofe crossed to the far post and from Souleymane 
Doukara’s knock-back Antonsson turned the ball home.

Norwich seized back the initiative with the man advantage in extra time and 
after Pritchard’s shot flew narrowly wide, the visitors regained the lead in 
the 99th minute.

Pritchard was again pivotal, whipping in a brilliant cross from Brady’s short 
corner for Oliveira to head home unmarked at the far post, but Leeds were back 
on level terms again 10 minutes later. Ruddy could only parry Hadi Sacko’s low, 
angled shot and Wood swept home to take the tie to penalties.

Mike Phelan celebrated his first win since being handed the Hull City job on a 
full-time basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/hull-mike-phelan-permanent-manager>
, with a 2-1 win atBristol City, guiding his side into the quarter-finals for 
the second successive year.

Phelan hopes Hull’s EFL Cup run can lift the “gloomy” atmosphere caused by the 
club’s slide down the Premier League table. Five successive league defeats has 
dropped Hull into the relegation zone.

“It has been quite gloomy when you’re getting beaten week in and week out,” 
Phelan said. “But you can see in the dressing room that a win’s a win and it 
does mean a lot.

“It gives you confidence to start again, because we all know the Premier 
League is unforgiving at times. We showed that we can win football matches 
again so let’s move forward.”

Harry Maguire headed the Premier League side in front from a corner just 
before half-time. It was 2-0 only two minutes into the second half when Michael 
Dawson nodded in from another Hull corner.

The Championship side scored a late consolation through a fine individual 
effort from the substitute Lee Tomlin before Tammy Abraham saw an effort 
cleared off the line in the closing moments.
 