
A win at Cardiff for a former Swansea manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/garry-monk-sacked-swansea> 
with the clinching goal scored by a former Swansea player. This was an ideal 
way for Garry Monk to ease some of the murmuring around his position and add to 
the worries of his counterpart, Paul Trollope.

A penalty from Chris Wood and a sublime goal from Pablo Hernández made it two 
wins in a week for Leeds and offered encouraging evidence that Monk will take 
them in the right direction should Massimo Cellino resist the urge to get 
trigger-happy.

Newcastle United crash at home to Wolves and have Vurnon Anita sent off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/newcastle-united-wolverhampton-wanderers-championship-match-report>
In Hernández and the winger Hadi Sacko, Leeds had the two players on the field 
capable of producing genuine quality in open play, while Pontus Jansson turned 
in a fearsomely committed display at the back.

Monk believes he is starting to see his side perform in the manner and fashion 
he has envisioned after ending what promised to be a testing week on a pleasing 
note. “We have a new group, a new manager and new ideas,” he said. “We are 
taking it step by step, we are right at the start of that journey and if we 
give this group time to show their quality they can potentially grow into 
something very good.

“This was another step in the right direction. We are getting there slowly, we 
have not yet had that complete performance but we are growing.

“I see the commitment, attitude and work ethic is second to none. You can see 
the players enjoy it and enjoy being together. It is important to get those 
back-to-back wins. Results dictate everything you do but you want to see that 
enjoyment.

“I thought we really controlled the game, we sensed we were on top and put our 
personality on the pitch to cause Cardiff problems.”

It was not all plain sailing. Cardiff caused Leeds difficulty from numerous 
set pieces, hitting the post twice during the opening half. The captain, Sean 
Morrison, was the first man to be denied after his header had beaten Rob Green, 
and Aron Gunnarsson’s volley also hit the woodwork.

In between those moments Leeds spurned two gilt-edged chances, gifted to them 
by their hosts. Matt Connolly’s lazy pass was picked up by Hernández, with the 
Spaniard forcing a sharp save from the Cardiff debutant Ben Amos, and Wood 
ought to have done better than shoot straight at the goalkeeper after Hernández 
and Sacko had profited from a Peter Whittingham lapse.

Tammy Abraham: the brightest light among Chelsea’s 38 loan stars | Ben Fisher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/tammy-abraham-chelsea-loan-bristol-city>
In the second half it was the visitors who took command and were rewarded when 
Connolly was adjudged to have fouled Jansson at a corner as the pair tussled.

Referees have been extra vigilant in that area this season and Monk had no 
doubt the referee, Graham Scott, had made the right call. Trollope, with some 
justification, queried why similar offences had not been punished. Wood calmly 
rolled the spot-kick home and as Cardiff huffed and puffed in search of an 
equaliser there was an inevitability that they would pay on the counterattack. 
The substitute Kemar Roofe gave them a let-off, but Hernández – who set up 
Swansea’s opening goal against Cardiff in the first game of Monk’s managerial 
career in 2014 – curled a wonderful shot into the top corner.

It leaves Cardiff in the relegation zone, having suffered four consecutive 
league defeats for the first time since 2007. “The results are nowhere near 
acceptable, that’s my responsibility,” Trollope said. “I know that and it is my 
responsibility to shape it and mould it and get the best out of people.

“I’m totally aware of that but I also believe in how we work, that this will 
turn around for us.”
 