
If you believe that unrestrained capitalism is the solution to our planet’s 
environmental and social challenges, or that democracy is enhanced by two major 
parties bickering about personality and management style, then you are 
currently well served by the Liberal, National and Labor parties and might 
choose not to read on. If you think there might be better ways to make the 
planet more sustainable, just, peaceful and democratic, then there is certainly 
a place for you in the Greens.

The Greens party was founded on four broad principles of ecological 
sustainability, social justice, participatory democracy, and peace and 
nonviolence. Over the past 20 years those principles have guided the party in 
campaigns as diverse as ending the logging of native forests, defending and 
participating in local government, tackling climate change, opposing war and 
promoting more progressive policies on public education, industrial relations, 
taxation and welfare.

However the principles don’t answer every political issue by themselves. They 
don’t tell us the best way to reduce carbon emissions, they don’t endorse or 
condemn capitalism, they don’t say if we should have an inheritance tax and 
they don’t tell us how to end animal cruelty. These are all issues where there 
is room for debate within the Greens. From forest defenders to middle-class 
doctors and student activists, the Greens party is a broad and accepting social 
movement that has always celebrated its diversity.

This is why it is pretty hard to understand all the anger being expressed at 
the establishment of a small, self-organising group within the Greens thatcalls 
itself Left Renewal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/greens-left-renewal-faction-plans-open-strategy-meeting>
.

Left Renewal members believe that capitalism is a major problem and express a 
belief in socialism and collective enterprise. They don’t much like the state 
and want grassroots collective decision-making and reduced police powers. In 
its blanket opposition to capitalism and denunciation of state power, Left 
Renewal goes much further than most Greens members are comfortable with.

Greens' Left Renewal faction plans open strategy meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/greens-left-renewal-faction-plans-open-strategy-meeting>
Just to be clear, neither of us are members of Left Renewal. Having read the 
group’s opposition to top-down decision-making, it probably wouldn’t have us if 
we tried. The group certainly steps beyond what either of us believes both 
economically and politically. However, what it is putting forward is one of 
many views that is consistent with the Greens’ four principles and is a 
legitimate contribution to political debate in the party.

Left Renewal has every right to exist in the Greens along with less obvious, 
but no less real, rightwing groupings in the party. It is perfectly natural for 
like-minded people in a party to coalesce and seek to achieve common goals. 
It’s equally natural for people to seek to build bridges internally and adopt 
more moderate or conciliatory positions. A healthy political party will have 
all these elements and be able to contribute to broader debates about how 
society should work.

Before the mid 1980s and the political ascendancy of neoliberalism in 
Australia’s state and federal parliaments, this country had a much more 
moderate economic position. It was common political ground that Australia 
should have a mixed economy with distinct roles for the private market as well 
as for public ownership and public enterprise. We had publicly owned banks 
which delivered profits back to government, public ports and railways that 
stitched our cities, towns and regions together, and a public health and 
education system that delivered for everyone to world-class standards.

We still have elements of this but they survive on borrowed time in the face 
of unrelenting political attacks from both the Coalition and Labor. As members 
of the Greens, we are happy to place a stake in the ground and say we will 
always support public before private education and public health over private 
hospitals. However if we are going to make the place fairer and more 
sustainable we need to support public and social enterprise more broadly.

Neoliberalism is creating loneliness. That’s what’s wrenching society apart | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/neoliberalism-creating-loneliness-wrenching-society-apart>
Of course capitalism has an extraordinary capacity to organise resources and 
innovate. Whether it is delivering the iPhone or Facebook, cornflakes or solar 
panels, there is an energy and creativity in capitalism that anyone can see and 
we support. But capitalism has also put our planet in danger, as the conditions 
for life are degraded by an economy in which fossil fuels, profit and the 
market reign supreme.

Markets can’t price a species and they don’t know the value of compassion. 
They don’t respect the fact that we have a finite planet with finite resources. 
Markets only respect customers with money, not citizens with rights or a planet 
in need.

That’s why it is well and truly time to openly reject neoliberalism and the 
major parties’ uncritical acceptance of market-based solutions to literally 
every challenge we face.

Let’s remember how in the 1950s Australia led the world with the publicly 
owned Snowy Hydro scheme for renewable energy. We are a lot richer now than we 
were then so there is no question that we can build the 21st century public 
solar and windfarms we need to end our reliance on coal.

Here's a formula for bursting elitist anti-elitism | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/heres-a-forumla-for-bursting-elitist-anti-elitism>
It’s time the public stopped subsidising corporations to destroy our native 
forests and that we redirected the billions of tax dollars from private 
educators to public schools and Tafe. We can discuss how to future-proof fair 
internet access by retaining the NBN in public hands. Perhaps we can remember 
how to tax the rich while we are about it?

In short, we need to come together as a society and say that people are more 
than customers and our natural world is more than a collection of exploitable 
resources. We need transformative change. Parliamentarians and elites passing 
laws and changing government programs cannot alone deliver the level of change 
that is needed. As always positive change will come about only when grassroots 
movements have sufficient momentum to drive that change.

If this makes our current leaders uncomfortable then that’s hardly a surprise. 
It’s about challenging and changing the status quo and that, surely, is what 
the Greens are here for.
 