
In mid-August, when it became clear that Riyad Mahrez was following in Jamie 
Vardy’s footsteps and staying atLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>, Claudio Ranieri was asked 
how many players he imagined he would lose in the wake of winning the Premier 
League title. “If I am honest, no one,” the manager said, frowning. “I thought 
everybody wanted to stay with Leicester and continue to fight. I made a 
mistake. One did want to go.”

N’Golo Kanté’s departure to Chelsea clearly took Ranieri by surprise. Even 
with a release clause in the Frenchman’s contract, Ranieri was confident that 
Kanté would stay, if only for one more season. There was the emotional pull 
that came with being part of the “band of brothers” who danced around Vardy’s 
kitchen, the lure of Champions League football – something thatChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were unable to offer – and the 
fact that Kanté, at the age of 25, had time on his side.

Chelsea confirm signing of N’Golo Kanté from Leicester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/chelsea-confirm-signing-ngolo-kante-leicester-city>
Kanté, however, had other ideas. He played what turned out to be his final 
game for Leicester at Stamford Bridge, in the 1-1 draw at the end of last 
season, and will be reunited with his former team-mates at the same venue on 
Saturday. It will be a reminder of how life used to be for Leicester and, at 
the same time, an opportunity for Kanté to deliver a performance that confirms 
what everyone knows: the Premier League champions miss him. Badly.

Signed from Caen for £5.6m, he was a revelation at Leicester, so much so that 
his industry and energy became a standing joke within the club. Ranieri 
predicted that Kanté would one day “cross the ball and score with a header”. 
Steve Walsh, the club’s former assistant manager, laughed about how Leicester 
“played three in midfield, Drinkwater in the middle with Kanté either side”, 
and Christian Fuchs posted mocked-up pictures of his team-mate’s recovery runs 
on social media, showing him scampering 657km across France on foot duringEuro 
2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>.

In short, Kanté was something special at Leicester, almost a one-off with his 
indefatigable running, and so it hardly comes as a surprise that the champions 
have not been quite the same team without him. They miss the defensive screen 
that he provided in front of the back four and also his ability to pinch 
possession and provide the springboard to break with such alacrity.

Chelsea confirm kit deal with Nike worth £60m a season until 2032
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/chelsea-new-kit-deal-nike-60m>
Statistics confirm what most would suspect in a post-Kanté Leicester team. The 
average number of tackles and interceptions per game have fallen significantly, 
from 22 to 16 and 19 to 14 respectively, and Kanté’s departure for around £30m 
has contributed heavily to that. He averaged 4.7 tackles and 4.2 interceptions 
per game at Leicester – the highest in the Premier League in both categories. 
Daniel Amartey, who has been handed the task of trying to replace Kanté in the 
centre of Leicester’s midfield, averages 1.5 and 1.2 in comparison.

As for high-intensity running – sprints registered by Opta at above 25.2km/h – 
Kanté completed, on average, 56 of those per game at Leicester. Amartey, in 
contrast, is making 41.5 each match.

In fairness to Amartey, he is only 21, still maturing as a player and was not 
the man earmarked to fill Kanté’s boots. Nampalys Mendy arrived from Nice for 
£10m with that remit but the 24‑year‑old has played only 53 minutes of Premier 
League football after picking up an ankle injury against Arsenal in the second 
match of the season. But even if Mendy were fit, could he really be expected to 
match Kanté’s contribution?

Interestingly, Kanté is a slightly different player at Stamford Bridge. By 
virtue of the fact that he is now playing in a team who tend to dominate 
possession, he is more like the midfielder who featured forFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> at Euro 2016 than the one who won 
the league with Leicester. Kanté is still scurrying around and has been the 
best Chelsea midfielder by a distance, yet he is spending far more time with 
the ball at his feet. He has made 65 passes per game for them this season, as 
opposed to 39 at Leicester, and the corollary is that Kanté’s name is a fair 
way down the Premier League list when it comes to tackles (he has made fewer 
than Drinkwater) and interceptions (ranked 47th).

Scotland's slump, a weekend preview and Temple of Doom – Football Weekly Extra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/oct/13/football-weekly-extra-scotland-slump-weekend-preview-temple-of-doom-james-richardson>
From Chelsea’s point of view it is about Kante being in the right place at the 
right time when possession does change hands, and by and large that has been 
the case, certainly in the early fixtures, including an outstanding debut 
against West Ham. The exception would be during the defeats against Liverpool 
and, in particular, Arsenal, when Kanté looked as lost as everyone else in a 
Chelsea shirt. At one point the cameras homed in on him being outpaced by 
Michael Oliver, the referee, when running back towards his own goal after Mesut 
Özil had turned him deep inside the Arsenal half.

That incident seemed like an aberration for Kanté, who is covering an extra 
1,000m per game in a Chelsea shirt compared with last season, which seems 
remarkable. Maybe that increased running is down to Antonio Conte’s decision to 
sometimes deploy Kanté as the deep-lying midfielder in a 4-1-4-1 formation, 
leaving him looking a little isolated on occasions. Some Chelsea observers feel 
that Kanté could do with a midfield ally to work in tandem with, as was the 
case with Drinkwater at Leicester, although whether Nemanja Matic, Cesc 
Fàbregas or Mikel John Obi are cut out for that sort role is a matter of debate.

What is indisputable is that Leicester’s loss is Chelsea’s gain. The voice of 
the softly spoken man who proudly parked his Mini alongside the BMWs, Mercedes 
and Bentleys at Leicester’s training ground was barely heard during his 10 
months with the club, yet his presence was felt everywhere in the team that 
defied those 5,000-1 odds. In fact Ranieri summed things up perfectly a little 
while ago when he said: “If Chelsea bought Kanté, it’s because he played as two 
players last season. The referee counted 11 but we were 12.”
 