
Celtic warmed up for their crucial Champions League play-off in midweek with a 
4-2 win overSt Johnstone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> at 
McDiarmid Park after surviving a late lapse.

Leigh Griffiths, celebrating his 26th birthday, opened the scoring in the 28th 
minute with his sixth of the season and further goals from Scott Sinclair and 
James Forrest looked to have three Premiership points secured by the interval. 
The Scottish champions cruised the second half until, in the 82nd-minute, the 
Celtic substitute Liam Henderson fouled Danny Swanson to hand the home side a 
penalty which the Saints midfielder converted before the striker Steven MacLean 
grabbed a second in the 88th minute to give the Perth side late hope andCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> late concern.

However, the Celtic substitute Ryan Christie then fired in from close range in 
added time to make it 4-2 and put a fairer reflection of the game on the 
scoreline.

Celtic beat Hapoel Be’er Sheva 5-2 in the first leg of their Champions League 
play-off on Wednesday night and on their first-half performance they can be 
confident of completing the job in the Turner Stadium although Brendan Rodgers 
may have some concern about the unnecessary loss of goals. Despite Celtic’s 
trip to Israel in midweek Rodgers named a strong starting 11.

He made only two changes, bringing in the defender Saidy Janko and midfielder 
Nir Bitton for Mikael Lustig and Callum McGregor, the latter starting on the 
bench.

The Saints manager, Tommy Wright had Richard Foster, his new signing from Ross 
County, in his reshuffled defence which was without the injured Steven 
Anderson, Tam Scobbie, Dave Mackay and Keith Watson.

The visitors were soon into their stride in the Perth sunshine and there were 
a few close calls before they took the lead.

The left-back Kieran Tierney got past Foster and, when his cut-back landed at 
the feet of Griffiths, he fired it in off the bar with what looked like the aid 
of a slight deflection.

St Johnstone responded and David Wotherspoon’s free-kick was tipped over the 
bar by the goalkeeper, Craig Gordon, with Celtic surviving the corner, but that 
was as much as Saints offered offensively.

Griffiths was then booked by Craig Thomson for simulation inside the box as 
Foster moved in but five minutes from the interval Celtic doubled their lead 
through Sinclair.

The midfielder Tom Rogic’s fine pass set up Forrest but his effort was blocked 
by Saints keeper, Alan Mannus, who then brilliantly parried Griffiths’ 
follow-up shot, only to see the ball break to Sinclair to knock into the 
exposed net.

In the 44th minute Forrest scarpered from just inside Saints’ half and eased 
past the chasing Paul Paton before confidently knocking the ball past Mannus, 
who then had to save a Griffiths free-kick to prevent number four before the 
break.

Rogic hammered a drive off the crossbar early in the second half as the home 
side continued their dominance without going flat-out and Foster almost headed 
into his own net.

However, St Johnstone were given a lifeline when Henderson, on for Bitton, 
tripped Swanson inside the box and the Saints player hammered the resultant 
penalty past Gordon.

With two minutes remaining MacLean got a touch to Swanson’s cross to ensure a 
nervy last few minutes for the Celtic fans until Christie, on for Forrest, 
hammered in the fourth.

“I thought 99.9 per cent of that game we were outstanding,” said a satisfied 
Rodgers.

“The quality of our football, in particular the first half, was excellent. We 
had opportunities in good areas in the second half. We had total control of the 
game and gave away a really soft penalty – and it was a penalty. It was a poor 
challenge – and we lose a goal when we are down to 10 men [Henderson was off 
getting treatment for a cut eye].

“So all of a sudden the scoreline is nowhere near the actual game but it gives 
them a little bit of hope.”

But once we get 11 men back on the field again we have the dominance on the 
ball and we create another chance and score. So I don’t think the scoreline 
reflected the game if I am honest. We got four today and we maybe could have 
got another four, which is a huge compliment to the players because this is a 
team that has done really well under Tommy Wright.”
 