
Celtic rounded up a fine week sitting top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a convincing 
4-1 victory against Aberdeen at Parkhead.

The Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> forward Leigh 
Griffiths opened the scoring in the 13th minute with a storming 20-yard shot 
before the striker Adam Rooney levelled in the 33rd minute in a rare Dons 
attack.

The midfielder James Forrest restored Celtic’s lead in the 42nd minute, 
however, and with three minutes remaining Scott Sinclair grabbed the third with 
a penalty with the visiting defender Mark Reynolds sent off for picking up a 
second yellow card after bringing him down, before the midfielder Tom Rogic 
added the last-gasp fourth.

Rangers held by 10-man Kilmarnock as Kris Boyd frustrates former side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/kilmarnock-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
Brendan Rodgers was a happy man post-match. “It was arguably our best result 
of the season because of everything that has gone before it,” the manager said. 
“To end up scoring four goals against a very good side, late on again, really 
shows the mental and physical fitness of the players. They are relentless at 
the moment. It's been a near-on perfect start for us.”

Rodgers’s side went into the game on a high after qualifying for the Champions 
League for the first time in three years with a 5-4 aggregate win against 
Hapoel Be’er-Sheva on Tuesday night before drawing Barcelona, Manchester City 
and Borussia Mönchengladbach in their section. After the international break, 
Celtic will host Rangers for the first time in four years – the Hoops 
leapfrogged theIbrox men, who drew against Kilmarnock, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/kilmarnock-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 at the top by a point and with a game in hand – before travelling to the Nou 
Camp for the first of their Group C games.

It is an exciting time at Celtic Park. Rodgers dropped the goalkeeper Craig 
Gordon and gave a debut to the 35‑year‑old Dorus de Vries who recently signed a 
two-year deal from Nottingham Forest, having worked with the Celtic manager at 
Swansea City.

The defender Erik Sviatchenko and the midfielder Rogic came in to the starting 
lineup at the expense of Saidy Janko and Callum McGregor. The defender Ash 
Taylor the and striker Wes Burns returned to theAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> side with Miles Storey on the 
bench and Peter Pawlett out with a groin strain.

Following an early attempt by Burns which flew high and wide, Celtic took 
control, showing no signs of fatigue from the midweek trip to Israel. In the 
11th minute Rogic crashed a left-footed drive off the crossbar with Anthony 
O’Connor’s mis-kicked clearance from the rebound gratefully gathered by 
Joe Lewis.

However, the Aberdeen goalkeeper was not so lucky two minutes later when 
Griffiths slipped the ball through the legs of the Pittodrie midfielder Kenny 
McLean before unleashing a vicious left-footed drive from 25 yards which flew 
in off the post. The Scotland striker then ran the length the park to hold up a 
T-shirt with ‘RIP Kieran’ on it, in tribute to the teenage Celtic fan Kieran 
McDade who died while training with his local team in Coatbridge last week.

Football clockwatch: Leicester 2-1 Swansea, Watford 1-3 Arsenal and more – as 
it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/27/football-clockwatch-leicester-v-swansea-watford-v-arsenal-and-more-live>
The home side grew in confidence and Forrest missed the target from a Sinclair 
cut-back when it looked a certain goal. In a rare attack the visitors levelled. 
The Dons midfielder Niall McGinn slipped past the right-back Mikael Lustig near 
the by-line and when his cross was cut out by the defender Kolo Touré, Rooney 
reacted quickly to turn and curl the ball into the far corner past De Vries.

The goal surprised the home side but three minutes from the break Rogic picked 
out Forrest inside the box and the Scotland international, with the outside of 
his right foot, sent the ball flying past Lewis. With the last kick of the half 
Griffiths came close with a low drive and eight minutes after the break 
Sinclair’s goal-bound drive was deflected by Taylor for a corner which was 
scrambled clear.

Celtic finished strongly and in the 87th minute Reynolds, booked minutes 
earlier for a foul on Rogic, bundled Sinclair to the ground as he went through 
on goal with the referee Bobby Madden sending him packing.

The Celtic winger drove in the penalty before Rogic put the icing on the cake 
with a 20-yard drive in the 90th minute.

Derek McInnes, then Dons manager, bemoaned Madden’s late decisions. ‘The 
referee gets involved with the penalty kick and it’s never a free kick when 
Rogic gets pulled down for his free kick but it’s not a free kick.”
 