
Hibernian took their fans from the depths of despair to delirium as a stunning 
extra-time strike from Leigh Griffiths sent them into theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final after a young Falkirk 
side had taken a three-goal lead inside half an hour.

Griffiths arrowed a 25-yard strike into the top corner with five minutes 
remaining of a classic encounter, which gives Hibs the chance to atone for 
their 5-1 final defeat by Edinburgh rivals Hearts last season.

Goals from the teenagers Craig Sibbald and Jay Fulton plus 21-year-old Blair 
Alston had given Gary Holt a superb start to a managerial career. But it was a 
teenager in green who inspired one of the great Hampden comebacks as Alex 
Harris scored from 25 yards in the 51st minute before Hibs put their First 
Division opponents under intense pressure. Griffiths missed a penalty kick 
before scoring and Eoin Doyle sent the game into extra time with a long-range 
effort seven minutes from the end.

A week after admitting Hibernian's season had been a failure because of their 
failure to make the top six of the Scottish Premier League, manager Pat Fenlon 
must have been fearing for his job at half-time.

Fenlon recalled Paul Cairney and Scott Robertson in midfield but neither saw 
second-half action and Hibs only started playing after he changed from his 
favoured 4-5-1 formation.

But his side turned the game around with lifelong Hibs fan Griffiths scoring 
his second semi-final winner in two years, and his 25th goal of the season. 
Hibs were behind in the sixth minute after Alston made the ball his 25 yards 
out and played Lyle Taylor into the right channel. The striker cut the ball 
back and Sibbald showed composure beyond his 17 years to guide a left-footed 
shot into the bottom corner. Robertson missed a glorious chance to equalise 
when he completely miscued his volley after Griffiths found him unmarked 10 
yards out, beforeFalkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> doubled 
their advantage in the 18th minute.

Sibbald sent in a high free-kick and Falkirk were first to the ball. Johnny 
Flynn won the initial header and Conor McGrandles hooked the ball into the 
goalmouth where 19-year-old Fulton got in front of Cairney to guide a diving 
header into the bottom corner.

Hibs looked shell-shocked and their fans booed them as they passed the ball 
without purpose in their own half, although Harris forced a save from Michael 
McGovern when his volley looped towards the top corner.

Falkirk went further ahead a minute later after the Hibs defence completely 
opened up when Alston won a challenge with Tim Clancy 30 yards out. The 
ricochet sent Taylor clean through and although Ben Williams got down to save 
his effort, Alston tapped home the rebound. Dozens of Hibs fans headed for the 
exit to avoid another Hampden humiliation while some tried to get close to the 
technical area to vent their fury at the Edinburgh side's manager.

The Hibs manager took off Robertson for Danny Handling but Hibs could not 
create a chance before the break and Taylor had a great chance when Stewart 
Murdoch's wonderful long pass sent him clear, but McGovern got down to block.

Hibs were roundly booed off at the half-time whistle but their fans cheered 
them back out with Doyle on for Cairney in a new 4-4-2 formation, from a 4-5-1.

Hibs belatedly burst into life when Harris played a one-two with Doyle and 
struck a volley which McGovern pushed on to the post. Hibs should have had a 
penalty seconds later when Murdoch's clumsy challenge brought down Clancy but 
Harris soon got the early second-half goal Hibs were desperate for.

The 18-year-old cut inside and fired a right-footed shot that took a slight 
deflection off the head of Darren Dods and nestled in the top corner despite 
McGovern getting both hands to it.

Handling and Doyle both failed to make the most of good opportunities and Hibs 
fans, who were now roaring their team on, might have suspected it was not their 
day when Griffiths sent a free header over and then passed up a chance to shoot 
from Doyle's cross.

Those suspicions were reinforced when the on-loan Wolves striker missed a 
72nd-minute penalty after Murdoch had clipped Handling. McGovern made a great 
double save as he also stopped Doyle's follow-up. But Griffiths rediscovered 
his goalscoring touch five minutes later when he guided the ball home from 
seven yards after Harris had got in behind Falkirk again.

Falkirk, with a fifth teenager on in the shape of substitute Thomas Grant, 
could not withstand the tide and Doyle equalised in the 83rd minute when he ran 
from the centre circle before firing a 25-yard strike into the bottom corner.

Dods was fortunate to get away with a clumsy penalty-area aerial challenge 
that felled Griffiths before Iain Brines blew for full-time in his last act 
before being replaced by the fourth official, John Beaton, because of injury.

Hibs remained on top and Griffiths had a goal disallowed for a contentious 
offside decision following Doyle's first-time pass in the first period. A 
drained Falkirk side tried to hold on but Griffiths came up with his latest 
wonder goal and Williams made a brilliant late save from Taylor to send Hibs 
through to the Scottish Cup final.
 