
Celtic shrugged off a European hangover as they came from behind to beat St 
Johnstone and go top of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

Ronny Deila’s side lost the Champions League play-off 4-3 on aggregate to 
Malmo in Sweden on Tuesday and on their return to domestic duty fell behind 
after 11 minutes when the defender Dedryck Boyata put through his own goal.

Leigh Griffiths levelled with a deflected strike seven minutes later for his 
eighth goal of the season and the midfielder Tom Rogic scored a fine goal just 
before the break. The 21-year-old defender Tyler Blackett, signed on a season 
loan from Manchester United, was introduced to the crowd at half time.

Charlie Mulgrew, on for the injured captain Scott Brown, who could be a doubt 
for Scotland’s Euro 2016 qualifiers against Georgia and Germany, headed home in 
the 67th minute as the home side leapfrogged Hearts to the top of the table, 
one point ahead of Aberdeen, who have a game in hand.

Emilio Izaguirre returned at left-back at the expense of Mulgrew while Kris 
Commons, Rogic and Gary Mackay-Steven came back into a new-look midfield 
attacking three asSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> midfielder David Wotherspoon 
replaced Simon Lappin.

The sense of anti-climax which hung over Celtic Park was helped little by the 
Green Brigade, the ultras-style section of the Celtic support, who held a 
two-part banner up which read “Gutless in Malmo; Clueless in Boardroom” 
although there were some cheers from otherCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fans when it was lowered.

However, there was general green and white disgruntlement in the 11th minute 
when the Saints midfielder Michael O’Halloran’s cut-back from the right somehow 
went through the hands of goalkeeper Craig Gordon to Boyata who inadvertently 
turned it into his own net under no real pressure.

Celtic’s response was hardly explosive but four minutes later the St Johnstone 
defender Thomas Scobbie cleared a looping Griffiths header off the line with 
goalkeeper Alan Mannus beaten.

However, the Celtic striker soon levelled with a drive from 22 yards, although 
it appeared to take a deflection before flying high past the goalkeeper.

Celtic slowly grew in confidence. With seconds remaining of the regular 45 
minutes, preceded by four added minutes of injury time for treatment required 
following a clash of heads between Murray Davidson and Izaguirre, the home side 
forged ahead.

From a tight angle on the left of the box, Rogic weaved his way past Davidson 
and St Johnstone captain Dave Mackay before firing past Mannus.

Davidson stayed in at the interval, replaced by Liam Craig, while Brown had to 
be replaced by Mulgrew on the hour mark after failing to shrug off a knock.

Celtic were more assured by then. After Mannus made a fine save from a Commons 
drive, from the resultant corner the Celtic midfielder swung in a cross which 
was headed back across goal by Virgil van Dijk to give Mulgrew the chance to 
finish it off from two yards out.

It looked like the home side would go on to finish the match in comfort, but 
again moments of slackness almost cost them dearly.

In the 75th minute, the St Johnstone substitute John Sutton, on for Steven 
MacLean, clipped the top of the bar with a turn and shot from close range, and 
Gordon had to make a great double save from Joe Shaugnessy and O’Halloran close 
to the end, but it was a deserved home win.
 