
Celtic banished their Molde misery with a commanding 4-1 Premiership win at 
Ross County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> as the in-form 
striker Leigh Griffiths grabbed a double.

The Hoops and their manager, Ronny Deila, had been heavily criticised after 
the 2-1 Europa League defeat by the Norwegian side at Parkhead on Thursday 
night kept them bottom of Group A, with qualification hopes damaged most likely 
beyond repair.

However, there was to be no dismay in Dingwall as a powerful drive from Tom 
Rogic in the 38th minute was followed by two goals in a minute after the break 
from the prolific Griffiths to take his tally to 18.

Tony Dingwall pulled a goal back for the home side but the midfielder Nir 
Bitton made it 4-1 to re-establish the champions’ six-point lead over Hearts at 
the top of the table.

There was something of a surprise for the visiting fans who made the long 
journey north when Carlton Cole, the 31-year-old former West Ham striker 
recently signed by Deila as a free agent, was on the bench along with the 
18-year-old left-back Kieran Tierney - the latter one of three changes from the 
Molde game.

The defender Jozo Simunovic and midfielder Kris Commons failed to shrug off 
injuries but Efe Ambrose, Emilio Izaguirre and James Forrest returned.

County’s defender Scott Boyd and midfielder Ian McShane came in for the 
injured Andrew Davies and Craig Curran, the latter starting among the 
substitutes.

After a minute’s silence to commemorate Remembrance Sunday, which was spoiled 
by a very small minority of travelling fans, the match got under way amid 
swirling wind and incessant rain.

The Staggies had the first real chance in the 11th minute but Liam Boyce 
headed a cross from Richard Foster past the near post when he ought to have 
tested Craig Gordon.

Forrest then drove wide from the edge of the box after being set up by Rogic 
and the Australia midfielder lashed a shot over the bar before Stuart Armstrong 
headed a Mikael Lustig cross over the bar.

However, just as the match began to become rather pedestrian, Rogic took a 
pass from the stand-in captain Lustig and fired in a left-footed drive from 
outside the box which gave County’s goalkeeper, Gary Woods, no chance.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> threatened to stretch 
their lead further but survived a let-off a minute from the end of the first 
half when Staggies captain Jackson Irvine, a former Celt, failed to connect 
with a Boyce pass while in a good position.

There was less than a minute of the second half played when Boyce played in 
McShane, but a heavy first touch allowed Gordon to thwart him, with the ball 
going behind for a goal-kick.

At the other end Woods dived to his left to make a fine save from Griffiths 
but he had no chance in the 54th minute when the Scotland striker made space 
for himself before curling a shot into the corner.

The Hoops fans had not stopped celebrating when Griffiths was picked out by 
Forrest following a driving run from the winger and he gleefully smacked the 
ball into the net from 12 yards.

County went for broke and Dingwall pulled a goal back in the 59th minute with 
a powerful drive from 12 yards to give the home side some encouragement and 
only a brilliant save 10 minutes later by Gordon prevented Irvine’s close-range 
header reducing the deficit further.

But when Bitton headed in an Armstrong corner in the 75th minute it allowed 
the Parkhead men to see out the rest of the match in comfort – even with 10 men 
in the final stages as Forrest went off after all three substitutes had been 
used.
 