
Celtic extended their near-perfect record in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with comfortable 
3-0 win over Inverness. The winger Scott Sinclair opened the scoring in the 
48th minute before returning striker Leigh Griffiths, making his first start in 
more than two months, made it 2-0 from in the 64th minute.

The Caley Thistle midfielder Greg Tansey, booked just before the break for one 
too many infringements, was sent off by the referee Crawford Allan for fouling 
Callum McGregor in the buildup to the second goal. The visitors, the only team 
to have taken points offCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> in 
the league this season with their 2-2 draw back in September, lost a third to 
the substitute Tom Rogic in the 83rd minute as the leaders made it to 10 wins 
and one draw in 11 fixtures to go 10 points clear of Aberdeen with a game in 
hand.

One possible downside of the afternoon from a Celtic and Scotland perspective 
was that Scott Brown – back from international retirement for Scotland’s World 
Cup qualifier against England at Wembley on Friday night – went off just after 
the hour-mark, with a numb foot.

Brendan Rodgers said: “It is a sore one because even if he does get knocked he 
doesn’t come off easy, so we will have to wait and see how that is. You know 
when he comes off it is a sore one … we will know in the next 24 hours. I am 
sure he will [report to Scotland].

“I don’t think there is anything to stop him, probably need to assess that 
over the next couple of days.”

Rodgers’ side signed off before the international break, however, in a 
commanding position, with the League Cup final against Aberdeen to look forward 
to later in the month.

After recovering from the virus that kept him out of the 1-1 Champions League 
draw againstBorussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/01/borussia-monchengladbach-celtic-champions-league-live>
 on Tuesday night, Griffiths paired up with Moussa Dembélé as McGregor, Patrick 
Roberts and Jozo Simunovic also came in with Cristian Gamboa, Emilio Izaguirre, 
Tom Rogic and James Forrest dropping to the bench.

Owain Fon Williams returned at the expense of Cameron Mackay in the Inverness 
goal, with Lewis Horner and Billy King also coming in for the injured duo Carl 
Tremarco and Aaron Doran.

The home side started with three at the back but had to change back to a four 
in the 13th minute when Mikael Lustig limped off following a strong challenge 
by Caley Thistle defender Josh Meekings, left-back Izaguirre coming on and 
Stuart Armstrong dropping back to right-back.

Celtic sprang into life only after Celtic keeper Craig Gordon saved a Ross 
Draper header. Fon Williams made a fine save from Griffiths’ close-range volley 
by tipping the ball over the bar before Dembélé just failed to reach a Roberts’ 
cut-back six yards out.

Armstrong, however, should have given the home side the lead in the 35th 
minute when Izaguirre planted a cross on to his head but he headed well wide 
from 12 yards.

McGregor sent Sinclair racing into the box, firing low past Fon William from 
14 yards for his 10th of the season on 48 minutes. The goal allowed Celtic to 
relax and Griffiths, McGregor and Brown all had efforts on goal within minutes 
of the opener. Inverness dropped further back as the champions pressed with 
purpose. In the 61st minute there was some concern when Brown, the Parkhead 
side’s best player this season, was replaced by Nir Bitton and Brown did not 
appear to be moving freely as he came off.

Three minutes later, Griffiths clinched the points when he tapped in from a 
few yards out after Fon William parried Dembélé’s drive, with the referee Allan 
racing back to deal with Tansey, who had crunched McGregor seconds earlier.

Celtic pounded the visitors thereafter and from 16 yards Rogic, who had 
replaced Dembélé in the 70th minute, drove in from Armstrong’s cut-back for 
number three with Inverness fortunate to leave without suffering further pain.

Joey Barton to train with Rangers under-20 squad after club lifts suspension
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/joey-barton-return-full-time-training-rangers-suspension-ban-lifted> 