
Leigh Griffiths struck his 30th goal of the season to help Celtic to a 2-0 win 
over Ross County at Celtic Park and open up a three-point lead over Aberdeen at 
the top of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

Ross County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> had ended 
Celtic’s hopes of a treble with a 3-1 League Cup semi-final win at Hampden Park 
two weeks ago and the pressure on the Celtic manager, Ronny Deila, increased 
with a 2-1 defeat at Aberdeen days later.

A 2-0 win over the Lowland League side East Kilbride in the Scottish Cup last 
Sunday did little to appease critics of the Norwegian and there was not a lot 
to heat up theCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fans on a 
bitterly cold day until Griffiths rifled in a drive from 12 yards just before 
the break.

Dedryck Boyata headed in a second in the 56th minute and the home side ran out 
comfortable winners, putting pressure on Aberdeen, who play Inverness on Monday 
night. Celtic, though, will have a game in hand afterwards and a vastly 
superior goal difference.

After pairing Griffiths with the new signing Colin Kazim-Richards against East 
Kilbride last week, Deila returned to using his top scorer as the lone striker, 
with the goalkeeper Craig Gordon, defender Mikael Lustig and midfielders Stefan 
Johansen, Nir Bitton and Stuart Armstrong returning.

The league leaders forced three early corners and in the ninth minute Ross 
County’s keeper Scott Fox made a great save from Gary Mackay-Steven’s drive 
after County’s captain, Paul Quinn, had conceded possession to Johansen.

Moments later at the other end, the former Celt Jackson Irvine drove just wide 
from the edge of the box after Bitton had failed to deal with a rather aimless 
Richard Foster cross.

Griffiths had a shot blocked by a clutch of dark blue jerseys during a 
goalmouth melee, but as the first half continued the home support became 
increasingly agitated at their side’s lack of tempo and drive.

And, when Griffiths rounded Fox after latching on to a Johansen pass only to 
hit a post, it hinted at an afternoon of frustration for the home side.

However, just before the break, Celtic left-back Kieran Tierney crossed into 
the area and, when the Ross County defender Chris Robertson headed clear to 
Griffiths under pressure from Johansen, the Scotland striker quickly returned 
the ball low past Fox.

Mackay-Steven blazed a shot over the bar early in the second half after being 
set up by Johansen in a swift break, but it was no indication that Celtic had 
stepped up a gear.

However, if the performance was not sparkling the points were effectively 
secured when an Armstrong cross from the left found Boyata at the back post and 
he headed powerfully past Fox.

The two-goal cushion allowed Celtic to relax a bit, invite County on to them 
and hit them on the break.

Johansen, Erik Sviatchenko and Griffiths had further efforts as the 
Highlanders left themselves more exposed than they would have liked in an 
effort to get a foothold in the game.

Five minutes before the end Gordon produced a spectacular one-handed save from 
Jonathan Franks before Ian McShane fired over from inside the box, the last 
real action before the match petered out through four minutes of added time.
 