
Roberto Martínez said it would be “foolish” to talk of winning the Europa 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> before the 
onset of winter but the noises coming from Everton are clear. The manager 
believes his team can reach Warsaw in May, the captain Phil Jagielka claimed 
likewise and their words were given substance by a convincing victory over 
Lille.

Everton require one point to qualify for the knockout phase following a second 
successive home win in Group H and a performance against Lille, who arrived in 
the competition via defeat in the Champions League play-offs, that demonstrated 
intent. Leon Osman underlined his enduring importance to the club on the day he 
signed a one-year contract extension with the game’s opening goal, the defender 
Jagielka scored his fourth goal in 10 games and Steven Naismith completed the 
victory after another incisiveEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> move.

The positives were not confined to the scoresheet. Romelu Lukaku led the line 
with a vastly improved display, Sylvain Distin made an assured return to the 
heart of an injury-hit Everton defence and James McCarthy was imperious in the 
middle of the park. A huge picture commemorating “The Holy Trinity” of Howard 
Kendall, Colin Harvey and Alan Ball adorns the main stand here and Martínez had 
no hesitation in praising the Republic of Ireland international as a worthy 
successor to that revered Everton midfield.

“James McCarthy does not surprise me,” said the Everton manager, who brought 
McCarthy with him from Wigan Athletic for £13m. “He fits so well at Everton. 
You talk here about The Holy Trinity, everything about that midfield, and I 
look at James McCarthy, Gareth Barry and Ross Barkley and I am proud of that 
sort of midfielder. People forget James is still only 23. He does the things 
that managers appreciate and fans don’t always see too easily but he is a vital 
part of this football club.”

Everton were dominant from the off against a Lille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> team who had drawn their three 
previous Europa League fixtures and demonstrated why they languish 12th in the 
French league. The Nigerian goalkeeper Vincent Enyeama produced a fine save to 
deny Lukaku after 22 seconds as the home side began brightly but Everton, 
unlike against Swansea City on Saturday, remained patient and purposeful 
against opponents content to absorb pressure.

Aiden McGeady was instrumental in helping them to a comfortable interval lead. 
Patience does not seem in plentiful supply for the former Celtic winger at 
Goodison but his willingness to take a man on, and delivery from both flanks, 
was a valuable outlet that Lille could not contain. Barry started the move with 
a ball through to Lukaku, who in turn released McCarthy. The midfielder sent 
his Republic of Ireland team-mate scurrying away on the right and though 
McGeady’s inviting cross evaded the in-rushing McCarthy and Naismith, it 
dropped perfectly for Osman at the far post. The 33-year-old enhanced his day 
with a sweeping finish into the far corner.

McGeady created chances for Naismith and Lukaku, albeit both with the same 
result as his colleagues missed the target, and it was from his corner that 
Everton doubled their advantage. Jagielka, who wrote in his programme notes 
that Everton could win the Europa League, lost his fellow central defender 
Marko Basa in the six-yard box and converted the winger’s delivery with an 
emphatic diving header.

This was the first appearance on Merseyside for Divock Origi since his £9.8m 
summer move to Liverpool, a transfer that came with the condition he remains 
with Lille on a season-long loan. It was also the first time a French club had 
played a competitive fixture at Goodison. Both debuts failed to impress. The 
Belgium striker, preferred to Lukaku for his country’s final games at the World 
Cup against the USA and Argentina, showed glimpses of pace and more intent as 
the contest wore on. He was either isolated or shackled by the experienced 
defending of Tony Hibbert otherwise.

In contrast to Brazil, Lukaku was the sharper, more influential Belgium 
forward on display. Everton’s £28m record signing was again thwarted by Enyeama 
when he unleashed a venomous free-kick from 30 yards and it was his astute 
pass, not always his strongest point, that led to the team’s third. Lukaku 
showed good strength to hold up play then released Leighton Baines on the 
outside. The England international picked out Naismith and the Scot sent an 
unstoppable finish into the top corner from close range.

“We are at a football club that is expected to win things,” said the Everton 
manager. “OK, it is a long time since we won a trophy and you can look foolish 
if you talk about winning competitions in November, but we want to go as far as 
we can in this competition. All we can do is keep testing ourselves.”
 