
We live on the edge, perched on the boundary between Earth and the rest of the 
universe. Every human civilisation has seen the stars, but no one has touched 
them. Down here it’s the opposite: messy, changeable, and full of things we 
touch every day. This is the place to look if you’re interested in how the 
universe works. The physical world is full of startling variety, caused by the 
same principles and atoms. But this diversity isn’t random. Our world is full 
of patterns.

If you pour milk into your tea and stir it, you’ll see a swirl, a spiral of 
two fluids circling each other while barely touching. In your teacup, the 
spiral lasts just a few seconds before the two liquids mix completely, a brief 
reminder that liquids mix in beautiful swirling patterns and not by merging 
instantaneously. The same pattern can be seen in other places, too. If you look 
down on the Earth from space, you will often see very similar swirls in the 
clouds, made where warm air and cold air waltz around each other instead of 
mixing directly.

In Britain, these swirls come rolling across the Atlantic from the west on a 
regular basis, causing our changeable weather. They form at the boundary 
between cold polar air to the north and warm tropical air to the south. The 
cool and warm air chase each other around in circles, and you can see the 
pattern clearly on satellite images. We know these swirls as depressions or 
cyclones, and we experience rapid changes between wind, rain and sunshine as 
the arms of the spiral spin past.

A rotating storm might seem to have very little in common with a stirred mug 
of tea, but the similarity in the patterns is more than coincidence. It’s a 
clue that hints at something more fundamental. Hidden beneath both is a 
systematic basis for all such formations, one discovered and explored and 
tested by rigorous experiments carried out by generations of scientists.

Sometimes a pattern is easy to spot in new places. But sometimes the 
connection goes a little bit deeper and so it’s all the more satisfying when it 
finally emerges. I studied physics because it explained things that I was 
interested in, allowing me to see the mechanisms making our everyday world 
tick. Even though I’m a professional physicist now, lots of the things I’ve 
worked out for myself haven’t involved laboratories. The most satisfying 
discoveries have come from random things I was playing with when I wasn’t meant 
to be doing science at all. Knowing some basic physics turns the world into a 
toybox.

There is sometimes a bit of snobbery about the science found in kitchens and 
gardens and city streets. It’s seen as something to occupy children with, a 
trivial distraction. But that attitude misses something very important: the 
same physics applies everywhere. A toaster can teach you about some of the most 
fundamental laws of physics. The advantage of looking at the toaster first is 
that even if you never get to worry about the temperature of the universe, you 
still know why your toast is hot. But once you’re familiar with the pattern, 
you will recognise it in many other places.

There’s another benefit to knowing about how the world works, and it’s one 
scientists don’t talk about often enough. Seeing what makes the world tick 
changes your perspective. The world is a mosaic of physical patterns, and once 
you’re familiar with the basics, you start to see how those patterns fit 
together. The essence of science is experimenting with the principles for 
yourself, considering all the evidence available and then reaching your own 
conclusions. The teacup is only the start.

Storm In A Teacup by Helen Czerski, published by Bantam Press, £18.99, is out 
now. To order a copy for £15.57 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/storm-in-a-teacup.html>
 