
What's going for it? Bugger eco-towns. Who needs new ones when we can have 
them freshly recycled, like St Davids? The diminutive city (Britain's weeniest, 
triv nerds) is going carbon neutral (the world's first, triv nerds, though 
greatly aided by being Britain's weeniest). This may strike the rational among 
you as literally being David against the Goliath of climate change, but 
sometimes the little guys do win. Already the public loos at Whitesands beach 
are run with rainwater, the art gallery's heated by ground-source heat pump, 
the local farmers have a co-op growing energy crops and there's an eco-hotel. 
They'll have China ditching coal by the end of the week. Otherwise, a magical 
spot - St David knew a nice patch for a bit of property investment when he saw 
one - dominated by the cute cathedral and lots of downshifters.

The case against ... Already sought-after - one of Pembrokeshire's most 
desirable spots. But rather that than when the sea waters rise and the Four 
Horsemen of the Apocalypse drop in for a pint. Pembrokeshire may be gorgeous, 
but it suffers from all the problems of life at the rural periphery, with a 
seasonal economy, economic hardships - especially, ironically, since the 
decline of the local oil refining industry - neglect of rural services and an 
ageing population.

Well connected? Don't be silly. It's on the edge of the universe. Your nearest 
rail station is Haverfordwest, 16 or so miles south, with trains to Swansea and 
beyond every couple of hours. Otherwise, bring a car, some patience and a stack 
of good CDs. Regular buses to Newport, Fishguard and Haverfordwest; fewer buses 
in winter.

Schools Primaries: Ysgol Bro Dewi - "Standards of achievement in both key 
stages are good," says Estyn. Secondaries: Ysgol Dewi Sant offers "first-class 
education".

Hang out at ... There's a lot of competition, but Cwtch is the new kid in 
town, wowing foodies with cockles and samphire.

Where to buy Anywhere you can. It's as big as a postage stamp and still in 
high demand, so doesn't really have an "other side of the tracks" as such. 
Period property, views of the cathedral and proximity to the coast bump the 
prices, obviously.

Market values Not cheap, though prices have levelled out recently. Large five- 
or six-bed farmhouses or town houses, £450,000-£550,000. Three- or four-bed 
detacheds, and smaller town houses, £250,000-£450,000. Three-bedroom cottages 
and terraces, £170,000-£250,000.

Bargain of the week A three-bed, ex-council semi may not be the place of your 
dreams, but it's only £172,500, with West Wales Properties, Haverfordwest 
(01437 762626).

From the streets of St Davids ...

Jes Durant "Nothing compares to the grandeur of the countryside. This is the 
Pembrokeshire coast par excellence, with wild cliffs and steep hills to climb, 
and the prettiest little coves to while away the summer. Bit windswept the rest 
of the year, mind. Whitesands Bay gets very crowded. Try Freshwater or Caerfai 
bays."

Geoff Lawton "There's one pub. That's right, this is a city with one pub. A 
nice pub, but still. Be warned: the town gets overrun in summer. Only 1,700 
people live here, but there are 10 times that come August."

Lisa Jones "Being at the end of the earth means it isn't dominated by 
supermarkets, and we can get all our stuff from the shops in town. For a night 
out there's Morgan's Brasserie, Lawtons at No 16 and the Old Pharmacy down the 
road at Solva."

·  Do you live in Huntingdon? Do you have a favourite haunt, a pet hate or 
advice for potential newcomers? If so, please write to us at Let's Move, 
Guardian Weekend, 119 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3ER. Or email
lets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com>. For inclusion, 
letters and emails should reach us by next Friday, and may be edited. A full 
name and postal address (not for publication) must be supplied.
 