
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> admitted he 
was haunted by memories of his engine failure in Malaysia as he drove to 
victory in Sunday’s United States Grand Prix, beating team-mate and current 
championship leader Nico Rosberg into second place.

Hamilton broke down with only 15 laps to go at the Sepang International 
Circuit. Speaking after his win in Austin, he said: “I was concerned the car 
was not going to make it for the whole race. Right up until the line I was just 
in fear of the same thing, the same feeling I had, the sound I heard in 
Malaysia. So I was grateful the car made it across the line.”

Lewis Hamilton wins F1 US Grand Prix with Nico Rosberg second
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-us-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-report>
The 31-year-old spoke about his “surreal” feelings after becoming only the 
thirdFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> driver to win 
50 races, following Michael Schumacher and Alain Prost. “It’s been a long time 
coming,” he said after his first win since July. “I’ve been here 10 years. I’ve 
had lots of ups and downs and had some great opportunities from gifted people 
who helped me get here today.

“It’s a very surreal feeling. I can’t believe it. Hopefully it will bring on 
bigger and better things.”

He added: “I’ve been relaxed all weekend. It’s been great work by the guys and 
it worked perfect today. That’s the first time in the whole year that I didn’t 
spin the wheels.”

Even if Hamilton wins the final three races of the season it may not be enough 
to stop Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg taking the title. “All I can do is my 
best, Nico has been driving fantastically well, so the battle will continue. I 
will be going for it,” said Hamilton, the world champion.

Reflecting on this race Rosberg, who now leads the championship by 26 points, 
said: “I lost out a bit at the start but gave everything to come back. I was 
going for it flat out until the end.”

There were smiles all round in the Mercedes garage afterwards and Toto Wolff, 
the team’s head of motorsport, said: “It was not so stressful, but we have seen 
so much drama this season and that is why I’m never relaxed during a race. Nico 
has to be careful to not risk a DNF [non-finish] and that is why he may have 
been a bit conservative up to turn one. I hope it was not too boring for the 
spectators but it was just what Lewis Hamilton needed. It was an immaculate 
performance.”

There was disappointment for the third-placed Daniel Ricciardo, who felt he 
could have finished second but for the deployment of the virtual safety car 
when his Red Bull team-mate Max Verstappen ground to a halt with gearbox 
trouble.

“I was looking forward to the battle. I think we had good pace,” said the 
Australian. “It was frustrating at the time; as soon as the virtual safety car 
came out I got on the radio and said ‘this isn’t good for us, is it?’.

“Simon, my engineer, said ‘No, it’s going to have us over’. I was pretty 
upset, but that’s how it goes and I’m not going to get too disappointed. It’s 
just cool to be on the podium here.”
 