
Lewis Hamilton insists he has faced lower moments in his career and promised 
not to dwell onhis latest engine failure as he bids to bounce back from his 
disappointment at the Malaysia Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-engines-malaysian-grand-prix>
.

Lewis Hamilton blames ‘higher power’ not Mercedes for F1 engine failures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-engines-malaysian-grand-prix>
The 31-year-old Briton now faces a race against time to wrestle the 
championship momentum back from Nico Rosberg after retiring from Sunday’s race.

Indeed with only five rounds remaining, starting at this week’s race in 
Suzuka, Japan, Hamilton has been cast 23 points adrift of his Mercedes 
team-mate and sole title rival.

“Last weekend was a massive disappointment, not just for me personally but for 
the whole team,” said Hamilton, who was on course to win before his engine blew 
up with only 15 laps left. “There is no use dwelling on these things, that is 
just negative energy. All we can do is focus on the next race, taking things 
one step at a time, and doing the best job we can.

“The guys are hurting from what happened too and I know they’ll be working 
just as hard to get things right next time. It’s not the lowest point I’ve had. 
There have been lower moments for sure. Regardless, I will find strength from 
within to fight back over these next five race weekends.”

Lewis Hamilton believes ‘faith and hope’ can fire him to F1 world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/lewis-hamilton-faith-hope-f1-world-title>
The faulty engine, which robbed Hamilton of his 50th career victory, arrived 
back in Brixworth on Tuesday as Mercedes desperately attempt to resolve the 
mechanical problems which have derailed the Briton’s title defence.

Hamilton’s retirement marked the third time his grand prix weekend has been 
scuppered by an engine problem this year – he also started last on the grid in 
Belgium as punishment for using too many parts – while Rosberg is yet to 
encounter any major mechanical dramas.

A furious Hamilton hinted at sabotage from within the Mercedes camp after the 
race on Sunday when he said: “Somebody doesn’t want me to win this year.” He 
later insisted he was referring to a “higher power”.

Mercedes have been unable to understand why Hamilton’s engines keep failing. 
“Last weekend was a particularly tough one, but words won’t change that now,” 
Toto Wolff, the Mercedes head of motorsport, added. “We pick ourselves up, 
brush the dust off and look ahead to the next race. With regards to Lewis, 
we’ve talked amongst ourselves and said: ‘How is this possible?’ But there is 
no rational explanation or pattern in these failures. If there were, we would 
resolve it.

“We’ve had that discussion with him and he understands that we are feeling his 
pain too. Despite his frustration, he has been trying to pick the team up and 
we admire him even more than ever for that.

“We will bounce back from this together. It’s tough when these things come at 
a crucial point in a championship battle. It’s a massive blow to his campaign, 
but the championship isn’t over yet.”
 