
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> threw the 
Formula One championship race wide open after surging to a thrilling and 
perhaps unexpected victory here on Sunday, appropriately providing a home 
winner on the day the former airfield celebrated its 50th grand prix.

Hamilton brought a packed crowd to their feet after his Mercedes team-mate, 
Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg>, was forced to 
retire on the 29th lap with a faulty gearbox. He has cut his rival’s lead in 
the standings from 29 points to just four.

It was the Briton’s fifth win of the season and came after he started sixth on 
the grid after slipping up in qualifying the previous day. He said: “I came 
into this weekend saying it would be great if the fans could put the wind in my 
sails to regain the momentum.

“I got the win and got the points back. I have been chasing all year after 
losing points in the first race. It has been very difficult. Now I feel we are 
back and close, and with the pace I had today I feel I have to focus for the 
next part of the season. Today I felt from the start I had the pace of Nico, 
and I was hunting him down like never before. I was looking forward to a 
wheel-to-wheel battle but I’m sure we’ll get more in the future.”

Talking about his qualifying mistake on Saturday, which threatened to ruin his 
weekend, he said: “It was a kick in the balls and I had to pick myself up. I 
had to pull up my socks and get on with it if I wanted to win this 
championship.”

Rosberg, who had started in pole position, was understandably disappointed 
with the car. “I’m very confident I would have won the race,” he said. “Things 
were going well until that point. We had a good balance, I felt comfortable. 
What can I say? It’s just a reliability problem and a pity. That’s it.”

Mercedes motorsport’s executive director, Toto Wolff, said: “Nico was facing 
disaster and retirement and he was very calm trying to go through the settings. 
We really tried hard to mend it. A couple of times up to the 29th lap we were 
trying to reset the whole thing.

“In 2014 you wouldn’t expect to have a DNF [did not finish] because of a 
gearbox breaking down. We have to analyse why. You can have such a DNF once but 
not twice.”

There was almost a first British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> podium place for Jenson 
Button, who was fourth and closing on Daniel Ricciardo at the chequered flag. 
It was an emotional day for the McLaren driver, who started third on the grid 
after being heavily criticised by the team’s executive chairman, Ron Dennis, 
who said he expected more from his main driver.

Button wore a pink helmet in tribute to his father, who died in January, 
echoing the pink shirt John Button used to wear to see his son race. “It was 
almost a great day,” he said. “I think one more lap would have done it. 
Sometimes it works out and sometimes it doesn’t. We definitely gave it our all. 
To get a fourth is far better than we expected. Maybe the time I get on the 
podium will be when I win.”

He added: “I don’t come away from here disappointed. I had a really good 
weekend. I had a lot of support from the fans, my team, my friends and family. 
Obviously it could have been a better weekend but it was pretty damn good, so I 
go away happy.”

He said of his father: “He would have loved it. I can see his face now. When I 
walked out of the motor home, he would have shook my hand, had a wink in his 
eye, and said: ‘Go on son, this is your time.’

“Today he would have loved the fight with Fernando [Alonso] and chasing down 
Daniel [Ricciardo]. It was the perfect sort of race for him. He would have been 
a very happy man.”

The third British driver in the race, Marussia’s Max Chilton, who finished 
16th, had a narrow escape when he was almost hit by a wheel from Kimi 
Raikkonen’s Ferrari after an accident that stopped the race for an hour.

“It was like an explosion and suddenly an alloy wheel came flying towards me,” 
he said. “I am lucky to be here. It was frightening to be honest. It was a 
tense moment because Raikkonen looked like he had regained control and then hit 
the barrier. I just ducked and it hit the nose of my car. I was saved by a 
matter of inches and I’m just glad I’m still here.”
 