
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> exhibited 
the touch and confidence that defines a multiple Formula One world champion in 
Mexico City on Saturday night, amid the maelstrom of a tense championship fight 
with his Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg.

A consummate lap in Q3 topped a dominant session in which Hamilton pushed to 
the limit of the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez and claimed pole for the Mexican 
Grand Prix, beating Rosberg by two-tenths of a second.

Hamilton had been faster than his team-mate in all three practice sessions and 
was so again through Q1 and Q2. His first run in the final shootout with a time 
of 1min 18.704sec confirmed that form and was enough. Rosberg pushed but he was 
more than five-tenths back on every lap but his last.

Mercedes F1 team member robbed at gunpoint before Mexican Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/mercedes-f1-team-member-robbed-at-gunpoint-mexican-grand-prix>
Hamilton, however, strung together a sequence of improving runs that came 
together on his penultimate hot lap, a performance which he acknowledged had 
been tricky. “It’s always tough trying to pull out perfect laps when it 
matters,” he said. “Definitely very challenging.”

The Red Bulls of Max Verstappen and Daniel Ricciardo were in third and fourth 
and the two Ferraris of Kimi Raikkonen and Sebastian Vettel were in sixth and 
seventh, with an impressive fifth for the Force India of Nico Hulkenberg.

Hamilton’s 10th pole of the season could not have been more timely as his 
battle with Rosberg reaches the endgame and he is now in a position to narrow 
the 26-point gap. Rosberg will still take the title should he finish second to 
a Hamilton win in the remaining three meetings but the world champion needs to 
force the fight to the wire. It is crucial he has a clean getaway, an issue 
that has compromised his season as much as mechanical problems.

Should he hold the place on the 800m run, the longest of the season, to turn 
one, he will be able to dictate the race and crucially have the first call on 
pit-stop strategy. He will also be in clean air – the best place for the 
Mercedes – and where he needs to be, since he cannot afford a DNF. His 
retirement and a Rosberg victory would mean the German claims the title here.

Confident following his win in Austin and having dialled-in the car, he did 
everything required of him but only the first part of the business of keeping 
his title hopes alive.

The two Williams of Valtteri Bottas and Felipe Massa were in eighth and ninth 
with Carlos Sainz Jr putting in a strong run to place his Toro Rosso in tenth.

Rosberg had left it late to secure a front row place and there was, briefly, a 
real danger that the consistency and determination he has shown all season, 
during which he has put his car on the front row, before penalties, for every 
race, was going to come apart. He was five-tenths down on his team-mate in Q1, 
six-tenths in Q2 and five again on the first hot laps of the final session.

His last run was hooked-up well however and it finally narrowed the gap. For 
the race though, Hamilton’s control and obvious ease with the circuit is 
already to his advantage. His time in Q2 was second-fastest only to Verstappen 
despite having to slow when coming up behind a weaving Vettel on the exit of 
the Stadium.

Rosberg had needed to push because the competition have found some speed in 
the thin air of Mexico City and both the Red Bulls and the Ferraris had shown 
good pace early in the session. Verstappen in particular had another confident 
run. He has mastered the single-lap discipline well this year, with this 
second-row slot adding to his third places at Silverstone and Malaysia, fourth 
at Hungary, Germany, Singapore, the US and Barcelona,the race he went on to win 
for his debut F1 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/max-verstappen-youngest-winner-f1-history-spanish-gran-prix>
.

Both Mercedes drivers have the advantage of starting on the more durable soft 
tyres having set their fastest time in Q2 on the harder compound. Hamilton 
noted that the track had rubbered-in considerably over the weekend and lap 
times, already well up on last year, are expected to drop further on Sunday, 
with top speeds going into the braking zone on the entrance to turn one likely 
to exceed 227mph.

There was disappointment for the local fans when Sergio Pérez could put his 
Force India only into 12th, splitting the two McLarens of Fernando Alonso and 
Jenson Button. The Renault of Kevin Magnussen was in 14th ahead of Sauber’s 
Marcus Ericsson. Pascal Wehrlein had another creditable performance to put his 
Manor into Q2 and finish in 16th place, well ahead of his team-mate.

Mexico’s second driver, Esteban Gutiérrez, span his Haas on his final quick 
lap and was knocked out of Q1 in 17th place. Toro Rosso’s Daniil Kvyat was 
18th, the Sauber of Felipe Nasr in 19th and the second Manor of Esteban Ocon in 
20th. Romain Grosjean in the second Haas had a battery problem and will start 
from 21st. Britain’s Jolyon Palmer will start his Renault from the pit lane 
after he cracked his chassis on one of the sausage kerbs in final practice and 
could not take part in qualifying.
 