
While Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> may 
still trail his Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg by 24 points in the Formula One 
world championship, his qualifying performances this season belie such a gap – 
he is still a master of the single-lap discipline and his run in Canada was yet 
further proof of what he can do when he has the car he needs under him. He 
delivered his fourth pole of the season at the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve with 
cool, confidence in difficult conditions and under no little pressure from an 
increasingly close sharp front-end of the grid.

This season Hamilton has claimed the top spot at every race where he has not 
endured mechanical problems during qualifying (which was the case in China, 
Russia and Monaco) and earlier in the weekend had emphasised that if “the car 
stays together and we keep it together, then I will get the result”. And indeed 
he did.

He took pole on a day marked by cold temperatures and occasional rain showers 
that tested all the drivers. His first run in Q3 was just six-hundredths 
quicker than Rosberg, with the world champion, who took his first win here in 
2007, putting his Mercedes through the high-speed and heavy braking test of 
Montreal with the obvious enjoyment of a man on a track he revels in, although 
afterwards he insisted that he could have done even better with his best lap. 
He did not improve on his second flying lap and Rosberg locked up at turn one 
and had to abort his second run meaning Hamilton’s time of 1min 12.812sec was 
enough.

It is a pleasing position for the British driver, then, before the real 
business of the weekend begins but also instructive for the season ahead.

The track is the first of the year really able to show where the teams stand 
relative to one another in real power terms and the form from Mercedes was not 
quite as strong as it has been in previous years at this stage of the season. 
This time last year in Canada they were five-tenths ahead but now Hamilton’s 
time was less than two‑tenths clear of the third-placed Ferrari ofSebastian 
Vettel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel>.

Hamilton acknowledged that it had been a close battle across the front of the 
grid. “It doesn’t matter how far you are ahead as long as you are ahead,” he 
said. “I didn’t have the pace I had yesterday but it was enough. It was great 
to see how close we all were, that’s great for the fans to see. It will be 
interesting tomorrow but it’s the best place to start, that’s for sure.”

Ferrari had expected a performance improvement here with a new turbo unit and 
Vettel’s quick lap justified their optimism, he had pretty much wrung the neck 
of his car to put it so close to the two Mercedes. The longed-for three‑car 
battle at the front may be closer than it has been all season asFerrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> usually have more to come in terms 
of race pace. “Overall I think we have a great car,” Vettel said. “We made a 
step forward so I am happy with how the weekend has turned out.”

Hamilton acknowledged the advances the Scuderia had made. “Ferrari have 
obviously picked up the pace with their upgrades,” he said. “This is a great 
track to test the ultimate speed so we are excited to race with them. I think 
their long runs look very strong.”

But it remains advantage Hamilton until the lights go green and history has 
him on pole as well. With four wins here and now five poles, he is second only 
to Michael Schumacher at the circuit on both counts and has converted three of 
his previous four pole positions into wins. They includelast year’s flawless 
run from flag to finish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/lewis-hamilton-canadian-grand-prix>
 where Rosberg suffered from overheating brakes – something that will be key 
again in Sunday’s race, while Hamilton’s touch is very much suited to a track 
that is highly demanding on the anchors.

Lewis Hamilton relishing return to happy hunting ground of Canadian GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/10/lewis-hamilton-formula-one-canadian-grand-prix-gilles-villeneuve>
To take advantage, though, he must start well on the short 260m run into turn 
one. Poor starts cost him from pole in Australia and Bahrain and he was passed 
by Rosberg around turn one in Barcelona. A clean getaway is required should he 
wish to control the race from the front as he did with clinical efficiency last 
year and he said he “felt pretty confident that it will be good”. Of course 
Ferrari and Red Bull will have something to say about it and they might yet 
have a shout.

The cool temperatures which have prevailed for most of the week are forecast 
to continue with further showers also expected. Should that be the case, 
bringing tyres (especially the ultrasofts) up to temperature will be a key 
issue, as will the stop strategy which is still open to a one or two-stop 
variation. While if the rain really comes down – as Jenson Button proved in 
2011 – anything can happen in Canada.
 