
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton>, even at his 
most graciously well behaved, has been outmanoeuvred by his rival Nico Rosberg 
in the buildup to Sunday’s United States Grand Prix.

Hamilton, when asked how he would feel if he lost his world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/lewis-hamilton-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
, said he would take it like a man. But when his Mercedes team-mate was asked 
how he would react if he lost, he replied: “I have not thought of that.

Such negative thoughts I will fully avoid. It won’t make me any faster this 
weekend if I think how I might feel if I lose. That doesn’t work. I am just 
planning to go for more race wins at the moment and that’s it.”

Hamilton loves this circuit, its swoops and climbs, its fast curves and 
overtaking possibilities, and he was quickest in Friday morning’s practice, 
beating Rosberg by 0.315 seconds, though he was slower in the afternoon. He may 
well win here on Sunday – he usually does, having been victorious in three of 
the four races staged at the Circuit of the Americas. It’s easy to see him 
cavorting again under his black Stetson and in a haze of sprayed champagne at 
the top of the podium. But even that, and three other wins in the remaining 
races, might not be enough to bring down the remorselessly consistent Rosberg.

Lewis Hamilton ready to move on and come back stronger if he loses F1 title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/lewis-hamilton-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
In downtown Austin the other evening Mercedes invited F1 correspondents into 
their virtual garage. We wore noise-cancelling headphones and were asked to 
take part in a listening experience, taking in the sonically rich environment 
of Hamilton’s and Rosberg’s garages, using recordings made at Silverstone in 
the summer. It was difficult not to feel that Rosberg is virtually champion, a 
dogged compiler of points amid Hamilton’s self-inflicted or unlucky mishaps.

As Hamilton will ruefully attest, it is very difficult to wrong-foot the 
German. Would he, someone asked, just drive for second places, with a lead of 
33 points? “I am aware of that but I will definitely not be putting any thought 
into that,” said Rosberg. “I am definitely going for the win rather than trying 
to bring home any second places. If I am in second place, behind Lewis, I will 
still be pushing for the win.

“I don’t know how much pressure Lewis is putting on himself. I am just trying 
to win this race, as I have done for the past three years. I am just trying to 
focus on this race.”

Rosberg insists he is taking things race by race, which may not be the stuff 
of tabloid headlines but seems to be working for him. “It is just something 
that has come about and I am sticking to it because it is working well,” the 
31-year-old said. “Why waste energy thinking about other things? It is better 
to stay in the zone and focus.” Thank goodness the more emotional Hamilton is a 
little less predictable.
 