
A breathless and chaotically wet Brazilian Grand Prix concluded with yet 
another Mercedes one-two at Interlagos, asLewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> won to draw level with Nico 
Rosberg on nine wins apiece for the season. With five appearances of the safety 
car and two stoppages this was one of the wettest races ever witnessed, 
eclipsing even that title decider played out here in 2012. It added up to over 
three hours of high skill and considerable bravery.

It was another great day’s wet driving from Hamilton, evoking memories of his 
superb win at Silverstone in 2008, as he won his third straight race. It was 
also his first win here in 10 attempts.

More than that it was the 52nd of his career, taking him ahead of Alain Prost 
in the all-time list, with only Michael Schumacher (91) ahead of him now.

But it was still another good result for Rosberg, even though his championship 
lead was cut from 19 points to 12, because it means he has only to finish in 
the top three in the final race of the season in Abu Dhabi in a fortnight’s 
time to collect his firstFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> world championship. Hamilton can 
only hope to win again and that something occurs in his rear-view mirror to 
knock back his team-mate.

Remarkably this was Mercedes’ 50th victory in 58 since the new 1.6-litre power 
units made their debut in Melbourne at the start of the 2014 season. But the 
best drive of the day came from 19-year-old Max Verstappen, who made memorable 
passes on Kimi Raikkonen and then Rosberg to go into second place. But he saved 
his best to last after falling to the back of the field. He battled his way 
from the back of the field to take the final podium place with some 
hair-raising overtaking manoeuvres. He made up 13 places in 16 laps.

It was a less pleasing result for the local hero Felipe Massa, never at his 
best in the wet, who failed to complete his last Brazilian Grand Prix. 
Ultimately the race officials were vindicated for their many difficult 
decisions. But at one point they were questioned by the drivers. After the 
second red flag Hamilton said: “The track is fine. It’s not even that wet now. 
I don’t now why we’re stopping. We should be racing, Charlie.” His comments 
were directed to the race director, Charlie Whiting.

He sounded a little like Marlon Brando in On The Waterfront:“I could have been 
a contender, Charley.”

But conditions for most of the afternoon were appalling. At one stage 
Britain’s Jolyon Palmer, who was involved in a crash with Daniil Kvyat, said, 
“From where I was, the visibility was impossible, you just can’t see anything. 
It is bad but it is just the standing water. Kimi [Raikkonen] lost it on full 
wets in a straight line.”

And Carlos Sainz from Toro Rosso said: “It’s unbelievable how difficult it 
was, how dangerous it was. I don’t blame the race director for being that tiny 
bit easy on the conditions, because it was very, very difficult.”

There was even a crash before the race started. Romain Grosjean, who had done 
splendidly to qualify in seventh, lost control of his car on the installation 
lap and had to withdraw.

The race started 10 minutes late, behind a safety car, and that was going 
slowly. After seven laps it came in and the drivers started racing. After a 
single lap Hamilton had already built up a two-second lead, even though he 
complained about water dripping through his visor and into his eyes.

But conditions were still poor and four laps later Sebastian Vettel spun out 
of control. Surprisingly, like others, he came straight in to swap his wet 
tyres for inters. Two laps after that, the 13th, Marcus Ericsson, on the 
difficult run out of the final turn, crashed into the barriers and the safety 
car was again deployed. “Aquaplane,” he said over the radio.

F1: Lewis Hamilton wins Brazilian Grand Prix – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/13/f1-brazilian-grand-prix-live>
But immediately after the race was restarted Raikkonen crashed into the 
barrier when he had been going in a straight line, and was almost hit by a 
number of cars with Esteban Ocon in particular danger.

This time the red flag came out and they stopped the race. There had been only 
36 minutes of action. There was a delay of 35 minutes before they came out 
again, behind the safety car which by now had hogged most of the limelight.

The action was red-flagged for a second time on the 29th lap, as Whiting 
looked at reports of further heavy rain. At this stage it looked unlikely that 
the 71-lap race would last for 54, the minimum needed for full and not half 
points to apply.

When the race started for a third time, this time after a delay of 27 minutes, 
some of the best entertainment of the afternoon took place, especially from the 
sensational Verstappen.

It was an unhappy final Brazilian race for Jenson Button, who regularly 
complained about his car before finishing last. But his fellow Britain Palmer 
did not even finish after driving into Kvyat.

There were plenty of boos and thumbs-down from the crowd when the safety car 
and red flag were employed. But in truth they had one of the best rounds of the 
season.
 