
Lewis Hamilton revelled in his moment. Arms aloft, blowing kisses to an 
adoring mass of fans before launching himself into their arms to crowd surf 
briefly at the conclusion of theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> he clearly wanted it 
here, more than anywhere else, to be communal. This was racing as rock’n’roll 
and Hamilton wanted to connect in the spirit of Morrison, Curtis and Cobain. 
For once the platitudes that entomb modern sport were banished by an outbreak 
of genuine emotion on both sides of the fence.

Sticking to the party line is the secondary instruction document that now 
comes with that giant manual that explains the switches on the steering wheel 
and it is adhered to by drivers with remarkable regard; Mark Webber’s absence 
is noticeable in this department.

Turn up at any of the many poorly attended tracks around the world that have 
little or no redeeming features and teams and drivers will trot out the usual 
lines about how pleased they are to be there and of the magnificence of the 
fans. Hamilton is no exception but, come Silverstone, come the huge numbers 
that flock here to watch for three full days, it is as if the curtain has 
opened on a real performance.

Lewis Hamilton cruises to historic F1 British Grand Prix hat-trick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/lewis-hamilton-wins-british-grand-prix-formula-one-race-report>
A day has not passed this past week in which Hamilton did not fulsomely praise 
the numbers and support of the British supporters. After qualifying he was 
attributing an almost spiritual element to it. “I want to say how amazing and 
grateful I am for all the fans,” he said. “The energy and the wave that they 
send is just mesmerising.”

With which it is hard to argue. Silverstone was glorious and they brought an 
atmosphere that is unmatched around the world. The sudden downpour that had 
preceded the start proved to do little more than make the circuit glimmer as 
the sun began to shine and Hamilton took to his task in front of a sea of union 
flags and, pointedly, one sign that read: “Nico: Caution. Corner approaching. 
Don’t forget to turn.”

Partisan but good-humoured, 139,000 of them packed the old airfield from tip 
to toe. The grand sweep of Copse was rammed to the rafters and the outside of 
the Vale chicane a seething mass. Hamilton has his detractors but they were not 
here and the world champion duly served up exactly what the faithful demanded. 
The fervour that attended his third win in a row at Silverstone had the air of 
the devotion with which they took to Nigel Mansell’s win after he clocked 
fastest lap after fastest lap to chase and then gloriously pass Nelson Piquet 
up the inside of Stowe in 1987.

Lewis Hamilton v Nico Rosberg: just the latest in a long history of F1 
rivalries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-history-f1-rivalries>
Il Leone’s win, of course, was extraordinary but fascinatingly, given the 
rapturous reception he received, Hamilton’s was almost textbook. It was not 
even his best drive here, an honour still belonging tohis debut win in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/06/lewishamilton.formulaone>. That 
run, a truly exceptional drive in the wet, where he was a class apart from the 
entire field and at times lapping four to five seconds faster than the 
competition – finishing more than a minute ahead of second-placed Nick Heidfeld 
– was definitive notice of how far his talent might take him. Eight years on 
and he has fulfilled the promise and now the home crowd were eager to celebrate 
a success story that has longevity. This must be what it feels like to support 
the German football team. They come with high expectations. Hamilton delivers.

That said, it had not been a cakewalk but that Hamilton was a class apart was 
clear. In the wet at the start he had a clear advantage over his team-mate,Nico 
Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg>, and, while 
experienced campaigners such as Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Raikkonen were 
struggling, Hamilton was ensconced on the island. He went wide but once, on the 
wet patch at Abbey that caught out so many, but ultimately managed his lead and 
his tyres to ensure he was unchallenged at the front.

The roar followed him the whole way, with Rosberg, after his failure to turn 
right in Austria, now cast as the pantomime baddie. Max Verstappen’s superb 
pass going though Becketts and round the outside of Chapel was greeted with an 
enthusiasm beyond its deserved acclaim. But this is a crowd who always 
acknowledge a good move regardless of the driver and have the right to some 
vocal schadenfreude.

Even the booing of Rosberg on the podium seemed little more than a spot of tit 
for tat after Hamilton’s reception in Austria and it was quickly over as the 
British driver descended once again to greet his fans. He had thanked them 
again from the top step but what was clear when he reached them, as he and they 
began celebrating all over again, was the obvious joy it brought both parties. 
Thank you and goodnight, Silverstone.
 