
Lewis Hamilton, his large brown eyes wide with wonder, speaks with awe about 
meeting Will Smith, Samuel L Jackson, LeBron James and Magic Johnson. But do 
they talk about meeting the racing driver? Sunday’sBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> will go a long way to 
defining Hamilton’s season and, perhaps, his place in Formula One’s firmament. 
That, in turn, will inform his wider fame, his celebrity status in the rather 
Neverland-ish world that he so often inhabits; the importance of this 
afternoon’s race cannot be overstated.

Arithmetically, Hamilton does not have to win on Sunday to maintain his world 
championship prospects. The British driver is 29 points behind his Mercedes 
team-mate – and only serious rival – Nico Rosberg, and there are 11 races 
remaining, including the double-pointer in Abu Dhabi at the end of the season.

Symbolically, though, he must. After three setbacks in Monaco, Canada and 
Austria, and yet another in qualifying , when he finished sixth on the grid, he 
must wrest the initiative away from Rosberg, a slower driver but one who is 
beginning to look as strong as Thor. Hamilton is the quickest man in F1 and now 
he has what he always coveted – the best car. But he also needs a little luck. 
There is a comforting myth that good and bad fortune will eventually even out; 
sadly, the brevity of a human life means that you can reach its conclusion 
clutching an IOU from Lady Luck in your cold fingers. In the contracted 
lifespan of the professional sportsman, this is even more the case.

Hamilton should have won the world championship in his rookie season of 2007, 
which would have been one of the greatest achievements in the sport. He should 
have won again in 2012, when he drove superbly but was betrayed by a McLaren 
car that broke down more often than a circus clown’s jalopy. Then, 
devastatingly, there have been his two failures to finish this year. In 
Hamilton’s life, though – a life brimful of starbursts and implosions – it is 
not just luck.

While Rosberg looks unremittingly focused, Hamilton appears more vulnerable to 
the error of judgment that marred his day on Saturday. While Rosberg is 
surrounded by friends, – he had 19 of them in Monaco’s Amber Lounge after his 
win there, celebrating until five in the morning – Hamilton often looks an 
isolated figure, cut adrift from the two control freaks who dominated his early 
career: his father, Anthony, and his old McLaren boss, Ron Dennis.

He certainly looked sad and solitary after qualifying. Asked why he had 
aborted his lap he shrugged: “I don’t know, I don’t have much of an answer. I 
don’t have anything to say at the moment.”

Toto Wolff, the Mercedes motor sport chief, said on Friday: “We have told 
Lewis that he needs to understand what is good for him. And all the decisions 
he has made – his dogs and whether he travels to see his girlfriend – are all 
his decisions. He has undergone a tremendous development in the last few months 
to decide what furniture he needs in his apartment. The analogy was empty your 
apartment and put all the furniture in front of your house, and only take back 
what you need to do your job.

“And that’s what he has done. There is nobody else around him, and he is OK 
with that. You need to find out how to live your life and what is important for 
you – and, in the last few years, maybe he has grown up.”

That is all very well, but Hamilton –even at 29 – is still growing up, and if 
his season does end in tears the situation may need to be reviewed. Silverstone 
is the scene of one of his greatest victories – indeed, one of the finest 
displays in allFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> – in 
2008, his championship year, when he came home in the wet with almost 70 
seconds to spare.

In a dismal summer for British sport, he must achieve something similarly 
heroic to win for the 120,000 fans who will be cheering him on on Sunday. More 
important, he must win for himself.

He has an unexpected cheerleader in the driver he left behind at McLaren, 
Jenson Button. “I do hope Lewis wins this weekend,” said Button, third on the 
grid for Sunday. “It’s the first time I’ve said I want a driver to win who’s 
not me. I think he deserves to, he’s gone through a bad patch. And he’s very 
talented.

“I think Lewis will do really well here. I don’t think he feels the pressure 
on his shoulder too much, which is good. He seems a very relaxed Lewis, and now 
I see him more, and speak to him more, than when we were team-mates.”

Button, though, was speaking before ’s qualifying session. On Saturday night, 
as darkness fell on the campsites surrounding Silverstone, there was a whiff of 
anticlimax in the damp Northamptonshire air.
 