
It’s difficult to tell what constitutes a difficult week at Rangers. Such has 
been the turbulence of the club’s recent history their results have become 
little more than a footnote. But in a week that has seen yet more boardroom 
upheaval – and Mike Ashley’s arrival at Ibrox – Rangers at least have aScottish 
League Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> semi-final 
to relish.

Lewis Macleod’s late header was enough to secure a place in the final four for 
Ally McCoist’s side, who face the prospect of meeting Celtic for the first time 
in almost three years, should their rivals overcome Partick Thistle on 
Wednesday. It wasn’t pretty but nothing much is atRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>.

“There’s been a lot going on off the field for what feels like a long, long 
time,” McCoist said. “It was easy to concentrate on the game in the respect 
that that’s our job. The only thing that we can have an effect on is the 
results on the park.”

News of Ashley’s victory in the boardroom power struggle which has rocked the 
club has been met with hostility, as was evident in the sparse crowd for the 
first game since his £2m emergency loan was accepted. The Sons of Struth 
supporters group has already vowed a boycott of Ashley’s Sports Direct stores, 
now it would appear the general Ibrox fan base are notable in their widespread 
absence. The retail tycoon is no more popular on the Clyde than he is on 
Tyneside.

The irony of a “Forever Ibrox” banner – in reference to Ashley’s hoarding of 
the stadium’s naming rights – held immediately above a Sports Direct 
advertising hoarding was perhaps intended but it was illustrative of the 
underlying fears that have bubbled to the surface over the past week.

“I don’t know at the moment,” McCoist bashfully confessed when asked who he 
reports to in light of Graham Wallace’s resignation as the chief executive on 
Monday and Derek Llambias’ arrival as a consultant. It’s over two years since 
Rangers entered administration but the future of the club is as vague as ever.

Who they will face in the League Cup semi-finals also remains uncertain until 
Saturday’s draw but the thought of a long-awaited Old Firm clash is at the 
forefront of minds at Ibrox, and undoubtedly Parkhead too.

“It would be a massive occasion given everything that’s happened,” said 
Macleod, who has been a rare shimmering star in what has been a dull season for 
Rangers thus far. Although McCoist was less accommodating when presented with 
such a possibility, conceding, “I’d probably take anyone other than Celtic, to 
be honest.”

Macleod’s flicked header from a Fraser Aird cross was a moment of quality in a 
game that largely lacked any as Rangers andSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> struggled to impose 
themselves. “I’ve not seen that very often from him,” said McCoist, in 
reference to the 20-year-old’s apparent aerial prowess in nodding home the 
winner. “It was Jon Daly-esque. We asked him at the start of the season if he 
could contribute a little bit more in the final third, and he’s certainly doing 
that.”

Rangers have toiled to make their mark against higher quality opposition since 
their banishment to the basement of Scottish football, suffering cup defeats to 
Inverness and Dundee United in recent seasons, and against St Johnstone that 
pattern looked set to continue, as the Perth side frequently exposed the 
defensive flaws that have undermined McCoist’s side of late.

“I think we did well enough to take it to extra time at least,” said the 
Saints manager Tommy Wright, whose side passed up chances of their own, 
particularly in the first half. “We could have got something out of the game 
and that’s disappointing. It’s a missed opportunity.”
 