
Lewis Hamilton won his second British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> on Sunday and with his 
team-mate Nico Rosberg failing to finish he closed the gap at the top of the 
drivers’ championship from 29 points to only four.

The only disappointment for the 120,000 crowd was that the promised showdown 
between the two Mercedes drivers never took place. Hamilton surged into the 
lead when Rosberg dropped out of the race with gearbox problems on the 29th 
lap. Hamilton, though, had been the faster of the two men after starting in 
sixth position. He had closed the gap on Rosberg to just 2.8sec when the German 
came in for a pit stop after 19 laps. That excellent stop was just 2.7sec but 
when Hamilton pitted just before the halfway mark there was a problem with his 
right rear wheel and it took 4.1sec.

Once again, though, Hamilton started to hunt his man down and the race was 
heading for a thrilling finale when Rosberg’s car came to a halt. After that 
Hamilton could afford to make yet another conservative stop before coming home 
to win by 30 seconds ahead of Valtteri Bottas. It was Hamilton’s fifth win of 
the season and his first here since his miraculous victory in the wet in 2008. 
It was also his 27th career win, putting him level with Sir Jackie Stewart.

At the start, Kimi Raikkonen’s awful season continued when he crashed after 
one lap. He ran wide, hit a bump when he rejoined the track and then flew into 
the barriers. He hobbled out of the car with a painful right ankle. Felipe 
Massa reacted quickly to prevent his Williams ploughing into Raikkonen’s 
spinning Ferrari.

Rosberg had got away well from pole but beside him Sebastian Vettel appeared 
to be in reverse as Jenson Button streaked past him into second place. Then 
Hamilton, who had gone past Nico Hülkenberg at the start, managed to squeeze 
past Vettel after being nudged almost off the track by the Red Bull.

The race was red-flagged and it took an hour to get going again. The wait, 
though, was worthwhile. Apart from Hamilton there was a thrilling drive from 
the Williams driver Bottas, who made a sequence of overtakes around the outside 
to promote himself from 14th on the grid.

There was also an entertaining battle between the multiple champions Vettel 
and Fernando Alonso, who was hit by a drive-through penalty after taking up the 
wrong grid position. That battle was won by Vettel, after a number of tetchy 
radio outbursts, but the best Red Bull on the day once again belonged to Daniel 
Ricciardo, who took the final podium position.

Button is still looking for that elusive first podium place in the British 
Grand Prix but he was fourth – only eight tenths of a second behind Ricciardo – 
and will be delighted with the outcome in an uncompetitive car. It was a 
magnificent race and after a disappointing summer for British sport a great 
result for the crowd.
 