
This year’s Formula One world championship may have been a two-horse race 
almost from the off but a win forLewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> in the Mexican Grand Prix 
has at least ensured the protagonists must weigh in at least once more in 
earnest. The three-times world champion led his Mercedes team-mate, Nico 
Rosberg, from pole and, having already dominated the weekend, proceeded to do 
so again when it mattered. A win was the minimum the British driver required in 
his attempt to defend his title and he delivered with almost flawless aplomb at 
the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez.

While he was trouble-free at the front, however, the final stages were 
enlivened by a battle in which Sebastian Vettel initially claimed the final 
podium spot, after an aggressive fight in the closing stages with Max 
Verstappen in the Red Bull, who was penalised five seconds after he gained an 
advantage by leaving the track, demoting him to fifth. However, Vettel 
subsequently received a 10-second penalty himself for moving under-braking in 
front of Daniel Ricciardo, promoting the Australian to third and Vettel to 
fifth. The decision is unlikely to improve the German’s temper, which had 
already been running high. He had said on team radio that his message for the 
race director, Charlie Whiting, regarding the Verstappen incident was to “fuck 
off”.

Lewis Hamilton vows to keep fighting after winning Mexican Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/lewis-hamilton-vows-to-keep-fighting-after-winning-mexican-grand-prix-formula-one-title-nico-rosberg>
This is Hamilton’s eighth win of the season to Rosberg’s nine and, while it 
was exactly what he needed to keep the championship fight alive, his team-mate 
did what he required to maintain his advantage. The German now leads by 19 
points with a maximum of 50 available to Hamilton at the remaining two rounds 
in Brazil and Abu Dhabi – enough for the German still to take the title with 
victory at São Paulo or second and third places against wins from the British 
driver.

Hamilton had come to Mexico buoyant from his win at the last round in Austin 
and, with everything still to play for, his focus has been absolute all 
weekend. The 31-year-old was quicker than his team-mate across practice and 
qualifying and the setup which the British driver found had worked well did so 
again in a race in which he was untroubled.

The opening of Hamilton’s 51st career win was one on which he will not wish to 
dwell, however. He had the start he needed after some poor take-offs this 
season and led off the line – he looked comfortably clear but braked late and 
locked up into turn one, failed to make the corner and went across the grass to 
rejoin on the entrance to three. Hamilton was not penalised and, when asked if 
he thought he had gained an advantage, he said: “I was in the lead going in and 
in the lead coming out, so no, I don’t think so.”

It was not an opinion shared by all the drivers, however, especially since 
Verstappen’s penalty was imposed for doing the same at turn one. “I think Lewis 
deserved a penalty for cutting the corner,” noted the other Red Bull driver, 
Daniel Ricciardo.

Hamilton was unchallenged from there to the flag by Rosberg who, in contrast, 
had struggled to dial-in his car all weekend. Having failed to pass Hamilton 
from the start or on the long drag to turn one, and knowing a well-consolidated 
and problem-free second place was all he needed, Rosberg’s rhythm suggested a 
driver who had long since calculated the percentages and whose push was more 
targeted at ensuring he did not surrender second to the ever-pressing 
Verstappen, who took the fight to him with the same fearlessness and 
impetuosity that has characterised the best parts of his season but which cost 
him the fury of Vettel at the end.

The pair were battling for third on lap 67 when Vettel passed as Verstappen 
locked up and went wide but rejoined in front of the Ferrari. The team told him 
to give the place back, but he did not, prompting Vettel’s angry message to the 
race director believing he had not been given instruction to do so.

The German was further infuriated as Verstappen backed him into the chasing 
Ricciardo, who moved to pass and Vettel squeezed him, under-braking to block 
him – a manoeuvre for which Verstappen has been heavily criticised several 
times this year. The stewards investigated and found against him, causing the 
third rearrangement of the podium positions of the day.

Vettel’s ire lasted well into the cooling down lap, swearing across team radio 
and gesticulating at Verstappen, but he was considerably calmer after he was 
hurried to the podium with the result reversed for the first time – a decision 
that Verstappen in turn was unhappy with. “I think it is pretty similar to what 
happened in corner one; Lewis went off and got a massive advantage,” he said.

Helmut Marko, the Red Bull adviser who was close to Vettel during his four 
title victories at the team, was not impressed. “The situation is unworthy of a 
four-time world champion,” he said. “His choice of words certainly wasn’t first 
class.” Equally the Ferrari driver may consider himself lucky he was not 
punished further under the sporting code regulations for an “act prejudicial to 
the interests of any competition or to the interests of motor sport generally”.

Clear of the bad language and the bickering for his second win in a row, 
however, the very lack of drama at the front was exactly what Hamilton required 
to move one step closer to taking the title race to the final furlong.

F1: Mexican Grand Prix – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/30/f1-mexican-grand-prix-live>  