
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> ensured he 
would take his defence of the Formula One world championship into the final two 
rounds with a dominant victory at the Mexican Grand Prix on Sunday but, while 
the three-times world champion admitted that to an extent the final result 
would be out of his hands, he said he would do everything to battle on against 
his Mercedes team-mate, Nico Rosberg.

Behind Hamilton’s almost incident-free run to the flag, however, a war of 
words erupted between Ferrari’sSebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> and Red Bull’s Max 
Verstappen after the pair engaged in a close-fought battle for third in the 
final laps.

Hamilton’s win at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez cuts Rosberg’s lead in the 
Championship to 19 points but the German can still take the title with a win at 
the next round in Brazil – a track at which Hamilton has yet to record a 
victory in his career – or a second and third place against wins for the 
British driver there and at the final meeting in Abu Dhabi on 27 November.

Lewis Hamilton vows to keep fighting after winning Mexican Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/lewis-hamilton-vows-to-keep-fighting-after-winning-mexican-grand-prix-formula-one-title-nico-rosberg>
Having already fought back in the championship after suffering mechanical 
issues this season, Hamilton was pleased with his run here and following his 
win at the last round in Austin, in his attempt to make ground on Rosberg. 
“It’s great to be performing as well as I know I can perform and not having car 
problems and being able to show that pace that I had today and in the last 
race,” he said. “It’s a great feeling to be able to do that.”

However, Hamilton also acknowledged that he knew even winning the final four 
races of the season might not be enough. “I am fighting for something that I 
don’t know if I will be able to make, so it’s an unusual scenario to be in,” he 
said. “But I am just going to push all the way to the end. One way it could be 
painful and one way it could be a great thing.”

Rosberg confirmed that he had simply been unable to match Hamilton in Mexico. 
“Lewis was a little bit too quick today and the whole weekend,” said the world 
championship leader. “So he did a great job and I have to live with second 
place.”

Daniel Ricciardo hits out at Sebastian Vettel after airwaves turn blue in 
Mexico
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/daniel-ricciardo-hits-out-at-sebastian-vettel-after-explosive-conclusion>
Behind them Vettel, who had been repeatedly swearing over team radio, 
including a message for the race director, Charlie Whiting, to “fuck off” in 
his frustration after Verstappen failed to give him back the place he believed 
he had taken, was unapologetic.

“I was full of adrenaline, you can imagine because I don’t think it was right 
what Max did,” he said. Verstappen said he would bring the matter up with the 
Ferrari driver. “I will speak to him because this is how ridiculous he is 
handling it,” he said. “He is just a very frustrated guy at the moment.”

Verstappen was punished for his actions, which promoted Vettel to third place 
but he was himself subsequently punished for moving while under-braking and 
demoted to fifth. That round of tempestuous musical chairs ultimately resulted 
in Verstappen’s Red Bull team-mate, Daniel Ricciardo, inheriting the final 
podium place.
 