
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> will already 
have counted the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve as a happy hunting ground, but it 
has been confirmed with his latest win here in a dominant run from pole to 
flag. He now has four victories in Canada – one more than his number of 
retirements – but, more importantly, he has reasserted his dominant position in 
the championship after the disappointment of losing the win to a poor strategy 
call at the previous race in Monaco.

Having taken pole he dutifully took the lead into the first corner and, with 
the exception of a single lap during which he made a pit stop, did not 
relinquish it for the rest of the race. He now leads his team-mateNico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> by 17 points in the title race 
and has ended the German’s brief bid to come back at him in emphatic fashion 
with his fourth win of the season, his first since Bahrain, all of which have 
come from pole position.

F1: Canadian GP – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/07/f1-canadian-gp-live-lap-by-lap>
“I love Montreal,” he said. “I love the track, I love the city. A fantastic 
weekend, it’s great to get back on the top step.”

He had not, however, enjoyed the perfect setup but it had not affected his 
performance, nor his confidence. “I didn’t feel happy or the most comfortable. 
I generally had a lot of understeer but I never really felt too much under 
pressure. Nico was quick but I felt like I always had it under control, I had a 
bit of time in my pocket to be able to pull it out when I needed it,” he said.

The team, too, were pleased to have put Monaco behind them with a one-two.

The Mercedes head, Toto Wolff, said: “We were exposed to massive criticism, it 
looked like all the victories and the world championship was forgotten and 
suddenly a bunch of idiots were managing the team. The result is a satisfying 
result considering what happened in Monaco and after Monaco.”

Hamilton, always strong in braking, made the most of a circuit where five of 
the seven braking zones are heavy on the anchors to maintain a lead that 
fluctuated between one and three seconds throughout and bore remarkable 
similarity to the control he had in Monaco before the poor pit call. Both 
drivers stopped only once, Hamilton to take on the soft tyres on lap 30 and 
Rosberg the same a lap later, but what slim chance he had of making the 
undercut were gone when he went wide at the hairpin on his in-lap.

As the race progressed Rosberg was warned that his brakes were overheating and 
Hamilton that he had to lift and coast to conserve fuel, but ultimately neither 
had an effect on the outcome. “Brake wear now critical, manage it for 10 laps 
before you attack Lewis,” Rosberg was told over the team radio, but although he 
managed the situation by dropping out of the dirty air behind Hamilton’s car, 
the attack did not materialise. With metronomic efficiency, every time Rosberg 
closed to within 1.1 or 1.2 seconds of his team-mate, Hamilton would extend the 
gap again the following lap.

His problem seems to be that he can get close to Hamilton but only enough to 
upset his car’s balance rather than pass. “It was a good race,” he said. “I was 
pushing like mad to try and put the pressure on but he didn’t make any 
mistakes.” He added: “It was just that tiny bit I lost out qualifying in the 
end, because the race pace was there and just that qualifying position makes 
that big difference.”

Valtteri Bottas took Williams’ first podium of the season with a very solid 
run to third place although it should be noted that, while talk persists of 
teams catching Mercedes, he was a full 33 seconds behind Rosberg. Taking 
advantage of Kimi Raikkonen spinning on cold tyres at the hairpin and passing 
him through the pit stop on lap 29, Bottas hammered it to the finish and 
although Raikkonen attempted to come back he could not make the ground on the 
Mercedes-powered car.

Power issues of the other kind beset McLaren, however, as their season lurches 
from bad to worse. Despite showing a united front up until now, behind the 
power and reliability of their new Honda engine the cracks were beginning to 
show.

Told that he would have to watch his fuel consumption, Fernando Alonso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> replied: “Already I have 
big problems now. Driving with this … looking like an amateur. So I race and 
then I concentrate on the fuel.” Which promptly went from bad to worse for the 
Spaniard as he suffered a terminal lack of power and retired on lap 47.

His team-mate Jenson Button fared little better. Having started at the back 
after not setting a time in qualifying due to an ERS failure, he had a further 
setback with a drive-through penalty that he took at the end of the first lap 
for replacing the turbo and the MGU-H for the fifth time. Then, to add insult 
to injury, he was lapped by Hamilton on lap 23, before he too had to retire on 
lap 58.

In a race that usually throws up considerable incident this was, to an extent, 
a tame affair but there was plenty to watch. Sebastian Vettel’s charge through 
the pack from his grid position of 18th was a fine drive, particularly when 
vying with Alonso, who was in no mood to make things easy.

Equally Felipe Massa, who started in 15th and began the race on the soft tyre, 
went through the field with aplomb, including coming perilously close to the 
Toro Rosso of Carlos Sainz. He switched to the supersofts on lap 38 and made it 
to the end to take sixth place.

But it had been Mercedes’ day, the first time the marque has won in Canada and 
the perfect riposte to the debacle in Monaco. “Did I need this?” said Hamilton. 
“I think so. The team did an amazing job, I am proud to be up here.”
 