
“If I’d known what the reaction was going to be, I would have drunk the milk 
first,” says Emerson Fittipaldi, unable to prevent himself from chuckling as he 
recounts the incident that, even 23 years later, is recalled by many fans in 
the United States more clearly than his two Formula One world championships. By 
reaching for orange juice after winning theIndy 500 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/may/29/indianapolis-500-a-look-back-at-a-centurey-of-races-in-pictures>
 in 1993 the Brazilian might have provoked rancour but he was always a singular 
driver and a singular character and he has no time, nor patience, for regrets 
after a remarkable career. Being himself was always more important to 
Fittipaldi and it is something he shares with and admires in Lewis Hamilton.

The winner drinking milk after the race at Indianapolis is one of motor 
sport’s oldest traditions, begun in 1933 after Louis Meyer celebrated his 
second victory with a glass. But Fittipaldi wanted to do his own thing (and 
doubtless help the business of the orange grove farm he owned) after taking the 
flag for the second of his two wins at the Brickyard. He duly swigged orange 
juice and was still being booed years later when driving the pace car before 
the opening of the 2008 race. Mentioning it now provokes gentle amusement.

“I was promoting the Brazilian orange juice,” he says. “I won the race and I 
did drink the milk, but it was after I drank the orange. The media all said: 
‘Emerson broke the tradition.’

Lewis Hamilton says ‘I don’t plan on being second’ after Mexican GP pole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/lewis-hamilton-mexico-gp-f1-nico-rosberg>
“I had drunk the milk but there are no pictures of me drinking it,” he adds 
earnestly, with the tone of one who has had to defend this charge before. “I 
didn’t want to offend anybody, it was a mistake but it was not intentional.”

Diehards may still bristle but apologies are not really necessary; his career 
will ultimately stand testament. On top of those two 500s, there were 22 race 
victories driving Indycars in the Cart series, including the title in 1989, 
after twice winning the F1 world title, with Lotus in 1972 andMcLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> in 1974. He went head-to-head with 
Clay Regazzoni – “difficult to fight, I knew he was dangerous”, Sir Jackie 
Stewart – “a fantastic champion, I diced wheel-to-wheel with him, he was always 
on the limit but respected your space”, and Nigel Mansell – “in Cleveland, in 
three laps we changed position seven times, we were right on the edge of the 
track and nearly touching wheels – it was fantastic”. He was respected in turn 
and has been lifelong friends with Stewart.

Now 69, he looks back on his years behind the wheel with unsurprising 
fondness. “I was so happy to win the world championships, to win at 
Indianapolis twice,” he says. “I have no regrets. I had the best behind me, I 
drove for Lotus and McLaren and some of the best teams in America. How can I 
complain?”

Hamilton, the world champion, has received a lot of criticism for his jet-set 
lifestyle and interests outside F1 and their potential effect on his driving, 
as well attracting an aggressive media response afterthe Snapchat incident in 
Suzuka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>
. But Fittipaldi is sympathetic. “From all the modern drivers, Lewis has a very 
strong personality, which is great for motor racing,” he says. “He is able to 
communicate with the fans and the fans like that. That’s part of the sport. I 
like his personality, doing what he wants to do.”

He has a valid point, the complaints about over-media-trained, bland drivers 
have been around for years but when one strays from the script, even only at 
the expense of journalists expecting stories, there is a furore. Fittipaldi 
insists you can’t have it both ways. “It’s important that someone can express 
themselves, we need that,” he says. “It’s very important to give our opinion 
the way we want to give it. It’s sometimes controversial but that’s part of 
life.”

Bernie Ecclestone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> has 
shared Fittipaldi’s admiration for Hamilton’s ability to promote the sport and 
the Briton is happy to engage with fans, unlike some of his peers. “The drivers 
are too controlled by the teams, the sponsors, the PR guys,” Fittipaldi says. 
“We are missing their personalities, because of the system and it has to 
change. They have to have more freedom, to express their own opinion, not just 
what the team or sponsors want them to say.

“They have to express their feelings more, that’s what people want to know. 
Racing fans love that, they like controversy.Motor sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/motorsports> is all about pressure and 
adrenaline and sometimes the drivers want to express that but cannot.”

Fittipaldi, saw out his final years in F1 staying loyal to the team his 
brother had set up in 1976; they struggled from the off and were never really 
competitive with third their best result. Cart would follow, but since retiring 
in 1996 he has not left motor racing behind.

Last week, alongside some other notable fathers and their sons including 
Riccardo Patrese, Juan Pablo Montoya and Jarno Trulli, he was at the South 
Garda karting track in Lonato, Italy, with his nine-year-old boy, known simply 
as Emmo.

Did the youngster have the makings of a future world champion? “He has the 
passion and talent but a long way to go,” was the reply, again with the same 
warm chuckle with which he had recalled causing horror at the Brickyard.

Hamilton, however, regardless of whether he can come back again at Nico 
Rosberg’s 26-point lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-mexican-grand-prix-mercedes>
 in another must-win race in Mexico on Sunday, was someone he was willing to 
back for the future. “Lewis is a fantastic talent,” Fittipaldi says. “His 
driving, his achievements show the talent that is there and the talent will 
deliver the result. He absolutely has more world championships in him.”
 