
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> sizzled like 
a Texas barbecue, searing around the Circuit of the Americas to produce the 
fastest lap ever seen here. It placed him on pole position – his 58th – for 
Sunday’s United States Grand Prix, and with three wins from four in Austin his 
damaged confidence has received a transfusion.

Without a win since July and troubled by engine failures and bad starts, 
Hamilton appears to be onthe very brink of losing his world championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/mercedes-lewis-hamilton-world-championship-f1>
. But the Mercedes driver is immensely strong in adversity and here, cheered on 
by the tennis star Venus Williams, he produced one of those thrilling, 
hooked-together laps that has earned him his reputation as one of Formula One’s 
fastest drivers.

He loves it here, the track’s darting dips and giddy climbs, its sweeping 
curves and considerable technical challenges. This Hermann Tilke-designed 
circuit acts like a tribute to other tracks, with some of its challenges 
modelled on famous parts of other venues, such as Silverstone and Istanbul. And 
Hamilton appears to understand its mixed personality better than any other 
driver.

Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg>, his team-mate 
and rival, will join Hamilton on the front row. He was no slouch either, but 
was still beaten by two-tenths of a second, with the Red Bulls of Daniel 
Ricciardo and Max Verstappen behind them on the grid.

Last year we had a washout of a weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/23/heavy-rain-cancellation-f1-practice-us-grand-prix>
 here but now a hot sun shone on Hamilton as he went almost three-tenths faster 
than Rosberg in the complicated first sector. But just before his winning lap 
the British driver appeared to be threatened by yet another technical glitch, 
when he reported: “Weird shift up to seven.” Mercedes replied: “OK, we’re 
looking.”

Hamilton said later: “I feel amazing. It is my first pole here. It has been 
many years of trying. A lot of great people have tried to get me there. Big 
thanks to the crowd; I could hear them cheer as I crossed the line.

“I hope tomorrow I will provide them with great race. I’m going to give it 
everything I’ve got. Now I just have to put thoughts to action. Tomorrow I need 
to have a real big one.”

The track, he said, was a difficult one to get right but even in Q1 he looked 
in his sharpest form. “We have worked hard over the last couple of weeks – 
understanding and improving a lot of areas – and it is a great feeling to be 
back up here.”

A resigned looking Rosberg said: “There was nothing specific. I preferred 
sector two and three today and Lewis was quicker in sector one, that was it. 
Nevertheless we have seen this year qualifying is not all important and I still 
have a great chance from P2.”

Of course Rosberg is right. Five bad starts have cost him dearly as Rosberg 
has built up a lead of 33 points in the world championship with just four races 
to go. Hamilton added: “I have been practising the starts all weekend, so I 
feel positive about it.”

If he wins here, and is also victorious in Mexico, Brazil and Abu Dhabi, it 
may not be enough. But Hamilton sounded ready for the challenge when he said 
that the championship was still all to play for.

Jenson Button, meanwhile, fell at the first hurdle, eliminated in Q1 after 
getting caught in traffic. “I had four cars to overtake in the last sector and 
the last one saw me really late and was on the racing line, so I had to 
outbrake them into the last corner,” he said.

There was also local disappointment for Haas supporters. This is the American 
team’s first home race, but Romain Grosjean immediately joined Button on the 
sidelines. There was better news for Britain’s Jolyon Palmer, who is fighting 
to retain his seat at Renault. After strong performances in the previous two 
races he beat his team-mate Kevin Magnussen to move into Q2.

Lewis Hamilton ready to move on and come back stronger if he loses F1 title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/lewis-hamilton-f1-title-nico-rosberg> 