
It started 10 years ago this week, lest we forget – the start of one of the 
most astonishingFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
careers ever witnessed.

Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/lewis-hamilton-unsure-regain-momentum-f1-title-race-motor-sport>
 made his F1 debut in 2007 but it was in November the previous year that it was 
announced he would drive for McLaren alongside Fernando Alonso. The decision 
was made by McLaren in late September 2006, the 23rd of the month to be precise.

The 21-year-old Hamilton was told to keep schtum for two months, which must 
have taken some doing considering the excitement bursting within him.

Lewis Hamilton unsure if he can regain the momentum in F1 title race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/lewis-hamilton-unsure-regain-momentum-f1-title-race-motor-sport>
Ron Dennis, the head of McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>, 
suggested at the time the decision was made almost by default, that there was a 
shortage of outstanding talent from which to choose. “As part of our 
decision-making process we reviewed the whole grid and apart from the top 
three, we reckoned most of them had plateaued,” he said. “I am distinctly 
unimpressed with the majority of drivers currently involved in Formula One. I 
feel Lewis is well equipped to deal with these drivers who fall into that 
category.”

Not exactly a ringing endorsement, was it?

McLaren were getting a little light on drivers. Juan Pablo Montoya had moved 
to the US and Nascar while Kimi Raikkonen had gone to Ferrari, where he would 
win the world championship in 2007 but there were still others under 
consideration to be Alonso’s team-mate. One was Pedro de la Rosa, while the 
name of Gary Paffet was also mentioned.

McLaren knew a little more than Dennis was prepared to say back then. Hamilton 
had just won the GP2 title ahead of Nelson Piquet Jr at Monza and before that 
he had shown sparks of his genius in karting. And before GP2 there were some 
eye-catching performances in the Formula Renault UK Championship and the 
Formula 3 Euro Series. McLaren had a good idea just how good Hamilton was but 
even they were taken aback by what happened in 2007.

Hamilton sounded confident when he said: “I have done everything I need to do 
to prove that I’m ready to race a Formula One car.” But even he had no idea 
what was about to unfold.

He came third in his first race, in Australia. He went on to lead the F1 
championship by finishing second to Felipe Massa in Bahrain and Barcelona. 
Alonso didn’t quite know what had hit him, though he did manage to beat the 
young upstart into second place at Monaco.

Hamilton’s first pole and win came at the Canadian Grand Prix in Montreal and 
a week later he won the US Grand Prix – the first Briton to win the race since 
John Watson in 1983. He also became only the second driver after Jacques 
Villeneuve to win more than once in his rookie year.

There were more wins in Hungary and Japan but it went badly wrong in China, 
where he won pole but then wasn’t brought in soon enough to change worn tyres 
and went into a gravel trap.

Hamilton was seventh in Brazil, which meant he lost the title in the final race
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/21/motorsports.formulaone20072> by 
one point to Raikkonen. At 22 he was the youngest runner-up and he could have – 
should have – won the championship if only his team had looked after his tyres 
a little better.

For me, it is still of the most extraordinary achievements in F1, especially 
when you consider the intensity of his rivalry with Alonso.

The young driver’s thrilling start to his F1 career is one of the most 
remarkable of all stories in the sport, and despite the fact the three-times 
world champion missed out on winning that championship by a single point, we 
should always remember that. Hamilton, who is going through some difficulties 
at Mercedes, should also reflect on that and just how brilliantly good he is in 
Malaysia this weekend.
 