
After what might be described as a trying summer for British sports fans, the 
huge crowd thronging the circuit at Silverstone had real reason to celebrate. 
But their full-throated joy still seemed a whisper to the untrammelled elation
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> brought to 
the podium as he took his second win at his home grand prix and, most 
importantly, put his fight for the world championship title back on track.

The grand old airfield was itself celebrating as it hosted its 50th grand 
prix, having held the very first F1 world championship round in 1950, and could 
have hoped for no more than a British winner to top it off. Hamilton delivered 
and although we were denied the pitched battle that he may have enjoyed with 
Nico Rosberg had the German not suffered a gearbox failure, he drove his own 
race to perfection.

Hamilton’s last win here was in 2008, which at the time he described as 
“definitely and by far the best victory I’ve ever had. It was one of the 
toughest races I have ever done”. It was without doubt one of the best of his 
career. Careering through the wet conditions, he found grip and pace seemingly 
invisible to the rest of the field and won by the huge margin of 1 minute 
08.577 seconds from Nick Heidfeld’s BMW.

Before this weekend, indeed before the disastrous error in qualifying that saw 
him start from sixth, and despite being behind the wheel of the fastest car on 
the grid, he was cautious about whether he might repeat the feat. “I feel very 
fortunate that I had the opportunity to win the British GP that one time. If I 
ever have an opportunity to win it again, that will be a real blessing. But 
just to win it once is more than I can ask for,” he said.

Yet blessed he was and it has doubtless crossed his mind that the previous 
home victory was also in the year he took his first and only world championship 
title. But while it may be a little previous for reading real portent into the 
win here, it is really what Hamilton, who beamed through the post-race press 
conference, needed in terms of the season as a whole.

The press conference itself was instructive. Hamilton tends to rub some up the 
wrong way; there were many negative reactions to his somewhat surly attitude in 
the immediate aftermath of his mistake in qualifying, a world away from the 
grinning, talkative driver who afterwards wisecracked at the expense of the 
shoddiness of the sponsors’ trophy. But the contrast is what makes him stand 
out as a driver. That he is truculent when disappointed may come across as 
immature but at least it is honest and he wears his emotions for all to see. 
Sometimes wilful and uncommunicative in defeat, joyous and open in victory, it 
may be infuriating to many but it is human and a world away from most of the 
rigorously trained and stage-managed reactions of his co-drivers. His rival 
Rosberg is fiercely analytical, critical and careful of his own performance, 
including off track with the media.

The differences inform them at the sharp end as drivers as well, which makes 
Hamilton’s victory here all the more important. His hero may be Ayrton Senna, 
himself a great racing analyst, but his emotions show the strains of Nigel 
Mansell. The latter’s furious and crowd-fuelled charge from 29 seconds back to 
take Nelson Piquet and the win here in 1987 resonates with a driver unable not 
to be moved by the battle, for whom success or failure means everything.

He showed it at the last race in Austria, coming back from ninth to finish 
second, and here again, putting his mistake behind him – again straying from 
the usual script, he said after the race it had “felt like a kick in the balls” 
– and turning sixth into first. It was crucial. With two DNFs already this 
season and with the likelihood of further failures for Rosberg diminishing as 
the season progresses and the new technology is mastered, Hamilton needed a win 
and for the German to share some of his misfortune.

He took both and with it narrowed the gap to his rival to the difference 
between a one-two finish. From recent mistakes and mechanical failures he 
could, by the close of the German Grand Prix in Hockenheim in two weeks, be 
leading the world championship.

Comparing his position thus far in the season with being psychologically 
similar to a tennis player two sets down, this win at his home grand prix – 
buoyed by a crowd that cheered his every move and erupted as he crossed the 
line, finally able to revel in British success – is the spur, the lift, in the 
sporting idiom perhaps more applicable to F1 than anywhere else, the momentum 
that his mercurial personality really needed. And Hamilton knows it. “The 
pressure is high but I really feel that now we’re back,” he said, with feeling.
 