
The Leyton Orient owner, Francesco Becchetti, faces a procedural hearing in 
London on 7 December after Albanian authorities requested he be extradited from 
the UK to face trial. The Italian businessmanis accused of fraud-related 
offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/09/leyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-wanted>
 and money laundering over a failed hydroelectric scheme that allegedly cost 
the government tens of millions of euros in grants and unpaid taxes.

A statement on behalf of Orient’s owner read: “On 7 December a procedural 
hearing for directions will take place in London, where a time-line will be 
agreed with the Crown Prosecution Service for the court to look into the 
Albanian request. A substantive hearing will not take place until next year. 
Certainly no decision has been made regarding extradition. Mr Becchetti and his 
lawyers believe his case is extremely robust.”

The statement reaffirmed Becchetti’s staunch denial of the charges, and 
accused the government of making “baseless accusations” against him. It added 
that his Albanian companies’ assets have been seized and their bank accounts 
frozen, preventing him from paying staff at his television company, Agon TV.

“Mr Becchetti strongly denies all the charges against him, which have been 
brought by the Albanian government and are demonstrably groundless, improperly 
motivated and unsupported by any evidence.

“The Albanian government’s claims are also a reaction to two significant 
arbitrations commenced by companies associated with Mr Becchetti against the 
government for large amounts of money, and are made to pressurise Mr Becchetti 
to settle these arbitrations.

“Accordingly, Mr Becchetti sees that the Albanian requests should have no 
impact on his duties and responsibilities as chairman ofLeyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>. On the contrary, Mr 
Becchetti continues to work very hard to reinvigorate the club, which is one of 
the oldest football clubs in London.”

Orient are seventh in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>, in a play-off spot on 
goal difference, having been relegated in May.
 