
Reality caught up with Kevin Nolan on Saturday. Appointed by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/21/kevin-nolan-leyton-orient-player-manager>
 Leyton Orient as player-manager nine days previously, he had supervised two 
wins. Just as significant were two clean sheets. Orient had managed only one in 
21 League Two games and gone 11 without one. Now they reverted to type and lost 
3-1 at home to Cambridge United.

“If it had been the first game, I could have taken it on the chin,” Nolan 
said. “It hurt a bit more after the last two performances.” At least the six 
points took Orient to sixth. Nine would have put them fifth. As it is, the O’s 
are ninth, only two places and two points above the U’s. There is time for both 
new managers to make their mark. Shaun Derry, succeeding Richard Money in 
mid-November, has already taken his side from 18th. “The potential here has got 
legs,” he said when he arrived.

They hardly needed legs here. Open arms were sufficient. On Friday Brian Corr, 
their leading scorer with 12, was ruled out for the season with a knee injury 
but Ben Williamson stepped up to the plate which Orient held out to him.

Nolan said beforehand: “It’s all about keeping our feet on the ground.” But 
their heads were in the clouds. Frazer Shaw’s soft back-pass let in Williamson 
early on, who then bullied the ball off Connor Essam after the interval for the 
second. After Armand Gnanduillet came on and forced in a riposte, the left 
flank of defence was at once exposed again. This time Williamson squared the 
ball for Jimmy Spencer, also a substitute, to score with his first touch for 
Cambridge. Derry bought him on Friday from Notts County, where the manager 
started.

Nolan, who fought many battles with Derry in Premier League midfields, 
referred to “the snowball effect of mistake after mistake”. The right side of 
defence held firm but the midfield, for all the energy of Nigel Atangana, gave 
the forwards nothing to work on. The wonder is that Jay Simpson has 22 goals, 
top ofLeague Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> by 
eight. Josh Coulson did a fine man-marking job.

Leyton Orient president Francesco Becchetti handed six-match stadium ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/15/leyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-ban>
Two seasons ago Orient finished third in League One under Russell Slade and 
the future looked fair. Then Barry Hearn, long-time owner, sold out to 
Francesco Becchetti, an Italian businessman. No doubt smarting at finding 
himself in baulk over the Olympic Stadium, Hearn warned: “If I was West Ham, I 
would be petrified of this fella.” He could not have done much worse if he had 
got Massimo Cellino, periodically allowed to be in charge at Leeds. Becchetti 
made his money in waste management and recycling. He has recycled five managers 
in 18 months. Nolan at 33 is sixth in line.

On Boxing Day Becchetti, wanted by Albanian authorities to face charges (which 
he denies) of fraud-related offences and money laundering – nothing to do with 
clean sheets – kicked the assistant manager, Andy Hessenthaler up the backside 
after the match. Last week the Football Association fined him £40,000 and 
banned him from the club for six games.

With these suspended pending appeal, Orient’s backroom largely stayed seated 
except for Nolan, who made his escape on to the field for the last quarter but 
too late to retrieve the game. Through Bolton, Newcastle and West Ham he was 
Sam Allardyce’s voice on the field as captain. After a first week which passed 
“at 100 miles an hour” he looks forward to preparing for Portsmouth on Saturday 
with more knowledge of his team. At least he looks fit for purpose, a potential 
inspiration off the field, an organiser on it.
 