
Aberdeen once again failed to take advantage of a Celtic slip-up, as they 
could only draw withSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> following the leaders’ draw 
with Hamilton on Friday night.

The Wales international Simon Church opened the scoring with a close-range 
finish 10 minutes before the interval, but the home side failed to turn 
possession into goals, and were punished when St Johnstone substitute Liam 
Craig won, and then converted, a late penalty.

Despite the absence of top scorer Adam Rooney, who may be out for six weeks 
with a calf injury, and key creative influences in right-back Shay Logan and 
winger Johnny Hayes,Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> 
were swiftly on the attack at Pittodrie, with Kenny McLean forcing Alan Mannus 
into a save within the first minute.

But St Johnstone had not travelled north to make up the numbers, and Aberdeen 
goalkeeper Scott Brown had to be quick off his line to block after Graham 
Cummins knocked the ball into his path.

Midway through the first half, Cummins himself found space in the penalty area 
to head a right-wing cross goalwards, but his effort was off target when he 
really should have done better.

However, the home side had just about edged things and opened the scoring 10 
minutes before the interval. Simon Lappin knocked a teasing Ryan Jack cross 
away from the lurking Shinnie, giving Aberdeen a corner from which Niall 
McGinn’s delivery was headed goalwards by Ash Taylor. Mannus saved, but could 
not hold the effort, and Church was on hand to sidefoot home from all of a yard.

Both sides were lucky to keep 11 men on the park after the Dons captain Jack 
and St Johnstone winger Danny Swanson got involved in a fracas, both benefiting 
from referee Steven McLean’s decision to flash only yellow cards.

The visitors introduced Craig for Scott Brown at the interval, but despite 
flashes of attacking prowess, it continued to be the home side who looked the 
more likely to find the net.

Indeed, both Taylor and Mark Reynolds were left scratching their heads as they 
both contrived to miss a teasing delivery from a McLean free-kick just after 
the interval.

And Church was denied a second goal just after the hour, Mannus diving low to 
his right to block a close-range effort from the on-loan MK Dons striker.

But Aberdeen were punished for their failure to extend their lead. Craig 
teased a needless challenge from Jack inside the area, and it was no surprise 
when the referee pointed to the spot.

Craig himself stepped up to take it, and calmly rolled the ball low to the 
goalkeeper’s right as Brown went the other way, earning his side a share of the 
spoils.
 