
The Gaddafis spent four decades plundering Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>, amassing private jets, fast cars and 
expensive properties the world over. But next week could see what international 
corruption experts say is the first repatriation of a major asset owned by the 
deposed Libyan rulers.

On Friday, at the high court in London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
, the Libyan state will attempt to seize from Saadi Gaddafi, the playboy son of 
the dead dictator, 7 Winnington Close, a Hampstead Garden Suburb mansion in a 
quiet cul-de-sac worth in excess of £10m.

The neo-Georgian, eight bedroom home complete with indoor swimming pool and 
private cinema was bought by the high-living 38-year-old former footballer six 
months before start of the Arab spring. Glentree, the estate agent that sold 
him the property, said he decided to buy it after a "quicker than normal" 
viewing.

Saadi owns 7 Winnington Close through Capitana Seas Ltd, a British Virgin 
Islands (BVI) company. It is understood that Capitana's lawyers will not defend 
the application for repatriation, which could mean the house reverts to Libya 
on Friday.

But Saadi's legal representative, Nick Kaufman, a lawyer based in Jerusalem, 
told theBureau of Investigative Journalism 
<http://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/>: "This is an issue of which my client 
and I are fully aware. My client is at present considering the legal options 
open to him to tackle this meritless claim."

Libyan investigators say they were unable to establish Saadi as the owner of 7 
Winnington Close until the British Treasury intervened. Treasury officials 
directly contacted authorities in the BVI, which is famous for protecting the 
identities of the ultimate beneficiaries of companies based there.

The lawyer hired by the Libyan embassy to handle the groundbreaking case is 
Mohamed Shaban. He said he had had to establish that Saadi could not have 
bought the property on his official military wage of £34,000 as commander of 
Unit 48 in the Libyan ministry of defence. "It would be impossible for him to 
make £10m in cash," Shaban said.

"This is hugely significant," said Robert Palmer, an anti-corruption 
campaigner at Global Witness. "It looks as if it's the first asset recovery 
case related to the Arab spring in London. It is a very complicated process 
requiring a significant degree of co-operation to identify an asset that is 
suspected of corruption and then take a case through the courts."

Shaban said he was looking at several other properties in London which could 
form the next phase of investigations.

A senior asset recovery expert at a global institution said London's private 
banks, desirable properties and luxury shopping made it a prime location for 
corrupt politicians and their families.

On Monday, James Ibori, a former governor of an oil-producing Nigerian state, 
pleaded guilty in a British court to 10 counts of money-laundering and 
conspiracy to defraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/feb/27/james-ibori-pleads-guilty-fraud>
. British police accuse him of stealing £160m over eight years. Some £22m of 
his alleged UK assets were frozen in 2007.

Senior asset recovery specialists suggest the process of repatriating money, 
property and other investments from fallen Arab dictators has been slow. So far 
the sum total of assets returned to Arab spring countries amounts to two planes 
that belonged to Tunisia's former president, Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, and his 
brother-in-law.

A leading London-based investigator involved in the repatriation of assets 
associated with the Egyptian former Mubarak regime said: "These people have 
been in power for years and it will take years to unravel. We have seen in 
recent cases how they use corrupt lawyers and accountants [to move money]."

The investigator pointed to the case of Sani Abacha, the former president of 
Nigeria who in the mid-1990s is estimated to have siphoned as much as $5bn from 
the oil-rich country he ruled for five years. "We are still finding Abacha 
money 14 years after he died."

It is said that Egyptian investigators have sent out "blanket requests" for 
stolen assets which have overwhelmed banks. A lack of co-ordination between 
newly established agencies has seen needless duplication of requests.

There are also reports of tensions and mutual mistrust between western banks 
and the Libyan central bank, which is leading attempts to track Gaddafi's 
assets.
 