
The best stories in France go all the way to the top, and this one is no 
different. Paris St Germain, newly under the ownership of Qatari Sports 
Investments, this summer appointed Leonardo as sports director and in one month 
spent €83m (£72m) on eight players, including €42m on Javier Pastore, the 
Argentinian playmaker coveted by Chelsea, Real Madrid and Barcelona, in a deal 
set to be confirmed before the new season kicks off on Saturday.

Seeing off the likes of Valencia for the striker Kevin Gameiro (€11m), 
Liverpool for Blaise Matuidi (€10m) andMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> for Jérémy Ménez (€8m) is one 
thing, but the Pastore deal is a marquee signing and shatters the previous 
French transfer record of €22.5m, spent by Lyon on Yoann Gourcuff. Le Parisien 
suggests Dimitar Berbatov is open to the idea of joining PSG, while Santos's 
Ganso is still on the radar, which raises the question of how all three may gel 
in the same dressing room, let alone the team. France Football called the 
spending spree the July revolution. Le Parisien claimed "PSG has truly entered 
a new dimension" while L'Equipe's Tuesday front-page splash asked of Pastore: 
"Is he worth €42m?"

Just as fascinating as the implications on the pitch are the machinations off 
it, particularly the role of the France president, Nicolas Sarkozy, in helping 
the QSI deal happen. Libération described Sarkozy, a PSG fan, as "the Qatari 
team's 12th man" and alleged that he had to be talked out of firing the sports 
minister, Chantal Jouanno, for saying she wished PSG's new owners had been 
French.

So Foot investigated the increasing business relationships between France and 
Qatar, and reported that 10 days after Sarkozy hosted a lunch between the QSI 
head, Sheikh Tamim al-Thani, and Michel Platini last November, the Uefa 
president – an outspoken critic of billionaire owners – voted for Qatar's bid 
to host the 2022 World Cup.

This is the backdrop to what promises to be the most exciting Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> season for years, with 
PSG now credible challengers to the vibrant new champions Lille, a regrouped 
and hungry Marseille, and a Lyon side coming to terms with a new philosophy. 
PSG's signings, up to now, have been impressive: Gameiro is a proven scorer in 
this league (22 goals last season), while Matuidi and Ménez represent quality, 
if inexperienced, replacements for the departed Claude Makelele and Ludovic 
Giuly.

The other new faces – Milan Bisevac, Momo Sissoko and the goalkeeper Salvatore 
Sirigu (tough on Nicolas Douchez, who drops to the bench within weeks of 
joining) are all on bigger salaries, worryingly, than the rest of the squad. 
"We want to do something long term and not buy 10 Messis straight away. That's 
not how you build a team," Leonardo said. Crucially, PSG have kept the 
centre-back Mamadou Sakho from the clutches of Arsenal. Sakho, 21, once 
captained the side at the age of 17 and is club captain this season.

QSI has targeted Champions League qualification for next season – as PSG 
finished fourth last term, that should be doable – the Ligue 1 title in 2013, 
and a tilt at winning the Champions League by 2015. What's unlikely is that the 
coach, Antoine Kombouaré, who has steadied a very rocky ship in recent seasons, 
will be around to see all that. "Why should I worry about my job?" the coach 
told Thursday's L'Equipe. "If we win, I stay, and if we lose, I don't. I know 
how these things work."

"When the Qataris invest, they want to be obeyed," Alain Perrin, Lyon's former 
double-winning coach now in charge at the Qatari side Al-Khor, has warned. "But 
I don't see Kombouaré staying very long." Perrin's predecessor at Al-Khor, 
Bertrand Marchand, agreed: "It's their trademark to appoint a big name. In 
Qatar, the coach is the star of the team." Carlo Ancelotti has already been 
linked to the job and Arsène Wenger remains a long-term target.

At least the fixture list has been kind to PSG: only three of their first 12 
games are against sides that finished in the top half last season. That's more 
than can be said for Marseille, last season's runners-up, who play four of the 
top six in the opening six weeks. No wonder Marseille figures past and present 
have been queueing up for a pop at PSG. "You can't go out and buy a style of 
play, a culture and an identity," the former president Bernard Tapie said (and 
he would know). The Marseille sports director, José Anigo, said: "When you 
spend almost €100m, you have to win the title." "They should be renamed the
Galactiques de Paris," according to the new president, Vincent Labrune.

For once, l'OM should be grateful that they have been able to conduct their 
summer business in relative serenity. Labrune's appointment has helped the 
coach, Didier Deschamps, win, temporarily at least, his power battle with Anigo 
and l'OM have bought the France captain, Alou Diarra (for a bargain €5m from 
Bordeaux), the talented young defender Nicolas Nkoulou and the Lorient pair of 
Jérémy Morel and Morgan Amalfitano. Mathieu Valbuena is likely to replace Lucho 
González as the No10, while Diarra playing just in front of Souleymane Diawara 
and Stéphane Mbia will give the team a formidable physical presence. Marseille's
5-4 Champions Trophy win over Lille last week 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/lille-marseille-13988506/> showed 
that the Ayew brothers (André hit a hat-trick, Jordan won two stoppage-time 
penalties) will be tough to handle this season.

But will Marseille be able to overhaul Lille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille>? Last season's champions sold 
their spine this summer, with Adil Rami, Yohan Cabaye and Gervinho all moving 
on, but were quick to replace them. Marko Basa, Benoît Pedretti and Dimitri 
Payet have come in – at a net profit of €5.5m – while the squad has been 
boosted for the Champions League with the arrivals of Laurent Bonnart, Vincent 
Enyeama, Ronny Rodelin and Nicolas Fauvergue. Lille's recruitment is normally 
spot on – last season's back five cost them nothing to put together – but they 
were also lucky to avoid any injuries last year: only 14 players made more than 
five starts all season.

The key to this season rests on the winger and French player of the year Eden 
Hazard staying fit, and Moussa Sow proving that last season, when he was top 
scorer with 25 goals, was no one-off – even though it was the first time in 
seven seasons in France that he hit double figures. "PSG may have the money but 
as champions we will be the team to beat," the coach, Rudi Garcia, warned.

What of the others? It's an age of austerity at Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>, whose president, Jean-Michel 
Aulas, promoted Rémi Garde from youth academy director to first-team coach, and 
promised "to play the youth card"; in other words, spend no money. As yet, the 
club's failure to sell Michel Bastos to Juventus (€15m asking-price) and Aly 
Cissokho to Liverpool (€10m) has prevented any funds coming in. Garde needs 
Gourcuff to rediscover his form if they are to challenge the top three.

Hot on their heels are Sochaux, looking to improve on a surprising fifth-place 
finish last season, and Rennes and Toulouse, who have both spent smartly: Chris 
Mavinga, Benoît Costil and Jonathan Pitroipa should all do well at the former, 
while big things are expected of Emmanuel Rivière (€6m) atToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse>.

The new campaign kicks off on Saturday night, when all eyes will be on Parc 
des Princes to see how PSG get on in their opener againstLorient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lorient>. A decent home win would be one 
thing: a glimpse of Sarkozy in the directors' box hugging Sheikh Tamim would be 
quite another.

Team-by-team guide

Ajaccio It took Ajaccio five years to get out of Ligue 2. To avoid a speedy 
return, the club has signed the Mexico goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa and the 
strikers Frédéric Sammaritano and Ilan, briefly of West Ham.Target: Survival

Auxerre The club starts a new era without Ireneusz Jelen and Benoît Pedretti, 
not to mention the coach, Jean Fernandez. With surprise pick Laurent Fournier 
as the new coach, a season of consolidation is in store.Target: Top half

Bordeaux Last season was disastrous under the unpopular Jean Tigana, who has 
been replaced by Francis Gillot.Bordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> sold their captain, Alou 
Diarra, to Marseille, and Gillot's tough task is to lead the 2009 champions 
back into Europe.Target: Europa League 

Brest The coach, Alex Dupont, nicknamed Sir Alex after Ferguson, won friends 
after Brest started last season very well. By the end, they only just stayed 
up, and pre-season has been disrupted by the striker Nolan Roux's public pleas 
to leave.Target: Survival

Caen The club hit the financial jackpot by selling the highly rated striker 
Youssef El-Arabi (17 league goals last season) to the Saudi side Al-Hilal for 
€7.5m and in M'Baye Niang, 16, they have a potential star in the making. He 
will play up front alongside new signing Pierre-Alain Frau.Target: Survival

Dijon Their first time in Ligue 1, Dijon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dijon> have Florent Malouda as a 
shareholder, and his younger brother Lesley, as well as Didier Drogba's brother 
Freddy, in the squad. New signings Cédric Varrault, Daisuke Matsui and Grégory 
Thil add L1 experience.Target: Survival

Evian Another Ligue 1 debutant, the Danone-sponsored club wanted to play home 
matches in nearby Geneva, but the federation forbade it. Sidney Govou, back 
from Panathinaikos after 11 years at Lyon, is their big summer signing.Target: 
Survival

Lille Worthy champions last season, Rudi Garcia's attacking side have been 
overshadowed by Paris St Germain and Marseille's transfer-market moves. Keeping 
Eden Hazard is a masterstroke, but Lille's final position could depend on their 
Champions League campaign.Target: Champions 

Lorient Canny Christian Gourcuff, the longest-serving coach in L1, has 
replaced the creative pair of Morgan Amalfitano (Marseille) and Kevin Gameiro 
(PSG) with Mathieu Coutadeur and Jérémie Aliadière, who is already injured. 
"It's going to be tough," Gourcuff says.Target: Top 10

Lyon A new strategy is in place for the president, Jean-Michel Aulas, which 
involves spending hardly any money and hoping the new coach, Rémi Garde, can 
finish in the top three. It could be a tough ask.Target: Champions League

Marseille With Didier Deschamps still in charge, Marseille are joint 
favourites for Ligue 1, and if André-Pierre Gignac repeats his second-season 
tally for Toulouse (he scored 22 league goals in 2008-09), l'OM could go one 
better than last season's runners-up spot.Target: Champions 

Montpellier Already established in L1 despite only arriving two years ago, 
stability is their great strength. Mapou Yanga-Mbiwa turned down an offer from 
Lille, while Emir Spahic (now at Sevilla) is the only departure.Target: Europa 
League

Nancy After five years as Auxerre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/auxerre> coach, the last season of which 
was in the Champions League, Jean Fernandez has replaced Pablo Correa on the 
bench. But after nine years of Correa in charge, it could be a tough adjustment 
to Fernandez's softer approach.Target: Top half 

Nice Neighbouring Monaco's relegation could bring more fans to Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice>, who finished one point above the 
drop zone last year. The coach, Eric Roy, an ex-Nice player, has a good 
relationship with the ambitious new president, Jean-Pierre Rivère, and the club 
is now looking up.Target: Mid-table 

PSG The big story of the summer, in Europe as well as France. Eight new 
players, Leonardo as sports director, and oil-rich owners: what could possibly 
go wrong? A poor start could spell the end for coach Kombouaré.Target: Champions

Rennes Stability is the watchword at Rennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> and keeping Yann M'Vila for 
another season was a coup. Look out for the latest academy talent, Yacine 
Brahimi, while new signing Jonathan Pitroipa has impressed in pre-season.
Target: Top six

St Etienne Last season's 10th-place finish was a big improvement on recent 
relegation battles, but Dimitri Payet and Emmanuel Rivière, responsible for 65% 
of Etienne's goals last season, have been sold andSteed Malbranque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/03/steed-malbranque-st-etienne-goodwillie-blackburn>
 and Florent Sinama-Pongolle have come in.Target: Top 10 

Sochaux The new coach, Mecha Bazdarevic, wants to build on last season's 
surprise fifth-place finish, but their best chance is if they hold on to Marvin 
Martin, Europe's leading assist-maker last season with 17. He's a wanted man 
but has yet to commit for this campaign.Target: Top four 

Toulouse Goals have been a problem since first Johan Elmander and then 
André-Pierre Gignac were sold, but TFC have tried to address that by spending 
€10m on Emmanuel Rivière and Umut Bulut.Target: Top six 

Valenciennes Another coaching change, with Daniel Sanchez replacing the 
Sociedad-bound Philippe Montanier, but the big boost for VA, who begin life in 
their new stadium this season, was the top scorer, Grégory Pujol, signing a new 
deal. They also want Slobodan Rajkovic (Chelsea) and Ryo Miyaichi (Arsenal) on 
loan.Target: Top 10

• Check out Ligue 1 stats and squads 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=23>

• Watch Ligue 1 news and highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/interactive/2009/jan/08/ligue-1-football-highlights-goals>
 