
Lionel Messi scored a pair of late goals on Sunday as Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> came from behind to win 2-1 at 
Osasuna in La Liga.

Barcelona's defeat at Osasuna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> 
last season played a part in the Catalan club losing the title to Real Madrid, 
and the hosts looked destined for another win after Joseba Llorente's acrobatic 
17th-minute goal.

But even after the Osasuna striker Juan Francisco Martínez hit the post and 
the Barcelona coach Tito Vilanova was sent to the stands, Barcelona rallied as 
Messi guided Alexis Sánchez's short pass beyond the goalkeeper Andrés Fernández 
to equalise in the 76th minute.

Osasuna went down to 10 men when Francisco Puñal was sent off for arguing the 
goal was offside.

Messi then latched on to Jordi Alba's cross in the 80th minute for the winner. 
It was the Argentinian's fourth league goal of the season, putting him top of 
the scoring charts, and gave Barcelona their first victory in Pamplona after 
being behind at half-time since 1960.

Osasuna made a confident start in which Llorente got his right foot up to 
chest level to tap Roland Lamah's cross past goalkeeper Victor Valdés at the 
near post.

Valdés had come under fire following a poor performance in the 3-2 Spanish 
Super Cup win over Madrid last week but was much better here. He made saves to 
deny Alvaro Cejudo in the opening moments and again to block from Martínez, who 
also hit the post with only the goalkeeper to beat after dispossessing Sergio 
Busquets.

Vilanova's furious reaction to that incident saw the Barcelona coach sent off 
in his third official game in charge but it also sprung his players into action.

Fernández saved from Andrés Iniesta and Messi but Barcelona's attack only 
really woke up after Xavi Hernández replaced Iniesta with 20 minutes to go. 
Cesc Fábregas had started in place of Xavi but failed to guide the team with 
any distinction.

Fernández watched in exasperation as Messi's redirected shot crossed the goal 
line to equalise, before Barcelona immediately took advantage of the extra 
space with the man advantage, Alba crossing from the left for Messi to curl 
home the winner.
 