
It has now entered the cultural canon that, on completion in 2001, the 
manuscript of Lionel Shriver's seventh novel was widely rejected by publishers 
and literary agents alike. In retrospect, this incidental fact being widely 
known is alone a little weird. After all, every day writers numbly receive 
curt, dismissive rejections of work they've slaved over for years. Writers 
should have some grasp of publishing's brutality, and this morose process of 
having your beloved creations stepped on and pissed over comes with the 
territory. Hence people in my occupation are routinely expected, as Kevin would 
say, to suck it up.

Sorry, did I say "Kevin"? That's what's truly weird: the large number of 
fiction readers who know exactly who Kevin is, and that number is set to swell 
once a cinema audience joins the mix. Yet "Kevin Katchadourian" is just a name 
I picked after combing through the phonebook on an ordinary afternoon.

The premiere of Lynne Ramsay's film 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/may/12/cannes-we-need-talk-about-kevin-review>
 of We Need To Talk About Kevin at the Cannes film festival provides an apt 
juncture at which to celebrate the miraculous power not of film but of fiction. 
Lo, I have created a monster.

Kevin is a dark book, and many of those initial rejections objected that its 
narrator, Eva, is "unattractive": a woman uneasy about pregnancy, who feels 
alarmingly blank after childbirth, and fails to form the bond with her boy that 
we like to imagine is as instinctive as closing the epiglottis when we swallow. 
The novel breaks one of the last taboos (and how amazing that at such a late 
date I found a taboo still standing): a mother disliking her son. Rife with 
difficult characters and climaxing in a high-school massacre of the sort 
Americans are rightly ashamed of, Kevin was a poor commercial bet from the 
get-go.

More, my timing was mythically crap. I submitted the final draft to my New 
York literary agent right after 9/11, in that hilarious little window when 
everyone thought Americans would never read or watch anything violent again. 
Waiting for her response, I recorded in my journal that my new novel "abruptly 
seems irrelevant and, more dangerously, dated". (Indeed, the week the twin 
towers fell,New York Times columnist Frank Rich 
<http://topics.nytimes.com/top/opinion/editorialsandoped/oped/columnists/frankrich/index.html>
 listed Columbine among a catalogue of national issues from "before" that 
suddenly didn't matter.) Ominously, my usually responsive agent went silent for 
weeks. Finger-drumming, I wrote presciently to myself: "Should this day, too, 
pass, with no comment from NY, I have vowed to break my silence and press her 
for a response. But the responses you have to ask for you don't want."

Quite. Finally I got an email – a long, unparagraphed, associative wail of 
dismay of which I've kept a copy: "For the life of me, I don't know who is 
going to fall in love with this novel . . . People in the industry are so 
thin-skinned right now – I just don't think anyone is going to want to publish 
a book about a kid doing such maxed-out, over-the-top, evil things, especially 
when it's written from such an unsympathetic point of view." She worried the 
plot might invite copycat killings. She suggested a rewrite with "a lot more 
humour (in that way which ONLY YOU can do) instead of one kid from hell who 
will make people sick just reading about the things he does. Don't make him a 
mass-murderer . . . And have him actually have a soft spot for his sister 
because she is easily humiliated and poses no threat." She demanded I pay my 
photocopying bill.

I paid the bill. I spent the next eight months shopping in vain for a new 
agent. Finally in desperation I sent the manuscript directly to an editor at a 
small house who'd published me before. She read it over the weekend, made an 
offer on the Monday, and that's where the fairytale starts. Offer in hand, I 
got a wonderful new agent whom I retain today.

Nevertheless, Kevin was a slow burn. The book went to 30 different British 
houses before the Little Publisher That Could, Serpent's Tail, picked up the 
title with a tiny advance but great compensatory enthusiasm. Meanwhile, three 
months after its hardback publication in America – publicity budget: near-zero 
– an article appeared in the New York Observer describing all these women on 
the Upper East Side biking a little-known novel to each other and convening 
coffee klatches to discuss it. "Word of mouth" had begun.

Word of mouth, far more than critical acclaim, is what elevated Kevin to the 
enduring status he appears to enjoy today, for the novel hit the London Times 
bestseller list beforeit won the Orange prize in 2005 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2006/mar/13/orangeprizeforfiction2006.orangeprizeforfiction>
. Oddly, for a book to do well merely because people like it is surprisingly 
rare. This novel has been driven from the off not by advertising and publisher 
hype, but by individual readers who passed it on to friends. Its success is 
therefore a populist tribute. Even Lynne Ramsay bid for the film rights well 
before the novel was a commercial hit. She was simply one more reader who 
discovered the book for herself.

Book clubs have also powered Kevin as he went viral, and I've visited a few, 
where groups cleave into ferocious camps: one convinced that the boy was evil 
from day one, the other just as convinced that his mother's coldness was 
criminally culpable. A fine spectator sport in which I never participate, since 
what the book means is no longer up to me.

The novel passed the signal sales mark of 1m copies worldwide some years ago, 
and I've stopped keeping track. It has secured 25 translation deals, including 
Estonian, Serbian, Arabic and Russian; I collect foreign editions because I 
enjoy comparing covers. My favourite is the Chinese version: a belligerent, 
deranged-looking teddy bear. The title has so installed itself in the British 
cultural lexicon that it's given rise to books such as We Need To Talk About 
Kevin Keegan and the wittily christened science primer We Need To Talk About 
Kelvin. And now the movie.
 Tilda Swinton, Ezra Miller, Lynne Ramsay, John C Reilly and his wife Alison 
Dickey on the red carpet at Cannes Photograph: Ian Langsdon/EPA 
What has it felt like, watching a novel travel from pariah manuscript to 
Cannes? Obviously, publishing the novel at all was a relief. Finally hitting a 
bestseller list when six previous novels had lost money was satisfying, though 
in general my experience of "success" has been surprisingly mild; I couch that 
word in inverted commas out of superstition, and also from dubiety that ever 
regarding one's self as having summarily arrived is good for one's character. 
My life is not so different, really, and though I'm less prone to depression I 
hardly leap out of bed every day bursting with disgusting go-get-'em-girl vim 
and vigour. (Any writer still wallowing in self-congratulation over the 
popularity of a novel written a decade ago should be shot.) I've travelled from 
amazement to incredulity to bewilderment, and at last to bemused detachment.

Yet underpinning all these emotions is gratitude. I owe thanks to a 
thoughtful, sophisticated readership hungry for challenging subject matter, for 
honest portrayals of parenthood, and for fiction whose meaning is neither 
obvious nor morally pat. This peculiar, tortured novel was an unlikely 
bestseller, and has benefited from numerous individual readers with independent 
tastes who have hand sold it. I've met many of these readers, and they've 
confirmed my view that the publishing industry routinely underestimates book 
buyers, especially women, who don't all want to read girly pap. I'm sometimes 
asked if I get bored with talking about Kevin, and of course the short answer 
is yes. Nevertheless, after a long slog in the literary trenches I never take a 
single reader for granted, and always remind myself that for new readers the 
unfolding story is fresh.

Most of all, Kevin as a phenomenon long ago ceased to have anything to do with 
me. I've published two novels since, and I'm stuck into another; fortunately, 
many Kevin fans have moved on to other novels of mine as well. Meanwhile, Kevin 
can continue to suck a lychee sadistically in front of his mother after her 
daughter has lost an eye without any further help from me.

My starkest realisation that this novel has achieved a life of its own was 
while watching Ramsay's riveting adaptation of the book. Mind, I've been lucky, 
because Ramsay's version is excellent: well cast, beautifully shot, and 
thematically loyal to the novel. Settings such as Eva and Franklin's slick, 
ghastly suburban house in fictional Gladstone look almost unsettlingly close to 
the way I saw them in my mind's eye.

Before the premiere in France, meeting Ezra Miller, who plays Kevin as an 
adolescent, was particularly surreal. In social circumstances, he still exudes 
a seductive eroticism you instinctively want to resist, a beguiling exterior 
disguising you're-not-sure-you-want-to-know-what, and a subtle manipulative 
sleaziness that I recognised instantly from the novel. Talking to Ezra in 
Cannes was so eerily like having a conversation with Kevin himself that at the 
premiere's after-party I turned to him with narrowed eyes. "You little shit," I 
said. Rationally I knew better, but something in me truly believed that this 
kid had killed seven students, a teacher, and a cafeteria worker at his high 
school, and still thought rather well of himself for pulling the atrocity off.

Allowing herself to look washed-out and haggard, Tilda Swinton is brilliantly 
cast as Eva, and seems already to have replaced my own flickering image of my 
narrator. Though the script is sparse, her silences exude an overload of 
conflicting emotion – a dismay, anguish, loneliness, and fury too dangerously 
combustible to express. John C Reilly brings to the role of Eva's husband 
Franklin a weight, presence and warmth that rescues the father from seeming 
simply a dupe in the face of his son's sunny pretence of being a normal, 
rambunctious boy. And the two child actors who play Kevin when younger both 
capture the exasperation with the meaningless adult world that I tried to 
impart to the novel's character, as well as providing Kevin a seamless physical 
contiguity as he grows up.

The film's literal manifestations of impulsive, near arbitrary decisions at my 
computer I found a riot. I picked the dorky name of Eva's squalid place of 
employ out of the air one day, yet the production team had to carefully paint a 
real sign over a real shop premises reading "Travel R Us". I snatched the name 
of the walk-on who runs that shabby travel agency with equal flippancy, yet 
there she is, in all her three-dimensional glory, with "My name is Wanda" 
pinned to her dress. Both comical and a little scary, my apparent capacity to 
conjure the solid from mere caprice suggests a power I'm not sure anyone 
should enjoy.

The film is an interpretation of the novel, of course, and Ramsay was obliged 
to edit out multiple scenes, lest the film run to 10 hours. But here's what's 
fab: the book still exists, inviolate. All the dialogue Ramsay eliminated is 
still in the book. All the scenes she couldn't dramatise are still in the book. 
All the literary reflections that have evaporated into a wordless interplay of 
colour and space are still in the book.

I've often marvelled at the ability of visual artists to let things go – to 
craft unique objects, to which they surely become attached, yet which they sell 
off and may never see again. By contrast, the medium in which I work allows 
simultaneously for generosity and piggy hoarding. I've given my book away to a 
director, producers, and cast; to dozens of translators whose skills this 
unilingual moron has to take on faith; and to countless readers, who have 
breathed their own life into the story and brought their own analyses to bear 
on the characters. Yet no matter how many copies my publishers sell, I get to 
keep mine, filed by chapter on my hard drive. In kind, fans of the novel 
shouldn't fear the film, which may contribute stunning visuals to the tale, but 
can't rob anyone of the original book.
 