
Liverpool’s squad strengthening is set to continue with the club having 
submitted an improved offer of £10.5m, potentially rising to £12.5m, to
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> for their 
England right-back, Nathaniel Clyne.

The offer was made after the arrival, subject to a medical and international 
clearance, of the Brazil international forward Roberto Firmino from Hoffenheim 
in a move that could end up costing £29m, the second highest fee in Liverpool’s 
history. Firmino, who is at the Copa América in Chile with a quarter-final 
against Paraguay awaiting on Saturday, has agreed a five-year contract after the
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> chief executive, Ian 
Ayre, flew to Santiago to complete the paperwork.

The Brazilian followed James Milner, Danny Ings, Adam Bogdan and Joe Gomez in 
moving to Anfield already this summer – that quartet will officially join on 1 
July – with the club, who endured such a dreadful end to last season, now 
turning their attentions back to Clyne.

An initial offer worth around £10m had been knocked back by Southampton in May 
for a player who is entering the final 12 months of his contract and has 
failed, as yet, to offer much encouragement to his current employers that he 
will agree terms on an extension.

Southampton had hoped to secure nearer £15m for the defender if he indicated 
he was not interested in signing a new deal. They have since secured the 
Portuguese right-back, Cédric Soares, from Sporting Lisbon for an initial £3.6m 
and continue to monitor Arsenal’s Carl Jenkinson, who might be secured on a 
season-long loan, as they bolster their own options with a Europa League 
campaign lying ahead.

Yet the arrival of Soares appears to have been a recognition that Clyne is 
likely to move on this summer. Indeed, Liverpool have received sufficient 
encouragement to feel their improved offer will prove more successful for the 
24-year-old, who earned his fifth England cap as a late substitute in the 
recent 3-2 win in Slovenia.

Brendan Rodgers frequently used Emre Can at right-back last season despite the 
German midfielder’s clear discomfort in the role with the manager’s other 
options relatively limited. Jon Flanagan missed the entire campaign through 
injury while Glen Johnson, who will leave the club under freedom of contract on 
30 June, fell out of favour and was reduced to a bit-part role.

Clyne, a product of Crystal Palace’s academy, enjoyed his best season yet at 
St Mary’s to force his way into Roy Hodgson’s England set-up and prompt 
interest from Manchester United, though it is Liverpool who have courted him 
most persistently. He would follow a well trodden path should he complete his 
move to Anfield to join Adam Lallana, Dejan Lovren and Rickie Lambert, all 
former club-mates at Southampton, in moving to Merseyside.
 