
Brendan Rodgers is to leave out Steven Gerrard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/steven-gerrard> and possibly Luis Suárez 
for Liverpool's trip to Mansfield Town on Sunday but insists no risks will be 
taken against the Blue Square Premier side.

Gerrard has played every minute of every Premier League game this season and 
after a demanding spell of four matches in 10 days over the festive period will 
be omitted from the team at Field Mill. Leading goalscorer Suárez has also 
faced a gruelling workload, but with the new £12m signing Daniel Sturridge 
unlikely to start the third-round tie, the Uruguay international may be 
involved in some capacity. Jonjo Shelvey operated as a "false nine" when Suárez 
was suspended for the league win over West Ham United and offers an 
alternative, but Rodgers is confidentLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have the depth to avoid a 
major upset.

The Liverpool manager said: "This is one where I'm looking to utilise the 
squad. This is the nature of it coming on the back of four very tough games but 
I'll pick a group to win. That's the key. I am confident in the group and I 
would never risk the tie because this is a competition we want to do well in.

"Luis loves playing, that is why he is here: to play games and score goals. I 
speak a lot with him and I know from working with him that he wants to play. 
But he's coming off the back of a real busy period where he's given everything 
in the games and scored goals."

Jamie Carragher will play, but Sturridge, having not started a competitive 
game since 17 November in 2012 – when Chelsea lost at West Bromwich Albion in 
what proved to be Roberto Di Matteo's final league game as manager – is 
unlikely to be hurried into the side. The 23-year-old is, however, included in 
the squad.

Rodgers explained: "Daniel is still catching up a bit on his fitness because 
he has been out for a period of time. He's looked good in the couple of 
sessions we've had but I'm not looking to rush Daniel into anything. He is not 
under big pressure to come in and perform straightaway, in particular because 
of the form of the team at the moment."

The Liverpool manager, who insists his staff "have prepared exactly the same 
forMansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> as we would 
Manchester United", expects to be without José Enrique for six weeks after the 
defender aggravated a hamstring injury at Queens Park Rangers on Sunday. "It's 
a shame because in the game he felt nothing," said Rodgers. "Sometimes you can 
enter games and be tight and stiff but he felt great. It is unfortunate because 
he has looked fantastic."

His fellow defender Sebastián Coates may be allowed to leave Liverpool on loan 
in the transfer window providing there is necessary cover for Martin Skrtl and 
Daniel Agger, Rodgers has confirmed. He said: "It's been difficult for him to 
get games. The best thing for Sebastián will be to go out and play some games."
 