
There was victory at last for Brendan Rodgers but no respite whatsoever. 
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> needed a penalty 
shootout to overcome League Two Carlisle United as the home supporters were 
subjected to another aimless, laboured display that will do little to ease the 
pressure on the manager. The Premier League team booked a place in round four 
at home to Bournemouth but it was Keith Curle’s men who took the acclaim.

Arsenal’s Mathieu Flamini rediscovers scoring flair to down Tottenham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/tottenham-arsenal-capital-one-cup-match-report>
Adam Bogdan saved from Danny Grainger, Luke Joyce and Bastien Héry in the 
shootout, the stand-in keeper’s stop from the French midfielder sealing victory 
after James Milner, Emre Can and Danny Ings had converted for Liverpool. The 
Hungarian goalkeeper also saved Rodgers from the ignominy of a sixth game 
without a win, not that he had cause to celebrate edging past the Cumbrians on 
spot kicks.

Adam Lallana and Philippe Coutinho both missed their spot-kicks, in keeping 
with a poor Liverpool performance. Only Ings, who opened the scoring in normal 
time before the veteran striker Derek Asamoah equalised, Bogdan and Can exited 
the match with credit. This was another galling night for a manager who had 
awoken to reports that his job had been offered to the Champions League winner 
Carlo Ancelotti, rumours denied by the Anfield club.

Liverpool were booed off at the end of normal time – the condemnation louder 
than afterSunday’s draw with Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/20/liverpool-norwich-city-premier-league-match-report>
 – and after both periods of extra time. Three rounds of booing in the one 
night takes some doing.

Rodgers’ team had 46 shots during the 120 minutes and yet lacked invention 
against a team 65 places below them in English league football. Mark Gillespie 
in the visiting goal had a procession of shots to watch but precious few to 
trouble him. It was a case of work the ball square, back again, shoot wide and 
repeat. The play reflected the current direction of the Liverpool team – going 
nowhere.

The Liverpool manager passed post-match duties to his team coach, Gary 
McAllister. “Brendan is delighted, as we all are,” said McAllister. “There was 
also a big sigh of relief in that dressing room. The positives are we are in 
the next round and we had around 50 shots on goal. We’ve been asking the 
players to take more responsibility in front of goal and we had that tonight, 
although we didn’t work the keeper enough. It was a good night in that we are 
through to the next round. We want the performance to be better and that is 
what we are striving for.”

Problems were not confined to the performance level. Dejan Lovren was taken 
off on a stretcher seconds before the end with what appeared a serious injury 
to his right ankle, although McAllister said the Croatian’s problem is 
“hopefully not as bad as it first looked”. Roberto Firmino also departed 
injured in the first half. Five years and one day ago Northampton Town had
embarrassed Roy Hodgson’s Liverpoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/22/liverpool-northampton-town-carling-cup>
l in the League Cup but that was a second string Liverpool team. Rodgers opted 
for the security of seasoned internationals and even that did not suffice.

It felt an age by the time Bogdan saved Carlisle’s fifth and final penalty low 
to his left but Liverpool had begun brightly, peppering Gillespie’s goal from 
the first whistle and passing more sharply than in recent weeks. Ings was their 
most prominent, relentless player up front and scored his second goal in two 
games to open the scoring. Alberto Moreno cut inside from the left and found 
Lallana running into the area. The midfielder swept over an inviting cross for 
Ings to head home from close range. It was a rare example of a quality final 
ball from Liverpool.

Southampton’s Sadio Mané joins treble of doubles in 6-0 romp at MK Dons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/mk-dons-southampton-capital-one-cup-match-report>
Asamoah, selected ahead of Carlisle’s leading goalscorer Jabo Ibehre, had gone 
close to converting Alex McQueen’s low cross as his side responded to their 
manager’s call for greater intent. Seconds later a simple pass in midfield 
released Héry from Joe Allen and co, and he ran unchallenged down the centre of 
the pitch before putting in Asamoah behind a non-existent Liverpool central 
defence. The striker beat Bogdan with a powerful finish inside the near post 
while Anfield, and Rodgers, wondered why no one had attempted a tackle.

Carlisle were pegged back after the restart but there was desperation in 
Liverpool’s play, not least when Martin Skrtel shot high into the Kop from 40 
yards. Only seven minutes of the second half had elapsed at that wild point. 
The frequency of shots from distance also reflected Liverpool’s inability to 
break down a League Two defence. Cambridge United and Plymouth Argyle managed 
four goals apiece againstCarlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> in August.

Rodgers brought on his insurance policy, Coutinho, just after the hour. The 
Brazilian stung Gillespie’s palms – also from long range – and floated a 
delightful ball into Lallana to waste but there remained a distinct lack of 
ingenuity and finesse to Liverpool’s play. Carlisle’s three-man central defence 
worked tirelessly to limit the openings and succeeded for 120 minutes. The 
lottery of a shootout, however, saved Liverpool and their manager.
 