
It was perhaps apt that in a city renowned for its red wine, Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> produced a performance that 
can be assessed differently depending on whether your glass is half full or 
half empty. For large parts of the first half the visitors looked set to endure 
a third successive defeat but they battled hard, became more positive after the 
break and looked to have secured victory in their first European fixture of the 
season thanks to Adam Lallana’s stylish goal. Then came the blow of a late 
equaliser but there were undoubted positives to take for a team that has become 
all too used to negatives in recent weeks.

Lallana’s goal aside, the most striking encouragement for Liverpool was how 
such a young team refused to fold against fast-paced, aggressive and skilled 
opponents. This was a starting XI that contained three teenagers in the 
19-year-old Jordon Ibe, 18-year-old Joe Gomez and another 18-year-old, Jordan 
Rossiter, making only his third appearance for his boyhood club. What appeared 
a gamble on the part of Brendan Rodgers then looked like suicide by a manager 
under pressure when on 28 minutes Liverpool’s most experienced player, Kolo 
Touré, had to go off with a dead leg and was replaced by another 18-year-old in 
the Spanish midfielder Pedro Chirivella for his first appearance.

By this stage Liverpool were struggling to contain a Bordeaux side that are 
also disappointing domestically but, buoyed by a 2-2 draw at the Ligue 1 
champions Paris Saint-Germain last Friday, seemed hell-bent on beginning their 
Europa League campaign with a win. They regularly exploited Liverpool’s lack of 
experience and cohesion – Rodgers made eight changes to the team thatlost to 
Manchester United last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 – and, in particular, the space afforded by the visitors’ 3-4-2-1 formation.

Twice in the opening 18 minutes Willy Sagnol’s side created openings down the 
inside-left channel of Liverpool’s area as neither Ibe nor Gomez, the right 
wing-back and right-sided centre-back respectively, sniffed danger. First Diego 
Rolán had a shot that went just over before Nicolas Maurice-Belay found time 
and space to play in the Tunisian Wahbi Khazri, whose shot went just wide.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/18/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Those efforts lifted the already raucous crowd at a venue opened only four 
months ago at a cost of £133m. The hosts were dominating and when Chirivella, 
fresh faced and with No68 on his back, came on they must have smelt blood. But 
there was no wilting by the men in white and instead they grew into the 
contest, with the tenacious Rossiter particularly impressive. It said much that 
he went down with cramp during the closing stages.

“I’m disappointed [not to win] but encouraged by our performance, especially 
given how many young players we had on the pitch,” said Rodgers. “I’ll always 
give young players a chance and as the game went on Jordan Rossiter and young 
Pedro gained more control. They acquitted themselves very well, as did the 
whole team.”

There were impressive displays also from Mamadou Sakho in his first start of 
the season, Philippe Coutinho on his return to the side following a domestic 
ban and Lallana, who was back after injury and may well reflect on this match 
as a turning point in his Liverpool career.

The midfielder has struggled to impress since joining the club for £25m in 
July 2014. But playing alongside Coutinho and behind the lone striker Divock 
Origi, he increasingly imposed himself here, with the 27-year-old’s goal a real 
peach.

Collecting Alberto Moreno’s pass by the left edge of Bordeaux’s area, the 
England midfielder spun, played the ball through Pablo’s legs and using his 
centre-back partner Nicolas Pallois as a shield, curled the ball into the far 
corner of the net.

“It was an outstanding goal, a touch of creativity that we haven’t seen much 
of in our play this season,” said Rodgers, who was left to rue Danny Ings’ 
failure to make it 2-0 following his own piece of eye-catching skill – and a 
clever assist from Lallana – soon after. And on 81 minutesBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> equalised through the 
substitute FerreiraJussiê’s thumping drive after good hold-up play by Enzo 
Crivelli.

In truth that was the least Bordeaux deserved and before Norwich’s visit to 
Anfield on Sunday Rodgers should reflect on another defensively shaky display 
by this team and those spells prior to the interval when they, as has often 
been the case this season, looked incapable of imposing themselves on their 
opponents.

But a young team dug in, scored in style and earned a point that could prove 
invaluable if Liverpool are to make their mark in Europe this season. For their 
supporters, here as well as back home, it is a case of onwards and upwards.

Tottenham v FK Qarabag: Europa League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/sep/17/tottenham-v-fk-qarabag-europa-league-live> 