
Exeter City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> began to roll 
out the red carpet for Jürgen Klopp’s arrival less than three hours before 
kick-off. A member of the ground staff hastily vacuumed the club’s media suite 
in the 110-year-old Stagecoach stand, which will be demolished at the end of 
the season. It resembled the local working men’s club more than anything 
possibly connected to Exeter’s fashionista manager, Paul Tisdale.

“The Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager is 
going to be coming in here after the match to do interviews and it looks a real 
state at the minute,” she told the stewards soaking up the scenery before just 
another game. Talk soon moved on to Accrington Stanley in a couple of weeks’ 
time but the final touches were ready for when Klopp eventually entered, 
receiving a hero’s welcome from home and away support as he made his way off 
the team coach, with locals leaning out of the windows from the lofts of 
terraced properties on St James Road to witness his heavily anticipated 
alighting.

Liverpool’s Brad Smith strikes to deny Exeter a memorable FA Cup scalp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
Perhaps they recognised the unenviable task that was presented to the German’s 
side in rain-soaked Devon. Klopp, who was forced to name what resembled a 
reserve side because of injuries, gave debuts to three of his travelling party 
– Kevin Stewart, Ryan Kent and Tiago Ilori. The tarpaulin at St James Park was 
probably nothing new to Stewart or the teenager Kent, who had been playing in 
League One with Swindon and Coventry respectively this season.

Without 13 first-team players because of injury, seven of whom were hamstrung, 
at least Klopp was able to lean on the sturdy frame of Christian Benteke, who 
was given the captain’s armband for the first time in a Liverpool shirt.

The German decided against utilising his insurance policy, the midfield pair 
of Adam Lallana and Lucas Leiva, who stayed on the bench throughout.

The shirts of the Liverpool starting XI looked more like lottery numbers. 
Despite the pre-match fanfare, burgeoning queues and selfies with just about 
anybody in a Liverpool tracksuit, something was missing.

Liverpool’s experimental line-up rarely looked scary for the League Two 
defence. Benteke was estranged and comfortably contained by the Grecians 
defender Jordan Taylor-Moore while the holding midfielder Jordan Tillson, son 
of the former Bristol Rovers defender Andy, halted most of Liverpool’s flow. 
Kent, the winger, was subdued and unsurprisingly replaced by Pedro Chirivella. 
José Enrique has been starved of first-team football and it showed. Their 
approach was at times naive but it will be a sight Liverpool fans may have to 
get used to as Klopp confirmed he will field a similar side in the replay at 
Anfield in 11 days’ time.

Despite the hospitality the Exeter manager Tisdale had urged his players to 
make the most of the occasion and give the visitors “a high-quality problem”.

“What we do today echoes in eternity, make history” one banner spread across 
the entire home Kop end read.

Tom Nichols, the Exeter striker, must have been taking note as he tapped home 
Jamie Reid’s cross to open the scoring.

Nichols had free rein down the right flank and his surging run led to the 
corner which Lee Holmes rattled straight in just before the interval.

Usually when Klopp clicks his fingers, his players react. His side thumped 
Southampton 6-1 after going a goal down inside 60 seconds and rescued a point 
against West Bromwich Albion in stoppage-time last month. Before that they came 
from behind to beat Bordeaux 2-1 and top their Europa League group.

They replied here, first through Jerome Sinclair, the 19-year-old forward, but 
nothing in this performance was reminiscent of the stage shows from Klopp’s 
teams that fans have learned to love. The Australia international Brad Smith 
would level things up with 17 minutes left.

The most important thing for Liverpool was to avoid picking up any more 
injuries a day after Jordon Ibe was ruled out with a hamstring injury, although 
they could have done without a replay, of course.

One cannot help but feel, though, that Klopp, perhaps more than any of the 
8,241 fans inside St James Park, sensed how events would unfold before the ball 
was even kicked. His wry smile following Smith’s equaliser was a picture that 
told a thousand words. There was a supreme confidence that Liverpool would not 
be toppled here, at a stage when so many big names have fallen in the past.

Aside from the ever-growing injury list, things are perhaps not too bad for 
the Liverpool manager after all. His side host Arsenal and Manchester United at 
Anfield in the next nine days and two wins would leave them firmly in the hunt 
for a place in the Premier League top four come February.

Klopp’s side are well-placed to reach the League Cup final and are more than 
capable of going the distance in the Europa League. The manager will just be 
hopeful Friday’s flight home to Merseyside does not involve another discussion 
with one of his medical staff.
 