
It was routine in the end, perfect preparation for Manchester City’s visit on 
New Year’s Eve and another reminder to Chelsea and the watching Pep Guardiola 
that Liverpool will remain in their company for some time to come. But there 
was more to an ultimately comfortable victory overStoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> than a further demonstration 
of the ruthless efficiency that Jürgen Klopp has created at Anfield. It took 
confidence under pressure and absolute faith in their methods for Liverpool to 
stage an emphatic recovery.

When Daniel Sturridge rounded the goalkeeper Lee Grant and rolled in his first 
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> goal since 
April to complete victory he also took Liverpool to 100 league goals in 48 
games under Klopp. Only Kenny Dalglish reached the century in as few games as 
Liverpool manager. The show of strength and the range of Liverpool’s attacking 
threat would not have been lost on Guardiola, whose presence in the main stand 
Klopp took as a mark of respect from a fellow contender.

Jürgen Klopp says Liverpool have Borussia Dortmund’s team spirit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/liverpool-jurgen-klopp-team-spirit>
But it was unmistakable how the home team had toiled against Stoke’s direct 
approach and two-man attack until Adam Lallana equalised Jonathan Walters’ 
early goal and how, even when unsettled, Liverpool never lost their belief or 
ability to hurt their opponents. Stoke’s generosity was boundless, with 
individual errors contributing to allLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> goals, and Klopp had the 
options at his disposal to ensure there would be no first managerial win at 
Anfield for Mark Hughes or top-flight league win here for his team. Roberto 
Firmino, his place never in doubt according to Klopp despite being arrested for 
drink driving on Christmas Eve, and an own goal from Giannelli Imbula joined 
Lallana and Sturridge in completing the recovery.

Hughes believed Stoke had the players and the gameplan to hurt Liverpool and 
so it proved when they took the lead from their first period of sustained 
possession and continued to trouble the home defence until Lallana levelled in 
the 35th minute. Peter Crouch, deployed as the obvious outlet against his 
former club, headed Mame Diouf’s cross goalwards and, though Ragnar Klavan 
hooked clear, Sadio Mané was slow to react to the second ball. Erik Pieters 
easily won their aerial challenge and delivered an inviting left-wing cross to 
the near post where Walters arrived ahead of Dejan Lovren. The Republic of 
Ireland international and boyhood Evertonian steered a glancing header beyond 
Simon Mignolet at his near post. Mignolet got a hand to the ball but was unable 
to redirect its path.

Joe Allen, who prospered in the first half on his return to Anfield, almost 
doubled the visitors’ lead when Jordan Henderson and Lovren failed to clear and 
he weaved his way into the area and shot low towards the far corner. Mignolet 
produced a vital save with his foot, the ball spun away from Crouch lurking in 
front of an open goal to Walters, and his follow‑up was blocked by Klavan. 
Stoke would have other opportunities on the counterattack but none as clear as 
that key moment. Liverpool heeded the warning and were ruthless once they awoke.

Henderson and Lallana went close, Firmino closer still when he reacted 
quickest to a Ryan Shawcross clearance and beat Grant with a low drive that 
Crouch cleared on the line. The pressure was growing but Stoke had defended 
well until a lapse by Glen Johnson offered Klopp’s team a way back in. Divock 
Origi produced a fine piece of centre-forward play to shield possession under 
pressure then spray the ball out to Mané on the right. His cross was met with a 
heavy touch by Lallana but, instead of clearing for a corner, Johnson 
miscontrolled and invited the England international – being watched by the 
national manager Gareth Southgate – to slip a clinical finish inside Grant’s 
near post from a tight angle. The pattern for the rest of the game had been set.

Firmino edged Liverpool ahead moments when he collected James Milner’s pass 
inside the area and found himself with time and space to pick his shot, despite 
Allen, Johnson and Shawcross being in proximity. The Brazil international 
produced a fine finish that kissed the inside of both posts before crossing the 
goal-line. Stoke complained to the referee Michael Oliver that play should have 
been halted with Mané lying injured in an offside position. He was neither 
interfering with play or responsible for the weak defending that continued 
unabated in the second half.

Any hopes Stoke harboured of a point were destroyed when Imbula started and 
finished a flowing move. Unfortunately for the visiting midfielder it came at 
the wrong end of the pitch. His poor header, under no pressure, gave possession 
to Henderson who unlocked the Stoke rearguard with a fine pass inside Johnson 
to Origi. The Belgium international crossed low and hard and the recovering 
Imbula converted into his own net under pressure from Mané.

Sturridge delivered Liverpool’s fourth 56 seconds after replacing Origi and 
thanks to a careless back-pass from Shawcross. The Stoke captain never looked 
up as he played Johnson’s square ball straight into the feet of Sturridge, who 
ended his uncharacteristic recent drought in the Premier League. The stage is 
set nicely for City’s visit on Saturday.
 