
Livingston reaped the reward for a wonderful debut season in the Premier 
League when they captured the last Uefa Cup place on offer to Scottish clubs 
with a convincing victory overDunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline>.

The West Lothian club, formed just six years ago, have made their way through 
the divisions in double-quick time and capped that meteoric rise by securing 
European football for next term in some style.

It was the stuff of fairytales and few would begrudge them that European spot 
apart, perhaps, from Hearts, who found themselves edged out of fourth place 
before taking on Celtic in a fixture that immediately became largely irrelevant.

Livingston's captain Stuart Lovell opened with a superb 33rd-minute header 
and, although the visitors equalised eight minutes later, they collapsed in the 
second half to set up wild scenes of celebration.

Two goals from the Canadian international David Xausa took Livingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> clear before Francisco Quino 
calmed any remaining nerves with a fourth goal seven minutes from time.

Livingston's chairman Dominic Keane admitted: "This has been a great story. I 
think we have made a great contribution to the Premier League and been a credit 
to the Scottish game."

Thir manager Jim Leishman said: "This beats everything in a long career for 
me. Everyone has played a part and there have been a few tears. We'll savour 
the moment and then move on. We can't stop with this success."

It was a good weekend for Livingston but not for Scottish football in general. 

Events at Ayr United, where visiting Airdrie fans broke a crossbar and caused 
the abandonment of the First Division fixture, came as the game north of the 
border stumbles from one crisis to another.

Hard on the heels of talk of 10 clubs breaking away from the Premier League 
and the persistent rumours of the Old Firm moving to England, the last thing 
needed was crowd trouble. Airdrie fans, though, have been stoking the fires of 
resentment against Ayr's owner Bill Barr for some time because they blame him 
for the fact that they have been in interim administration for 18 months.

Barr, whose company built Airdrie's New Broomfield ground, is believed to be 
owed close to £500,000 for work done but the inability of all parties to reach 
a compromise has led to the Diamonds facing the possibility of full liquidation 
tomorrow unless a late deal can be struck with a consortium interested in 
taking over.

The Scottish FA will now investigate the pitch invasion and subsequent 
vandalism that forced the abandonment.

The minimum penalty Airdrie face is a 3-0 defeat - although relegation has 
been mooted by the Ayr MSP Phil Gallie, who declared: "I would condemn this 
sort of behaviour and if the SFA don't put Airdrie out of the league altogether 
they could demote them to the Third Division."

But Gallie's words could prove irrelevant if no rescue package is found to 
save Airdrie this week.

 Man of the match:  David Xausa (Livingston) 

· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, as sharp or 
as stupid as you like, to thefootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>.
 