
Sam Allardyce confirmed that Loïc Rémy will make his long-awaited debut for 
Crystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> on 
Saturday, four months after joining on loan from Chelsea.

The French striker, who turned 30 this week, has so far been unable to help 
Palace as they slipped to within in place of the relegation zone in the Premier 
League, having suffered a thigh injury shortly after arriving from Stamford 
Bridge. But he passed the first stage of his comeback by playing for Palace’s 
under-23 side in a match behind closed doors this week and Allardyce plans to 
start him alongside Fraizer Campbell in the FA Cup tie atBolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers>.

“Hopefully he will stay fit,” Allardyce said. “Of course he’ll be a little bit 
rusty, to say the least, as it’s his first competitive game for a long time. 
Hopefully he’ll work well with Fraizer Campbell in a good partnership. He won’t 
play all of the match because it’s like pre-season for him. He says he’s OK and 
ready to go but obviously he’s lacking match practice. If he can hit the form 
and the heights that he has hit in the Premier League before, particularly in 
terms of the goals and the use of his pace, then he can hopefully lift our 
team.”

Crystal Palace fans launch petition to reinstate stadium announcer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/crystal-palace-stadium-announcer-petition>
Rémy’s return is particularly timely as Palace are depleted by a slew of other 
injuries on top of the departures of Wilfried Zaha and Bakary Sako to the 
Africa Cup of Nations. They will travel to Bolton without the strikers 
Christian Benteke and Connor Wickham, while Jason Puncheon, James McArthur and 
Scott Dann are also out.

With the goalkeepers Steve Mandanda and Wayne Hennessey also injured, the 
37-year-old Julián Speroni is likely to play for the first time this season and 
thereby set a record for the number of appearances by a goalkeeper for Palace. 
Speroni has made 388 appearances in all competitions for the club, the same 
number as John Jackson, who kept goal for Palace between 1964 and 1973.
 