
I am sure that there are residents of Zhigansk who regard the place with 
affection and would not dream of living anywhere else. For my part, I would be 
happy never to hear the name again.

Zhigansk was wrongly positioned as being in Ukraine by Araucaria in his March 
Genius puzzle, possibly because Zhitomir, which begins with the same three 
letters, is somewhere near Kiev. And I placed it wrongly again in my April 
column because of a typo - Serbia for Siberia. But I hope that we have at last 
located it accurately. Zhigansk is up there in the Arctic Circle on the river 
Lena, way north of the fleshpots of Yakutsk. For the record, as the Arctic tern 
flies, it is just under 500 statute miles closer to Kiev than to London.

--------------------

Apart from that it was an "alternative" spelling that caused the most fuss 
last month. A clue by Rufus ("It sounds a beastly form of warfare (8)") 
required the spelling GUERILLA for the answer to fit. Thick and fast came the 
protests that we should know better. The word, they said, is GUERRILLA, being a 
diminutive of the Spanish word for war (guerra). In fact, both spellings are 
sanctioned by all the main dictionaries. But this leads to an interesting 
question. Why should there be two correct spellings, one with the double and 
one with the single R? Neither Chambers nor Collins is helpful here. They both 
give the Spanish "guerra" as the root, simply adding guerilla (with one R) as 
an alternative spelling.

Even the full OED takes the same line, though it adds the note: cf. F. 
guérilla. So could it be that the two different spellings came into English by 
two different routes: one Spanish and the other French? Certainly, the French 
word for a guerrilla is guérilla with one R, though why this should be, when 
the French for war (guerre) also has two Rs, is not obvious. But it is possible 
that Brits only started to use the word frequently as a result of 
guerrilla/guerilla activities during the peninsular war of 1808 to 1814 and 
that we took one spelling from the Spanish side and the other from the French. 
But this is pure amateur speculation. Does anyone have a more professional 
point of view?

---------------------

Offence was also taken by animal rights activists to a clue in April 9's 
Saturday prize puzzle by Araucaria, where "Rodent and bird without enclosure 
(page 1 version) (6,3)" led to GUINEA PIG. This, for example, came from 
Chalon-sur-Saône: "I am sure that the majority of solvers will have been aware 
of the standard reference on this point, the article 'Is the guinea-pig a 
rodent?' by Graur and Hide in the February 13 1992 issue of the journal Nature, 
which established once and for all that the genus Histicomorpha should be 
elevated in taxonomical rank and regarded as a separate mammalian order 
distinct from the Rodentia." The hurt to guinea pigs is compounded by the fact 
that both Collins and Chambers define them as a South American rodent, the 
cavy, even in their post-1992 editions.

To continue the disturbing notion that dictionaries can be wrong, a 
correspondent took issue with what was said last month about the correct 
spelling of the little two-edged Scottish dagger. "The Gaelic spelling is not 
'sgian dhu' but 'sgian dubh'. (The 'bh' is silent here in the Gaelic 
orthography.) ... Sadly, even the OED doesn't list 'sgian dubh' as an option, 
though it does at least get the spelling right in the etymology." So now you 
know.

---------------------

I have had one desperate cry for help this month from an addict in rural 
Ireland and would appreciate your views on what we should do. She writes: 
"Please disable the cheat button on the current day, or at least make it active 
only after 7pm or somehow harder to access. Sometimes it is just too tempting 
to use it." Technically, there is not a problem with helping her as she asks. 
But my fear is that she would then simply resort to ringing the helpline from 
Ireland at huge expense. Tough love is what is usually required in such cases, 
but something tells me that addicts need to find control from within 
themselves, if any cure is to be lasting.

· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 