
Four London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> theatres – the Duchess, 
the Vaudeville, the Garrick, the Adelphi – will be demolished if a 
redevelopment plan for Covent Garden is approved by the Secretary for the 
Environment, Mr Peter Walker.

The Greater London Council, who have produced the plan, would insist that four 
new theatres were built to replace those demolished. But with the cost of 
building a London theatre now at £800 per seat, the new theatres would become 
“white elephants.” Their rents would be too exorbitant for any theatre company 
to contemplate.


A fifth theatre building, the Lyceum, would also be demolished, but it is no 
longer used as a theatre.


The GLC said yesterday that the Garrick, the Lyceum, and the Duchess would be 
affected by the Covent Garden proposals, and the other two would be affected by 
“private developments.”


There is the obvious likelihood that a property speculator could build one of 
the new theatres and then convert it into a cinema. This has happened to the 
Prince Charles and Royalty theatres. Both began as theatres in the past six 
years and were converted to cinemas within three years of their opening. The 
GLC spokesman admitted that the council was powerless to prevent this.


Not listed
The Duchess and the Lyceum will come down in the first phase of the Covent 
Garden development in 1974-8, said the GLC. None of the theatres is a listed 
building.

Miss V. Hudson said yesterday for Peter Saunders, who owns the Vaudeville 
Theatre: “I really don’t know what’s going to happen. But we spent £100,000 in 
1969 redecorating, reseating, and reequipping the whole theatre, back and front 
stage.”


The economics of theatre building in London make the GLC’s proposals to build 
new theatres implausible and financially disastrous. A 500-seat theatre would 
cost a minimum of £400,000.


Before an incoming management can recoup any money it must pay overheads of at 
least £900 per week, and rates of £120 per week. Insurance costs at least £180 
per week, so a new theatre would have to charge £1,100 a week to a theatrical 
management. The rate at the moment is £450. The difference is so vast that any 
company, even with Arts Council or GLC subsidy, would have to refuse the offer.


If, say, the Garrick theatre was razed to the ground and rebuilt, experts 
calculate that the rental of £1620 per week would rise to £2,300 per week. The 
new Winter Garden theatre in London, which opens soon, is expected to be an 
expensive proposition for any management to contemplate.


On these grounds, some theatre owners believe the GLC cannot go ahead with its 
plans, simply because it shows no knowledge of theatre economics.


The GLC redevelopment plans for Covent Garden 
<http://www.coventgardenmemories.org.uk/page_id__37.aspx> were abandoned in 
1973, after a campaign by theCovent Garden Community Association 
<http://www.coventgarden.org.uk/about/about-the-cgca/>.
 