
English spelling is a many-splendoured thing, unlike (say) French or Spanish, 
where official bodies, the Académie Française and the Real Académia Española, 
exist to stamp out heresy. The French Academy was established by Cardinal 
Richelieu in 1635, fell foul of the French Revolution and was then 
re-established by the Emperor Napoleon in 1805. Its 40 members for life (the 
Immortals) are France's official authority on French usage, spelling and 
grammar. General de Gaulle saw the French Academy as the cornerstone of what he 
called 'the world-wide struggle for the French language'.

The Spanish Academy is even more imperialist in its linguistic aims. Founded 
in 1713 and at once given royal approval and the state's active support by 
Philip V, its purpose is to preserve the purity of the Castilian language, not 
only in Spain but in the rest of the hispanophone world. It does this via the 
21-strong Association of Spanish Language Academies. Cuba's national academy 
has been a member of this association since 1926 and, whatever their slight 
political differences may have been, it never occurred to General Franco to 
expel Fidel's regime from it. Its most recent new member is the United States; 
the Académia Norteamericana de la Lengua Española joined in 1973.

By contrast, British and American lexicography has always been a private 
sector initiative (Dr Johnson, Webster, the Oxford University Press etc) and, 
as a result, its impact has been much less prescriptive, which is nice for our 
crossword world. So I was able to fend off a complaint that the spelling of a 
solution in Quick crossword No 13,305 (31 December) – SKEAN-DHU for 'Dagger 
worn as part of Highland dress' – should have been SGIAN DUBH by pointing out 
that my dictionaries said it could be either. Similarly, I was able to cope 
when it was asserted (Quick No 13,312, 8 January) that the spelling of 
SOUBRIQUET for 'Nickname' was wrong and should have been SOBRIQUET. (Be warned, 
I am also equipped to parry almost any complaint about the spelling of UKULELE.)

However, I was getting ready to apologise and offer a correction when Francis 
Wheen, a regular Guardian solver, complained about the solution to 24 across in 
Cryptic No 25,856 (28 January by Rufus), 'Sacrifice make in the interest of 
self-esteem (6)' being FOREGO [FOR/EGO], when we all know that the correct 
spelling should be FORGO.

But then, very sportingly, Francis sent me another message to say that, to his 
astonishment, the ever-reliable Chambers authorises both spellings. (So, I am 
relieved to report, do Oxford, Collins and all the other main dictionaries.) So 
that bullet, at least, whistled safely past.
_____

Araucaria has been quite overwhelmed by the messages that have flooded in to 
him since the publication of his puzzle about his cancer. He has asked me to 
include the following general response here:

Thank you very much, everyone who sent me so many kind messages of support 
that I can't answer them all personally. I am feeling so well at the moment 
that I expect to be setting you puzzles for a long time yet. Araucaria.

Two related things. First, Steve Caplin took a photo last week of Araucaria, 
working at his desk with the Scrabble tiles he uses for composing anagrams in 
front of him. If you would like to see it,Steve has uploaded it to Wikipedia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:John_Galbraith_Graham.jpg>.

Second, Araucaria's long anagram that turned 'While shepherds watched their 
flocks by night ...' into 'Hark the herald angels sing ...' has passed into 
legend but, like so much that is legend, it is difficult to nail down when it 
appeared. Araucaria has never kept a copy of any of his puzzles. It was before 
my time as editor and it was earlier than the start of our digital crossword 
archive. If anyone has a clue as to when it appeared, I should be very grateful 
to know.
_____

The gremlins struck again last month, resulting in the January puzzle (No 115 
set by Puck) uploading late on the first Monday. As a result the first correct 
entry (from Tony) was not in until 10:42, but there were still 28 correct 
entries on the first day and 317 by the deadline. I think/pray that there has 
not been any similar problem with this month's puzzle by Qaos.

Congratulations to Claire Swinson who is January's winner.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. 

If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>.

For Observer crosswords please crossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 