
Plenty has changed for Fleetwood Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town> since they last played 
Wrexham. The Conference season was only five games old when they travelled to 
north Wales full of optimism after losing in the play-off semi-finals to AFC 
Wimbledon last year, only to be comprehensively beaten 2-0 by the league 
leaders. Promotion looked a long way off then. The defeat, their second in 
their first six games, left them in 11th place and eight points behind Wrexham. 
Yet since that afternoon in late August, Fleetwood have lost just once more in 
the league and a win over Wrexham on Tuesday night would clinch the title with 
three games to spare. More importantly, it would ensure promotion to the 
Football League for the first time in their turbulent history.

This, after all, is Fleetwood's third incarnation as a football club – a 
phoenix from the ashes not once, but twice. Formed in 1908 as Fleetwood FC, 
they folded in 1976 because of financial difficulties, reformed a year later as 
Fleetwood Town FC, before disappearing again in 1996. They re-emerged a year 
later, this time as Fleetwood Wanderers, and found themselves in Division One 
of the North West Counties Football League, the 10th tier of English football. 
Forget the Football League, even the Conference was a mere pipe dream at that 
point.

"The game against Wrexham is the culmination of a season's work and many years 
of building before that," says Derick Thomas, the editor of theCod Army website 
<http://thecodarmy.co.uk/index.php?>. "The ground closed down when the club 
folded in 1996, the grass was waist-high, the ground was vandalised and it took 
a great deal of work to get it up and running by the club president Jim 
Betmead." Thomas has supported the club through thin and thinner, and admits he 
never imagined they would ever be where they are now.

Their fortunes turned when Andy Pilley, a local businessman, became their 
chairman in 2003. Pilley sponsors the club through his BES-licensed company, 
provides financial backing and has recently paid £4.5m for a new stand at the 
Highbury Stadium (no connection with Arsenal; a nearby street is called 
Highbury Avenue). Two years ago, Pilley ensured the club attained full-time 
professional status, but the chairman has been quick to stress they are not 
living beyond their means. Indeed one of his most important decisions was to 
appoint the 39-year-old Micky Mellon, formerly a youth coach at Burnley, as 
manager in 2008. This will be Mellon's third promotion.

Big spenders are not always popular in non-league football – witness the 
reaction to Crawley Town 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2011/apr/09/crawley-town-football-league-finances>
 – though Fleetwood have not broken the bank when it comes to transfers and the 
club has been run on a sound financial footing, with an emphasis on signing the 
right player instead of the right name. Improvement and the future is key. 
There is no desire to return to the bad old days, especially as Pilley has 
essentially built the club up from nothing.

"The chairman has built the team on the pitch, but he's also built the 
infrastructure to meet Football League standards by using his business know-how 
and his own private investment," says Thomas. "He knows you can't do anything 
overnight. It's been a long slow process, building the stadium up from that 
vandalised mess in the late 1990s. We've invested wisely on the pitch and have 
not always paid the money like Crawley did last season. That's certainly not 
the case."

Now they are comfortable enough to be able to resist interest from 
Championship clubs in their highly coveted striker Jamie Vardy during the 
January transfer window. He was the subject of a £1m bid, but money can't score 
goals. The 25-year-old Vardy, who arrived from FC Halifax after the season had 
started, has scored 32 in 36 games in all competitions; given his clinical 
touch, it is no wonder Fleetwood have scored 99 goals in the league this 
season. How fitting that a 100th goal against Wrexham could be the one that 
seals promotion.

They already have 101 points, 11 ahead of Wrexham in second place, and will 
finish with 113 if they win their four remaining games. That may sound 
fanciful, but since losing 4-1 at home to Newport County on 11 October, 
Fleetwood have been unbeaten for 27 games in the league. The relentlessness has 
been staggering – of those 27 games, 23 have been won. Those in search of a 
thrill could do worse than watching Fleetwood, whose fluid passing football, 
with the full-backs encouraged by Mellon to maraud forward like Lancastrian 
versions of Cafu and Roberto Carlos, has earned them many admirers. Arsenal 
themselves would not be averse to playing on this Highbury pitch;the 
groundsman, Dale Frith, won an FA award 
<http://www.thefa.com/GetIntoFootball/Facilities/NewsAndFeatures/2011/groundsman-of-the-year-2011.aspx>
 for his sterling work last season. "It's just like a carpet," says Thomas. "We 
play good football that you'd expect to see at a higher level."

Just ask Southport and Ebbsfleet United, who were both hit for six. Or 
Kidderminster, beaten 5-2 despite Vardy being sent off after 28 minutes. 
Overall Fleetwood have scored four goals or more on 11 separate occasions. The 
win over Kidderminster also demonstrated that they are far from solely reliant 
on Vardy. The Brazilian striker Magno Vieira has made a useful contribution 
with nine goals, while Andrew Mangan, who was signed from Wrexham last summer, 
has helped his new side above his former employers with 19 goals. Then there is 
Richard Brodie, whose solo winner at York City on Saturday edged Fleetwood 
closer to the promised land. No one in the division can match their attack; 
Mansfield, in third place, are the second highest scorers with 77 goals.

The expansive style favoured by Mellon has inevitably meant there have been 
times when they have been too open at the back and they have conceded 41 goals; 
Wrexham have let in 27. Not that it has mattered, considering Fleetwood's goal 
difference of +58 is easily the best in the division. In any case, the majority 
were let in at the start of the season, which was mainly down to a crippling 
injury crisis, and the goalkeeper Scott Davies has excelled, keeping 14 clean 
sheets. Shaun Beeley and Peter Cavanagh have impressed in defence, and then 
there is the club's longest-serving player, the midfielder Nathan Pond. He has 
been at Fleetwood since 2004, and the 27-year-old's year-on-year improvement 
has epitomised the club's incredible journey.

Fleetwood are unlikely to be overawed next season, confidence stemming from 
composed performances against Football League opposition in the FA Cup that 
belied their non-league status. In the second round, they won 2-0 in a replay 
at League One's Yeovil Town. Naturally Vardy scored, and then did so again when 
their neighbours, Blackpool, came to town in the third round. Fleetwood were 
given a lesson in finishing by strong Championship opposition, yet Blackpool's 
manager Ian Holloway was impressed with what he had seen after a deceptively 
hard-fought 5-1 win. "That was as tough a game as we've had in months," he 
said. "I wish Fleetwood all the best. I've no doubt they will be in the league 
soon. If there are better teams in their division I would be amazed." He wasn't 
wrong.
 