
To give way to Schadenfreude is unworthy and to compare theguardian.com's 
crosswords with London Heathrow's Terminal 5 is absurd.

But I am willing to admit privately to taking some solace from BAA's recent 
discomfort when facing the barrage of abuse last month because our relaunched 
website is still beset by glitches: such as the failure of the special 
instructions to appear with Araucaria's Easter weekend offering until the bank 
holiday was over; or causing you on March 28 to believe that you were looking 
for a 15-letter word as an anagram for "gins Gretchen has" when in fact the 
answer was (5,3,7). All I can say is that we are trying our hardest, even if 
(as I used to tell my children when they were growing up) that is not hard 
enough.

On a detail, though, for those who complained that, if the solution to 22 down 
in Arachne's March Genius was supposed to be CARDIE, the word does not exist, I 
would with respect point out that Chambers gives it alongside CARDI and CARDY 
and Collins likewise, though only with CARDY.

_____

Looking to the future, I am most grateful to all who made suggestions for 
further improvement. The top four on your collective wish list were: making the 
black squares in the grids lighter so as to reduce the profits of ink cartridge 
manufacturers; making available a PDF version of all puzzles for downloading, 
as is already occasionally done for AZEDs; facility for submitting all prize 
entries on line and not just the Genius puzzles; setting the clues in a larger 
type size.

I shall now brandish this list in front of the powers that be. On the last 
point, though, there is a relatively simple solution already to hand. You can 
highlight what you want in the print version and tell your printer to fit that 
to a page and print it. Or, if that does not work, you can "copy and paste" 
what you want to a new Word document, highlight the clues there and put them 
into any type size that takes your fancy.

_____

Last month, though it had nothing to do with crosswords, I mentioned the 
liberation of Stanley in the Falkland Islands in June 1982 and used the word 
"Argentinian". Barbara took up the cudgels on behalf of a friend because he 
always asserts vehemently that: a) he is an Argentine and not an Argentinian; 
b) Argentinian is a word make up by ignorant British tabloids during the 
Falklands/Malvinas conflict because they did not know better and were too lazy 
to check; c) others, who should know better, have ignorantly since followed 
suit.

All I could say in response to Ballistic of Buenos Aires was that the 
dictionaries disagree with him. Chambers has Argentine or Argentinian as "a 
native or citizen of Argentina (also Argentino)". Collins also has Argentian, 
though only as an adjective. thefreedictionary.com has it as both a noun and an 
adjective. Most importantly, the great OED not only has the word both as a noun 
and an adjective, but has found it being thus used as early as 1918.

I never like to give gratuitous offence and there are, of course, many words 
once in common use that we now consider derogatory and have been put on the 
banned list. But this appears to be a move in the opposite direction: a word 
that causes great distress to nice people that for over 90 years has come to be 
more and more generally used.

Can anyone throw light on this paradox and should I exclude it from Guardian 
crosswords?
 