
Inevitably, most of the crossword letters and messages that come to me are 
complaints, usually highly indignant, sometimes pained. This month has seen 
several about foreign languages being allowed to creep into the clues.

 Half a century ago, I think that a Guardian crossword compiler would have 
felt safe in assuming that small Latin references were acceptable. Though, even 
then, he or she would have been less comfortable using Greek ones.

 Today, given the way British secondary and higher education has gone since, 
it would obviously be asking for trouble to write a clue demanding knowledge of 
Latin or Greek. There are, of course, Latin words and phrases that have passed 
into English, which are, therefore, acceptable at least pro tem, though they 
should obviously not be used ad lib.

 But I think that, even if a compiler were moved for any reason to declare his 
or her love for a table, the blue pencil would go straight through amo mensam. 
A clue I once saw, based on the idea that virgo intacta was a Latin pin-up 
girl, would also clearly now be out. (I think, though, that the classic clue "I 
am Latin in total (3) = sum" would still be allowed.) Greek, however, is today 
a non-starter, even though Guardian cryptic crosswords are clearly not intended 
for the hoi polloi.

 If changes in standard school curriculums (or curricula) explain why Latin 
and Greek have largely gone from crosswords, the same does not seem to be the 
case for classical mythology. The comings and goings of quite minor Greek and 
Roman deities still feature cryptically long after most Guardian readers can 
ever have been taught about them at school. No one seems to get upset, which is 
a bit odd.

 Dead languages are one thing, but what of living ones? Indignant of Ipswich 
is in no doubt on the question. She writes: "English crosswords should be in 
English. Why should I be expected to speak French, or worse still German, in 
order to do a Guardian crossword? It is typical Guardian elitism to assume 
otherwise."

 I am not with Indignant of Ipswich on this one. Even she, I think, would 
accept that a lot of little bits of French, German, Spanish, and Italian have 
gone into the accepted shorthand of our game.

 No one objects "to the French" producing "au" (or "a la" or "aux", for that 
matter). Der, Die, Das, El, Il, M, Mme, Mlle, signoras, senoritas, and 
Hausfraus (or should that be Hausfrauen?) flit by all the time. No one could 
object to "The French gentleman's drink = lemsip". And solvers seem ready to 
accept that they are expected to count up to 10 (and, perhaps, even a bit 
beyond) at least in French and German.

 Indignant of Ipswich would, of course, reply that this was not what she was 
objecting to. All these examples, she would say, are of the tiny bits of the 
main European languages that are common knowledge even to those who cannot 
speak or read a sentence in them. Her objection is to the assumption that you 
should know what the French, German, Spanish or Italian is for any old word 
that the compiler wants to work into a clue.

 There does not seem to be any easy rule of thumb on this. On the one hand, it 
seems intolerably insular in 2004 to deny for crossword purposes the existence 
of all other languages. On the other, while it seems reasonable to expect a 
Guardian reader to know, for example, the French for black and white, or good 
and bad (and possibly even the German), why does it not seem reasonable for 
them to know what they are in Spanish? Answers on a postcard please.

 All of this ignores a problem that Indignant of Ipswich sidesteps entirely. 
In her view, we should stick to English, but does she just mean English 
English? What about Scottish, Welsh, and Irish English, to say nothing of 
regional English and the often different versions spoken further afield? Should 
we let in Shakespearian and Spenserian English? But, if we do, why should poor 
old Chaucer be left out in the cold?

 This is one reason why Chambers is so much the crossword compiler's 
dictionary of choice. It includes (and, therefore, validates the use of) so 
many convenient words that do not reach other single volume dictionaries. Ba 
(ball in Scots), bach (affectionate address in Welsh), bagarre (scuffle in 
French), ballant (ballad in Scots), boreen (lane in Irish) and bothy (rough 
shelter in Scots) are all words that it is unco (unusual in Scots) to find 
elsewhere, but which are all there in Chambers.

 Here, I do have a rule of thumb to fall back on. If a Scottish, Irish, 
Australian, South African, West Indian, or other non-English English word is in 
Chambers, it is in. Otherwise it is out.
 