
Louis van Gaal will deny a Football Association charge of bringing the game 
into dispute. The Manchester United manager said he was “not angry but 
disappointed”after being accused of implying bias on the part of the match 
referee, Chris Foy, after the goalless draw in the FA Cup at Cambridge United 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/2015/feb/04/louis-van-gaal-charged-fa-referee-cambridge>
.

Van Gaal pointed to how this was the first time he had ever faced such a count 
from a football governing body in a 24-year managerial career. “I am not angry. 
I am very disappointed,” he said. “I am now for nearly 30 years a trainer-coach 
or manager and I have never been charged. And still, up to now, I don’t think 
that I said something wrong.

“I said already in our press conference the same phrases because I know in 
advance [of the tie] that everything is in favour of the underdog. You, as 
media, has confirmed that. It’s always like that.

“I said it in front of the game and I said it after the game, only in the 
meaning of the general feeling of everybody, everybody for the underdog. So I 
cannot imagine the FA has charged me. But, OK, it’s like that. Of course I will 
contest it. I never said anything wrong.”

Van Gaal also cited how he never makes comments generally about match 
officials. “You can confirm, as the media, that I never say anything about the 
referee, in all the matches I have played,” he said.

Following a sluggish display from his side against Cambridge in the 
fourth-round tie at the Abbey Stadium, Van Gaal said: “Every aspect of a match 
is against us. We have to come here, the pitch isn’t so good, that can 
influence that you can play in another style. The opponents always give a lot 
more than they normally give and defending is always easier than attacking. 
Then you have seen the referee - it’s always the same. Everywhere I have 
coached these games, and I have coached them with other clubs, it’s always the 
same.”

When it was put to the Dutchman that one of his predecessors, Sir Alex 
Ferguson, believed the FA could have an agenda against United due to the club’s 
status, Van Gaal said: “If I say that, then I am maybe rightly charged, so I 
don’t say it.”

The 63-year-old was speaking after a memorial service at Old Trafford to mark 
57 years since the Munich air disaster in which 23 people died, including eight 
players and three United staff.

Of the ceremony the Dutchman said: “I represent the club nowadays as a manager 
and my group of players. They were also a group of players who brought a lot of 
joy to the people at that time. I think they have played a big part of the 
history of this club. I think we have to remember that always. There were men 
who were singing and I was impressed. I want to read in front of you what they 
said because I was impressed because of the big influence they still have now.

“These were the last sentences: ‘You are the strength and inspiration for 
those who play your roles today’ – that’s me and the players – ‘We look for 
flair and pace and passion, to play the game United’s way.’ I was happy I was 
there because of this and also the impression the people gave to me.

“I think we have made the right decision to be there, out of respect for the 
players and Matt Busby, and what they left. I think it was impressive for all 
the people and also me. It was 57 years ago and still the people are coming and 
still we remember and that doesn’t happen so often, so I think it’s good.”

When asked if his United play with the description read out in the memorial – 
“flair and pace and passion, to play the game United’s way” – Van Gaal 
concurred. “It’s not a question playing with wingers or three or four 
defenders,” he said. “It is a playing style that is attractive.”
 