
Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> overcame the 
midweek virus that ran through the club to floor Aberdeen with a second-half 
fightback that deals a severe blow to Aberdeen’s hopes of catching Celtic.

Determined to keep on leaders Celtic’s tail, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/kilmarnock-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 Derek McInnes’ Dons pressed from the start.

After eight minutes Shay Logan’s cross was knocked out to the edge of the area 
where Ryan Jack fired a low drive through the packed box and force a good 
diving save from Connor Ripley. With the home goal under pressure Simon Church 
found time to swivel only to fire his shot wide of the post. The Dons 
goalkeeper, Scott Brown, was relieved in Motherwell’s first attack as Louis 
Moult’s cross picked out Marvin Johnson whose volley curled over the bar. 
Motherwell went closer again after 29 minutes when the width of post denied 
them a great opening goal. Law’s free-kick found Moult at the corner of the 
penalty area, but after a slick one-two with Scott McDonald, Motherwell’s 
leading scorer’s powerful drive cannoned back off Brown’s right-hand post.

The visitors opened the scoring from the penalty spot in controversial 
circumstances a minute before the break. Marvin Johnson was flattened by Andrew 
Considine in front of the dugouts and as play raced towards the home box Jonny 
Hayes was tripped from behind by Kieran Kennedy. There was no questioning the 
award or Kenny McLean’s confidence as he slammed the spot-kick past Connor 
Ripley to put the Dons ahead.

As the Motherwell manager, Mark McGhee, remonstrated with the fourth official, 
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> were denied a second 
goal when Ripley made a fabulous save to block Niall McGinn’s thumping 
close-range volley.

The first real opportunities of the second half arrived when the Dons twice 
went close to extending their lead in the 67th minute.

McLean’s sweet left-foot drive was rising into the corner of the net until 
Ripley leapt high to push the ball behind. Then from Hayes’s corner Simon 
Church watched his overhead effort bounce off the crossbar.

Aberdeen looked comfortable until the six-minute spell that turned the game. 
In the 73rd minute a cross from Lionel Ainsworth was returned into the six-yard 
box by Johnson and as the ball bounced around McDonald cutely nodded it over 
Brown and under the bar to level the match.

If that shocked the Dons, they were stunned two minutes later when Louis Moult 
chased Johnson’s ball into the box and got between Mark Reynolds and his 
advancing goalkeeper to delicately lob his finish into the empty net.

Worse was to follow when Barry Robson, on the field for two minutes as a 
substitute, was shown a red card for an elbow on Moult.

In an exciting finish Ripley saved from Hayes before Wes Fletcher allowed 
Brown to save his shot from six yards.
 