
Louis van Gaal has admitted he has yet to find the best balance for Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> but the manager 
is content with their results after losing only once in 18 matches.

On Wednesday night at Old Trafford Burnley were defeated 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/11/manchester-united-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
, though Van Gaal was unhappy with the first-half display in what was the 
latest unconvincing performance from United. Against Sean Dyche’s team Van Gaal 
played a 4-1-3-2 and at other times the Dutchman has fielded a 3-5-2, a 4-4-2, 
4-2-2-2 and 4-1-4-1.

Asked if he is any closer to discovering the ideal balance, Van Gaal said: 
“No, I don’t think so. And that is also the difficulty of the system. I have 
played now already five or six systems and I am looking still for the balance. 
But this system [4-1-3-2] is more attractive and I can play with more attacking 
players. That’s the reason I am doing that. In spite of the fact that we are 
looking for the balance, our results are not bad and our defensive organisation 
is not bad; we also score a lot of goals. So, I cannot say that I am very 
disappointed about that.”

Van Gaal brushed off criticism from Paul Scholes, who claimed the side’s 
football had been “miserable” at times against Burnley. “I don’t worry about 
it. It’s not so interesting, I think, because he is one of the fans, I hope, 
and he can criticise,” the Dutchman said of the former United midfielder. “Fans 
can criticise, and that’s not a problem.

“That’s what I have to say about that. I am used to it and I think all the 
players are used to it because they are not first-time professional football 
players. Maybe some players are affected, but normally most of the time it does 
not affect me or the players.”

Van Gaal, though, did admit how the side performs is vital. “The style of play 
is always very important. The club has a lot of fans, so you have to play for 
them,” he said. “I was not down about the second half [against Burnley], I have 
given my opinion and am always honest. When it is bad, it is bad and when it is 
good, it is good. Next match we can show that we are still in our process and 
positive.”

United are at Preston North End on Monday evening for an FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> fifth-round tie. Robin van Persie 
has an unspecified problem and the availability of Phil Jones and Daley Blind, 
who suffered a leg injury and a knock to the head respectively against Burnley, 
is also in the balance.

“Phil Jones shall be difficult to play on Monday. Daley Blind, I don’t know, 
we have to wait and see how he recovers. Robin van Persie also has something, 
so now I have given the players a day off. Only the injured players have 
visited our centre, but the doctor has not called me yet so I cannot say 
anything.”

Van Gaal added that Michael Carrick, who is out with a calf problem, has 
suffered a minor setback in his recovery so the vice-captain may not be able to 
return until next month.

Preston are the third team in three rounds from the lower divisions United 
will face in the Cup. After playing Yeovil Town andCambridge United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cambridge-united> previously, Van Gaal is 
beginning to understand the romance related to the completion.

“It is fantastic, I have already described, we have to play for the third time 
a lower team,” he said. “You know the world is against you, the environment is 
against you because everyone is with the underdog, you have confirmed it but 
you are conscious to do that so it is more difficult to accept but it’s like 
that. But the chance that you can survive is higher because you are playing 
against lower qualities. But you have to beat the team with better motivation 
in other circumstances and in the atmosphere where everyone is against you.”
 