
The battle for fourth place reaches a climax on Sunday but Louis van Gaal is 
apparently in relaxed mood. The Dutchman was on Friday talking with certainty 
about being atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> next season and of 
beating Bayern Munich, Real Madrid and Barcelona in the summer market.

More realistically, his job security may hinge on his team overhauling 
Manchester City on the Premier League’s final day to claim a Champions League 
berth, and that has the look of an uphill task: United must win at home to 
Bournemouth and hopeManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> lose at Swansea.

With the title secured by Leicester City and the relegation places settled, 
the most significant top-flight question to be answered involves Manchester’s 
two biggest clubs battling over one prestigious and lucrative slot. A Champions 
League place would also help attract the best players. This weekRenato Sanches 
joined Bayern Munich from Benfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/bayern-munich-sign-benfica-renato-sanches-manchester-united>
 afterUnited considered themselves to be in pole position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/25/manchester-united-deal-renato-sanches-benfica>
 to sign the 18-year-old midfielder.

Not that Van Gaal believes United are behind Bayern, Real and Barça when elite 
footballers choose where to move. “I have read that but it is not always the 
truth,” he said. “It is a question of the feeling of the player and that shall 
always be like that. In your eyes it’s hard to attract players of a certain 
level but I can assure you that it is not like that, always. Sometimes it is 
happening like that but I cannot say the things how they are because then I 
interfere with the transfer policy of our club.

“But it is not like you think. It is three parties – us, the club, the player 
himself and then it is not always the player. The player wants to come, in 
general. Of course there are others who would prefer Real Madrid but there are 
players of Real Madrid who want to leave there or Barcelona or Paris 
Saint-Germain it depends on a lot of circumstances.”

Regarding Sanches, Van Gaal said: “There are three parties [involved] and I 
only have one party under control and not three parties.”

Van Gaal, who could still end the season with a trophy should his side beat 
Crystal Palace in the FA Cup final a week on Saturday, signalled he expects to 
be in place next year when assessing his performance as manager. “I am always 
evaluating and always adapting to the situation where we stand,” he said. “It’s 
always the same: you have to evaluate yourself but also your staff and players, 
and then with that kind of people you have to communicate and listen to each 
other and that I’m doing. That shall be done also next season.

“And I have said I shall be here [then] – that is my opinion – so the board 
has to decide if it is like that. That is a different way of looking to the 
situation.”

Despite Leicester’s triumph, which occurred with vastly less finance than 
United have to invest, Van Gaal said expectations that United could claim a 
21st crown this season were overblown.

“Of course you can say Manchester United need to be champions. Yes, I know the 
expectations are like that but I don’t think that is realistic. We are still in 
the race [for fourth]. You cannot say we are not. We can win the FA Cup. How 
many are still in the race? How many? It’s not so much. Of course when we don’t 
qualify ourselves we don’t reach our aim. That is true because our aim was to 
qualify but we are in the final of the FA Cup and we are in the race in the 
last match mathematically – we can qualify ourselves still. How many teams can 
say that? Not many.”

If Van Gaal remains in place he will enter the final year of his contract, but 
there is no concern that he will become a lame duck in the eyes of his players. 
“I have [led them] already now in very difficult circumstances – I had 14 
injuries and you have sacked me for five, six, seven months,” he said, before 
pointing to how as Holland coach he told his squad before the 2014 World Cup 
that he would leave after the tournament and they finished third. “Also, I have 
said that to the [Dutch] federation in October. I can motivate players, that is 
my ability as a manager.”

While Van Gaal’s fate is unclear, Pellegrini will certainly be leaving City at 
the season’s end. He said he had not watchedUnited’s midweek defeat at West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/west-ham-manchester-united-premier-league-report-upton-park>
, where a win for the visitors would have taken them above his team.

That helping hand from Slaven Bilic’s side means City’s fate remains in their 
own hands and Pellegrini said there would be no urgency at Swansea to keep tabs 
on events at Old Trafford.

“We don’t need to know the other scores, so we won’t be thinking about 
anything more,” he said. “That’s why it’s important that you depend only on 
what you can do. We need to play well and focus on that game, nothing more. 
When you are depending on what other teams do, it is very difficult to focus on 
your game. You can make your best efforts but it doesn’t depend on what you do 
so that is very important in the mind of players.”

Pellegrini makes way for Bayern Munich’s Pep Guardiola after Sunday. “There is 
no bitterness,” he said.
 