
Brendan Rodgers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brendan-rodgers>, the 
Liverpool manager, was forced into another defence of Luis Suárez after the 
striker's controversial goal put Liverpool into the FA Cup fourth round at the 
expense of Mansfield Town from the Blue Square Bet Premier.

Suárez's 19th goal of the season, assisted by a clear handball, prompted the 
Mansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> chief executive, 
Carolyn Radford, to say it felt like a replay had been "stolen" from her club. 
Rodgers, though, defended his player. "It's not his job to own up," said the 
Liverpool manager.

Suárez was subjected to cries of "cheat" from the home crowd and the 
goalkeeper, Alan Marriott, said the offence was so obvious that some of the 
other Liverpool players had sympathised. "When you seeLuis Suárez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luis-suarez> laughing as he kicks the 
ball across the line … he knows himself what happened. Even Stewart Downing 
said to us that he couldn't believe professional officials missed that. When it 
turns out to be the decisive goal, it's a sickener for everyone."

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> had been leading 
1-0 when Suárez ran into the penalty area in the 59th minute and his effort 
ricocheted back to him off Marriott. The Uruguayan put out his right hand to 
pat down the ball, leaving himself an open goal.

"I don't want to be too hard to him because he's a fantastic player and it was 
instinctive but look at the reaction of all the other players," Paul Cox, the 
Mansfield manager, said.

"Ours all ran to the referee shouting handball while Suárez blasts the ball 
into the net in a way that says: 'Yeah, I handled it and the ref's going to 
rule it out.' I'm a little bit gutted because I think we warranted something 
out of the second half." But Cox admitted he would have accepted a goal scored 
like that by one of his players: "I can't be two-faced on that."

Radford said: "I've absolutely enjoyed the day but I have to say it is a 
little bit like it's been stolen from us. Whether it's deliberate or not, I 
really do feel that it should be sorted out. We are a very good side and we put 
up a sterling effort. We are very proud of ourselves and it's very unfortunate 
that referees and officials can't pick up these things. It should be clarified 
and sorted out as soon as possible because obviously it wasn't in our favour 
and we should be going through to a replay at least."

Radford's anger was visible at the final whistle but Rodgers said his player 
should be absolved of any blame. "It's hit his hand but what do you want him to 
do in that situation?

"I don't think it's even a discussion [that he should have owned up] and I 
don't think people would ask the question if it was anyone else.

"The ball has popped up, it's hit him and, after that, it is up to the 
officials what they do. I said to the fourth official straight away: 'Was that 
handball?' and he said they had seen it but they decided that it was not 
deliberate.

"It's not his [Suárez's] fault. But he has a thick skin and I think people are 
starting to recognise the ability the boy has. He is a brilliant talent as you 
have seen him in that little cameo when he has scored one and might have scored 
a number more.

"He is a wonderful professional and we need to appreciate him while he is 
here. He loves it. He is a great family man and a great player."

Mansfield also felt aggrieved that three penalty claims in two second-half 
minutes were turned down, each involving the ball striking a Liverpool hand. 
First Jamie Carragher blocked a Matt Green shot with an arm, then the full-back 
Jack Robinson fell over on the edge of the box and inadvertently handled, 
before Joe Allen stopped a Green backheel on the line. "Referees and linesmen 
have the hardest job in football but you do want them to accept the blatant 
ones," said Cox.
 