
Luis Suárez <https://www.theguardian.com/football/luis-suarez> has confirmed 
he wants to leave Liverpool in the latest interview to express his 
disillusionment with life in England.

The Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> striker has 
given three interviews in the past two days to encourage interest from Real 
Madrid, the first to reveal he would find it hard to say no to the Spanish 
club, the second suggesting now is the time for a "change of environment" and 
the third finally confirming his intention to leave Anfield.

Liverpool have responded to Suárez's latest announcement, though they have 
been unable to rein in the 26-year-old while on international duty in his 
native Uruguay.

A club spokesperson said: "Luis Suárez is not for sale. Neither Luis or his 
representatives have communicated these feelings directly to Liverpool football 
club. The club remains supportive of Luis and expect him to honour his 
contract. We will not be making any further comment at this stage."

Suárez has repeatedly insisted his reason for wanting to leave Liverpool is 
not financial or the lure of Champions League football, but his treatment by 
the press in England.

Ahead of Uruguay's friendly against France in Montevideo on 4 June, Suárez 
told a press conference: "It is a difficult moment for me. My coach and my 
colleagues know that they [the media] didn't treat me well. Because of the 
paparazzi I could not go in my garden, I could not go to the supermarket. My 
reason for leaving is not the money. It's my family and image. I don't feel 
comfortable here any more."

Suárez was a target for photographers after he sunk his teeth into the Chelsea 
defender Branislav Ivanovic in April, an act that resulted in a 10-match ban 
from the Football Association and, he has now confirmed, prompted him to 
reconsider his future in English football. "The straw that broke the camel's 
back was my mistake," he said of his second suspension for biting an opponent. 
The first came at Ajax in November 2010.

The Liverpool striker insists he has not agreed a deal with Real, and his 
agent, Pere Guardiola, contradicted his client's utterances on Thursday by 
claiming Suárez remains happy at Anfield. Liverpool have feared the striker 
would push for a move despite the club's firm support over the Patrice Evra 
racism controversy and the Ivanovic issue. Those two incidents alone have 
landed Suárez with suspensions totalling 18 games but the Uruguayan claims it 
is the press who have sullied his image.

He said: "It's a good moment for a change of environment because of all I've 
been through in England, where I haven't been judged as a player but based on 
other things. I had a hard time, very hard, in the things that have been said 
are lies. One has limits and the family also suffers. They treated me bad and 
it would be understandable if one day I go to my club [and the media are 
waiting for him] but I cannot walk my baby – the paparazzi are always there.

"My family, my image – that's what matters to me most. The coach and some 
colleagues know that I suffered, I was treated badly and I did not feel 
comfortable and they know perfectly.

"It's nothing against Liverpool, on the contrary, I feel very comfortable at 
the club, but I have a daughter and I do not want [her] to hear bad things 
about her father. In England they talk about many things and in some ways I 
feel uncomfortable. I do not know when I'm going and I do not know if I'm 
staying. If I stay it is because it is a great club but also in turn I know 
that it is difficult because of the harassment I get from the press."

In his latest interview, however, Suárez confirms a decision to leave has been 
made.
 