
Lukas Podolski has agreed to join Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> for the start of the 2012-13 
season, leaving FC Köln with one year remaining on his contract.

The 26-year-old Germany international, who has been linked with a move to 
north London for several months and joins for an undisclosed fee, said: "The 
move to Arsenal provides a great opportunity for me to gain experience in 
international competitions at a top European club.

"I have made this decision not against FC Köln but for this great opportunity 
and the good of my own individual development. This was not an easy decision 
for me at all, as Köln, our fans and the city are something special for me. I 
will always carry FCKöln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> in my 
heart. We need to pool our strengths now and have to be fully focused on our 
survival in the Bundesliga."

The Arsenal manager, Arsène Wenger, expressed his satisfaction with the deal. 
"We are delighted to secure the deal for Lukas and see him as an important part 
of our future," he said. "He is a top-class player, a very good finisher and a 
proven performer at club and international level. He is a very strong player 
and will provide us with good attacking options."

Claus Horstmann, the German club's executive board chairman, said: "Lukas 
Podolski is a player of world class standing with a special relation to FC 
Köln's fans and to the city. We are proud of the development he has taken at 
the club within the last years. From his early days at our youth squads, via 
his first competitive match for our professional team, through to a highly 
renowned Germany international.

"That's why we deeply regret his step, which is not a decision against FC but 
for the good of his own career. FC Köln were prepared to extend Lukas 
Podolski's contract on the basis of a competitive offer. Nonetheless, this 
early transfer decision offers scope and planning security for the next season. 
We will jump at this opportunity to reinvest these transfer earnings back into 
our team's quality and into the promotion of our youth squads.

Podolski joined Köln at the age of 10 and scored 10 goals in 19 Bundesliga 
matches in his first season (2003-04). He has played 95 times and scored 43 
goals for Germany.
 