
The French have been here, en masse. The best Spanish players too. World-class 
Dutchmen? Of course. We've had the current Argentina captain (Javier 
Mascherano) and Italian geniuses (Gianfranco Zola et al). But the one thing the 
Premier League has lacked in its first 20 years is an influx of the best 
German players.

What is it with the German players? Why do they not like us? Is our money not 
good enough for them? Over the years, players such as Lothar Matthäus, Oliver 
Kahn, Matthias Sammer, Bastian Schweinsteiger, Miroslav Klose and Philipp Lahm 
have all shunned the Premier League to stay in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>, or moved to another 
country (and it surely has nothing to do with the German league being amazingly 
competitive, Glazer-less, entertaining and full of sold-out stadiums …).

There have been a few good German players here of course – Jürgen Klinsmann, 
Christian Ziege, Uwe Rösler, Didi Hamann, Michael Ballack, and Jens Lehmann 
spring to mind – but not enough, and not thevery best. This season, two of the 
success stories have come from the Bundesliga (Newcastle's Papiss Cissé and 
Swansea's Gylfi Sigurdsson), and next season two high-profile German players 
from the same league will be playing over here. First,Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> announced that they are signing 
Marko Marin from Werder Bremen and then, on Tuesday, Lukas Podolski confirmed 
that he is moving to Arsenal in the summer from Köln.

In Germany, the Poland-born "Poldi" is as high-profile as you get. He has, in 
may ways, been the darling of German football for a long time. He made his 
Bundesliga debut in 2003, yet he is still only 26 years old. At the 2006 World 
Cup – as a new, expansive Germany wooed the world with its free-flowing 
football – Podolski was one of the main heroes. He fought, he ran, he scored 
goals and, most importantly, he smiled a lot. A big, infectious smile.

A song was recorded in his honour <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OcHdHNbC3jM> 
and the future seemed bright. However, he struggled at Bayern Munich after 
moving there from Köln, in 2006, and his return to his adopted home-town club 
has not been as smooth as anticipated. At one stage he was overlooked for the 
captaincy in favour of a player who hardly spoke German. That was hard. The 
striker, however, has learned a lot from his setbacks and comes to the Emirates 
Stadium a more mature man. In an interview with the magazine 11Freunde last 
year, Podolski spoke about what happened in Bavaria. "I gained a lot of 
experience and won some medals, but I was given too little playing time," he 
said. "Instead, whenever I did get on the pitch for 10 minutes a big thing was 
made of it. And if I didn't manage a shot on goal, everyone immediately said: 
'Lukas has lost it.'

"If that carries on for a while then it is quite difficult for a footballer. 
Then you lose a little bit of enjoyment. When I see the current Bayern side I 
sometimes ask myself whether I couldn't have fitted in there, but that is in 
the past now."

Podolski is unlikely to make the same mistakes at Arsenal that he did at 
Bayern and he said this week that the Gunners "were the only club" he 
considered joining. He added: "I had other interesting offers but for me, it 
had to be a top club. When you look atArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, with a fantastic manager, good 
environment and never any bad press surrounding the club; they are playing 
attractive football and have a great stadium with great fans."

Oliver Bierhoff, now the Germany team manager, once said of the player: "If 
someone said to Lukas Podolski straight after an international game: 'Come on 
Poldi, let's go down to the park and play a bit of five-a-side,' then he would 
be there straight away. That's how much he loves playing football."

For Arsenal this has the potential to be a superb transfer. If Arsène Wenger 
can make Podolski feel wanted and at home in London then the 26-year-old has 
the potential to be everything Gunners fans would want from a new forward. Even 
if Robin van Persie leaves.

Marin, like Podolski, was born outside Germany but moved to the country when 
he was two years old. The Werder Bremen winger and playmaker was born in what 
was then Yugoslavia and grew up with Dejan Savicevic as his idol. It shows. The 
23-year-old is extremely skilful and has a wonderful eye for the game. He is 
every striker's dream team-mate and has recorded more than 10 assists in every 
season since his breakthrough at Borussia Mönchengladbach as an 18-year-old in 
2007-08. That is an extraordinarily consistent statistic (although this season, 
mainly because of injuries, he is likely to miss out as he currently stands on 
five). It sounds promising for Chelsea. Will Fernando Torres finally rediscover 
his goalscoring form for a prolonged period of time next season, with the aid 
of Marin?

Marin has been called both "the king of dribbling" and a diver.He can be 
inconsistent but no one can doubt his talent. And as far as tumbles in the 
penalty area are concerned, he vehemently denies the allegations. "These 
accusations are rubbish. When have I ever been booked for diving? Never. I 
would be stupid if I'd fall over and therefore miss a chance to score a goal. 
There is no way I dive."

One thing is for sure, he is unlikely to challenge John Terry for the 
captaincy. In fairness, he does not even see himself as a leader. In an 
interview with ran.de this season, he explained: "I see other players as 
leaders, those who have more experience than I do. The way I see it I don't 
have to be someone who needs to be loud off the pitch. I try to take 
responsibility by the way I play instead."

Marin can play out on the wing or as a central playmaker. He has had more 
success in the former position and it will be interesting to see where Chelsea 
play him. Either way, he is likely to play with a smile on his face. "My father 
always says: 'Having fun is part of the Marin family,'" he says. "Amid all the 
seriousness and the absolute will to win, I need a bit of fun in everything I 
do. A little joke here, a gag here, that is what I know from since I was 
little."Sometimes my father phones me up, just to tell me a joke. The telephone 
call lasts for about a minute. We both laugh, and then we hang up."

Follow Marcus Christenson on Twitter <https://twitter.com/#!/m_christenson>
 