
Lukas Podolski has ruled out a January transfer to Arsenal. Kon Schramm, the 
representative of the Köln striker, told the Guardian that a move in the 
Bundesliga winter break is "all but impossible", citing the player's reluctance 
to endanger his chances of featuring forGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> in the European Championship in 
Poland and Ukraine this year. "Köln has priority right now; we have time [for 
everything else] in the summer," said Schramm.

Despite the Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> manager 
Arsène Wenger's protestations to the contrary, there has been contact with the 
Polish-born forward in recent weeks. But Podolski, who has scored 14 goals in 
16 league games this season, is wary of trading his automatic starting place 
for a new beginning in the Premier League at this stage of the campaign, 
especially in the light of Robin van Persie's outstanding form.

The left-footed Podolski has 95 caps and has been a mainstay for the German 
national team since 2004, but he is faced with increasing competition from 
emerging talent such as Mario Götze (Dortmund) and Marco Reus (Borussia 
Mönchengladbach).

While Gervinho's absence for the Africa Cup of Nations would provide the 
26-year-old Podolski with an opportunity to play wide left for Arsenal, in the 
same role he has successfully filled for Joachim Löw's team in recent years, 
the player is much happier as a centre-forward. He is also very settled at his 
hometown club. On Monday, he revealed to Bild he was putting off planned nasal 
surgery so as not to miss five days of training.

A possible deal is further complicated by Köln's stance. The 10th-placed club 
are €31m (£25.8m) in debt but will not accept Arsenal's mooted offer of £10m 
due to the player's importance for the team and his contractual situation. A 
third of Podolski's transfer rights are held by the club sponsor SolarWorld, 
which partly financed his €10m return from Bayern Munich in 2009.Köln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> would thus only receive £6.6m, 
too meagre a return for the political and sporting fallout of selling their 
prize asset half-way through the season.

It would take an offer closer to €20m to make the economic case for his 
departure more compelling, according to a club source. But Köln will be forced 
to accept lower offers in the summer if Podolski refuses to extend his existing 
contract beyond 2013.
 