
Luke Chadwick has no qualms about confirming that his wife used to buy him a 
Cambridge United shirt every Christmas but the formerManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> winger was not 
bargaining on it becoming public knowledge that the League Two club’s badge was 
once painted on an interior wall at home.

“I didn’t really want that to come out!” Chadwick says, laughing. “It makes me 
look a bit strange. My wife did it for me! She put it up there a few years ago. 
We were thinking about selling the house, so she painted over it. She did a 
similar thing when my son was born, she did a Winnie the Pooh mural on one of 
the walls in his bedroom and it was incredible. I said: ‘You could do a 
Cambridge one,’ mucking about.

“Five years ago I went away pre-season [with MK Dons], came back and there it 
was. The wall was painted yellow and black and then the badge in the middle. It 
was really good. When people came over to the house, if they were people we 
knew well, they could go in the room. If they were strangers, we didn’t want to 
make us look a bit strange, like the Alan Partridge room!”

Chadwick says his wife, Hayley, is “not a massive football fan” and that “she 
did it for a bit of banter”. Another school of thought is that Mrs Chadwick 
knows the way to her husband’s heart. The 34-year-old, who is relishing the 
chance to come up against Louis van Gaal’s team in theFA Cup fourth round  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/05/fa-cup-fourth-round-draw-manchester-united-cambridge>
on Friday night, has only ever had eyes for one club.

He played enough games for Manchester United in 2000-01 to qualify for a 
Premier League winner’s medal and also featured in a Champions League 
quarter-final against Bayern Munich but nothing will ever come close to the joy 
Chadwick felt at the end of last season, when he signed for Cambridge and 
helped his hometown clubreturn to the Football League after a nine-year absence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/18/cambridge-united-gateshead-conference-premier-play-off-final-match-report>
.

“It was incredible scoring here for the first time,” Chadwick says. “Coming 
here, all those years watching them, seeing that Newmarket Road End, so to 
score there [against Southport] was special. I’ve never felt like that on the 
field before. It felt so surreal. It felt more emotional than anything I did at 
United. Even when we won at Wembley in the play-off final ... I don’t really 
cry but I couldn’t stop. I felt crazy. ‘Why am I crying? I’m not really an 
emotional person. It just felt so good. It was really emotional.”

Chadwick watched his first game at the Abbey Stadium at the age of six and 
within a few years was hooked as Cambridge, under the management of John Beck 
and with Dion Dublin up front, climbed through the leagues. At one point 
Chadwick starts to reel off every member of the 1991 team and he sounds 
genuinely disappointed when he mentions that a signed photo of Gary Clayton, 
his favourite Cambridge player during that era, has gone missing.

Yet convincing Cambridge they needed him proved more difficult. “When I was 
about 10 I came here,” Chadwick says. I had all the gear, the Cambridge 
tracksuit, but they never wanted to sign me. I went for three weeks and they 
never asked me back. That was a bit of a kick in the mouth.”

He was later picked up by Arsenal but his world turned upside down following a 
trial with Manchester United and a surreal phone call. “I went to the Milk Cup, 
came back and then they asked me back up for another week. I remember we played 
Nottingham Forest at Littleton Road. I think my old man brought me back. My mum 
let us back in the house and said: ‘I’ve just had a call from Alex Ferguson.’ I 
said: ‘No you didn’t!’ It was incredible. She said when she was on the phone 
she thought it was someone mucking about. I felt like a million dollars.”

Chadwick signed for United and went on to make 39 appearances but admits he 
was never really cut out for life at Old Trafford. “If Cambridge would have 
come in for me [at the age of 16], there was every chance I would have been 
happy to stay at home but it never happened. I moved up there and I was a bit 
homesick to start with, I was thinking this is maybe not for me.

“You get to know all the lads and it was a fantastic time but, the higher up 
you go, it maybe wasn’t as much fun as before. It is a huge pressure 
environment every day you’re there. Training with the best players in the 
world, I was thinking: ‘I can’t believe I’m in this squad and environment.’ The 
times when the team would be struggling, it was a crisis, it was in all the 
newspapers, and I was thinking maybe I’m not enjoying this as much as I should 
be. I sort of slipped away from the first team and it was always my plan to get 
back down south where I could live at home, where I was my happiest.

“Don’t get me wrong, I wouldn’t change anything. I really enjoyed my time 
there. I just don’t think I really wanted it as much as you should. Even if I 
went back now, I’m not sure I would still be desperate to do it. I don’t know 
if I wanted that life. I’m not a big fan of this [media attention]. I just want 
to play football. I don’t want to be famous. I’m pretty sure I wouldn’t have 
been involved in the Beckham world! You’re getting paid a lot of money to play 
football, it’s a great thing to do but happiness is more important, to be 
comfortable, living a life I want.”

Chadwick’s face lights up as he talks about the greats he played alongside. He 
remembers how Roy Keane was always willing to help the younger players, even if 
it was scary to be on the end of a rollicking in training from time to time, 
recalls Beckham’s jaw-dropping ability – “I’ve never seen a player with that 
sort of technique; if you were doing crossing and shooting, every ball would be 
bang on” – and how it was impossible to get anywhere near Ryan Giggs when he 
would “dip that shoulder and go”.

The best player in training by a distance, Chadwick says, was Paul Scholes. 
“Scholes could do everything. He could run a small-sided game just playing one 
touch for the whole session, he wouldn’t even have to take two [touches]. His 
vision, awareness and ability to just play the right pass every single time was 
absolutely incredible. The man was a genius.”

Chadwick left Old Trafford for West Ham in 2004 and went on to play for Stoke, 
Norwich and MK Dons before joining Cambridge, initially on loan, in March last 
year. It is now a bit of a family affair, with Louis, his 11-year-old son, a 
goalkeeper in Cambridge’s academy and Liam, his younger boy, in the club’s 
shadow squad.

Life could not be much better for a man who sounds as if he is living the 
dream every time he pulls on that Cambridge shirt and runs out at the Abbey 
Stadium. “I’m sure a lot of footballers are fans of clubs,” Chadwick says. 
“Just maybe not with murals – I’m pretty sure about that!”
 