
An own-goal by Luke Hyam was enough to give Paul Lambert his first home win in 
charge ofBlackburn Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> as 
they overcame Rotherham 1-0.

In a game low on quality, the decisive moment came in the 31st minute as Craig 
Conway, who is leading the way by some distance in terms of chances created in 
the league, whipped in an inviting ball that Hyam could only divert past Lee 
Camp.

Dexter Blackstock earns Forest a late draw as Wolves fail to capitalise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/wolves-nottingham-forest-championship-match-report>
It was slightly harsh on Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham>, who showed admirable 
commitment and organisation. But for a clearance on the line by Grant Hanley 
and a fine Jason Steele save, they would have taken a share of the spoils.

But despite a performance that was laboured at times, Blackburn took the three 
points on the 140th anniversary of their first official game and, after 
stretching their unbeaten run to seven, Lambert’s men find themselves two 
points outside the Championship’s top six.

Lambert named an unchanged side after last week’s win at Bristol City while 
Neil Redfearn was without the injured Danny Ward. So Hyam started in one of two 
changes from the defeat by Wolves, with Joe Mattock in for Harry Toffolo.

Rovers’ sloppy play almost led to their downfall in the eighth minute when 
poor communication between Steele and Shane Duffy presented a chance for Hyam 
to lob and, although the goalkeeper got a touch on the ball, Hanley headed off 
the line and blocked Lee Frecklington’s rebound.

Blackburn struggled to create any tempo early on but Tom Lawrence produced a 
superb turn midway through the half to deceive two Rotherham players before 
teeing up Ben Marshall, who saw his fierce drive parried.

The home side imposed themselves as the half wore on and edged ahead.

The goal came from yet another terrific cross from Conway. His inswinging ball 
from the left tempted Hyam into an attempted clearance but he could only head 
past the helpless Camp.

Rotherham were not out of it, though, despite Blackburn’s dominance of 
possession, and six minutes before the break Joe Newell bundled his way into 
the area before forcing a fine low save from Steele with Duffy clearing the 
loose ball.

A moment of sloppiness again almost caught out Rovers as Duffy’s slack pass 
was seized on by the visitors – and Grant Ward burst into the area before 
finding Hyam but his cross was crucially blocked by Duffy.

Rotherham were almost two down after a slick exchange between Corry Evans and 
Lawrence gave the former a shooting opportunity which he skewed wide.

Both sides went close with headed chances late on but Camp magnificently saved 
Duffy’s effort while Jonson Clarke-Harris saw his powerful header deflected 
wide as Rovers claimed the points.
 