
Can you spot the difference? One is a true, traditional Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> heavyweight, with a 
history rich in titles and mythology. And so is the other.

Based in a big, powerful city? Yes.

A following that transcends the immediate neighbourhood? Check.

Dreams of trophies forever stymied by a series of disruptive events behind the 
scenes, lack of competence at boardroom level and a chronic inability to find 
consistency in the dressing room and the bench? Check, check and check.

A new manager, struggling to impose his style on a squad not of his own 
making? Sure.

A number 10, arguably the most influential player in recent years, about to 
leave? A relegation battle? Count them both in. For both.

There really isn't all that much that separates FC Köln and Hamburger SV 
beyond a single point in the table. But despite their many similarities, they 
find themselves in close proximity after two key, possibly season-defining 
games that could not have worked out more differently. For Köln, a tremendously 
important 1-0 victory against Hertha that had the RheinEnergieStadion bursting 
at the seams with heart-stopping drama, was followed by the long-overdue 
dismissal of their sporting director, Volker Finke.Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg>, though, defended with sheer 
"stupidity" – according to their right-back Dennis Diekmeier – in the 3-1 
defeat at Schalke 04 on Sunday night and fell further into the rubbish dump 
that is the wrong end of the table. And the walls are closing in, fast. "It'll 
be tight," said their sporting director, Frank Arnesen. What an incredible 
smell Thorsten Fink has discovered since his move from FC Basel in the autumn.

The visitors had actually looked half-decent going forward, with Jacopo Sala, 
in particular, finding some space on the right side of Schalke's narrow 
midfield. But that kind of sterile, harmless dominance only accentuated the 
gross ineptitude at the back, where the captain, Heiko Westermann, and Jeffrey 
Bruma were outdoing each other at doing nothing. "Hara-kiri football led them 
to doom," wrote Hamburger Abendblatt in light of a series of amateurish mishaps 
and mistakes in the box that resulted in Schalke being 3-0 up after 33 minutes. 
Gojko Kacar pulled one back before the break but the hosts calmly saw the game 
out while Hamburg seemed relatively happy to protect their vulnerable backside 
by sitting on their hands. For Huub Stevens's men, the win opened up the 
enticing possibility of direct Champions League qualification. For Fink, 
though, a season that was billed as transitional could yet lead to HSV's first 
ever slump to Bundesliga 2. They're only four points off 16th place, the 
relegation play-off spot and host the rapidly improving SC Freiburg at home 
next week. Quite a worrying prospect, if you consider that Hamburg have only 
won two home games this season. Even if the squad is not quite relegation 
material, their form certainly is.

Everyone and everything must get better, the cry will go out this week, and 
Fink will probably threaten to make wholesale changes, just as he had done 
after the 4-0 home defeat to Stuttgart the week before. The 44-year-old manager 
is in acute danger of losing his "good, young manager" tag but you wonder how 
much of the current malaise is really his fault. "I still feel that the quality 
is there to stay in the league," said Arnesen, fresh from a trip to London 
negotiating the arrival of yet more recruits from SW6. And that's perhaps the 
problem. The former Chelsea players Michael Mancienne, Slobodan Rajkovic, 
Jacopo Sala, Gokhan Tore and Jeffrey Bruma offer potential but too little 
instant substance to make up for the loss of seasoned campaigners like Zé 
Roberto, Ruud van Nistelrooy, Piotr Trochowski or indeed Mladen Petric, who 
will not see his contract renewed beyond the summer. Losing those names made 
good financial sense, as did hoovering up the crumbs underneath Roman 
Abramovich's dinner table. But the Hamburg board had been under the impression 
that Arnesen's famous international network would comprise more than the number 
of Cobham's reserves department on his speed dial.

The genial Dane, hired to lead Hamburg into a glorious future, has bought 
himself some time by playing the "Bob the Builder" card. A sizeable section of 
the public has been hoodwinked into accepting that the club's current problems 
are a natural byproduct of the new, ultimately successful course with plenty of 
young, exciting players. So far, no one seems to have stopped to wonder how it 
happened that all these truly wonderful talents were overlooked by other clubs. 
It will be interesting to see whether Fink, who has been frustrated in his 
attempts to sign Basel players such as Granit Xhaka, will remain loyal to 
Arnesen or get more political should results not improve.

Over in Cologne, Stale Solbakken has already won that kind of war. Finke's 
departure, officially declared as "by mutual agreement" was anything but. The 
63-year-old, in rather bizarre fashion, appeared at a Sunday press conference 
but quickly told reporters that he had nothing to tell them before physically 
acting out "the three monkeys: hear nothing, say nothing, see nothing" on the 
podium. If only the 63-year-old had gone ape in that particular sense before, 
much strife could have been avoided. As it was, his briefings had constantly 
undermined the Norwegian coach to the point that he and Solbakken had become 
embroiled "in a silly, unbearable feud like two preening cocks", according to 
the website Kicker. Of the feathered kind, of course.

Lukas Podolski, who wasn't a huge fan of Finke either, admitted to not being 
surprised about the former Freiburg manager's dismissal. The local tabloid 
Express speculated that the player might yet change his mind over his reported 
move to Arsenal — "I haven't signed yet," he told a TV reporter – in the wake 
of Finke's removal but that possibility seems, at best, fanciful. The deal is 
done, bar a few details.

Podolski was one of three players sent off on Saturday, but will surely win an 
appeal. TV pictures show that he did very little in an altercation with Levan 
Kobiashvili, who was also sent off, and certainly nowhere near as much as his 
team-mate Mato Jajalo, who had gone following a later than late tackle on 
Kobiashvili. Still, Köln bravely held out in a 4-4-0 system for an emotional, 
redemptive win that gives them a bit of breathing space. Hamburg, immediately 
below them, should really end up saving themselves, too. The industrial dose of 
inexperience that Arnesen has injected makes them a shaky proposition, however. 
The 55-year-old, unlike the gruff, overbearing Finke, has been able to utilise 
a considerable amount of charm thus far to deflect the doubt but now it is time 
for a bare minimum of results if his performance is not to come under closer 
scrutiny. For all their recent, almost institutional disappointment, there's 
only so much genuine disaster proud clubs such as Hamburg — orKöln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> — will tolerate.

Talking Points

• "We've had 55 points. Now we have 56. There are worse days in football," 
said Jürgen Klopp. The Dortmund manager put a brave face on the 0-0 draw away 
to Augsburg on Saturday night; an unexpected result that saw Bayern (7-1 
winners against Hoffenheim) narrow the gap at the top to five points. A wobble 
or a mere blip? The champions extended their impressive unbeaten run to 19 
league matches but didn't sound quite convincing when they dismissed the 
setback as irrelevant afterwards. "I don't give a shit what Bayern do," said 
the captain, Sebastian Kehl, while the goalkeeper Roman Weidenfeller and Klopp 
both blamed the bumpy pitch for a lack of goals. New boys Augsburg, though, 
were well worth the point. They pressed high up the pitch, put in a shift of 
running every bit as frantic as the opposition and nullified the threat of 
Shinji Kagawa with an old-fashioned yet innovative piece of man-marking. Hajime 
Hosogai unnerved his compatriot by getting so close that the pair were probably 
in danger of flouting the German shooting association's new, controversial ban 
onsame-sex ceremonial "kings" appearing together 
<http://www.thelocal.de/national/20120311-41275.html>. 

• Bayern, though, couldn't stop scoring. TSG Hoffenheim were the perfect 
opponents after a week of recriminations, managerial doubts and most 
Bayern-unlike defeatists noises about the title race. Mario Gomez stumbled to a 
hat-trick in typical fashion but Arjen Robben and Franck Ribéry were the true 
stars of the afternoon. It was an almost painfully one-sided spectacle, the 
footballing equivalent of Predator v the Muppets. Even the visitors' sole reply 
was an own goal by Luiz Gustavo.  Borussia Mönchengladbach's 0-0 draw at home 
to Freiburg made the afternoon more enjoyable still for the Bavarians but the 
biggest of all boons came courtesy of Bastian Schweinsteiger, who made a return 
to standing ovations after a six-week lay-off. "Some people will be surprised 
how long Jupp Heynckes will be manager here," insisted the president, Uli 
Hoeness, later that night but his support wasn't quite unconditional. "If we 
don't beat Basel on Tuesday in the Champions League, it will be difficult to 
salvage the season," he warned.

• Werder Bremen threaten to make a late push for the Champions League 
millions. They beat Hannover 3-0 and must hope that Claudio Pizarro's honest 
admission  ("I slapped Pogatetz in the face but it was accidental") will 
placate the disciplinary commission – an investigation into the matter started 
on Monday afternoon. The Peruvian once again made the difference, with one goal 
and one assist.

• Leverkusen followed up their embarrassing 7-1 defeat away to Barcelona with 
an almost-as-embarrassing 3-2 defeat at VfL Wolfsburg, but the defender Manuel 
Friedrich was not to blame: he moved to the MLS franchise Chicago Fire last 
week. According to the Chicago Tribune, that is. The paper illustrated a piece 
on the Fire's capture of the former Germany international Arne Friedrich with a 
photo of his namesake from Bayer 04. Well,these things can happen 
<http://blog.ergatides.com/2012/03/09/cnn-says-nicosia-is-in-sicily-not-cyprus-oops>
. The reference to Friedrich's "1999 Bundesliga debut for SC Verl" – they were 
in the Regional League South-West at the  time  – was slightly more difficult 
to explain, however.

Results: Stuttgart 0-0 Kaiserslautern, Wolfsburg 3-2 Leverkusen, Mainz 2-1 
Nürnberg, Gladbach 0-0 Freiburg, Augsburg 0-0 Dortmund, Köln 1-0 Hertha, Bayern 
7-1 Hoffenheim, Schalke 3-1 Hamburg, Werder 3-0 Hannover.

• View the latest Bundesliga table 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 