
Alexandre Lacazette's deflected goal gave Lyon a much-needed win in the first 
leg of theirChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> game with Apoel Nicosia. 
Apoel, the first Cypriot side to reach the last 16, showed no attacking intent 
– they did not have a shot until the 88th minute – and looked for much of the 
match like they might hang on.

But Lacazette scored after 58 minutes to give some relief to Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>, whose poor domestic form has seen 
them slip 11 points adrift of the leaders Paris St-Germain.

Lyon had a penalty shout after two minutes ,when Ederson appeared to be eased 
out of the way by Nuno Morais, but the Italian referee Paolo Tagliavento waved 
play on.

For all Lyon's possession they were struggling to create chances and their 
first real opportunity came after 24 minutes when, following good work from 
Lisandro López, the ball broke in the area to Anthony Réveillère, whose shot 
was blocked. López then saw his low shot held by Dionisis Chiotis diving low to 
his right, before Lacazette cut in from the right but hammered a good chance 
over the bar.

Five minutes before the interval Lyon had their best effort of the half. 
Ederson's slide-rule pass was cut out by Ivan Trickovski but the ball broke to 
Lacazette, whose shot from the edge of the box was turned over by Chiotis. 
López then fired over from a narrow angle.

Two minutes after the interval, Michel Bastos produced a lovely pass for 
Ederson, who rounded the keeper and slid the ball towards goal only for Paulo 
Jorge to slide in and clear at the very last moment.

Lyon took the lead when Cris played the ball down the left channel for 
Lacazette, who cut inside and unleashed a shot that deflected off Jorge and 
looped over Chiotis.

With two minutes remaining Apoel had their first attempt as Gustavo Manduca, 
on as a late substitute, cut in from the right and fired at goal but Hugo 
Lloris was alert to the danger and turned the ball over.
 