
Málaga held on to beat Athletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> 1-0 to kick off the 
Spanish league on Saturday, after the new coach Javi Gracia’s winning debut was 
almost spoiled by two of his players earning red cards in a wild finale.

Gracia’s first victory with Málaga was followed by positive starts for the 
Valencia manager Nuno Espírito Santo, Espanyol’s former player-turned-manager 
Sergio and Joaquín Caparrós at Granada. A 10-man Valencia salvaged a 1-1 draw 
at Sevilla with a late goal, while Sergio García scored in stoppage time as a 
10-man Espanyol drew 1-1 at Almería. Granada managed to come from behind to 
beat the visitingDeportivo La Coruña 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> 2-1.

Málaga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> scored in the 34th minute 
when Luis Alberto converted the rebound from his own penalty after the 
goalkeeper Gorka Iraizoz blocked his spot kick. The season opener was far from 
spectacular, but Málaga’s balanced defence did well to neutralize Bilbao’s 
talented set of attacking players.

“We weren’t brilliant, just efficient,” said Gracia, who took over Málaga 
after his Osasuna side were relegated last season. “We didn’t have possession 
of the ball, it was theirs. But I think that through 96 minutes we played 
defence well. We played the last minutes in disadvantage and we kept fighting.”

Roque Santa Cruz earned the penalty to set up Alberto’s winner by poaching 
Carlos Gurpegui’s backpass and drawing a foul from Iraizoz in the area. Málaga 
limited Bilbao to Mikel Rico’s header by the far post in the 65th and Guillermo 
Fernández’s header into the arms of goalkeeper Carlos Kameni in the 87th.

Tempers flared near the end, when Málaga lost two players to direct red cards 
and gave Bilbao their best chance of the match.

Duda was first sent off for shoving Bilbao’s Iker Muniain to the turf in the 
88th minute, and Vitorino Antunes compounded that error by earning his exit 
with a dangerous tackle to cut down Fernández two minutes into stoppage time.

Iraizoz came forward in the final minute and thought he had grabbed an 
unlikely equalizer when he headed into the net, but the referee disallowed the 
goal because the assistant referee ruled a Bilbao player offside at the free 
kick.

Even Gracia praised Iraizoz and questioned the referee’s decision to annul the 
keeper’s goal.

“I saw a great goal by Gorka,” said Gracia. “I saw the line judge lift his 
flag, but I don’t know why.”

Bilbao must quickly regroup from their stumble. The Basque club host Napoli on 
Wednesday in the second leg of their Champions League playoff after they drew 
1-1 in their first meeting.

In Seville, Valencia’s Pablo Piatti went close in the eighth minute with a 
shot that bounced off both posts, but forward Aleix Vidal put Sevilla ahead in 
the final minute of the first half following Vitolo’s precise long pass to 
spring Carlos Bacca on the break.Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> then lost their goalkeeper Beto 
to a left thigh injury in the first half. He was replaced by new signing 
Mariano Barbosa.

Valencia played a man down from the 66th minute after Rodrigo de Paul received 
a straight red card for elbowing Vidal in the face, ending the Argentinian’s 
European debut just one minute after he had come on as a substitute. Sevilla, 
however, failed to take advantage of the sending off and theValencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> substitute Lucas Orbán chested 
a deflected shot over the goal line in the 88th to secure a point.

Espanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> appeared to be 
finished after the defender Anaitz Arbilla got his second booking in the 33rd 
minute and Almería’s Fernando Soriano fired the ball in off the upright in the 
52nd minute. But Sergio controlled a long pass with his chest before unleashing 
a low shot that grazed a defender and squirmed inside the post four minutes 
into injury time.

Granada rallied to ruin Deportivo’s return to the top flight on a night when 
neither goalkeeper had a good day. Deportivo struck first in the 20th when the 
Granada goalie Stole Dimitrievski let Ivan Cavaleiro’s shot slip by. The 
Granada forward Ruben Rochina levelled with a long-range strike in the 55th 
minute before the defender Jean-Sylvain Babin completed the comeback in the 
77th minute when he flicked in a free-kick, while the keeper Germán Lux made no 
effort to reach either the cross or his header.
 