
Luis Alberto set foot on the pitch on 76 minutes and 26 seconds, got his first 
touch at 76.44, went past Mario Pasalic on 76.45, beat Enzo Roco on 76.46 and 
took aim on 76.47. The clock said 76.48 when the ball hit the net and it had 
not long passed 76.50 when he stuffed it up his top, team-mates piling on. From 
a goal down, Málaga were 2-1 up. When the final whistle went 15 minutes later, 
they embraced, shouted and danced in celebratory circles. Sergi Darder, the man 
taken off on 76.25,published a picture 
<https://twitter.com/SergiDarder/status/546758700367876096/photo/1> from the 
dressing room: a trestle table topped with tupperware, raised arms, alien eyes, 
big grins and a victory sign or two. “This is a team.” Darder cheered.

The hashtag read: “Come On Málaga!” You’d think they had won something, not 
just scraped past Elche – the team at the bottom of the table who’d lost four 
in a row and won only once in 13, the club in crisis whose fans pulled out the 
hankies and whose manager moaned afterwards: “I can’t do any more.”

You’d think that, but then it wasn’t just Elche; it was Elche and Celta and 
Deportivo, Eibar, Real Sociedad, Rayo, Córdoba and Granada too. It was that of 
the last 10 games, Málaga have won eight, only losing to the two big teams from 
Madrid (and that you have to go back 13 games for the last time Madrid scored 
fewer goals). It was that they drew with Barcelona. It was that if you take a 
look at the table this morning you’ll see thatMálaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> are a solitary point off the 
final Champions League place; that they have 30 points. “30puntazos,” Darder 
wrote. 30 Big Points.

It wasn’t supposed to be this way; no one can quite believe it. The match 
report of Málaga’s 2-1 victory over Elche in Diario del Sur on Monday morning 
opens with the line: “Thirty points. Yes, yes, thirty points.”

It’s only 20 months since that Champions League semi-final against Borussia 
Dortmund, but Málaga inhabit a different world now. Of the starting XI that 
night, four remain. This weekend, Isco was winning the World Club Championship 
with Real Madrid. He went that summer of 2013, just like Joaquín, Jérémy 
Toulalan, Martín Demichelis and Júlio Baptista. The manager left too: Manuel 
Pellegrini went to Manchester City, where he won the league. The glory days 
were over quickly. Last season, Málaga finished 11th, 14 points off the 
European places; at times, they had been uncomfortably close to the relegation 
zone.

This summer, Willy Caballero, Eliseu and Jesús Gámez followed Joaquín, 
Toulalan and Baptista out of the door. Málaga’s owner had long since withdrawn 
his investment,the promise to compete with Madrid and Barcelona ditched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/26/ruud-van-nistelrooy-malaga> , 
and this summer he said he was leaving completely, complaining of a lack of 
equality and affection. Ten players came in, sure, but they cost a total of 
€1.3m, all bar two of them signed on loan or for free. The one World Cup star 
they did sign – the Mexican goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa – hasn’t played a single 
game in the league. The old manager walked and the new manager had just been 
relegated: Javi Gracia finished last season going down with Osasuna after 14 
consecutive years inprimera.

Málaga had little choice but to restructure the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/dec/24/malaga-real-madrid-uefa-punishment>
. It had been good while it lasted but it couldn’t last long; even when they 
were splashing €60m in a single summer they had insisted that they weren’t 
making “mad signings” but hindsight suggested otherwise: they were creating an 
enormous deficit and when the external investment from the owner dried up, they 
faced a crisis. The situation was as chaotic as it was concerning. Inland 
Revenue was on their back, the debt heading beyond a hundred million, which has 
been virtually paid up in full now, and so were clubs they owed money to. Uefa 
banned them from European competition.

It was not just that Málaga could not make signings, it was that they had to 
sell – not to raise the money, although they needed cash quickly to satisfy 
their creditors, but to shed the salaries that they had paid to attract players 
in the first place. Málaga were spending more on salaries alone than they were 
generating each year: some estimates put the difference between the cost of 
paying the players and the money made at more than €20m. Over €50m was going on 
salaries alone. There was no way of sustaining that, so they embarked on a 
complete restructuring. The budget dropped from €120m two years ago to €39m 
this season. The highest salaries in that Champions League season were close to 
€6m, while the manager too was on big money; now, only a couple of players are 
over €2m – and only just.

The first wave of cuts happened last year but the restructuring continued this 
summer. The biggest earners no longer remained but some players still had 
contracts dating from better times. Carlos Kameni was about to leave – with 
Ochoa signed to be his replacement – but he agreed to renew his contract, 
spreading the money he was due to make in the final 18 months of his current 
deal over the next four years. Eliseu, Gámez and Caballero were among the best 
paid players and departed. Roque Santa Cruz played his last game for the club 
on Sunday night. “He’s a 10/10 in everything and he will leave a hole that we 
can not fill,” Javi Gracia said. “I feel proud of having coached him.” Others 
will follow, if offers arrive.

In their place, Málaga are turning to youth. Of the nine players that played 
in midfield or the attack last night, six were born in the 1990s: Horta (94), 
Camacho (90), Darder (93), Castillejo (95), Recio (91), and Luis Alberto (92). 
Then there’s Juanmi (93), Juampi (94) and Samu García (90). Mario Husillos, the 
sporting director, has built carefully. Determinedly too: he travelled to 
Portugal to speak to Ricardo Horta and persuade him to sign, literally turning 
up one day and announcing to Horta: “Hello, I’m Mario Husillos, you don’t know 
me but I want you to sign for Málaga.” He and Castillejo, particularly, have 
impressed.

There are exceptions to the trend. Nordin Amrabat, on loan last season, was 
signed for €1m; born in 1987, much of the attacking responsibility lies with 
him and he has three goals so far this season. Ignacio Camacho’s new contract 
brought with it a salary increase: Málaga see Camacho, who is still only 24 but 
played in that semi-final against Dortmund, as the new leader and his role will 
be important. The defence remains experienced: Sergio Sánchez, the club’s best 
paid player is 28; Weligton and summer signing Marcos Angeleri are older.

The reason is strategic. At long last, a new collective TV deal draws close, 
with the amounts earned by each club likely to be set by league positions. 
Málaga thought they had to maintain a strong nucleus, lessen the pressure on 
the young players, and use what little money they had to add something 
different as they seek to compete for the top eight or nine places which will 
bring a significantly better deal. Small margins, they thought, can bring large 
rewards.

Then there was the manager; Husillos sought someone who fit that new profile. 
When he turned to Javi Gracia, the idea was to find someone who knew the 
Spanish league and was not afraid to bring in young players – something that 
neither Pellegrini nor Bernd Schuster really did. They wanted a manager who 
would connect with the fans too after Schuster’s often tense relationship with 
pretty much everyone. Defensive drudgery was not their thing, either. Gracia 
had been relegated with Osasuna but he had taken over there with an almost 
impossible task before him and he had previously won promotions with Almería 
and Cádiz, from the Second and Second Division B respectively, as well as twice 
reaching the play-offs with Pontevedra.

Listening to Gracia talk, it is hard not to be impressed. There is no 
arrogance, no show, and every word is convincing. Naturally, there were doubts 
at first but they have gone. Players have been convinced, certainly; struck by 
the depth of knowledge and the hours he puts in, the level of preparation, and 
the intelligence and clarity with which he conveys his ideas, building a team 
dynamic.

He has also been fair. Kameni is an example: he was given a chance at the 
start of the year, having joined pre-season before Ochoa, and he has played 
superbly so he kept his place. “The panther’s back,” Iker Casillas told him 
after the Madrid game. Luis Alberto is another: on loan from Liverpool, he has 
started just five games, despite scoring on his debut. On Sunday, he came on as 
a sub. Twenty-two seconds later, he had won the game. “Competition for place is 
intense and the players know that. They’re the ones that appear and make the 
difference. Tonight, Luis Alberto did,” Gracia said.

It was a brilliant goal and it put them level with Sevilla and Villarreal, 
just a point behind Valencia. If competing for the top seven or eight places 
was part of the plan, no one truly imagined this, even if Málaga have superb 
support with over 20,000 season ticket holders in a region where unemployment 
is nudging 40%. European football was a vague idea, never an objective. 
Survival was the only target, and they are probably only 10 points off that 
already, with 22 games left. Meanwhile, they are 10 points ahead of Celta in 
eighth. They have never, ever had as many points after 16 games.

In part Málaga’s run has been a product of the fixture list. Some will 
conclude that they should beat Elche, Celta, Deportivo, Eibar, Real Sociedad, 
Rayo, Córdoba and Granada. But beatall of them? In a row without ceding 
anything? And should they really? Measured against expectation and resources, 
Málaga may just be the outstanding performers of the season so far – after 
Eibar.

Next up, Málaga play Villarreal, Sevilla, Athletic and then Valencia. It is 
perfectly possible that they will lose all four. But, unlike the team that for 
one, brief season had Málaga’s fans dreaming of winning the European Cup, 
finding themselves just seconds away from the final, those 30 points cannot be 
taken from them. Nor, in all probability, will seventh place. Not yet, anyway. 
“Thanks God. Congratulations to everybody,” said the club’s owner Al-Thani on 
twitter. After the win over Elche, Javi Gracia said that Málaga are in a 
“privileged position”. In four games’ time they still will be.

Talking points

• At half-time at San Mamés, Diego Simeone told his players to go out and 
enjoy the second half. It has been a “fabulous 2014”, he said. “Now, end it the 
right way.” Atlético Madrid were 1-0 down at Athletic Bilbao. Less than a 
minute later, it was 1-1, thanks to a truly wonderful goal, six first-time 
touches, ping-ping-pinging their way past the Athletic defence to Juanfran on 
the right. His cross was headed in by Antoine Griezmann.

And so it was that the comeback was on. It finished 4-1 to Atlético, who have 
now been to the new San Mamés three times. All three times they have trailed 
and all three times they came back to win. Simeone said that it was winning 
there last season that convinced him that they could win the league. This win 
prevented them from slipping seven points behind Real Madrid (having played a 
game more).

“I don’t know how we lost that,” Ernesto Valverde said. The penalty to make it 
2-1, scored by Raúl García, was extremely ropey and Griezmann was offside for 
the fourth. “There’s contact,” admitted the Atlético director Clemente 
Villaverde, “but I don’t know who provokes it.” Tiago Mendes had. All that was 
bad about the match made it good. At times it was brutal. The kind of game when 
the players got back to the dressing room and counted the number of limbs they 
had, just to make sure they were all there. When it came to counting the goals, 
Griezmann had it easier: all he needed to do was glance at the matchball in his 
hands.

• A last-minute penalty for a questionable handball cost Real Sociedad their 
first away win of the season, at Levante. David Moyes marched on to the pitch 
at the end, and no wonder. Asked about his confrontation with the referee 
afterwards, he replied: “I didn’t say anything to him; I just looked at him.” 
Moyes heads off for his first Christmas break. His record so far: seven games, 
four draws, two wins, one loss and four clean sheets.

• Eibar are the Basque Country’s best club this Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/aug/25/eibar-la-liga-fairytale-introduction>
.

• 570 minutes later, Luis Suárez got his first league goal for Barcelona as 
they beat Córdoba 5-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/20/barcelona-cordoba-la-liga-match-report>
 in a game that one paper described as “tedious”. They were probably right too; 
there’s still something unconvincing about Barcelona. Leo Messi scored two 
more, the second of them brilliantly taken; he hooked the ball out of the sky, 
turned and hit it almost instantly. He hit it, like he had the first, with his 
right foot too. He has now scored more with his right than his left this 
season: 11-10. Can it really be coincidence?

• “After one minute it was over. 1-0 down in a minute, there’s no story … 
There were few fouls, few bollocks, and that hurts me. I feel ashamed when I 
see – fucking great! – that [Andrés] Iniesta is more aggressive than we are. 
That hurts. With the greatest of respect to Iniesta, we all know he has other 
qualities .… Barcelona scored two from dead balls against us and they don’t 
[score from dead balls] against anyone … We went out there before the game to 
ask Barcelona’s players for their shirts. Turn off the lights, let’s get out of 
here. It hurts. I feel ashamed … I am sorry and they’ll be sorry too. The 
players who play will be the ones with balls. I’ll go down to the Second 
Division but with warriors, with players who have the knife between our teeth. 
They may not have a fucking clue how to play football but they’ll have the 
knife between their teeth. If we don’t have the knife between our teeth, 
there’s nothing we can do. In this shitty life, either you’re good or you’re a 
warrior, but you have to have something … I know that Barcelona is not our game 
but either we change things or we’re going nowhere.”

Anyone else think the Córdoba manager Miroslav Djukic wasn’t impressed?

• “If I was the president I would sack the coach and almost the entire squad. 
We’re not good enough for the first division. We’re going to suffer like dogs, 
dogs I say.”

Anyone else think the Rayo manager Paco Jémez wasn’t impressed either?

• Maybe Jémez was just annoyed about the weekend’s best tackle? Here it is 
<http://www.sportyou.es/blog/futbol/2014/12/21/video-tremenda-entrada-de-quini-a-paco-jemez-514206.html>
: He can’t complain about Cristian Álvarez’s commitment, at least.

• “For now, I’m staying.” So says Getafe’s manager, Cosmin Contra. But not for 
long. And his departure speaks volumes about the club right now.

• Villarreal: quietly going about being very, very good indeed – 389 minutes 
without conceding, five wins in a row and a manager who declares himself “proud 
… and very satisfied.”

• Celta: beat Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/03/celta-vigo-nolito-jonny-castro-luis-suarez-lionel-messi-barcelona-la-liga>
, haven’t won since. In fact, they haven’t even scored since then. That’s a 0-0 
draw and five defeats in a row now.

• Real Madrid head off for Christmas top of the table, despite not playing 
this weekend. Their game with Sevilla has been postponed to February because 
they were in Morocco winning the Club World Cup. Madrid have won four trophies 
in 2014 – the best total in their history. Gareth Bale has scored in three 
finals for Madrid:the Copa del Rey final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/16/barcelona-real-madrid-copa-del-rey-match-report-gareth-bale>
against Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/17/gareth-bale-real-madrid-wonder-goal-copa-del-rey>
, theChampions League final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/25/gareth-bale-zinedine-zidane-real-madrid>
against Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/may/24/real-madrid-gareth-bale-atletico>
, and now the Club World Cup final against San Lorenzo. The only final he 
didn’t score in was the one in Cardiff … and he did provide an assist then. But 
the real hero was Sergio Ramos. He did it again: the man who scored in the 
semi-final and the final of the Champions League scored in the semi-final and 
the Club World Cup final too. He won the Golden Ball award and got a gigantic 
car key, which hung round his neck like a guitar.

• “I got taken off at 2-3. When I got out the shower, it was 3-5,” said Lugo’s 
Jonathan Valle. He needn’t have worried: he still hadn’t missed the best bit. 
Or perhaps that should read “worst bit”. There were 11 minutes and four goals 
still to go. His Lugo team made it 3-6 at Numancia and it seemed all over. But 
then Numancia made it 4-6 in the 83rd minute, made it 5-6 in the 90th and 6-6 
in the 90th and they still had time to almost grab a winner. It finished 6-6 – 
the first time a second division match has ever ended 6-6, 31,633 games later. 
It has only ever happened once in the first division too.

• And who’s top in Segunda B, group I? Oh, look 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/546605351710511106/photo/1>. Happy 
Christmas, everyone.

Results: Celta 0-1 Almería, Barcelona 5-0 Córdoba, Levante 1-1 Real Sociedad, 
Eibar 0-1 Valencia, Rayo 1-3 Espanyol, Villarreal 3-0 Deportivo, Granada 1-1 
Getafe, Elche 1-2 Málaga, Athletic 1-4 Atlético, Real Madrid versus Sevilla, 4 
February.
 