
Many of the areas that have been recently marked as potential sites for 
fracking are rich in wildlife that perform crucial functions from pollination 
to decomposition, researchers have found.

Scientists say that almost two-thirds of the areas that have been labelled as 
suitable for shale gas extraction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/17/fracking-uk-government-hands-out-new-licences>
 have levels of biodiversity equal to or above the national average, according 
to a new analysis of records collected from across the country.

“A lot of the areas that have opened up to shale gas licensing actually 
harbour much higher than average levels of biodiversity,” said Tom Oliver, of 
University of Reading who is a senior author of thestudy 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2664.12784/abstract> in the 
Journal of Applied Ecology. “We only have one natural heritage and we have to 
protect it and so using these data to highlight those very valuable sites and 
to facilitate their protection is hopefully a useful thing to do.”

British public support for fracking sinks to lowest ever level
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/13/british-public-support-for-fracking-sinks-to-lowest-ever-level>
The study, which analysed previously collected records of more than 5,500 
species, including those of birds, plants and butterflies, found that 65.3% of 
proposed areas that have been designated suitable for fracking have levels of 
biodiversity equal to or above the national average, including parts of 
Lancashire and South Wales.

After dividing Britain up into squares, measuring 10km by 10km, the records, 
which were made by volunteers between 1970 and 2013, were assessed, taking into 
account the climate and geology of the area, as well as variations in the 
thoroughness of the recordings, thereby allowing different locations to be 
given a rating for their biodiversity, and compared to each other. The results 
are available to explore in an interactivedigital map 
<https://eip.ceh.ac.uk/apps/ecostatus/>.

The scientists say the approach offers a new, fine-grained approach to looking 
at biodiversity across Britain. That, adds Oliver, will help, “to inform the 
location of large infrastructure projects or ecological restoration work”.

The study also looked at how biodiversity had changed over time, focussing on 
changes between two time periods, 1970-1990 and 2000-2013. While in many areas 
the decline in the presence of protected species mirrored that of biodiversity 
more widely, in others that was not the case.

“That wider biodiversity is still really important for a whole range of 
functions – pollination and pest control and decomposition – and also just the 
species that people really value seeing in the environment,” said Oliver. 
“[Priority species] are often used as indicators in these environmental 
assessments and we’re showing that actually our new method allows us to 
incorporate a whole suite of other species, thousands of more common species, 
which are just as important really.”

The RSPB welcomed the research.  “This is an important piece of research that 
uses the UKs wealth of biodiversity data collected by volunteers to add to our 
understanding of the risks that come with fracking.” said Abi Bunker, the 
RSPB’s head of policy and advocacy. “The RSPB has long been concerned that 
fracking could pose risks to wildlife, and that’s why we campaigned for and 
welcomed a Government ban on fracking in Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
and other designated areas in England and Wales. However, this new evidence 
shows that fracking could still put sensitive wildlife and habitats at risk and 
that stronger regulation is needed before fracking goes ahead.”

A spokesperson from the Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy 
said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-business-energy-and-industrial-strategy>
: “We have more than 50 years of drilling experience in the UK and one of the 
best records in the world for economic development while protecting our 
environment and the public.

“Any company that wants to carry out fracking must conduct an assessment of 
the impact on the environment and habitats, and earlier this year we brought in 
extra protections so that fracking could not take place in a number of 
protected areas that are home to wildlife.”
 