
The critics might have hoped it would meet its Waterloo after just a few 
weeks, but four months after it opened the Abba-themed musicalMamma Mia! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125168> has become the highest grossing 
movie ever to be released in the UK, usurping Titanic's decade-long hold on the 
record.

Phyllida Lloyd's film, which stars Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep>, Colin Firth and Pierce Brosnan, 
has grossed £69,068,073 to date, just surpassing the £69,025,646 made by James 
Cameron's watery romance. Lloyd also directed the original West End production 
of Mamma Mia!

The film, about a young woman who tries to uncover the identity of her 
biological father by inviting the three likely men to her wedding on a Greek 
island, received a lukewarm response from reviewers on its initial release. The 
Guardian's own Peter Bradshaw was particularly scathing: "Mamma Mia! ties 
itself in knots trying to shoehorn in every single famous number," he wrote. 
"And each time, the beginning of an Abba song triggered in me a Pavlovian stab 
of pleasure, cancelled after a millionth of a second by a backwash of rage that 
this soulless panto has done nothing to earn or even understand the good 
feeling."

Not that this had any effect on the film's fans – Mamma Mia! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mamma-mia> has profited from repeat viewings 
by enthusiasts who have, on occasion, filled auditoriums with the sort of 
riotous audience participation common to the theatrical production. A 
re-release of the film with "sing-a-long" karaoke-style subtitles has proved 
especially popular.

David Kosse, president of Universal Pictures International, said breaking 
Titanic's record was "truly phenomenal". He said: "This film has exceeded our 
expectations and delighted audiences around the world since it opened in July."

Mamma Mia! has also proved a success around the world, racking up No 1 slots 
in 15 different countries. Last week it was nominated for two Golden Globes: 
best film in the musical or comedy category and best actress (musical or 
comedy) for Streep.
 