
English football is on course for its highest ever number of managerial 
casualties after a bleak end to 2015 for the men in charge of its clubs.

The League Managers Association’s Mid-Season Manager Statistics report, which 
was released on Monday asScunthorpe boss Mark Robins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/18/scunthorpe-sack-mark-robins> 
andOrient’s Ian Hendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/18/ian-hendon-sacked-leyton-orient>
 became the latest to be shown the door, makes grim reading with the figures 
suggesting the all-time high of 53 dismissals in 2001-02 could be exceeded by 
the end of the current campaign.

Leeds defender Sam Byram snubs Everton to join West Ham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/18/sam-byram-everton-west-ham> 
The statistics show that 34 managers were either sacked or resigned between 1 
June and 31 December last year, two more than the previous high of 27 by the 
same point in the 2014-15 campaign.

For those who have departed - 29 were relieved of their duties and five left 
of their own volition - the average reign amounted to just 1.58 years.

Six of them - Leicester’s Nigel Pearson, Liverpool’s Brendan Rodgers, 
Sunderland’s Dick Advocaat, Aston Villa’s Tim Sherwood, Swansea’s Garry Monk 
and former Chelsea manager José Mourinho - left Premier League clubs.

However, it was the Championship in which the profession was most precarious 
with no fewer than 10 managers parting company with their respective clubs 
during the same period compared with six in League One and seven in League Two.

Indeed, the second tier has proved to be something of a graveyard for managers 
in recent years with no fewer than 20 changes during the whole of last season, 
although Watford and Leeds accounted for seven of those between them.

However, it is in League One where the man in the hot-seat appears to have the 
least time in which to try to establish himself. The average tenure for those 
in post on 31 December amounted to just 1.17 years as opposed to 2.13 years in 
the Premier League, 1.37 years in the Championship and 1.63 years in League Two.

The figures contain depressing news for new managers in particular with eight 
of the 29 dismissed having been in their first post.

On a more positive note, Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger continues to fly the 
flag after more than 19 years in the job and 1,095 games under his belt by the 
turn of the year. Exeter’s Paul Tisdale is his closest competitor after 9.52 
years in his job.

But while Wenger and fellow top-flight managers Tony Pulis and Sam Allardyce 
occupy first, third and fourth places in the list of current managers who had 
taken charge of the most games by the end of December, the lower leagues are 
represented too with Chesterfield’s Danny Wilson in second and Hartlepool’s 
Ronnie Moore in fifth.
 