
Manuel Pellegrini could be dealt his first setback as the Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> manager with Málaga's 
Isco contemplating snubbing his former coach by turning down a move to the 
Etihad Stadium and signing instead for Real Madrid.

The playmaker has said that following Spain's triumph at the European Under-21 
Championship team against Italy in Jerusalem he would take a holiday and then 
decide whether to sign for Madrid or City, having revealed he faced a straight 
choice between the two clubs. Isco's decision could come as early as within the 
next 24 hours.

Yet terms have been agreed between Málaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> and Madrid for him, according to 
reports in Spain, and if Isco does decide to sign for Madrid it would also 
represent a severe blow to City's new chief executive Ferran Soriano and 
director of football Txiki Begiristain.

AS, a newspaper that is particularly close to Madrid, reported that Isco would 
sign for Madrid in a €30m (£25.5m) five-year deal following talks between the 
Madrid president Florentino Pérez, the Madrid director executive José Angel 
Sánchez and Málaga executive Vicente Casado on Friday.

During last season's doomed title defence Roberto Mancini, Pellegrini's 
predecessor, consistently complained of how the failure in the preceding summer 
to land any of the club's five main transfer targets significantly impacted on 
the subsequent campaign. As well as finishing second to Manchester United in 
the Premier League City were unable to progress to the knockout stages of the 
Champions League, having finished bottom of their group without recording a 
single victory.

Soriano and Begiristain can point to the signing of Pellegrini, as Mancini's 
successor, and the arrival of Fernandinho and Jesús Navas for a combined £47m 
as examples of the quick, efficient work that forms part of their brief. Yet 
with the memory of last season's championship failure a motivating factor at 
the club and an experience City's Abu Dhabi-based owners do not wish repeated, 
the prospect of losing Isco would present a sizeable blow.

There was confidence at City that having pursued Isco for so long and given 
Pellegrini's relationship with him, the 21-year-old he would agree to a move to 
Manchester. Last week Isco said of the Chilean: "He is a great coachwho has 
done some impressive work at Málaga, as he did at other clubs, and I am sure 
things will go well for him [in England]. It's true that I know Pellegrini 
already, I know how he works and he has been fundamental in my career during 
the two years I have been at Málaga with him. It's a point in favour that we 
worked together and that I know how he works but it's not definitive. I am 
going to take a holiday [after the Euro Under-21 championships], which I need, 
and then decide my future." The Madrid players Alvaro Morata, Dani Carvajal and 
Nacho, who are all colleagues of Isco in the Spain Under-21 squad, have also 
urged him join them at the club. Morata said: "I have been pressuring him and 
I've told him that Madrid is the best club in the world."
 