
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
have warned about 9,000 season-ticket holders that a seat for next week’s FA 
Cup replay against Cambridge United needed to be bought by 8pm on Wednesday or 
they would not be allowed to attend the home match with Sunderland on 28 
February.

The letter sent to season-ticket holders and seen by the Guardian states: “The 
deadline to buy your seat forCambridge United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cambridge-united> is 8pm tonight. Please 
note that not buying this ticket will result in your Season Ticket being 
suspended for the Sunderland game.”

While that meeting with Gus Poyet’s side is a month away, one supporter, who 
wanted to remain anonymous, claimed United’s policy, which is in the club’s 
regulations, is causing widespread disgruntlement as some cannot attend next 
Tuesday’s fourth-round tie with Cambridge due to work and other commitments.

“They are threatening the Sunderland game,” the supporter said. “I – like many 
others – cannot attend the replay at such short notice, due to work 
commitments.”

A United spokesperson pointed out that the system had been in place for a 
number of years and said: “We did notify fans that failure to pay for a game in 
the cup scheme would mean a suspension from the next game. We have consistently 
done this throughout this season.

“The terms and conditions are clear: ‘In respect of each home cup match for 
which the ticket holder fails to provide valid payment card details or for 
which the ticket holder’s card or payment is declined, the ticket holder’s 
season ticket may be suspended for one home league match. This measure was 
introduced [two seasons ago].

“If we successfully sell the ticket the fan has failed to pay for, they can 
apply for a refund of the Sunderland ticket at the end of the season.”

All of the 55,000 season-ticket holders are obliged to buy tickets for FA Cup 
and Champions League games – Capital One Cup matches can be opted out from, as 
can theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> for those under 16 
– with the payment for these automatically debited from members’ accounts when 
required.

The fan stated that no money had been left in the bank account used to pay 
United purposely. “I leave the card that MUFC have on record without a balance 
as I want to be in control – as best I can – when payments are debited,” said 
the supporter.

When trying to contact United’s ticket office on Wednesday afternoon, callers 
could wait for more than 35 minutes and still not be put through, which may 
have been due to season-ticket holders trying to buy seats for the Cambridge 
tie.

It was claimed that at least 9,000 were being chased. “I just called the club 
to vent and the adviser said 9,000 fans are in this situation,” added the fan. 
“I told them that’s a pretty high percentage of total holders and shows the 
system doesn’t work – for anyone other than the club.”

Supporters are allowed to give away tickets for the Cambridge match as long as 
they can vouch for the recipient, as they are responsible for the behaviour of 
that person when attending.
 