
This was a slipshod and frantic display that confirms Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> remain a confused 
bunch under José Mourinho.Paul Pogba limped off before the half hour but that 
may have been a blessing owing to his underwhelming contribution since his 
world-record transfer in the summer. The Frenchman’s replacement, Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic, had a match to forget, again looking off the pace and in need of 
next week’s international break.

He is not the only United player who appears lost. The defence were constantly 
overrun – perhaps because the midfield went awol – and though Anthony Martial 
and Marcus Rashford showed flashes of quality, Wayne Rooney was virtually 
anonymous until an 89th-minute consolation that is goal No247 for the club.

All of this suggests Mourinho has work to do on a side third in their Europa 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> group and 
whose Premier League title challenge is languishing in eighth place, eight 
points behind Manchester City.

José Mourinho lets rip at Manchester United’s ‘summer friendly’ attitude
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-fenerbahce>
The nightmare started after 69 seconds. When Hasan Ali Kaldirim’s hopeful punt 
came in from the left Daley Blind and Marcos Rojo failed to close down Moussa 
Sow. This allowed the Senegal forward to launch an audacious overhead kick that 
beat David de Gea, gave Fenerbahce the lead, left the goalkeeper bemused and 
Mourinho a picture of quiet fury. No wonder: this was a near replica of the 
dire beginning at Chelsea, when Pedro scored after 30 seconds and United ended 
onthe wrong end of a 4-0 hammering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/chelsea-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Any hope of silencing a raucous stadium was gone. A firecracker atmosphere now 
had an opening that only sparked the faithful further.

What United needed desperately was to slow the game and lower the temperature 
– take hold of the ball and move Fenerbahce around. Instead, it came close to 
being a two-goal deficit before the quarter hour. Slick interplay between 
Jeremain Lens and Alper Potuk ended with the former being fouled by Morgan 
Schneiderlin just outside the area. The free-kick came to nothing but United 
were rocking.

What they needed was a sight of goal – something to offer encouragement and 
make Fenerbahce think. Rooney was given the chance to do so when Martial 
slipped him in. The 31-year-old captain was clear but an awful first touch 
allowed Volkan Demirel to rush out and the danger ended.

In a display of disjointed football and questionable confidence, United 
continued the pattern of not only this season but of those under David Moyes 
and Louis van Gaal. A classic illustration of the ills that continue to bedevil 
United came just before Pogba limped off. A Rooney corner came to Blind, who 
had time. An amateurish touch allowed Souza to seize possession. Fenerbahce 
broke, United were in disarray, and the move ended in relief when Lens missed 
with a volley.

Pogba’s forced exit – he had been brought down earlier – ushered Ibrahimovic 
into the contest. The 35-year-old took up the centre-forward position and 
Rooney, at first, moved into the No10 slot. From here, United dominated until 
the interval during a volatile period in which the niggle factor rose.

The flashpoint came in just before the interval. Ibrahimovic desperately needs 
a goal, which may have caused the frustration that moved him to lose his temper 
with Simon Kjaer as they came together. Ibrahimovic appeared to grab the 
defender around the throat yet neither Milorad Mazic nor the referee’s 
assistant saw an infringement and the United striker walked away scot-free, 
though loud boos became the soundtrack when he neared the ball thereafter.

The next unsavoury incident happened outside the home side’s area. Rooney 
lunged towards Souza, made no contact, but this did not stop the midfielder 
going down. It provoked Rooney and a fracas developed which featured 
significant involvement from Schneiderlin and Demirel. When it cleared 
Fenerbahce’s goalkeeper was booked and the game continued with United more or 
less camped inside their opponent’s territory.

Mourinho had sent out a side showing three changes from the goalless draw with 
Burnley. Ibrahimovic, Juan Mata and Jesse Lingard were replaced by Martial, 
Rooney and Schneiderlin. The latter’s role ended when he was substituted for 
Mata and so Ander Herrera became the lone holding player in what appeared to be 
a 4-1-4-1 formation.

It meant Rooney dropped into the quasi-midfield role Mourinho states should 
never be his but which he seems unable to escape. Ibrahimovic cannot avoid 
blame for Lens’s second goal. He chased back admirably only to give away a 
free-kick 20 yards out. Up stepped the No77 with a sweet curling strike that 
left De Gea rooted. Mourinho instantly substituted Henrikh Mkhitaryan for 
Rashford. Still, Fenerbahce poured forward. Blind was unable to halt Emmanuel 
Emenike and De Gea had to scramble clear.

Scrambling was what United ended the match doing: it is not supposed to be 
like this under Mourinho.
 