
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> have 
announced the signing of goalkeeper Willy Caballero from Málaga on a three-year 
contract.

The 32-year-old Argentinian has moved for an undisclosed fee in a switch that 
sees him reunited with the City manager Manuel Pellegrini. The pair previously 
worked together atMálaga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> after 
Pellegrini signed Caballero for the Spanish outfit in 2011.

City have been looking for a new goalkeeper to provide competition for their 
first-choice stopper Joe Hart followingCostel Pantilimon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/16/sunderland-costel-pantilimon-manchester-city>
’s release at the end of last season. Caballero is City’s third new signing of 
the summer, with midfielder Fernando and full-back Bacary Sagna the other 
arrivals.

“I am very happy, and really looking forward to the start of pre-season and 
performing well to help the team,” Caballero told the club’s website. “This is 
a new challenge and a new league for me. I have been doing well in the previous 
years and my goal is to go on and hopefully perform at the same level for City.”

Caballero is determined to push Hart for the starting spot. “I know I am 
coming to a big club with a very good goalkeeper,” Caballero said. “City 
already have a great goalkeeper in Joe Hart, but I will try and compete for the 
No1 spot. I will do my best in the training sessions.”

Caballero began his career in his homeland with Boca Juniors and then moved to 
Spain in 2004, spending seven years with Elche before linking up with 
Pellegrini at Málaga, with whom he gained Champions League experience. The 
goalkeeper added: “The most beautiful moments of my career were under Manuel 
Pellegrini in Málaga, where we achieved big things and we made Málaga’s name 
known around Europe.

“As for my new team-mates, I have a very good relationship with Martín 
Demichelis, but I’ve never met Pablo Zabaleta and Sergio Agüero (City’s three 
other Argentinian players). It’s something I’m looking forward to. For me it is 
very good to have people from Argentina in the squad because I think it will be 
very helpful.”
 