
Manuel Pellegrini's first official day as Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> manager ended in 
disappointment with Isco set to reject the chance to join his former Málaga 
coach and sign for Real Madrid.

City are relaxed about the midfielder's decision, which has yet to become 
official, after the 21-year-old said that Madrid "excite".

Pellegrini is also unconcerned that the prospect of landing Napoli's Edinson 
Cavani is receding. City have kept watch on the striker after he was identified 
as a target by Roberto Mancini but Pellegrini does not hold the Uruguayan in 
the same regard.

If Isco is signed by Madrid, Pellegrini is content with the resources at his 
disposal, which include Yaya Touré, David Silva, Jesus Navas, Fernandinho, 
Samir Nasri and James Milner.

City's plan to play 4-3-3 as their main formation next season puts in further 
context their content with the current midfield and attacking personnel. As 
Carlos Tevez and Sergio Agüero, the forwards, can play anywhere across the 
attacking line, the need to bring in Isco and Cavani is not being viewed as 
vital.

Pellegrini spoke for the first time about Navas and Fernandinho. He told 
mcfc.co.uk: "Jesus is a player I know well from La Liga. He is quick, has 
excellent technique and City fans will enjoy watching him. He will provide a 
variety of attacking options for us and can also score goals as well as create 
them."

Of the Brazilian, Pellegrini said: "I made Fernandinho one of the top 
priorities. He has impressed me on a number of occasions over the past few 
years and is another player I've taken a keen interest in. He is an experienced 
international who will further strengthen our midfield and I think he will be 
well suited to the Premier League. He is a superb athlete with a wide range of 
passing, can score goals and most importantly, can quickly turn defence into 
attack.

"I am looking forward to working with both our new signings and with the 
players who have already won a Premier League title together. We have a very 
strong pool and together we aim to achieve great things."

The future of Joleon Lescott remains in the balance, though with Kolo Touré 
having departed for Liverpool the central defender could yet remain at City.
 