
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> are 
closing in on a second addition to their midfield this summer after holding 
talks with Crewe Alexandra's coveted Nick Powell.

The 18-year-old is expected to undergo a medical at United this week and could 
complete a transfer worth £3m-£4m despite initial reservations over a lack of 
first-team opportunities at Old Trafford. Powell has his pick of several 
Premier League clubs having scored 16 goals in 45 appearances for Crewe last 
season, including a stunning strike in the League Two play-off final win over 
Cheltenham, and attracted interest from Arsenal, Tottenham Hotspur, Liverpool 
and Everton.

David Moyes, the Everton manager, had hoped Powell's desire for regular 
first-team football would tempt the midfielder to Goodison Park. However, the 
England Under-18 international remains keen on joining Sir Alex Ferguson at Old 
Trafford. He would be United's second midfield signing of the close season 
after they agreed a £17m deal with Borussia Dortmund for the Japan 
international Shinji Kagawa.

The Crewe manager, Steve Davis, said: "Nick is still with us but I am sure 
talks are still ongoing with his agent and clubs. These things take time and 
rightly so because all parties have to be satisfied with any deal. I still 
envisage him leaving us this summer but if it doesn't happen then we would 
welcome him back for pre-season. We'll see what happens this week because 
obviously I would like to know as soon as possible if we are moving forward 
without him or not."

It has been suggested that Powell could sign for United and rejoin Crewe on 
loan next season to continue his development in League One. But Davis said: 
"One thing I can confirm is that he won't be coming back here on loan. That 
wouldn't be part of it because we want to bring in a replacement of our own and 
give our own players, such as Max Clayton [an England Under-18 international], 
a chance."

Moyes is also facing a challenge from Ferguson over Leighton Baines, the 
Everton and England left-back who is aware of United's desire to bring him to 
Old Trafford this summer. Everton have not received an offer for Baines but 
value the 27-year-old at around £20m, a fee United are not prepared to pay
 