
The hollow football remains and Louis van Gaal still appears to be out of 
ideas and inspiration. HisManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> side are in Monday 
night’s FA Cup fourth round draw but the sense is of Van Gaal being a dismal 
defeat away from the same scrutiny he suffered during the festive period.

Next is Tuesday evening’s visit to Newcastle United, then Sunday’s trip to 
Merseyside to face Liverpool. Both sides are struggling, so to go down to Steve 
McClaren’s men or United’s fiercest rivals will not play well with Ed Woodward, 
the executive vice-chairman, or supporters.

Against Sheffield United of League One, the Dutchman’s team were lacklustre 
and fortunate to win. Only a lateWayne Rooney penalty dragged United through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/manchester-united-sheffield-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 the teatime game in which Memphis Depay drew ironic cheers for actually taking 
aim at George Long’s goal. As Depay was a 60th-minute substitute and his shot 
went wide this is an apt illustration of the home crowd’s deep frustration.

Afterwards, the bona fide United great Paul Scholes, who knows about 
entertaining the Theatre of Dreams,spoke of players and Van Gaal seeming bored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/paul-scholes-manchester-united-players-bored-sheffield-united>
. Ennui is indeed the prevailing emotion emanating from this United squad. The 
Van Gaal factor becalms his players and the fans who pay a sizeable amount to 
watch them.

There were only 20 minutes remaining when a man in a red shirt finally managed 
to shoot at the target. There was little surprise, though, that Matteo 
Darmian’s effort proved tame and was simple for Long to collect.

The Italian offers a prime example of Van Gaal’s puzzling modus operandi. On 
joining from Torino, Darmain operated smoothly from his right full-back berth, 
looking a classy addition to the squad. But since then he has been played at 
left-back and centre-back, dropped, criticised publicly and become another Van 
Gaal signing to whom the 64-year-old offers mixed messages.

Darmian, who cost £13m in the summer, was clear in his understanding of fans’ 
frustration at the grey product they are watching. This was the 10th 
consecutive home match in which United failed to score in the first half.

“Of course, we want to score earlier in games as well,” Darmian said. “But 
sometimes it is difficult for us because Sheffield, like a lot of teams when 
they come here, have all their team behind the ball and it is not easy to find 
space. Sometimes we tried to pass the ball in behind to create the space.

“The fans were fantastic because we didn’t score [before the penalty] and they 
still supported. We want to do our best for the fans but know it is not easy.”

Rooney was the game-winner for a second Saturday in a row, after his 
back-heeled finish in thevictory over Swansea City here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/manchester-united-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
. “He was very calm to take a penalty in the 92nd minute,” Darmian said. “But 
he’s a top player and he didn’t feel the pressure. It would have been better if 
we had scored earlier but we won the game and are in the next round.

“This sort of game can always happen with a team from League One but we fight 
and in the end we got the penalty, we scored it, we won and we are happy with 
the result. Wins always help to increase our confidence. Now we have two days 
to prepare for Newcastle. We have to recover and then focus on that game.”

Darmian does not seem too sure how Van Gaal views his progress. “Yes, I think 
he is happy and when I train I try to improve day by day. And when the manager 
gives me a chance I try to do my best and to help the team.”

However, Italy’s right-back knows his preferred position. “On the right side. 
But playing on the left is not a problem when the coach wants me to play there. 
I always try to do my best wherever I play. To return after a hamstring injury 
[in early December] is not easy. Sometimes it affects you mentally. But I feel 
good. I want to play like I did at the beginning of the season and that is what 
I’m trying to do.

“Now we have to continue in the way we have started the new year. We have 
beaten Swansea and won [against Sheffield United] and now we must continue in 
this way.”

But how much longer can the Van Gaal way continue? The XI he fielded had 
Anthony Martial out of position again on the left. The 20-year-old possesses 
two qualities United sorely miss at the head of attack: serious pace and flair. 
So why not select him at centre-forward, and the ever-slowing Rooney behind? 
Afterwards Van Gaal spoke of needing more wing-play. Juan Mata is a fine 
footballer but no Stanley Matthews or even Ashley Young of the wide areas. Yet 
the Spaniard is continually deployed there. Why? Countless more questions such 
as these could be put to Van Gaal. Perhaps the most pertinent one is this: what 
happens regarding the Dutchman’s position if he fails to scrape wins in the 
next two games?

Man of the match Memphis Depay (Manchester United)

Paul Scholes: Manchester United players looked bored against Sheffield United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/paul-scholes-manchester-united-players-bored-sheffield-united> 