
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> have 
beaten Barcelona to the signing of Nolito, with the forward choosing to work 
under Pep Guardiola again after previously doing so at the Catalan club.

Nolito, 29, was given his Barça debut by Guardiola in the 2010-11 season when 
the Spaniard was in charge at the Camp Nou. Barcelona were intent on taking him 
back to the club, whom he opted to leave to join Benfica in 2011, before moving 
to Celta Vigo in 2013. But in an indicator of Guardiola’s attraction it is 
understood that Nolito decided to join City from Celta instead, the club
triggering his release clause of around £14m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/manchester-city-nolito-close-signing-celta-vigo>
 and the player agreeing a four-year contract.

Guardiola is also targeting the Ukrainian forward Oleksandr Zinchenko, who 
plays for Ufa in Russia. If the 19-year-old, who became Ukraine’s youngest ever 
scorer with a goal against Romania in May, is added to Guardiola’s squad he is 
likely to be loaned out.

Watford turn down £38m Shanghai SIPG offer for Odion Ighalo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/watford-turn-down-38m-odion-ighalo-shanghai-sipg>
Nolito becomes Guardiola’s second major signing as City coach, following Ilkay 
Gündogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/manchester-city-confirm-signing-ilkay-gundogan-borussia-dortmund>
. Nolito said: “I’m very fortunate that it was he who handed me my debut at 
Barcelona. I know him a little, I was with him for a short while whenever he 
got me to train with the first team or included me in the playing squad. I 
think that Pep Guardiola is one of the best managers in the world. He knows a 
lot about the game and he’s going to help me progress as a player and I’m sure 
he’ll get the best out of me.”

Txiki Begiristain, who was Barça’s director of football for most of his time 
at the club, will be another familiar face. Nolito said: “It was a really 
satisfying feeling when I heard of City’s and Pep’s interest in me, and also 
that of Txiki. It’s something I’m really excited about and so here we are.”

Nolito started all of Spain’s matches at Euro 2016 and scored against Turkey 
in the 3-0 group game win.

Of his ambitions at City, Nolito, who will wear the No9 shirt, said: “I hope 
to perform well when I get the chance to feature and to be amongst the goals of 
course. Let’s hope that I can score whenever I make my debut, but firstly that 
we win the game. That would then be the dream debut and the perfect start.”

He also pointed to the influence of his grandparents, who raised him. “I was 
brought up by my grandfather and grandmother, they helped to educate me and 
they provided everything they possibly could for me. For that I am really proud 
of them and grateful for all they have done and continue to do for me. My 
grandfather was like a father to me and it was he who bought me my first 
football.

“They really are a motivation to me, because when you think back to going 
through more difficult times, by comparison now life is a lot easier. I 
remember that my grandad was just like a father to me and that he always used 
to take me along to training and pay my subs as a kid to the local teams in my 
town when he had to. You never forget stuff like that.

“I’m from Sanlúcar de Barrameda, a town in the south of Spain. From as far 
back as I can remember I’ve always loved playing football. It’s been the same 
right through until today.”
 