
Manor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor> have been summoned to the 
stewards to explain why they missed qualifying for the season-opening 
Australian Grand Prix. Despite strenuous efforts this week, the former Marussia 
F1 team failed to make it out on track at Melbourne’s Albert Park at any stage 
over the course of the past two days.

It resulted in drivers Will Stevens and Roberto Merhi, along with the team’s 
mechanics, looking on from the garage as qualifying unfolded. Sporting director 
Graeme Lowdon confirmed the team had made enormous strides since encountering 
numerous issues on Friday, but ultimately had to concede defeat in their bid to 
take part.

Lewis Hamilton dominates to take pole position at Australian Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/14/lewis-hamilton-pole-australian-grand-prix>
The South Yorkshire-based marque only emerged from administration three weeks 
ago after being saved by energy entrepreneur Stephen Fitzpatrick. Prior to that 
Manor were on the brink of selling their assets via an auction, resulting in 
them being forced to wipe all the hard drives of their computers, so losing 
valuable data to aid their return.

Attempting to rebuild their systems from the ground up has proven time 
consuming and difficult, and in the end too big a hurdle to overcome, leaving 
them now to focus on the next race in Malaysia. The FIA, however, appears far 
from impressed as a team representative has met with the race stewards, 
providing “a written statement explaining why the team did not participate in 
qualifying … after receiving a letter from the FIA on 20 February”.

No details have yet emerged as to the contents of the letter referred to by 
the FIA, or whether the team face any potential sanction. Team principal John 
Booth, explaining Manor’s position prior to the request from the stewards, 
said: “We always expected things to be this difficult. We knew there was only a 
slim chance of making qualifying when we set off.

“These modern Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> cars 
are incredibly complex things, and we have had three weeks to design and build 
the car in accordance with the 2015 regulations. We’ve had no time to fix the 
racks and electronics, and get all the infrastructure built that was required.”
 