
The Mansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> forward Adi 
Yussuf has been banned for five games and fined after being found guilty of 
urinating at the back of a stand during a recent game.

The misconduct charge from the Football Association is in relation to the 
League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> defeat 
against Plymouth at Home Park on 13 February, and occurred as Yussuf was 
warming up as a substitute. Brendan Malone, the referee that day, included the 
incident in his report and Yussuf, 23, admitted the charge at an independent 
regulatory commission hearing.

A statement on the FA website said: “Adi Yussuf has been suspended from all 
domestic club football for five first-team competitive matches and fined £700 
after he admitted an FA misconduct charge. It follows a breach of FA Rule E3 by 
the Mansfield Town player in or around the 30th and 53rd minute of the league 
fixture against Plymouth Argyle on 13 February 2016. The decision of the 
independent regulatory commission, which sat on Thursday 10 March 2016, also 
included a warning as to the player’s future conduct.”

Yussuf joined Mansfield at the end of last season and has scored five goals in 
23 league appearances, but all of those have come as a substitute. Beginning 
with the trip to Bristol Rovers on Saturday, Yussuf will miss subsequent 
matches against Portsmouth, Wycombe, Northampton and Hartlepool. Mansfield are 
10th in League Two but just two points shy of the play-off places.

“We are very disappointed by the length of ban received,” said the Mansfield 
manager, Adam Murray 
<http://www.mansfieldtown.net/news/article/yussuf-banned-3000509.aspx>. “While 
the football club does not, in any way, condone the isolated ‘act’ which has 
previously been reported, it should be borne in mind that Adi has stated that 
he was given alleged guidance by both a steward and unused substitutes from 
Plymouth Argyle as to where to perform this act, which was at the back of the 
Plymouth stand and out of public view.

“At this time Adi was an unused substitute and was warming up on the touchline 
at the far end of Home Park and furthermore, the water closets at this ground 
are a fair distance away. Without in any way excusing the player’s act, Adi did 
follow instructions by three Plymouth employees, at a venue which was 
unfamiliar to him. It must be re-emphasised that the club would never support 
this type of action. Adi has been disciplined by the club, fully reminded of 
his responsibilities in no uncertain terms and warned of his future conduct in 
such circumstances.”

Premier League, FA Cup and more: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/11/premier-league-fa-cup-scottish-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend> 