
Mansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> Town, the Stags, 
are monarchs of the Blue Square glen. They have had the Football League in 
focus for five seasons since they fell out of it and for a year since they came 
third and lost in the play-offs to York City. This time they made no mistake. 
They can hold their heads high, which stags do rather well.

The situation was tight. A home victory over Wrexham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wrexham> would do it; a draw would be 
enough if Kidderminster Harriers did not beat Stockport County by more than a 
goal; defeat would require Kidderminster, too, to lose. At Field Mill eyes were 
on Mansfield, ears 70 miles west. The eyes had it. Mansfield won 1-0. Stags 
outran Harriers, as they should. But it was agonising at the end, adding to the 
thrill. It is much more exciting to win by a millimetre than a mile, as they 
know in Manchester.

Mansfield scored in the 40th minute, which was before Kidderminster got their 
first goal and crowd trouble set that match back almost half an hour. 
Nonetheless more Kidderminster goals came in time to give Mansfield no margin 
for error as they entered their last few minutes. The referee, Nicholas 
Kingsley, was superbly deaf to 6,300 whistlers in the crowd of 6,394, some 
3,800 above average, as he stretched the minimum of five minutes' added time 
beyond six for dragging feet.

Wrexham's scant support was understandable. They were secure in the play-offs 
and can look forward to Kidderminster's visit for the first leg tomorrow, 
though without David Artell, who was sent off shortly before the end. Their 
player-manager Andy Morrell's selection suggested an eye to this immediate 
future, though theirs was an honest performance, simply without a cutting edge. 
It gave Alan Marriott in Mansfield's goal as comfortable an evening as the 
occasion could. There were half a dozen scrimmages when the goalmouth resembled 
a human threshing machine but all were at Wrexham's end.

On the face of it Matt Green, the conference's top scorer, was Mansfield's 
match‑winner, putting away the goal from the penalty spot for his 25th league 
goal of the season. Last year, on loan from Oxford United, he got 29 before 
signing for Mansfield in the summer. But Louis Briscoe, genuinely 'winning' the 
award with tricky footwork before Glen Little brought him down, was the 
match-turner and several times threatened to create a second goal that would 
have settled nerves.

Paul Cox, Mansfield's manager, found it easier to look ahead than back. "I 
need a little time to adjust," he said. "There was immense pressure at the end 
and all these chemicals were running through the body. We'll enjoy tonight but 
I want to push on. I don't want to stand still. I'm hungry for the next 
challenge and we've got to stay strong. I don't want to be a yo-yo club."

Cox, once a local lower League defender, cut his managerial teeth at Eastwood 
and can look back on two successful seasons. Adam Murray, the captain, said: 
"He's big on team spirit. You know you can rely on the man next to you." 
Morrell said: "They've got the most points, so they deserve to be top." They 
also got the most wins (30) and goals (92). Wrexham, often pace-setters, ended 
15 points adrift. They won only six of 24 Saturday fixtures.

Though Mansfield started better than Kidderminster, who had five defeats then 
five draws before finding their magic carpet, they followed the Harriers into 
the play-off places only in the new year. But they won 20 of their last 23 
games – 60 points in the second half of the season after 35 in the first – 
including one run of 12 wins. The surge began afterLouis Suárez had a hand in 
Liverpool knocking them out of the FA Cup <http:> and their owner, John 
Radford, born in the town, saying he was going to marry his chief executive a 
second time. Maybe he will make that three now. No ground approached by the 
Robin Hood Line should be short of romance.

Radford makes money in Doncaster and spends it on Mansfield. He bought the 
club at the start of the 2010-11 season, saving it from the dire clutches of 
Keith Haslam, who had had it since 1993 and dragged it into obscurity if not 
disrepute. Haslam retained ownership of the ground until 1 March last year, 
when Radford purchased that, too. Now they are released, as amber and blue 
balloons were before kick-off.

Cox spoke of the "great bloke who owns and runs it. He's given me the tools. 
I've got good and honest people around me." Radford has talked of taking the 
club to the Championship. Cox mentioned "the stars". Owner and chief executive 
joined in the cavorting of a club in rightful ecstasy.

The players had a rehearsal on Tuesday when they came from behind at Hereford 
to win in injury-time with a Green goal that gave them pole position on 
Saturday. On such moments are seasons decided. Lee Beevers, right-back, came 
off injured then but was back and steadfast for the final game. He has a 
recurrently dislocated shoulder. It will now be relocated in League Two as 
Mansfield take up their former station in the League index behind Manchester 
United.
 