
Marcella Hazan, who has died aged 89, introduced America to the delights of 
proper Italian cooking. In a series of books from 1973, she called time on the 
masquerade of Italo-American overcooked pasta slathered in viscous tomato 
sauces and crowned with mountains of inappropriate cheese. She insisted on 
authentic ingredients, a light touch with stocks (or, more properly Italian, 
broths), sauces and flavourings such as garlic, and the use of fresh, seasonal 
produce. This was a revelation to Americans, just as their supermarkets, frozen 
and convenience food and tomatoes "half-ripe, gassed, shuttled great distances 
and artificially quickened back to life" had greatly shocked Hazan when she 
first arrived inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> in 1955.

Her books were influential in Britain too, although Elizabeth David's Italian 
Food (1954) had given it a head start, later capitalised upon by writers such 
as Anna Del Conte andPatience Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/18/guardianobituaries.food>. 
Certainly, come the late 1980s, when British cooks began to look away from 
France and concentrate on Italy as a principal culinary inspiration, Hazan's 
recipes were widely praised by such leading culinary figures asRose Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/feb/28/rose-gray-obituary> and 
Ruth Rogers of the River Cafe whose books, in turn, emphasised the simplicity 
and freshness of Italian cookery.

She was born Marcella Polini in Cesenatico, a seaside town on the Adriatic 
coast, in the province of Emilia-Romagna (the capital of which is Bologna, 
Italy's food central), to an Italian expatriate mother from Beirut and an 
Italian father. When Marcella was an infant, her parents moved to Egypt to be 
nearer to her mother's family and her father, a tailor, set up shop in 
Alexandria. However, at seven, she fell badly on the beach there, breaking her 
right arm. Complications from this injury necessitated a return home and 
extensive surgery. She never recovered full use of her arm, although she was 
able to grip a knife or hold an onion.

After the second world war, Marcella gained a doctorate in natural sciences 
and biology at the University of Ferrara and turned to teaching. In the early 
50s she met Victor Hazan, a young American from an Italian-Jewish family who 
had fled to New York at the outbreak of war. When Marcella and Victor married 
in 1955, it was not with his parents' blessing. They would rather he had found 
a bride of like faith.

Soon after their marriage, the young couple were called to America to help in 
the family furriers business. Marcella took a job in a dental research 
laboratory, but it was shortlived owing to her lack of English, and the time 
she needed to devote to housekeeping for her husband. This meant learning to 
cook, from a copy of Ada Boni's great classic of Italian regional cooking, and 
to speak English, from watching sport on the television. Her kitchen 
apprenticeship was instinctual rather than learned: she cooked as she 
remembered meals in her youth – and when she returned toItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> she found her productions were a fair 
simulacrum of the real thing. In all this, she was guided by her husband, 
cooking his lunch each working day and accepting his criticisms when her 
efforts were not up to scratch. This collaboration, with Victor often proposing 
a change of tack or new step in her career, was to continue all her life.

In 1962, by now with an infant son, they returned to Italy, where Victor 
worked in advertising, and the couple gained more experience of the food and 
cookery of regions other than Emilia-Romagna. When a further crisis in the 
family firm brought them back to New York in 1969, Marcella decided to learn 
more about Chinese food (given that the Chinese too enjoyed pasta and building 
up complex flavours). However, her Chinese teacher was called away by some 
family emergency, and Marcella's fellow students suggested she teach them about 
Italian food instead.

Rumour of these small cookery classes came to the ears of Craig Claiborne 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2000/01/24/nyregion/craig-claiborne-79-times-food-editor-and-critic-is-dead.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm>
, then culinary arbiter of the New York Times and the guzzling classes alike, 
and in a landmark piece in 1970 he launched Marcella Hazan upon the world. Not 
long afterwards, it was suggested that she might write a book. "But I can't 
write English," was her response. At this, Victor proposed that he translate 
her words into English (which he carried on doing for all her books) as well as 
imposing some sort of order and method on her instinctual cooking.

The Classic Italian Cookbook was published in 1973 by Harper's Magazine Press, 
to some acclaim, but no great sales. The style was quite peremptory, the 
recipes to the point, the cooking devastatingly direct. As much effort was 
expended in teaching the reader the Italian way of eating (that's Victor) as of 
the Italian way of cooking (Marcella).

The book and the classes were a passport to the American cooking elite: 
Claiborne, James Beard andJulia Child,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/aug/16/usnews.guardianobituaries>who 
was a friend. It was Child who suggested a move to the publisher Alfred A Knopf 
and their formidable editor Judith Jones. Knopf reissued the book in 1976 and 
followed it up with More Classic Italian Cooking in 1978 (published in the UK 
as The Second Classic Italian Cookbook, adapted for English readers by Del 
Conte). Later, Hazan moved to HarperCollins.

Fame had come to her quite late in life (she was nearly 50 when her first book 
appeared) but with undimmed vigour she and Victor expanded her cookery teaching 
in New York and then in Bologna and Venice. She retired to Longboat Key in 
Florida only with the dawn of the new century (but still had energy enough to 
write another book, Marcella Says (2004), to deal with the lack of decent 
materials in her new home). Hazan also wrote Marcella's Italian Kitchen (1986), 
Marcella Cucina (1997) and a memoir, Amarcord (2008).

She suffered from emphysema for some years. There was often a moment of 
surprise among younger Americans when they found that she had an enthusiasm for 
their tobacco and bourbon whiskey while viewing their food with some suspicion 
("We don't eat Italian food in America," she once remarked to an Oregon 
restaurateur).

She is survived by Victor and their son, Giuliano, himself a cookery teacher 
and writer.

• Marcella Hazan, cookery writer, born 15 April 1924; died 29 September 2013
 