
Marco Djuricin’s goal gave Brentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> a west London derby win over 
Queens Park Rangers and turned up the heat on Chris Ramsey.

The Austrian striker Djuricin grabbed his fourth goal of the season as the 
Bees beat their local rivals for the first time in 50 years. It meant another 
miserable evening for the Rangers manager Ramsey, who is already under fire 
from fans and under pressure from above at Loftus Road.

They had not even faced Brentford in more than a decade but made the short 
trip with some trepidation following an unconvincing start to the season to 
face opponents who had won their past three games.

Massimo Cellino agrees to sell shares to supporters group Leeds Fans United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/30/leeds-massino-cellino-fans-united-shares>
However, they can count themselves unfortunate after Massimo Luongo was twice 
denied by the woodwork in the first half.

Brentford had the first chances of a scrappy opening 45 minutes with the 
Chelsea loanee John Swift forcing an early save from Rob Green and Alan 
McCormack heading over.

Rangers were struggling to string two passes together but Brentford were 
unable to take advantage, their best chance falling to Swift whose fierce, 
curling effort was kept out by Green at full stretch.

The visitors finally mustered a shot on goal after 33 minutes but Matt 
Phillips’ effort did not trouble David Button. Moments later Tjaronn Chery’s 
chip floated over before Luongo found the frame of the goal twice in the space 
of five minutes.

The Rangers forward nodded a Phillips cross against the crossbar before 
cutting in from the left wing to fire a low shot across Button and back off the 
inside of the far post.

Brentford came close to opening the scoring in the first minute of the second 
half when McCormack found Djuricin inside the area. His snap shot looked 
destined for the net until Green instinctively stuck out an arm, with Swift 
firing the rebound wide.

But they were not to be denied and eventually took the lead in the 56th minute 
when Alan Judge broke down the left and drilled a low cross to the edge of the 
six-yard area where Djuricin tucked the ball home.

Ramsey threw on Charlie Austin, just back to fitness after a month out 
injured, but the striker barely got a look-in as Rangers finished the match 
with a whimper and left their beleaguered manager with an uncomfortable walk 
across the pitch in front of the disgruntled away support.
 