
Mario Gómez scored twice as Bayern Munich beat Nürnberg 4-0 in the 183rd 
Bavarian derby to open a four-point lead in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> on Saturday, with 
defending championsBorussia Dortmund held 1-1 at Stuttgart.

Bayern, who host Napoli in the Champions League on Wednesday, got off to a 
perfect start when Gómez scored with a powerful header from Bastian 
Schweinsteiger's precise cross. And the league's top scorer returned the favour 
for Schweinsteiger to score from distance, 20 minutes before Franck Ribéry 
unleashed a low strike past the helpless Alexander Stephan.

Bayern's intensity dropped in the second half, when Nürnberg's Tomas Pekhart 
should have scored, but was let down by his first touch. Any hopes of an 
unlikely comeback were dashed, however, when Toni Kroos crossed for Gómez to 
score his 12th goal of the season from close range.

"We could have gone forward more often in the second half," Gómez said. "A lot 
of the players were already thinking of Wednesday's game. The fans have to 
excuse us if we don't go forward so aggressively once it's 3-0 or 4-0, because 
we have to think of the coming weeks."

It was Bayern coach Jupp Heynckes's first win against a side coached by Dieter 
Hecking at the fifth attempt. "You can see the players are enjoying themselves 
playing football. It's a very important aspect of playing successful football," 
Heynckes said.

Kick-off in Stuttgart was 15 minutes late, after Dortmund were delayed in 
traffic. But the visitors started brightly, Robert Lewandowski hitting the post 
in the third minute, and Mario Götze also shooting narrowly wide. However, 
Stuttgart's Serdar Tasci was first to react when Martin Harnik's effort struck 
the post and the defender slid in to score off the rebound.

Götze was unlucky not to get a penalty in the 37th minute, when the 
19-year-old was upended by Christian Molinaro. "In my view, a very clear 
penalty, no ifs and buts," the Dortmund coach, Jürgen Klopp, said. "I've said 
it before: This is so wrong … [Götze] is whistled for fouls as often as he gets 
fouled. That's very funny."

Götze played Shinji Kagawa through before the interval and the Japan 
midfielder crossed for Lukasz Piszczek to tap in. TheStuttgart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart> goalkeeper, Sven Ulreich, 
superbly denied Götze and then Neven Subotic late on as Dortmund piled forward, 
but the visitors had to settle for a point.

In Gelsenkirchen, Schalke beat Hoffenheim 3-1 to climb to second, one point 
ahead of Dortmund. Raúl scored from close range in the 28th minute, though 
there was a suspicion of handball. "He clearly played the ball with his hand," 
the Hoffenheim goalkeeper, Tom Starke, said. "It was unintentional," Raúl 
insisted.

Vedad Ibisevic equalised in the 63rd minute, 10 minutes before Schalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> striker Klaas-Jan Huntelaar 
scored a penalty he earned following Marvin Compper's push, and Huntelaar 
sealed the win with his second, from a narrow angle in the 76th minute.

Hertha Berlin won 3-2 at Wolfsburg, who twice equalised, but Pierre-Michel 
Lasogga scored a dramatic winner for the visitors, with five minutes remaining.

Borussia Mönchengladbach beat Hannover 2-1, and moved up to fifth place on 
goal difference after their first win in four games, thanks to two goals from 
Marco Reus.

Reus got the better of Emanuel Pogatetz before slotting a low shot past 
Germany team-mate Ron-Robert Zieler in the 21st minute. Pogatetz made amends 
five minutes later with a header from a free-kick, but Reus scored with another 
fine strike in the 51st minute.

In the late game, Werder Bremen came from behind to win 3-1 at Mainz to move 
fourth behind Dortmund on goal difference.

Niko Bungert headed Mainz in front in the 23rd minute, but the outstanding 
Claudio Pizarro went past four Mainz defenders before putting the ball over 
Christian Wetklo for his 150th Bundesliga goal six minutes later. "It's my 
job," Pizarro said.

The Peru striker also set up Aaron Hunt to score with an impressive long-range 
strike 62 seconds after the interval.

Sebastian Prödl crashed a header off the post in the 78th minute, but made the 
game safe when he scored at the second attempt. "I've no more desire to talk 
about the good game my team played," said the Mainz coach, Thomas Tuchel, after 
his side's fifth home defeat in a row. "I've been saying the same stuff for the 
last nine weeks."
 