
Bayern Munich needed a second-half goal from the Bundesliga's most expensive 
signing, Mario Gomez, to salvage a 1–1 draw at home toWerder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen>. After falling behind six 
minutes before the break when Mesut Ozil fired home a cross from Aaron Hunt in 
the box, Gomez came to the rescue with less than 20 minutes remaining.

The Germany striker, who joined from VfB Stuttgart in May for around €30m, 
beat keeper Tim Wiese to the punch and connected with a cross from the right 
from Philipp Lahm. The result means Bayern are still to win under new coach 
Louis van Gaal in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>, after their draw 
against Hoffenheim last week.

With Franck Ribery on the bench but striker Miroslav Klose back fit, Bayern 
quickly took control of the game. Werder were made to defend hard as the 
Bavarians stormed forward, dominating in midfield and keeping Wiese busy, the 
Bremen stopper stretching well to save a 20-metre drive from Bastian 
Schweinsteiger after nine minutes.

However, Werder then struck against the run of play. Ozil gave keeper Michael 
Rensing no chance when he notched his second goal in as many matches. But with 
Ribery on for his first appearance of theseason dGomez levelled in the 72nd 
minute, beating Wiese from five metres.

Former Newcastle striker Obafemi Martins scored his first Bundesliga goal as 
Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> continued their 
impressive start to the new campaign. The defending champions came back from 
being a goal behind to beat Cologne 3-1 with last season's 26-goal hitman Edin 
Dzeko also on target.

If scoring goals was not a problem last season, it appears to be even easier 
this term with Martins strengthening what was already a record-breaking attack. 
Wolfsburg now have maximum points from their opening two fixtures and have won 
16 of their past 18 Bundesliga matches.

Borussia Moenchengladbach moved up to third thanks to victory against Hertha 
Berlin <https://www.theguardian.com/football/herthaberlin> in their first home 
game of the season. Roel Brouwers put Gladbach ahead against the run of play in 
the 23rd minute before Karim Matmour added a second in the 52nd. Gojko Kacar 
reduced the arrears immediately, but he then missed a golden opportunity to 
equalise as he struck the woodwork in the dying seconds.

In the opening 12 minutes, Hamburg SV struck three times and conceded one 
againstBorussia Dortmund, before grabbing another in the second half to win 
4–1. Defender Guy Demel gave the hosts the lead in the third minute with a 
tap-in before Dortmund levelled through Nelson Valdez only 62 seconds later.

Brazilian Ze Roberto put Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg>
 ahead on the rebound after his first effort rattled the post seven minutes 
later and striker Paolo Guerrero made it 3–1 from just inside the box in the 
12th. Swede Marcus Berg completed the rout 18 minutes from time.

VfB Stuttgart also scored four times as they beat Freiburg 4–2 with new 
signing Pavel Pogrebnyak scoring the first goal and winning the penalty that 
led to the second.
 