
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 

Paul Foot is a contender. The first time I saw him – about 10 years ago – I 
thought I was going to start rolling around on the floor laughing, like people 
do in modern internet acronyms.

The funniest sketch I’ve ever seen 

There was a Simon Day Fast Show sketch where he tried to sort out a group of 
people who owed money to each other, with an increasingly complex set of 
transactions. I’m making it sound more boring the more I talk about it but, 
trust me, it was brilliant.

The funniest thing that shouldn’t be funny 

Other people’s pain is the answer, I think; both physical and mental. I used 
to have a story about watching a man run for the train and, when he didn’t 
quite make it, shouting “HE’S MISSED IT!” in a euphoric tone of voice, in front 
of all the other passengers.

The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen 

The Simpsons is the best TV show ever made. The quality may have dropped off 
but as a body of work it deserves to be ranked alongside Shakespeare, chorizo, 
etc. I plan to watch it on my deathbed.


The funniest person I know 

 Tim Key and my brother Paul, but in each case it’s hard to say why. If you 
know someone for long enough, you develop a sort of shorthand which means 
things are increasingly funny for you but incomprehensible to anyone else. 
Eventually, this means that nobody else wants to talk to you and you die almost 
alone, but there we are.

The funniest hairstyle I’ve ever had 

At university, I briefly experimented with dyeing it red. I’d split up with a 
girl and thought it would be a good way of showing that I’d moved on. With 
hindsight it was mostly just a good way of showing that I’d split up with a 
girl and was having a breakdown.

The funniest number 

I might go for nine, which was the percentage of tickets sold for my least 
successful ever tour show. It amounted to around 100 but in a venue which had 
been designed for several thousand. The sound of the wind whistling outside was 
louder than their laughter.

Mark Watson is touring to 10 Dec <http://www.markwatsonthecomedian.com/>
 