
Mark Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mark-hughes> is confident 
his Stoke side will not be caught cold on Monday night when they play Rochdale 
at Spotland just days after returning from warm-weather training in Dubai.

The Stoke manager took his squad to Dubai for a change of scenery as 
temperatures plunged last week. Returning to the cold to face the League One 
side in theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> fourth round 
may come as a shock to their system, but Hughes is unconcerned.

“We are used to the weather in these parts and it won’t take us long to get 
back into it,” he said. “Hopefully, the surface will be OK. We know we’ve got 
to go there, face the conditions and get on with it. It won’t faze us. We will 
take the challenge on and make sure we get the job done.

“The training ground here is a little bit wet under foot at the moment and 
that obviously wasn’t the case away, so we got some good work done. We’ve had 
two days leading into the game so the structure of the week works for us. The 
break has done us good. We’ve just come through Christmas, which takes its toll 
on everybody. It’s key they are able to reboot for the challenges ahead.”

The Welshman is preparing for Rochdale in the same way he would a Premier 
League match and insists the FA Cup is important to his side. “Even against 
Wrexham in the last round we had something like 10 internationals on the field 
of play,” he said. “It’s a trophy we have a good opportunity to win. But you 
need a bit of luck in terms of opposition, and in games, because sometimes it 
can hit somebody on the backside and you lose.Rochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> are doing well and are highly 
thought of, so it won’t be easy.”

The Rochdale manager, Keith Hill, has been suffering from a virus and has been 
unable to work with his players all week. Rochdale have also encountered 
problems with the weather, with snow still covering the Spotland pitch on 
Friday. But Hill, whose team have been training at a local indoor facility, 
said: “We won’t use the weather as an excuse.”
 