
Mark Warburton has backed Kenny Miller to continue playing into his 40s after 
watching the veteran striker bury his 100thRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> goal.

Miller, who turns 37 two days before Christmas, volleyed home his landmark 
goal to hand the Ibrox side a 1-0 victory over Inverness in the Highlands.

Jürgen Klopp bewildered by Liverpool’s festive fixture schedule
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-festive-fixture-schedule>
And his manager reckons that, with his professional approach, he could emulate 
his assistant, David Weir, who was 41 before he hung up his boots.

Warburton said: “It was a tremendous finish from Kenny. How Kenny trains, how 
he conducts himself, how he looks after himself, his mentoring role with the 
younger players on and off the pitch and the respect he has in the dressing 
room is all very important.

“With people like Kenny, like Lee Wallace, like Niko Kranjcar, they have an 
important role to play.

“Kenny knows what we think of him, his contribution, another 90 minutes 
tonight, tells you all you need to know.

“How long can he keep going? Ask Davie Weir. He looks after himself very well. 
He deserves to keep going.”

Rangers put on one of their best displays of a troubled campaign so far but 
even then could maintain the pace and tempo Warburton has been demanding for 
only 60 minutes.

It was enough to seal victory, though, with Miller lashing home a sumptuous 
volley from Wallace’s cross after 22 minutes.

Inverness came back into the match in the latter stages and should have 
equalised when Liam Polworth released the substitute Aaron Doran with 17 
minutes left. But the Irishman’s shot was weak and Clint Hill was able to clear 
off the line.

“It’s a tough place to come,” said Warburton, who revealed Danny Wilson will 
be fit to face Celtic next week despite missing this match with a thigh strain.

“We played very well in the first half. We were brave and patient and I was 
very happy at half-time. But we gave them too many chances in the second half 
with us being loose in dangerous areas. We need to tighten up on that. There is 
room for improvements but there are still lots of positives.”

Caley Thistle’s manager, Richie Foran, felt his side deserved more than a 
defeat. “You have to stick the ball in the net. We had enough opportunities 
tonight,” he said. “I’m disappointed for the lads as it was a real high-tempo 
game and they gave their all.”
 