
The death of a track marshal on a sultry afternoon in the first week of a 
southern hemisphere autumn cast a shadow over yesterday's Australian grand 
prix, in which a flag-to-flag victory for Michael Schumacher's Ferrari carried 
the momentum that took him to last year's world championship into the opening 
race of the new season. The marshal was killed by flying debris in the wake of 
a high-speed accident between Ralf Schumacher, the champion's younger brother, 
and Jacques Villeneuve, both of whom emerged almost unscathed.

However extensive the efforts to make it safe, motor racing will always be a 
dangerous business, and not only for the drivers who are rewarded so generously 
for risking their lives in the cause of sport and spectacle. Marshals are 
unpaid volunteers who give up their spare time to make it possible for others 
to compete for glory. At Monza last September one of their number was killed 
when a wheel came off Heinz-Harald Frentzen's Jordan during a five-car pile-up. 
Yesterday in Melbourne it was the turn of a 50-year-old Queenslander, his 
identity still guarded several hours after the end of the race.

The two cars were running close together in sixth and seventh places as they 
approached turn three on the fifth of the race's 58 laps, with Villeneuve 
looking for an opportunity to force his BAR-Honda past Schumacher's 
Williams-BMW. Schumacher was in the middle of the track, with Villeneuve in 
line astern. Trying to guess his opponent's intention, Villeneuve moved his car 
to the outside of the track as they approached the right-hand turn at 175mph, 
only to discover that Schumacher was already applying the brakes.

The BAR's right front wheel hit the left rear wheel of the Williams, slewing 
Schumacher into a spin and launching Villeneuve into a flight which sent him up 
and over his rival before crashing down against the barrier. All four wheels 
and the front and rear wings were ripped from the BAR as it hurtled along the 
concrete wall, topped with safety netting, which lines the outside of the 
track. One of the many pieces of debris - possibly one of the wheels - hit and 
killed the marshal, who was standing on the outside of the turn, close to an 
aperture cut in the wire netting through which warning flags are waved. Seven 
other spectators were treated on the spot for slight injuries, none requiring 
further treatment.

In Schumacher's recollection, he had slowed normally. "I was on the brakes and 
being careful not to make any change of line," he said afterwards, going on to 
suggest that Villeneuve had made a misjudgment similar to that which brought 
the pair into contact in Montreal last year. Visual evidence, however, appeared 
to support Villeneuve's belief that the German driver had begun the process of 
retardation slightly earlier than usual, by enough of a margin to make the 
accident unavoidable.

So effectively are the drivers now protected that three of the weekend's 
accidents would probably have produced fatalities in the cockpit only six or 
seven years ago. Had improvements in the safety aspect of the cars not been 
ordered after the deaths of Ayrton Senna and Roland Ratzenberger at Imola in 
1994, then Villeneuve, Luciano Burti andMichael Schumacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-schumacher> would all have been 
killed or crippled when their cars left the track at Albert Park at various 
times during the three-day meeting.

As for the marshal, his death meant that signs of celebration were scarce in 
the pad dock last night. Few drivers need much encouragement to admit the debt 
they owe to the volunteers whose lives are at risk from the start to the finish 
of every race. Yesterday's winner was clearly upset by the news of the 
fatality, his sorrow shared by David Coulthard and Rubens Barrichello, who 
finished second and third. "We have to look at how we can improve track safety 
for those people whose work enables us to go racing," Coulthard said.

The safety car came out and ran at the head of the field for 10 laps, while 
debris was cleared away and the medics went about their work, but the accident 
happened early enough in the race to have no discernible effect on its outcome.

This was the fifth grand prix in a row that Michael Schumacher has won from 
pole position, a statistic which will be preying on the minds of Ferrari's 
chief rivals. "We had a better car than McLaren this weekend," Ross Brawn, the 
team's technical director, said, "and what's pleasing is that we've got quite a 
lot of developments to come."

So clear-cut was the reigning champion's victory on this fast parkland circuit 
that his final winning margin over Coulthard, a mere 1.7sec, gave no indication 
of the true gap between the relative performance of the two cars.

Coulthard had a poor start, becoming entangled with Ralf Schumacher and the 
Jordan of Jarno Trulli in the run down to the first corner. The Scot recovered 
well enough to mount a respectable challenge, however, once Mika Hakkinen, his 
team-mate, had been forced out of second place when his front suspension failed 
just before half-distance, and Barrichello had slowed after an early brush with 
Frentzen put a front wheel of his Ferrari out of alignment. But the 10-second 
margin that lay between Schumacher and Coulthard after each had made his only 
pit stop gave the German a cushion which he was content to exploit over the 
final 15 laps, preserving his machinery while keeping a careful eye on the 
McLaren.

The first race of the season contained no suggestion that any of the other 
nine teams will soon be in a position to mount a serious challenge to Ferrari 
and McLaren. Olivier Panis, in his first race for BAR, finished in an 
apparently solid fourth place on the road, only to be given a 25-second penalty 
after the race for overtaking under a yellow flag, which moved him down to 
seventh in the standings. His misfortune brought joy to the Sauber team, giving 
fourth and sixth places to their young pair of Nick Heidfeld and Kimi 
Raikkonen, aged 23 and 21 respectively. Raikkonen, in only his 24th race since 
graduating from karts to cars, gave a remarkably assured display after making a 
poor start from 13th place on the grid. The young Finn ran consistently fast, 
made no mistakes, had the pleasure of overtaking Jean Alesi's Prost and the 
Benettons of Giancarlo Fisichella and Jenson Button, and was the last driver to 
finish on the same lap as the leader.

Last year's prodigy, in sharp contrast, endured the most miserable day of his 
short and spectacular formula one career. A year ago in Melbourne Button was 
the star rookie, holding sixth place in his first grand prix until the engine 
of his Williams-BMW gave way. Yesterday his new Renault-engined Benetton showed 
itself to be down on power and deficient in handling qualities, and the 
Englishman's chances of making a respectable showing were further reduced when 
he was given a early 10-second stop-and-go penalty after race officials spotted 
that his mechanics had been late in leaving the grid before the parade lap.

Juan Pablo Montoya, the 25-year-old Colombian driver who arrived from the US 
to take Button's seat in the Williams team, had worked his way up to fourth 
place during the pit stops, taking advantage of retirements and misfortunes, 
when his engine expired.

The first round of a new war between tyre manufacturers went firmly the way of 
Bridgestone, whose clients filled the top six positions. Panis was the highest 
placed runner on equipment supplied by Michelin, making a return to formula one 
after a 16-year absence. Eighth and 11th, also on Michelins, were the 
disappointing Jaguars of Luciano Burti and Eddie Irvine.

The increased level of competition among the tyre manufacturers, and the 
significance of their products to the performance of the cars on yesterday's 
grid, could easily be seen in the pole position time, which was four seconds 
faster than last year's figure, despite the governing body's efforts to reduce 
performance by applying new aerodynamic regulations. Trying to slow a formula 
one car down, it seems, is a bit like trying to make motor racing safe.
 