
Marseille's preparations for Wednesday's Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> clash with Manchester 
United have been dealt a serious blow by the news that their in-form striker, 
André-Pierre Gignac, will miss the match through injury.

Gignac was carried off the pitch in the 74th minute of the French champions' 
2–1 victory overSt Etienne <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stetienne> on 
Saturday and a scan has confirmed that groin damage will keep him out of action 
for the next two weeks.

After a poor start to the season Gignac hit a rich vein of form over the last 
month after the manager, Didier Deschamps, switched him from centre-forward to 
the left side of Marseille's 4-3-3 formation, and before Saturday he had struck 
five goals in five games.

The other two members of their attacking trio, Loïc Rémy and Brandão, also 
limped off against St Etienne, both with ankle injuries, but are expected to 
recover to face United. With the France forward Mathieu Valbuena already ruled 
out, they will probably need them.

Despite the casualties sustained, Deschamps said he did not regret fielding a 
strong side on Saturday, maintaining that finishing in the top three of Ligue 1 
and qualifying for next season's Champions League is more important than 
progressing in Europe this term. He conceded, however, that the absence of 
Gignac and Valbuena and the knocks suffered by Rémy and Brandão have hampered 
preparations.

"[They] are all the more costly because the Manchester United players sat at 
home with their feet up," said Deschamps. "I watched their match [against 
Crawley] but Alex Ferguson rotated so much that there was very little to see."

The one positive development on Saturday was confirmation of the return to 
form of Marseille's playmaker Lucho González, whose improved performances after 
a lacklustre winter have helped them climb to second place in Ligue 1, taking 
13 points from the last 15 available. González scored the first goal and 
created the second for Rémy.

The right-back Rod Fanni is expected to be fit to face United, as he resumes 
training on Monday after a short lay-off and the centre back Souleymane Diawara 
is also likely to return to the starting line-up, having been omitted on 
Saturday after missing training the previous day owing to his arrest for 
speeding.
 