
Some sporting events will indelibly be etched into folklore because of who did 
not win as opposed to who did. The 2015 Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship falls into 
that category, with a spectacular and unforeseen collapse byMartin Kaymer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/martin-kaymer>, added to Rory McIlroy’s 
latest brush with glory on this course, more newsworthy than the Frenchman Gary 
Stal’s success. For all that may sound unfair, it is unquestionably the reality.

This developed into an extraordinary Sunday in the desert, one Kaymer will 
recall for all the wrong reasons. His meltdown was even more remarkable given 
this is an event he has won three times. Sport’s unpredictability, and capacity 
to offer wounding scenarios, was emphasised in a three-hour spell.

Kaymer held a 10-shot lead and was trading at 1-500 to win after five holes of 
the fourth round. What happened next to the routinely unflappable US Open 
champion was almost beyond comprehension. Even a double bogey at the 9th did 
not look like causing meaningful damage but Kaymer was to triple-bogey the 13th 
– a pulled drive, penalty drop and fluffed pitch played their parts in that – 
to surrender the lead and from there he could not recover.

Kaymer eventually signed for a 75, 10 shots worse than Stal, to finish third. 
It actually seemed cruel on the German that he had to sit through a public 
presentation of his prize. History tells us he should recover from this blow 
where lesser mortals, even in the game’s professional ranks, would struggle.

The only logical explanation for Kaymer’s capitulation is pressure. It is 
often said that golf is a game of inches, the most significant of which lie 
between a player’s ears. When the heat is on, age-old flaws – in Kaymer’s case 
relating to chipping – have an ugly tendency to reappear. “I am surprised and a 
little shocked,” he said. “It was very, very surprising today. I started off 
well, then hit a couple of bad tee shots and they cost me double bogey and a 
triple bogey.

“Twice I missed the grass and I was in a bush. I had to drop it in the sand. 
Obviously then you get a bad lie and then it’s tough to make bogey. I haven’t 
done that all week long. Unfortunately I did today and therefore it cost me the 
tournament. But there’s still a lot of positives and that’s tough to say after 
that round. I certainly was shocked.”

Second place belonged to McIlroy, whose closing 66 left him one adrift of 
Stal. Typically there was plenty of drama attached to that. The world No1 came 
within a whisker of holing the bunker shot on the 18th that would have earned 
him a play-off. McIlroy declared himself content with his week’s work to start 
the season but there was a rueful smile as he departed. Missed putts cost 
McIlroy what ultimately would have been a runaway victory.

“Going out today, my goal was to finish second,” said McIlroy. “I didn’t think 
I was going to get close to winning the tournament. Martin was 10 ahead at one 
point. You think from there, there’s only one winner but it just shows you 
funny things can happen in this game. If you just plug away and stay patient, 
your time will come, I guess. It was just a little too late for me today.” 
McIlroy’s next Tour event will be the Dubai Desert Classic on Thursday week.

For Stal there is the glory of a first European Tour success at the age of 22 
and the confidence that can be gleaned from a flawless display. He had started 
the final day eight shots adrift of Kaymer and a 150-1 shot to prevail.

Stal is a calm character but his shy response to victory also owed plenty to 
an element of disbelief. There was cause for deep-rooted emotion as well: 
Stal’s mother, Christine, died when he was competing in the BMW PGA 
Championship at Wentworth last May. “I have thought about her a lot today, 
obviously,” said Stal. “I was thinking on the 18th green about all the people 
who were looking at me.

“It’s unbelievable to win because, when I see the leaderboard and the 5th 
hole, I saw Martin Kaymer on 23 under and I say: ‘It’s not possible to win.’”

He was not alone. One of the event’s catchphrases, “Expect the unexpected, 
proved perfectly appropriate.
 