
For the Republic of Ireland the contrast is vivid. When Giovanni Trapattoni 
took the nation to the previous European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/nov/15/republic-ireland-estonia-euro-2012>
 in Poland and Ukraine four years ago he named his 23-man squad more than a 
month before the opening tie. Trapattoni even announced his starting XI for 
that fixture against Croatia seven days beforehand and it did not change. 
Everything felt as if it were set in stone.

Before Euro 2016 in France his successor, Martin O’Neill, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/martin-o-neill> has taken a different 
approach. The manager has already said he will wait until the last moment – 
after Tuesday night’s final warm-up game against Belarus in Cork – before he 
names his squad and submits it to Uefa. The deadline is at 11pm.

Knowing O’Neill, it will go in at 10.59pm – following plenty of agonising – 
and there have been many comments here about how the internet connections had 
better hold up at the 7,000-capacity Turner’s Cross stadium, where the 
facilities are not known for their international quality.

O’Neill is expected to perm the final three places in his squad from eight 
hopefuls and he intends to impart the bad news to those disappointed in 
face-to-face conversations after the Belarus game, although finding a quiet 
corner in which to do so at Turner’s Cross might be challenging. The manager 
will need to have made his decisions before the post-match press conference 
and, if the game finishes at around 9.40pm, it is easy to predict a frenetic 
hour or so, together with the potential for chaos. What happens if there are 
any injuries?

Ireland play Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> in Dublin 
on Friday night and there was an amusing moment in the pre-match press 
conference when John O’Shea was asked to compare O’Neill’s method with that of 
Trapattoni. Was it better, worse or just different? O’Neill was sitting beside 
the defender. “Just different,” muttered O’Neill under his breath but into a 
microphone.

“It’s just different,” O’Shea said. “When there are two games coming up, the 
manager wants to give lads a chance, as well. It’s always been the case when 
the manager has had the chance to see younger players or lads who are coming 
back from injury or whatever, that that opportunity has been taken. It’s a case 
of giving everyone a fair chance.”

It does feel late in the day to be making decisions that relate to the final 
composition of the squad but it should be said that 90 per cent of it will be 
settled – and those chosen told, in private – by Saturday.

The hopefuls are the midfielders Harry Arter, Stephen Quinn, David Meyler, 
Darron Gibson and Eunan O’Kane and the strikers Kevin Doyle, Daryl Murphy and 
David McGoldrick. It is unclear whether O’Neill will take four or five 
strikers; the certainties in this department are Shane Long, Jon Walters and 
the captain, Robbie Keane.

Doyle will play for Colorado Rapids in their home fixture against Philadelphia 
Union on Saturday and then fly to Ireland for the Belarus game. It might be a 
long way for him to come to be told he is not in the squad for the finals but 
O’Neill bristled at the notion.

“If I had been asked years ago, when I was a player for Northern Ireland, that 
I had the chance to travel to the other side of the world to play a game, I 
don’t think I would have a problem with that,” O’Neill said. “People have also 
asked me what will we do if the young players get bored at the finals. I’d be 
so, so sorry for them – playing in a competition that comes around every four 
years, and doesn’t always come around for them every four years. They can get 
bored the following month.”

O’Neill spoke about how those still fighting for selection ought to be 
encouraged that the door remained open for them and the impression was of a 
manager who was keen to build on recent momentum. Ireland areon a run of one 
defeat in 12 matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/16/republic-of-ireland-bosnia-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
.

“The momentum is definitely building,” said O’Shea, one of the survivors from 
Euro 2012,when Ireland lost all three of their group games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/18/euro-2012-italy-republic-ireland-group-c>
. “The atmosphere and enthusiasm around the group have got stronger and 
stronger throughout this campaign. That’s something that is very similar [to 
four years ago] but it has probably gone up a notch as well. It’s a different 
squad, different management and there are lots of different elements involved 
in it to make me believe that it’s going to be very different.”

Republic of Ireland (probable, 4-3-1-2) Randolph; Coleman, O’Shea, Keogh, 
Brady; Hendrick, Whelan, Arter; Hoolahan; Long, Walters.
 