
Martyn Waghorn netted his first league goals since August as Rangers beat 
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> 2-1 at the SuperSeal 
Stadium.

The Englishman had not found the net in the Premiership since striking against 
Martin Canning’s men on the opening day of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/rangers-hamilton-scottish-premiership-match-report>
. But he ensured Rangers secured three straight top-flight wins for the first 
time this season with a clinical brace.

Dougie Imrie gave Hamilton hope late on but victory strengthens Rangers’ grasp 
on second spot as they move seven points clear of Aberdeen, albeit having 
played two games more, while denying Accies the opportunity to move into the 
top six.

Nothing says Christmas more than Celtic’s Leigh Griffiths dressed as an elf
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/celtic-christmas-advert-leigh-griffiths-brendan-rodgers-scott-brown>
With Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> having adopted a 
more direct approach to accommodate the striker Joe Garner, it was Accies who 
produced the more fluent football in the opening phases. But all the hosts had 
to show for their guile was a deflected Danny Redmond effort which squirmed 
wide.

The visitors took their time getting warmed up but as Barrie McKay - 
impressive against Hearts last week - began pulling the strings, the traffic 
was increasingly going in one direction. However, Hamilton’s relentless 
work-rate meant it was never going to be a Rangers barrage.

The closest they came during a largely drab opening half-hour came when Greg 
Docherty sent a header towards his own goal. Gary Woods did not exactly look 
comfortable in goal as he flapped at the ball when it came back off the 
crossbar but he was thankful no one in blue was close enough to take advantage.

Docherty did better at the other end when he robbed James Tavernier but he put 
too much on his shot as he tried to beat Wes Foderingham from a tight angle.

Rob Kiernan and Waghorn both went close but eventually the pressure being 
applied to the hosts told as Rangers struck a minute before the break.

Waghorn – making his first start since 14 October in place of Kenny Miller – 
started the move as he released Jason Holt into the box. And the striker was 
quick to dart on to his team-mate’s cut-back before looping a header over 
Woods, with the ball clipping the underside of the bar on its way into the net.

The former Wigan frontman has looked a shadow of the player who hit 28 goals 
last season after having his start to the campaign disrupted by hamstring 
trouble. But he confidently tucked away his second on 52 minutes, slotting home 
from Lee Wallace’s cross after the captain raced on to another pin-point McKay 
pass.

Alex D’Acol came close to pulling one back for Hamilton as he flashed a shot 
wide from 25 yards and Woods blocked well at Tavernier’s feet. With renewed 
self-belief surging through the Rangers ranks, Accies found themselves 
increasingly penned in as the half wore on.

They survived further damage when Garner, Waghorn and Tavernier all failed to 
control shots which flew over. Imrie then set Rangers nerves jangling as he 
pulled one back with 13 minutes left, finishing off after Redmond mugged Andy 
Halliday out wide, but the visitors held on.
 