
Martin Ling needed no introduction at the County Ground for his first home 
match as Swindon manager but he got it anyway in the programme where the 
general manager, Steve Anderson, welcomed him as “a former legend of this 
parish”, adding: “I know that everySwindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> supporter wants him to do well.”

Ling did as well as anyone dared hope with a first win in 13 games since 5 
September, 11 of them inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, beating Scunthorpe, 
10th in the table, 2-1 and climbing from 23rd to 20th. It was their first at 
home since the opening day of the season.

Swindon’s lowly position has been startling. They lost to Preston in the 
play-off final last May, having held a top-four position from early November 
under Mark Cooper with a poise that was a passing impression of Barcelona. 
Returned loanees, necessary sales and injuries to key players upset 
equilibrium, if not inclination, and confidence went before Cooper last month. 
The chairman, Lee Power, a player for Norwich and brief manager at Cambridge in 
2006, where Ling had a longer spell later, took over for three games (cf Ron 
Noades at Brentford) and one point before Ling’s appointment.

Born in West Ham a fortnight before Bobby Moore lifted the World Cup, Ling 
achieved his legendary status in 190 games as a live left-wing wire for Swindon 
and played in Glenn Hoddle’s side that reached the Premiership in 1993. After a 
bright start in management with Leyton Orient he went via Cambridge to Torquay 
where, early in 2013, he suffered serious depression. Thanks to the League 
Managers’ Association, following cricket’s belated example in recognising the 
illness, he is well again and excited to be given a fresh chance.

Signs are that he wants to recapture Cooper’s ways. “Pass with a purpose” is 
his mantra though Saturday’s conditions, with Abigail’s attendants blasting 
rain downfield (and seemingly disabling the goal-back clock and fourth 
official’s board), would have challenged even the Spanish champions. “It was 
not a pretty-football day,” he said. “In the first half we looked nervy on the 
ball. If you’re going to play that way, the hardest time to do it is when 
things are not going well. I’d love to sit here and say it was free-flowing and 
we controlled the game but we had to grind it out. You’ve got to have a firm 
belief in your philosophy and stick to it. I think the players did. The win 
should give them a little more confidence.”

Mark Robins, Scunthorpe’s manager, recognised a missed opportunity. “We could 
have won this game hands down in the first 20 minutes,” he said. Tacking into 
the teeth of the wind then they dominated possession, using the width of Gary 
McSheffrey on the left and Paddy Madden, scorer of nine league goals this 
season, on the right. For Swindon only a free-kick from Anton Rodgers, possibly 
reflecting his father Brendan’s long-distance ambition at Anfield, came close 
to using the wind to advantage. Madden tried his luck inside 30 seconds of the 
second half, drawing a frantic save from Lawrence Vigouroux.

Reaching the interval without a lead might have demoralised Swindon but they 
grew in strength into the wind, challenging and holding the ball better in 
their 3-5-2 formation. By the hour, inspired by Ben Gladwin, sold to QPR in the 
summer but back on loan, they were two up with two goals in five minutes. From 
his free-kick the central defender Raphael Rossi Branco forced in after a 
stunning initial save by Joe Anyon. Then Gladwin, on the break, fed Nicky Ajose 
for a clinical finish. Jordan Clarke’s headed reply – Swindon have four Jordans 
ontheir books – led to an anxious 20 minutes in which McSheffrey’s free-kick 
hit the far post but, rallying round Rossi Branco in the absence of the injured 
captain, Nathan Thompson, Swindon held out and may have turned a corner.

With three men on international duty – but one a youth loanee, so no 
postponement – they have strength to return, notably Iraq’s Yaser Kasim in 
midfield. Ling is encouraged but said: “I don’t think we need to have any 
fanfare about me coming back.” Whether or not he answers to the nickname 
“Tinga”, the bells are ringing again at Swindon.
 