
The team formerly known as Marussia have taken a step closer to appearing on 
theFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> grid this season.

Marussia went into administration towards the end of last season, missing the 
final three grands prix in the United States, Brazil and Abu Dhabi.

Behind the scenes talks have taken place in the hope the team, who are on the 
FIA entry list for this year asManor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor>, 
would emerge from the ashes of its demise.

Last month those hopes were raised slightly when a planned auction of 
Marussia’s assets was cancelled to allow for discussions to continue with a 
third party. Those discussions remain ongoing and appear to be drawing towards 
a fruitful conclusion that would allow the team to compete this year, albeit 
using the 2014 car.

Crucially, it is planned for Marussia to exit administration on 19 February 
via a Company Voluntary Arrangement (CVA), which is a key positive move towards 
salvation. From there the team could then plan for the opening race of the year 
on 15 March in Australia.

Geoff Rowley, the joint administrator, and a partner at FRP Advisory, said: 
“Since the appointment of administrators negotiations have taken place with a 
number of parties to try and secure a long-term solution for the team.

“We can confirm that negotiations continue towards a longer term viable 
solution for the business and participation of a team in the 2015 season. It is 
envisaged that, prior to the commencement of the first race of the 2015 season, 
investment into the business will be made upon the company exiting from 
administration via a Company Voluntary Arrangement, which is planned for 19 
February 2015.

“A CVA is a restructuring process agreed with the company’s creditors which 
allows for a turnaround of the business and the creation of a longer term 
viable solution for the team.

“Given the confidential nature of the negotiations underway we are unable to 
provide further details. The joint administrators would like, on behalf of 
Marussia F1 Team, to thank all involved with the team for their support during 
this process.”
 