
The Italian businessman Massimo Cellino has been disqualified from buying a 
majority stake in Leeds under the Football League's "owners' and directors' 
test".

Last week, a court in Sardinia found Cellino guilty of illegally evading 
import duty, a criminal offence. The owner of the Serie A clubCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> was ordered to pay a €600,000 
(£500,000) fine after the court convicted him of failing to pay €388,500 in tax 
on Nélie, a yacht seized by Italian police and customs officials in June 2012.

The decision leaves Leeds in a state of limbo over its future ownership – 
Cellino has already paid more than £2m into the club.

The Football League said in a statement on Monday: "At its meeting yesterday 
evening, the board of theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> considered the 
eligibility of Massimo Cellino. The board considered detailed legal advice with 
regard to the application of its regulations within the context of a decision 
made under Italian law.

"Mr Cellino was recently found guilty beyond reasonable doubt by a court in 
Sardinia of an offence under Italian tax legislation relating to the 
non-payment of import duties on a boat. This resulted in a fine of €600,000, an 
order for the payment of trial costs and the confiscation of the boat in 
question.

"Having fully considered the matter, the board agreed unanimously that the 
decision of the Italian court does constitute a disqualifying condition under 
its owners' and directors' test. The relevant disqualifying condition being 
that Massimo Cellino has been convicted of an offence involving acts that would 
reasonably be considered to be dishonest.

"In line with Football League regulations, Massimo Cellino is entitled to 
appeal against the decision within 14 days. In such circumstances, the League 
would seek to expedite the process to deliver certainty to all parties in the 
shortest possible timeframe."

The news will come as a blow to Leeds as the club continues to seek the 
investment it needs to prosper. However, in a statement on Monday afternoon the 
club tried to reassure fans it was not in any immediate financial trouble.

"The club and its shareholders are disappointed at the decision of the 
Football League not to approve Massimo Cellino as a director ofLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>. However, the board and 
executive management of the club, will continue discussions with the Football 
League and Eleonora Sport to find a solution that is suitable to all parties.

"Our shareholders continue to support the club directly or through additional 
investments as has always been the case. We would like to reassure the fans of 
the continuity of our great club."
 