
Matej Vydra scored twice as Reading eased into the fifth round of the FA Cup 
with a 4-0 victory over the League One sideWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall>.

Losing semi-finalists last season, the Championship side struck twice shortly 
before half-time against Walsall throughthe Wales international Hal Robson-Kanu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/06/hal-robson-kanu-wales-euro-2016-gareth-bale-aaron-ramsey>
 and Vydra.

Shrewsbury’s Jack Grimmer records last-gasp win over Sheffield Wednesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/shrewsbury-town-sheffield-wednesday-fa-cup-match-report>
Walsall offered little threat throughout and Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> added a third through Danny 
Williams before Vydra netted his second.

Reading went into the tie sitting 15th in the Championship and on a run of 
only three wins in nine outings under new manager Brian McDermott. Walsall 
started the day in third place in League One, just one point off an automatic 
promotion slot. They had lost only once in eight games since Sean O’Driscoll 
took over as head coach from Dean Smith in December.

Reading created the first opening in the fifth minute when Aaron Tshibola 
tried his luck with an audacious volley from 30 yards, which landed on the top 
of the net. Tshibola lasted only five more minutes. He was taken off injured, 
after an innocuous-looking fall, and was replaced by the on loan Chelsea 
defender Michael Hector.

Walsall, playing their ninth cup tie of the season, hardly troubled Reading 
early on but Tom Bradshaw went close with a 20-yard shot. The striker, linked 
with Reading during the transfer window, struck the ball well but it deflected 
off Jake Cooper and flew narrowly wide.

Reading then struck twice in three minutes to give themselves a comfortable 
cushion at the break.

In the 37th minute, Robson-Kanu collected a Chris Gunter throw-in and wriggled 
his way through before unleashing a fierce shot into the roof of the net from a 
tight angle. Five minutes before the interval, Stephen Quinn got free on the 
left and crossed for Vydra to stab in from close range.

Vydra should have made it 3-0 soon after, when racing clear of the Walsall 
defence, but he dragged his effort well wide.

Reading continued to press in the second half, with Robson-Kanu sending in a 
weak shot that the goalkeeper Neil Etheridge gathered easily.

Walsall gradually got their act together going forward and Romaine Sawyers was 
unlucky to see his 25-yard strike the crossbar, with home goalkeeper Ali 
al-Habsi well beaten. The left-back Andrew Taylor let fly with a 30-yard free 
kick but that also narrowly missed the target.

Reading soon regained their momentum, with Etheridge athletically tipping a 
long-range Oliver Norwood free-kick on to the bar and away to safety. But they 
settled the outcome in the 75th minute, when Williams latched on to an error by 
James O’Connor and ran through to beat Etheridge.

Completing Walsall’s miserable afternoon, Etheridge was injured as Williams 
tucked the ball past him and had to be carried off on a stretcher. The 
substitute goalkeeper Craig MacGillivray replaced him for the closing stages.

Vydra added Reading’s fourth in the last minute, heading home a Gunter cross.
 