
Reading booked an FA Cup fourth-round meeting with Walsall with a 5-2 victory 
over 10-manHuddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> at 
the Madejski Stadium.

Huddersfield had led 2-0 after 15 minutes of the third-round replay with goals 
from Jamie Paterson and Tommy Smith.

But they lost Jonathan Hogg, sent off for a last-man challenge on Matej Vydra, 
and Lucas Piazon reduced the gap from the resultant free-kick.

Down to 10 men, Huddersfield were unable to cope in the second half, with 
Vydra helping himself to an expertly executed hat-trick before Alex Fernández 
added Reading’s fifth in stoppage time.

Huddersfield went into the game on a six-match unbeaten run. Reading had won 
only twice in seven matches sinceBrian McDermott was appointed as manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/reading-appoint-brian-mcdermott-manager-second-time>
, for his second spell at the club, last month.

The teams drew 2-2 in the first meeting, with Nakhi Wells rescuing 
Huddersfield with a 92nd-minute equaliser from the penalty spot.

Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>, beaten FA Cup 
semi-finalists last season, had the first chance of the replay, with Piazon and 
Vydra combining well on the left. But Vydra’s ball into the area carried too 
much pace and Hal Robson-Kanu was unable to reach it.

Huddersfield then struck twice in seven minutes as they tore apart the Royals’ 
defence. In the eighth minute Paterson exchanged passes with Wells before 
drilling the ball high into the net past Ali al-Habsi.

Then, in the 15th minute, shortly after Emyr Huws had nodded against the 
Reading crossbar, the right-back Tommy Smith beat Habsi with a low, angled 
drive from wide on the right that flew in off the far post.

Huddersfield were rampant and could have stretched their lead further, with 
Habsi saving well from Wells and Paterson.

But Reading were handed a lifeline in the 27th minute, when Hogg was dismissed 
after pulling down Vydra as he skated past him towards the Huddersfield area.

Two minutes later, on the restart from the free-kick, Piazon guided home a 
superb set-piece effort from 25 yards. The Huddersfield goalkeeper, Joe Murphy, 
barely moved.

Reading, with the numerical advantage, failed to make it count before 
half-time. Danny Williams drove high and wide when well placed. But they almost 
drew level soon after the break. Robson-Kanu headed powerfully goalwards from 
an Andrew Taylor cross only for Murphy to save brilliantly.

Vydra then struck twice in four minutes to edge Reading ahead. First, in the 
57th minute, he volleyed home precisely after Murphy had saved from 
Robson-Kanu. Then, also from close range, he tucked in a low cross from the 
substitute Ola John.

Vydra could have completed a hat-trick not long after but Murphy denied him 
with an agile stop.

Little was seen of Huddersfield going forward but Wells could have equalised 
when his clever lob over Habsi struck an upright and bounced to safety.

But Vydra did complete his treble with a firm drive and Fernandez added the 
fifth with a low 20-yard effort in stoppage time.
 