
Hull City, FA Cup finalists last year, were forced to come from behind on 
penalties to oust lowlyAccrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley> from the Capital One 
Cup after a performance the visiting manager Steve Bruce branded lackadaisical.

Capital One Cup round-up: ‘Awful’ Brentford lose 4-0 at home to Oxford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/11/capital-one-cup-round-up-walsall-nottingham-forest>
Hull, who were relegated from the Premier League on the final day of last 
season, were twice in control against Accrington, known to their followers as 
the club that refused to die for their ability to survive against all financial 
odds.

Goals from the substitutes Chuba Akpom, an on-loan Arsenal striker, and Greg 
Luer were pegged back by Matt Crooks’ towering header and a scruffy rebound 
from Terry Gornell, sending the contest to spot-kicks.

Accrington led 2-1 after the England Under-21 defender Harry Maguire blazed 
over the bar but Curtis Davies stepped up to score the Championship side’s 
fourth spot kick and Crooks lost his nerve and put his effort over to send Hull 
into round two.

“We were lackadaisical and not playing as quick as what we should have done. 
We played it like it was a pre-season friendly and sometimes that happens when 
you come to places like this,” said Bruce. “Losing games like this can damage 
you and that’s the cup in this country, it’s why we love them.”

Only when Akpom, in glowing orange boots, emerged from the bench to replace an 
uninterested Nikica Jelavic on the hour did Hull’s overall enthusiasm match 
that of their £3.5m debutant Moses Odubajo, a recent acquisition from Brentford.

With the clock running down in normal time, the two teams went toe to toe in 
their search of a winning goal with the son of the Hull club ambassador Dean 
Windass, Josh, shooting on sight to force Eldin Jakupovic to punch out a drive 
which looked destined for the top corner.

Akpom’s clinical left-foot finish across the Accrington goalkeeper, Jason 
Mooney, at 6ft 9in the tallest player in the Football League, put the 
Championship side in front two minutes into extra time.

However, an equally authoritative header from the Accrington midfielder 
Crooks, who connected with Piero Mingoia’s right-wing centre, levelled things 
at 1-1. And a repeat in the second 15-minute period – the 20-year-old Luer 
climbing highest to head home before Gornell punished Jakupovic’s poor handling 
– sent the tie to penalties.

In the end it was the 1,097 away supporters who contributed to more than 50% 
of the attendance that went home smiling, although Bruce acknowledged they had 
been pushed to the limit by an Accrington team with Windass pulling the strings 
in the pocket behind the striker Billy Kee.

Indeed, Accrington might have had their name in the hat for Thursday night’s 
second-round draw had Kee kept his composure when, with the score at 2-2, he 
dragged a shot against Maguire. There was even a hint of handball but the 
giantkilling was not to be.

“Walking off the ground people were congratulating us. What for? We are out of 
the cup. We should be proud of our performance but there’s no pride in getting 
beat. We know the rules, that the game can go to penalties and we came up 
short,” said the Stanley manager, John Coleman.

For Bruce, who fielded seven full internationals, victory proved a huge 
relief. Attention will now turn to adding two further creative players – 
Chicago Fire’s Scotland international Shaun Maloney and Odubajo’s former 
Brentford team-mate Andre Gray ahead of the trip to Wolves. Dialogue continues 
between Hull and both clubs for the players in question.
 