
Tottenham’s transformation under Mauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> has resulted in a 
convincing challenge on three fronts but equally telling is the way in which 
they can be held up as a role model to those lower down. Victory was rarely in 
doubt during a good-natured lunchtime in Essex but the lasting impression was 
that the visitors, for so long dogged by questionable planning and the lack of 
an obvious pathway to the first team, are at last seriously rivalling their 
neighbours Arsenal as an operation from whom others can learn.

“I think there’s a parallel to be drawn between the way Tottenham do things 
and the way Colchester United are hoping to do things,” theColchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> manager, Kevin Keen, said. 
“They have a fantastic academy. Carroll, Bentaleb, however many have come 
through. In the modern game that’s really tough. To bring young players through 
when you’re a Tottenham, a Chelsea or an Arsenal, you can’t even say how hard 
that is. They’re a fantastic model for us to follow and it’s something to 
aspire to.”

Fulham call off Moussa Dembéle’s £6m move to Tottenham over loan-back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/fulham-call-off-moussa-dembeles-6m-move-to-tottenham-over-loan-back>
Tom Carroll, who scored Tottenham’s fourth goal with a smart volley, partnered 
Nabil Bentaleb in midfield and the pair were joined towards the end by Josh 
Onomah, about whom Pochettino has struggled to hide his excitement. Five of 
Colchester’s starting XI were aged 22 or under and, if not a contest between 
equals, this was a meeting of philosophies. Keen was appointed to his first 
managerial role in December by the Colchester chairman, Robbie Cowling, who was 
attracted by his appetite to work with the club’s well-regarded Category Two 
academy. It will be the only such facility in League Two if they cannot 
overturn a seven-point gap to survive demotion from the third tier.

Colchester, whose chances of an upset receded dramatically when an early 
collision of heads between the centre-backs Alex Wynter and Tom Eastman led to 
both being replaced inside 21 minutes, showed flashes of technical quality that 
would hold up a level or two higher and merited their consolation when a 
rebound bounced off the helpless Ben Davies.

Tottenham, though, operated with the clarity and seriousness that has become 
their hallmark. Pochettino identified “the commitment and way that we work 
without the ball” as the basis for the waves of attacks that, particularly in 
the first half, bore down on Jake Kean’s goal.

“We show a lot of fight for everyone and try to be desperate to recover the 
ball quick, to pressure and to run,” he said. “I think the team enjoys when it 
runs and tries to recover the ball, as when we have the ball we have a lot of 
opportunity to play.”

Nacer Chadli twice finished adroitly and Eric Dier’s deflected goal at least 
demonstrated a desire to influence matters from centre-back. Tottenham have the 
kind of equilibrium lesser opponents struggle to disrupt and Pochettino 
emphasised it comes of striking the right note between youth and experience.

“The team has started to play how we want in the last six or seven months,” he 
said. “This is a new and different project. It is true that we have a lot of 
younger players, but the right kind as they have a very strong mentality. 
Sometimes you have a lot of older players who have won a lot of titles [and 
are] without hunger. We need to have senior players who are hungry and young 
ones that push and want to win the title.”

Keen, who takes his side to Southend on Saturday in the hope of a first league 
win since October, believes that may be only a matter of time.

“It’s a long time since Tottenham fans could be this excited,” he said. “I’m 
really impressed with them, impressed with the manager. He conducts himself 
really well and his football team play in the correct manner. They’re very 
organised and athletic, but also play in a way that befits the Tottenham name 
and I think they’ve got a really, really bright future.”

Man of the match Nacer Chadli (Tottenham)
 