
As Crewe Alexandra's players strode triumphantly up the Wembley steps for the 
second time in a year, having just defeatedSouthend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> in the Johnstone's Paint Trophy 
final, they wore T-shirts with the message: "Your [sic] in our thoughts". The 
poignant gesture was for the Crewe defender Adam Dugdale and his partner, whose 
newborn son Jude recently passed away.

The fans, too, offered their support with applause at the sixth minute of the 
match – by that stage Southend had just gone a goal behind and were clearly 
shocked by the quality and urgency of their opponents. Strikes from Luke Murphy 
and Max Clayton ultimately gave Crewe a deserved 2-0 victory, just 11 months 
after they won the League Two play-off final here against Cheltenham by the 
same scoreline.

"I spoke to Adam yesterday morning and I told him the players were behind him 
and Nicola [his partner] and that we'd try to do something today for them," 
said Crewe's manager, Steve Davis, afterwards. "I'm sure the players put that 
little bit extra in for him. We're a family and when something like that 
happens we really rally and get behind people."

Crewe were vibrant from the kick-off and the opening strike, from a move 
engineered at Arsenal's London Colney training ground during the team's final 
preparations for the clash, was a treat: Byron Moore's low corner was aimed at 
Harry Davis, whose cunning step-over allowed his captain, Murphy, arriving 
behind him, to sweep the ball beautifully into the top corner.

Though Southend improved thereafter, they could not find the net. And less 
then four minutes into the second half, Clayton doubled Crewe's advantage with 
a tap-in after Southend's Bilel Mohsni had been bundled off the ball.

The Shrimpers might have scored themselves when Britt Assombalonga and Mohsni 
attempted to force home a cross from close range, but the two effectively 
foiled one another and the ball was blocked by Crewe's last man, Davis.

"We wanted to put in a really good performance and entertain at the same time, 
but Southend caused us some problems and we had to put our bodies on the line," 
said Davis. "They could have scored but, being a centre-half myself, I think 
it's of paramount importance that if you're going to attack in numbers then you 
have to defend in numbers too. It's a balancing act but it does get us results."

Southend will reflect with despair on a third defeat in the Football League 
Trophy final. After failures in 2004 and 2005, their 31,000 supporters had 
hoped they would return to Essex with silverware at last. Phil Brown let his 
No2, Graham Coughlan, lead the side on to the pitch in recognition of his role 
in guiding the club to the national stadium – and Brown himself was in the 
dug-out only after Paul Sturrock declined the invitation from the chairman to 
manage the side for one last match following his departure from the club last 
month.

Southend's preparations for the big day included a trip to the local Adventure 
Island theme park. Somehow, it failed to ready them for the giddying tempo and 
surging attacks forged by Crewe, who always looked the likely winners.

"The effort and determination was there but the nouse, quality and attention 
to detail wasn't," Brown admitted, choosing not to dwell on the penalty appeals 
his side might, on another day, have won. "From now on I will have to stamp my 
DNA on the team if we're to get promotion."

Man of the match Byron Moore (Crewe)
 