
Before a race he has only won once – the Hungarian Grand Prix – it seems 
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> is not 
happy with the state of Formula One, but a relative lack of success at the 
Hungaroring is the least of his concerns. The Spaniard’s latest expression of 
distaste comes via an interview with Autosprint magazine, in which he bemoans 
the current direction of the sport, the cars and even the dearth of a physical 
challenge, before, now somewhat inevitably, making come hither eyes at the Le 
Mans 24 Hours and the Indy 500.

The cars, he argued, could not be driven to their limits due to the tyres 
overheating and losing grip, while pushing the engines forced them over 
consumption parameters. “To be quick in today’s F1, you must not attack too 
much, that’s the secret, but that’s something against a driver’s instincts,” he 
said. “These days, F1 is in a time of highs and lows, for several things the 
series’ direction isn’t clear.”

This formula, he continued, was not even truly testing drivers’ stamina. 
“Before, after 10 laps you had to have a two-hour massage, while now you can 
drive 150 laps and barely sweat by the end,” he said. “Current cars aren’t as 
pleasing to drive compared to other periods, when the technical rule book was 
different. This situation doesn’t make me too happy.”

F1 drivers in open revolt against Bernie Ecclestone’s running of sport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/f1-drivers-demand-change-attack-obsolete-rule-making-qualifying>
Seasoned Alonso watchers will find little new in this. Indeed, it is hard to 
imagine a period when he has actually been happy since his two world titles 
with Renault in 2005 and 2006. The turbulent year alongside Lewis Hamilton was 
next, followed by two more years in a relatively uncompetitive Renault before 
the much-heralded signing to Ferrari. A revitalised and successful partnership 
was expected for both driver and team. The former did initially occur, with 
five wins for theScuderia in his first season in 2010, but the latter 
singularly failed to materialise and there were no victories in his final 
season, 2014, before the relationship fell apart and he returned toMcLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>.

But this was not, of course, the McLaren of 2007. Now the team were starting 
with the new Honda power unit and were seriously off the pace, a situation that 
is improving only slowly. And it is clearly not one Alonso is happy with, as 
his calls to end races early because trawling round at the back of the midfield 
is proving to be as unedifying for him to take part in as it is for fans of 
McLaren to watch. None of which is a good recipe for any driver, let alone one 
who knows he is in the latter part of his career, fully aware that he is one of 
the best drivers of his generation and yet one who still only has two world 
championships. Well known to be demanding and with a reputation for toy 
ejection, attempting to manage him under these circumstances must be quite the 
task at McLaren.

His contract with the team lasts until the end of the 2017 season and he 
suggested that should the sport not improve to his liking that he might go 
elsewhere. “If I see F1 carries on going in a different direction compared to 
what I knew and loved in the recent past, at that point I could consider other 
alternatives and leave F1,” he said. Which is reasonable enough but it is worth 
considering the subtext to all this.

Firstly, Alonso repeatedly backs his team publicly. His pronouncements on 
optimism for the future and how united and confident McLaren and Honda are 
behind the scenes are many and varied. In this sense, at least, Ron Dennis 
still has him firmly on the leash. To an extent then, venting his frustration 
at the sport as a whole is the main way he can publicly express his unhappiness 
at his position, without pointing the finger at his team.

F1’s Bernie Ecclestone claims 2017 engine-related rules could be ‘torn up’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/f1-bernie-ecclestone-2017-engine-related-rules-torn-up-start-again>
Secondly, there is the obvious issue that winning drivers, and 
championship-winning drivers especially, very rarely find any fault with a 
formula in which they are successful. Alonso is doubtless being honest that he 
would like to be tested more, that he would like to push more, to attack and to 
drive on the limit. Would he be making such public announcements were he on top 
of the table? Few drivers in that position do so (Hamilton, to his credit, is 
one, recently criticising the 2017 regulation changes for their lack of driver 
input 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/28/lewis-hamilton-jenson-button-f1-changes-2017>
) and it is hard to imagine an Alonso in the middle of a title fight, allowing 
his focus to shift onto such broad issues.

There is a point behind the steam coming from his ears and the idea that 
drivers are managing rather than racing, is not one the sport should promote. 
But it is more complex than simply giving drivers what they want – which would 
likely result in a formula where the idea of entertainment comes a very slow 
last place. The tyres are built as they are to enhance the on-track racing and 
spectacle, while the engines are hybrids with energy recovery systems at the 
behest of manufacturers, with an eye on public opinion. There is, as always, 
more to the sport than pleasing Alonso.

“Many things will change next year, let’s hope the joy of driving will return 
to be a major factor,” he said. As one of the true greats and still a driver it 
is a pleasure to watch, let’s hope it does. Or at very least his car becomes 
quick enough to compete at the front and we will see if the joy returns, 
regardless of the changes.
 