
Reconstruction of Scottishfootball is proposed as often as vote-gathering tax 
cuts by Her Majesty's Opposition, but, with a tripartite government now in 
power at Hampden Park — the Scottish FA, the Scottish Premier League and the 
Scottish Football League — change is likely to be effected at an epochal pace.

Resistance to revolution is likely to be the most formidable obstacle faced by 
Henry McLeish, the former first minister at Holyrood and East Fife footballer, 
who has been nominated as chairman of the SFA-sponsored Scottish football 
review committee, briefed with the objective of leading the troubled game north 
of the border towards salvation.

This in-built aversion to disruption is especially pronounced when, as now, 
the most pressing priority appears to be streamlining the ruling bodies, with 
even the most dreaded word of all, amalgamation, in the air. The last time a 
think tank was commissioned, in 1995, led by the then SFA secretary, Ernie 
Walker, and including the Dutch luminary Rinus Michels, the impact of its ideas 
and suggestions was negligible.

The national association did eventually trim its traditional 49-man council to 
a more manageable 10-man board, but that was the extent of the overhaul, making 
no material difference to the quality of the product. It should be remembered, 
too, that 14 years ago there were only two legislatures. It was not until 1998 
that the leading 10 clubs seceded from the Scottish Football League to form the 
SPL, arguably the most antipathetic of all organisations to interference in its 
business.

It is hardly surprising that Tony Higgins, a member of the Walker group in his 
capacity as secretary of the PFA Scotland and now head of education at the 
world players' union, Fifpro, should express scepticism over McLeish's 
prospects of making a telling impression.

"Resistance to change was a massive issue then — the implementation of ideas 
never took place," Higgins says. "If people think there will be only one body 
running Scottish football at the end of this, that will not happen."

If anything, the SPL, far from being willing to engage with the others in a 
spirit of co-operation and shared ideals, would prefer the demise of the SFL. 
Indeed, there is evidence to support the argument that they have been in 
pursuit of that end for some time.

When the 10 clubs defected in 1998, they were obliged to enter a legally 
binding contract to the old organisation that amounted to a bribe. In order to 
effect an immediate break and circumvent the rule that requires a two-year 
period of notice to quit, the SPL members agreed to increase their number to 12 
by the year 2000 and to pay an index-linked annual sum to the poorer brethren 
they had left behind.

Since then, they have tried unsuccessfully to have the amount of the annuity 
reduced, the first step towards the ultimate goal of ending it. The SPL 
recently gained a legal victory when an independent panel concluded that their 
plan to poach another 10 clubs from the SFL to form SPL2 would not breach the 
settlement agreement.

Whether or not this comes to pass remains to be seen, but if it does, the 
SPL's next step would be to prosecute a case for a reduction, or outright 
quashing of the annual payment, on the basis that it was structured to serve 30 
clubs, rather than the 20 that would be left.

In addition, by withdrawing from the Scottish League Cup – the only major 
source of income left to the SFL – they would leave the 120-year-old 
institution with a small collection of 20 part-time clubs and, effectively, 
send it to the wall.

If whatever list of ideas Henry McLeish may already have formulated to benefit 
Scottish football includes unification of the three governing bodies, he can 
reduce it by one forthwith.
 