
Jackie McNamara has been ruled out of Celtic's Champions League tie against 
Lyon on Wednesday night. The versatile Scotland international joins Alan 
Thompson and Didier Agathe on the sidelines for a match in whichCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> need to avoid defeat to progress.

McNamara was injured in the dying seconds of Saturday's 2-0 win over Livingston
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston>. Celtic's manager Martin 
O'Neill hoped that the 30-year-old would return from the local hospital after 
an x-ray with good news, but initial tests suggested shoulder ligament damage.

"We will know more after a scan tomorrow but the long and short of it is that 
Jackie is out of the midweek match," O'Neill said. "It is a massive blow 
considering how well he has been playing and along with Alan and Didier it is a 
list of players I would much rather have had available."

There is also still a doubt over the influential defender Bobo Balde, who has 
a back injury. "We'll have to monitor him between now and kick-off," O'Neill 
said.

Thompson, who will be suspended on Wednesday, clinched a straightforward 
victory at Almondvale after Chris Sutton had opened the scoring.

Celtic's keeper Magnus Hedman, who only had one save to make, is expecting an 
altogether more difficult challenge on Wednesday night. He said: "I expect I'll 
be a bit busier against Lyon. But my confidence has never been higher since I 
came to Celtic and I'm looking forward to the Champions League game. We will go 
there to win even though a draw is all we need because I don't think Celtic 
know how to play for just one point."

Rangers also need a point against Panathinaikos at Ibrox on Tuesday night, but 
their prize will be only a Uefa Cup place.

Alex McLeish, too, faces huge injury problems. Yet when his team went 2-0 up 
against Dundee United through early goals from Nuno Capucho and Peter 
Lovenkrands it looked as if he would be able to give some players a much needed 
rest.

Instead Emerson missed a penalty, other chances were passed up and Billy Dodds 
pulled a goal back, meaning that McLeish, instead of giving Stephen Hughes, 
Michael Mols, Chris Burke and others a break, had to watch his side battle to 
the bitter end for victory.

"We shot ourselves in the foot again," McLeish said. "This one should have 
been done and dusted by half-time."

With the threat of closure hanging over them Dundee could have done without 
losing 2-1 at home to Kilmarnock. Colin Nish and Kris Boyd scored for the 
visitors either side of Nacho Novo's penalty.

Goals by Derek Young and Scott Wilson earned Dunfermline victory over Hearts 
at East End Park.
 