
It was back in February when the rumours that had been doing the rounds for 
months firmed up into something far more concrete. Pogba was, indeed, to sever 
ties with his Italian club and move to the Red Devils, a recently installed 
manager pinning his hopes on a player forged by English football during a 
previous apprenticeship in the north-west. Yet, well before the yellow ticker 
could whirr into action, the truth was out. For Paul, read Mathias Pogba.For 
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/22/football-transfer-rumours-manchester-united-paul-pogba>
, substitute Crawley Town.

The striker smiles when the scenario is laid out even if, of the three Pogba 
brothers, he will be the one taking centre stage for the next few days. While 
Paul rests a torn hamstring in Turin, his sights set on returning to the 
Juventus side against Real Madrid for the second leg of theBianconeri’s first 
Champions League semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/24/champions-league-semi-final-draw-barcelona-bayern-munich-juventus-real-madrid>
 in 12 years later this month, and Mathias’s twin brother, Florentin, recovers 
from a similar injury at St-Etienne, the forward will take to the pitch at the 
Broadfield stadium on Sunday with League One survival his objective. Crawley 
know victory over Coventry City will guarantee their place in the third tier 
for another campaign,possibly at the expense of their visitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball/table>.

The request is in with the club’s press office for at least 10 tickets for the 
Pogba clan, his London-based aunts and uncles as well as friends, family and 
his first youth-team coach from Paris all clamouring to be at the season’s 
finale. This corner of West Sussex will be racked with tension yet, if the 
locals are fretting, their Guinea international is growing used to occasions 
such as these.

“I had exactly the same last year with Crewe, going into the last game needing 
to win to stay up,” he says, his mind drifting back to Gresty Road when he 
opened the scoring against Preston and the Railwaymen eventually survived. 
“This is a final for us. Last weekend against Peterborough we’d started so well 
and were ahead with a few minutes to play. Then it all fell to pieces. It was 
unbelievable. Shocking.

“We’d been within sight of survival, and then it was snatched away from us. 
Now it boils down to this. We know what we have to do: there’s no point 
worrying about other teams or other matches, we just have to win. It’s all on 
this.”

Pogba had scored his first goal since that mid-season move from Pescara at 
London Road only for a 3-2 lead to evaporate in those frenzied last few 
minutes, the 4-3 defeat casting Dean Saunders’ side beneath the cut-off. 
“There’ll be ‘good nerves’ ahead of the game,” he says. “It’s not getting to 
us. If a few players crack under the pressure, it brings everyone down, so it’s 
about staying calm. We have the experience, and if we stick to the manager’s 
plan we’ll be OK. Personally, I’m never nervous. Ever. It’s a football match, 
that’s all. Go out on the pitch and give your best, that’s all you can do.”

Pogba, at 24, sounds worldly wise. A nomadic career has taken him to clubs in 
France, Spain, Italy, England and Wales, together with trials with teams in 
Scotland, Germany and the Netherlands. Each move has shaped his footballing 
education, even if some have been more successful than others. The brothers 
grew up in the eastern suburbs of Paris, the twins making a name for themselves 
locally on the five-a-side pitch at La Renardière where they would play, day 
and night, with friends. Paul, a player Mathias believes will be back in 
English football one day, would tag along, urged to compete with the older 
boys, and would return home battered and bruised but stronger for the 
experience.

“That’s where we toughened up and Paul, as the youngest, wanted to be like us. 
He was far too good for players the same age as him, so we told him: ‘Come and 
play with us and your game will progress quicker, you’ll become stronger.’ Just 
look at him now. It worked.”

Mathias and Florentin, as Paul would after them, went on to play for the local 
club in Ile de France, US Roissy-en-Brie At 16, they were offered a trial at 
Celta Vigo and were duly recruited by the club’s academy. The upheaval affected 
both. “Mentally it was very, very hard: life abroad; leaving friends and 
family; not speaking the language … we were so young. On my own, I don’t think 
I could have done that. It was hard enough with two.”

They returned two years later, Florentin joining Sedan while Mathias spent 
time at Kaiserslautern, then an injury-plagued year at Quimper which “almost 
cost me my professional career before it had even started”. Thankfully, English 
football came calling.

His younger brother had already been at the United academy for a year, 
arriving from Roissy via the youth teams at US Torcy and Le Havre, when Bury 
offered the older Pogba another trial in a game against Wrexham. He scored and, 
while the Football League club dawdled, the Welsh side, under Saunders, offered 
a contract. He moved in with Paul in Manchester – “he was a good flat-mate, no 
problem” – and, after two successful Conference campaigns, joined Crewe.

“They’d just gone up into League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> when I signed, but I 
didn’t have a clue,” he says. “I heard ‘Crewe’ and knew they were all about 
developing young players, and that was what was important. Finding out they 
were in that division was just another boost. The whole thing was an education. 
I discovered ‘my football’ in England. My style of play. I can’t say it’s my 
home, because I feel as if I’ve lived everywhere, but it’s where I am best 
suited. Aggression, strong in the air, physical duels with opponents … that’s a 
typical English style, I guess. I get more from my natural game here in 
England.”

In that context, the decision to up sticks and move to Pescara last summer 
felt risky. The transfer to Serie B had been suggested to his then 
representative by his younger brother’s agent, Mino Raiola, though it 
transpired he had been bought by the sporting director, Giuseppe Pavone, 
without the go-ahead of the manager, Marco Baroni.

“It wasn’t about going specifically to Italy, even with Paul at Juve by then,” 
he says. “I’m ambitious and wanted a new challenge, to step up again. But even 
in those first few weeks, something didn’t ring true. It was clear the manager 
didn’t need me. I’d be in the first-team squad in the week, but would be in the 
stands or on the bench on a match day. There was no dialogue at all with the 
coach.

“The first time I got to speak to him face to face in his office was in 
December, when I couldn’t take any more. He admitted he hadn’t seen me play 
before they signed me and, when he’d actually watched the videos, he’d told 
[the club] straight away my style wasn’t for him. I said to him: ‘You’re 
telling me this in December? Why didn’t you tell me when I got here in the 
summer?’ I’d never have gone there if I’d known. Perhaps it was about politics, 
but it was wasted time.”

Pogba spent a few days at Den Haag, scoring in a 7-1 friendly win with 80% of 
voters on an online fans’ forum urging the Dutch club to sign him. When the 
contract negotiations dragged, a phone-call from Saunders, appointed Crawley’s 
interim manager when John Gregory required heart surgery over Christmas, lured 
him to Sussex.

This is a short-term arrangement, with much dependent upon the result on 
Sunday as to whether Pogba’s stay – like that of Saunders – is extended into 
next term. Indeed, while Florentin has been establishing himself at St-Etienne 
in Ligue 1 and Paul claiming successive Serie A titles,with a third for Juve 
imminent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/29/juventus-fiorentina-serie-a-match-report>
, Mathias’s career has been a whirlwind. The brothers still speak every day, 
geeing each other up and sharing their contrasting experiences in the game. 
There will be a telephone call from Paul, a player coveted in England, Spain 
and France and whose£75m sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/20/juventus-sell-paul-pogba-price-is-right>
 would allow the Italian champions to revamp their squad, wishing him luck 
against Coventry. Thoughts of Real briefly put to one side.

Mathias will be at the Bernabéu for the second leg of that Champions League 
tie as the France international seeks to revel on his glittering stage. “I’m 
protective of him, yes,” adds the emigre to England. “I don’t see him as ‘Paul 
Pogba’ like everyone else. For me, he’smon petit frère. I’m fiercely proud of 
him, but I think we’re all proud of what we’ve achieved in the game. We’re all 
still young, but we’ve given everything, each of us, to become professionals 
and earning our livings. But we’re all still aiming higher. We want more.

“I look at my two brothers: one is at Juve, champions of Italy year after 
year; the other at a club qualifying for Europe. But why stop there? Why should 
any of us? Let’s look to climb higher, to do more, achieve better. I want to 
progress, to play in the Premier League. That’s what I’m targeting. I do think, 
in the future, all three of us could be playing in the same country, in the 
same championship, perhaps all against each other. In England. Flo loves 
England and would love to play here one day. Paul has already been here with 
Manchester United. He could come back to this country. It’s possible. Very 
possible. We’ll see.”

All three are treated like returning heroes when they visit La Renardière 
these days, the local youngsters using their progress at clubs across Europe as 
inspiration. But, this weekend, only one of the trio is playing. This is 
Mathias’s moment.
 