
Melbourne Victory <https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> 
have clung on to defeat Brisbane 3-2 in stormy A-League circumstances after a 
controversial red card to frontman Besart Berisha. AAMI Park was alight on 
Friday night, with five goals scored in the opening half and a fiery second 
stanza centred on Berisha’s controversial dismissal.

A James Troisi-inspired Victory stormed to a 3-0 lead within half-an-hour but 
nearly threw their lead away before halftime, conceding two before the break. 
Troisi scored the opener, set up Marco Rojas’ second and played in Berisha who 
netted the third from the penalty spot.

The Roar replied through a Dimitri Petratos stunner and a James Donachie 
own-goal, but couldn’t find a third despite playing with a one-man advantage 
for 30 minutes. 

Adelaide United stun Melbourne City after late Mark Ochieng winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/adelaide-united-stun-melbourne-city-after-late-mark-ochieng-winner>
Berisha was dismissed for a high arm on Luke DeVere, although contact appeared 
to be minimal in an incident reminiscent of Jade North’s dive against Melbourne 
City last month at the same ground. The red card sent the partisan crowd into a 
frenzy, loudly booing DeVere’s every touch and with a bottle thrown onto the 
pitch. 

Incredibly though, after the helter-skelter first hour, Victory held on for a 
sixth-straight win. Troisi started Victory’s early rampage with an exquisite 
free kick, curled over the wall and past Michael Theo from just outside the box.

Five minutes later, he conjured Victory’s second. Troisi turned his way out of 
close attention, playing a stunning through-ball around the Roar defence and 
catching Theo unaware. The Roar gloveman was indecisive in the crucial moment, 
allowing Rojas to run onto the ball and slot home at the near post.

Berisha made it three from the spot shortly after, racing onto Troisi’s pass 
and being brought down brought down by DeVere. The Roar looked to be playing in 
second gear but, out of nowhere, Petratos conjured a route back into the match 
with the contest’s best goal.

From a free kick 30 metres out, the 24-year-old unleashed a thunderbolt that 
screamed into the top right corner, giving Lawrence Thomas no chance. Victory 
were flattened by the strike and, soon enough, their three-goal advantage was 
just one. Brandon Borrello’s tricky ball into the hotspot proved too tricky for 
ex-Roar defender Donachie to deal with and he put it into his own goal.

It might have been all square at the break too, with Thomas narrowly 
deflecting a Matt McKay effort wide. Berisha’s dismissal after the break 
changed the complexion of the game but there would be no sixth goal. With just 
10 men, Troisi hit the post after fine lead-up work by Rojas and Fahid Ben 
Khalfallah, while Thomas denied McKay with Brisbane’s best chance to equalise.



 