
In sweltering conditions at AAMI Park, Melbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> moved to within seven 
points of Sydney with a game in hand with an emphatic 4-1 win over Central 
Coast.

Now, Victory, with six wins from their last seven games have leaders Sydney FC 
in their sights after another dominant win moved them into second place on the
A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> ladder.

Western Sydney Wanderers release Kerem Bulut from A-League contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/wanderers-release-kerem-bulut-a-league-contract>
However, coach Kevin Muscat isn’t focusing on the race for top spot.

“Who knows what’s around the corner? I don’t really concern myself with what 
anyone else is doing,” Muscat said.

“All we can do is keep going along the way that we’re going and whatever 
happens at the end of the season happens.

“But I certainly won’t die wondering.”

While Sydney might not be the target, the sky is the limit for the surging 
Victory, according to the coach.

“I don’t know (how good we can be) but I’m not going to put a ceiling on it, 
I’m not going to put a limit on it ... why would we?” Muscat said.

“The reality is I’ve got no idea, but we’ll keep finding ways to improve the 
team, we’ll keep identifying areas where we can be better.”

Victory took a 1-0 lead into halftime against the Mariners then pressed home 
their advantage as the game opened up, with goals to James Donachie and Marco 
Rojas, who found the net twice in two minutes.

Trent Buhagiar made the most of a rare Victory lapse to beat advancing keeper 
Lawrence Thomas with 89 minutes played, but it was little consolation for the 
visitors.

Besart Berisha appeared to have passed former Victory teammate Archie Thompson 
to become the all-time leading goal scorer in the A-League in the 28th minute.

But his close-range shot was ruled to have gone in off Mariners defender Jake 
McGing. The Albanian sharpshooter was a constant threat but couldn’t find the 
net before he was subbed off in the 76th minute.

“The weather wasn’t conducive to the way that we like to play, but we still 
persisted,” Muscat said of the oppressive conditions.

“We had to alter things and I thought we were clinical and well worth the 
three points.

“If I can allow myself to be disappointed it was that late goal (conceded) 
which was just sloppiness.”

Central Coast coach Paul Okon felt his side created chances in the second half 
but bemoaned the costly first-half lapse.

“We should never have gone in a goal behind, we gave away a cheap goal, which 
puts you on the back foot,” Okon said.

“It’s happened far too many times this season.

“Cheap goals ... it’s an area that we must improve in.”



 