
It's no fun being bred out of the cultural gene pool. Watching TV, theatre or 
film, I'm on constant alert for a glimpse of someone who looks Chinese, for the 
slightest resemblance to an estimated 499,999 others like me living in the UK.

Barring Gok Wan, scientist Kevin Fong and the odd TV chef, UK Chinese are 
virtually absent from mainstream media. So it was with a sense of "here we go 
again" that we learned that the esteemed Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) is 
mounting the classic play The Orphan of Zhao in the way prize trophies usually 
get mounted: gutted and stuffed. This 13th-century Yuan-dynasty masterpiece may 
be the first Chinese play, to make it to the hallowed RSC, but theonly parts 
given to actors of east Asian heritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/19/royal-shakespeare-company-asian-actors>
 are two dogs. And a maid-servant. Who dies. Tragically.

Yes, out of 17 roles in the classic known to Eurocentrics as "the Chinese 
Hamlet", a grand total of three have gone to Asians. Another dog is played by a 
black actor, making you wonder exactly what the RSC is trying to say.

All director Gregory Doran came up with is that the blizzard of complaints is 
a case of "sour grapes", and that the critics should "get real"; not the most 
eloquent response you might expect from the intellectual heavyweight described 
as "one of the finest Shakespeareans of his generation". Any finer, and he 
might appreciate why casting Asians as dogs and a maid – the latter dying in 
the most tiresome Madame Butterfly tradition – might elicit consternation. 
Quite rightly, "blackface" was long ago laughed out of court on the grounds 
that it not only challenges credulity but is also both ludicrous and demeaning 
to all parties concerned. Yellowface, however, apparently remains acceptable 
and credible. Why?

Had Doran remembered the lessons learned by director Peter Brook when he cast 
a range of ethnicities in his well-intentioned 1980s film and stage adaptations 
of the Indian epicMahabharata 
<http://www.boloji.com/index.cfm?md=Content&sd=Articles&ArticleID=1431> and was 
forced to face his own ideological assumptions in the ensuing row, he might 
have trodden more sensitively instead of crashing in like a 19th-century 
colonialist after our tea and silks.

Only last year in the US, La Jolla Playhouse felt compelled to hold a public 
debate <http://vimeo.com/46243248> after it was caught having cast a mere two 
of the roles in the Chinese story, The Nightingale, as Asian, and one of them 
was a bird.

Cheekily, the RSC targets Chinese audiences (and their growing disposable 
wealth) in their marketing – with adverts in Chinese and a poster featuring a 
Chinese kid who looks nothing like the actors playing the main roles in the 
show – so we know it can make the effort when it wants to. Playwright David 
Henry Hwang of the Asian American Performers Action Coalition which fought in 
the Nightingale battle, says: "By producing The Orphan of Zhao, the RSC seeks 
to exploit the public's growing interest in China; through its casting choices, 
the company reveals that its commitment to Asia is self-serving, and only 
skin-deep."

Once again: why? The RSC casting is something of a litmus test, indicating how 
a failing superpower asserts its cultural dominance when its economic base is 
disintegrating. It may no longer operate under cold war rules to consciously 
exclude representations of the upstart Chinese, or feel pressured to depict us 
as Fu Manchu monstrosities (except for the hideously backward BBC Sherlock 
episode The Blind Banker, replete with oriental lowlifes and lotus blossoms). 
But, as George Orwell pointed out, you don't need a whipped dog when a 
well-trained one will do.

Such minds are hard-wired to eliminate an entire group's cultural 
representation, and they don't even realise it. Amanda Rogers of Swansea 
University, says: "As a national company they have a responsibility to 
represent all sectors of British society. There is a real paucity of east Asian 
representation in this country, and when we do see it, it is usually confined 
to minor or stereotypical roles."

One danger is that, the more a minority is presented as a blank canvas, the 
easier it is to project all sorts of rubbish on to it.

It's a shame that James Fenton, with his progressive track record, allows his 
adaptation of The Orphan of Zhao to be cast along colonialist lines. As a 
component of the establishment's entertainment wing shaping our perceptions and 
feelings, the RSC continues to airbrush us out of the picture, ready to be 
re-inserted into the frame only when villains are required. Whipped dog, 
well-trained one or puppet: you have to ask the old question: cui bonio?
 