
If one-twelfth of an annus horribilis is a mensis horribilis, then the 
Guardian crossword website had one in April. By now you will be suffering from 
'apology fatigue', but I should like to add mine to those that you have 
received already. You will not want to hear excuses, but part of the problem is 
that we have been trying to make too many changes to improve the service too 
fast. For example, the wonderful Azed puzzle from the Observer comes on 
non-standard grids and the template for it usually has to be redesigned each 
week, with consequent room for error.

Also, it is my experience in life that no good deed ever goes unpunished. A 
subscriber suggested that it would be nice to be able to get the solution to 
the Saturday prize puzzle online on the following Saturday, instead of having 
to wait a further two days until the Monday, which is when it appears in the 
paper itself. This seemed a good suggestion, so this is what we now do. But the 
existing software was written so that, when you try to upload a solution to a 
puzzle "early" (ie earlier than the program expects), an error message is 
generated that has to be manually overridden. And, once you start overriding 
error messages and the associated flashing red lights, one thing leads to 
another. This was the cause of the fiasco when Araucaria's Easter weekend 
special puzzle came up with half the solutions already showing. And the same 
thing happened again the following Saturday, though it was spotted and 
corrected more quickly. The only silver lining to that cloud is that you did, 
as a result, get an extra Araucaria bumper puzzle for the May Day bank holiday 
weekend on April 29 by way of a peace offering.

I made my personal contribution to this hopefully-soon-to-be-forgotten month 
by informing you that the late Beatle's full name had been John Churchill 
Lennon before he changed it to John Ono Lennon, when the word I was looking for 
was Winston. And a surprisingly large number of you were bold enough to assert 
that I was wrong in claiming that Tiger Woods was a precocious rising toddler 
when he won the first of his four Augusta Masters championships. When I was 
young there was a publication that offered its readers a prize for spotting the 
deliberate mistake in each issue. But this, I am afraid, was just a typo of 
1977 for 1997.

_____

On a more serious subject, new dictionaries and new editions of existing 
dictionaries now come so thick and fast that I own to having been confused 
about the Chambers stable when I said last month that the Chambers 21st Century 
Dictionary, though set out in an attractive and user-friendly way, was no 
substitute for the good old plain Chambers Dictionary. The publishers, Chambers 
Harrap, have pointed out to me that I am right, because it is not (and never 
was intended to be) such a substitute. The Chambers 21st Century Dictionary is 
an entirely different enterprise, with somewhat fewer entries and focused 
directly on its mission to illustrate modern English language usage. It would 
be of great help to students and to non-native English speakers, but less so to 
crossword solvers. Meanwhile, the Chambers Dictionary proper, I am happy to 
say, goes marching on. It is now in a splendid ninth (2003) edition with a 
foreword by the ubiquitous Melvyn Bragg. Its only weakness from our point of 
view is that it lacks the names of famous people, who used to appear in 
Collins. Many of those names (though not as many of the famous dead as in the 
old Collins) can now be found in the Oxford Dictionary of English (which you 
should not confuse with the Oxford English Dictionary).

_____

Life is easy for a crossword editor when definitions of words or phrases can 
be settled by reference to a dictionary. It becomes harder when words either 
take on new meanings, or sometimes begin to lose their existing ones, but the 
printed dictionaries have not caught up. I have just had a discussion (argument 
would be much too strong a word) with a setter over the phrase "jump cut". I 
have never heard or seen the term used before except in the context of a jerky 
piece of bad film or tape editing, which should be avoided at all cost, or of a 
deliberate use of a jerky cut in the editing to achieve a particular effect. An 
alternative view, though, is that the phrase is now coming to mean the 
equivalent in the other direction of a flashback, ie a deliberate and sudden 
forward movement in a film to a new point in time. Google, I have to confess, 
gives some support to this view. But it is not a definition that has made its 
way into any of the latest dictionaries from Oxford, Chambers or Collins with 
which I am surrounded. Such problems are the stuff of bad dreams for crossword 
editors.

* Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor
 