
The Mexican footballer Alan Pulido, who was kidnapped and held for 24 hours 
over the weekend, escaped his captors by disarming and taking a mobile phone 
away from one of them, then calling the police, according to an official 
summary report obtained by the Guardian.

The report, a summary of three phone calls to emergency operators, appears to 
contradict initial reports that Pulido was freed by the police.

It describes how Pulido found himself alone with one of his three kidnappers 
and wrested a .50 calibre weapon away from him. Pulido originally asked the 
operator to trace the call and can be heard beating his captor, demanding that 
he say the street name correctly.

Pulido was unable to leave the safe house as the doors were locked, though he 
stuck his head out the window and described a nearby antenna, that he was in a 
two-storey home and that there were two cars parked outside.

Mexican footballer Alan Pulido's kidnapping sets off massive manhunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/29/mexican-soccer-player-alan-pulido-kidnapped>
In one of the calls, Pulido said police were outside the safe house and wanted 
the officers informed someone inside was contacting emergency officials. The 
operator asked him to fire the pistol so the authorities knew they were in the 
correct spot, but Pulido said the weapon was not loaded.

Police officers started firing at one point, prompting Pulido to offer a 
description of his attire – shorts and a multi-coloured singlet – so he 
wouldn’t be confused with his captor.

Press photos showed Pulido, 25, with a bandaged right hand from breaking a 
window. In a Twitter message on Monday afternoon Pulidothanked 
<https://twitter.com/puliidooo/status/737365593095999488> the authorities for 
finding him, and fans for their prayers. “Thanks to everyone for their prayers, 
they helped us a lot in this terrible experience us a lot in this terrible 
experience of our lives that we do not wish on anyone.”

The Tamaulipas state prosecutor, Ismael Quintanilla, first said Pulido was 
rescued at around midnight on Sunday, after he was able to alert authorities to 
his whereabouts via a mobile phone call.

Quintanilla later told reporters Pulido had authored his own rescue, then 
contacted the authorities.

Press photos showed Pulido, 25, with a bandaged right hand, reportedly 
sustained when breaking windows in the house in which he was held. He was 
expected to speak to the press later on Monday.

The striker, who plays for Olympiakos in Greece and has represented Mexico but 
is not in the squad for the forthcoming Copa América,was abducted after leaving 
a party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/29/mexican-soccer-player-alan-pulido-kidnapped>
 with his girlfriend in his hometown of Ciudad Victoria, some 200 miles south 
of the Texas border.

Family and state officials said his captors intercepted the BMW he was 
driving, pulled Pulido out and fled the scene. Pulido’s girlfriend notified the 
authorities. Quintanilla said the first call requesting a ransom came at 1.30pm 
on Sunday, Mexican media reported.

Ciudad Victoria, capital of Tamaulipas, is a city disputed by rival factions 
of the hyper-violent Los Zetas cartel. Authorities detained a suspect in the 
Pulido kidnapping, who was accused of belonging to Los Zetas.

The kidnapping of an international footballer attracted worldwide attention 
and again cast attention on insecurity inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, and especially Tamaulipas, which 
has been consumed by organized crime over the past six years, as warring drug 
cartels dispute a territory coveted for the carrying of contraband to the US.


Tamaulipas leads the country in kidnapping, according to federal government 
statistics. The online news organization Animal Político reported that the 
incidence of abduction in the city has increased 360% between 2010 and 2015.

“The little news [on security] that comes out of Victoria and other 
crime-ridden cities in Tamaulipas is very watered down, since criminal groups 
have muzzled the press,” said Jorge Kawas, a security analyst based in 
Monterrey.

Kawas said official statistics were low, as most kidnappings remained 
unreported and families expressed fears that police are sometimes complicit. An 
annual victimization survey from the Mexican statistics survey Inegi estimated 
the number of kidnappings nationwide in 2014 at between 83,000 and 116,000.

Mexicans reacted with relief to news of the rescue of Pulido, whose kidnapping 
was considered so sensitive that no mention of it was made during the Mexican 
league’schampionship match in Monterrey on Sunday 
<http://www.espnfc.us/mexican-liga-mx/22/blog/post/2883002/victor-guzman-oscar-perez-star-as-pachuca-down-monterrey-to-win-mx-title>
.

The speed of the rescue also raised uncomfortable questions on social media 
sites, where some wondered how Pulido was found so quickly in a country with 
countless victims and in a state that will hold elections on 5 June, which 
could replace the party in power for the first time in 86 years.

“When we knew who it was we knew that it was going to generate a lot of 
pressure,” Quintanilla said, according to Animal Político.

Security analysts expressed incredulity. 

Kawas said: “I’ve never heard of authorities acting so fast and coordinated to 
solve any problem, let alone a kidnapping.”

Another analyst, Alejandro Hope, tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/ahope71/status/737275833241337857>: “Alan Pulido was 
victim of the most inept kidnappers on the planet or there is something that 
they haven’t wanted to reveal.”


 