
The legend of Dos a Cero and ‘Fort Columbus’ were dismantled Friday night in 
Mapfre Stadium as a gritty game between the two best teams in theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifying group saw 
Mexico grab all three points in the first game of the Hexagonal. A 20th-minute 
Miguel Layun goal was canceled out by a strong Jozy Altidore run in the 49th 
minute that saw him thread the ball in for Bobby Wood to slot home and tie up 
the game until Mexico’s Rafael Marquez headed in a corner right before 
second-half stoppage time to give Mexico a critical 2-1 win.

Much was made of what US coach Jurgen Klinsmann would do with his formation 
coming into the game.Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> coach 
Juan Carlos Osorio likes to play a 3-4-3 or 3-3-3-1 and Klinsmann dutifully 
took the bait, switching his team into a 3-5-2 to start the game and watching 
his center back trio of John Brooks, Matt Besler and Timmy Chandler struggle as 
a result. After conceding Layun’s goal, he switched his team back into a 4-4-2, 
but the question remains why he opted to change tactics in the first place.

USA 1-2 Mexico: as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/11/usa-mexico-world-cup-2018-qualifying-live-ohio>
The 3-5-2 saw Chandler and Besler give up a ton of space on the flanks and 
Mexico smartly took advantage of that, using Carlos Vela and Tecatito Corona to 
put pressure on the American’s back line. Even after the reversion to a 4-4-2, 
there were still moments of confusion on where players should be and what runs 
to make.

That was not helped by Tim Howard, who made history by being the only US 
goalkeeper to start three home qualifiers against Mexico, going off in the 40th 
minute after suffering a groin injury during a goal kick. Brad Guzan came in 
after Howard tried to give it a go but was hardly threatened for majority of 
his time in net, except Marquez’s goal.

Although that could have shook the Americans going into half-time, they came 
out of the interval with some great attacking play and equalized with Wood’s 
goal. For the remainder of the match, both teams traded shots at each other, 
mainly utilizing turnovers in the opposition’s box to create a quick break 
through the middle or down the flank.

The game quickly got chippy as well, with a lot of comings together and finger 
pointing at the referee. And some theater was always going to come into play, 
with Hector Herrera tripping over his own feet in the box in the 62nd minute 
and going down, arms flailing, in an acting job so superb it could have landed 
him a spot in Hamilton. He was yellow carded for simulation and the game 
proceeded after some loud chants from the crowd.

Both teams had plenty of opportunities, whether it came when Mexico hit the 
bar twice in the opening minutes of the game or when Altidore saw his dipping 
free kick tipped over the bar by Alfredo Talavera in the 77th minute. Michael 
Bradley also had opportunity in the 58th to put the US ahead when he went one 
on one with Talavera but put the shot right at the goalkeeper. But Mexico came 
away with the last one.

The game seemed to have petered out near the end, with both teams not really 
making any progress until the Mexicans got a corner in the 89th minute. And who 
else was there to direct the winning goal in than Marquez, the designated 
villain in this rivalry who is likely, at 37, playing in his last qualifier in 
Columbus against the US. The crowd seemed stunned after the goal and both teams 
had a coming together in the final minutes of stoppage time that saw Carlos 
Salcedo receive his second yellow card and get sent off right before the game 
was called. After a week in which Donald Trump, who’s been notorious for his 
anti-Mexican sentiment, was chosen to be the next president of the US, the 
Mexicans got the last laugh in Columbus.

Both teams will quickly have to shift their focus to upcoming games with the 
U.S. taking on Costa Rica while the Mexicans travel to Panama. The legend of 
Dos a Cero may be gone, but the Americans showed in Columbus that they will be 
a hard out for any team they face during qualifying.
 