
A Mexican international footballer was kidnapped in the north-eastern state of 
Tamaulipas over the weekend, triggering a massive manhunt in territory that has 
been a battleground of warring drug cartels.

Lionel Messi limps off to give Argentina an injury scare before Copa America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/lionel-messi-argentina-injury-scare-copa-america>
Alan Pulido, 25, was abducted after leaving a party late on Saturday night. 
The kidnapping happened near Pulido’s hometown of Ciudad Victoria, 200 miles 
south of the Texas border, according to family and state government officials.

Pulido’s brother Armando told the sports publication Medio Tiempo that his 
brother had attended the party with his girlfriend and left at around 11.30pm. 
Pulido was traveling back to Ciudad Victoria when his vehicle was intercepted 
and he was seized by unknown individuals, his brother said.

A state security source told the Guardian Pulido had been seen in Ciudad 
Victoria driving a BMW. The source said it was not known if he was pulled from 
that vehicle by his captors.

Tamaulipas state prosecutor Ismael Quintanilla Acosta confirmed the 
disappearance, saying Pulido was “intercepted by armed persons” and that his 
whereabouts have been unknown ever since.

The kidnapping made national headlines in Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> and brought outpourings of support.

“We sincerely hope that this ordeal ends before long and that Alan returns 
home safe and sound,” Pulido’s Greek club team, Olympiakos,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/olympiacos_org/status/736989764088369156> on Sunday.

“Terrible what happened to Alan Pulido … in Mexico there are thousands like 
him and without anyone’s help. Regrettable situation. My prayers for Alan and 
his family,”tweeted <https://twitter.com/herculezg/status/736956185199423488> 
former US international Herculez Gómez.

Pulido played for Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> and was 
included the 2014 World Cup squad. He was left out of the squad for the Copa 
America, which starts next week, due to a legal dispute with his former Mexican 
club, Tigres, according to national coach Carlos Osorio.

Pulido’s kidnapping put attention on the public security problems in Mexico 
and especially Tamaulipas state, which occupies the country’s north-eastern 
corner and has been beset by violence and crimes such as kidnap and extortion.

Security analysts say the Gulf Cartel and its former armed wing Los Zetas have 
disputed the state since splitting in 2010.

Ciudad Victoria, the state capital, has been especially hard hit, with 
shootouts occurring in broad daylight and residents preferring to stay off the 
streets after dark.

A Mexico City think tank, the Citizen Council for Public Security and Criminal 
Justice, has ranked Ciudad Victoria the second-most dangerous city in the 
country for kidnappings.

Online news organization Animal Politico, citing federal government 
statistics, reported Tamaulipas having the highest rate of kidnapping in the 
country – with cases increasing 360% between 2010 and 2015.

The security source said the cartels have splintered and two factions of Los 
Zetas are squabbling over Ciudad Victoria.

“They need money to pay their expenses” and continue fighting, the security 
source said. “(Kidnapping) is the easy way to get it.”

Mexico has one of the wealthiest football leagues in the hemisphere and its 
high salaries tend to keep players at home, though Pulido is among a growing 
number of Mexicans to try their luck in Europe.

Analysts say player kidnappings are rare, even with franchises operating in 
cities suffering through spells of insecurity brought about by a crackdown on 
drug cartels and organized crime. The crackdown has claimed more than 100,000 
lives and left more than 20,000 missing persons over the past 10 years.

“Organized crime usually respects sports figures and singing stars and leaves 
them alone,” said Héctor López Zatarain, an expert in sports marketing. “Here 
in Mexico, you almost never see a player with bodyguards.”
 