
Television chef Michel Roux Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux-jr> has emerged this week 
as an unlikely champion of the common man.He is worried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/16/michel-roux-jr-scrap-service-charge-increase-menu-prices-le-gavroche>
 that restaurant goers do not understand the difference between a tip and a 
service charge, and hopes that others in the catering industry “will join me in 
making it clearer for the public to understand what they are paying for”.

He said this after admitting that his restaurant, the Michelin-starred 
Le Gavroche, keeps all the service charge added to its customers’ bills, 
instead of distributing the cash to staff.

Allow me to help. A tip is cash given to your waiter in a private transaction 
denoting personal gratitude and also shared knowledge that the restaurant trade 
generally pays front-of-house staff as little as it can get away with. Aservice 
charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/14/time-for-restaurants-to-get-rid-of-tips-jay-rayner>
 is a ruse restaurants have developed in order to gain control over the tips 
their underpaid staff might otherwise receive. Which I think is pretty clear.

Michel Roux Jr to scrap service charge and increase menu prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/16/michel-roux-jr-scrap-service-charge-increase-menu-prices-le-gavroche>
How could it be otherwise? Adding a service charge in a restaurant is like 
adding a body-covering charge in a clothes shop. The whole point of going to a 
restaurant is to sit at a table while people prepare and bring food and drink 
to you. Or, to put it more simply, to receive services. And pay for them. A 
service charge is a charge on your charge for services. The public is confused, 
as Roux knows perfectly well, because restaurants want us to be.

The trouble is that people are not as confused about Roux’s restaurant as they 
were a couple of weeks ago. First, it was revealed that staff in the extremely 
posh restaurant were being paid £5.50 an hour for a 68-hour week. Roux said he 
was sorry – presumably he meant for flagrantly breaking the law in this manner 
while assuming that the victims of this violation would protect him because 
they wanted the work.

But he couldn’t leave it there. When the thoughts of his critics turned to 
questions about what happened to service charges and tips, Roux, or a 
spokeswoman anyway, decided once again to have a go at outfoxing people. “Wages 
are not dependent on fluctuating levels of discretionary service charges or 
cash tips.”

That sentence has a terrible beauty about it. The spokeswoman is trying to 
make out that it would be terribly unfair to let staff rely on the vagaries of 
customer discretion and that they’re doing the staff a favour by “treating 
service charges as revenue”, so that no criminally underpaid staff member is 
left behind. They pay tax on the service charges, they explain. So if their 
staff need in-work benefits, they’re doing their bit there too. Lovely.

So, basically, Roux has come over all educate-the-public because he got caught 
out in deceiving the public. I say the public, though of course hardly anyone 
can afford to eat at Le Gavroche, which is now raising its menu prices because 
it’s removing its service charge. Which only goes to show what a moveable 
feast, if I may say, the service charge was in the first place.

The depressing thing is that this issue has been around for years. If the 
public isn’t by now fully educated about the less than transparent nature of 
service charges and the variations in how they are distributed, then 
we’re never going to be. Thegovernment is currently considering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/02/tips-should-go-to-workers-not-employers-government-report-restaurants>
 making it illegal for businesses to take any cut of service charges at all. 
This is a good idea, but as we have seen from the wages paid at Le Gavroche, 
the most putatively respectable and financially secure of businesses are not at 
all averse to breaking the law.

The $600 dinner. Have we all gone mad? | Adam Liaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/14/the-600-dinner-have-we-all-gone-mad>
Yet more depressing is the fact that the public for whom Roux cares so greatly 
is so enthusiastically complicit in helping the world of business and finance 
towards its goal of a cashless economy – in which money can become entirely 
abstract even as it controls and tracks our every move. We don’t want to fart 
around with splitting bills on cards then digging around for cash to provide a 
tip as well, because we’re all convenience junkies. It makes it easy for 
businesses to hoover up everything.

And you can never tell the good guys from the bad guys. Plenty of restaurants 
are pretty scrupulous about ensuring tips are divided equally among employees. 
They’re the ones in which the staff are familiar figures, because they stay for 
years in their jobs. And that really is the second best way: the charming young 
people who know how to flirt will get plenty of tips, the acne-scarred 
washer-upper will get none. So pooling and dividing the tips evens out the 
Darwinism.

The best way, of course, is to set your wages so that neither the giver nor 
the receiver feels used or exploited, mutual respect is maintained and no one 
relies on tips at all. But, somehow, that kind of thinking seems to be 
something akin to totalitarian Marxism.

Meanwhile, back in the gentle world of the free market, the only thing to try 
to keep doing is naming and shaming, picking off bad employers one by one 
so that others think they might be next. It may not be the village green 
stocks. But it’s still pretty medieval. No wonder restaurants weren’t a thing 
back then.
 