
Given the opportunity, would you be a tracksuit or a business suit football 
manager? This dilemma used to be a schoolyard staple, and I can recall arguing 
the relative merits of theunkempt groundsman look of Brian Clough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/23/brian-clough-tribute-forest-green-jumpers>
, a man of the people in his green sweater, compared to say thearistocratic 
tailoring of George Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2000/feb/12/newsstory.sport>, 
stiff-backed and dapper, on a state of permanent readiness for a royal visit.


A University of Portsmouth research team published a paper 
<https://researchportal.port.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/examining-the-impact-of-physical-appearance-on-impressions-of-coaching-competence(016b8ec2-ee97-428f-be4f-06f6905a55cb).html>
 in the International Journal of Sport Psychology in 2010 investigating the 
competing merits of the two sartorial approaches on football teams. The lead 
researcher, Dr Richard Thelwell, revealed: “We have found that the clothing 
that coaches wear can have a direct effect on the players’ perceptions of the 
coach’s ability.

Defenders shine for Melbourne City in victory over Western Sydney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/defenders-shine-for-melbourne-city-in-victory-over-western-sydney>
“In our study, coaches wearing a suit were perceived as being more 
strategically competent than those wearing sporting attire. However, when 
wearing sporting attire, they were perceived to be more technically competent 
than those in a suit… A coach in a suit suggests strategic prowess which is 
obviously ideal for a match.”

Michael Valkanis commanded Melbourne City’s technical area on Friday night in 
a pristine club suit, sky blue tie, and chocolate brown dress shoes. He looked 
every inch the sophisticated modern manager. The symbolism was impossible to 
ignore. To this point in his career Valkanis has been a tracksuit coach. He’d 
sit alongside the man in hand-stitched cotton and silk wearing his mass 
produced polyester, keeping his thoughts to himself save for the occasional 
opening of a set-piece flipchart to bring an imminent substitute up to speed. 
On Friday night he was the main man in the expensive threads.

Valkanis is a few days into a job interview of indeterminate length. Results 
will carry the most weight but the former Adelaide United coach also needs to 
enhance his public perception. If he is to be awarded what must surely be the 
most coveted job in Australian club football he has to be seen as a suitable 
representative of the City Football Group in the eyes of executives like Brian 
Marwood.

If the University of Portsmouth study is accurate, Valkanis has already proven 
his credentials to the playing group in his civvies, and now has to graduate 
from the tracksuit to the business suit and bring his expensively assembled 
squad along with him.

He began promisingly. Friday night’s win over Western Sydney Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/defenders-shine-for-melbourne-city-in-victory-over-western-sydney>
 was by no means a vintage performance in a instantly forgettable game but he 
secured City’s first three points since November and their first clean sheet 
since the opening round. His paymasters have an eye on playing style but 
they’re more concerned with winning. Valkanis already has an early head start 
on his rivals for the full-time job.

The interim head coach did nothing revolutionary to demarcate his era from 
that of his predecessor. If anything he brought a welcome dose of simplicity to 
what has at times been overcomplicated.

He selected an XI that seemed uncontroversially the best and most experienced 
available (with perhaps the exception of the goalkeeper). He operated a flat 
back four, in front of which players patrolled the parts of the pitch they were 
most associated with.

Tim Cahill remained an enigma. Playing off Bruno Fornaroli he seemed to 
operate as a permanent decoy, running along the Western Sydney defensive line 
like an NFL receiver in motion behind the line of scrimmage. Despite his 
regular goals Cahill’s influence in open play remains limited, especially for a 
nominal No10.

Valkanis’ greatest influence appeared to be on the full-backs with both Ivan 
Franjic and Josh Rose operating as secondary wingers for much of the game. Rose 
proved a regular attacking outlet for City while Franjic struck home the game’s 
highlight.

That tactic also exposed another element of Valkanis the boss. He was a much 
more vocal presence on the touchline than John van ’t Schip ever was, 
especially to players within earshot – commonly the wingers and full-backs. 
When Rose or Franjic drifted nearby Valkanis would bellow encouragement, 
cajoling them to attack more directly, press harder in transition, or stick 
tighter to their man. Valkanis doesn’t ride every touch of the ball like Paul 
Okon at Central Coast Mariners, but he is closer to that school than City have 
been used to.

Nobody seems to know how long Valkanis will require his matchday suit. The 
club’s statement following Van ’t Schip’s departure implied there was no rush 
to find a permanent replacement. At the halfway point of the home and away 
season it would be a challenge for an outsider to hit the ground running. City 
seem assured of a finals place but long odds for the Premiers’ Plate. The next 
four months will be about tailoring arguably the most talented squad in the 
league for the playoffs and securing progression into the Asian Champions 
League.

The alternatives to extending the incumbent’s tenure seem to be twofold. The 
conservative play would be to employ a credentialled local or someone familiar 
with theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>. Tony Popovic 
and Josep Gombau head this list but the chances of securing the release of 
either from their existing positions at Western Sydney and the Olyroos seem 
remote at this stage of the season.

The ambitious play would be to headhunt a marquee name, someone who may help 
put bums on seats and reflect the international status of the City Football 
Group. Plenty of big fish are on the market, including Marcelo Bielsa, Juande 
Ramos and Frank de Boer, withone report 
<https://twitter.com/Val61/status/817931029193244672> indicating a former 
Premier League boss could be in the pipeline. How realistic any of those names 
are remains to be seen, but the owners’ deep pockets and global profile enables 
Melbourne City to position themselves as a viable springboard for a coach of 
repute looking for a route back to the big time.

For the time being, Valkanis is the man in possession and if he maintains his 
100% winning record he will prove a hard man to unseat. Especially now he’s 
dressed for success.
 