
Belgium’s rising star Michy Batshuayi scored twice as Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> cruised to their biggest win 
this season at Toulouse that provisionally lifted the club to second place in 
the French league standings on Friday.

After failing to win their four previous matches – including a home loss to 
Caen last week – Marcelo Bielsa’s players put on a performance of attacking 
verve and defensive solidity against a poorToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> side who were overrun from the 
start.

Marseille moved ahead of Paris Saint-Germain on goal difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football/table>, one point behind 
leaders Lyon while Toulouse remained in the danger zone, two points below 
safety.

“This win should help us find back our confidence and the level we played 
earlier this season,” Bielsa said. “If there is something to keep from tonight, 
it’s the team’s cohesion.”

Marseille, who boast the league’s best attacking record with 56 goals from 28 
games, had conceded seven goals in their previous three league games, dropping 
seven points in their quest for the French title after failing to hold on 
toleads. This time, on their way to a first away win since October, Marseille 
players made sure it would not happen again by scoring four goals before the 
interval.

Batshuayi, who started the season as a cover for André-Pierre Gignac but has 
eclipsed the France striker recently, needed two minutes to score with a 
left-foot shot between three defenders from the edge of the box.

The defender Baptiste Aloé doubled the visitors’ lead four minutes later 
before Jacques François Moubandje beat his own keeper under pressure from Lucas 
Ocampos.

The 21-year-old Batshuayi netted his sixth league goal before Wissam Ben 
Yedder pulled one back.

André Ayew and Gignac, who came on as a substitute for Batshuayi on the hour 
mark, then completed Marseille’s win. Gignac is now the most prolific active 
striker in the French league with 97 goals.

PSG host Lens on Saturday and Lyon travel to Montpellier on Sunday before a 
decisive clash with Marseille the following weekend.
 