
A characteristically elegant swipe of Stewart Downing’s left foot cut through 
the Teesside mist to keepMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> on course for a return to 
the Premier League and leave Rotherham stuck to the foot of the Championship.

Aitor Karanka’s side remain fourth – but only one point off the top – at the 
end of a night when the £5m invested inreturning Downing to his native 
north-east 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/16/stewart-downing-returns-middlesbrough-west-ham>
 from West Ham last July once again paid dividends.

“The most important thing was the three points, sometimes it’s hard to play 
the bottom side,” said Karanka, whose players missed a string of chances 
throughout what turned into a surprising slog of a game. “But Stewart was 
amazing.”

Certainly the last person Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> wanted to concede possession 
to was the former England winger and sure enough, Grant Ward’s slapdash pass 
lead to Downing pouncing on the resultant loose ball. Accelerating towards 
goal, he proceeding to elude Lee Camp courtesy of a crisp low, left-foot shot 
dispatched on an unerring trajectory towards the bottom corner.

Caught all out of position Neil Redfearn’s defence swiftly suffered another 
breach. Camp was again beaten but this time the woodwork offered Danny Collins 
and Co a reprieve as Carlos de Pena’s header rattled the bar following David 
Nugent’s cross.

Karanka’s decison to allow his best defender, Daniel Ayala, a rest on the 
bench – which may have had something to do with Ayala being one yellow card 
from a suspension, with Boro having a very important game at Hull, the leaders, 
on Saturday – seemed vindicated. Certainly, his goalkeeper, Dimi 
Konstantopoulos, was seriously under-employed on an evening when only Tony 
Andreu really threatened for Rotherham.

Even so Redfearn’s players did enjoy patches of sustained possession and 
Karanka’s slightly edgy technical area demeanour betrayed a certain anxiety 
about the slenderness of his side’s lead.

How the Spaniard could have done with Albert Adomah converting George Friend’s 
fabulous nutmeg and precision cross but the winger miscued over the bar.

Downing kept conjuring chances but collectively Boro were losing tempo and 
momentum, leaving the 21,000-plus crowd increasingly subdued and, briefly, 
alarmed when a slip from Fernando Amorebieta allowed Jordan Bowery a chance 
which he could not convert.

“Middlesbrough are really good, a top side, but at times we kept possession 
well and frustrated the fans,” said Redfearn, who is still seeking his first 
win after a month in charge at Rotherham. “We were always in it.”
 