
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> eased their way into 
the sixth round last night, even if analogies to the slaughterhouse which 
adjoins Forfar Athletic's tiny stadium are not quite necessary. Hamilton 
Academical now lie in wait for the Ibrox side, Rangers' pursuit of three 
domestic trophies and successful defence of this particular one still being on 
track.

Forfar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/forfar> finished with 10 men but 
also have a welcome and healthy cheque to remember this game by.

Barry Ferguson and Pedro Mendes had been spared the trip to Angus, Walter 
Smith obviously sensing Forfar's standing as the third-worst team in the 
country rendered this something short of a hazardous tie. Put into further 
context, Forfar has gained far more esteem over the centuries for a famous 
local delicacy – the bridie – than for its team's football.

The most profitable spell of their history has arrived in the last 25 years, 
courtesy of a Third Division title, a Second Division title and a raft of 
Forfarshire Cups, but Sasa Papac endorsed Smith's theory within eight minutes. 
The Bosnian full-back, not accustomed to finding himself in advanced positions, 
supplied a low finish after being played in by Kenny Miller.

This was the complete opposite to the Old Firm game of Sunday, but harassed 
Forfar officials still rushed around beforehand and all for a purpose – the 
payday from live TV alone eliminated the club's overdraft. Nobody appeared 
overly concerned, however, as one set of auxiliary floodlights installed for 
the night switched themselves off within 15 minutes of kick-off. Perhaps the 
hosts were resigned to chasing illustrious shadows.

DaMarcus Beasley and Miller warmed the palms of the home goalkeeper, Alistair 
Brown, with fierce efforts while on the terrace, as if to prove you get morons 
in every corner of Scottish football, one was adamant the home side should 
"break the legs" of their opponents. Thankfully the sentiment was ignored, Andy 
Tod twice launching decent attempts at the Rangers goal before the interval.

Such wastefulness is often costly and so it proved. Stephen McNally rather 
shanked a clearance to the feet of Miller, who duly teed himself up before 
volleying home to put the Cup tie out of sight as a contest with the striker, 
who had failed to score in his nine previous outings, doubtless relieved to 
have broken that barren run.

The surprising aspect of the night had been that Miller's partner, Kris Boyd, 
failed to find the net, however. The prolific striker has 23 goals to his 
credit this season and can usually be relied on to excel against technically 
weak opposition. There was to be no Boyd intervention, though, with the former 
Scotland international cutting his usual sulky figure as he was substituted.

The Forfar full-back Elliot Smith made a similar walk moments later, but at 
the behest of the referee, after a wild and two-footed lunge on Beasley. All 
that remained was for the substitute Aaron Niguez to claim his first Rangers 
goal and for Miller to nod in his second of the evening from close range.
 