
Wembley and a possible return to the Championship beckon for Millwall, who 
kept their northern rivals at arm’s length to book their place in theLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> play-off final. Phil 
Parkinson’s side came up short, proving incapable of scoring the second goal 
that would have left Millwall jittery and just the kick of a ball separating 
the sides. “I’m proud of my players,” said the softly spoken Millwall manager, 
Neil Harris. “Two legs against Bradford and Phil’s side were always going to be 
challenging, always going to be tough and we’ve been top drawer.”

Clubs concerned about falling turnstile revenues in Football League shakeup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/clubs-revenues-football-league-shakeup>
The side Harris had sent out to win 3-1 at Valley Parade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/bradford-city-millwall-league-one-play-off-semi-final-match-report>
 last Sunday was unchanged, while Bradford were again forced to make do without 
the defensive rock Reece Burke and hold-up merchant James Hanson, with the pair 
sidelined through injury. A masked Billy Clarke recovered sufficiently from a 
fractured cheekbone to partner Jamie Proctor up front.

The scorers of 46 goals between them so far this season, Steve Morison and Lee 
Gregory were a source of constant first-half torment for Bradford’s defence and 
it was no surprise when they combined to break the deadlock.

Morison slalomed through a couple of lackadaisical challenges before sliding 
the ball to Gregory, who slotted into the bottom corner from 18 yards to make 
it 4-1 on aggregate. “I’m delighted for them,” Harris said. “The two of them up 
front have been talismen in the team and, obviously, to be successful you need 
players who are scoring goals.”

In a first half dominated by Millwall, Bradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> were largely reduced to hopeful 
crosses from the flanks into the conspicuous Hanson-shaped void in the 
opposition penalty area and it was from one such move that they eventually 
grabbed a lifeline. Just before the break, Proctor needed a second attempt to 
beat Jordan Archer before converting Kyel Reid’s delivery from the left.

Seconds later, the striker squandered a glorious opportunity to further 
silence a boisterousMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> 
support, dawdling unforgivably when put clean through on goal. “They were more 
clinical than us in and around the penalty box,” said Parkinson, who also felt 
the referee let the home crowd influence him. “Ultimately, that’s what cost us.”

Sensing the tie’s momentum shift in their favour, it was Bradford who began 
the second half in the ascendency but Millwall who continued to craft the 
chances. First, Jimmy Abdou thrashed wildly after a poor defensive header from 
Rory McArdle, then an unmarked Byron Webster thumped a header over from a 
corner when scoring looked simpler. As the clock ticked on, each missed 
Millwall opportunity left their opponents clinging to something resembling 
hope, however forlorn it may have been.

The Bradford substitute Tom Thorpe certainly was forlorn after being denied a 
spot-kick for what looked like a blatant trip on the edge of the area. His 
pleas fell on deaf ears, much like the stadium announcer’s comically futile 
exhortations for Millwall’s ecstatic fans to stay off the pitch at the final 
whistle. “They were brilliant,” said Harris of the home fans. “The atmosphere 
was electric, it was hostile and that’s exactly the way you want them.”
 