
The property developer in line to benefit from a compulsory purchase order on 
land occupied byMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> FC 
appears to have been looking into selling its part in the project, a document 
suggests.

The developer Renewal denied it had any desire to “take the money and run” at 
a scrutiny committee meeting last Tuesday. “We’re not going anywhere,” a 
Renewal director, Jordana Malik, told Lewisham councillors, responding to the 
suggestion Renewal could take the benefit of statutory powers and sell on for a 
quick profit. “If we had been intent on doing what we have been accused of – 
that is, taking the money and running – we could have done it a while ago. We 
get our return at the very end of this development when the place is made.”

Millwall score an early goal as they seek the ultimate home win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/millwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer>
And yet a brochure seen by the Guardian suggests Renewal’s 50% owners 
Incorporated Holdings Limited (IHL) has been making active efforts to sell its 
access to the development. The brochure, marked “strictly private and 
confidential” and prepared by the commercial property agent Lambert Smith 
Hampton, shows IHL, Renewal’s part-owner, appearing to offer a chance to buy 
outright its share in “one of London’s largest regeneration schemes”. It is 
unclear when the document was prepared.

Renewal denied any knowledge of the document, or any relationship with Lambert 
Smith Hampton. A Renewal spokesman said: “Lambert Smith Hampton have never been 
employed by Renewal to advise on the scheme and Renewal has never commissioned, 
seen, or until today, heard of any report by LSH which sets out that the scheme 
is for sale. At no stage has Renewal sought an outright disposal of the scheme 
nor does it intend to.”

The brochure refers to the fact Renewal has been buying up land around the Den 
for more than 10 years. In a key phrase it tells potential investors “options 
for the existing joint venture investor at this stage may include – exit, 
partial exit, introduction of private third-party equity (dilution of equity), 
debt-funding/refinancing, other structured finance, equity or Debt IPO 
fundraise [sic]”. The first option, exit, refers to the complete sale of IHL’s 
interests in the project.

John Baird, a real estate partner at Osborne Clarke with an expertise in 
planning matters and who has seen the document, said: “Exit, partial exit is 
standard industry language for a developer selling all or part of their 
interest in a site. The only point I would make is that it’s listed as one of 
the options, but the brochure definitely states that selling all or part of the 
site is an option.” Contacted by the Guardian, an agent at Lambert Smith 
Hampton said marketing of the development was, to the best of his knowledge, 
currently on hold while CPO issues were resolved.

The order to seize land occupied by Millwall and other local residents and 
businesses was called back in last Tuesday for a second hearing. It is now 
slated to be reheard on Wednesday. Lewisham Council’s constant preference for 
the Renewal scheme has led some close to the process to fear it will ignore 
concerns raised by the scrutiny committee and reconfirm the order. However, the 
indications that the development appears to have already been offered for sale 
could raise basic questions about the use of statutory compulsory-purchase 
powers. A CPO is to be granted where there is a “compelling case in the public 
interest”.

The New Bermondsey development stands to benefit from significant public money 
and accelerated planning powers. The investment brochure notes the “fast track 
measures” that have “accelerated by three years” the development around The 
Den. Millwall have been eager to provide their own scheme, keeping the club at 
the heart of their community and even offering a profit share with the local 
council. Instead Lewisham has been intent on compulsorily purchasing the club’s 
land in order to lease it to its preferred developers.

Elsewhere in the brochure, the gross value of the project is estimated at 
“between £850m and £1bn”. Much is made of the “world-class community sports 
franchises” on offer, a reference presumably to the sports centre Renewal has 
promised to build through a charity called Surrey Sports Canal Limited, which 
has the current mayor of Lewisham, Sir Steve Bullock, on its board of directors.

This is not the only historic connection between developers and the local 
council. Jordana Malik’s father, Mushtaq Malik, is a former senior officer of 
Lewisham council. In another connection, Mushtaq Malik was also one of the 
original directors of Renewal – along with the previous Lewisham mayor David 
Sullivan. The draft due-diligence report prepared by PricewaterhouseCoopers in 
2013 contains the following passage in between heavily redacted sections: “The
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Borough of Lewisham have a 
longstanding relationship with Mushtaq Malik. He was a former senior officer 
and latterly an outsourcing provider … [next sentence redacted] … Based on the 
longstanding relationship between the Council and Mushtaq the Council benefits 
from previous knowledge of working with this individual.”

Renewal is likely to face further questions now on its future intentions, 
given the existence of the document. Other questions remain unanswered, too. On 
the second day of the Labour party conference in Liverpool the shadow 
chancellor, John McDonnell, spoke about the party’s commitment to curtailing 
the influence of offshore companies operating behind a veil of secrecy. “We 
will ensure that all British Crown Dependencies and Overseas Territories 
introduce a full, public register of company owners and beneficiaries,” 
McDonnell said. Renewal is owned by a company registered in the Isle of Man and 
the British Virgin Islands. The identity of its ultimate owners has still not 
been made public.
 