
On a night of high-stakes manoeuvring in the council chambers the final 
hearing of the compulsory purchase order of Millwall’s land around The Den was 
dramatically adjourned, to be reheard on 11 January.

Representatives of Millwall, their supporters and fellow residents who stand 
to be evicted had gathered in the Civic Suite at Lewisham Town Hallto learn 
their fate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/millwall-the-den-development-compulsory-purchase-renewal>
 in front of the Labour Cabinet. To general surprise the meeting began and 
ended with a terse written statement, which said the council was responding to 
new information regarding the potentially devastating effects on Millwall’s 
Category Two academy.

Millwall suffer bitter blow before verdict on The Den development plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/millwall-the-den-development-compulsory-purchase-renewal>
As it stands Lewisham’s plans to seize land around The Den would leave the 
club’s community trust homeless and imperilled, with the land due to be sold to 
opaque offshore-owned developers Renewal, a company founded by the last Labour 
mayor of Lewisham, Dave Sullivan.

The council said it was eager to investigate last-minute concerns raised 
regarding the operation of the academy under the land seizure. The club is 
concerned that as the plans stand not only would its commercial operations be 
threatened, its academy would be unable to function. Lewisham council now plans 
to “gather information” on this point before the rescheduled hearing.

Millwall, whose players had spent the afternoon giving presents to children at 
nearby Lewisham hospital, welcomed the stay of execution. A club statement 
read: “Millwall Football Club is pleased that Lewisham council’s Mayor and 
Cabinet has taken the opportunity to investigate further the potential impact 
of the CPOs in terms of the club’s ability to operate as a Category 2 academy 
under current proposals. We look forward to assisting in this process and would 
further reiterate our serious concerns about the devastating impact the CPOs 
would have on the club, our academy,Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> Community Trust and community.”

The cancellation will be seen by some an indication of the effects of added 
scrutiny on council procedures, with newspapers, television news and supporters 
groups now following the saga closely. With the powerful elected Mayor Sir 
Steve Bullock barred from sitting with his cabinet due a declared interest in 
the proceedings (the Mayor sits on the board of a Renewal company) the council 
presence was led by the unelected chief executive Barry Quirk, a former 
colleague of Renewal’s CEO Mushtaq Malik, and present here to oversee a £2bn 
regeneration project the Labour authority remains determined to push the way of 
its favoured mysterious offshore developer.
 