
A decision on the sale of land around the Den to a property developer has been 
deferred, withMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> urging 
Lewisham council to reconsider the club’s regeneration plans for the area.

The origin of the two-man penalty, Shaquille O’Neal and hugging the ref | 
Classic YouTube
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/18/classic-youtube-best-sports-clips-shaquille-oneal-slam-dunks-football-nba-cycling-cricke>
The League One side had warned their future was at risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/millwall-battle-den-john-berylson-lewisham-andy-ambler>
 if the land – leased to the club – was sold to the developer Renewal. A 
petition against land around the stadium including the car park, cafe and Lions 
Centre falling into private hands has beensigned by more than 16,000 people 
<https://www.change.org/p/lewisham-council-defend-our-den-stop-millwall-land-sale-to-property-developers>
, and the council deferred a decision on a compulsory purchase order at a 
meeting on Wednesday evening.

Millwall fear sale of the land would affect their revenue. They want to build 
a hotel and 400 homes on the site. Renewal says its project will create 2,000 
jobs, 2,400 homes and a new overground station.

Andy Ambler, the club’s chief executive, said: “We’d like to thank the 16,000 
people who signed theDefend Our Den petition to stop land leased to the ​c​lub 
being taken from us, as well as our local MP, Vicky Foxcroft, who publicly 
called for the deferral. There’s no doubt the strength of support we received 
from across the football family has been noted by the council.

“ But we are under no illusion this is over or the battle is won and would 
urge people to keep signing the petition. We have effectively gone into 
extra-time. So I hope ​cabinet members will use this opportunity to accept my 
invite to come down to the Den to see what could be lost and how the club could 
develop our land in conjunction with the ​council and for the benefit of the 
community.

“We want them to consider the plans we submitted back in August 2013. Millwall 
has always said it wants to be an active partner in this regeneration, not a 
reluctant spectator. It’s time for Lewisham council to make the most of this 
deferral and work together with us to move this forward.”

Renewal’s director, Mark Taylor, said in a statement he was disappointed by 
the deferral. “We believe a compulsory purchase order is now necessary to 
ensure this important regeneration can be progressed,” he said. “We have made 
every attempt to secure an agreement with Millwall for the land surrounding 
their stadium and have been clear throughout the process that our proposals 
would safeguard the club and deliver significant improvements to the external 
parts of the stadium and the land around it, as well as providing a new home 
for the Millwall community scheme.

“The CPO process is an important step forward in the delivery of the New 
Bermondsey scheme and we look forward to the council making a decision in due 
course.”

Lewisham council said: “The circumstances of a person potentially affected by 
the CPO have just come to light. These circumstances need to be investigated 
before the cabinet can consider the report concerning the CPO. That will now 
take place as quickly as possible so that the consideration of the report can 
be rescheduled at the earliest possible date.

“Considering the substantial representations that have been received on the 
matter, members of the cabinet have asked that the opportunity that this delay 
presents is taken to try once more to bring Millwall and the developers Renewal 
together to see if they can come to an agreement.”

Millwall are sixth in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> and play Peterborough 
at the Den on Saturday, with Neil Harris’s side hoping to return to the 
Championship at the first attempt.
 