
In more disorderly times a Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> supporters group called 
Treatment used to gather on the terraces wearing powder-blue surgical face 
masks. In the last few months anyone standing too close to the mouldering fug 
of unanswered questions over Lewisham council’s plan to seize and sell on 
Millwall’s land at The Den might be tempted to try something similar.

With Lewisham’s cabinet still stalling on confirming its order to sell the 
freehold of the land to an offshore-registered company, Renewal, with historic 
connections to senior council officers, the air around the club has been more 
than a little toxic of late. This week the process has taken a further series 
of twists, firstly with a dramatic show of support for the club’s cause from a 
senior council officer.

Alan Hall, chair of Lewisham’s own scrutiny committee, has called for the 
compulsory purchase order decision to be reversed, saying the process has been 
“spectacularly mishandled” and urging the mayor and cabinet to redesign the 
scheme to include Millwall, Bermondsey’s own enduring community asset, at the 
heart of its plans.

“There are so many holes in the plans, so many questions unanswered and so 
many alarm bells going off,” Hall told the Guardian. “Top of our concerns are 
the mystery directors of the company behind Renewal. The company is offshore 
and the ultimate beneficiaries are unidentified. Let the mayor and cabinet of a 
Labour council tell me that is a good thing.

Millwall score an early goal as they seek the ultimate home win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/millwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer>
“We need more transparency and assurance before investing taxpayers’ money and 
taking away other people’s property. Common sense tells you that the mayor and 
cabinet who ultimately are taking these decisions need to put the brakes on and 
take stock of the situation.

“The reputation of Lewisham council is at risk. I and my fellow scrutiny 
councillors are determined to protect it. There is not a compelling case in the 
public interest to proceed with a CPO. This decision must be reversed.”

Hall’s comments will come as a huge boost to the hopes not just of the club 
but of other local residents threatened with eviction. Lewisham has a powerful 
elected mayor at the head of its cabinet. For an individual councillor to stick 
his head above the parapet speaks not just to Hall’s own commitment to 
transparency but to the levels of ambient disquiet.

Meanwhile, in an equally significant turn, Lewisham’s own due diligence report 
into Renewal’s financial affairs has been released. A freedom of information 
request to see this document was made on behalf of Millwall two and a half 
years ago. An appeal to the information commissioner led to the release of a 
heavily redacted version. A less redacted version has been winkled out this 
week.

A little oddly the document is headed “Project Lion”, presumably the council’s 
own codeword for its land-grab on The Den. Marked as a draft by the accountants 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, the report was the chief source of information on 
Renewal’s finances in late 2013 when the current process was set in train.

A section headed “At a glance – our views” is redacted. It concludes: 
“However, based on the commercial rationale and anecdotal evidence provided it 
appears that the two controlling shareholders have the financial wherewithal to 
continue to offer financial support to the Renewal Group.”

The lack of clarity is startling. Under the heading “Our Scope” PWC have rated 
their access to Renewal management as closer to “none” than “good”. Clarity of 
information is verging on “Poor”. On the first page the report states “it 
should be noted we have not performed any due diligence on either Incorporated 
Holdings Limited or Independent Financial Advisers Limited, the two entities 
which control the Renewal group”. Later PWC add: “As part of our work we were 
not able to gain an understanding as to the financial standing of either of 
these two entities.” Entities, it should be remembered, that currently stand to 
gain from the use of public powers to evict residents from their homes.

Millwall property developer faces renewed questions over suggestions it wants 
to sell quickly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/millwall-property-developer-the-den-offshore-renewal>
At the end of which the question of exactly why Lewisham council are so intent 
on selling Millwall’s land to these particular offshore developers remains a 
mystery. The council says it has received greater clarity on Renewal’s workings 
through subsequent drafts of the report. Indeed the council is eager to point 
out the CPO decision was based on the August 2016 draft of this report. At the 
time of writing this draft has not been made available to the Guardian.

Crucially PWC’s report does point to the council’s faith in its pre-existing 
relationship with Mushtaq Malik, chief executive of Renewal and a former senior 
Lewisham officer. “TheLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Borough of 
Lewisham have a longstanding relationship with Mushtaq Malik,” the report 
notes. “The Council benefits from previous knowledge of working with this 
individual.”

Indeed Lewisham’s current chief executive, Barry Quirk, was also chief 
executive when Malik was at the council in the 1990s. Quirk seemed keen to play 
down any part in this “long-standing relationship” when asked about it by the 
Guardian. “Our chief executive has had no professional connection, and no 
shared interests, with Mushtaq Malik since he left the council in 1995,” a 
spokesman said.

Why could this be? After leaving Lewisham Malik set up a company called 
Serviceteam supplying services such as rubbish collection to local authorities. 
Malik’s time at Serviceteam ended in 1997, the same year the London borough of 
Barnet was successfully prosecuted by the Health and Safety Executive over 
failings on Serviceteam’s watch, including one accident that led to a bin man 
having his foot amputated and another being crushed against a lorry. The court 
also held that the contract for Barnet’s waste collection was “potentially 
under-funded”. Later that same year Malik resigned from all six of his 
directorships, appearing back on the directors’ roll in 2002.

Why Lewisham’s plans for Millwall’s Den really take the biscuit | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/09/lewisham-millwall-the-den>
Malik’s spokeswoman told the Guardian that his departure from the company “was 
not linked to” any of the above operating issues. They pointed out that 
Serviceteam had inherited from another company the Barnet waste contract, which 
was already “historically significantly under-funded”. In the interests of 
balance Malik’s spokeswoman also stated that Serviceteam were “successfully 
providing services to more than 70 local authorities” at the time.

Millwall still have hopes of advancing their own plans to regenerate the area, 
providing more affordable and social housing than the current minimal scheme. 
Instead, as councillor Hall points out: “Millwall are not being included in the 
plans. They have been a famous, thriving sporting institution in this area for 
over a hundred years. Up until recently Lewisham have worked closely with 
Millwall and now that important relationship is being badly undermined by the 
spectacular mishandling of the whole project.”

On the pitch Millwall’s more mundane struggles in League One were eased a 
little at the weekend by a 2-1 defeat of Fleetwood Town in south Bermondsey. 
Off it the future looks less certain. Already there have been dark mutterings 
among some fans about a full-on gentrification-led exile to the wilds of Kent. 
And really at heart this is a struggle for the right to exist in a city where 
every plot is parcelled out and costed up. Millwall’s corner of inner-outer 
London, pushed up against the bend in the river, has always felt like a 
slightly lost world, a place where a less violently stratified version of the 
city has been allowed to linger. Nobody doubts that regeneration is needed. The 
question is how and for whose benefit.

For now the council continues to “investigate the veracity” of the marketing 
brochure made public by the Guardian last month. That document appeared to 
suggest one of Renewal’s offshore owners had already been looking into selling 
its interest in the development. Its emergence led to the last-ditch 
cancellation of the council’s own hearing.

Millwall land battle takes further twist as new document sparks investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/millwall-land-battle-new-document-sparks-investigation>
Renewal has since denied any knowledge of the brochure and denied it has any 
intention to sell. It has refused to make any similar claims on behalf of its 
Isle of Man-based parent company, the named client in the document.

There is of course a wider narrative here beyond the usual story of clubs and 
communities menaced by more voracious interests. Close relationships between 
local authorities and private companies emerged as a Blairite initiative in the 
mid-1990s (Sullivan – ex-mayor, ex-Renewal – even gave his son the middle name 
“Blair”).

The layers of confusion in the current CPO have now led to a splinter in the 
council, with a growing sense of anger among Labour backbenchers, the majority 
of whom stand to the left of this in a space where forced sales of public land 
to an offshore developer do not reflect Labour values. Millwall’s CPO order is 
likely to be reheard later this month. In a battle on many fronts this part of 
the campaign may be just beginning.
 