
The smallest Ibrox crowd for a decade saw Rangers labour to negotiate their 
way past Third DivisionBrechin <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> 
City. But goals from Allan Johnston and Kenny Miller were enough to make sure 
the champions' name was in the hat for tomorrow's Scottish Cup draw.

Not even the most die-hard Brechin supporters were expecting to become today's 
giant-killers on Scottish Cup third-round day, but the 2,000 red-and-white-clad 
fans who had travelled over from Angus were determined to make some noise 
anyway.

Injuries forced Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager 
Dick Advocaat to make changes from their last league outing, at St Mirren on 2 
January, with Tore Andre Flo, Lorenzo Amoruso and Neil McCann all absent.

In their places came Allan Johnston, Tony Vidmar and Jorg Albertz, with Ronald 
de Boer pushed up to partner Kenny Miller instead of Michael Mols or Rod 
Wallace, who found themselves on the bench.

Dick Campbell's Third Division promotion hopefuls were rated at 25-1 outsiders 
with the draw a 7-1 shot. Yet Campbell was determined not just to defend, 
naming a 3-4-3 formation that included former St Johnstone striker Roddy Grant 
and Lee Bailey, who had scored four in the previous round to earn the chance to 
play at Ibrox, up front.

The unthinkable almost happened when Stefan Klos dropped a cross from Grant 
but the German made amends for his fumble with a point-blank save. Bailey set 
up a glorious chance for Grant with a back-heel which put him clear but the 
flag was up anyway as the striker delayed his shot and was crowded out.

Brechin won their first corner on the half hour and Kevin Bain rose to win the 
header but sent it over the bar.

Miller was denied by the crossbar after he had given Cairney the slip with a 
neat turn. But Miller made no mistake straight after when Mols sent Albertz 
away into the box and he squared the ball across goal and away from the 
goalkeeper to allow Miller to convert at full stretch.

Ferguson almost dribbled his way into a shooting position but was tackled in a 
crowded box at the last moment. Soutar pulled off the save of the game from 
Wallace in stoppage time. Having already done well to foil Johnston, he 
acrobatically tipped the former Leeds man's header round a post.
 