
It did not take long after arriving in Georgetown, the capital of Guyana, for 
Matthew Briggs to understand the confluence of heart and head that had decided 
his future in international football had also given rise to something more 
powerful.

“My mum’s brother, my uncle – I’d never met him before,” says the Millwall 
full-back who is on loan atColchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> United. “He’d never been able 
to come over to England. But now he saw me for the first time and it was very 
emotional, he just grabbed me and held me for five minutes. I was in tears 
there.”

Briggs had not visited the South American country, which has borders with 
Brazil and Venezuela but is anglophone and part of the Caribbean, before being 
selected for the squad to face Grenada in March, but it already felt close 
enough to home. “I grew up with my mum and my grandma, who was born there,” the 
24-year-old says. “So it was a very Guyanese household – the food we’d eat, the 
culture, even down to the accents. It was just what I was used to.”

This was in south London and Briggs would not object if anybody pointed out 
Guyana were not originally in his thoughts as a football option. On 13 May 
2007, he became the youngest player to appear in the Premier League, coming on 
as a substitute forFulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> against 
Middlesbrough at the age of 16 years and 68 days. It is a record that still 
stands and while young players are sometimes blooded in order for a manager to 
make a point or curry favour, Lawrie Sanchez had seen in him what England 
Under-16 coaches had already spotted, and what every age group beneath the 
senior set-up would take a first-hand look at in the next four years.

Not everything has worked out since and via several loan spells and an injury 
that laid him low for the whole of last season, Briggs left Fulham for the Den 
in the summer having played for them on only 28 further occasions. With his two 
Under‑21 caps in 2011 a fading memory, it was time for something different.

“Guyana asked me to take part in the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifiers a couple 
of years ago but I was around the England set-up then and at that age I was 
thinking I wanted to push on and play for them,” he says. “But as time passed I 
thought: ‘Why not play for Guyana?’ It would mean senior international football 
and a chance to represent the country my family is from, and I knew how proud 
my grandma, Daphne, would be. I was close to her, but lost her quite a while 
ago. It wasn’t a hard decision to make.”

So Briggs accepted the offer of a getting-to-know-you trip for the Grenada 
game, tweeting “This is for you nan” as he departed. He was joined by a 
familiar face. Neil Danns has been a competent operator in the Football League 
– primarily in the Championship for clubs such as Crystal Palace, Leicester and 
Blackburn – for a decade and at 32 received a first call-up of his own. The two 
had been team-mates before, their loan spells at Bristol City coinciding in 
2012-13.

They were far from the first recognisable names to have been enlisted by the 
Golden Jaguars. The Cort brothers, Leon and Carl, won six caps apiece this 
decade and Ricky Shakes, formerly of Swindon and Brentford, has been a regular 
too. The three contributed to a minor sensation in those Concacaf qualifiers 
for the last World Cupwhen Shakes and Leon Cort scored to help them beat 
Trinidad & Tobago <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4gBexFQHFpg> and reach the 
region’s second group stage.

Things have veered off course since: the local football federation president, 
Christopher Mathias, controversially decided to ban overseas-based players in 
what was offered as a cost-cutting measure, and with infighting dragging the 
sport into chaos a Fifa normalisation committee was appointed to run football 
in Guyana when Mathias was removed last October. With that episode having drawn 
to a close, the squad that set up camp in March appears to have been a happy 
one. “You wonder what the players will be like, whether the local guys will be 
a bit envious of you or think: ‘Who’s this guy coming from England?’” says 
Briggs.

“Dannsy and I are humble guys, though, and it wasn’t like that. I don’t think 
they expected us to be as we were. Chris Nurse, the captain, told me this is 
the best Guyana squad he’s been involved with – the best squad harmony. He said 
that in the past players had come over from different countries but the local 
players hadn’t really taken to them and there was some segregation in the 
group. This time everyone really stuck together and the atmosphere around the 
dressing room was brilliant.”

The buzz peaked when Briggs walked out at Providence Stadium, which was built 
for the 2007 Cricket World Cup, for the first time. “It was like nothing I’ve 
ever experienced in my life,” he says. “Just amazing. I like Caribbean music 
myself but to be running out of the tunnel and they’re blazing the tunes out … 
it was so enjoyable. The game itself went well for me. I spent most of my time 
in the attacking third and we won 2-0, although it should have been at least 
six. In the end we just saw it out but Dannsy and I both put in solid 
performances.”

Briggs’ commitment would be rubber-stamped if he appeared competitively 
against Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in a World Cup qualifying tie this 
June and he is keen to emphasise this will not be an ephemeral relationship. “I 
used this friendly to experience it for myself but I enjoyed it so much that I 
can definitely say I’ll be going back,” he says. “It was an honour and such a 
great feeling to hear people on the street saying ‘thank you for coming to 
represent us’ and ‘welcome home’.

“I think we can put together a decent enough team to challenge for a World Cup 
place. Ryan Fredericks [of Tottenham] can play and he’s thinking about it, 
Callum Harriott [the Charlton winger] too. If we can get guys like this in and 
get football back up and running as it should be in Guyana, with the right 
training facilities, I don’t see why we can’t be successful.”

It would be a different kind of success from that which Briggs envisaged eight 
years ago but one whose nourishing qualities might extend far beyond adornments 
to a football career.

What happened next to the Premier League’s 10 youngest players? | Nick Ames
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/14/premier-league-10-youngest-players-what-happened-next> 