
Millwall took a big step towards Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/barnsley-walsall-league-one-play-off-semi-final-first-leg-match-report>
 by coming from behind to win 3-1 at Bradford City in the first leg of their 
League One play-off semi-final. First-half goals from Lee Gregory, Steve 
Morison and Joe Martin turned the tie in Millwall’s favour before Friday’s 
return game after Bradford had taken the lead through Tony McMahon’s early 
penalty.

Sam Winnall at the double to give Barnsley first-leg lead over Walsall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/barnsley-walsall-league-one-play-off-semi-final-first-leg-match-report>
There was a raucous atmosphere inside Valley Parade all afternoon, although it 
was temporarily subdued before kick-off by an emotional minute-long applause in 
memory of the formerBradford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> 
player Chris Mitchell, who died earlier this month at the age of 27.

Spurred on by the vocal backing, the home side were given the perfect 
opportunity to seize the initiative when Millwall’s left-back Martin handled in 
the box following Jamie Proctor’s header across goal.

McMahon was perhaps lucky to still be on the pitch to take the penalty 
following a coming-together with Millwall’s Chris Taylor as he waited to take 
the kick. The referee Dean Whitestone opted to book the Bradford player and he 
stepped up to send the goalkeeper, Jordan Archer, the wrong way with 13 minutes 
played.

The goal prompted the noise levels inside the stadium to increase further, but 
the City supporters were not smiling for long.

Millwall’s top-scorer Gregory, on his first start since 19 April following a 
double hernia, controlled Morison’s nod down in the area two minutes later and 
turned to fire his 26th goal of the season into the bottom left corner.

Filipe Morais then flashed a volley wide for Bradford before the visitors 
turned the game on its head 11 minutes prior to the break.

Shane Ferguson sent in an outswinging corner from the left and the captain 
Morison rose highest to head home off the underside of the crossbar.

Millwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> are aiming for an 
immediate return to the Championship following relegation last season, and 
Martin atoned for his early error by extending their lead in the final minute 
of the half. Gregory was fouled 25 yards from goal and Martin impressively 
curled the resulting free-kick past the dive of the Bradford keeper, Ben 
Williams, and into the left corner.

The Portuguese midfielder Morais should have reduced the deficit eight minutes 
into the second period but he somehow shot wide with the goal gaping after 
Proctor had robbed Carlos Edwards and teed him up.

Phil Parkinson’s side, who have not been in the second tier since 2004, 
dominated the second period and the defender Nathan Clarke almost scrambled the 
ball home following a corner.

Archer then had to be alert to tip over a header from Clarke, while Lee Evans 
curled narrowly wide from a free-kick from distance.

The Londoners offered little attacking threat after the break but their dogged 
defending was enough to ensure they take a two-goal advantage back to The Den.
 