
Millwall are at risk of running out of Dens. A few seasons ago the Lions had 
Lewisham council on their shirts. Now,as reported in the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/millwall-battle-den-john-berylson-lewisham-andy-ambler>
, they have it on their backs, threatened by its apparent intention to secure – 
by compulsory purchase order for property developers – land around the ground 
currently leased to the club, who hope to develop it themselves to secure their 
long-term future. If the decision, deferred on Wednesday, goes against them, 
they fear they may soon have nowhere to go.

A Defend Our Den appeal had drawn close to 18,000 signatures by Saturday, 
though fewer than 8,000 endorsed this support againstPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough>. At least on the field as 
off it – there was a first-half skirmish with police for old times’ sake – 
Millwall were up for the fight after a midweek blip at home to Scunthorpe. A 
3-0 win, their sixth victory in eight games, took them to fifth in League One, 
their highest place this season.

Millwall to battle on after decision deferred on sale of land around the Den
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/millwall-decision-deferred-sale-land-the-den>
The Den has not been the forbidding place it could be and Neil Harris, leading 
scorer before becoming manager almost a year ago, said last week he wants his 
players to “experience The Den with 18,000 in”. But their home form has been 
poor for a while. In the past four seasons, all in the Championship, they won 
successively seven, eight, six and five games there and this was only their 
seventh this season, the same as they have lost at home and two fewer than they 
have won away. The programme discreetly showed a reduced table.

Harris admitted beforehand they have not done enough to put the “fire in fans’ 
bellies” at The Den but this was a performance to draw them back, aided by 
Peterborough. Graham Westley, the visiting manager, watchedMillwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> on Tuesday. On Saturday his 
players did much the same and Westley said: “We lacked energy, didn’t execute 
what we came to do and didn’t box clever. We’re falling short on the character 
stakes.” They lost 4-0 at home to Bradford City the previous week.

Millwall were in marked contrast. At times they have lost their way after 
conceding early. Here, as Harris said: “You saw our aggressive side and we’ve 
done what we’re good at. I told them to enjoy themselves. There’s a spirit 
about us and we dig in for each other.”

Even so it might have been different. Early on Mark Beevers hooked a 40-yard 
back pass for Jordan Archer, except the keeper was on the edge of his area. 
Back-pedalling frantically and with a presence of mind to match Beevers’ 
absence of it, Archer back-headed the ball over the bar from a yard out and 
landed in the net himself. He could not tip it over for fear of incurring a 
free-kick. After that Beevers and Byron Webster, his fellow centre-back, 
rightly gave the ’keeper an easy ride, strong on the ground and in the air, 
though Millwall were too competitive for the Posh everywhere.

Millwall took the lead on the half-hour when Lee Gregory was quick to retrieve 
his shot parried by Ben Alnwick and crossed for Steve Morison to head in. 
Gregory added to it after half-time with the second header from a free-kick and 
Morison got his second, again with the head, from a corner just past the hour. 
Gregory’s was his 19th, 13 in the league. He came from Halifax, where he played 
alongside Jamie Vardy. Morison was one of only two signings last summer, when 
Harris sold or released 18 players.

There was bright service from the wings, notably from Jed Wallace, whose loan 
from Wolves coincides with the side’s good run. They could do with a compulsory 
purchase order on him. Injuries have forced Millwall to promote youngsters from 
their reduced squad and Ben Thompson and Mahlon Romeo, both 20, impressed in 
midfield and at right-back.

Two years ago, when Harris and the academy manager, Scott Fitzgerald, were 
briefly caretakers, this was no side of paradise. Now they look ready to 
flourish again if Lewisham council gives them a chance.
 