
Two goals and six substitutions should, at 30 seconds a go, have meant a 
minimum of four added minutes at Stadiummk. Perhaps the board showed two for 
official pity’s sake. Colchester United were five goals and a man down. Even as 
the PA was conveying the message Lee Hodson made it 6-0 to Milton Keynes Dons 
and the final whistle sounded within seconds of the restart. MK Dons were not 
complaining. They stayed fourth inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> with two games in hand 
on the three above. The U’s fell to 22nd.

This was not quite Brazil against Germany but Colchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> – average age 22 – looked 
callow as students against the Dons. Their strong defender and captain, Magnus 
Okuonghae, is out for ages with a ruptured achilles tendon, though thanks to 
two dismissals he had played only nine league games anyway. Will Packwood, on 
debut and loan from Birmingham, matched him at least in the red card. Their 
manager, Tony Humes, maybe recognising it as a bad day in the classroom, said: 
“Hopefully we’ll learn from this. It’s the first time we’ve not stood up to 
what’s come at us.”

What came at them seemed a force of nature. Karl Robinson, the MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> manager, has talked keenly of 
“the Dutch ethos that the master of the ball becomes the master of the game”. 
Everyone showed comfort in possession and the confidence to be brave, from 
Jordan Spence at right-back, through the captain, Darren Potter, to Daniel 
Powell wide left. David Martin in goal might have been counted in the crowd.

When Dele Alli made room outside the penalty area to put MK Dons ahead in the 
11th minute Sam Walker in goal railed at the lack of challenge; he had just 
kept out Kyle McFadzean’s header at a corner with a fine, low save. Alli, 
home-produced, is an England Under-18 midfielder. It was his eighth league goal 
of the season. The club contribute more to international age-group teams than 
almost anyone outside the big few.

By half-time Benik Afobe, 21 and on loan from Arsenal, had drawn level with 
two goals set up by Carl Baker from the right. By the hour Afobe had his 
hat-trick (18 in all competitions) and it was he who was brought down by 
Packwood for the red card and MK Dons’ fifth from Ben Reeves’ penalty. They had 
enjoyed twice the possession of Colchester, who enjoyed nothing, though they 
were only two goals worse than Manchester United in the League Cup at the same 
venue in August.

Robinson’s delight was unconfined. “We’ve had 10 clean sheets and 50 goals 
before December,” he said, measuring in all competitions. His squad is small 
but, he said, “the group believe in each other. I thought the players were 
sensational today, every single one of them. Benik will get the headlines but 
Dele’s goal reminded me of Steven Gerrard’s against West Ham in the FA Cup” in 
the 2006 final. It would. Robinson is a Scouser with a passion. He never made 
it as a league striker but at 29 became the youngest holder of the Uefa Pro 
Licence and youngest League manager when he started at MK Dons in May 2010. The 
song “Don’t Put Your Son In The Dugout, Mrs Robinson” never stood a chance.

He thought Will Grigg, a substitute on Saturday, was man of the match in 
Tuesday’s draw with Rochdale but decides and tells players two games in advance 
when they will be playing. On Tuesday they are at Sheffield United, the first 
of four games running against top-seven teams that will challenge their 
eight-match unbeaten league run. He said he would love Bramall Lane crowds 
(average 19,762). MK Dons’ conception may not have been immaculate but their 
handsome football deserves more than 7,646 in a stadium holding 30,500. This 
was their record win, albeit in only 11 seasons. Maybe rugby’s World Cup will 
fill the place.
 