
MK Dons deservedly claimed the prize of a home FA Cup fourth round tie against 
Chelsea after inflicting a 3-0 replay defeat on neighboursNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton>.

The midfielder Ben Reeves was involved in two second-half goals that finally 
gave the Championship side due reward for their dominance, netting the crucial 
opener from the penalty spot then releasing the substitute Josh Murphy nine 
minutes later. Simon Church rounded off the scoring in the 89th minute.

The League Two promotion chasers Northampton, cheered on by 7,000 travelling 
fans, played some enterprising football although their best chance of progress 
disappeared through MK’s late equaliser in the original tie 10 days ago.

The night was not without cost for the MK manager, Karl Robinson, who juggled 
his resources with their crucial Championship survival battle at Bolton on 
Saturday in mind.

Already committed to five changes in his starting lineup, he quickly lost two 
more players through injury. Nicky Maynard was hurt in the warm-up and replaced 
by Church whose first involvement was to bring a second-minute save from Adam 
Smith. The injury-plagued former England defender Matt Upson, making a rare 
appearance, limped off in the 38th minute.

The home side had the better of the first half with Rob Hall in sparkling form 
on the right flank but Northampton defended capably. A fierce 20-yard shot from 
Sam Hoskins which was parried by the Dons goalkeeper David Martin in the 18th 
minute was the closest the visitors came. Dean Bowditch narrowly failed to get 
a final touch to a superb cross from Hall who then shot wildly over after an 
exciting run.

The tie then turned in the space of two dramatic minutes. The referee, Tony 
Harrington, silenced Cobblers fans after Martin appeared to carry a Ricky 
Holmes corner over his own line by awarding a foul against Hoskins.

Then he pointed to the spot when Zander Diamond chopped down Bowditch and 
Reeves confidently lifted his 53rd minute spot kick into the middle of the 
goal. It was Bowditch’s last contribution before he, too, limped off but his 
replacement Murphy was even more effective.

He had already clipped the bar and sent a low shot inches past the post before 
racing clear to steer his shot past Smith in the 62nd minute.

Northampton toiled manfully to seek a way back into the tie with Holmes, 
two-goal hero from the first match, making a number of threatening runs.

But now it was MK who had the luxury of being able to pull players back behind 
the ball, then threatened to make further inroads with their pace on the break.

Harrington gave a more disputable spot kick in the final moments when Smith 
plunged at Hall’s feet and Church added insult to Northampton’s injury.
 