
When you ask smart people if they believe there are major ideas currently 
accepted by the culture at large that will be proven false, they will say, 
“There must be. That phenomenon has been experienced by every generation who’s 
ever lived.” Yet offer those same people a list of contemporary ideas that 
might fit that description, and they’ll be tempted to reject them all.

I like to think of myself as a sceptical person, but I’m pretty convinced by 
gravity. My confidence in gravity is absolute, and I believe this will be true 
until the day I die (and if someone subsequently throws my dead body out of a 
window, I believe my corpse’s rate of acceleration will be 9.8 m/s2). But I’m 
probably wrong. Maybe not completely, but partially. And maybe not today, but 
eventually.

“There is a very, very good chance that our understanding of gravity will not 
be the same in 500 years,” says theoretical physicist Brian Greene. “In fact, 
that’s the one arena where I would think that most of our contemporary evidence 
is circumstantial. I do think that gravity is the least stable of our ideas, 
and the most ripe for a major shift.”

Gravity is the least stable of our ideas, and the most ripe for a major shift

Which statement is more reasonable to make: “I believe gravity exists” or “I’m 
99.9% certain that gravity exists”? Certainly, the second statement is safer. 
But if we’re going to acknowledge even the slightest possibility of being wrong 
about gravity, we’re pretty much giving up on the possibility of being right 
about anything at all.

Taste is subjective, but some subjective opinions are expressed the same way 
we articulate principles of maths or science. There isn’t an ongoing cultural 
debate over the merits ofMoby-Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/13/100-best-novels-observer-moby-dick>
: it’s not merely an epic novel, but a literary innovation. So how did this 
happen? Herman Melville, a moderately successful author at the time of the 
novel’s release in 1851, assumes it will be seen as his masterwork. But it 
sells poorly and he dies destitute in 1891.

For the next 30 years, nothing about the reception of this book changes. But 
then the first world war happens, and modernists living in postwar-America 
start to view literature through a different lens. The concept of what a novel 
is supposed to accomplish shifts in Melville’s direction and amplifies with 
each generation, eventually prompting people to classifyMoby-Dick as “the most 
ambitious book ever conceived by an American writer”. The practical reality is 
that any present-tense version of the world is unstable. What we currently 
consider to be true – both objectively and subjectively – is provisional. But 
the modern problem is that reevaluating what we consider “true” is becoming 
more difficult.

We live in an age where virtually no content is lost and virtually all content 
is shared. The sheer amount of information about every idea makes those 
concepts difficult to contradict, particularly in a framework where public 
consensus has become the ultimate arbiter of validity.

It’s impossible to understand the world of today until today has become 
tomorrow. This is no brilliant insight, and only a fool would disagree. But 
it’s remarkable how habitually this truth is ignored. We constantly pretend our 
perception of the present day will not seem ludicrous in retrospect, simply 
because there doesn’t appear to be any other option. Yet there is another 
option: we must start from the premise that – in all likelihood – we are 
already wrong. And not “wrong” in the sense that we are examining questions and 
coming to incorrect conclusions, because most of our conclusions are reasoned 
and coherent. The problem lies with the questions themselves.

But What If We’re Wrong? by Chuck Klosterman is published by Amberley 
Publishing at £13.49
 