
Monaco dominated but were held to a 0-0 draw by Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> on Friday to drop points for 
the first time this season.

Jérémy Toulalan nearly scored a stunning late winner for Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> but his 30-yard effort came back 
off the woodwork.

The Monaco striker Emmanuel Rivière had scored four goals in two matches and 
he had several chances to add to his tally, notably in the 19th minute when he 
cut in between two defenders into the penalty area and unleashed a shot which 
was parried by Ali Ahamada. Radamel Falcao had his follow-up blocked.

Yannick Ferreira Carrasco missed a golden chance for Monaco as he pounced on a 
loose ball in the area but blasted over from four yards out.

Toulouse's only real chance was when Oscar Trejo fired inches wide of the 
right upright.

The match was played in an empty stadium as punishment for crowd trouble in 
Monaco's match against Le Mans last season.

Monaco, who were promoted as Ligue 2 winners, were looking to make it three 
wins out of three. The last promoted side to have achieved that feat were 
Toulouse, 31 years ago.

"It was a very good match," the Monaco coach, Claudio Ranieri, said. "We 
played well in the first half. We just lacked a goal. In contrast there was a 
lot of nervousness in our team in the second half. The players wanted to win, 
they were looking for the goal.

"But it's not possible to win every match. Moreover, the atmosphere was very 
difficult. The players are used to playing in front of fans. This type of team 
is defensive. It's normal. We were expecting that. But I am fairly satisfied."

Toulouse have two points from their opening three matches.

"It's a good point that wasn't easy to get," the Toulouse coach, Alain 
Casanova, said. "I haven't seen my team play like that in a long time: helping 
each other out, showing solidarity and being unselfish.

"Of course, we suffered a lot in the first half. But in the second half we 
corrected a lot of things, they didn't create any chances apart from Toulalan's 
shot off the crossbar. We could even have left with a victory, although that 
would have been tough on Monaco."
 