
The Monaco Grand Prix will be broadcast live on free-to-air television in the 
UK for the first time in five years asChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> revealed its programme details for 
the new season.

The terrestrial broadcaster will again show 10 live Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> races as part of its 
co-broadcasting deal with Sky Sports, including the British Grand Prix at 
Silverstone on 16 July. Sky will show all 20 races live.

Channel 4 will also broadcast live for the first time the Russian, Singapore 
and US grands prix, dropping Spain, Hungary, Italy and Mexico as a result. The 
channel has also retained the rights to the season-ending Abu Dhabi race.

Channel 4, which took over the rights from the BBC in 2015, has a deal to show 
Formula One until the end of 2018, when coverage in Britain is set to become 
solely available on pay-per-view through Sky.

Related: Future of F1 British Grand Prix at Silverstone in doubt over hosting 
costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/future-f1-british-grand-prix-silverstone-in-doubt-hosting-costs>

“It’s a particular delight to welcome Monaco back to terrestrial television 
live, for the first time in five years,” said Channel 4’s head of F1, Stephen 
Lyle. “Once again our team will bring extensive coverage of every race with the 
Monaco grand prix, Great Britain and the finale in Abu Dhabi among our 10 live 
race weekends.”

Channel 4 will continue with the format it used last season, which was largely 
well received, showing practice and qualifying in full on the weekends it is 
broadcasting live, as well as the races uninterrupted by commercial breaks and 
in high definition. The other races will be shown as extensive highlights later 
in the day and available on its on-demand platform, All 4.

The services of the production company Whisper Films has been retained, after 
Formula One returned successful viewing figures for the channel – frequently 
achieving the highest ratings for the time slot during live races. The 
presentation team which was led last year by David Coulthard, Steve Jones and 
Ben Edwards, with analysis from Mark Webber and Eddie Jordan among others, has 
yet to be confirmed.

The decision to end terrestrial live coverage of the sport in the UK from 2019 
onwards has angered fans and led to accusations that Formula One Management is 
pursuing short-term financial gain at the expense of the long-term future of 
the sport, amid falling worldwide viewing figures.

However, since that deal was concluded F1 has been purchased by the Liberty 
Media group, which has stated its intention to look at increasing the exposure 
of the sport and its popularity.

Channel 4’s F1 season

Bahrain, 16 April

Russia, 30 April

Monaco, 28 May

Azerbaijan, 25 June

Great Britain, 16 July

Belgium, 27 August

Singapore, 17 September

Malaysia, 1 October

USA, 22 October

Abu Dhabi, 26 November
 