
The Hairy Bikers’ Comfort Food
4.15pm, BBC1

Cooking to drive away the mid-winter blues. Dave and Si present a new weekday 
series devoted to dishes that imbue feelings of warmth and contentment. We 
begin with recipes that conjure up the past, such as a Lancashire hotpot like 
the one Dave’s mum used to make. For his part, Si opts to bakepissaladière 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/apr/01/nigel-slater-classic-pissaladiere-tart>
, an onion-heavy, pizza-like tart that recalls a French holiday. Probably not 
for those whose new year’s resolutions involve dieting.Jonathan Wright

An Island Parish: Anguilla
8.30pm, BBC2

The return of this unfussy, curiously compelling show following some of the 
world’s further-flung congregations. This series touches down on the British 
overseas territory of Anguilla, where it has plenty to work with – the 14,000 
locals are sufficiently pious to fill 19 churches. The focus is on the Anglican 
flock of St Mary’s, whose affable bishop, Errol Brooks, has an enviable beat, 
ministering to several other equally glorious-looking islands.Andrew Mueller

Silent Witness 
9pm, BBC1

Even in its 20th series, this forensics drama can’t be accused of living in 
the past. The case at the heart of this latest run is a timely, if occasionally 
clunky, exploration of issues surrounding the refugee crisis. The first episode 
of this two-parter (which concludes tomorrow) is a tangled web of desperation 
and exploitation, with Emilia Fox’s Dr Nikki Alexander at its bleeding, liberal 
heart. Generic, but still a noble attempt to put a human face to an intractably 
vast problem.Phil Harrison

The Halcyon 
9pm, ITV

A decent new period drama that introduces two entwined families running a posh 
London hotel in the early months of the second world war. The manager and his 
receptionist daughter (Steven Mackintosh and Hermione Corfield) have a complex 
history with the lord and lady owners (Alex Jennings and Olivia Williams); they 
lend class to an info-dump opener full of affairs, intrigue and debate. It 
doesn’t put a foot wrong, but it doesn’t linger in the mind, either.Jack Seale

The Affair
9pm, Sky Atlantic
 Artfully staged ... Maura Tierney in The Affair. Photograph: Jeff 
Neumann/Showtime 
In two-and-a-half seasons of this artfully staged and sombrely shot melodrama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/10/us-tv-series-the-affair-dominic-west-ruth-wilson>
, Dominic West’s self-involved novelist, Noah, has torpedoed two marriages, 
done some serious porridge and become borderline addicted to painkillers. His 
most recent reconnection with Alison (Ruth Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/03/ruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre>
) may have involved a hot tub, but it also dredged up a traumatic formative 
experience. Can he exorcise some of his demons before alienating his resentful 
son, Martin, for ever?Graeme Virtue

Celebrity Fat Fighters 
9pm, TLC

Seven “celebs” – among them Gogglebox’s Sandi Bogle, former Brookside actor 
Jennifer Ellison, Stevi Ritchie from the 11th series of The X Factor and 
Towie’s James “Diags” Bennewith – are put through their paces in the hope of 
losing some pounds. “Resistance is futile,” proclaims no-nonsense Russian detox 
guru Galia Granger, who uses a rigorous regime of eight hours of training a day 
and allows her charges to ingest only 400 calories per day. Continues Tuesday 
and Wednesday.Ben Arnold

First Dates Hotel 
10pm, Channel 4

Irresistible First Dates maître’d Fred opens the doors to his hotel in the 
south of France for a new matchmaking series. Couples are paired up in romantic 
surroundings for dinner and a possible 48 hours of courtship. Daddy’s girl 
Kelly has her date interrupted by a phone call from her protective pa, Joey is 
looking for his first boyfriend and nervous widower Bruce opens up. Full of the 
warmth, openness and hope that made the original concept so compelling.Hannah 
Verdier

Film choice

Albert Nobbs (Rodrigo García, 2011) 9pm, BBC4
Star, co-writer and producer Glenn Close had wanted to bring this curious 
project to the screen since playing Albert Nobbs on stage in the early 80s. 
It’s set in a small Dublin hotel where Nobbs has long worked as a waiter, 
guarding the secret that she is in fact a woman in man’s clothing. It’s 
involving enough as a study of gender inequality and identity, but Close is an 
awkward, uncomfortable presence in her male skin.Paul Howlett

Alien 3 (David Fincher, 1992), midnight, Film4
Once more into those dark tunnels for Sigourney Weaver in Fincher’s 
exceptionally gloomy chapter of the great sci-fi horror saga. Her battle-weary 
Ripley crash-lands on a planet colonised by convicts; her surrogate family, and 
with them any hope, is dead, but one creature is very much alive and stirring 
in her belly. Head shaven as if in preparation for execution, she rises to the 
final challenge. ’Atta girl, Ripley.PH

Live sport

Premier League football: West Ham United v Manchester United All the action 
from the London Stadium (kick-off 5.15pm). 5pm, Sky Sports 1

World Darts Championship Coverage of the final from Ally Pally in London. 8pm, 
Sky Sports 1

Test cricket: Australia v Pakistan Australia will be looking for a win in 
Sydney in the final Test of their series against Pakistan. 11pm, BT Sport 3
 