
Like an obnoxious city banker who's half cut, tie undone, creased-shirt 
billowing out of trousers with drool dripping from his sticky red lips eyeing 
that 28-year-old brunette sat with her lover at the bar,Manchester City will 
not give up the chase forJohn Terry – no matter how much self-respect they've 
frittered away after again slapping their bulging crocodile skin wallet in 
front of the pair and winking furiously at the increasingly irritated other 
half.

Not content with having had the knock back at first £30m, and then £32m, Mark 
Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mark-hughes> will now wave £40m in 
front of Roman Abramovich's blank face and dare him to pluck the cash out of 
his hands in return for the Chelsea captain. Quite why Hughes has never 
considered the unloved curly-haired bit of talent calledRicardo Carvalho is a 
mystery which will trouble the Mill for at least as long as it takes to finish 
this sentence. Anyway, the Portuguese has accepted he won't be able to join up 
with Jose Mourinho atInter and is duty-bound to stay at Stamford Bridge so that 
boat may have already set sail.

If City fail in their relentless pursuit of JT, they will likely leave £15m in 
Everton's car park and race off down the M62 with Joleon Lescott tied up in the 
boot.

In other Merseyside-related news, Hull City fancy a piece of that blond with 
the ponytail at Anfield. WellAndriy Voronin to be precise. Having managed to 
put one foot in front of the other regularly at Hertha Berlin, thus giving the 
impression of a functioning striker, they reckon he's the man to keep them up 
next year.

And in the daily Xabi Alonso-to-Real-Madrid
-does-anybody-really-think-it-won't-happen saga theLiverpool midfielder has 
said he reckons Madrid have an "impressive project" going on but he does not 
know how things will turn out because he's not a "fortune teller". Which is 
strange, because when Florentino Pérez digs deep enough to offer Rafa Benítez a 
fortune for him – around £35m – the Mill's got a good idea where he'll end up.

Arséne Wenger intends to fill the Emmanuel Adebayor-sized hole in his Arsenal 
front line withToulouse striker André-Pierre Gignac. He's young, he's tall, 
he's French, he'll cost £18m, but of course, Wenger being Wenger, he won't 
budge from £13m.

Tottenham manager 'Arry Redknapp is wearing a balaclava and stalking the A1 
where he hopes to intercept the delivery ofPortsmouth's Peter Crouch to 
Sunderland and drag the big man back to White Hart Lane. He'll have to post a 
cheque to Fratton Park for £12m mind, to avoid kidnap charges and what-not. 
He'll raise £4m of that by offloadingChris Gunter to Preston North End.

Having been subject to barbarous text-speak such as "Is evil something u are 
... or something u do?" from a boy band called Riot Squ ... oh from La Galaxy's 
really scary hardcore section of fans called the Riot Squad,David Beckham will 
try to hug as manyMilan players as possible until every one of them tells their 
manager Leonardo that he's such a nice guy that they don't mind doing all of 
his running for him providing he kisses them when they've scored a goal.

Blackburn's Sam Allardyce has sent the soon-to-be fossilised trialist 
Christian Vieri packing after realising the former Italian international 
striker's waist was almost as big as his own.Manchester United's bean-counters 
haven't got the £21m worth of beans required to bringGremio's 18-year-old 
striker Douglas Costa to Old Trafford. They managed to count £8m before 
resorting to looking down the sides of the couch.

Having not been able to tempt West Brom to part with Jonathan Greening for 
£2.5mFulham will dig £3.5m deeper to sign Juventus's Danish midfielder 
Christian Poulsen.

The Mill's a bit under the weather today, so please give it a push by posting 
your gossip and transfer tittle-tattle in the comments section below.
 