
Rémy Cabella’s proposed move to Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> from Montpellier has hit 
a snag after the French club raised their asking price to around £12m.

The Tynesiders believed their £7m offer had been accepted in principle but now 
Alan Pardew <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> faces an anxious 
wait to see if his board are willing to haggle and whether a compromise can be 
reached. It is understood Cabella has told his Ligue One employers he is 
determined to leave and that he is very interested in relocating to north-east 
England.

Pardew regards the 24-year-old playmaker as an ideal replacement for Yohan 
Cabaye who was sorely missed at St James’ Park following his £20m defection to 
Paris Saint-Germain in January.

Newcastle’s manager tried and failed to sign Cabella during that transfer 
window and now the future of a player currently on Didier Deschamps’ stand-by 
list for the Brazil bound France World Cup squad is once again in limbo.

The recruitment of Cabella could end Pardew’s disastrous attempt to make his 
team more direct in the wake of Cabaye’s departure. If Newcastle fans would 
welcome a reversion to more of a controlled passing game, they will also be 
relieved that Mike Ashley, Newcastle’s owner, seems set to deliver on promises 
to invest significantly in reconstructing the squad this summer. Ashley though 
is famously reluctant to pay over the odds.

Newcastle struggled horribly to score goals from midfield following Cabaye’s 
exit but Cabella, who has an Italian father, managed an encouraging 14 in 41 
appearances forMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> last season.

A fast, agile and creative attacking midfielder he is capable of operating on 
either wing or behind the main striker as well as in a slightly deeper 
playmaking role.

While Pardew is determined to restock his heavily Francophone dressing room 
with more British players this summer Cabella – a creator tracked for many 
months by Graham Carr, Newcastle’s influential chief scout –always ranked high 
on his shopping list.
 