
Imagine, if you possibly can, Malcolm Glazer sporting a mohawk haircut dyed 
red and white (or yellow and green for that matter). PictureRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich?INTCMP=SRCH> making a 
public declaration that he will become a monk if his team brings success. 
VisualiseSheikh Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheikh-mansour?INTCMP=SRCH> joyously 
adding to his enormous collection of legendary football shirts. Try to conceive 
ofStan Kroenke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stan-kroenke?INTCMP=SRCH> 
publishing a comic book with a cartoon of himself on the front, to tell the 
story of his life in football.

In an era when the modern football owner is not renowned for dramatic 
gestures, Louis Nicollin stands out from the crowd. The larger-than-life 
president of Montpellier-Herault SC has done all of the above, and much more, 
while driving his club forward over a period that encompasses four decades. 
Unyielding, outrageous, crude and famously explosive, it is safe to say that 
the experience of watching his team in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> means more to him than 
it does to Glazer, Abramovich, Sheikh Mansour and Kroenke put together several 
times over. A local entrepreneur who made his fortune out of the family's 
business in waste collection, he says he had to pinch himself 20 times before 
believing the team he built was competing in such elevated company.

It is a pity that Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team>, who travel to 
the Emirates on Wednesday, have not made more of an impression in their debut 
run in the competition because Nicollin's promise to check in to the nearest 
monastery if they managed to exceed all odds by winning Europe's most 
prestigious trophy was not announced lightly. "I will become a monk and as I 
have many fans who want me to become a monk, then so be it," he explained to 
Champions magazine.

"Naked under my robe, like real monks, without any socks in the winter. A real 
monk. I like that."

He is not a man for loose words, for casual wagers. That was the case last 
season when he promised Montpellier's impudently talented winger, Rémy Cabella, 
that he would emulate the kid's spiky hairstyle if Montpellier won the title. 
As part of the celebrations, when Ligue 1 was secured, the players turned up 
with razors to do the honours. "But my hairdresser did it nicely, blue on the 
sides and then orange," recalls the 69-year-old. "It all went fine. When you 
bet on something, you must always honour it."

Beneath the stunts is a man who has been determined and dedicated to the cause 
of Montpellier for much of his lifetime. When he first became involved, in the 
1970s, the club were in a parlous state – demoted, and stripped of professional 
status.

Nicollin set the wheels in motion for a merger between Montpellier and his 
company team at La Paillade, to breathe new life into the region's football.

A journey from such a modest place to the Champions League has been uplifting. 
It was particularly meaningful for Montpellier to hurdle the nouveau riche at 
Paris St-Germain in conquering the league last season.

Maintaining that success was always going to be a demanding challenge even 
beyond Nicollin's brand of enthusiasm, and Montpellier are languishing in the 
bottom half of the table, well off the pace.

Although the club were pleased to hold on to influential performers such as 
the defender Mapou Yanga-Mbiwa and playmaker Younès Belhanda, losing the top 
section of their spine, in the form of hulking striker Olivier Giroud, has been 
a difficult blow to absorb.

So, it seems the monasteries of south-west France will be quiet enough for the 
foreseeable future. But Nicollin remains devoted to his cause. His club is, he 
says, like a daughter, to be cherished and looked after at all costs. "I 
wouldn't sell her for all the money in the world. I don't see why I would sell 
her. This is my club, my life, that's it."

Michel Platini annually sends him souvenir versions of the Champions League 
trophy engraved with the 32 crests from the group stage and another of his many 
famous friends is Gérard Depardieu.

The actor wrote the foreword to Nicollin's comic book, and tried to sum up the 
essence of the man. "Loulou Nicollin is another empire builder of the 
Languedoc-Roussillon spirit, of the culture of the south of France," he wrote.

Nicollin is a throwback. A dying breed. The age of the local 
businessman-made-good looking after his town's football club is on its way out. 
But more's the pity.
 