
Evening all No peace for the insipid, I've had to double up with the cricket 
earlier so haven't had time to compose much of a preamble. Tony Adams is 
looking very relaxed indeed on Sky's coverage. When told Arsenal were 20-1 to 
win the European Cup, he said: "Jesus! It's a cup competition." Maybe he'll 
have a punt. Ray Wilkins thinks this is a '"very nice" start for Arsenal given 
Montpellier's poor form this season but any club with Younés Belhanda should 
not be written off. I was based inMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> for the 1998 
World Cup. Lovely city. All the talk that summer from fans of MHSC focused on 
the future of Ibrahima Bakayoko. He ended up at Everton before returning to 
France with Marseille. I've enjoyed watching Arsenal this season, Cazorla in 
particular, but praise is also due to Arteta, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Podolski and 
Diaby. The Ox, however, is on the bench tonight, making way for Giroud's return 
to Stade de la Mosson.

Your teams
Montpellier: Jourdren, Bocaly, Yanga M'Biwa, Hilton, Bedimo, Estrada, Saihi, 
Mounier, Belhanda, Cabella, Camara.
Subs: Pionnier, Marveaux, Herrera, Congre, Ait-Fana, Stambouli, Jeunechamp. 
Arsenal: Mannone, Jenkinson, Mertesacker, Vermaelen, Gibbs, Diaby, Arteta, 
Gervinho, Cazorla, Podolski, Giroud.
Subs: Shea, Koscielny, Andre Santos, Walcott, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Ramsey, 
Coquelin. 
Referee: Carlos Velasco Carballo (Spain)

Cultural update: From the culturally inquisitive Gary Naylor: "I'm in the 
Queen Elizabeth Hall on the South Bank for an avant garde musical production of 
Hamlet by the Tiger Lillies. There was a time when this sort of thing cost more 
than a night at the football." I've seen some of their Shockheaded Peter stuff, 
Gary, and realised my tastes are, by comparison, hopelessly square.

"Will you be giving us updates on the Real Madrid-Man City game tonight while 
you effortlessly MBM Montpellier-Arsenal?" asks Brian Russell. "I'm recording 
that one, see, so I would prefer it if you didn't." Fair enough. I ain't sayin' 
nish. If you want news from the Bernabéu,you need to check in with the Doyler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/sep/18/champions-league-real-madrid-manchester-city-live>
. And as for the "effortlessly" …

1 min: Montpellier kick off and within 20 seconds Abou Diaby is yellow carded 
for a sliding tackle on Estrada in the centre-circle, the referee deciding that 
even though he got the ball, the lunge was reckless and with his studs up.

2 min: Camara is slipped the ball from the left but he had made his run 
between Vermaelen and Mertesacker too early and was offside, which the referee 
eventually notices.

4 min: Free kick to Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> on 
the edge of the box, five yards or so to the left of centre, for Saihi's foul. 
Taken by Cazorla, he hits the wall and HSC break quickly with Camara but 
Vermaelen is well-positioned and the cover comes quickly with Jenkinson making 
very good ground to force a mistake from Camara and win a throw.

6 min: Arsenal corner after a rather nervy clearance from Bocaly. Taken to the 
near post for Mertesacker but Camara reads the intention and clears the danger.

8 min: Mounier is given the ball by Jenkinson rather carelessly when he's 
looking for Gervinho but again the cover snuffs out the danger.

Penalty to Montpellier!!

GOAL!! Montpellier 1-0 Arsenal (Belhanda) The penalty looked tame when 
Belhanda went flying over Vermaelen's challenge. It looked on replay though 
that he did clip him even if the two forward rolls looked excessive. And 
Belhanda scores the pen with a Panenka of class and contempt.

11 min: We're still on the old MBM software so you might need to refresh the 
page for the goal descriptions to appear. There's a smoke bomb or flare behind 
Mannone's goal after the penalty. Arsenal have responded with composure, 
playing it short after going behind for the first time this season, looking to 
get Cazorla and, particularly, Podolski on the ball.

13 min: Montpellier take a free kick for another soft foul, Estrada rifling in 
a shot from 30 yards out by the left touchline that Podolski half clears but 
the rebound opportunity is hit wide and wasted.

GOAL!! Montpellier 1-1 Arsenal (Podolski) A wonderful move with Cazorla 
picking up a pass about 30 yards out and firing in a pass to Giroud who lays it 
off to Podolski running free through the middle with a deft flick and the 
German sells the goalkeeper with his shimmy and calmly slots his shot home from 
15 yards.

GOAL!! Montpellier 1-2 Arsenal (Gervinho) The assist comes from Jenkinson with 
a cross spun across the six-yard box from the right begging to be turned in. 
Gervinho had started the move, playing a one-two with the right back before 
cutting inside. When he was tackled the ball made its way back to Jenkinson who 
curled in the cross to the spot where Gervinho had continued his run.

20 min: Right. Where were we? Refresh if you can't see the goal descriptions.

22 min: You get the feeling from the way Tony Adams spoke of Jenkinson in the 
build-up that he's Streve Bould's particular protege. And he's playing very 
well, indeed, linking up with Gervinho but also positioning himself to prevent 
Cabella cutting in to link up with Belhanda. Belhanda just did get a run but 
his cross ballooned up and Mertesacker nodded it clear.

24 min: An almost identical cross to his assist from Jenkinson is cut out by 
Yanga-Mbiwa for a corner, taken by Cazorla and headed away by Belhanda.

26 min: Podolski gets away with a foul on Cabella, either unseen by the 
referee, or, according to the commentator, the referee not impressed by the 
triple body roll on falling so decided to ignore it. Belhanda robs Cazorla who 
claims a foul but doesn't get it either then Arteta stalls the move by tapping 
Cabella's ankles.

28 min: Giroud's crossfield pass is telegraphed and cut out, allowing Mounier 
to launch a jinking raid up the left to win a corner. It's played short to make 
an angle and though three HSC forwards anticipate the deep cross to the far 
post from the left so does Gibbs who leaps to head it out of the area and 
upfield to Podolski. Good anticipation and concentration.

30 min: Arteta on the ball in the old right-half position, elegantly chips up 
a pass to Jenkinson on halfway by the touchline and he feeds Gervinho with a 
short lay-off, turns and sprints upfield but Gervinho hesitates and holds on to 
the ball too long losing possession.

32 min: Giroud wins a free-kick when Yanga-Mbiwa jumps into his back. Cazorla 
takes it, five yards in from touch, 35 yards from goal on the left but he and 
Arteta try to be too clever and draw the defenders out but are caught in 
possession when they can't offload it quickly enough.

34 min: Shot from 20 yards from Estrada who ran in horizontally across from 
the right touchline and spun a left-foot shot towards Mannone's left post and 
the Italian turned it around with his finger tips.

36 min: "Calling Montpellier HSC, while strictly true, makes them sound like 
bankers," writes Krishan Arora. "Maybe the Arsenal fans could think of a chant 
around that." Inventive these football fans, Krishan. Good break from 
Montpellier with Mounier spinning in a deep cross that Mannone picks up.

39 min: Mertesacker looks calm in possession tonight. There were times last 
season when he was prone to panic but it seems that he trusts both himself, the 
system and his team-mates now. Yellow card for Yanga-Mbiwa for pole-axing 
Arteta after he'd lost the ball and tried too vigorously to reclaim it.

41 min: Aaagh. Diaby fails to make the killer pass to set up Giroud by inches.

43 min: Gervinho is enjoying the space he's been given and the movement of 
Cazorla and Podolski, to sneak in off the right touchline and almost carve out 
chances. His final balls, so far since his goal, have just been cut out. But 
only by a toe.

45 min: Arsenal corner from Cazorla loops straight into Jourdren's hands.

Half time:  "A propos of very little, the great Carlos Valderrama used to run 
out for Montpellier," writes Simon Frank. "He is a quarter of my all-time dream 
midfield of Xavi, El Pibe, Seedorf and Bart-Williams." The Bartman. What taste! 
"This is the first time I can remember seeing Montpellier on TV since Mark 
Hughes grabbed his face after zero contact, a la Rivaldo, to get one of their 
players sent off," says Niall Mullen. "I think it was at Old Trafford but I 
cannot find a clip anywhere. Did I dream it?"

You didn't, Niall. Here's David Lacey:

"07 Mar 1991: The Guardian - Page 18 - (686 words)
Soccer: Ten-man Montpellier show up United - European Cup Winners' Cup, third 
round, first leg: Manchester United 1, Montpellier 1
By: By DAVID LACEY
MANCHESTER United made a blissful start to their Cup Winners' Cup 
quarter-final against Montpellier at Old Trafford last night but then showed 
their ignorance of European affairs. As a result English football's first 
season back in the continental competitions since the Heysel tragedy looks 
likely to end with a spot of French leave.

When Brian McClair gave United the lead after 53 seconds Old Trafford echoed 
to the sounds of a half-forgotten glory. But within six minutes Lee Martin, 
whose goal had won them the FA Cup at Wembley last May, put the ball into his 
own net and Montpellier , thrown this unexpected lifeline, never let go.

So now Alex Ferguson's players have to visit the tight little stadium in the 
south of France where Bobby Robson's PSV Eindhoven side lost narrowly in the 
first round and Steaua Bucharest were routed 5-0 in the second. Last night 
Montpellier showed all the resilience which had frustrated PSV in the away leg 
and easily survived the dismissal of Baills which reduced them to 10 men for 
all but three minutes of the second half.

The right-back was a little unlucky but remained the victim of his own 
impetuosity. The game had stopped for a Manchester United free-kick when Baills 
charged at Hughes and appeared to knock the striker to the ground.

Television suggested that contact between the two players had been minimal but 
the Italian referee saw only violent conduct and produced the red card.So 
Baills will miss the return game along with Guerin, who had been sent off in 
Eindhoven and was booked last night for a foul on Sharpe.

Manchester United will not take much consolation from the absence of these 
Montpellier players. Valderrama and his orange mop have yet to appear in this 
tie and Xuereb, who came on for the last eight minutes, nearly won the match 
for them in the closing seconds.

Manchester United provided a stirring overture but then failed to give a 
performance. Robson and Hughes are not short of European experience but the 
team as a whole lacked the wit to break down a Montpellier defence tightly 
organised around Blanc, the sweeper, and increasingly relieved of pressure by 
the excellent displays in midfield of Lemoult and Suvrijn.

Having shown how Sharpe's speed on the left could win the tie, United relied 
more and more on Robson trying to drive deep wedges into a packed defence which 
absorbed this form of attack with equanimity. It was boiled beef and carrots 
against solid provincial French cooking.

Manchester United never recreated the speed and simplicity of their opening 
movement a quick pass from Hughes to Sharpe, whose pace left Baills standing, 
and a low cross from which McClair drove the ball firmly past Barrabe. 
Thereafter their crosses and final passes became vague and predictable.

Yet all might have been well for United had Martin not suffered his moment of 
aberration in the seventh minute. Garcia opened up the left flank for 
Montpellier by sending Ziober towards the byline. The Pole's centre was low and 
true but nobody was in the goalmouth except Martin and Sealey.

Maybe Martin was aware of someone stealing up behind but the young full-back, 
who had not scored at either end since the Cup final, prodded the ball into his 
own net.

Manchester United had several chances to regain the lead Barrabe saving 
smartly from Hughes, who later directed a free header into the goalkeeper's 
hands, and McClair just failing to connect with a diving header after Sharpe 
had at last provided another dangerous centre.

Half-time emails ping in: "Louis Nicollin cheekily offered to take Giroud back 
on loan," says Matt "not an Arsenal fan" Dony. "Is it equally as cheeky to 
suggest it might be a good idea for Arsenal? Especially now that Gervinho 
appears to have discovered some footballing ability. Maybe he sold his soul at 
a crossroads over the summer?" Yes it is equally as cheeky. No. It's not a good 
idea. Ben Dunn writes: "The pic makes Wenger look like Hodgson had the latter 
lived a healthier life." The Malmo legend an unhealthy life? What's he been 
doing, all night domino sessions?

46 min: Arsenal kick off and Diaby gets caught fannying about in his own box, 
oo er, almost throwing away the lead but the finish is too high to punish his 
dallying.

48 min: Mounier takes on Jenkinson up the left and wins a corner and Arsenal 
get caught napping when the ball comes into the box but recover to sniff and 
snuff the danger. This has been very disjointed so far from Arsenal this half.

50 min: Another HSC corner, taken short then sent to Mounier on the edge of 
the D. He pivots to take it on the volley with his left foot and connects well 
but Vermaelen is wise to it and stands tall to block the shot. "Simon Frank got 
me to reminiscing about Montpellier when Valderrama played for them," writes 
Brian Russell. "I have a strong memory of them playing, I think, Liverpool, in 
Europe in the early 90's. Valderrama and a forward whose name was Aguilera (if 
memory serves) were a class above every Liverpool player on the pitch, although 
the game ended in a draw. Good times for fans of crazy hair and slick togga."

54 min: Montpellier have begun this half with great gusto and given the 
chances they've either been handed on a platter by Arsenal's slackness or 
carved out for themselves should be level by now. Now Cazorla is robbed and the 
ball breaks to Cabella who weights a lovely chip over Mannone and on to the bar 
then hits another with his left foot over the bar from the rebound.

56 min: Montpellier have dominated this past 10 minutes, largely because Diaby 
and Arteta are being bypassed either on the flanks or with the ball coming from 
the breakdown of their attacks catching them on the front foot.

58 min: Diaby sidles forward with all his languid grace to set up a shot for 
Cazorla that is beaten away by Jourdren.

60 min: Very sharp passing from Montpellier, quick and to feet, is threatening 
still to pierce Arsenal's defence. As Alan Smith says, they're putting in far 
more conspicuous effort this half, upping the pace and getting right up to 
their opponents on the press.

62 min: Part of this second-half recovery is down to the greater presence of 
Saihi and his impact in splitting the advanced midfield three from the two 
behind.

64 min: In truth HSC have moved the ball with such slickness this half that 
they should have equalised before they inevitably run out of puff.

66 min: Bocaly and Belhanda play a one-two in the box, the full-back falling 
over when he receives the final pass by the penalty spot. The crowd appeals for 
a penalty but the ref tells him to get up. It looked like a dive. Off goes 
Mounier, replaced by Aït-Fana.

68 min: Excellent close control from Podolski on the dribble when he storms 
into the box almost bears fruit but Yanga-Mbiwa stays so tight that he finally 
gets his foot in to stop him shooting.

70 min: A lot of chat from the commentators centres on Giroud's lack of 
effectiveness and whether he should be replaced. He's not found it easy this 
half and I wonder if his positioning as the spearhead with the so called 
trident behind him is quite right yet.

72 min: Pot shot from Ait-Fana ends up as a daisy-cutter when he slips 
mid-execution as he hits it from 25 yards.

74 min: Perhaps Arsenal have weathered that 30-minute storm but then again 
given the number of times they have given the ball away they might need the 
imminent reinforcements in midfield to effect a proper change. Mertesacker and 
Vermaelen have been the ones to steady the ship this half when they've had to.

75 min: Arsenal substitution. Ramsey on for Giroud.

77 min: So Gervinho goes left and Podolski through the middle and again the 
German is a foot away from a fair shooting chance. It's Diaby and Cazorla who 
look most knacked and in need of replacing. Stamboulli for Camara, Herrera also 
comes on for HSC.

79 min: Diaby is pickpocketed again, for the third or fourth time this half, 
and has his centre-halfs to thank for stopping the thrust from HSC. He didn't 
play on Saturday and looks ring rusty after the international break and his 
knock.

81 min: Belhanda wastes a peach of a chance after shifting the ball between 
his feet having seen Mertesacker on his backside when his lunge couldn't cut 
the pass out. His fall opens the space for a shot from 10 yards which Mannone 
blocks with his armpit.

83 min: Arsenal look pooped, more than a touch winded after their exertions to 
repel Montpellier's second-half revival. They earn a breather when Belhanda is 
booked for catching Arteta with a flung-out hand and understandably take as 
much time as they can.

85 min: Arsenal play it back from an attack up the left wing, fully 80 yards 
to Mannone who begins again but when the ball is chipped over the top by Diaby 
for Gervinho's clever run he was a couple of feet offside.

87 min: Montpellier continue to commit players forward, particularly 
Yanga-Mbiwa on surges up the right flank to link up with Bocaly. In he runs 
from the touchline towards the box, lays it off then gets it back and hits a 
cross from inside the area but Mannone catches it.

89 min: Arsenal subs: Walcott for Podolski; Coquelin for Cazorla. There will 
be three minutes of added time.

90 min:Montpellier claim a penalty against Diaby for what they perceive to be 
a trip on Cabella but he didn't seem to catch him and the referee isn't buying 
it.

90 min+2: Yanga-Mbiwa plays a 30-yard pass into the box, trying to find 
Herrera but Gibbs heads it away before it drops to the forward's feet.

90 min+3: Strong block by Vermaelen closes the game.

Full time: Montpellier 1-2 Arsenal One-nil down. Two-one up. Arsenal played 
very well for a good half hour of the first half but Montpellier dominated that 
second half as Arsenal lost possession, and energy because they'd spent so much 
chasing the ball which was being zipped about. HSC squandered several chances 
and Arsenal, in the end, hung on. Excellent result for them and rumours of 
Montpellier's demise have been greatly exaggerated but their performance after 
half-time will be a concern. Thanks for your emails. Good night.
 