 The Chancellor of the Exchequer had just finished the examination of his 
letters bag in Downing Street yesterday morning when he received a 
representative of THE OBSERVER. Full of enthusiasm and looking extremely well, 
he expressed his gratification at the reception of the scheme of national 
insurance against sickness, infirmity and unemployment.
'I have,' he said, 'deliberately kept out of the scheme everything that would 
bear a political aspect, or even bear a partisan interpretation, because I 
thought it is so important that the scheme should have the co-operation of all 
parties and all classes in the country, and I mean throughout, so far as I can, 
compatible with the safety of the Bill, to defer to the legitimate wishes of 
those of my political opponents who are genuinely interested in the project, 
and are, I think, sincerely desirous of helping it through.

'When the Budget was introduced, the first shoal of letters I got revealed 
exactly what I might expect. The mass of comments indicate what measure of 
support I could rely on and, what was equally valuable, it told me where I 
should encounter strenuous opposition. So it has been with the State Insurance 
Bill. Yesterday, I received a constant stream of messages from all parts of the 
country - Liberals and Conservatives alike - and they were all, without 
exception, messages of enthusiastic approval. The communications to hand this 
morning are, if possible, more gratifying in that they show how widespread is 
the country's appreciation of a measure meant to lay the foundation of a 
happier and healthier nation.

'Naturally some misgivings have been aroused. Medical men, in industrial 
districts, who have not co-operated with the existing Friendly Societies, are 
apprehensive lest the adoption of State Insurance should give a definite 
advantage to one section of the medical profession at the expense of the other.

Nothing of the kind is intended. Sufficient money will be set aside to cover 
the cost of giving adequate medical aid to all who come within the purview of 
the scheme, and every medical man will be given the chance of electing to say 
whether he will take part in it. He will, at any rate, have the knowledge that 
he will be paid for his services.'

[The interview continues at considerable length on details of policy, and 
concludes:]

Then Mr. Lloyd George, who is taking wise care of himself and was golfing on 
Friday, went off to the breezes of Littleton-on-Sea. Recent pessimistic rumours 
have been very much astray. Encouraged by having come with extraordinary 
success through the long-expected and formidable ordeal of last Thursday, Mr. 
Lloyd George is again the embodiment of vitality and high pressure.
 