
Chris Hughton taught his former side a harsh lesson in the realities of the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> as Brighton 
picked off a fragile visiting side and left Alex Neil ruing the worst defeat in 
his short managerial career.

What had been billed as a tight encounter between evenly matched rivals ended 
up as a rout. Goals from Lewis Dunk and Anthony Knockaert complemented a Glenn 
Murray hat-trick and left home fans believing they can improve on last season’s 
third-place finish. Norwich, who led the league 13 days ago, ended the day 
confronting each other in heated dressing room exchanges.

Hughton spent two seasons in charge at Carrow Road, where his reputation as a 
safety-first coach never endeared him to the home support despite keeping them 
in the Premier League in the 2012-13 season before relegation the following 
campaign. The 57-year-old is held in far greater affection here in Brighton and 
he cited a solid defensive foundation as the main reason for his team’s easy 
victory.

“When you’re playing against such a talented team the basis has to be; can you 
keep a clean sheet?” Hughton said. “We defended as a team very well, we 
restricted them to minimal chances and the team should be as proud about the 
defensive side as the rest. Irrespective of the opposition these days don’t 
happen too often.”

Football League your thoughts: Fulham hit five to hand Huddersfield reality 
check
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/29/football-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check>
Hughton was full of praise for Murray, the striker who made his return to the 
club in the summer. He opened the scoring in the sixth minute, capitalising on 
sloppy play from Norwich’s goalkeeper, Michael McGovern, but for Hughton it was 
his second goal, a firm header to finish a counterattack on the hour, that 
decided the match. “Glenn is a proven striker at this level,” he said. “He 
scores goals. He worked very hard, the first goal being a great example of 
that. It was a great opportunist goal. But the second goal was crucial. We were 
up against a very talented team, but they opened up more at 2-0 and we 
exploited the spaces.”

Murray’s second goal was followed four minutes later by another header, this 
time from the impressive Dunk, who buried Knockaert’s corner. Murray claimed 
his hat-trick in the 73rd minute, pouncing on another of the visitors’ many 
mistakes to toe poke beyond McGovern. Knockaert completed a comprehensive 
thrashing when he dinked the ball home with six minutes remaining.

While Norwich were in the game at half time, the manner in which they threw it 
away in the second half poses serious questions about their ability to bounce 
back to the Premier League at the first attempt. Individual errors 
characterised their descent from the Premier League and they have not mended 
their ways this term, ironically perhaps a consequence of Neil’s commitment to 
playing attacking football. But the current Championship manager of the month 
is now under real pressure to keep his job.

“It’s fair to say I feel let down and some of them will feel like they’ve let 
themselves down,” Neil said about his players. “They’ve not got anywhere near 
enough to their standards. It’s the worst result of my career and all I can 
really do is apologise to the fans.”

The 35-year-old denied that some of his squad are not up for the fight in the 
Championship. “I don’t think that’s the case but I think they thought the game 
was over.

“After the second goal, that’s where the frustration comes in. We have to act 
as top professionals. There was more said after the match today than what I 
normally do. Sometimes I don’t think you think clearly after the match but that 
certainly changed today. They had words with each other and I don’t think 
that’s a bad thing.”
 