
During this fixture last season Massimo Cellino found himself in the away end 
with theLeeds United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> 
supporters. The mood at Elland Road has turned somewhat since then and, 
although it was probably a wise decision not to do the same again, Leeds did 
secure a point with Mustapha Carayol’s late strike.

Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> had looked 
relatively comfortable until Carayol’s precise low effort squeezed into David 
Button’s bottom-left corner with six minutes remaining. Dean Smith’s side took 
the lead in the first half through Sam Saunders – his first goal of the season 
– and with the exception of two penalty shouts from Mirco Antenucci and a 
curling strike from the Italian, Leeds carried little threat until later in the 
game.

John Swift moved the ball well throughout for Brentford, who stay 10th in the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, six points 
off the play-offs, while Leeds move to 14th. Saunders was granted time and 
space to advance with the ball from just inside the opposition half and shoot 
low past Marco Silvestri in the 27th minute but Leeds showed greater resolve 
and creativity in the second half.

“The conditions in the first half were really tough, there was a swirling 
wind,” said Steve Evans, the Leeds coach, who thought his side deserved a 
penalty when Antenucci went down inside the area in the 57th minute. “I don’t 
excuse our passing, of course. We changed the shape of the team in the second 
half and go away disappointed not to have won the game.

“I think the substitutes played a good part. Antenucci was really bright from 
the minute he came on. Carayol takes a fantastic goal and was a real handful. I 
think every time he got the ball their left-back got a bit jittery. You always 
know when you play a team like Brentford they are going to have a lot of the 
ball. I’m really proud of them, to go from a low level performance and then pin 
Brentford back.”

Chris Wood was substituted early on for Leeds with a tight hamstring, although 
Evans said he hoped to have the striker available for the FA Cup tie at Bolton 
on Saturday. Evans spoke with Cellino, the owner, on Tuesday about attacking 
additions to the squad before the transfer window closes.

Brentford controlled the game in the first half but struggled for clear-cut 
opportunities. Leeds almost secured a victory late on but Button produced a 
fine save to deny Souleymane Doukara, while Toumani Diagouraga, signed from 
Brentford just days ago, made his debut for United.

“In the first half I thought some of our football was very good,” said Smithy. 
“We should have probably gone in more than one up. Our final ball or touch just 
wasn’t there. I thought we restricted them to long-range efforts. It was a fine 
finish from Carayol.”

On the goalscorer Saunders, Smith added: “He’s a good player and has worked 
hard in training. He’s a bundle of energy and has that know-how and experience 
to help the younger players as well. I thought we had chances on the break to 
get the winner.”
 