
Recently I made a dreadful mess in the kitchen. It was delicious. I was 
looking for something to kick off a dinner party, something around which 
conversation could gather, and was musing on the Jewish Ashkenazi staple of egg 
and onion: crushed up cooled boiled eggs with slow-cooked, then cooled fried 
onions. It’s a soothing trip to the nursery or better still, the small child’s 
overheated sick bed.

I wanted to make a grown-up version. Instead of onions I used finely sliced 
spring onions. I added chopped salted anchovies. I dressed it with a serious 
vinaigrette, made with spoonfuls of nose-tickling Dijon mustard and mayonnaise 
and glugs of peppery olive oil. I can’t pretend. It looked terrible. It looked 
like it had been pre-consumed, rejected by the body as not fit for purpose and 
returned to the bowl from the wrong direction. I hesitated. Could I really 
serve this?

Then I scooped some on to a cracker. Forgive a moment’s boasting, but God it 
was good: the comforting back rub of the eggs remained, but now there was an 
insistent kick from the anchovies and the spring onion and the Dijon. It was 
the word “compelling” fashioned from ingredients. Soon my friends were scraping 
at the glaze.

It got me thinking. So much of the very best food is like this, which is to 
say a huge bloody mess. It lies on the plate or in the bowl, looking like 
something requiring the attentions of the emergency services or a swift burial. 
And yet, it tastes marvellous. I’d go even further and say that messy food 
rules. Messy food is where the satisfying stuff is. For example there’s a 
Vietnamese chicken dish I make, full of fish sauce, heaps of black pepper and 
sugar and handfuls of sliced ginger. An hour of slow simmering and it ends up 
looking as though a lot of bleach will be required to tidy up the dun-coloured 
“accident”. However, it tastes fabulous, a bash of salt and sweet and umami.

Think of the very best stews; of chillies and curries, of fish stews bursting 
with saffron or even just a winter salad heaped on a plate. It looks like 
something awaiting the composter. You don’t know whether to use a rake or a 
fork. And yet it’s delicious. I know I’m not meant to think like this; that, 
when a plate lands on the table, people like me are meant to nod sagely, and 
mutter about the artful way in which the ingredients have been introduced to 
each other like they were guests at a cocktail party humming with sexual 
tension. Supposedly we eat with our eyes first. And I understand that ambitious 
chefs have spent so long fretting over each element of a dish that they are 
then going to take extreme care in their positioning on the final plate. Of 
course they are. They need something with which to fill their Instagram 
accounts. And I can’t promise not to comment on artful presentation in the 
future. We all appreciate it when a bit of effort has been made.

But I know my heart will be with the messy platefuls and I think for good 
culinary reasons. Making ingredients taste of themselves is of course virtuous. 
But slamming them together with other ingredients so they become something else 
is where the real action is. Messy makes flavours talk to each other. Messy 
makes them bounce off each other. It works. Now do excuse me. I’ve got an 
appointment with the kitchen. I need to make something that will require an 
awful lot of cleaning up. In a good way.
 