
The dilemma Mine is a very long story, but to keep it short, I left home at 18 
to live with my boyfriend, who is Jamaican. The problem is that I am Indian, so 
my dad and grandmother were not pleased at all. I regret the way I left, but 
not the boyfriend who became my husband. Ten years on and three small children 
later, my dad and I hardly talk. It hurts me so much and my heart cries at 
night. But I don’t know if I’m feeling sorry for myself or is all this my fault 
and my dad has a valid reason not to speak to my husband? My dad and I were 
close, and now we barely speak. I wish I could tell him how I feel. It’s sad.

Mariella replies Sad, and hopefully surmountable. It’s ironic that in the 
immediate aftermath of our vote to leave Europe my mailbag should have been 
flooded with letters from people for whom difference, whether cultural or 
religious, presents a challenge in their lives. One letter came from a Muslim 
teenager, growing up in Britain, whose mother’s increasingly histrionic 
response to her dating a boy is making her a laughing stock among her friends. 
She’s deeply unhappy and considering rejecting her faith. Dragging your 
16-year-old daughter from a cinema foyer and screaming at her hysterically for 
holding hands with her boyfriend is not appropriate behaviour in our society. 
More importantly, perhaps, it’s not the sort of behaviour that’s likely to 
achieve the desired result.

In daily life and the wider world, talking things out, not enforcing our will 
or storming away, is the best solution

So what does one do when cultures collide and there are no particular rules to 
follow? We’ve seen one example and may well live to regret the myriad forces 
that propelled our nation to reject our inclusion in a community of neighbours. 
The whole nation mourned when an MP and friend,Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
, who I admired enormously, not least for her open-hearted commitment to 
inclusion, was murdered by a man presumably so incapable of engaging in 
dialogue that he resorted to taking her life. Her children will grow up without 
a mother and the culprit will most likely never leave jail. It’s hardly a good 
result for anyone involved.

It’s difficult to come up with a scenario, whether in our daily lives or in 
the wider world, where talking things out, rather than enforcing our will or 
storming away, isn’t the best solution. Tolerance has to work both ways. It 
does seem unrealistic to raise children in a country where personal freedom, 
religious tolerance and basic human rights are at the core of society without 
acknowledging that your descendants will probably embrace those basic tenets of 
freedom of freedom and justice.

We’re not very good at being proud to be British. In the recent referendum 
campaign we also seemed unclear about what it means; our historical sense of 
ourselves appearing uncomfortably at odds with those qualities we should most 
be celebrating. We’re not a great nation because each citizen can trace an 
unbroken bloodline back to the Anglo-Saxons and the Celts; we’re an amazing 
nation because of our enterprise and our adaptability, our finely honed sense 
of what is right and wrong, and our determination to make a fairer world for 
all. We may have taken a long time to evolve to this state, but I’m incredibly 
proud to be a citizen of a country where so many differing cultural identities 
contribute to the dynamic diversity of what for many is an adopted home.

In an ideal world the 16-year-old girl I mentioned will be negotiating a 
compromise with her mother that involves retaining her faith, but being free to 
explore how she can best interpret it in the world she actually lives in, not 
the one her parents left behind. It won’t be an easy conversation, and I have 
little hope of it being resolved overnight, but she has the right to make her 
own choices and mistakes.

Yours, happily, seems like a less complex conundrum. You made your choice a 
decade ago, and it sounds like you made the right one for you. Now you just 
need to slowly but insistently nudge open the door to your dad. You’re happy 
telling me it makes you sad – I wonder if you’ve told him the same? Even if you 
have, it bears repeating over and over until he gradually accepts that what he 
stands to lose by maintaining this stand-off is far less than he will gain by 
ending it. There really is no right and wrong, and no place for judgement from 
either side. Your dad may have had different choices in mind for you, but he 
raised you in a place where you have the right to choose your own destiny. 
That’s not just something he should accept, but a gift he can be really proud 
of having given you.

I’ve no doubt he still loves you as much as he ever did. You just need to 
mitigate his upset and agree to differ on your choice of partner – now the 
father of his grandchildren. Look for the areas you can agree on rather than 
returning to those you don’t, and shower him with your love. It’s the only 
emotion that is truly is irresistible! As Jo Cox so famously told Parliament in 
her maiden speech: “We have more in common than that which divides us.” You 
just need to help him see that.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 