
The dilemma I have two ex-wives: two children with one, and another child with 
the other. I see my children all the time, have never missed child support 
payments, attend events and help as much as I can. My relationship with my 
second ex is strong, but not with my first. I’ve recently begun a new 
relationship with someone who has a young son. I am really happy and treat him 
as my own. I completely love them both and think I am finally content. She has 
met my children although we have not stated we are partners. My second ex is 
happy for me. My first ex, however, has banned me from going anywhere with my 
new partner when I have the older two children. It has meant we have missed 
family events and my partner doesn’t get to know my older children. If I try to 
stand up to my first ex she becomes abusive and brings up our break-up, which 
was more than seven years ago. I don’t know what to do. If I put my new partner 
first I get accused of neglect; if I play nice with my first ex she takes 
advantage.

Mariella replies That’s quite a lot about you. I do, however, appreciate 
irrepressible optimism. And your assertion that you have now, finally, found 
the woman who will make you content is certainly that. You’re not alone in your 
struggle to create harmony between family left behind and those you move on to. 
It’s an increasingly necessary life skill as longer lifespans and the hunt for 
personal happiness takes its toll.

You may be a pioneer of this new phenomenon, but your quest for a companion 
who will make you feel good, coupled with support from all those you’ve 
lingered with along the way, isn’t inspiring my sympathy. Instead, with you 
putting “I think” in sentences about this new relationship’s potential I find 
myself lurching toward your first ex-wife’s corner.

It’s not that you should be held to ransom for past mistakes: of course that 
does none of us any good, but it could be that she has less conviction about 
the lasting potential of what’s heading to be marriage number three than you 
do. The benefit of hindsight is a valuable gift. Judging by your allusion to 
dates you’ve managed two wives and three children in less than a decade. No 
wonder your first incumbent has little confidence that this latest fancy will 
be any more of a permanent fixture than she or her replacement were.

Putting children through the turmoil of embracing new partners is unavoidable, 
but it’s often prematurely demanded to assuage a parent’s guilt. That’s why far 
from being included in the auditioning process it’s better in most cases that 
the relationship is firmly cemented before you reinvent “family occasions” to 
include new arrivals.

You say you’ve started seeing this woman recently and I’m curious as to how 
“recently” you mean. The enthusiasm to introduce new lovers to friends and 
wider family is a perfectly natural impulse, but when it comes to kids a more 
cautious approach is preferable. So why don’t you make the most of this 
enjoyable liaison and also of the precious time you have with your own children 
without trying to create aKardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> family clan?

You say you “help” with your children “when you can” – a luxury not many 
parents enjoy – and I can’t shake off a suspicion that you’re pretty focused on 
you. Look at all the “I”s in your email, for starters. So how many potential 
stepmothers do you expect your children to meet and get to know? Does ex-wife 
number one get on with ex-wife number two? And does your love for the latest 
youngster caught in the slipstream transcend what you feel for the child’s 
mother? In other words is your current devotion to the boy likely to continue 
if you and this latest squeeze split up?

The thing about having children is that for as long as they are dependent and 
vulnerable you can’t reasonably expect to freely follow your heart. Their 
feelings and indeed their basic human rights must also provide a point of 
reference. I’m not against you dating, or eternally questing for Mrs Right, but 
is it absolutely necessary to envelop the children quite so swiftly into the 
newest family fold?

Choices have repercussions and learning to live with the outcome of your 
decisions is as important as striving for personal fulfilment. Trying to get 
three women and four children to sing “Kumbaya” for your pleasure seems a 
pretty selfish demand.

A harmoniously blended family isn’t your automatic right. Like everything else 
in life it’s something you have to work for. Your first ex-wife may be 
unforgiving and guilty of wilfully obstructive behaviour, but you’d be 
surprised how much you could improve understanding between you simply by 
changing tack. Listening and understanding, and taking responsibility for the 
emotional scars you’ve created, will serve you far better than just expecting 
others to hop to your tune.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 