
The dilemma My son married a beautiful woman nine years ago and their son is 
seven. Sadly, her long-standing mental health problems, including several 
suicide attempts, put their unborn child on the “at risk” register. Despite 
this, my son, who became his wife’s registered carer, coped – with help from 
social services, her parents and me. I cared for my grandson regularly.

Four years ago my now ex-daughter-in-law left the marital home with no prior 
warning, taking their son with her. Acrimonious proceedings followed, with my 
son accused of sexual and physical mistreatment, and the maternal grandparents 
became my grandson’s guardians.

The former close relationship I had with my grandson has been diluted as I see 
him for short periods when he is with my son. There are no overnight stays with 
either of us, and my family has become sidelined. We can’t fit family 
gatherings into a six-hour period on three Sundays a month. Will my heartache 
ever cease?

Mariella replies How painful for you all. That’s a very difficult situation 
and one in which everyone will have emerged feeling like the loser. Judging by 
your description several experts have been involved already and this is what 
they’ve come up with as a solution. Happily, for once, they have included 
grandparents in a child’s care, though unfortunately not from your side of the 
family. I appreciate what a terrible loss and also an unfair one that must feel 
to you.

You’d be surprised, or maybe not, how often, despite sincere and enthusiastic 
offers to lend a hand, grandparents are instead marginalised or left out 
altogether. Even without the trauma of a separation, or more complex family 
issues, it’s a cruel shame to deny younger children the experience of being 
cared for by those at the opposite end of life. They miss out on so much wisdom 
and maturity, so much lore and history, if their social interactions are 
limited to friends their own age and their parent’s buddies. I know it’s a 
wholly different conversation, but with playdates nowadays so often dependent 
on parental planning and participation, kids are losing what was once everyday 
exposure to a multitude of age groups. Most of the craziest things my kids have 
done to date have been with their grandparents, which has made them extremely 
enthusiastic about septuagenarians.

With emotional warfare surrounding that little boy, stand out as the voice of 
inclusion and kindness

It’s not such a bad scenario. With increasing numbers of retirees making up 
such a vast percentage of our population and pension funds stretched, a 
proposition for the future has to be to corral the elderly into childcare and 
teenagers into community service. Then we midlifers can just lie around 
drinking wine and bitching about each other on social media. Seriously, my 
husband and I would have struggled far more with our commitments to work if we 
hadn’t been lucky enough to have grandparents to call on for help.

While guilt tends to be the emotion that underpins most of us forced to farm 
out our childcare to paid strangers, when it comes to grandparents, it’s 
entirely guilt free. Children see it as a treat and if you don’t say thank you 
too often grandparents don’t notice you’re taking advantage of them! You’d 
think any sane government would offer financial incentives to exploit the 
legions of able and elderly.

The saddest character in your family tragedy is your grandson. He inhabits a 
tightly timed, prescribed half-life between you all and probably doesn’t really 
understand why things around him are as they are. Of course you are heartbroken 
to have the relationship so depleted, but I also note there’s six hours on 
three out of four Sundays where you can all be together if you wish to be. I 
suggest that rather than mourning the loss of access you take enormous care to 
savour every moment of what you are left with.

Time moves on, and as your grandson gets older his voice will count much more 
in any conversation about who he gets to spend time with. I know it’s hard to 
be selfless when you feel you’ve been cruelly served, but if you focus on the 
endgame, in time, he will be returned to you. Better still it will be because 
he’s chosen to keep you in his life, rather than simply because you were a part 
of it.

I’m so pleased to hear you describe your daughter-in-law as a “beautiful” 
woman. It shows plenty of hope for the future. With the perpetrators and 
victims of emotional warfare surrounding that little boy, make sure you stand 
out as the consistent voice of inclusion and kindness, and that means trying to 
reach out to your fellow grandparents, too. If we have a rock in our lives, no 
matter what age we are or how far the distance to reach it, we’ll head there 
when we need to. Bide your time, be your grandson’s rock and you’ll make 
yourself a magnet to him in the process.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 