
The dilemma I am a 25-year-old woman who is feeling quite lost. At university 
I enjoyed going out and partying with friends. Come graduation in 2013 I didn’t 
really want that to stop. Neither did my friends for a while and we just fitted 
it in around full-time work – which made for some very hungover Mondays. 
Gradually, though, my friends wanted to go out less and less. Suddenly “let’s 
pre-drink and go clubbing” became “let’s have dinner at an Italian restaurant”. 
This all came to a head recently when I called one of my closest friends boring 
and she said I should “grow up”. So who is correct? Is it time for me to admit 
the party is over, settle down, find a boyfriend and have picnics instead?

Mariella replies That’s a rosy picture you paint! I’m not quite sure what 
you’re asking of me. I can’t force your old friends to revert to their 
student-style lives and you don’t need me to tell you that overindulgence is 
bad for just about everything: your health, your looks, your relationships and 
your career. As with so much of what tends to ail us emotionally the root cause 
can probably be traced close to home.

This is an internal struggle if ever I saw one and not something we can hold 
your social circle to account for. As much as you may resent their changed 
priorities and believe fervently that you are a free spirit, battling on 
against the pressures of society’s norms, you really aren’t up there with Che 
Guevara.

What is it you are fighting for? A desire to remain rooted in past 
experiences, endlessly reliving the craic of your college days, trapped in your 
own privateGroundhog Day? If yours were a stand against the values and 
lifestyles of “smug marrieds” asHelen Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/helenfielding> so memorably christened them, 
you’d have a degree of support from me. Yet what you seem to be doing is just 
petulantly stamping your foot and demanding the DJ plays on after hours.

Finding fulfilment beyond perpetual oblivion isn’t a marker of running out of 
steam but of progress

I’m not quite sure why you remain so committed to this repetitious pattern. If 
that’s all you want, then a quick-fix solution would simply be to get in with a 
new crowd who want to keep on partying like it’s 1999. If your old friends have 
changed their lifestyles, developed new interests and embraced stable 
relationships, none of which appeals to you, then of course you don’t want to 
set your sights on similar.

But could it be that yours is a self-fulfilling prophecy? Does your 
determination to keep lining up the cocktails and be the last on the dance 
floor make you the cliché while your friends have found other things worth 
living for, and many of them worth staying sober(ish) for? I can’t take a stand 
on the purity pedestal but I like to think I get drunk in moderation! In the UK 
the mark of adulthood is – dysfunctionally – when you first raise a glass of 
alcohol to your lips, and from that moment on, ups and downs, births, 
marriages, funerals and everything in between are centred on the demon drink.

You certainly don’t need to sober up to shape up for adult life but the world 
is definitely easier to navigate without a perpetual hangover. If the biggest 
struggle you currently face is persuading old friends to keep up their party 
spirits, it suggests there’s not much of value going on in your own life. 
Developing new interests, evolving as a human being and finding fulfilment 
beyond perpetual oblivion aren’t markers of running out of steam but of 
progress. Satisfaction is definitely not to be found in treading the same 
hamster wheel in perpetuity.

My guess is you want your life to change too, not necessarily in the same 
direction as your mates but not to stay stuck in a groove either. You feel 
abandoned and it’s making you resentful toward those you feel have left you 
floundering. Instead of lambasting your friends for their changing lives, how 
about taking a long, hard look at your own? Admittedly you’re still young and 
if you are going to waste a few years, it’s the obvious time to do it. But what 
are you animated by aside from pre-drinking destinations and not being alone 
when the music stops? Seriously, could your relationship with alcohol have 
become your main priority?

If that’s the case, it’s time to call in the experts – Alcoholics Anonymous 
<http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk/> have saved many a life, young and 
old. It’s the easiest thing in the world to find drinking buddies, but 
relationships with longevity that survive the myriad ups and downs in our lives 
are much harder to come by. Facing the world with a degree of sobriety, and 
yourself without the distancing lens of an eternal hangover, are hard 
challenges to rise to. The party might have the potential to last forever but 
none of us will, and you want to find a better use of your time, not be left 
hanging on by your fingertips to the pursuit of oblivion and scouring the floor 
in search of potential companions for a night cap.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 