
Marianne Ihlen’s house was high above the town of Hydra, next to one of the 
tiny roads that wind up from the port where, back in 1973, the steam ferries 
ended their journey from Piraeus.

The island had defied the tide of mass tourism, and the foreigners living 
there were mostly part of its colony of artists, often heavily influenced by 
the fading counterculture of the 1960s. It was spring, and the sun burned with 
an intensity I had never experienced before. For the first time in my life, at 
the age of 19, I had been travelling abroad – to Israel with my friend Simon, 
to work in the lemon groves and cowsheds on a kibbutz alongside Dutch dropouts 
and American veterans of the anti-Vietnam war protests.

Our homeward journey took us first to Matala in Crete, where we ate in the 
Mermaid Café made famous by Joni Mitchell’s song “Carey”. Then we took the 
ferry to Hydra, to see a venerable friend and grand former army surgeon who had 
sought hasty exile from scandal in England.

So it was that we made our way for lunch to the villa of Marianne, fabled 
subject of Leonard Cohen’s poem, one of the most beautiful love songs of the 
1960s, whose lyrics we had learned by heart as schoolboys in Bristol. The two 
had started their relationship on the island in 1960 and it had burned fitfully 
for the next decade, but the passion Cohen described in his song endured, 
revealed in thehaunting letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/07/so-long-marianne-leonard-cohen-writes-to-muse-just-before-her-death>
 he wrote to Marianne last month as she lay dying: “Well Marianne, it’s come to 
this time when we are really so old and our bodies are falling apart and I 
think I will follow you very soon. Know that I am so close behind you that if 
you stretch out your hand, I think you can reach mine… Goodbye old friend.”

Back on that roasting May morning on Hydra, Marianne served lunch on the patio 
overlooking the harbour, local cheese and bread with rocket and spinach picked 
on the hill nearby – and lots of retsina. I’m sure I was overwhelmed by the 
occasion, and remember only that Marianne was keen that we forge some sort of 
friendship with her son Axel, a bored teenager in need of company.

Afterwards we sat among the cushions scattered over the stone floor while she 
gamely tried to explain theI Ching, a text compiling centuries of Chinese 
wisdom, fashionable in the 1960s. When she failed, us three boys were 
dispatched on a fishing trip, during which Axel contrived to fall out of the 
boat.

The next day Simon and I resumed our journey home, a reluctant end to that 
brilliant spring. Within weeks of our return the world darkened. War broke out 
in Israel, and economic shockwaves spread across Europe. The three-day week 
brought gloom and bitterness to Britain. The optimism and thrill of the 1960s 
evaporated. The glittering view across the Aegean from Marianne’s hilltop 
cottage seemed a world away.
 