
In 1994, I was invited to Christmas dinner at Ozzy Osbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ozzyosbourne>’s house. Rock’s enduring wild 
man was emerging from self-imposed retirement and his return to action had been 
marked by the launch of his official website. Ozzy’s wife and manager, Sharon, 
had arranged for the first 20 fans to visit it to meet their hero at the 
couple’s rambling estate in Berkshire.

The formidable Sharon hired a fleet of caterers to serve turkey and trimmings 
in a candlelit dining room adorned with a towering Christmas tree. I was 
dispatched byKerrang! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/aug/04/kerrang-radio-week-listening-to>
 magazine to document the festive tidings and arrived to find Ozzy in a 
mutinous mood. Within minutes he had convinced himself I was a waiter and 
loudly demanded that I be put to work. “Ignore him,” Sharon soothed, adding: 
“He’s a daft old sod.”

A series of comic episodes ensued as soon as the over-enthusiastic American 
visitors pitched up. Gaggles of them roamed the house in search of souvenirs, 
with Ozzy stomping after them. “Sharon!” the Brummie boomed from a far-flung 
wing, “Someone’s nicked the bog roll.”

After dinner, I joined Ozzy in the library for our interview. Skittish at the 
best of times, he set off at once on a rambling and wholly libellous discourse 
meant to “out” a score of his fellow rock stars as gay. I asked him instead 
what he did for a hobby. His eyes widened and he leapt up. “I’ve a fan who is a 
colonel in the US Marines,” he enthused, throwing open a cupboard, “and he gave 
me these.” He showed me two pairs of infra-red, night-vision goggles.

And so it came to pass that on a frigid December’s night, Ozzy and I embarked 
upon a stroll around the woodland encircling his home. In the inky blackness we 
viewed each other in a luminous green glow. Rain had turned the ground into a 
thick, viscous bog and I suggested we might incur Sharon’s wrath by trailing 
mud across her carpets.

“Bollocks to that,” Ozzy trumpeted. He had a mission in mind. He meant for us 
to seek out his herd of fallow deer, which remained entirely elusive for the 
hour that we fumbled about. Finally, at 2am, as we stumbled around in a bog, 
Ozzy shrugged and concluded in a baleful voice: “Fuck ’em, let’s go home.” That 
was the real Ozzy: funny and bonkers.

When We Were Lions (£18.99, Aurum) by Paul Rees is out now. To order a copy 
for £15.57 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/when-we-were-lions.html>
 