
The dilemma My sister’s twins were conceived by IVF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> using donor sperm. Both are now 
teenagers and do not know that they were donor conceived, nor that their father 
is not their biological parent. My sister has told me many times since their 
birth that she and her husband intend never to disclose this to the children. I 
love my nieces unconditionally and respect my sister’s role as their mother, 
but I am increasingly distressed that they are being lied to – it’s putting a 
strain on my relationship with them and causing me endless frustration with 
her. One of the children, on finding out a friend was donor conceived, asked 
her mother if she and her sister had been, too. She was told no. So this goes 
beyond secret keeping and has become outright dishonesty. For now I am 
distancing myself from my sister and her children, but this is not a long-term 
solution because I love them all dearly.

Mariella replies So how about you back off? That may sound harsh, but I’m 
perplexed by your determination to meddle. Just because you two share 
parentage, what makes her offspring your business? If the children were in any 
danger I’d understand, but that’s not the case. Your sister and her husband are 
at liberty to share with their children, or not, whatever information about 
conception they feel fit. Whether you agree or not is of absolutely no 
consequence. It’s to their credit that they’ve indulged your opining to date 
and not themselves been the ones seeking “distance”.

Have you considered how your brother-in-law must feel about your one-woman 
mission to coerce him into revealing all? He is probably still a little bit 
insecure about his inability to create potent sperm – and no doubt devoted to 
his “non-biological” children. Or is the only valid opinion on this matter your 
own?

Is the only valid opinion on this your own? I’m bemused by why it’s animating 
your emotions

It’s not that I disagree about disclosure – there’s no question that the fewer 
secrets we keep from each other the fewer nasty surprises lie in ambush for us 
along life’s path. But that doesn’t give genetically connected bystanders an 
inalienable right to screech out their version of morality and expect those in 
earshot to comply. Last week I replied to a woman whose choice not to 
communicate with her abusive mother was pricking her conscience. I said then 
that I don’t believe that simply sharing DNA gives you open and intimate access 
to the lives of others.

Being offered a place inside any family circle is something to be earned, not 
the result of destiny. I’m bemused by our conviction that the chromosomes that 
create us offer a potentially richer relationship than with those adults who 
take the time and trouble to raise us. It used to be just monarchs and 
aristocrats who worried about where they came from, because such connections 
were their lifeline. We have no such vested interest in these egalitarian times 
so is it symptomatic of the shallow world we live in that we’re all so 
desperate to find deeper roots?

I’m also bemused by why it’s animating your emotions to the extent it is. If 
you love your nieces and they are well cared for, why would you want to lob a 
grenade through their bedroom door? There’s no question that if they do find 
out, because of the importance placed on such matters, they will be 
traumatised, so what’s the urgency?

I was once asked if I would be interested in appearing on Who Do You Think You 
Are? and was thrilled to have the task of trawling through my past for 
glamorous or sadistic ancestors taken off my hands. What would I discover and 
how would it affect my life’s path, I wondered with excitement? Then they got 
back to me and said there wasn’t really much of a story on either side, apart 
from a serial fraudster back in the 19th century. By way of thanks for the 
information I’d provided they gave me a red folder tracing back my bloodlines 
and waved me goodbye. And do you know, I’ve not looked in it once? What earlier 
felt desperately important now seems like a retirement activity at most. 
Instead, I’ve come to the conclusion that the most important “family” we have 
are the people we create, are descended from or who nurture and care for us 
during life.

It doesn’t matter if your ancestor was Horatio Nelson if you’re depressed and 
in need of a hug now! So whether your brother-in-law is biologically connected 
to his girls or simply the man they know as their father who cares for them 
every day of their lives is simply a detail, rather than of urgent relevance. 
Obviously, if you and your sister are close you’re entitled to express your 
opinion, but once you’ve elaborated on what you believe to be the right course 
of action, it’s entirely her choice to make. Perhaps you’d do better to turn 
your forensic gaze inward and work out why something that may yet be a defining 
issue in that family’s future should be of such concern to you right now.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 