
The dilemma This evil referendum has driven a wedge between me and my partner. 
We’re in midlife and have no children. My parents were immigrants – my mother 
Scottish, my father a British Indian soldier who came to the UK after the war. 
I was brought up to be open and accepting of other cultures. My partner has a 
close-knit, rather insular family and has limited contact with anyone outside 
the UK. He’s not a political person: he veers towards conservatism, whereas I 
have been a trade union rep for many years and active campaigner. He voted to 
leave and the period since the results has been among the lowest in my life. I 
told him that if it weren’t for immigrants I wouldn’t be here at all. I have 
never felt so isolated – having a partner who feels this way makes me despair 
even more. Any attempt to discuss the issue ends in petty squabbling. I feel he 
is diminishing me, but voicing this will cause a deeper rift. I know you can’t 
solve the catastrophic situation we find ourselves in, but please give me 
advice on where to go from here.

Mariella replies I wish. Watching the interparty squabbles and defections of 
those who championed our exit while in real life the pound slides ever further 
in value has introduced new lows into our political world. Yet, as your letter 
ably illustrates, the reverberations of that most divisive of referendums are 
being felt in homes and families up and down the country.


The chasms that have opened in the world of politics have opened in our 
communities, too, with Brexiteers and Bremainers still battling out the 
argument on either side of that dividing line. Equally shocking are the hate 
crimes being committed daily on our streets on anyone without a blood line to 
Boudicca.

I visited the former Yugoslavia just before the war in the 1990s and was then 
shocked when fighting broke out and the civilised, intelligent, cultured 
academics, writers and musicians I had met during that work trip became 
combatants against friends and neighbours in the terrible civil war. It was a 
salutary lesson in how easily we slip from civilisation to chaos when what we 
believe metamorphoses into how things must be.

Park the political debate for a moment and respect the rights of those you 
don’t agree with

Civil war is the inevitable outcome when enforcing our opinion becomes more 
important than discussion and compromise. So it is increasingly important for 
the many of us who voted to remain – although perhaps vindicated in our voting 
choice by the fast disappearing economy and the descent into racism and 
xenophobia we all feared – to speak up for the values of tolerance and mutual 
understanding. The people have made their choice and we have to live with it, 
unless seismic shifts in the political landscape lead to the only democratic 
way out, which would be a general election.

The multitude of reasons for which people voted to leave the EU are as 
irreconcilable as the divide between in and out. People who hated Cameron, 
racists, eco warriors, already settled immigrants defending their turf, anti 
bureaucrats, new age druids… it’s a big bag of snakes if ever I saw one. So 
what’s happening within families needs to be viewed in that context. The only 
act worth chastisement would be not to have voted at all or to have voted 
dishonestly. Otherwise, exercising your democratic right and making your choice 
has to be seen as righteous action no matter what side of the Euro fence you 
are now perched on.

Now, let’s talk about you and your partner. Your letter suggests the 
referendum wasn’t the beginning of your problems. I’m wondering what state your 
relationship was in way before Brexit reared its Medusa-like head.Relationships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/relationships> can survive a 
political divide: just look at the Speaker of the House (of Commons) John 
Bercow and his wife, whose differing politics seem only to have increased 
resilience in other potentially fractious areas. But it sounds here as though 
the very foundations of your union are under threat and that there’s little 
love lost.

I suggest you park the political debate for a moment and respect the rights of 
those you don’t agree with to choose where their X goes. Your partner has voted 
as he sees fit and he’s not alone in having managed to do so without looking 
too closely at his own circumstances. You need to move on from that debate, 
already a slice of history, and look to your present and future. Open the 
discussion out into a general “What are we doing together?” debate and “How can 
we improve it?” As a person who voted for Remain you are clearly a believer in 
sorting out problems from within. Let go of the rhetoric and try to find 
similarities rather than differences. It’s the only way to judge whether your 
future is together or apart.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 