
The dilemma My partner has been divorced for four years and his two 
middle-aged daughters are causing problems in our relationship. For example, 
the younger daughter wanted only her parents and her partner at her birthday 
meal at a restaurant, so my partner went behind my back and lied and said it 
was just him at the meal. I caught him out as his daughter put a picture on 
Facebook of his ex. He went because he did not want to upset his daughter, but 
he lied to me as he did not want to upset me. He didn’t take me as he did not 
want to upset his ex. His daughter is 37 years old! How much longer can I be 
expected to put up with this?

Mariella replies All pretty frustrating I’m sure. Splitting up is never easy, 
and for many, prolonging the complications becomes a way of life. There’s 
plenty that could be deemed unfair here, but separating insult from injustice 
would be a good start. It’s unfortunate that in advanced adulthood these 
siblings are still intent on playing at happy families, and insulting you by 
failing to include you in their wider family circle. Either they have not come 
to terms with their parents’ separation or they are trying to make their 
feelings known and dole out punishment to those they see as responsible. 
Banning your father’s girlfriend from your birthday celebration isn’t a mature 
choice. It is, however, totally allowable!

I know you won’t thank me for pointing it out, but you are both at liberty to 
select who you invite to celebratory occasions. It may not make for comfortable 
coexistence, but the company you choose to keep is an individual choice. The 
onus is on your partner to ensure that you are not left out, or that if you 
are, you two can have an adult conversation about it. He’s certainly failed you 
on that front, but would it have helped if you’d discussed it? Or are you 
hellbent on forcing yourself into that particular family circle no matter what?

Your partner lying is inexcusable but I would guess that telling you the truth 
would have caused an argument

Each of you will be playing a part in prolonging this dysfunction, so 
emotional maturity and a willingness to compromise need to be an expectation on 
all sides. Foisting yourself on any such event in order to prove something is 
pretty pointless. Breaking the impasse, however, is something you can work on, 
by nurturing relationships with his daughters that are not based on expectation 
but a degree of friendship and shared interests. That can’t be solely up to you 
– it’s also incumbent on your partner to position your role in his life as 
permanent and therefore non-negotiable when it comes to extended family 
gatherings. Again that’s not something you can demand, but must encourage by 
your actions.

As long as his daughters judge there to be residual acrimony between the 
adults in their lives they will continue to exploit those divides for their 
gain – that’s just human nature. The area where you can justifiably make 
demands is when it comes to honesty from your partner. He needs to set the tone 
and clear the path forward. The failure to be open and truthful falls firmly on 
his shoulders and while I can see why he might be reluctant to confront the 
issue, it doesn’t condone his behaviour. Whether you will react badly or not, 
whether he is a coward, whether there are endless unresolved difficulties, the 
point you make that’s inarguable is that trust and honesty are essential in any 
partnership. Whatever his reasoning, lying to you in order to save his own 
skin, or to avoid ruffling feathers among others, is inexcusable.

It is ridiculous that a group of adults are striving so hard to continue the 
myth of the nuclear family. However, you too are no doubt also complicit and 
I’m guessing that telling you the truth would have caused an argument. How 
about rising above their petty divisiveness by making your own plans without 
comment; choosing to do something a lot more fun than making polite 
conversation at a table full of people with grudges against each other? That 
would certainly be my way of coping in the short term. Whether it’s family or 
old friends, colleagues or blood relations, the best way to respond to 
exclusion is to embrace it as an opportunity rather than a slight.

I’ve no idea the circumstances that led to their divorce but it’s not hard to 
see that every one of you comes to the table with an agenda. If yours was 
instead a clean slate you’d stand a likelier chance of welcome into the inner 
circle, though do make sure that’s where you really want to be. I can think of 
far more fun ways to spend an evening, and taking up your “rightful” place may 
turn out to be a permanently uncomfortable seat.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 