
The dilemma I suspect this may be an unusual question, but it’s something 
that’s causing me genuine distress. My wife is addicted to reading advice 
columns. She spends entire evenings on her laptop digging through years’ worth 
of columns on a host of different websites. Whenever she’s been doing this she 
becomes incredibly suspicious of me, accusing me of behaviour that indicates 
I’m having an affair. This can include using my phone at night (I read ebooks 
to get to sleep) or dressing in a manner she considers too showy when going out 
of the house. I’ve never had an affair, or attempted to, or even wanted to, and 
although I’ve told her that the constant accusations are extremely hurtful to 
me, nothing I can say seems to convince her that I have no interest in cheating.

Mariella replies Imagine what it’s like round my place. Exposure to the dark 
corners of other people’s lives, week in week out, for the past 15 years has 
certainly been no picnic in the park. The briefest of encounters encourages 
further scrutiny; the apparently unblemished exteriors of my fellow humans just 
incitement to deeper incursions where seams of unmined misery lie waiting to be 
exposed.

But let’s not dwell too long in the shadow world that an undisciplined 
imagination can provoke. The reality is that the more you learn about other 
people’s concerns the more diminished your own tend to become. With the 
privileged access of a mailbag like mine it’s much more common to be 
overwhelmed by the enormity of what others are going through. You, on the other 
hand, presume that with such significant exposure the potential for paranoia 
about your own personal life increases.

If your wife were truly addicted to agony columns she wouldn’t have the time 
to waste worrying about what you were up to. Instead of being the focus of her 
attention you’d be a nuisance distraction, diverting her away from the 
eye-popping, enticing, vicarious experience of other people’s trauma.

I can happily idle away a day at my computer unravelling a total stranger’s 
sadness

My husband has in the past observed that he could be lying on the kitchen 
floor, stabbing himself with a kitchen knife and I’d simply step over him and 
ask him not to make a mess, yet I can happily idle away a day at my computer 
trying to unravel the complexities of a total stranger’s sadness.

I’d be very surprised to discover I’m in a minority in this. I suspect you are 
mistaken in believing that your wife’s jealously over your activities is driven 
by her consumption of agony columns. The notion that reading about other 
people’s affairs makes you think your own partner is having one is to misjudge 
what intimacy with our species’ private lives provokes.

On the emotional scale I find A and B rarely lead to C. You’ve got your spouse 
marked down as an agony addict, but I see her as more of a special interest 
customer, browsing the web in a search for confirmation of her already- 
existing paranoias. I wouldn’t be surprised if a review of her search history 
(which I’m not recommending) revealed a mono-topic focus on infidelity. If your 
wife were consuming a balanced diet of human dysfunction she’d soon recognise 
her suspicions were misplaced, or far lower in relevance than she currently 
imagines. I’m worried that she’s making adultery her specialist subject – and 
that’s often because fixated individuals have a heightened interest in the 
topic themselves.

Hell hath no fury like a person tempted by bad behaviour but afraid to act on 
it. Instead of cutting down her dilemma diet perhaps you should be looking to 
expand it. What you’d both find is that far more common than letters about 
infidelity are those describing the impossibility of living with someone who is 
overly jealous or controlling. An expansion of her reading might illuminate her 
to the danger of giving that “green-eyed monster” too much tenancy in your 
relationship.

Judging by your description of the current situation, your wife has failed to 
learn from her agony imbibing and instead is using it to prop up her 
ill-founded suspicions. Encouraging her to embrace a broader spectrum of 
real-life drama might bring you closer together and open her eyes to the 
virtues of your relationship rather than focusing on the spots where she 
suspects peril may lie.

Finally, with the festive season upon us, and theatre visits at their most 
popular, why don’t you seek out a production ofOthello, or just slip one of 
those pocket-sized publications into her Christmas stocking? As with so many of 
our vices, Shakespeare skewered long ago the danger and damage created by 
unfettered jealous impulses. Though on that note are you absolutely sure it’s 
advice columns she’s perusing when she spends all that time online? Just asking…

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>

 