
If you are to cause a Cup shock then favourable alignment of the stars is a 
clear prerequisite. It is true that Tottenham, lucid and authoritative 
throughout against opponents who are bottom of League One, deserved this 
victory, but an equally fair observation would be that the cosmos demurred at 
Colchester’s hour of need.

Their centre-backs, Alex Wynter and Tom Eastman, were substituted within the 
first 20 minutes after an early collision. Tottenham made full use of the 
resulting disarray and might have scored many more than their eventual four, 
but the home side’s cruel luck made the application shown in their performance, 
particularly a spirited second half, a minor achievement of its own.

Little over a minute had passed when the Colchester defenders, challenging for 
a high ball with Harry Kane, clashed heads and prompted a four-minute delay. 
Wynter’s condition immediately looked the more serious. He appeared to suffer a 
mild seizure on the pitch and while Eastman disappeared down the tunnel for 
stitches, Wynter eventually departed on a stretcher. Eastman returned briefly, 
swathed in bandages, before declaring himself unable to continue. Wynter was 
taken to hospital.Colchester <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> 
later provided an update on Wynter on the club’s website: “Whilst still a 
little groggy, his CT scan came back normal and Alex will be kept in hospital 
until midnight to monitor his recovery.”

In the meantime Tottenham set about a barrage of the home goal that was only 
going to end one way well before Nacer Chadli scored the first of his two goals 
before the half-hour.

Moussa Dembélé to have Tottenham medical before £6m move from Fulham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/moussa-dembele-tottenham-6m-transfer-fulham-loan-end-of-season>
“How many times has that happened?” asked the Colchester manager, Kevin Keen. 
“You lose one like that, you make a substitution and play with 10 men, then you 
lose another one. You’re a League One team against a Premier League team and 
it’s a tough ask. I’ve got nothing but pride in my players and how they 
represented the club.”

Only the Colchester goalkeeper, Jake Kean, and a variety of wayward efforts 
had prevented Tottenham from being out of sight by the time Chadli, found just 
outside the area by Erik Lamela, whipped an excellent shot into the far corner.

Kean saved brilliantly again from Kane, who wore the captain’s armband, and by 
half-time the only surprise was that this remained a contest in any form.

A wickedly deflected shot from Eric Dier, deployed at centre-back here, in the 
64th minute simultaneously doubled the lead and epitomised Colchester’s luck. 
After that Chadli, who had earlier struck the bar from six yards when a second 
goal seemed inevitable, resumed centre stage, first heading in at the near post 
from Kieran Trippier’s delivery and then providing the left-sided cross for Tom 
Carroll to volley past Kean eight minutes from time.

“I’m very pleased with him,” said Mauricio Pochettino of Chadli, who scored 
for the third consecutive game and has found form after recovering from ankle 
ligament damage. “After his injury it was difficult to find his level but this 
was the kind of performance from before. Yes, he hit the crossbar, but I’m very 
pleased and maybe he was keeping some goals for the next game.”

Pochettino accepted that “a lot of things happened” in the game’s first 
quarter and sent his wishes for a speedy recovery to Wynter, whose team-mates 
made a fight of things after half-time.

If Chris Porter had used head rather than outstretched leg to attack a Darren 
Ambrose cross in the 55th minute then things could have been different. Had 
Marvin Sordell not clipped the post when sent clear by a one-two with Gavin 
Massey then Tottenham would have been clinging on to a 2-1 lead in the final 15 
minutes.

The goal they deserved came after Chadli’s second had put the issue to bed, 
Ben Davies standing little chance of getting out of the way after Massey had 
rapped the same upright.

Colchester had lost 11 of their previous 13 league games but they showed 
enough wit here to keep their visitors honest.

Tottenham are thought to be seeking some more attacking ingenuity of their 
own. Pochettino, when pressed about a move for the Fulham striker Moussa 
Dembélé afterwards, refused to talk about specific players but admitted that an 
addition was not out of the question.

“Maybe it will happen but I repeat that it’s important to add the right 
profile to the squad,” he said. “It’s not buying for buying’s sake. Maybe we 
will have a bit of luck in the next few days.”
 