
My life is all work, no relaxation. I sleep when I can; I eat if it’s there. 
But I love it. I am cooking, I’m baking, I’m writing. And I have the luxury of 
being able to go home to a beautiful family. If I’m stressed and tired, my kids 
have a way of making everything light-hearted and fun.

It was weird watching this year’s Bake Off. When you see other people in the 
tent, it feels like they’re imposters: why are they in our tent? It’s as if 
they’ve broken into your house and you’re watching them on CCTV. You also know 
how stressed they feel, so it’s really hard to watch.

I was a distracted and quiet child. As I grew up, I became quite rebellious 
and talkative. My dad would say “mouthy”. He’d say: “Why do you turn everything 
into a debate?” Now when I complain about my daughter being similar to me, Dad 
just laughs in my face: “This is what you call karma.”

When you write, you always take your own experiences and weave them in. My 
novel is about a family of Bangladeshi origin living in a quiet English 
village. The four sisters in the novel are not related to my own sisters, but 
there are certain characteristics I’ll take from my family and think, “Oh, 
that’ll make for a nice detail.”

The closest I’ve come to death was having my first child. I was in labour for 
72 hours. His heart rate dropped, he wasn’t going to come out. Just as they 
were wheeling me away for an emergency C-section, he decided to fly right out, 
leaving lasting damage.

Being in a relationship isn’t 50-50. The balance shifts. There was a time when 
I was at home doing everything and he went out to work. Now that’s changed and 
my husband’s doing a lot more at home.

I’m less of a control freak since Bake Off. Although when my husband has been 
cooking for a while, I have to step in. Fish fingers four days in a row is just 
not acceptable.

I’ll never forget the feeling of magic the first time I saw a cake being made. 
It was my home economics class in the first year of high school. At home, my 
mum never cooked in the oven – she used it to store frying pans. So when I saw 
the teacher putting this mixture in the cupboard, I thought she’d lost it. Then 
out comes this cake. I thought she was a sorceress.

I’m scared of crows. When I was a kid, my brother caught a crow in the garden 
and put it in my very, very small bedroom. I came back from school and ran into 
my room to get changed, and this crow comes flying at me. I didn’t like them at 
all after that.

There’s a rule in my house: if the cake stand is empty, it needs to be filled. 
That hasn’t changed sinceBake Off. In fact, I have to bake more than ever. If 
someone comes to my house and there’s no cake, they question how I won.

Secret Lives of the Amir Sisters, Nadiya Hussain’s first novel, is published 
by Harlequin on 17 January at £12.99. To order a copy for £10.65, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-lives-of-the-amir-sisters.html>
 