
Gonzalo Higuaín scored his 30th league goal of the season but was later sent 
off and had to be restrained by his team-mates as Napoli lost 3-1 atUdinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> on Sunday, severely denting 
their Serie A title hopes.

The Argentinian appeared to push the referee in the chest after being shown 
his second yellow card in the 75th minute and, overcome with rage, lashed out 
at team-mates andNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> officials 
as they ushered him off the field.

The midfielder Bruno Fernandes converted one penalty, missed another and 
scored with an overhead kick for Udinese, while Napoli dropped six points 
behind the leaders, Juventus,who beat Empoli 1-0 on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/juventus-empoli-serie-a-match-report>
, with seven matches to play.

Higuaín, whose second yellow card was given for what appeared to be an 
innocuous challenge on Felipe, may now face a lengthy ban which could prove 
fatal to Napoli’s hopes of a first title since 1990.

Cesare Maldini, former Milan captain and Italy manager, dies aged 84
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/03/cesare-maldini-ac-milan-captain-dies-italy-manager>
Napoli also had their coach, Maurizio Sarri, sent off for dissent in the first 
half and he watched the game from the stands, quietly smoking. An angry Sarri 
complained about the referee, the international calendar, the kick-off time and 
theSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> fixture list 
after Sunday’s 3-1 defeat by Udinese severely dented his team’s title hopes.

The midday kickoff topped his list of grievances as second-placed Napoli 
dropped six points behind the leaders Juventus with only seven games to play. 
“We didn’t move the ball around the way we usually do and that has happened on 
the other occasions we have played at this time (12.30pm local time),” Sarri 
said. “It’s a difficult and unnatural time of the day.”

He was also angry that Napoli invariably had to play their games after 
Juventus, who have won 20 of their last 21 league matches, which he said meant 
that they were always trying to catch up. “Ever since we’ve been second, we’ve 
been playing after Juventus, this is the sixth time out of six, and the anger 
and frustration came out,” he said. “It is strange that the team that is second 
in the league has to play at this time. I don’t like this spread out fixture 
list and I’ve always said so.”

He then took aim at the international calendar, where South American and 
African players play for their countries in midweek and immediately face long 
flights back to Europe before playing at the weekend. “We have players who 
haven’t had a single training session after spending hours in the air,” he 
said. “These are enormous difficulties and we are suffering more than the other 
teams.”

Sarri then turned his attention to the referee Massimiliano Irrati, who 
awarded Udinese two first-half penalties, one of which was converted and one of 
which was missed. “I just told Irrati that he was refereeing really badly, but 
you can’t even say that,” Sarri said of his sending-off. “I didn’t like the way 
the referee judged fouls and cards at all. Higuaín told me he accidentally trod 
on his opponent and therefore felt he was the victim of an injustice.”

Udinese went ahead after 14 minutes when Fernandes converted a penalty with a 
shot which went under Gabriel’s arms as the Napoli goalkeeper dived to his 
right.

Higuaín equalised 10 minutes later with a piledriver of a shot but Udinese 
were given another penalty almost immediately, this time after Faouzi Ghoulam 
tripped Silvan Widmer. Fernandes again sent the ball to Gabriel’s right but 
this time the goalkeeper, standing in for the injured Pepe Reina, saved the 
shot.

Gabriel turned villain, however, in first-half half stoppage time when he lost 
control of the ball and chased Duván Zapata out of the area. The Colombian 
crossed into the centre and Fernandes turned the ball into an unguarded net 
with a bicycle kick.

Cyril Théréau volleyed the third just before the hour as the Napoli defence 
was caught napping.
 