
Carl Edwards, who in November came agonizingly close to winning his first 
Nascar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nascar> premier series title before a 
late-race crash in the season finale, is expected to announce Wednesday that he 
will retire immediately, according to multiple sources.

Fox Sports’ website was first to report the news of the 37-year-old driver’s 
shock decision.

'I don't think it can recover': what's behind Nascar's nosedive?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/16/nascar-decline-struggles-auto-racing>
Joe Gibbs Racing has called for a news conference on Wednesday in which 
Edwards is expected to announce he will not drive the No19 Toyota next season 
after 13 years in Nascar’s top circuit.

Daniel Suárez is expected to replace Edwards in the Cup Series. The Mexico 
native, who became the Nascar’s first foreign-born driver to win a national 
series title when he captured the secondary Xfinity title in November, will 
join Kyle Larson as the only two drivers from the organization’s diversity 
program to race in the top flight.

“This is comparable to Barry Sanders’ retirement back in 1999, shocking and 
with loads of ability and time left in a very successful career,” said Texas 
Motor Speedway President Eddie Gossage.

“I talked to Carl about a month ago and he didn’t give any indication that he 
was considering this,” Gossage added. “It is a shock that just doesn’t seem 
real.”

It was not immediately clear on Tuesday whether Edwards’ retirement is 
permanent or whether he would be taking a one-year break from competition. 
Spokespeople for both Fox Sports and NBC Sports told USA Today on Tuesday 
afternoon that Edwards would not be joining either network as a commentator.

Edwards was leading all championship contenders with 10 laps remaining at 
Homestead-Miami Speedway in November when a caution set up a restart that 
bunched the field. Edwards tried to block Joey Logano’s attempt to take the 
lead, and it caused a crash that ended Edwards’ title bid. The wreck left him 
with a fourth-place finish on the year.

Edwards twice finished second in the overall standings: first in 2008, when he 
won nine races but a late crash at Talladega Superspeedway handed the title to 
Jimmie Johnson, then in 2011, when he finished in a tie with Tony Stewart but 
lost a tie-breaker on race victories for the season.

The famously private Edwards, who first ascended to the Cup Series when he 
replaced Jeff Burton in the No99 Roush Fenway Racing Ford in 2004, spent 13 
years in Nascar’s top flight and recorded 28 race victories, 22 poles and 124 
top-five finishes in 445 career starts.
 