
The rich diversity of the world around us, from the smallest insect to the 
music of the stars, is from the perspective of the human race, a gift. For the 
purposes of this article, I don’t think it matters whether you think creation 
(even Darwin’s theory of evolution itself) must, in some way unfathomable to 
the human mind, issue from one who can only therefore be described as god or, 
if you happen to think that we are simply the recipients of a stupefying and 
lucky cosmic accident. In either case, the thing we can all agree on this
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, is that the 
wonder of the world around us is something we have done nothing to earn or 
deserve. It predates us; it is the ultimate free gift.

Even now, in the darkest midwinter, there is surprise and delight to be 
savoured in an ordinary English garden. With all the bursting colour and 
urgency of summer gone, the clean lines of winter please the eye and rest the 
soul. Trees silhouetted against inky skies. Our little avian friends scratching 
out their living, making the most of the untidy parts of our gardens. The earth 
is cold and hard, but we know it is only asleep and soon life will course back 
into our gardens and fields. Spring will come and life will cover our hills and 
valleys once more, so that next year there will be a harvest of good meat and 
wholesome bread. But what if one year the earth went to sleep, never to wake up 
again? How then would we feel in the midst of a bleak midwinter?

If the created order (or the luckiest cosmic accident imaginable, as you will) 
is a free gift, should we not respond to it in a way that becomes someone who 
has just been given something of, literally, cosmic value? Maybe because we 
have done nothing to earn it, we take it for granted. The joy brought to our 
hearts by the other creatures we share this earth with is familiar, I hope, to 
every reader. Should we take care to do what we can to preserve their various 
races and tribes? Is it acceptable that several species of bumblebee have 
become extinct in this country? Do we mind if our industrial use of herbicides 
and pesticides halve, quarter and then halve again, like a giant scimitar, our 
insect populations? Are we not quaking when we look to our ancient woodland 
with the ash and now the oak in our anxious thoughts, and only a dim memory of 
the elm?

I say “our” industrial use of herbicides and pesticides, because we can’t 
simply blame farmers. We eat the food they make. We must stand shoulder to 
shoulder with them, but with open eyes. We must find a way to walk into a 
future together in which they can feed us and provide for their families, while 
preserving the diversity of life.

Can we do this? Of course we can. We have travelled to the moon, created 
computers that are microscopic and plumed the very depths of existence through 
quantum physics. Like the talented genius in a family, our race can do almost 
anything it pleases, from wreaking unimaginable destruction to preserving for 
whatever eternity may mean the beauty we find around us. This Christmas I am 
trying to hold in my mind’s eye the inestimable value of the gift I find just 
outside my front door. Perhaps if I do this each day next year, in some small 
way, the world will start to change.

 * Charlie Hart is a gardener and garden writer. He worked on the Modern 
Slavery Garden at the Chelsea flower show 2016 and tweets as@peverelsgardens 
<https://twitter.com/peverelsgardens>.
 