
When your family get together at Christmas, do you find yourself feeling as 
though you are re-experiencing childhood dramas? Do you feel you’re taking on a 
role, reverting toChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>
 past? You may even feel as though you are reading from an invisible script and 
repeating interactions with family members that leave you feeling frustrated 
and angry.

We may consider ourselves to be autonomous adults who have carved out our own 
independent lives. But when the holidays loom, many find themselves dreading 
predictably damaging and repetitious scenarios withfamily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family>. These unnerving interactions 
often include put-downs,competitiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/22/killer-comebacks-to-win-every-christmas-family-argument-from-brexit-to-bowie>
, control freakery and passive aggression.

Lots of us have a family member whom we find particularly goading and who 
pushes all the right buttons to zone right in on our most vulnerable responses. 
Although we promise ourselves (and others) that this year we will be different 
and we will not become entangled in an argument we cannot win, we still find 
ourselves drawn into the same old scenarios with the usual suspects, and 
responding to them in familiar, ineffective ways.

Christmas can be a time when we find ourselves particularly locked in a role 
that we thought we had discarded long ago. In my case, I grew up in a family in 
which “emotional perfectionism” – being upbeat and positive – was obligatory 
and served as an effective camouflage to distract from our father’s severe 
winter depressions.

Killer comebacks to win every Christmas family argument – from Brexit to Bowie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/22/killer-comebacks-to-win-every-christmas-family-argument-from-brexit-to-bowie>
If this sounds familiar, sit down and write out an example of a scenario that 
you experienced last year, noting what the situation was, what your family 
member said and how you responded. Then note how this made you feel. You may 
find this exercise surprisingly easy because the same scenarios tend to have 
been repeated since childhood. That is because we know our script, and that of 
our relatives, all too well.

How can we change these scripts, without upsetting others? Re-writing can be 
extremely helpful, and can turn a challenging get-together into a much more 
enjoyable one. Yet we often hold ourselves back because we feel that certain 
behaviour is expected of us by others. We don’t want to rock the boat at a big 
family occasion. But often our worries about this are exaggerated, and you may 
find that, by making a few changes in your personal script, you can experience 
a greater sense of control over these upsetting encounters. The following tips 
might help:

Be prepared

If your family member always pushes your buttons about your health, your life 
choices or your children, consider alternative ways of responding, and mentally 
rehearse your new lines of response before your relative arrives.

Enlist support

Another person will probably have witnessed these scenarios many times, and 
the distress that they cause you. Discuss your concerns about the upcoming 
holiday, and see if they have ideas or solutions that might be helpful. They 
could even keep an eye out during the holidays to make sure you feel supported 
when you are trying out new ways of dealing with troublesome family.

Plan your escape

Remember that you don’t have to tolerate abuse or belittling comments from 
family members. Just because they’ve succeeded in making you feel bad for 
decades doesn’t mean this pattern has to continue forever. Try not to rise to 
their bait. Leave the room and get some fresh air if you are feeling trapped by 
them.

Feel your anxiety, then control it

Our adrenaline can build up when we are dreading these encounters and can 
often cause us to shake, or waver in our resolve to handle things differently. 
Start practising controlled breathing and mindfulness exercises before the 
guests arrive, and talk to yourself like a supportive coach. Thinking “I can 
handle this” is much more helpful than a constant cycle of worry and “Oh no, 
here we go again …”

Holidays are stressful enough without finding ourselves caught in the trap of 
replicating outdated family dynamics and negative interactions. A bit of 
preparation, self-calming, and alternative strategies are a way of rescuing 
yourself from tedious, but undermining, family roles.
 