
Neil Lennon is “pretty confident” Bolton’s players will receive their November 
wages soon, but admits he cannot provide any guarantees in their bleak 
financial situation.

The Sky Bet Championship side announced on Monday afternoon that their squad 
had not been paid this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/bolton-first-team-players-yet-to-receive-wages-for-november>
 “due to a short-term funding issue” in a statement which came hours before the 
1-1 draw with Brentford.

Wanderers have been put up for sale by long-time owner Eddie Davies, who is 
unwilling to bankroll the club further despite being prepared to wipe out £185m 
of loans owed to him as part of any potential takeover.

And while negotiations continue with parties interested in acquiring the team, 
Lennon’s players will attend a meeting with a PFA representative and advisor 
Trevor Birch on Tuesday to discover when they will be paid.

“I’m pretty confident that they will get their wages paid but I can’t 
guarantee that,” Lennon said.

“That’s what we said to the players - they just need to concentrate on the 
game. We are in an adverse situation and they are the strength of the club - as 
are the fans.

“They were united tonight, they gave everything. We could have won the game - 
it would have been a great story if we had won the game - but we look to 
Cardiff now and see if we can win that one.”

Bolton Wanderers players yet to receive wages for November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/bolton-first-team-players-yet-to-receive-wages-for-november>
Asked if he was optimistic the situation would be resolved on Tuesday, Lennon 
replied: “I don’t know, is the answer. You’re asking the wrong person, really.

“These are things that are out of your control as manager. We’ll know more 
tomorrow.

“But the players have done very well in difficult circumstances, and they may 
need to continue to do that, the longer the process goes on.”

Although the Northern Irishman’s players showed plenty of fight on the pitch 
against the Bees, there was a hint at tension in the camp when television 
cameras appeared to pick up substitute Gary Madine verbally insulting his 
manager after lashing a second-half shot way off target. Lennon played down the 
incident, though.

“I don’t know what he said,” he added.

“He’s a Geordie, I can’t understand him! It was probably reciprocated!”
 