
Neil Warnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/neil-warnock> would have 
been excused for feeling like a bloke who had found a penny and lost a pound on 
his return to management as Rotherham’s relegation predicament worsened.

Defenders Richard Wood and Joe Mattock were dismissed in a fractious final 
quarter-hour of a tenaciously fought draw with Birmingham that nevertheless, 
left them five points from safety. Not that the ebullientWarnock, shipped in as 
a modern-day Red Adair by the Rotherham chairman, Tony Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/rotherham-neil-warnock-new-manager>
 on the eve of this contest, was allowing negativity to pervade the air on a 
return to his roots.

“It’s great to be back in South Yorkshire,” said the 67-year-old. “I just said 
to the lads: ‘If you think that’s exciting, we’ve got 15 more of them.’ In this 
situation you have to get your players to give 100%, that’s what they gave, and 
I was quite proud of them.”

Victories for Bristol City and MK Dons have stiffened Warnock’s task but he 
said: “We just have to worry about ourselves and probably win games we are not 
expected to. If you had said you would get a point off Birmingham you would 
have probably taken it.”

What his new team lacked in quality they offset with enthusiasm, and although 
Nicky Eaden was named in the match programme as caretaker manager (chiefly due 
to print deadlines), thisRotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> certainly had the Warnock 
stamp. Indeed, he selected a team showing two changes after taking Friday’s 
training.

When unveiled, as a counter to those who might fear his methods are outmoded, 
he suggested he always left clubs better off than when he started. To use Leeds 
and QPR – his last two ports of call – as test cases might be unfair given the 
volatility of both over recent seasons and the response of the home crowd when 
he emerged from the tunnel oozed optimism.

Birmingham proved feisty first opponents. Gary Rowett’s team had experienced 
two defeats in their previous 11 matches. However, both of those and five of 
Birmingham’s nineChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> defeats before kick-off had 
come at the hands of Yorkshire opposition. Despite their energy and endeavour, 
though, only in brief patches did it appear likely Rotherham would make it a 
half-dozen.

When Chris Burke’s deft footwork won a corner on the half-hour, Kirk Broadfoot 
nodded Joe Newell’s delivery back across the six-yard box, agonizingly out of 
Paul Green’s reach. Then, when Danny Ward engineered space, his shot was 
charged down by Michael Morrison to a whelter of penalty appeals.

The opening period became something of a war of attrition, with Birmingham 
pinned back territorially early on. After the interval, it was a more open 
affair and it took a sublime tackle at the near post by the Birmingham debutant 
Ryan Shotton to snuff out Matt Derbyshire before Ward side-footed into Tomasz 
Kuszczak’s midriff. Soon afterwards, Ward profligately headed wide when 
unmarked.

At the other end, Birmingham’s best chance came when Jacques Maghoma was 
foiled in a one-on-one by Lee Camp’s combination of timing and agility. But 
they did not benefit from Rotherham’s reduction in manpower. Over-zealous 
handling of Clayton Donaldson resulted in the first of the two late dismissals 
when Wood toppled him, while in added time Mattock received a second booking 
for alleged timewasting.

Like his opposite number, Rowett was content with his lot despite loftier 
ambitions. “We are not going to be overly displeased with the point. You are 
starting to getting to the stage of the season now where the teams at the top 
end are feeling the pressure that little bit more. For us it’s all about points 
on the board and if you can’t win the game, make sure you don’t lose it and 
keep adding to your tally,” he said.

Rotherham appoint Neil Warnock manager until the end of the season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/rotherham-neil-warnock-new-manager> 