
Neil Warnock is excited. Perhaps at 67 years old, having thought he had 
retired a year or so ago, and after taking charge of his 15th club, he should 
be a little more jaded. But just from the sound of his voice, you can tell the 
newCardiff City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> manager is 
giddy. “I suppose if I lost that feeling I’d be in trouble,” Warnock says, 
before taking charge of his first game, against Bristol City on Friday evening. 
“Even when I was going to speak to Cardiff, when I was travelling down, I was 
excited. I don’t think my mate could shut me up.”

Cardiff City appoint Neil Warnock as new manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/cardiff-city-appoint-neil-warnock-new-manager>
That excitement does sometimes, shall we say, spill over. Warnock’s Wikipedia 
page has a section entitled ‘disputes’ that runs to 2,179 words, covering 
assorted disagreements with 17 players and other managers, plus a few clubs, 
referees and the actor Sean Bean. And it’s not comprehensive either, as it 
doesn’t cover a robust exchange of views with the Bristol City manager, Lee 
Johnson, last season, when Warnock was at Rotherham.

Before the two sides faced each other in April, Johnson said he wanted to 
“make sure we win the match, whether we do it through aggression, good football 
or intimidation”, something that displeased Warnock, to say the least. After 
the 1-1 draw, he called Johnson’s words “a disgrace” and that he “didn’t have 
to do a teamtalk”, before adding Johnson senior, the former City manager Gary, 
to the list of managers perhaps not coming round for a cup of tea. “Like 
father, like son,” he noted.

“You’re always going to have spats,” says Warnock now. “When I go to Bristol 
City I do get stick. I thought it was a little bit over the top prior to the 
game, but I think you’re going to get that sort of thing when you’re a manager. 
I haven’t spoken to him since, though. We’re not on each other’s Christmas card 
lists. He was linked with Aston Villa last week, wasn’t he? So he’s doing 
something right.”

Warnock lists City as his outside bet for promotion this year, praising their 
summer transfer business that saw JonathanKodjia sold to Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/22/jonathan-kodjia-ivory-coast-new-didier-drogba-aston-villa>
 for a fee that could rise to £15m, and Chelsea’s Tammy Abraham arrive on loan 
in his stead. Abraham has eight goals in 10 league starts, while Kodjia just 
has the one, so for the moment City are up on that deal, and that’s a big 
reason for them being in the top six. “We couldn’t have a tougher bloody game 
than Bristol City at home,” says Warnock. “They’re flying at the moment.”

Cardiff on the other hand are not so hot, second-bottom of the table with just 
eight points, having scored the same number of goals as Abraham has on his own. 
Warnock’s desire to get an eighth promotion, which would be a record for one 
manager and the main reason hedidn’t stay with Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/rotherham-part-company-neil-warnock>
 in the summer, is a distant hope at the moment. “I don’t think you’re going to 
be putting money on me this year,” he says. “I did speak to three or four clubs 
over the summer, but two went with foreign managers, one an English one and 
another hadn’t a clue what they were doing.”

One of those clubs was Nottingham Forest. “I was so disappointed not to get 
the Forest job,” Warnock says. “I had three or four players ready to come into 
that team, and if I’d have got them in I could’ve had a right go. But the Greek 
investors wanted a director of football and a foreign manager.” As that Greek 
investment is still ‘pending’ and the director of football, Pedro Pereira, has 
left the club, Warnock is probably feeling a little smug. “When I go to a club 
like Cardiff, I try to prove everyone else wrong that didn’t take me.”

Gordon Strachan to remain in charge of Scotland against England in November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/gordon-strachan-remain-scotland-against-england>
He’s certainly been busy. Since arriving a little over a week ago, Warnock has 
signed four free agents on short-term deals, including Kieran Richardson, 
Junior Hoilett and Sol Bamba, and that spark flickers in his voice again as he 
talks about working with the latter, a 31-year-old centre-back, to make him, 
well, a more ‘Neil Warnock’ player. “I first liked him at Leicester. Even at 
his age, he’s got to put certain things into his game, but he’s one of them 
I’ve always thought I could educate.”

The other is Marouane Chamakh, signed on a contract until January to “put him 
in the shop window” and at least try to find a few more goals. Warnock is fully 
aware that is a punt, though, saying of the newly-bald Moroccan last week: “I 
wanted to knowwhich Marouane was going to turn up. 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/i-want-know-marouane-were-12012210>
 There’s a couple of Marouanes and he has a bit of a reputation in certain 
areas. One or two people at the club mentioned to me about that and three or 
four things that he’s renowned for – and I added a couple to that, hence us 
taking him until January.”

Warnock describes Cardiff as a “blood and guts” club, of the type he enjoys. 
He felt at home so quickly that he made the chairman, Mehmet Dalman, very 
nervous by not seeing the rush to sign a contract, after the pair had shaken 
hands on a deal. “I said: ‘Listen Mehmet, I’ve shook your hand. I’m from 
Yorkshire. Don’t panic.’ I’ve shook the chairman’s hand a few times in the last 
couple of years and it’s cost me a couple of million, not getting it in 
writing.”

Cardiff’s players have already described how he has lightened the mood at the 
club and, according to Warnock, the fans have made him feel at home, too. 
“They’ve been absolutely fantastic. I’ve never had a response like this from 
the fans. I think there was a poll that said 95% wanted me, which is great for 
a manager to know you’re wanted.

“They’re almost like Yorkshire people transferred to Wales,” he continues, and 
you suspect that, fromNeil Warnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/neil-warnock>, there’s no higher 
compliment.
 