
Just in case anybody thought the Scottish Premier League season ended when 
Rangers eventually secured their second title in succession, thankfully it 
hadn't. The various Europa League qualifying slots are yet to be confirmed for 
next season – an affair that basically centres around how early in July a team 
begin their unlikely attempt to progress to the group phase – and, more 
significantly, relegation is still to be settled. For the latter, far more 
interesting and final chapter in this SPL season, see Rugby Park inKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> tomorrow lunchtime.

Falkirk, for the second season in a row, find themselves involved in a 
final-day shoot-out for survival. They must beat Kilmarnock, who lead them by 
two points, in Ayrshire or Steven Pressley's regular assertions thatFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> "will not be relegated" will 
come back to haunt their manager.

Kilmarnock have cause for hope and fear as they contemplate their objective: 
to pick up "just" a draw. In 1965, they became champions of Scotland for the 
only time with a final-day 2-0 win over Hearts, which secured the title on goal 
average. The class of 2010, though, will need no reminder that Falkirk 
collected the win they needed, 12 months ago in Inverness, in almost identical 
circumstances.

Jimmy Calderwood's brief tenure at Kilmarnock opened brightly, a win over 
Celtic included, but had nose-dived rapidly until the midweek win in Aberdeen. 
Calderwood retains aspirations of working in England and remains privately 
miffed no opportunities arose south of the border upon his leaving Aberdeen 
last summer: overseeing Kilmarnock's return to the second tier of Scottish 
football would hardly boost his CV. Calderwood is nearing the end of his 
four-month tenure; perhaps this piece of short-term thinking has contributed to 
the team's recently poor run.

Kilmarnock's off-field situation remains a fraught one. Saddled with debt that 
is edging towards £10m, they have no reasonable hope of trading out of such a 
position without meaningful investment.

A hotel built at Rugby Park with a view to returning the club to a period of 
regular profitability remains little more than a building that contributed 
heavily to that bank borrowing figure. If hardship remains, the sale of that 
complex appears the most legitimate way of clawing back some money.

Kilmarnock continue to have the support of bankers because they play in the 
SPL. Relegation, and the drastic drop in income that would come with it, would 
probably fall short of forcing the club out of business but it would prompt a 
drastic cost-cutting exercise upon a club that already operates at the bare 
bones off the field.

The alternative theory is that demotion could lift Kilmarnock once again. 
Their crowds remain worryingly low – fewer than 5,000 turned out for a crucial 
game with St Johnstone last week – and a winning First Division team could 
bring in a lost or new generation of supporters. Given their perilous financial 
state, that is not something Kilmarnock are prepared to anticipate. The town 
has been hit by unemployment recently and the removal of top-flight football 
would be another cutting blow to the local economy.

Not that Falkirk are listed among Scottish football's big spenders. Their most 
recent plan to raise cash surrounds the novel idea of selling on 15 years of 
the long-term lease they hold on one of the stands at their stadium for £1.5m. 
Under this scheme, Falkirk would receive a much-needed cash injection and pay 
the new landlord rent starting at £120,000 a year.

Pressley, meanwhile, has become something of a divisive figure during his 
brief spell in charge. The former Hearts captain has been perceived as arrogant 
and disrespectful by some for stressing on so many occasions that Falkirk will 
avoid the drop. A slightly odd reaction, this, given that Pressley has not 
publicly criticised any other team. If he believes positive thinking will rub 
off on his players, he has every right to be bullish. Contrary, to some 
opinion, Pressley is perfectly smart enough to realise what he is doing.

Other managers have also complained about Pressley's colourful touchline 
antics: a row broke out with St Mirren's Gus MacPherson last weekend in which 
the Falkirk boss complained about "bad language" from the opposition dug-out. 
Perish the thought.

Pressley has become the great dresser of the Scottish management game. Silk 
scarves, raised coat collars and trendy shoes are his hallmark. What he cannot 
deny is that, on the pitch, Falkirk have claimed six wins from 37 league games. 
A seventh would condemn Kilmarnock to relegation they can ill afford. Anything 
else would be a severe, potentially fatal, blow to Pressley as he takes his 
first steps into management.

For the neutral, the prospect of something to play for in the final weekend of 
this SPL season is simply something to savour.
 