
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> prevented the chasm 
that separates them from Celtic from widening further following the Parkhead 
side's success at Pittodrie but there was, in truth, little to recommend this 
performance.

Christian Nerlinger provided Rangers with a victory, but there is clearly much 
to be done if they are again to offer a credible challenge, for there are 
glaring deficiencies to be addressed by Alex McLeish sooner rather than later.

The Livingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> players 
hardly had time to draw breath when they eventually arrived at Ibrox shortly 
before the scheduled kick-off time.

It was feared the opposition might fail to meet their obligations after 
roadworks on the M8 motorway held up their journey, but the fixture began on 
time.

Rangers served early notice of their intent when they mounted an immediate 
offensive, putting Livingston under intense pressure. But quite how Peter 
Lovenkrands was allowed the space to fashion a header out of nothing was 
mystifying. So, too, was the defence's failure to be alert to the danger posed 
by the lurking Nuno Capucho.

In the event, Capucho's follow-up effort was blocked by goalkeeper Roddy 
McKenzie and Livingston survived the anxious moment to regroup and offer a 
threat of their own.

The Rangers defence was just as slipshod when Derek Lilley ghosted in 
unnoticed to head wide after six minutes.

But the home side quickly reasserted themselves and there was an air of 
inevitability to the fact that Livingston's failure to subdue Rangers would 
eventually be punished.

Consequently, it came as no great surprise when Rangers assumed the lead after 
13 minutes, despite McKenzie's best efforts to deny Fernando Ricksen a goal 
when he stuck out his foot and deflected the Dutchman's effort.

McKenzie's luck was out, however, when the ball broke to Christian Nerlinger 
and the German neatly converted the rebound to claim his first league goal of 
the season and put Rangers in the driving seat.

Those who expected Livingston to capitulate at that point were presumably 
disappointed when both Stuart Lovell and Emmanuel Dorado saw shots deflected 
after David Fernandez had resisted the temptation to throw himself to the 
ground in an attempt to win a penalty after Nerlinger's clumsy challenge.

As half-time approached, Rangers raised their game sufficiently for Shota 
Arveladze to conjure up a stinging long-range drive that was well saved by the 
alert McKenzie.

Speculation is rife in Glasgow that McLeish has been earmarked by the 
Southampton chairman, Robert Lowe, as a replacement for Gordon Strachan.

If that is the case, McLeish may be tempted to consider a switch to the 
Premiership, given that his hands are tied by the stringent financial 
constraints placed on him by his employers at Ibrox.

But McLeish at least enjoyed the sight of Ronald de Boer returning to 
first-team action when the Dutchman replaced his countryman Michael Mols in the 
62nd minute following five months of frustration as he recovered from knee 
surgery.

Before de Boer's arrival on the scene, Fernandez caused home hearts to flutter 
in the 49th minute when he sprung Rangers' offside trap and succeeded in 
floating in a shot that squirmed just wide of the far post.

The referee Ian Brines' decision to caution Capucho following Dorado's 
challenge seemed harsh, even though the Livingston defender had succeeded in 
winning the ball.

But for all Rangers territorial advantage they were far removed from the 
comfort zone and there was an edginess about their play as Livingston spotted 
the potential for an upset.

Fortunately for Rangers, Stefan Klos has been in outstanding form this season 
and his save from Fernandez on 72 minutes was a hallmark of his consistency.

But it wasn't until the referee's whistle signalling the cessation of 
hostilities that the Ibrox legions were able to relax.

You can mail the Observer direct at sport@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 