
Happy new year and particular thanks to all those who gave me their views on 
the monthly Genius puzzles. I hope that you will suffer less from technical 
cock-ups with our crosswords in 2007, though - as Samuel Johnson is reported to 
have said of remarriage - this may be a triumph of hope over experience.

The majority of the 38 comments that I had about the Genius was that it had 
become harder over the last three years, but that this was a good thing and the 
general level of difficulty should on no account be lowered. This message was 
tempered by three comments.

Firstly, puzzles where the answers to be entered in the grid are gobbledygook 
should only be used sparingly, because part of the pleasure of solving puzzles 
is the recognition of letter patterns and crosswords should be about actual 
words. The second was that instructions as to how a particular puzzle is to be 
solved can seem so complicated that it can put solvers off trying at all. And 
finally, that it would be nice to have an occasional easier Genius as 
encouragement.

The first point about gobbledygook solutions will be passed on to setters. As 
for the special instructions, I don't see how they can be avoided with this 
kind of puzzle. Also, though they may not always mean what they say, some care 
is taken to see that they say what they mean. In other words, as these are 
intentionally difficult cryptic puzzles, it seems fair that the special 
instructions should also have some cryptic element with the penny dropping 
later rather than being obvious at once.

One correspondent was pleased that the December instructions included an 
example of the manipulation required, which was an encouragement to attempt the 
puzzle. Against that, another said that, if December's had been a Listener 
puzzle, the preamble would have been less explicitly helpful. I await the 
reactions to January's preamble with great interest. At least it should not, in 
itself, put anyone off trying the puzzle, since it only applies to the 
completed grid.

With point three, the plea for an occasional easier puzzle, Lavatch's December 
offering seems to have met the demand. There were 176 correct entries, 
including 16 by the end of the first day (December 4), the first of them coming 
in at 9.30 am from Uxbridge in Middlesex. But this raises another point that 
comes out of your responses - the way in which you approach a Genius puzzle.

Some clearly would like the Genius to be just like an ordinary Saturday prize 
puzzle, only a couple of notches harder. When they cannot make substantial 
progress in a single sitting, they feel it would be more sensible to stop 
beating their heads against the wall. But most of you seem to think of solving 
a Genius as a project to be spread over all or most of the month and are quite 
happy, even if you don't finish it, providing it is tough going on the way. 
Again, I don't see how both groups can easily be satisfied by a single puzzle.

So, on balance, it seems to me that the Genius, in roughly its present form, 
has its place in the range of cryptic puzzles offered by Guardian Unlimited. At 
one end is the weekly Quiptic, which (as its name implies) is a quick and 
simple introduction to the game. Then there are the regular cryptic puzzles 
provided by some 20 setters with widely differing styles and levels of 
difficulty. And then there is the monthly Genius, which is intended to be 
pitched at an altogether higher level of difficulty. As a footnote though, even 
the toughest Genius (for example, Doc's November offering) still in principle 
only allows words that are to be found in Chambers or Collins dictionaries, so 
you are not required to Google to get there.

Pleasing all of you all of the time with all our puzzles would be nice, but 
it's an impossible mission. All of you some of the time, and most of you most 
of the time, seems to be a more realistic target.

_____

During 2006 I was taken to task more than once for letting foreign languages 
through the net. Traditionally, the kind of basic French vocabulary required to 
pass GCSE is regarded as legitimate, plus the definite and indefinite articles 
and simple numbers in German, Italian and Spanish, along with some cod Latin. 
But is this unduly patronising to our solvers?

Recently I vetoed an excellent clue "German lad in store" for T<ED>ESCO, being 
the Italian for German. Here I was influenced by the fact that, though tedesco 
is in the 1993 Chambers, it has been dropped from the latest edition, 
indicating perhaps that knowledge of the history of Italian unification and 
italia irridenta is becoming less widespread.

I did let through the German NORDSTERN for the Pole Star in Paul's September 
Genius and got some flak for it. But, as I would allow the French for Elysian 
Fields, it seemed only fair to allow Berlin's most famous thoroughfare Unter 
den Linden to be used in a Gordius clue to reach the answer SUBLIME. I would 
greatly like to hear your views on how far we can safely expand the linguistic 
envelope.

_____

In general, I think deadlines are important. But we have made one exception. 
Through the post has come a correct solution to a Saturday prize puzzle by 
Araucaria from a reader in Newark, Nottinghamshire. Only it was No 15,515 and 
the deadline was October 29 1979 - when Mrs Thatcher had been PM for less than 
a year. He has been sent a prize dictionary, but this will not be allowed to 
set a precedent.

_____

Users very quick off the mark this morning may have downloaded or printed a 
version of the Genius that was missing the all important special instructions. 
These are now inplace, but for the sake of those who might have missed them, 
here they are again:

Service with a smile

Examination of the completed grid will reveal seven of a traditional series of 
eight, all treated in the same way. You should send (untreated) the missing 
eighth in the series by seperate email to
crossword.genius@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.genius@guardianunlimited.co.uk> when you submit your entry in 
the usual way. "
 