
May I wish you all a new year of happy crosswording?

My recent blogs have been much concerned with the fallout from the switch to 
the new crossword site. It seems to be beginning to bed in, or it is if the 
falling volume of emails of complaint is anything to judge by. A few of you 
have even been kind enough to say that, with familiarity, it is an improvement 
on the previous version. However, for a significant minority, difficulties with 
printing are still an obvious source of anguish and rage.

The developers have been working to improve this side of things. The type size 
for the clues, which was already larger than that in the printed paper itself, 
has been increased and the previous ‘print preview’ stage has been 
reintroduced, so that you can now make personal size adjustments before 
actually printing out. There are now three routes to printing puzzles and you 
can choose the one that suits your needs best.

1. The print option. Having got the interactive version of your puzzle on the 
screen, click on the ‘Print’ option above the grid. This should open a new 
page, with a white grid and grey squares (to save you ink) and clues formatted 
to fit an A4 page. If you print this out (on my PC this involves poising the 
mouse arrow over the image and ‘right-clicking’ once, with other machines 
things will be different), you are offered a box to check before moving on to 
the printing itself. If you then click ‘+ more settings’, you can check on the 
default paper size. For most of you this should be A4, but you can try others. 
If you do so, the clues may run over to more than one page. At this stage you 
can also choose other destinations for the image than your usual default 
printer.

2. The PDF option. Click instead on ‘PDF version’. You should now have new 
page, with solid black grid squares and the solution to the previous puzzle at 
the bottom right. Start the printing process (as for 1 above) and the ‘preview’ 
box on the left will now allow you to choose a paper size to suit. You need to 
ensure that the ‘Fit to page’ box has a tick in it. If you choose smaller paper 
than A4, the print size will reduce (or, if the ‘Fit to page’ box is not 
ticked, the clues will stay the same but run over on to more than one page).

3. Print dialogue option (recommended only for those who know what they are 
doing). At the ‘print preview’ stage, click in the box on the left on ‘Print 
using system dialogue’. With this option you have some control over the layout 
of the grid and the clues by adjusting your printer and/or browser settings. 
The downside is that there are more things to go wrong; for example, the grid 
may not display properly, or the clues may run to more than one page, or the 
special instructions and setter’s name may not appear on cryptic puzzles.
One additional tip. If, with the basic interactive puzzle on your screen, you 
want to increase the type size of the clues for greater legibility (or decrease 
it so as to be able to see all the clues and the whole grid at the same time) 
this is easily achieved. With standard personal computers, hold down the Ctrl 
key and hit either the + or the – sign as many times as you want. With Macs the 
same effect, I think, can be achieved by holding down the Command key (the one 
to the left of the space bar) and hitting + or – in the same way.

Two final comments.

1. Despite all the above, there are now so many different types of computers, 
smart phones, browsers etc out there that individual problems will continue to 
arise. When they do and you are unable to resolve them, please send details to 
theUser Help <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> desk and they will investigate 
your difficulty. It will help them greatly, if you can give as much detail as 
possible about the browser(s) and operating system(s) you are using, preferably 
by going to http://www.thismachine.info/ and copying and pasting into you email 
what you get there as your full ‘user agent string’. It will look something 
like this: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like 
Gecko) Chrome/47.0.2526.106 Safari/537.36.

It would also help, if you were able to take, copy and send to the User Help 
desk at the same time a screen shot of what is going wrong. Instructions on how 
to take and save a screen shot may be found at 
http://www.take-a-screenshot.org/ .

2. There is no point in asking why the Guardian cannot go back to the old 
crossword site that you knew and loved, nor why it cannot just run the old and 
the new sites alongside each other as alternative options. I tried to explain 
the reason why this was so in my October blog, which can be read via the 
crossword home page or by copying and pasting this rather long URL into your 
browser: 
http://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/oct/09/life-after-beta-testing-new-guardian-crossword-website 
. For those with continuing transitional problems the User Help desk, the 
system developers and I are ready and willing to give all reasonable assistance 
to enable you to continue to enjoy your free online crosswords.
_____

In case you did not see the names of the 10 winners of Maskarade’s Christmas 
special prize puzzle No 26,759, they were: Rose Reeves, Bradford, West 
Yorkshire, Ron & Sue Falder, Lilleshall, Shropshire, Ann Radcliffe, 
Maine-et-Loire, France, A Besse, London W11, Hugh Betterton, Godalming, Surrey, 
Rupert Cousens, Oxford, Judith Goodman, London SW19, John Di Mambro, Wishaw, 
North Lanarkshire, F Jackson, Harlow, Essex and Kathryn Greenhalgh, Stafford, 
Staffs.
_____

The December Genius (No 150 by Boatman) got off to a bad start, with much of 
the first Monday, 7 December, been taken up with getting a usable version of 
the puzzle on to the screen. As a result there was only one correct entry by 
the end of that day, received at 22:23 from GM in Sussex. (JS with gmail would 
have beaten him by 3 minutes, but for one slight error.) There were also fewer 
than usual entries in total by the deadline – 149 – about half the size of 
recent fields. Congratulations to Jeffrey Goldsmith from Bromham in 
Bedfordshire, who is the winner of the December Genius competition.

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 