
It has been a month for new beginnings. First a seven-year old solver wrote to 
complain that the cryptics were a little too hard and would it not be possible 
for the Guardian to find it in its heart to publish a children's cryptic puzzle 
one or twice a week. Leaving aside the question of whether the Guardian has a 
heart, I replied that the demographic was probably wrong for this newspaper but 
my correspondent might like to try the Quiptic puzzles published on this 
website. It was, I suggested, 'easier', but I made this observation with a 
heavy heart, knowing that the mailbag every week contains a number of letters 
saying the puzzles are getting easier. The letters are matched in volume, of 
course, by those suggesting that the puzzles are getting harder.

Of course, if you're a beginner they're all hard. At a party last week I found 
myself giving and impromptu late-night seminar to a group of neophyte solvers 
and the week before I was in the USA where I spent the commuter journey from 
Washington DC to Baltimore trying to teach my American colleagues 'the basics'. 
As it has proved in the past, the difficult part was not listing and going 
through the various cryptic tricks of the trade. The biggest hurdle was 
persuading my colleague to ignore the surface reading - but not entirely. You 
can imagine the conversation:

"Ignore it. It is there to deceive you."

"But you just said it might be relevant?"

"Yes, but first ignore it."

"When do I stop ignoring it?

"When you've decided what the solution means."

"But for that I might need to think about the - what did you call it? - 
surface?"

"Yes."

"I see."

A statement which was demonstrably untrue. But we all have to start somewhere, 
and for that it is best to have a tutor. Self-taught solvers are not that 
common. For most of us that was one or both parents, but there comes a point at 
which you have to practise. I recall entering the American Crossword Tournament 
once in Stamford, CT and talking to one of the contenders for the title. He 
spoke about solving in much the same was as a boxer might speak about preparing 
for the big fight. I asked him how he prepared for the tournament and he told 
me he spent four hours a day 'working on his speeds' and 'matrixing sequential 
approaches'. I didn't much like 'matrix' as a verb, but I was taken with the 
idea that his solving had more than one speed. Again I couldn't shake the image 
of the boxer, doing work on the speed bag before moving over to the heavy bag 
for a bit of serious bone crunching. He didn't win though, and perhaps his was 
the wrong approach. Certainly it seemed to take the fun out of it.

Most readers of this column will have had the experience of explaining 
crosswords to others, and it may be you are tired of it. In which case you 
might want to steer them the way of Tim Moorey, who is running a workshop at 
the Barbican Centre on 21st October. Tim tells me it is "designed for those who 
would like a brief exposure to some of the tricks of the trade rather than a 
fuller teach-in. No previous knowledge is required and the workshop will not be 
a competitive one. Details are in the October Barbican listings, the cost is 
£15 (£10 concessions) and booking is from the Barbican Box Office." For more 
information see www.timmoorey.co.uk.

I say this with some trepidation. After all, I have been browsing in Brian 
Greer's How to do the Times Crossword, in which he tells the story of a 1925 
Broadway revue which included a scene in a "Crossword Puzzle Sanatorium" for 
people who had been driven insane by the craze. The 'Alice in Wonderland 
world', Ruth Crisp calls it in Crosswords, How to Solve Them (Hodder & 
Stoughton 1992) and in doing so she was echoing A.F. Ritchie and his famous 
injunction , "You need not means what you say, but you must say what you mean."

As a solver, though, you are under a different injunction. Your task is to 
enjoy solving the puzzle. For this you need to do two things: "Believe 
everything and trust nothing." The seven-year old solver would instantly 
understand. But for my American colleague on the 5.15 from Baltimore? That, I 
think, is a harder sell.
 