
The Montpellier owner, Louis Nicollin, has said Newcastle are "too small" for 
Olivier Giroud <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud> but would 
not rule out a switch to Arsenal – if the price is right. Giroud, who has 
scored 13 times this season, has caught the attention in his side's surge to 
second in Ligue 1 at the winter break.

Newcastle, who have signed several players from France in the last 18 months, 
had been linked with a move for the 25-year-old. They are no longer in the 
market for a striker in January but Nicollin suggested they were never an 
option. Although he could not rule out selling to a club likeArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, the presence of Robin van 
Persie and a sizeable asking price point toward the player staying.

"Newcastle? They are too small for him," Nicollin told the television station 
RTL. "Arsenal? You would have to see if Arsène Wenger is interested but, as 
before, there is Van Persie.

"And at €10m (£8.3m)? No. Given that he still has more than two years of 
contract, it will cost more. He has a contract until 2014, [so] €50 (£42m) or 
€60m (£50m) at least."

The Newcastle manager, Alan Pardew, said on Wednesday the club will not 
attempt to sign a striker in January after confirming the collapse of Modibo 
Maiga's proposed move to Tyneside. The Sochaux forward was expected to complete 
a £6m transfer but the deal broke down before Christmas after a medical 
revealed uncertainty over one of his knees.

However, Pardew, who will lose Demba Ba to Africa Cup of Nations duty in the 
coming weeks, has admitted the club will do their homework and target a new 
forward during the summer rather than acting in haste during the winter window.

"I don't think we will be bringing a striker in in this window after the 
collapse of Maiga, which we had put a lot of work into," he said. "As far as we 
are concerned, we will go with what we have got. We will have to do a lot of 
work between now and the summer to locate another striker."

In the meantime, Newcastle will instead concentrate on trying to bring in a 
defender after Steven Taylor's season was ended prematurely by an achilles 
injury.

"You have to pay over the odds in this window, everybody does, and you have to 
accept that if you are going to invest in this window, and we won't in terms of 
a striker," Pardew added. "We are looking at bringing maybe a defender in. We 
need to bring in a defender."
 