
Ipswich Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> arrived on 
Tyneside with a reputation for defensive parsimony but departed with their 
pride shredded by Ayoze Pérez and Matt Ritchie. It left Rafael Benítez’s 
steadily improving team three points clear at the top of the Championship. If 
their fifth successive league win is anything to go by Newcastle will take some 
dislodging.

“We’ve been beaten by the champions,” said Mick McCarthy who, pressing every 
available button, changed formations and personnel mid-game but merely 
succeeded in giving Newcastle some minor second-half problems. “Newcastle were 
better than us,” the Ipswich manager said. “We tried everything to stop them 
but we couldn’t. My players worked really hard but nothing we did worked.”

Football League your thoughts: Aston Villa on rise but Norwich slip up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/22/football-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich>
Sixty seconds had passed when Pérez opened the scoring courtesy of an 
exquisite right-foot volley unleashed in the wake of Paul Dummett’s cross and 
Dwight Gayle’s headed flick.

It was a goal Sir Bobby Robson would have relished and, appropriately enough, 
the stadium soon echoed to an evocative rendition of “Walking in a Robson 
Wonderland.” How Sir Bobby would have been intrigued by this meeting of two 
clubs so close to his heart in front of a crowd of nearly 52,000 on an 
afternoon when Ipswich fans gathered around his statue on Gallowgate, taking 
selfies.

In the match programme, Kieron Dyer, the former England midfielder, who played 
for both teams, suggested Benítez was the first Newcastle manager since Robson 
capable of masterminding a return to the Champions League. Dyer predicted the 
Tynesiders would “surprise” the Premier League next season.

Benítez knows there are an awful lot of hard yards to be covered before a 
return to the top tier is assured and looked suitably concerned when Ipswich’s 
Leon Best directed a left-foot shot against the bar after meeting Tom 
Lawrence’s cross.

Otherwise Newcastle were very much on top with Ritchie and Gayle missing a 
couple of first-half chances. Moreover they should have been awarded a penalty 
when Bartosz Bialkowski hauled down Gayle following the forward’s connection 
with Jonjo Shelvey’s defly curled ball but, inexplicably, James Adcock, the 
referee, disagreed.

Benítez’s frustration mounted as the second half unfolded and, still, his 
players could not quite extend their advantage. After Ritchie volleyed inches 
wide after latching on to a Dummett cross and Bialkowski did well to repel Yoan 
Gouffran’s shot, the fragility of Newcastle’s narrow lead created nervous 
tension whenever Ipswich counterattacked.

Although Karl Darlow in the home goal rarely seemed troubled, there was a 
spell when their pass-and-move game clicked out of rhythm, when even Shelvey 
became oppressed by the close central midfield attentions of Jonathan Douglas 
and Adam Webster and it all became rather flat and mundane.

McCarthy’s streetwise spoiling tactics were, albeit briefly, succeeding in 
dragging Newcastle down to Ipswich’s level. “Overall it was another good win 
and it was easy at the end,” Benítez said, “but they made it difficult for us 
during the second half.”

It took Pérez’s second goal to raise the tone and restore the party 
atmosphere. McCarthy had made a particular pre-match point of emphasising the 
threat posed by Ritchie but, still, Josh Emmanuel failed to prevent the former 
Bournemouth winger from crossing perfectly for Pérez to lash the ball home from 
inside the area.

Ritchie had begun the game slowly but was clearly saving the best for last. 
Perhaps anxious to further vindicate McCarthy’s judgment, Ritchie scored a 
long-range goal himself, beating Bialkowski with a subtly curving shot 
dispatched with the outside of his left foot after an exchange of passes with 
Perez.

“Newcastle are a very good team and all their three finishes were fabulous,” 
McCarthy said. “We got what we deserved. Nothing.”
 