
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> ground 
out a 2-0 victory over Wigan Athletic that lifted them back to the 
Championship’s summit and had Rafael Benítez praising their staying power.

The Magpies once again responded to Brighton’s win a day earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/brighton-top-championship-blackburn-rovers-newcastle-united>
 to regain their spot at the top, as they did at the weekend, though these 
three points were not delivered as emphatically asSaturday’s 4-0 success over 
Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/newcastle-birmingham-championship-match-report>
.

At the DW Stadium, the former Wigan midfielder Mohamed Diamé’s first-half goal 
was added to by a 78th-minute strike from substitute Christian Atsu against the 
struggling hosts, who have now gone five games without scoring at home.

Though the Latics never truly made them sweat, Newcastle were not in the type 
of form that has seen them in promotion contention, but their manager was just 
pleased they got the job done.

“We have had some games where we couldn’t score the second goal and then we 
had problems,” Benítez said. “In this case, we knew that we needed to finish 
the game with the second goal because they were pushing, crossing, winning 
second balls, it was difficult.

“We needed fresh legs to change the game and we did it. The team was working 
very hard to get three points. We tried to play well. The pitch wasn’t the best 
in terms of the possibility to pass the ball on the floor. You could see they 
needed to control the ball and it was more difficult.

“We try to play well and if we can, perfect, because we will have more chances 
to win more games if we play well. If not, we have to just work hard and try to 
win.”

After 21 games, Newcastle have a nine-point advantage over third-placed 
Reading. They may be cruising towards promotion, yet Brighton’s 15-game 
unbeaten run means they have a genuine rival for the title.

Asked if they can stay at the top, Benítez replied: “We will try obviously to 
do it but Brighton are doing well. Hopefully we can keep winning our games. We 
don’t need to see what they are doing if we continue doing what we have to do.

“[Brighton manager Chris Hughton] is a great manager and they are a very good 
team doing really well. It’s not easy to win in any competition but in the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> still they are 
winning – that shows how good he is and how good the team is.”

Wigan’s focus is on safety, something they are currently four points adrift 
from, and a lack of goals is their clear achilles heel with their total of 16 
the same as Dwight Gayle’s personal haul for Newcastle this season.

“There were some good opportunities but even more frustrating was that there 
were opportunities where we didn’t even get contact or efforts on target,” said 
the Wigan manager, Warren Joyce. “There was no devilment, no real aggression to 
get a goal.

“Every game, barring the Reading game, we’ve always been in with a chance of 
winning it. I don’t think any of the top sides have come here, played us off 
the park, cut through us and given us real problems.”
 