
The former Newcastle United footballer Derek Bell, who was subjected to years 
of sexual abuse by a boys club coach who subsequently worked at Newcastle, has 
accused the St James’ Park club of a cover-up for their limited response after 
Bell raised the alarm in 1998.

Bell was sexually abused by George Ormond, his coach at the local Montagu and 
North Fenham boys club, from the age of 12 to 16 in the late 1970s, until Bell 
signed as an apprentice at Newcastle United in 1979. He believes that after he 
joined Newcastle, Ormond had to “wean himself” off Bell, and he fears that 
Ormond must then have targeted other young players at the boys club for similar 
abuse.

Former Newcastle player on being abused: ‘It was horrific. He thought it was 
normal’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/derek-bell-abuse-coach> 
Almost 20 years later in 1998, Bell discovered that Ormond was working in the 
youth system at Newcastle and had been seen frequenting a hotel where young 
players stayed. Bell says he immediately told a youth-team coach that Ormond 
had sexually abused him as a boy and the club appear to have then informed 
Ormond he was no longer welcome to work at Newcastle. However, inquiries at the 
club today have not found that any further investigation was carried out, nor 
do the police appear to have been informed, and Ormond remained free until Bell 
himself went to the police and Ormond was finally arrested in January 2001.

Another former Newcastle player, David Eatock, has now said he, too, was 
abused by Ormond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/david-eatock-abuse-newcastle-united>
, at the hotel in 1995, thought to be at the beginning of an approximately 
three-year period during which Ormond was involved with young players at 
Newcastle.

“After I told Newcastle United about Ormond, they got him out of their club 
but the club hierarchy did nothing else,” Bell told the Guardian. “They had the 
information but they do not appear to have passed it on or held any inquiry. 
Instead they covered it up and finally it was me who went to the police.”

Newcastle, owned since 2007 by Mike Ashley, are still trying to establish 
precisely when Ormond became involved in the club’s youth system and the 
circumstances in which he left. The current managing director, Lee Charnley, 
has worked closely with Bell and supported him since he came forward to the 
club last week, and Newcastle have said they will assist any new police or 
other investigation.

It is believed so far that Ormond worked for approximately three years in an 
unpaid capacity, which according to Eatock, included driving boys around and 
having access to them at the hotel. When Bell informed the youth coach in 1998 
that Ormond was an abuser, the youth coach is understood to have immediately 
told the club’s then secretary, who in turn is believed to have passed the 
information about Ormond further up the club’s hierarchy. The then director and 
co-owner of the club, Freddy Shepherd, told the Guardian that he does not 
remember being informed about Ormond, and that the then chief executive,Freddie 
Fletcher, who died in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/aug/28/newcastle-united-freddie-fletcher-dies>
, may have dealt with the Ormond issue.

The club hierarchy appear to have given an instruction that Ormond be told he 
was no longer wanted at Newcastle United, and he then ceased working there from 
October 1998, the club has established. However, there is no evidence that 
Newcastle United did anything further such as internally investigate Ormond’s 
activities at the club over three years’ involvement and the police do not 
appear to have been informed until Bell himself blew the whistle, separately, 
on Ormond, in 2000. Ormond appears to have remained free to be involved in 
coaching youth football during that period of longer than two years, until 
Northumbria police arrested him in January 2001.

In 2000, Bell went to Ormond’s house with a tape recorder to try to secure an 
incriminating confession, after seeing Ormond loitering behind a tree at a 
Newcastle city council hostel where vulnerable teenage refugees were being 
accommodated. He then worked with the police for 18 months to find other 
witnesses who could support a prosecution and finally, in November 2002, Ormond 
was sentenced to six years in prison after being found guilty of 12 indecent 
assaults.

Seven former Montagu and North Fenham boys club players gave evidence, 
including Bell, all claiming anonymity. Bell waived that anonymity this week, 
saying that he has wanted to speak publicly about the “horrendous, horrific” 
abuse for years, and not “live a lie,” andhe talked to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/george-ormond> about the 
abuse by Ormond and his life of trauma ever since.

At the time of the police investigation and trial, he felt that the Newcastle 
United hierarchy again wanted to minimise publicity and any impact on the club, 
and to “push it under the carpet”. There was little publicity even locally for 
the trial and conviction, and the club did not make a public statement 
afterwards saying they would welcome people who may have suffered abuse to come 
forward.

Bell says that he personally, a former player until his career was ended due 
to a knee injury in 1983, did not receive even a telephone call from the club 
hierarchy through the investigation and trial, which left him feeling “let 
down”.

Shepherd, a Newcastle director and major shareholder in the club throughout 
the 1990s and until he sold his shares to Ashley in 2007, said that he does not 
remember being told about Ormond in 1998, or during the trial in 2002. He said 
he has looked through his own records and not found anything about Ormond, who 
was never formally employed by Newcastle.

Police say 350 people have come forward to report child sex abuse in football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/fa-punish-clubs-cover-up-martin-glenn>
“I don’t remember it being brought to my attention, and I don’t know what 
happened,” Shepherd said. “We are not the type of people to hold back; it would 
have been dealt with if I had been informed.”

Shepherd said he thought that Fletcher may have dealt with it himself and that 
he did not remember the case when it came to court.

Bell is also critical of Northumbria police, arguing that the prosecution was 
limited mostly to his experiences and limited supporting testimony mostly from 
people he contacted himself, and that the police did not thoroughly investigate 
the boys club, where Ormond had been a senior coach with access to young boys 
since at least the mid-1970s.

“There was no full investigation into the boys club,” Bell said. “The emphasis 
in the police investigation was on me trying to find other people who I knew 
had played for the boys club, who I suspected may have been abused as well, to 
see if they would give evidence.”

He recalls that the police did talk to the former chairman of Montagu and 
North Fenham boys club, Dick Almond, who is now dead, and that Almond had said 
he was not aware of any abuse. Bell believes no thorough investigation was then 
conducted into Ormond’s activities and the culture at the boys club over more 
than two decades.

Northumbria police has not yet responded to the Guardian’s questions about 
Bell’s criticisms of that investigation.

Newcastle United are now cooperating with the police on any new investigation 
into Ormond and historical sex abuse following a complaint they are understood 
to have received. A club spokeswoman said that on police advice, they consider 
it would now not be appropriate to respond publicly to questions about past 
handling of allegations.

On Thursday two former Southampton schoolboy players, Dean Radford and Jamie 
Webb, waived their right to anonymity tovoice to the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-hampshire-38128841> allegations of 
grooming and sexual assault against a former club employee. The pair say they 
were in their teens when the incidents took place.

Webb said boys were asked to write the club employee love letters, and 
described an incident where “he tried to move down and put his hand in between 
my shorts and my tracksuit that I was wearing and I just blocked him”.

Radford described his experience as “the first I’d had of that sort of 
closeness and whatever else you want to call it”, adding that he was made to 
snuggle up to the employee with another youngster.

“The reasons he gave were that we needed to trust him, he needed to be like a 
second father to us – if we trusted him, and it worked both ways, then the 
chances were there that we could become a professional footballer.”

Radford added that he held the club “partly responsible” for the abuse. 
Southampton said they would cooperate fully with any police investigation.

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 