
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> are 
expected to appeal against Jonjo Shelvey’s five-match suspension and £100,000 
Football Association fine after an independent disciplinary commission found 
the former England midfielder guilty of directing racially aggravated language 
towards an opponent.

That misconduct charge was imposed following allegations that arguably Rafael 
Benítez’s most influential player directed racially abusive language towards 
Romain Saïss, a Moroccan midfielder, in the 87th minute of the2-0 Championship 
defeat by Wolverhampton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/newcastle-united-wolverhampton-wanderers-championship-match-report>
 at St James’ Park on 17 September.

It is understood that at Tuesday’s hearing in Birmingham the three Wolves 
players called as witnesses gave slightly varying accounts of the alleged 
insult, with one claiming Shelvey had called Saïss “a smelly Arab”. Another 
witness is believed to have claimed he heard the word Arab attached to a 
different insult while the third is understood to have suggested he used the 
word “Moroccan” in a derogatory context.

Newcastle sources say Shelvey, who has also been ordered to attend an FA 
education course, continues to maintain his innocence and is adamant he did not 
use the words in question. It also appears the midfielder was taunted about his 
baldness before the incident but claims he did not rise to the bait.

Once the club receive the written reasons behind the commission’s decision, 
which should happen by the end of this week at the latest, they and their 
lawyers will decide whether to appeal and have seven days in which to do so.

David Wagner focused on Huddersfield amid Bundesliga clubs’ interest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/david-wagner-focused-huddersfield-town-bundesliga-interest>
Until any appeal is concluded or the club accept the charge, the suspension 
will be “set aside”, meaning Shelvey could well be free to play in the 
Championship leaders’s next three league games, at home to Sheffield Wednesday 
on Boxing Day and Nottingham Forest on 30 December and at Blackburn Rovers on 
Monday 2 January.

If the case goes to appeal, it is expected to be heard during the first week 
in January but the written reasons, normally published on the FA’s website as 
soon as they become available, will almost certainly be withheld from public 
consumption and circulated to involved parties only until the matter is finally 
resolved.

While Newcastle are convinced of Shelvey’s innocence and their instinct is to 
challenge the verdict, Benítez is concerned about the prospect of potentially 
losing an appeal and then having his playmaker banned for the vital game 
against second-placed Brighton on 28 January. Against that their lawyers 
believe there are strong grounds for an appeal.

Although at least one team-mate of Saïss reported their concerns to Walter 
Zenga, Wolves’ then manager, immediately after the game and the Italian 
informed Tim Robinson, the match referee, the misconduct charge was not issued 
until 8 November.

Matters were apparently complicated by Saïss’s limited English and a lack of 
video and audio footage, allied to confusion as to what had been said.

A five-game suspension is a minimum mandatory sanction in such cases – the 
then Liverpool striker Luis Suárez was sidelined for eight games after racially 
abusing the former Manchester United left-back Patrice Evra back in 2012 – and 
the FA has the right to appeal against the length of any ban on the grounds of 
leniency.

In this instance, though, it is understood it is not minded to challenge 
Shelvey’s punishment. Moreover, it is believed there is no possibility of the 
ban being extended following an appeal.

Shelvey has emerged as a virtual ever present in an otherwise heavily rotated 
Newcastle side, with his midfield vision, playmaking skills and passing range 
regarded as key elements in Benítez’s attempt to return the club to the Premier 
League.

A £12m signing from Swansea last January, the 24-year-old former Charlton and 
Liverpool midfielder has six England caps and earns around £80,000 a week. He 
appears arguably Newcastle’s one “irreplaceable” individual.
 