
Rafael Benítez <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rafael-benitez> is 
disappointed Hull City have refused to increase Newcastle United’s allocation 
of 2,400 tickets for their EFL Cup quarter-final at what threatens to be a 
sparsely populated KCom Stadium on Tuesday night.

All the indications are that Hull’s ground will be barely half full, with a 
crowd of around 13,000 expected for a tie which both sides arguably could do 
without as they strive to, respectively, remain in the Premier League and 
return to it.

“I’d like to see as many of our fans as possible,” said Benítez, whose 
Newcastle players are endeavouring to reach a first domestic semi-final since 
2005 while also keeping their Championship promotion campaign on track. “I’m 
not liking Hull’s policy, I can’t control what they decide but it’s a pity, not 
only for our fans but for football in general.

Blackburn’s Charlie Mulgrew gives his side shock win at Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/newcastle-united-blackburn-rovers-championship-match-report>
“Why would you have empty stadiums when you could fill them with people who 
would enjoy themselves? The good thing is it’s not normal here but in Spain you 
see stadiums half empty and in Italy sometimes they’re only 20% occupied.”

Newcastle’s manager is particularly impressed that several thousand Tynesiders 
were prepared to make a six-hour, 300-mile round trip to East Yorkshire on a 
winter’s night at a time when the sheer amount of live matches on television 
presents a potential threat to attendances.

“With so much football on TV, it would have been giving more fans an 
opportunity to see a game live,” Benítez said. “It’s a pity because football 
needs to be more about the people who go to games rather than about TV. I 
always like to see stadiums full because, ultimately, football is for the fans. 
Its future is about children and families going to games.”

Given the growing local disgruntlement with the failure of Hull’s owners, the 
Allam family, to furnish Mike Phelan with a squad properly equipped for Premier 
League combat, the ambience may not be entirely family friendly. The sort of 
dissension in the stands expected, once again, on Tuesday night partly explains 
whyNewcastle’s Mohamed Diamé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/newcastle-sign-mohame-diame-hull-city>
 and Isaac Hayden were happy to depart Humberside after helping the side, then 
managed by Steve Bruce, win promotion last May.

Benítez, meanwhile, must juggle his desire to succeed where countless 
predecessors have failed and collect some long elusive silverware, with the 
imperative to keep Newcastle on top of the Championship.

“We’ll make changes,” said the second tier’s most enthusiastic rotator. “If we 
go through I’ll be pleased but, if we don’t, I’ll say we weren’t strong enough 
to compete in two competitions at maximum level.

“I’ll play the team which, in my opinion, can do the job – without taking any 
risks by pushing individual players too hard and risking injuries. Risking one 
or two players being out for maybe a month makes no sense.”

Should a two-legged semi final in January beckon, ambition must continue to be 
leavened by pragmatism. “If we’ve progressed and I have to take a risk with one 
player [over fitness] because he can help us be in the final and maybe win the 
final, I’ll do it if I can,” said Benítez. “It depends where we are in the 
League in January - but if we have a chance to win a trophy, I’ll try to win a 
trophy. That’s 100 per cent sure.”

Despite his often strained relationship with Sir Alex Ferguson, Phelan’s old 
boss at Manchester United, Benítez feels no animosity towards Hull’s manager. 
“I have a lot of respect for him,” he says. “He’s doing a great job, despite 
recent results, they’re playing good football.”

While Newcastle have one eye on the League trip to Nottingham Forest on 
Friday, Hull visit relegation rivals Middlesbrough on Monday night, leaving 
both managers with broadly similar dilemmas.

“My players all want to go as far as they possibly can,” Phelan said. “They’ll 
be giving it everything.” Which does not preclude a little rotation of his own. 
“We’ve got three or four players that haven’t been involved up to now and we 
need to get them out on the grass, so we’ll be using them. There’ll be changes 
but we should still be in reasonably good shape. It’ll be interesting to see 
what team Rafa plays.”

The Newcastle midfielder Jack Colback, meanwhile, has been fined £25,000 after 
admitting a Football Association misconduct charge for betting.Colback was 
charged with a breach of regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/jack-colback-investigated-fa-betting-rules-according-to-reports>
 introduced in 2014 which prevent players and coaches from placing bets on any 
football activity worldwide.

A club statement said: “Jack Colback has been fined 25,000 after he accepted 
an FA misconduct charge in relation to betting. The Newcastle player breached 
FA Rule E8 in respect of a bet placed on the result, progress, conduct or any 
other aspect of, or occurrence in, a football match or competition on 16 March 
2016.”

Colback’s offence came two days after Newcastle lost 1-0 at Leicester City and 
four days before they drew 1-1 with his former club Sunderland as they fought 
desperately – and ultimately unsuccessfully – to remain in the Premier League.
 