
Rafael Benítez has ordered his players to put a bad day behind them after 
seeing their winning run torn apart by Wolves.

Newcastle, who went into the game on a high after Tuesday night’s 6-0 romp at 
QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/qpr-newcastle-championship-match-report>
, had taken a maximum 15 points from their previous five Championship matches 
but never recovered from Chancel Mbemba’s first-half own goal as the visitors 
cemented their win with Hélder Costa’s strike after the break.

Asked if his players had allowed themselves to be carried away by their 
exploits at Loftus Road, Benítez said: “No, I don’t think so because we were 
talking about that the day after, we were talking about that the day before, we 
were talking about that today, so they knew how important it was to be 
concentrated and then do the right things.

“But it’s more about the decisions. The football decisions were wrong and then 
we put ourselves under pressure.

“It’s a bad day, but we have to analyse what was wrong and try to change it. 
It’s not that you have to forget – you have to forget but try to understand why 
and try to correct things as soon as possible.”

Benítez opted to make three changes to the side which excelled in midweek, but 
insisted that had no bearing on the result. He said: “You have to change 
players, but we did it before and we were winning. Today it was just doing from 
the beginning a lot of things wrong, that’s it.”

Walter Zenga was pleased with the way Wolves responded to Tuesday night’s 4-0 
home defeat by Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/newcastle-united-huddersfield-town-championship>
, in which all the goals came inside the final 17 minutes.

He said: “I am delighted because I got an answer from the team. We prepared 
for this game to show to ourselves first of all that the last 15 minutes of the 
last game was an accident, was something that can happen in football.

“Especially here in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, where you play Saturday, 
Tuesday, Saturday, Tuesday and it’s very important to react or to confirm.

“The players wanted to see a reaction themselves to show that the last 15 
minutes was a shock for everybody. Besides the fact that we won 2-0 here in 
Newcastle, the spirit of the team, how they approached the game, how they 
started the game, how they played is a big answer to everybody.

“Playing at this stadium in front of 52,000 fans against a team that came from 
five victories in a row, four games without conceding a goal and the last game 
was 6-0 for them away and we lost 4-0 at home, the approach was very important, 
and that is my satisfaction about today.”

The Iceland striker Jon Dadi Bodvarsson and the midfielder Costa were simply 
too hot to handle. Newcastle fell behind when Mbemba headed Bodvarsson’s driven 
cross into his own net, the first goal they had conceded in 524 minutes of 
football. In the second half Costa was allowed time and space to curl a 
left-foot effort across Wolves keeper Matz Sels and inside the far post. Late 
in the game, Newcastle’s Vurnon Anita was sent off for a challenge on Ivan 
Cavaleiro.

Leeds beat lowly Cardiff to ease pressure on manager Garry Monk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/cardiff-city-leeds-united-championship-match-report> 