
Ayoze Pérez already knows that in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> little is ever certain but 
Newcastle United’s young Spanish striker remains convinced about two things. 
“Brighton’s going to be a special game,” he says. “And it’s going to be hard.”

If Chris Hughton’s return to St James’ Park on Saturday evening represents the 
“special” part of the equation, the former Newcastle manager’s Brighton side 
are out to capitalise on Rafael Benítez’s loss of two principal strikers, 
Dwight Gayle and Aleksandar Mitrovic to the Football Association’s 
precautionary concussion rules.

Once an expected 52,000 crowd has greeted Hughton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/chris-hughton-signs-new-contract-brighton-manager>
 – who led the Tynesiders out of the second tier in 2010 and whose replacement 
by Alan Pardew when the team were 11th in the Premier League the following 
season still rankles – attentions will focus on Pérez’s interpretation of an 
unfamiliar lone-striker role.

The absence of Gayle and Mitrovic, both having suffered minor blows to the 
head during the League Cup win against Cheltenham on Tuesday, has frustrated 
Benítez. “They’re fine,” he said, “but it’s the English rules.” It leaves him 
turning to Pérez to lead the line as Newcastle continue their quest to regain 
Premier League status at the first attempt.

“I’m just about the only fit striker,” said the 23-year-old Pérez, whose 
confidence has been bolstered by League victories at home to Reading and 
Bristol City.

Those wins followed defeats against Fulham  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/fulham-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
and Huddersfield but Pérez ascribes those losses to culture shock. “The 
Championship is tougher than the Premier League, 100% tougher,” he said. “But 
we’ve now adapted to this league. Although there’s still a lot of work to do 
we’re becoming more confident and playing better football. Brighton almost won 
promotion last season so they’re good and I’m sure they’ll be up there again 
this time – but we can win.”

He maintains the division’s “toughness” is not merely down to its enhanced 
physicality. “I’d say the Championship’s the sixth best league in the world,” 
Pérez said. “There are a lot of good teams with a lot of money. It’s tough.

Rafael Benítez unmoved by Newcastle’s struggles | Louise Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/16/rafael-benitez-newcastle-early-season-struggle>
“It’s harder physically. But it’s more than that. It’s about the fixtures, 
there’s so many. You’re playing most midweeks. You feel really tired and you 
need a bigger squad to survive. There’s no let up. And in every game you have 
to give 100% physically. It’s more about winning second balls, winning battles, 
than the Premier League.”

He continued: “Everyone’s desperate to beat us because we’re Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited>. You can see it in their 
eyes. We’re the biggest club in this league and they want to be able to say 
they stopped Newcastle or they beat Newcastle.

“Just look at the way Fulham and Huddersfield celebrated afterwards. Beating a 
club like this was a big moment for them. Now we know what to expect. It’ll be 
the same every match. Maybe it was a shock at first but now we know every team 
will raise their game against us. We’re everyone’s game of the season. Teams 
are running hard, running so much but we have to try to beat them with good 
football.”

It is surprising a forward regularly watched by Barcelona remains on Tyneside 
but unlike the unsettled Moussa Sissoko (the France midfielder is once again 
omitted from Benítez’s squad as he desperately attempts to engineer an escape) 
– Pérez has never sought a move “I’ve always been happy here,” he said. “That 
hasn’t changed – not even when we were relegated. Of course, relegation was bad 
but not once have I thought about leaving.

“I believe staying here is what’s best for my career. If you’re happy in one 
place, why leave? During the summer I could have gone to other teams but I 
didn’t.”

And Barcelona? “That is something big,” he said. “But if I started thinking 
‘Barcelona, oh Barcelona’ it would be wrong. Newcastle has given me everything.”

It will be an evocative occasion for the once similarly loyal Hughton but his 
sole focus is on outwitting Benítez. “It’s one of the biggest games on our 
calendar,” said Brighton’s manager, who is adamant his gifted winger Anthony 
Knockaert will not be among the “two or three more” players Benítez hopes to 
sign before Wednesday’s transfer deadline. “Playing Newcastle in front of more 
than 50,000 people is an atmosphere our lads are going to embrace.”
 