
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> are 
still waiting for one of their players to score this season but they saw off a 
resilient Gillingham, even if they relied on a first-half own goal from John 
Egan to navigate their way into the Capital One Cup third round.

Alan Pardew’s desire to sign a striker before the transfer window shuts on 
Monday will have only been strengthened as Newcastle’s frustrations in front of 
goal continue to build having failed to find the net in their two Premier 
League games.

“The scoreline didn’t reflect our dominance,” Pardew said. “We controlled the 
game more or less all the way through. I’m kind of pleased and a bit frustrated 
we didn’t score more than one. It was difficult to penetrate their three 
centre-halves.” He refused to comment when asked about likely transfer activity 
in the coming days.

The Newcastle board remain adamant that league safety trumps cup success but 
Pardew stuck with five of the 11 who startedthe scoreless draw at Aston Villa 
on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2014/aug/23/aston-villa-v-newcastle-united-live>
and they dominated from the outset. Rolando Aarons’s blistering pace on the 
left caused the Gillingham defence plenty of problems but the goal came from 
the opposite flank 25 minutes in when Gabriel Obertan’s cross was deflected off 
Egan, who joined Gillingham from Sunderland in the summer.

It was Gillingham’s fourth own goal in six games. “It’s amazing, incredible. 
Hopefully there will be no more but it was unlucky for John – especially being 
a former Sunderland player,” the League One side’s manager, Peter Taylor, said. 
“We’re not doing anything wrong. There’s nothing we could possibly be doing to 
encourage that.”

They could, however, have done more to threaten the Newcastle goalkeeper Tim 
Krul. At times in the opening 45 minutes they had all 11 players in their own 
half – although Matt Fish raised the Holland goalkeeper’s heart rate with a 
curling effort which floated narrowly over.

Mehdi Abeid and Emmanuel Rivière both failed to threaten for Newcastle early 
on but despite being comfortable they failed to trouble Gillingham’s back three 
regularly enough. Massadio Haïdara came closest to scoring a second in the 54th 
minute when his pot shot from 30 yards rattled the crossbar but their next best 
attempt was a Fabricio Coloccini strike which was easily smothered by Stephen 
Bywater.

Gillingham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> became more 
adventurous when the clock reached 70 minutes and Krul required a stiff wrist 
to direct Luke Norris’s attempt over. The home team pushed forward as the 
minutes ticked by but Norris’s left-footed drive was their only shot on target.
 