
Full-time: It's all over, thank bog. The game started at a pleasing pace and 
Bordeaux looked set to give Newcastle a proper challenger, but as the hosts 
opened up a lead through a combination of slick finishing and good luck, both 
of which eludedBordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>, the 
visitors gave up. The last half hour was harrowing.

87 min: Perch booked. Deliverance just three minutes away.

84 min: This is doing nothing for the reputation of a competition that is 
usually unfairly maligned.

81 min: "Am I too late to remark that Newcastle's domination is Bordeauxing on 
the widiculous?" asks Mark Leadbitter. Certainly not. But you are too far too 
late to catch any football worth watching. That all stopped when Bordeaux 
surrendered after Newcastle's third.

77 min: In the absence of anything to report from this dwindling fare, I offer 
youthis <http://www.thepoke.co.uk/2012/10/04/how-to-advertise-milk/>, via 
@greg_jenner.

74 min: And now Newcastle give us something to note: shoddy defending, which 
allows Bellion to race free down the right and shoot at goal. Harper diverts 
his low shot away with his foot.

72 min: Booking for Nguemo, possibly because the ref was feeling sorry for mbm 
scribes everywhere and wanted to give us a least something to note. This is 
drab. Oh yes.

71 min: Newcastle change: Tioté off, Gosling on.

68 min: Gouffran off, the one and only David Bellion on. "I've really liked 
the look of Bigirimana so far this season," reveals Arran Ridley. "Good to see 
him involved and I've been thinking about future chants for him and the best 
I've come up with so far is 'Bigi Bigi Bigi can't you see, sometimes your 
skills just hypnotise me' to the tune of Notorious B.I.G's 'Hypnotize'." It's a 
winner.

65 min: Cissé tries a silly shot from 40 yards. He had team-mates to his right 
and left but instead just offered the ball back to the keeper. Non-matches like 
this has become tend to induce such decadence.

63 min: Decent jinking by Gouffran, followed by a reasonable shot from 20 
yards. But Bigirimana blocks.

60 min: Newcastle substitution: Cabaye off, Bigirimana on.

57 min: Right, as we await something to happen in this match of diminishing 
interest, anyone know any good jokes?

55 min: Elsewhere in this group, Club Brugge have just gone 1-0 up against 
Maritimo.

53 min: Bordeaux have sagged badly. Newcastle are coasting now.

GOAL! Newcastle 3-0 Bordeaux (Cissé 50') Newcastle have been clinical tonight, 
and Cissé underlines that point with an immaculate finish. Mind you, he was 
fractionally offside when Ferguson sent in a fine cross from the left.

49 min: Saivet meets a cross from the right with a brazen flick that almost 
catches Harper off-guard, but the keeper manages to push it out for a corner. 
Which is cleared.

48 min: I've just noticed that Newcastle mad a change at the break too: 
goalkeeper Elliot apparently suffered a groin injury towards the end of the 
first half and has been replaced by Harper. "I'm a Newcastle fan, but surely 
the reason the lad stretched and diverted the ball in his own goal was the 
Newcastle player just behind him in an offside position?" reckons John Davis. 
"He's got to be interfering with play. Plus, the keeper can't have called loud 
or early enough to tell him to leave it. Yes, I did score an own goal at 
six-a-side last week."

46 mins: Bordeaux substitutions: Diabaté and Nguemo on, Obraniak and Plasil 
off.

Half-time: Bordeaux's lack of a cutting edge has been compounded by a comedy 
mistake for Newcastle's second goal to give the hosts more substantial lead 
than they merit on the balance of play. Decentish game, though.

44 min: Anita comes close to making it three, but the keeper bats his 16-yard 
shot away well after ropey defending by the visitors.

GOAL! Newcastle 2-0 Bordeaux (Henrique 42') Sacré bleu! Newcastle are gifted a 
second goal, very much against the run of play. Ameobi did well to play in 
Simpson, who sent in a decent cross from the right but Henrique has no excuse 
for the way he diverted the ball into his own goal. Rank defending, is all.

39 min: Sané smashes a ferocious shot at goal from 35 yards, but Elliot pushes 
it to safety,

36 min: Cissé miscontrols as he attempts to latch on to a hopeful ball over 
the top. Like pickpockets at boxing bouts, Newcastle are feeding off scraps.

34 min: Obraniak curls in a sweet cross that Elliot pushes behind for another 
corner. That's Bordeaux fifth, to Newcastle's none. Williams defends this one 
well, heading powerfully clear.

33 min: Bordeaux knock the ball around at their pleasure before Saivet curls a 
cross in from the right and Gouffran's header from 12 yards bounces off 
Williamson and out for a corner.

30 min: Alan Pardew is livid on the sideline, what with his team being 
outplayed despite leading. I'd be getting very nervous if I were the assistant 
ref on the near side ...

27 min: Lovely interplay by Bordeaux, culminating in a nice turn and shot by 
Gouffran and a good block by Wiliamson.

24 min: Bad news for Newcastle as Tioté hobbles off to continue treatment on 
what looks like an ankle injury that he seemingly suffered while twisting for 
the ball.

23 min: Bit of a lull here ... but not in Marseille, where the home team have 
just gone a goal down against Limassol on Joey Barton's debut ...

20 min: Tioté gets his customary card, for a late tackle on Saivet.

18 min: Obraniak and Plasil combine nicely before feeding Saivet, who is again 
in plenty of space down the right. But his cross is plop.

GOAL! Newcastle 1-0 Bordeaux (Ameobi 16') Wonderful goal! Cabaye found Obertan 
with a splendid cross-field pass, and then the winger tricked his way past 
Mariano before firing the ball across the face of goal for Ameobi to tap in 
from close range.

13 min: Cabaye curls the freekick wide.

12 min: It's all Bordeaux. They're sharper and more clever than Newcastle. And 
just as I write that, Anita plays a fine through-ball for Ameobi and Henrique 
takes him down: yellow card for the defender, freekick in a promising position 
to Newcatsle.

9 min: Bordeaux have the upper hand here, showing what a fluent outfit they 
are. Saivet wayward shot from 25 yards is unbecoming of them.

7 min: Champagne stuff from Bordeaux! They smoothly played their way from back 
to front before presenting Obraniak with a great chance to open the scoring ... 
but he headed wide from eight yards!

4 min: The first four minutes of this match have been more entertaining than 
the 93 of the Pana-Spurs game. It's urgent, open and fun.

2 min: Tioté slips a pass through to Cabaye, who ignores the run of Cissé and 
lets fly himself from the corner of the box .... the whizzes just past the post!

8.02pm: Curious: Bordeaux's tracksuits appear to be the same as the kit worn 
by the match officials in the Panathinaikos-Tottenham match ..

Teams:
Newcastle: Elliot, Simpson, Williamson, Perch, Ferguson, Anita, Cabaye, Tiote, 
Cisse, Shola Ameobi, Obertan.
Subs: Harper,Santon, Ben Arfa, Gosling, Ba, Bigirimana, Sammy Ameobi.

Bordeaux: Carasso, Mariano, Henrique, Planus, Tremoulinas, Saivet, Sane, 
Plasil, Obraniak, Jussie, Gouffran.
Subs: Olimpa, N'Guemo, Bellion, Diabate, Chalme, Marange, Traore.
Referee: Antonio Lahoz (Spain)

Good evening all. Paul will be here soon enough but while you are waiting for 
him, here's Alan Pardew calling on Newcastle to 'up their levels' ahead of some 
tough tests. Enjoy.

Alan Pardew has instructed his Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> players to raise their 
game as they prepare for two matches which seem poised to serve as a litmus 
test of the team's potential.

On Thursday night Bordeaux, unbeaten in France's Ligue 1, visit Tyneside on 
Europa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> duty, 
and Sunday sees a reversion to the Premier League and the arrival of Manchester 
United.

"They're significant games in terms of upping our levels," said Pardew, whose 
side have made a decent start to the campaign without ever quite hitting last 
season's highs. "We go in with a strong chance of winning both matches, but we 
need people playing at their maximums. So far we've been getting results 
without being at our best."

According to Steve Harper, the reserve goalkeeper, Pardew "read the riot act" 
to his team following last Saturday's fortunate draw at Reading and has 
challenged Newcastle's players to remind him what they are truly capable of.

Continued here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/oct/03/newcastle-bordeaux-europa-league>
.
 