
The Newcastle manager, Alan Pardew, is hoping to head into the knockout stages 
of theEuropa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> 
with a significantly stronger squad than the one with which he started.

The Magpies had qualified for the next stage of the competition before 
Thursday night's defeat inBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>, which saw the French side 
retain their place at the top of Group D to secure, in theory at least, a more 
favourable draw.

Pardew fielded an inexperienced side at the Stade Chaban-Delmas with Davide 
Santon, Cheik Tioté, Jonas Gutiérrez, Hatem Ben Arfa and Demba Ba left at home 
nursing injuries and Steven Taylor and Yohan Cabaye on the long-term casualty 
list. However, he is hoping that by the time their European campaign resumes in 
February, his hand will have been strengthened considerably.

Pardew said: "We wanted to qualify – that was the first agenda in this 
competition – and we did that with a game to spare. I think it would have been 
difficult coming here if we both hadn't qualified and they played their best 
team on that pitch.

"It would have been difficult for us because they have got some very good 
players. But the bottom line is we have qualified and we can look forward to 
February. I am just hoping that, fingers crossed, when we come out of the other 
side of the window, we have got a stronger squad."

Cheick Diabaté headed home Fahid Ben Khalfallah's 29th-minute cross and slid a 
72nd-minute shot through the goalkeeper Rob Elliot's legs to condemn Newcastle 
to a first European defeat of the season and avenge their 3-0 defeat at St 
James' Park in October.

It was little more than the French side deserved. But for Elliot, who made 
important first-half saves from Henri Saivet, Ben Khalfallah – who passed up a 
glorious opportunity at the death – and the former Sunderland striker David 
Bellion, they could have won even more handsomely.

There was little Elliot could do just before the half-hour when Bellion and 
the excellent Ben Khalfallah combined down the left for the latter to curl an 
inviting cross into the box. Diabaté gave Mike Williamson the slip to climb 
high above James Perch and direct a firm header past the helpless keeper.

Any hopes of a fightback were dashed when Diabaté ran on to André Poko's ball 
over the top and beat Elliot to wrap up the win.
 