
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Five Year Forward View sets 
out the service’s own views on the radical action it, the government, local 
councils, employers and the public need to take in order to ensure that it can 
survive the growing pressures.

It is a blueprint for whoever ends up in government after next May’s general 
election, setting out what ought to be done between 2015 and 2020 to improve 
the NHS by transforming how it works and interacts with patients.

The document’s 39 pages are a response to the widespread concern that, with 
demand for healthcare rising just when the NHS is experiencing an unprecedented 
financial squeeze, the health service is in danger of soon becoming 
“unsustainable”.

Reforming the whole

The Forward View says that the NHS has been getting better in the last 15 
years, despite its tight budgets, as illustrated by much-improved outcomes for 
people who get cancer or heart problems. However, it warns, “quality of care 
can be variable, preventable illness is widespread, health inequalities 
deep-rooted. Our patients’ needs are changing, new treatment options are 
emerging and we face particular challenges in areas such as mental health, 
cancer and support for frail older persons. Service pressures are building.”

The NHS needs to change significantly in order to have “a better future” it 
concludes. While the service itself can make some of those changes, “some 
critical decisions – for example on investment, on various public health 
measures, and on local service changes – will need explicit support from the 
next government”.

Public health

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> problems associated with 
obesity, smoking and drinking are growing, and the NHS is facing a rising 
financial burden from dealing with them. “The future health of millions of 
children, the sustainability of the NHS, and the economic prosperity of Britain 
all now depend on a radical upgrade in prevention and public health.” As a 
result, “the NHS will now back hard-hitting national action on obesity, 
smoking, alcohol and other major health risks”. Mayors and local councils, 
which regained responsibility for public health last year, should get greater 
powers to tackle such problems.

Employers also need to do more to help their staff look after their health 
better. Employees who lose weight, for example, could be rewarded with cash or 
shopping vouchers. However, it is unclear if NHS funding would be available for 
that.

England’s 1.4 million full-time unpaid carers will get new support, and those 
who volunteer in the NHS could receive a £200 council-tax discount the document 
proposes.

Hospital reforms

Unhelpful divisions in the NHS – between the different places care is 
delivered, such as hospitals and GP surgeries, for example, need to be 
dissolved, to improve care. “The NHS will take decisive steps to break down the 
barriers in how care is provided between family doctors and hospitals, between 
physical and mental health, between health and social care.

The Forward View envisages much less healthcare being provided in hospitals 
and much more in community settings. “The future will see far more care 
delivered locally but with some services in specialist centres, organised to 
support people with multiple health conditions, not just single diseases.”

NHS England will expect, embrace and fund “new models of care” to look after 
specific groups of patients, such as diabetics or the frail elderly. One option 
could see the creation of a so called “multispeciality community provider” in 
which GPs could come together with nurses, hospital specialists and potentially 
also mental health and social care services to provide integrated care outside 
of hospitals.

Urgent and emergency care services, which look after patients when GP 
surgeries are shut, will be redesigned so that the array of different services 
are integrated. That will see A&E units, out-of-hours GP services, urgent-care 
centres, walk-in centres, the NHS 111 telephone advice line and ambulance 
service work together better.

Smaller hospitals, which some fear have a very uncertain future, are promised 
“new options to help them remain viable, including partnerships with other 
hospitals further afield”. For example, Moorfields eye hospital in London 
already operates services in 23 other places across the capital and the 
south-east. Some acute hospitals could share their “back-office” functions with 
another, which may not be nearby.

New deal for GPs

For GPs there needs to be a “new deal” because many are struggling to cope 
with growing demands from patients, many of whom are more medically challenging 
than before. The service will tackle the recent shift in NHS funding away from 
family doctor services; “the NHS will invest more in primary care”. New 
incentive schemes will try and boost the number of GPs, especially those 
prepared to work in deprived areas.

Financing the future

Under the proposals the NHS will try to close the £30bn gap between its 
available resources and demand for care that is predicted to open up by 2020/21 
by making annual productivity and efficiency gains of 2%-3%. It has averaged 
0.8% historically. Further restraint of NHS staff’s pay, through wage freezes 
and 1% rises, is deemed unsustainable in the long-term.

If those productivity gains materialise, and new ways of looking after 
patients bear fruit, and demand can be reduced, the government would need to 
give the NHS an annual budget increase to cover inflation, plus some money to 
bankroll its metamorphosis into a new-look service, and also another £1.5bn a 
year of extra funding in order to ensure the £30bn gap is closed.
 