
Rangers scraped through to the fifth round of the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> thanks to late goals from 
Nicky Law and David Templeton at Falkirk. The tie looked as if it was heading 
for a replay after Lee McCulloch failed to convert from the penalty spot and 
Rangers struggled to break down a Falkirk side who played the last half hour 
with 10 men. But Law grabbed the opener with a minute of the regulation 90 
minutes to go and Templeton doubled the advantage deep into injury time as Ally 
McCoist's men left it late to book their place in the next round.

Ian Black tried his luck with an early effort that he dragged wide of target 
as the visitors tried to put their hosts under some early pressure. A scramble 
in the six-yard box followed but no one was able to produce a clean shot at 
goal before theFalkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> 
goalkeeper Michael McGovern claimed possession.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were threatening again 
when Arnold Peralta's corner found McCulloch six yards out but he could not 
keep his header down and on target. McGovern was then alert to claim a Jon Daly 
header and prevent the Irishman from adding to his 17 goals this season.

The Falkirk keeper came to the rescue again when he raced off his line to 
block a Lee Wallace effort after the left-back found himself one on one with 
McGovern. At the other end, Phil Roberts tried a shot from distance that failed 
to trouble Cammy Bell, moments after the striker had picked up the first 
booking for a challenge on Peralta.

Roberts was quickly followed into referee Brian Colvin's book by Mark Millar, 
who was cautioned on the stroke of half-time for a late sliding tackle on 
Black. Wallace, who had the best chance of the first half, had another decent 
opportunity to open the scoring shortly after the restart. He raced on to a Law 
pass and unleashed a shot from just inside the box that dipped over the 
crossbar, with McGovern untroubled on this occasion.

Rangers were handed an opportunity to open the scoring on 58 minutes when the 
referee pointed to the spot after David McCracken was shown a straight red card 
for hauling down Nicky Clark. McCulloch stepped up for the penalty but the 
skipper was denied the opener by a decent save from McGovern. Law steered the 
ball back towards goal and McCulloch flicked it into the back of the net, but 
the offside flag was already raised.

Peralta and Clark were then replaced by Fraser Aird and Templeton respectively 
as Rangers shuffled their pack in a desperate bid to find a way past the 
Bairns. Aird was denied by the woodwork with his first touch of the ball when 
his ferocious shot cracked off the crossbar and the danger was cleared.

The breakthrough finally came with 89 minutes on the clock when a Black 
free-kick broke for Law and he lashed home. Templeton then ensured there was no 
way back for Falkirk when he collected from Aird and dispatched a shot beyond 
the grasp of McGovern to seal the match and Rangers' place in the next round.
 