
Derby County’s revival under Steve McClaren gathered pace when they defeated 
Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> 3-0 
at Pride Park.

Although Nicklas Bendtner was unlucky to put through his own goal in the first 
half, Derby underlined their superiority against one of McClaren’s former clubs 
with second-half strikes from Tom Ince and Will Hughes. It was a sixth 
successive league victory for the Rams and moved them into the top six for the 
first time this season.

Forest’s four-match unbeaten run came to an end and although they competed 
well in the first half, they created little as Derby kept a fourth consecutive 
clean sheet and seventh in nine games since McClaren returned to the club in 
October.

Football League your thoughts: Wolves and Fulham share spoils in 4-4 draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/dec/10/football-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw>
Forest probably sensed it was not going to be their day before a ball had been 
kicked when Henri Lansbury, the Championship Player of the Month for November, 
was injured in the warm-upand replaced by Mustapha Carayol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/mustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest>
.

It was Carayol who threatened to open Derby’s defence with a powerful run that 
ended with a shot blocked by Richard Keogh before a flare-up involving Bradley 
Johnson and Ben Osborn in the ninth minute resulted in bookings for both 
players plus yellow cards for Darren Bent and Damien Perquis.

Bent was close to connecting with a low cross from Chris Baird before Marcus 
Olsson glided past a defender on the left but could not pick out a white shirt.

Carayol had a shot deflected behind when Forest broke dangerously in the 25th 
minute and Bent was lucky to stay on the field a minute later after catching 
Eric Lichaj late.

The game had lacked quality so it was appropriate that the goal that gave 
Derby the lead in the 33rd minute was a scrappy one with a flick on by Johnny 
Russell from a corner ricocheting off Bendtner’s head and past Vladimir 
Stojkovic.

Forest could count themselves unlucky but they had a chance to equalise in 
stoppage time when the ball broke to Matty Cash 15 yards out. However, his shot 
lacked power and Scott Carson dropped to his left to save.

Bendtner almost scored a second own goal in the 52nd minute when he headed a 
free-kick against the bar but Derby made it two in the 55th minute when Baird’s 
precise pass down the right channel allowed Ince to slip past Lichaj and turn 
inside Michael Mancienne before lifting the ball past Stojkovic from 12 yards.

Any chance of a Forest recovery vanished in the 64th minute when Hughes set up 
Russell and although Stojkovic thrust out his right foot to make a great save, 
Hughes followed up to net the rebound.

It was then a case of damage limitation for Forest but Derby knew they had 
done enough to give their fans an early Christmas present.
 