
Nico Rosberg does not strut around the Silverstone paddock attired in 
lederhosen and munching Bratwurst but no one would be entirely surprised if he 
did, because he has suddenly become German. It is a disconcerting turn of 
events for the already fully stretched Lewis Hamilton before Sunday’sBritish 
Grand Prix <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>. Not only 
does Hamilton find himself up against a formidable and thoroughly prepared foe 
but also a large and powerful nation.

Rosberg, of course, born in Wiesbaden, in south-west Germany, 29 years ago, 
has always been German. It is just that Germans could not get their heads 
around the notion until recently. His father Keke, the 1982Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> world champion, was so Finnish 
he might have had a blue cross tattooed on his forehead. He was one of those 
crazy, sliding and sometimes rolling drivers we know and love from rally 
driving – and who are often Finnish.

Then there is the fact that Rosberg Junior left Wiesbaden to live in Monaco at 
the venerable age of four weeks, and has lived there ever since, apart from 
when he’s in his Ibiza mansion, reading his many books, playing with his 
adopted cats or eating his girlfriend Vivian’s organic food. So German air is 
almost foreign to his lungs.

This did not worry Germans because they had Michael Schumacher. For the past 
four years, they have had Sebastian Vettel. But then – it might have been 
around the time of theMonaco Grand Prix in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/25/nico-rosberg-wins-monaco-f1-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-mercedes>
, or perhaps theCanadian race last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/08/daniel-ricciardo-nico-rosberg-grand-prix-canada>
 – they started getting behind Rosberg. It is not only for their footballers 
that the black, red and gold flag has fluttered in recent weeks.

A German is leading the world championship, and might very well win it. He is 
driving a German car to boot, and the German Grand Prix is just around the 
corner. Even the most churlish Bavarian and Berliner is beginning to get 
excited.

Toto Wolff, the head of motorsport at Mercedes, said: “It changed, I think, a 
month ago. That was when we noticed the Facebook and Twitter activity with Nico 
going up a lot. Nico is also a very keen footballer, and he’s been 
communicating a lot about the World Cup. Also, Vettel is not competitive this 
year. There was less passion in Germany for Nico, for whatever reason, while 
the emotional momentum behind Lewis is enormous in the UK. I haven’t seen that 
with any other driver. But now Germans are getting behind Nico much more.

“When we announced the driver lineup at the end of 2012 the majority would 
have said that Lewis was clearly going to be the quicker driver. But they are 
very equal. We can say we have two No1 drivers, which is a very nice 
experience.”

There is also a recognition that Rosberg, with his intense intelligence, his 
technical knowledge and his solid all-round driving, may have been 
underestimated. Certainly Johnny Herbert, winner of the British Grand Prix in 
1995, thinks so.

Herbert says: “I think Nico is a lot better than many people thought. When 
Schumacher joined Mercedes people said he would beat Nico. But it didn’t 
happen. Then everyone said that Lewis would see him off. But that’s not been 
the case either.

“He has a very good knowledge of his car, works extremely hard in the 
simulator and is always talking to his mechanics and engineers. He is also a 
very good driver, even if he may not have that spark of raw talent we see with 
Lewis. But he doesn’t make mistakes. The only thing we don’t know is can he 
handle the pressure if things gets tight? But he has given no sign that he will 
crack.”

Damon Hill, who won at Silverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> the year before Herbert, said: 
“I think he’s a far more polished a driver than people give him credit for. 
Sometimes you have to express yourself, even if you’re not winning – and 
perhaps he hasn’t done that loudly enough.”

But expressing himself is exactly what Rosberg is doing now with his social 
media presence having increased hugely. Nicola Pohl, who works for the German 
newspaper Bild, says there is a lot of fun behind that introverted image. “He’s 
funny. He has jokes and he is teasing all the time. It’s almost like a 
competition for him to get the better jokes.” And he can tell jokes in five 
languages – none of them Finnish. He speaks German, English, French, Italian 
and (a little less fluently) Spanish.

Vettel, German race fans complain, does not use social media, and is content 
to attend the more formal sponsors’ functions and autograph-signing sessions. 
Rosberg has also succeeded in playing down his gilded youth in Monaco. His 
pocket money was just three euros a week, he says. He had to save up to buy 
jeans. He even claims that the boy Hamilton, living in his council home in 
Stevenage, had more spending money. Poor Hamilton is even struggling with 
Rosberg to cling on to his working-class background.
 