
When the dust and rubber had settled on the chaotic old airfield in 
Northamptonshire, whenthe tyres and tempers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jun/30/british-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-boycott>
 had cooled, two men stood tall in the lengthening shadows of the evening 
sunshine.

Nico Rosberg's second win of the season 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jun/30/nico-rosberg-wins-british-gp>, and 
the third of his career, was not only a personal glory; it also pulled Mercedes 
ahead of Ferrari in the constructors' championship, where they are likely to 
remain as Red Bull's main challengers.

The smile was, briefly, wiped off his face when he was hauled before the 
stewards for not sufficiently reducing his speed when the yellow flags were 
waved, but he got away with a reprimand.

For the second-placed Mark Webber, his serious face expressed sadness mingled 
with pride; this was his lastBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> and he came so close to 
repeating his victories here in 2010 and 2012.

In the absence of a British winner, a victory for the Australian would have 
been the most popular here, for this Anglophile lives just a short drive away 
from theSilverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> circuit. 
That he might have waved from a higher point on the podium is remarkable when 
it is considered that he made such a bad start he seemed to have located 
reverse gear at the beginning of the race.

As he slid back down the field he encountered the infamous battering ram that 
is Romain Grosjean and sustained front wing damage. He was once as far back as 
15th. At the end, though, he was beaten by Rosberg by just 0.7sec and had 
enough pace to suggest he might have overhauled the German if only the race 
could have been extended by a lap or two.
 Lewis Hamilton has a left rear tyre failure. Photograph: Lars Baron/Getty 
Images 
But if you screw your eyes tight shut you might be able to imagine that even 
Rosberg's win was a local triumph. He said afterwards: "This is a very special 
day for me – special because it's the home grand prix of the team and the 
factory is 10 minutes away [in Brackley]. A lot of people, a lot of my fellow 
team members and colleagues are in the grandstands watching today and it's 
very, very nice that I was able to give them such a great race and such a great 
result. They really deserve it. It's great to see the momentum we have in the 
team at the moment.
"I feel sorry for all the British fans. It would have been a great race for 
Lewis [Hamilton] here in front of his home crowd – that's always a massive 
disappointment. But that's racing sometimes. When Sebastian [Vettel] stopped, 
to be honest, I won't lie, I wasn't disappointed by that one. And from then it 
was a great race to win.

"When Mark was chasing me, it was a compromise between how fast is he coming 
at me and how much am I going to take out of the tyres, so I was staying off 
the kerbs, taking it easy in the high speed where the most damage is done. Then 
I had to pick up the pace a little bit towards the end as he was getting quite 
close, so that was really difficult to judge."

Webber had been chatting to his friend Fernando Alonso while Rosberg was 
speaking. When the Red Bull man was asked about the race he shrugged and looked 
a little wistful. "It is mixed feelings when you finish seven-tenths behind 
Nico for the win," he said. "But he's also out there doing his things, so he 
deserved the win. We did recover. I think we had a bit of luck after that but 
we've got to be there to capitalise on it. We had a good strategy and obviously 
I pushed very hard.

"The start … I don't know. I have no idea how we can get good starts some 
weekends and then not at others. That was a big negative for us. And then 
Grosjean – someone, I think it was him – touched my front wing at turn one. I 
had to get that changed at the first stop. And then the race was really reset 
from there. The safety cars obviously helped."

Alonso, who was third, looked one of the most dejected drivers out there, even 
though he closed the gap on the championship leader, Vettel, who retired with 
gearbox failure when he looked certain to win. "This weekend everything went a 
little bit on the wrong side for us," Alonso said. "We get the podium and 
Sebastian doesn't finish the race – it's one of these weekends where the result 
is very good but the feeling is that we must improve for next weekend."

As for the Brits, behind Hamilton (fourth) there was Paul di Resta (ninth), 
Jenson Button (13th) and Max Chilton (17th). It wasn't really a very British 
British Grand Prix.
 