
Touch, speed, aggression, all tempered by pitch-perfect judgment of the 
briefest moments have defined some of the greatest drivers inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> but the latter, perhaps more so 
than in any sport, must sometimes ride pillion to blind luck. Both have been 
key factors in determining how the world championship title fight has evolved 
this season and one or the other will yet be key here in Mexico.

Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton>, who was 
faster than Rosberg in both practices on Friday even if Ferrari’s Sebastian 
Vettel proved quickest in the second outing, must execute his role to 
perfection to keep his title hopes alive and should the dice roll for him his 
challenge to win a fourth championship might be in his hands again. If fate is 
fickle, however, it could be over.

Lewis Hamilton admits wresting world title from Nico Rosberg grip is tall order
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/f1-lewis-hamilton-world-title-nico-rosberg-mexican-grand-prix>
His battle with Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> 
can still go to the wire – three races’ time in Abu Dhabi. The German leads by 
26 points, and even Mercedes one-twos in Hamilton’s favour would still secure 
his first championship. But that would seem too straightforward an ending to a 
season during which the advantage between them has ebbed and flowed to dramatic 
effect and on Sunday the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez might yet host a further 
twist in this tale.

If Rosberg wins here and Hamilton fails to finish or score a point, the title 
will belong to the German. If Hamilton wins and Rosberg endures a DNF, the gap 
between them will be down to one point. Neither Mercedes driver thus far has 
been able to lay claim to truly be the heir apparent. Rosberg opened with four 
wins and an advantage of 43 points but Hamilton came back at him with a run of 
six from seven and was 19 points to the better after the German Grand Prix. He 
did not win again, however, until the last round in Austin, with Rosberg’s 
advantage regained through four victories.

What has made these shifts so compelling and caused so much debate is that 
they have not been down solely to one driver simply gaining the upper hand on 
track. Without doubt fortune has not been kind to Hamilton. His early season 
deficit was prompted by ERS failures in qualifying for China and Russia, then 
he lost practice time in Singapore with a hydraulic issue, all setbacks that 
would be dwarfed by having his engine blow up while leading in Malaysia – an 
event that was as unlikely for the Mercedes hybrid power unit as it was 
crushing to the driver.

The early-season failures were compounded by a penalty-enforced start at the 
back in Spa, while the only major mechanical issue Rosberg has endured was a 
gearbox problem at the British Grand Prix that caused him to finish third 
rather than second. After Malaysia Hamilton was vocal in his frustration that 
whenever a Mercedes power unit had an issue it was the one on his No44 car. He 
has a point; of the eight Mercedes-powered cars on the grid only his has needed 
replacements engendering penalties.

But there have also been uncharacteristic problems in areas over which he does 
exercise control. An error in qualifying cost him Baku but poor starts are the 
real issue: five, in Australia, Canada, Bahrain, Italy and Japan. The change 
this season to only one clutch with the teams unable to change its settings 
once the car has left the garage, is one with which Hamilton has struggled and 
it has cost him.

He must not let it happen again this weekend but how it plays out beyond that 
is made all the more compelling by taking place at the unique challenge of the 
Mexican Grand Prix. The daunting high-speed banking of the Peraltada may have 
been neutered but in almost every other way this track is still a ferocious 
test of car and driver.

Mexican Grand Prix fans and passion lay foundations for long F1 future | Giles 
Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/mexican-grand-prix-fans-passion-foundation-f1-future>
The high altitude and thinner air of Mexico City reduces aero effects. The 
turbo-chargers work harder to deliver the same level of power but with the drag 
reduced top speeds are high and may well better the upper limits of the current 
generations of cars – it will be at least around 227mph before braking into 
turn one. Equally, however, there is less downforce, to deal with a track that 
requires grip through the second half and particularly through the stadium 
section. The power unit is under pressure then, as are the brakes which are 
difficult to cool and the tyres face extra work from the lack of downforce and 
low grip levels. As engineering tests go, Mexico poses stern questions and 
having raced here only once before in the modern era, it remains to a certain 
extent an unknown quantity – if the dice are to roll, a DNF here for either 
contender would be more likely than Brazil.

The tight corners, allied to lower downforce and higher top speeds, will 
demand the maximum from the drivers, with intense pressure on both this may 
well prove to be both a test of nerve and of will. Crucially, however, here 
Rosberg has an advantage. Hamilton cannot afford a retirement and should the 
German squeeze him and risk contact he will have to yield, not something the 
world champion will take to easily.

There were questions about Hamilton’s focus in the season-closing races after 
he had the title secured in 2015, all of which Rosberg won, beginning in Mexico 
but this year, with the title race in the balance, luck and judgment may play 
their part, but there will be no questioning the attention of either driver.
 