
The recipe

Rinse 200g of brown basmati rice in warm water and drain. Put the rice into a 
small, deep saucepan, pour in enough water to cover by a couple of centimetres, 
then add 8 whole black peppercorns, 2 bay leaves and a couple of cloves. Bring 
to the boil, then lower the heat so the water simmers and cover with a 
tight-fitting lid. Leave to cook for about 10 minutes, till the water has 
evaporated and small holes have appeared on the surface of the rice. Set aside, 
covered with the lid, for 5 minutes.

Slice 2 large leeks into pieces about the size of a wine cork, then wash them 
thoroughly under cold water. Melt 40g of butter over a moderate heat, add the 
leeks and 4 tbsp of water and cook over a lowish heat for 10 minutes, taking 
care they soften but do not colour.

Peel and very thinly slice a large clove of smoked garlic. Wash and finely 
shred a large handful of kale. In a frying pan, sizzle the kale in a little 
butter, add the sliced garlic and cook for a couple of minutes until bright and 
tender.

Sizzle the kale in a little butter before adding the garlic

Boil 2 eggs till they are as you like them, then carefully remove their 
shells. Check the rice, then run a fork through it to separate the grains and 
stir in 1 tsp of garam masala. Toss together the rice, kale, garlic, leeks and 
their butter, then divide between 2 plates. Top with the peeled eggs. Serves 2.

The trick

Rinsing the rice 2 or 3 times or until the water runs clear will prevent the 
grains from sticking together. To keep the leeks from browning, add a disc of 
greaseproof paper on top of the leeks, butter and water, then cover with a lid, 
so they steam rather than fry.

The twist

You could comfortably use this recipe for leftovers, such as roast meat, torn 
into large shreds, or pieces of cooked salmon or smoked mackerel. You could 
also warm crème fraîche in a saucepan, then spoon it over the hot, spiced rice 
as you eat.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 