
Nigel Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigel-pearson> is expected 
to be sacked as the Derby County manager after a furious argument with Mel 
Morris, the Championship club’s owner, led to him being suspended before the 
game at Cardiff City on Tuesday night. Pearson met Morris at Derby’s training 
ground on Monday to discuss in part the club’s poor start to the season and it 
is understood the conversation became extremely heated.

Barnsley add to Roberto Di Matteo’s Aston Villa misery with late leveller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/barnsley-aston-villa-championship-match-report>
Morris also had other concerns about Pearson’s general approach and the club 
have opened an internal investigation in the wake of the incident.

Chris Powell, the assistant manager, has been asked to take charge of the team 
in the interim, although that situation will not continue for long, with Derby 
expected to make a decision about the manager swiftly. Derby picked up a first 
win in sevenChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> 
games with a 2-0 victory against Cardiff.

Powell dedicated the win to Pearson. “I believe I will be in charge on 
Saturday against Reading, I will speak to the owner on Wednesday and we will go 
from there,” he said. “But that was Nigel’s team and I dedicate that win to 
Nigel because I felt it would come and he had them in the right place to 
perform and full credit to everyone at the club after a tough 24 hours.

“It is very emotional. I thought the players were extremely professional, it 
would have been easy to go the other way because of what has happened and fail 
to perform. They were terrific, I am really proud of them and the fans who came 
all this way, it has been a tough start but we know the quality we have.

“We have had tough results but I always felt the players would perform after 
how they trained.”

It seems highly unlikely Pearson will stay, leaving the door open for Steve 
McClaren to return to Derby. The former England manager is out of work and is 
likely to be interested, although it is unclear whether Morris would be 
prepared to go down that path again. Steve Bruce, another manager not in a job 
at the moment, could also be in the frame.

Pearson was appointed in May because of his proven track record of winning 
promotion from the Championship, but Derby have won only one of their nine 
league games under him. The east Midlands club are still looking for their 
first win at the iPro Stadium, where they have scored just one goal. Following 
Saturday’s defeat at home against Blackburn Rovers, Pearson said that his 
players were “paralysed by fear”.

The news about Pearson’s predicament at Derby came on the eve of Leicester’s 
first Champions League home game. Pearson was sacked as Leicester manager in 
June last year, after a fall out with the club’s Thai owners. He had 
masterminded Leicester’s great escape at the end of the 2014-15 season, when 
they won seven out of their last nine league games to survive, but there were a 
number of controversial incidents during that campaign.

He appeared to be sacked not once but twice at Leicester, surviving one 
reported dismissal following his bizarre on-field altercation with Crystal 
Palace’s James McArthur before eventually being undermined by his son’s role in 
the sex-tape furore that offended the club’s owners. In between Pearson 
attracted a certain amount of attention in a routine press conference by 
referring to a journalist as “an ostrich”. He later apologised for his comments.
 