
Nigel Clough haunted his former employers at Derby County on Friday night as 
Burton Albion <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion> secured a 
1-0 Championship win over Derby County in the first competitive meeting between 
the sides.

Premier League: transfer window summer 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/aug/23/premier-league-transfer-window-summer-2016-interactive>
Clough spent four years at Derby before being sacked in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/28/derby-county-sack-nigel-clough>
 and his new side were excellent value for three points against their more 
illustrious neighbours from 10 miles down the road.

The Australia international Jackson Irvine scored for the third league game 
running and his early goal proved enough for Burton in front of a lively crowd 
of 6,746 at the Pirelli Stadium.

Both teams made wholesale changes from their midweek EFL Cup fixtures, 
although showed only one from their last league outing. Burton replaced their 
injured captain, John Mousinho, with John Brayford while Derby brought in 
Marcus Olsson at left-back after Craig Forsyth sustained a serious knee injury 
during the goalless draw against Aston Villa.

Burton made the brighter start and they nearly went ahead after six minutes 
when Chris O’Grady won the ball in a dangerous area and found Lloyd Dyer, whose 
effort was well stopped by Scott Carson. A minute later the lively Lucas Akins 
broke down the right only to fire high and wide.

However, the pressure told 12 minutes in when Akins beat Olsson and picked out 
Irvine, who nodded home Burton’s fifth headed goal of the season from close 
range.

Derby were wasteful in possession and when they eventually carved out a chance 
after 20 minutes Johnny Russell lost his footing at the crucial moment after a 
neat one-two with Chris Martin on the edge of the box. A tidy Derby move six 
minutes later ended with Jacob Butterfield firing straight at Jon McLaughlin 
but Burton remained a threat on the break as Tom Naylor won the ball in 
midfield and set Dyer and O’Grady clear, only for the attack to fizzle out.

Derby’s best chance of the opening period came three minutes before the break 
when Tom Ince broke down the right and picked out Martin but his shot was 
charged down.

Abdoul Camara replaced Ince at half-time and only three minutes after the 
interval he had an effort blocked by the former Derby defender Brayford. Two 
minutes later the Guinea international Camara cut in from the right and saw his 
deflected effort clawed out by McLaughlin.

Derby introduced Darren Bent and the Manchester United loanee James Wilson in 
an attempt to raise their pedestrian first-half tempo and McLaughlin had to be 
alert to parry away Craig Bryson’s dangerous cross-shot.

Camara shot straight at McLaughlin from the edge of the box but Burton’s 
tremendous work rate restricted the visitors to half-chances. Hughes’s hopeful 
30-yarder, which sailed well over the bar with three minutes left, summed up 
Derby’s evening.

Akins found the substitute Marcus Harness with another dangerous cross in the 
final minute but he failed to add a gloss to the scoreline.
 