
I am not going to forgo my daily salad just because there’s a bit of frost on 
the roof. Those crisp, crackling leaves of winter, the welcome snap of 
bitterness and bright flavours will continue to take their place on my table, 
they just need a slightly different treatment. Most of my winter salads have a 
hot element to them – a sizzling, often spicy addition to contrast with the 
coolness of all the lush, crunchy greenery.

Roast chicken tossed with a dressing made from its own roasting juices, mellow 
black garlic and ice cold segments of citrus appeared on the menu this week, as 
did another salad of fat-marbled pork (I used belly), sweet miso and honey with 
pears and freckled lettuce. The pears, incidentally, were cooked with vinegar, 
sugar and peppercorns to give a teasingly pickled note, and would be good with 
cold meats or a wedge of pork pie, too.

Add a spicy element to contrast with all the lush greenery

The introduction of something hot and sticky to a refreshing salad can stretch 
as far as pork ribs tossed with an orange, watercress and pomegranate; sliced 
sausages with a tangle of shredded cabbage and radishes, or maybe sautéed 
potatoes and smoked mackerel lurking deliciously amid spinach and a tangle of 
young leaves.

I cannot be alone in the urge to toss chilled watercress, spinach and chicory 
leaves with steaming hot juices from a roast, the heat of the gravy lightly 
softening the leaves. For me, the contrast of temperatures and textures, the 
juxtaposition of the searing hot with the icy cold only adds to the pleasure of 
what is on my plate.

This is not the time to abandon the salad bowl.

Chicken, black garlic and citrus salad

I suggest chicken thighs here, but drumsticks will work, too. Just choose 
really thick and meaty ones from a free-range bird. The texture of the salad is 
much improved by tearing the roasted chicken from the bone by hand in thick, 
juicy pieces rather than chopping it with a knife. Lardons and frisée aside, 
little cubes of meat do nothing for the look of a salad.

Serves 4
chicken thighs 1kg (about 6)
olive oil 2 tbsp
black garlic 4 cloves
sesame seeds 4 tbsp
lambs lettuce 25g
watercress 50g
mustard and cress or other micro-salad leaves
grapefruit 1
orange 1, large
clementine 1

Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Put the chicken thighs into a roasting tin, 
pour in the olive oil, season generously with salt and black pepper and toss 
gently to coat the chicken. Bake for 30 minutes until the skin of the chicken 
is deep gold and crisp.

Remove the black cloves of garlic from their papery skins, then crush the 
flesh into a smooth, sticky paste with the back of a knife.

Crush the garlic cloves into a smooth, sticky paste

Toast the sesame seeds in a dry pan until golden then remove from the heat. 
Wash the lamb’s lettuce and watercress and dry well. If the watercress stems 
are long, chop them into short pieces. Peel the grapefruit with a knife then 
slice thickly. If the grapefruit is large, cut the slices in half. Do the same 
with the orange, reserving as much juice as you can.

Remove the chicken from the pan then pull the meat from the bones in large, 
juicy pieces, place in a large bowl and set aside. Pour away all but a couple 
of tablespoons of the oil in the roasting tin, then place the tin over a 
moderate heat, and stir in the mashed black garlic, the juice of the clementine 
and any reserved citrus juice. Stir thoroughly to combine, then pour the 
dressing over the chicken and toss gently to evenly coat the meat.

Add the prepared grapefruit and orange, the watercress, cress and lamb’s 
lettuce and toss gently to combine. Scatter with the toasted sesame and serve.

Pork, miso and pickled pear
 Belly up: pork, miso and pickled pear. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the 
Observer 
Strips of pork belly, sold without the bone, work nicely here. Look for those 
with plenty of fat. I use white miso for the dressing. Use dark miso if that is 
what you have, but the flavour will be saltier and more intense.

Serves 4
For the pears:
white wine vinegar 4 tbsp
black peppercorns 8
caster sugar 1 tbsp
salt 1 tsp
pears 2
pork belly 700g, strips, without bones
liquid honey 2 tbsp
white miso paste 3 tbsp
grain mustard 2 tbsp
salad leaves a handful

Put the vinegar, black peppercorns, caster sugar and salt in a saucepan with 
100ml of water and bring to the boil. Peel the pears, halve them then cut out 
the cores with a teaspoon. Lower the pears into the pickling liquid, lower the 
heat and leave the pears to cook until tender to the point of a knife. Remove 
from the heat, cover with a lid and leave to rest. Set the oven at 200C/gas 
mark 6.

Place the strips of pork on a shallow grill pan, season with salt and black 
pepper, and roast for 30 minutes until golden and sizzling. In a large shallow 
pan, warm the honey, white miso paste and mustard until you have thick paste.

Tear the pork into short, finger-width strips, then toss with the hot 
dressing. Return the dressed meat to the oven for 7-10 minutes until sizzling 
and starting to caramelise. Wash and dry the salad leaves and place them on a 
serving plate, then pile the hot pork on top. Place half a pickled pear on each 
plate.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 