
Nigel Mansell, Britain’s most successful Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> driver in terms of grand prix 
victories with 31, has special memories of his win at Silverstone in 1992, his 
world championship year. Mansell, four times the victor in the British Grand 
Prix, in 1986, 1987, 1991 and 1992, and the latest former champion – along with 
Emerson Fittipaldi – to announce he will take part in Silverstone’s 50th GP 
parade next weekend, has particularly vivid recall of his last home victory, in 
the superb Williams FW14B, when fans invaded the track at the end of the race.

“It’s not something I’d recommend nowadays but the euphoria took over as a sea 
of people surged on to the track. It was absolutely amazing and something I’ll 
never forget,” he says. “I have a standout memory from each of my three
Silverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> wins – in 1987 it 
was the overtake on my team-mate Nelson Piquet down Hangar Straight, dummying 
to go around the outside before taking him on the inside going into Stowe. That 
was a really satisfying win.

“In 1991 I had another great win, but it’s probably best remembered for me 
stopping to give my rival Ayrton Senna a lift back to the pits after he ran out 
of fuel on the last lap. Silverstone is still one of the most exhilarating 
circuits in the world but it’s the fans and their passion that make the race so 
special.”

The old Northamptonshire airfield staged its first British Grand Prix in 1948 
and it marked international motor racing’s return to Britain after an absence 
of 10 years. It was won by Luigi Villoresi in a Maserati.

When the world championship was formed two years later Silverstone was given 
the honour of staging the first round. The capacity 150,000 crowd included King 
George V1 but the star attraction, Juan Manuel Fangio, broke down with engine 
problems after leading for most of the race.

British race fans had to wait 10 years to cheer on a home-grown winner. Peter 
Collins, who had almost become world champion in 1956 – in a remarkable gesture 
he handed his car over to Fangio after the Argentinian suffered steering 
problems – won in 1958, two weeks before he died in the German Grand Prix. It 
was the year that Mike Hawthorn, Collins’s Ferrari team-mate and close friend, 
became Britain’s first world champion.

Jim Clark, Britain’s and possibly the world’s greatest F1 driver, enjoyed one 
of his most famous victories at Silverstone in 1965, the year of his second 
world championship. The Lotus was quieter than today’s cars. In fact, at times, 
it was totally silent as he coasted round the track. “The engine began to lose 
oil pressure so I decided to switch it off,” he said afterwards. “It was to 
give the bearings a rest when they were under load. It was a bit hairy at first 
but then I got the hang of it.”

Clark won again there in 1967. A British win was no longer a novelty. The next 
domestic success at the famous track came in 1969. The three-times world 
champion Jackie Stewart says: “I had one of the greatest battles in my racing 
career with Jochen Rindt, when there were more than 30 lead changes during the 
race. My father and my brother were there to witness it. It was one of the 
proudest occasions of my career. My victory at Silverstone was to lead on to me 
securing the world championship for the first time.”

Alain Prost was a five-times winner of the British Grand Prix. “Silverstone 
has always been one of my favourite tracks and I have a lot of good memories 
there. The first time I won in 1983 with the Renault it was a very special 
feeling. The crowd was so loud – you could really hear their passion, even over 
the roar of those turbo engines,” says the four-times world champion. “I was 
lucky enough to win another four races there and each time I was really touched 
by the support. British fans love their motor sport. This is one of the few 
things that has not changed in the 20 years since I last drove.”

The 2003 race won was by Rubens Barrichello but it is perhaps better 
remembered for a defrocked Irish priest, Neil Horan, jumping over the fence at 
the Hangar Straight to play with the traffic. A safety car was brought on which 
helped to produce one of the most entertaining races of the season.

Lewis Hamilton won at Silverstone in his championship year of 2008. “It was a 
really wet race that year,” he recalls, “with cars going off everywhere but I 
managed to keep the car on the track – most of the time – and drove a pretty 
good race.

“The team also made the right calls tactically. But it was a huge win for me 
and an unbelievable feeling to win my first British Grand Prix. The reaction 
from the crowd was amazing. That win was also a real momentum changer, in the 
season I went on to win title.”

Hamilton’s victorious car from six years ago and Mansell’s 1987 winner will 
feature in a 50th Grand Prix Heritage Paddock at the track. For the first time, 
the track is holding a fans’ Thursday, when three-day ticket holders will have 
access to the pit lane. The Kaiser Chiefs will also be in concert on Friday 
evening.

Organisers are hoping for another sell-out crowd although, with Wimbledon and 
the World Cup providing rival attractions, tickets are still available.
 