
Nürburgring, August 1
James Hunt’s victory in the German Grand Prix here today is his third world 
championship win in a row, but it may mark the last major race on the 
Nürburgring circuit. The race started in confusion, and had to be restarted 
after an accident which put out five cars and sent the world champion, Niki 
Lauda, to the intensive care unit of Mannheim’s University clinic with serious 
injuries.

Hunt’s win gives him 44 points to Lauda’s 58 and with six races to come, 
revives his chances of winning the title. The start was delayed by rain, which 
may have contributed to Lauda’s accident. The 27-year-old Austrian almost 
certainly owes his life to other drivers, including Guy Edwards, aged 32, from 
London, who stopped to pull him out of his blazing car.


Clearing up after an earlier race delayed the start of the Grand Prix in any 
case, but when rain was reported on the far side of the 14-mile circuit, the 
team managers put their wet weather procedure into practice. This is an 
unsatisfactory arrangement, involving a declaration by the organisers about 
making the race officially wet or dry. A course car was despatched, which 
confirmed that it was indeed wet in several places round the demanding 
50-year-old track among the pine clad Eifel mountains.


This returned the decision on tyres to the teams, and everyone except Jochen 
Mass (McLaren) began the race on rain tyres. But during the delay the skies 
cleared and under a cold brisk wind the road began to dry. As a result, after 
only one lap more than half the drivers rushed into the pits and changed to the 
smooth, dry-weather tyres which offer superior grip but make the car quite 
unmanageable in rain. They could not remain on rain tyres because, without the 
cooling effect of water, these overheat. Mass meanwhile was streaking ahead of 
the field, his gamble on starting with dry weather tyres apparently having paid 
off.


Lauda was among the drivers who stopped, changing all four wheels. Whether the 
drama and tension following the delays and the argument about how to start the 
race was responsible for what followed is not clear. Even drivers a matter of 
50 yards behind theFerrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> disagree 
about whether a wheel came off or something else broke, or if in his efforts to 
catch up with the leaders, Lauda simply lost control. One way or another, on a 
150mph bend halfway round the course, at Bergwerk, Lauda plunged off the road 
into the catch fence.


The car was badly damaged. One of the safety fuel cells was wrenched clear of 
the hull, and flames surrounded the injured driver almost at once. Brett Lunger 
(Surtees) andHarald Ertl <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harald_Ertl> collided 
avoiding the wreckage and stopped. Guy Edwards (Hesketh) andJacques Laffite 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacques_Laffite> (Ligier) also stopped and 
together they set out to rescue Lauda because, on such a long circuit, the 
official services take time to arrive. Helped by a marshall with a hand 
extinguisher, they pulled the driver clear, scorching their own fire resistant 
clothing in the process.


Jean-Pierre Jarier <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Pierre_Jarier> was 
among the drivers critical of the rescue services, calling them amateurs, and 
the driver emphasised the dangers of a track where help can be a long time 
coming. Chris Amon refused to take part in the restarted race. The most 
experienced driver racing today, he had seen, he said, too many occasions where 
drivers had been alone then they had their accident, and help arrived too late.


When the field lined up again Lauda, Ertl, and Lunger were non-starters owing 
to damage. Laffite’s gearbox had been knocked out of adjustment while his car 
was being towed, and Amon simply withdrew. Hunt started alone on the front row 
of the grid, and for the race’s 14 laps was never headed.Jody Scheckter 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jody_Scheckter> (Tyrrell) pursued him, setting 
the race’s fastest lap, but Hunt remained in command. Jochen Mass in the second 
McLaren made up for his disappointment at losing the lead before the accident 
by finishing third after Regazzoni damaged the front of his Ferrari and dropped 
back. Carlos Pace scored an encouraging fourth place for Brabham-Alfa, in spite 
of having been unwell throughout the weekend. Ronnie Peterson crashed without 
injury, and Patrick Depailler went off in the Elf Tyrrell while avoiding 
Regazzoni but was not injured.

 