
Arbroath <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arbroath> was neither windswept 
nor surprising on Sunday. Which is exactly how Rangers wanted it.

Those seeking a Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>
 shock at Gayfield Park placed plenty of faith in the routinely blustery 
conditions at Arbroath's exposed home ground but the reality was that Rangers 
enjoyed perfectly benign conditions on the edge of the North Sea and strolled 
into the fifth round.

Aside from typical praise of his players' character and attitude, the Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager, Ally McCoist, offered 
his latest transfer window bulletin. McCoist is anxious to add depth to his 
squad, particularly in attack, in order to challenge Celtic in both the 
Scottish Premier League and Scottish Cup.

Francisco Sandaza, of St Johnstone, is a key Rangers target, with the Rangers 
manager hoping he can sign the Spaniard this month rather than as a free agent 
in the summer. "I'll have a chat with [owner] Craig [Whyte] and see where we 
are on that one," McCoist said. "He is just one of a number of forwards that 
I'm really, really interested in."

Speculation that Malaga could coax the Rangers goalkeeper Allan McGregor from 
Ibrox, meanwhile, has been swiftly denied in private.

Arbroath started as the brighter side against their Premier League opponents – 
McGregor saved superbly from Josh Falkingham and Steven Dorris blasted wide of 
the visiting goal – but a swift two goals for McCoist's team ensured the tie 
was settled before half-time.

David Healy claimed a second in as many matches, before the home defender 
Craig Wedderburn deflected a cross from Nikica Jelavic into his own net. 
Jelavic himself added to the scoring just before the hour mark but it was 
Rangers' fourth that was celebrated most of all as Salim Kerkar, who has become 
something of a cult figure among the Rangers supporters, apparently on account 
of his status as an almost permanent substitute rather than starter.

With 13 minutes remaining, Kerkar produced an excellent strike when meeting a 
Healy pass to score his first goal for the club. "I was delighted for him," 
McCoist said of Kerkar. "He is a smashing lad and has waited long enough for 
his chance.

"It's wonderful to see the relationship he has got with the fans. I think they 
really appreciate the fact that he's a solid citizen and he is always very 
reliable. He was just waiting for his chance and he got it and I was absolutely 
delighted for him."

Rangers are joined by Celtic in the fifth‑round draw, which will be conducted 
by André Villas-Boas and Marcello Lippi at Hampden Park on Monday afternoon. 
Hours after Rangers' success at Arbroath, a hat-trick from Anthony Stokes 
handed Celtic a 3-0 victory at Peterhead.
 