
Hey Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>? Si 
senõr, the league is on. Ten games into the 2016-17 season, there are the old, 
familiar, expected faces at both ends of the table – FC Bayern (unbeaten und 
unconvincing) at the top, Hamburger SV (clueless, rudderless, irreparable) at 
the bottom – but otherwise, it’s a jolly good mess of smart overachievers, 
former giants growing in stature, elite sides mired in inconsistency and an 
array of sporting disasters of varying magnitude.

Only six points separate the first seven teams. RB Leipzig, are second behind 
Bayern on goal difference after another exhilarating win, 3-1 over Mainz. While 
their twisted football fairytale (a rich, despised prince buys himself 
seven-league boots and runs aways from most rivals) was always likely to be off 
to a pacy opening chapter and Julian Nagelsmann’s TSG Hoffenheim merely 
re-confirmed the village club’s reputation for its highly inventive use of 
(considerable) resources, Hertha BSC’s staying-power was much harder to foresee.

Bayern Munich saved by Steven Zuber’s own goal against Hoffenheim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/bayern-munich-hoffenheim-bundesliga-report>
The Berliners underlined their remarkably efficient start to the campaign and 
burgeoning Champions League place credentials (don’t laugh) with a 3-0 win 
against Borussia Mönchengladbach, featuring a hat-trick by Ivorian striker 
Salomon Kalou). The most surprising surprise so far, however, is perhaps the 
Eagles’ flight of fancy over in Frankfurt. “Really sensational,”Frankfurter 
Allgemeine Zeitungexclaimed after the 1-0 over 1. FC Köln on Saturday, no so 
much in reference to the decent, unspectacular performance as such but 
Eintracht doing so inexplicably well this season. They were, lest we forget, 
grade A relegation material reliant on regular divine intervention by local 
Fußballgott Alex Meier when Niko Kovac took over in March, and only narrowly 
escaped the drop in the relegation play-off against 1. FC Nürnberg.

Kovac, the former Croatia coach and Bayern Munich midfielder, had proved the 
right man for the tense rescue mission with his natural authority and 
impassioned “you have to eat dirt!” speeches, but very little hinted at a 
sustainable or even prosperous future under a 45-year-old whose views came 
across a little antiquated for his age. A self-imposed transfer-market 
moratorium - Frankfurt only spent a negligible €3m on new players - further 
lowered expectations; the underwhelming track record of new sporting director 
Fredi Bobic didn’t necessarily instil full confidence either. “Consolidation,” 
Kovac’s official target for the season, was really just a fancy word for 
staving off relegation worries a bit earlier than last time, wasn’t it? A great 
run of results, with five wins and three draws in the opening 10 games, has now 
lifted the side to seventh place, well into contention for a European place.

Kovac, though, is still firmly in class warfare mood, unwilling to gaze at the 
stars. “I’m not looking up (at the top places), I’m looking at the table as a 
whole,” he said on Saturday. “We are 10 points clear of the third from bottom. 
We want to keep or extend that lead to be able to celebrate a calm Christmas.” 
Eintracht are wise not to dream bigger at this stage. But the reality is 
fantastic enough as it is. Frankfurt are no longer solely dependent on Meier, 
or any particular player for that matter; they can grind out results by virtue 
of collective strength.

Kovac, a stickler for good manners and a human approach (“empathy is 
important, openness, honesty and an understanding for others,” he told Die Welt
) has solidified a baffled, lost squad of players with methods so old-school 
that they’re almost ingenious again: exhaustive fitness training with mammoth 
sessions in pre-season and a 3-5-2 system (with re-purposed midfielder Makoto 
Hasebe at the centre) that turns into a traditionally German five at the back 
without the ball have provided security, on the pitch and in the minds of the 
players. “Fitness gives you confidence, and if you’re fit, you don’t have to 
wonder whether you’ll last the 90 minutes,” Kovac said after the Köln win, 
courtesy of an early goal by 21-year-old Serbian international Mijat Gavinovic.

The manager’s emphasis on football’s “basic virtues” (Süddeutsche Zeitung) and 
professionalism is somewhat counter-cultural at the Commerzbank Arena. 
Frankfurt used to pride themselves on free-flowing, devil-may-care attacking 
football, their old nickname, “the diva from the Main” reflected the perverse 
pleasure the locals took in the team’s unpredictability. Kovac’s very 
combative, back-to-the-future approach, by contrast, will not result in 
fireworks any time soon but it might just build a platform for more upper 
mid-table consistency, especially if long over-due improvements behind the 
scenes are put into place.

Tim Wiese goes from Bundesliga to WWE: ‘I’ve got trash-talking in my blood’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/tim-wiese-ive-got-trash-talking-in-my-blood-wwe>
Three weeks ago, Kovac openly criticised training conditions at the 
Commerzbank compound as shambolic; “there’s not enough space, not enough rooms 
for meetings, bad ventilation,” he said. “We are expected to play good 
Bundesliga football with Bundesliga 2 means.” As a result, the club have vowed 
to construct a new building for the first team. Right now, Eintracht get 
changed in the stadium’s second floor, where the kitchen abuts the sauna and 
the washing machine is positioned next to the ball machine. The gym is tiny, 
too, certainly not big enough to let Frankfurt continue to play their 
particular brand ofKraftfußball. “It was great to see us fight so hard,” a 
pleased Bobic said after the successful battle against Köln.

All in all, it adds up to a remarkable transformation in the space of eight 
months. Frankfurt, like fellow Bundesliga blue chip stalwarts/sleeping giants 
Köln, might be turning into a proper club at last.

Results: Hertha 3-0 Gladbach, Freiburg 0-3 Wolfsburg, Frankfurt 1-0 Köln, 
Bayern 1-1 Hoffenheim, Leverkusen 3-2 Darmstadt, Hamburg 2-5 Dortmund, Leipzig 
3-1 Mainz, Schalke 3-1 Bremen.

Talking points to follow

• The new three-at-the-back trend also reached Hamburger SV this weekend, 
albeit with less happy consequences. Coach Markus Gisdol surprised friend and 
foe with his tactical switch for the game against Borussia Dortmund. “It was 
new for many of us, the automatisms were missing,” centre-back Johan Djourou 
lamented after the 5-2 defeat. In Gisdol’s opinion, however, the ability to 
play different systems was “part of the basic education” of football 
professionals. Both are not wrong but the upshot was a first half that was 
certainly more corporal punishment than lesson. The visitors smashed the 
disjointed hosts to bits with some straightforward through-balls to make it 4-0 
shortly after the break. “Sorry” didn’t have to be the hardest word as 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang atoned for his unauthorised midweek trip to Milan 
(and subsequent suspension against Sporting) with four goals. “His reaction was 
outstanding but we didn’t expect anything else after the talks we had,” BVB CEO 
Hans-Joachim Watzke told Bild. “He’s like Cristiano Ronaldo, he likes to be in 
the limelight.” Insert your own softcore-underwear-shot joke here.

• The northerners have much graver problems. The catastrophic result marked 
the second worst start to a Bundesliga season since Saarbrücken (1963-64) and 
left supporters seek solace in sarcasm. “Apart from Uwe, you can all go,” they 
sang, in honour of club icon Uwe Seeler, who celebrated a most unhappy 80th 
birthday.


• Elsewhere, Markus Kauczinski paid the price for an equally poor run with 
Ingolstadt, getting his marching orders following the 2-0 home defeat by 
Augsburg in the derby. The Bavarians might appoint Ottmar Hitzfeld’s former 
sidekick Michael Henke as interim coach “to provide a new impulse,” as club 
director Harald Gärtner put it.

• VfL Wolfsburg, on the other hand, promoted Valerien Ismael to head coach in 
the wake of their 3-0 win at Freiburg. The former French defender had been in 
charge as interim coach after Dieter Hecking’s dismissal and can now stay - 
rumours are that sporting director Klaus Allofs didn’t really have any other 
viable ideas at this stage.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Bayern Munich 10 18 24 
2 RB Leipzig 10 13 24 
3 TSG Hoffenheim 10 7 20 
4 Hertha Berlin 10 7 20 
5 Borussia Dortmund 10 13 18 
6 Cologne 10 9 18 
7 Eintracht Frankfurt 10 6 18 
8 Bayer Leverkusen 10 1 16 
9 SC Freiburg 10 -3 15 
10 Mainz 10 -1 14 
11 Borussia M'gladbach 10 -5 12 
12 Schalke 04 10 1 11 
13 Augsburg 10 -4 11 
14 Wolfsburg 10 -4 9 
15 Darmstadt 10 -10 8 
16 Werder Bremen 10 -15 7 
17 FC Ingolstadt 10 -14 2 
18 Hamburg 10 -19 2  