
Northampton, a side who have made do-or-die something of a trademark when it 
comes to theHeineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup>, 
spent Thursday poring over the hand they have been dealt this time around and 
bracing themselves for another cliffhanger against Castres.

"We are just about playing knockout rugby, so getting the win is all that 
matters," their director of rugby, Jim Mallinder, said before announcing a team 
with four changes from the starting XV who somehow went to Belfast and beat 
Ulster to keep their lifeline intact in the last round of games in Europe.

A win on Friday night and another against Glasgow, who are bottom of their 
group, next week in the sixth and final round of pool matches could see 
Mallinder's side with 20 points – traditionally the minimum for getting into 
the knockout stages as one of the two best runners-up, somethingNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> have managed four times 
previously.

Currently they are five points behind the pool leaders, Ulster, with Castres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres>, who have history to conquer as 
well as Northampton, two points ahead in second. The French side sit in fourth 
place in their domestic championship, having given bloody noses to most of 
their bigger rivals, but on the road in Europe their form is shocking, winning 
only four times in 27 attempts and only once in England – back in 2001 when 
they surprised Harlequins.

It is a less than proud record for the men from the Midi-Pyrénées who 
travelled without their giant Fiji centre Seremaia Bai, 127kg (20st) of New 
Zealand prop in Karena Wihongi and the French wing Marc Andreu while making 
seven changes from the side that slipped up at Grenoble in the Top 14 last 
weekend.

Mallinder has all six of his England elite squad players available and has 
made three changes from the side which showed something of a return to form 
last weekend when they beat Exeter in the Premiership. James Wilson replaces 
the injured wing Ken Pisi, lock Samu Manoa takes over from Mark Sorenson, while 
the England flanker Tom Wood returns to a rejigged back row that includes Calum 
Clark, who was this week added to Stuart Lancaster's Six Nations squad.

"We still have a massive point to prove in Europe and the players know what is 
expected of them," said Mallinder. "We also know that it will not be easy 
against one of the top teams in France. Castres have been in superb form over 
the past few months and have been playing a style of rugby which makes the most 
of their big forwards and speed out wide."

On Friday night that speed will be provided by the Scotland wing Tom Evans, 
Marcel Garvey, recently of Worcester, and the France squad full-back Brice 
Dulin, although Castres' leading points scorer is their South Africa scrum-half 
Rory Kockott, currently at loggerheads with the unfashionable club and wanting 
away at the end of the season.

Kockott is believed to be heading for Racing in Paris but the interest here is 
that his contract, which has another year to run, allows him to leave if 
Castres fail to make next season's Heineken.

Elsewhere Sale, who have the second leakiest defence in the tournament and are 
already out of this year's competition, field a famous name in their side to 
faceMontpellier <https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team>
 on Friday. The Premiership's bottom club selected Josh Beaumont, son of the 
former England grand slam captain Bill Beaumont, at No8, one of 10 changes from 
the side beaten by Saracens last Sunday.

Sale's group is already a private tussle between Montpellier and their 
neighbours Toulon but Beaumont, the lock Tom Holmes and flanker James Doyle 
will look to make an impression in a team that has the former England wing Mark 
Cueto at outside-centre. Montpellier, meanwhile, will be looking for a 
resounding win, preferably with a bonus point, at the Salford City Stadium to 
keep the pressure on Toulon, who lead Pool Six and play the Blues in Cardiff on 
Saturday.
 