
To cobblers the last may be first but fans of Northampton Town are trying to 
understand now that white can be black. At Sixfields on Saturday the Cobblers 
beatExeter City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> 3-0 in a 
scintillating match that would not have been out of place in any division. Both 
League Two clubs had won their opening game and beaten League One opposition 
midweek in the Capital One Cup.

Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> are now one of 
five sides with maximum points and have yet to concede a goal. Invited to 
enthuse afterwards, Chris Wilder, the manager, was all but tetchy. “It wasn’t a 
3-0 at all,” he said. “We can’t fluctuate from an OK performance on Saturday to 
an outstanding one on Tuesday and then to a bang average one today. We scored 
three cracking goals but they’ve not had the bounce of the ball, we made some 
great blocks and the goalkeeper [Adam Smith] was outstanding.”

Not content with that, after a game that had fizzed with crisp passing and 
nonstop, electric running, he added: “We didn’t pass the ball well, we didn’t 
make the right decisions and our energy levels weren’t great.”

Wilder is nothing if not unpredictable. Having taken Oxford United from the 
Conference to sixth inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>, he left them in 
bewildering fashion 18 months ago for Northampton, who were bottom. They 
survived by winning their last two matches, sending down Bristol Rovers, who 
bounced straight back only to be beaten by Northampton on the opening day. 
After hitting a side when it was up – that was the “OK performance” – they hit 
one that is down, Blackpool, 3-0 while Exeter were achieving the greater scalp 
of Swindon away. Exeter, enjoying the stability of Paul Tisdale’s nine-year 
management, were no mean opponents. “I don’t think we were that far away,” he 
said, but admitted Northampton were “more effective”.

If Wilder’s reaction was not a case of mind games and management of 
expectations, it was madness that adds to the fans’ prevailing mystification. 
In June the chairman, David Cardoza, revealed he had agreed to sell his 
controlling share in the club to an Indian consortium. Being London-based, they 
may not be chicken farmers but fans, as long as they remain in the dark, are 
wondering if the deal is cock-eyed. John Morris, chairman of the club’s 
charitable foundation and former general secretary of the British Boxing Board 
of Control, was not alone in the programme in referring to the uncertainties 
hanging over the club and the need to sort them out quickly.

Wilder, whose work he commended in spotting talent and developing it, not only 
has been given the time and money to assemble the squad he wants but is doing 
his best to make the club look a good buy, notwithstanding what Morris calls 
“the steel skeleton of an East Stand”, a monument at present to over-ambition.

The goals came from everywhere except the three of the 4-2-3-1 who buzzed as 
impressively as any, Lawson D’Ath, Alfie Potter and Nicky Adams. In the second 
quarter Jason Taylor, of the defensive two, volleyed in from 20 yards, with 
Exeter surprised by a free‑kick taken short, and the centre-back Ryan Cresswell 
headed home a long one. Afterwards Taylor, man of the match, said: “We’ve got 
to knuckle down and go again [at Barnet tomorrow].”

“We weren’t quite at it for much of the time,” added Cresswell. Heaven help 
opponents if they are. Both had had the Wilder debriefing. Marc Richards’ late 
third goal rounded off a typically swift attack from Ricky Holmes’ cross.

In a nominal curiosity each side introduced a Holmes and Hoskins from the 
bench in the second half, when Exeter switched from 4-1-4-1 to 3-1-4-2 and put 
their tricky Holmes (Lee) up against Josh Lelan, the first man booked by Ross 
Joyce, handling his first League match since promotion this season. At 29, from 
Cleveland, he is the youngest of the 62 referees and looked an old hand. City 
were more dangerous for the substitution and Smith, lately acquired from 
Leicester, made an exceptional save from Will Hoskins in a busier second half.

Fifty years ago Northampton were “enjoying” their only season in the top tier, 
in a decade which they started and finished where they are now. The manager, in 
his wilder dreams, may be reliving it. They already have a League Cup tie to 
look forward to at Newcastle next week. Sense may return only when the Cobblers 
are sold and healed.
 