
Everton’s promising start to the season was put into perspective by 
Championship opponents asNorwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> deservedly progressed to the 
last 16 of the League Cup, with the Goodison old boy Steven Naismith not only 
setting his side on the path to victory but being applauded by the home crowd 
for doing so.

Ronald Koeman had promised beforehand to make a few changes but not too many, 
and in the event made six. On the evidence of a listless performance, that 
appears to be too many forEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton>
, who may be second in the Premier League but found the going tough against a 
Norwich side who made no fewer than 10 changes of their own from their last 
league outing.

Lucas Pérez opens account as much-changed Arsenal ease past Nottingham Forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/nottingham-forest-arsenal-efl-cup-third-round-match-report>
“The players who came in applied themselves really well,” said Alex Neil, 
Norwich’s manager, perhaps unintentionally rubbing salt into Everton’s wounds. 
“Most of those boys haven’t played a lot of football this season but they still 
produced a great performance.”

Koeman, the Everton manager, said: “Norwich were more clinical than us, I must 
admit that. They only had two shots on goal, and one of those was lucky.”

Norwich survived an early penalty appeal when Aaron Lennon’s goalbound shot 
struck Steven Whittaker on the elbow. The referee quite reasonably felt the 
defender could not get out of the way and had his back turned in any case, yet 
it was a let-off for the visitors because Lennon seemed certain to score once 
Seamus Coleman had squared the ball across goal.

Gerard Deufoleu had the next attempt on target as gaps began to appear in the 
Norwich defence, but having sprinted purposefully into the area the winger took 
a fraction too long over his shot and allowed John Ruddy to scramble the ball 
away. A good block by Robbie Brady was required to prevent Tom Cleverley 
meeting a cross from Enner Valencia on the six-yard line as the home side 
stepped up their attacking efforts.

Making his first start for Everton, Valencia was supposed to be operating at 
centre‑forward, but was sent down the left wing by a perfectly weighted pass 
from Ramiro Funes Mori, himself playing in an unusual position at left back.

For all their attacking intent, however, Everton were somewhat lightweight up 
front in the absence of the injured Romelu Lukaku. Valencia did not present the 
same sort of threat to defenders, and Lennon, Deulofeu and Ross Barkley all 
struggled to impose themselves on the game.

Norwich took Everton to penalties here in the same competition last season and 
seemed content to stay behind the ball while the game remained scoreless. The 
debutant striker Nelson Oliveira shot wide in the opening minutes but was 
otherwise quiet, though it was his subtle flick that sent Naismith striding 
into the area to break the deadlock.

Only four minutes remained before the interval and it was the first time 
Norwich had even looked interested in opening Everton up, but on his return to 
Goodison Park Naismith stunned his former crowd with an unexpected finish. 
Whether he intended to chip Maarten Stekelenburg is debatable since he seemed 
to slip slightly in the act of shooting, but the effect was a delicate waft 
over a bemused goalkeeper into an otherwise unprotected net.

It took the Goodison crowd a second or two to work out what had happened, but 
once the penny dropped Naismith’s reward was a generous round of applause. 
“That sums up this place,” the scorer said. “It is a great club, with great 
people. It wasn’t the cleanest of strikes, I took a big divot, but in the end 
it’s a goal and that’s all that counts.”

Everton could not capitalise on a chance to equalise at the start of the 
second half with Ruddy out of his area after attempting to head clear. The ball 
fell straight to Barkley, who attempted to volley it into an empty net from 20 
yards out and missed by a considerable distance. It was not an easy chance and 
he would have been praised for his audacity had it gone in, though he could 
have taken a touch and tried to make sure rather than going for the 
spectacular. Deulofeu was guilty of the same offence minutes later when 
Lennon’s persistence presented him with a clear sight of goal, leaning back and 
managing to miss the target from a position close to that where Naismith had 
scored.

Koeman replaced both his wingers in a double substitution midway through the 
second half, and immediately Everton looked sharper. Yannick Bolasie’s cross 
from the right led to a free kick from which Kevin Mirallas brought a fingertip 
save from Ruddy, then Alex Pritchard blocked a Valencia effort on the line. Yet 
this flurry of activity proved misleading.

Norwich were the next to score, Josh Murphy taking advantage of some 
statuesque defending to secure victory with a fine individual goal. Cutting in 
from the right, the winger rode half‑hearted challenges from Funes Mori then 
Cleverley before beating Stekelenburg from just inside the area as Ashley 
Williams attempted to block. Ruddy was brought into action a few more times 
before the final whistle but there was no way back for the Premier League side.
 