
As Alex Neil acknowledged, it was the kind of thing that only happens when 
your luck is out. A little more than 30 seconds after kick‑off at Loftus Road 
on Saturday, Jack Robinson’s long throw flicked off the head of theNorwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> defender Sébastian Bassong 
and struck Martin Olsson in the midriff, before almost being smothered by John 
Ruddy – only for the unfortunate Olsson inadvertently to dislodge the ball as 
he fell over.

“Next thing I know, Olss is cradling it on the line and gets a kick up the 
backside,” Ruddy said. “We could have had a foul ourselves, but the referee 
made the decision.”

The Joy of Six: nefarious goal-line handballs | Lawrence Ostlere
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/the-joy-of-six-nefarious-goal-line-handballs>
While the Sweden international’s efforts would have drawn cheers had he 
executed something similar a few miles up the road at Twickenham, his red card 
for handball was met with groans from the 3,000‑strong Norwich contingent 
behind Ruddy’s goal.

After three successive defeats before the international break, including a 5-0 
thrashing against their promotion rivals Brighton & Hove Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/brighton-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
, Neil went into this match under pressure to turn things around but the 
Norwich manager was immediately forced on to the back foot, having made six 
changes to his starting lineup. Tjaronn Chery missed the resulting penalty 
before making up for it by playing a part in both Queens Park Rangers goals, 
with his pass for Sebastian Polter to make it 2-0 the highlight of the 
afternoon on Ian Holloway’s return to the home dugout.

Neil was heartened by Norwich’s response in the second half, in which Steven 
Naismith pulled a goal back, but admitted results are what count as they chase 
an immediate return to the top flight. “The fans are frustrated, annoyed and 
angry and everything that goes with not winning. All I can say is I am working 
extremely hard to try and turn it around,” he said.

However, with rumours of internal divisions within the squad growing, the man 
who started his managerial career with Hamilton Academical aged 31 before 
moving to Carrow Road in January last year after two seasons with the Scottish 
club, will know time is against him.

The appointment of Jez Moxey in the summer to replace the long-serving David 
McNally means he has a new employer to impress, with the former Wolverhampton 
Wanderers chief executive taking his opportunity last week to remind Neil of 
exactly what is expected at a club who have played Premier League football for 
four of the past six seasons.

“He is in the results-driven business and he has got to win football matches 
for this football club. That is his job,” Moxey said beforehand. “He more than 
anyone else realises it has to happen very quickly because it is uncomfortable 
for him, it is uncomfortable for the players, for the board, the staff and the 
supporters. We are disappointed at the current situation. The staff feel it, we 
feel it, the manager feels it. That is not what Norwich City should be about. 
We should be about success.”

Having gone toe-to-toe with the Championship pace-setters earlier in the 
season, Neil’s side are now 13 points off Rafa Benítez’s Newcastle United and 
eight points behind Brighton in the second automatic spot and travel to 
resurgent Derby on Saturday. Having left several first-team regulars, including 
the Switzerland defender Timm Klose and Wes Hoolahan, on the bench against QPR, 
Neil must now decide whether to revert to the tried and tested or persevere 
with their replacements. Some supporters have already made their feelings clear 
about his future on social media but despite taking Norwich down last year, the 
majority appear still to back the man wholed them to promotion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/may/25/middlesborough-norwich-championship-play-off-final-live>
 via the playoffs in 2015.

“They were vocal throughout the game in a supportive manner, which we 
appreciate,” Ruddy said. “This run is disheartening because I’ve got a lot of 
affection for this club. Norwich have given me a lot; it’s my home. The results 
don’t lie though, we’ve lost four in a row and that’s not good enough. It’s 
down to us as players, not as individuals, to rectify that. We need to make 
sure we are working hard for each other, now more than ever.”

Murray hits hat-trick as Chris Hughton makes point with Norwich thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/brighton-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
• Paul Lambert’s return to management ended in a 0-0 draw at Preston North End 
on Saturday. Wolves are the Scot’s seventh club since starting his career at 
Livingston and he handed 18-year-old striker Bright Enobakhare a first start 
since April. “The future for this club is good,” he said despite the stalemate 
at Deepdale. “Not just Bright. We’ve got young players as good as I’ve seen in 
many a year.” Whether they will get regular chances to play with Jorge Mendes 
breathing down his neck is another matter. The super-agent has close ties with 
the club’s Chinese owners Fosun International and was instrumental in the 
arrival of a stream of talent from Europe over the summer. Lambert must 
therefore balance the expectations of his pay-masters with his experience as a 
manager. It won’t be a simple job – as Walter Zenga will no doubt testify.

• AFC Wimbledon were expected to struggle after winning promotion to League 
One via the playoffs last season but after putting five past Bury for the 
second time in a week, the Dons are on the march. Four goals before half time 
on Saturday sent them on their way to securing sixth spot in the table, with 
George Francomb, Dominic Poleon, Chris Whelpdale and Tom Elliot all on the 
scoresheet to condemn caretaker duo Chris Brass and Ryan Kidd to defeat in 
their first match in charge. A 5-0 victory in the FA Cup first-round replay had 
cost David Flitcroft his job so Millwall’s Neil Harris had better watch out 
when Wimbledon travel across south London on Tuesday night.

• When Reuben Reid scored after just 40 seconds, those brave souls who made 
the 700-mile round trip from Exeter to Carlisle must have thought it was all 
worth it. But football can be a cruel mistress and even after Lee Holmes had 
restored Exeter’s lead following Charlie Wyke’s equaliser, two late goals 
ensured they made the trip back to pointless. After a week in which the 
Supporters’ Trust ordered the club to serve notice on the contract of manager 
Paul Tisdale, it was hardly an uplifting result and pressure is mounting on the 
longest-serving manager in theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league>. Tisdale had a two-year 
rolling contract and is now serving that notice period, although the trust has 
insisted he is not under any immediate threat of the sack. Whether that is 
still the case if his side continue to prop up the table remains to be seen.
 