
Norwich City have kept their manager and most of their Premier League squad 
since relegation last season and were able to show their pedigree at Ewood 
Park, cruising into a commanding first-half lead to leave an out-thought and 
outclassedBlackburn Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> 
looking like a side from several divisions below.

The first boos of Owen Coyle’s reign as Rovers manager were heard after 
24 minutes, as a sweeping crossfield move ended with Cameron Jerome scoring at 
the far post to put his side three goals in front.

The home centre-backs had been badly embarrassed twice by then – first when 
Jacob Murphy made space for himself with a neat turn to beat the Blackburn 
keeper, Jason Steele, from outside the area with an outstanding strike to mark 
his league debut; then when Wes Hoolahan made it two after darting between 
Elliott Ward and Shane Duffy into the area.

Ward went off injured shortly afterwards and Blackburn improved when Gordon 
Greer took over in defence, though they were already chasing a lost cause, and 
the situation become hopeless when a third goal went in with less than a third 
of the game completed.

New recruit John Swift brings Jaap Stam’s Reading quick return to beat Preston
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/reading-preston-championship-match-report>
Steven Naismith and Hoolahan tried to find a way through the middle again but 
found their routes blocked, though they retained possession and the presence of 
mind to sweep the ball out to Ivo Pinto on the right, whose low cross behind 
the Blackburn defenders was tucked away by Jerome with deflections off post and 
goalkeeper.

Blackburn could not get going in midfield, where Hoolahan and Jonny Howson 
were in firm control, and all the Norwich keeper, John Ruddy, was asked to do 
before the interval was come out to collect a couple of hopeful crosses.

Danny Graham had been unable to accomplish anything on his own up front in the 
first half, so Coyle sent out Anthony Stokes to accompany him for the second, 
although Blackburn were still too slow into most of the 50-50 challenges and 
too laboured in their passing for it to make much of a difference.

A good example came early in the second half, when Norwich could easily have 
increased their lead. Naismith in the centre had options on both sides, but 
chose Murphy, powering into the area on his right. A fourth goal was avoided by 
only the width of a post after Steele let Murphy’s shot through his legs.

No matter, it took only another six minutes for the fourth goal to arrive. The 
irrepressible Hoolahan cheekily nutmegged Adam Henley in the penalty area to 
set up Naismith, who finished with his usual calmness and accuracy. Steele 
saved with his legs to prevent a fifth when Hoolahan played Murphy into space 
on the left.

Norwich were so neat and precise in comparison with their hosts that some of 
their attacking moves looked like training exercises – though it is easy to put 
on an exhibition when four goals to the good.

While Stokes did manage to raise a small amount of cheer midway through the 
second half with a debut goal, a downward header from a deep cross that Ruddy 
probably should have saved, it did not lead to any quickening of Blackburn 
pulses, either on or off the pitch.

It looked as though Norwich had begun their season a few weeks ago and were 
now hitting their full stride. Alex Neil’s side are among the favourites to be 
promoted from theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> and they could hardly have 
made a more promising or confident start.

“We knew everyone would be looking at us after Newcastle United lost their 
first game,” the Norwich manager said. “We wanted to make a good impression and 
we did.

“We put down a marker and, hopefully, people will be saying nice things about 
us now.”

Blackburn, in contrast, looked as if they were still on their holidays, or 
perhaps warming up in a friendly with the real thing still a week or so away. 
Unfortunately for Coyle and his new patch of east Lancashire, this was the real 
thing and Blackburn are in trouble already.

“That was not what we envisaged and it is a horrible feeling on the first day 
of the season,” Coyle said.

“Norwich are a very good side but we stood off them too much and let them 
play. We have to put more pressure on the ball.”
 