
Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> 
wasted two penalties but still beat nine-man Newcastle United 2-1 in the Sky 
Bet Championship.

A late own goal from the former Forest player Jamaal Lascelles proved decisive 
on a night when another former City Ground favourite, Karl Darlow, almost 
earned the leaders an unlikely point. The goalkeeper saved spot-kicks from 
Nicklas Bendtner and Henri Lansbury – after first Jonjo Shelvey and then Paul 
Dummett were sent off for incidents in the box.

Wolves’ Hélder Costa tames 10-man QPR to seal Paul Lambert’s first win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/queens-park-rangers-wolverhampton-wanderers-championship-match-report>
The Forest manager Philippe Montanier said: “We had to be patient in the 
second half to push higher, to get a lot of crosses in and create opportunities 
to score. We had to respect the plan but we did that and we got the goal at the 
end.

“We were on a downer after missing the two penalties, but I told the players 
to be clear in their minds – we had 45 minutes still to win the game and we 
knew we only needed a few seconds to score a goal.

“They had nine men and we had to move the ball. We had to deliver crosses and 
get bodies in the box. We needed to be accurate with the crosses. But the most 
important thing is that we got the two goals and the three points.”

Matt Ritchie put Rafael Benítez’s side in front between the two penalty misses 
but Bendtner levelled, before Lascelles deflected Lansbury’s corner to secure 
Forest’s third successive league win.

A superb crossfield ball from Eric Lichaj picked out Matty Cash early on but 
Darlow produced an unorthodox save to deny the first-time shot.

The visitors immediately hit back by creating their first opening through some 
unselfish play from Shelvey, who passed when he might have shot and saw Ritchie 
bend a 20-yard shot just wide of the upright.

Yoan Gouffran was not too far away with a similar effort from the opposite 
side of the box, with Vladimir Stojkovic at full stretch in the home side’s 
goal to cover as the ball fizzed inches wide.

Shelvey had been running the game for Newcastle in the early stages but was 
sent off in the 33rd minute for kicking out at Lansbury’s face as the pair 
tangled on the ground after challenging for the ball. Yet

The moment also earned Forest a 34th minute penalty – but it was an opening 
they failed to take as Darlow dived to his left to push away a slightly 
hesitant effort from Bendtner.

Newcastle responded well to going a man down and took the lead in the 45th 
minute. Cash gave away possession and Isaac Hayden’s cutback found Ritchie, who 
drove home superbly from 12 yards.

That was not the end of the first-half drama however as, after another good 
ball from Lichaj had sent Lansbury skipping clear, the Forest striker was 
brought down by Dummett.

The Steven Martin duly pointed to the spot again – and showed another red – 
but Darlow dived low to his right to deny Lansbury, who had taken over penalty 
duties.
Steve Martin (@SteveMartinToGo) 
Evidently, there's someone who's a bad referee with my name, and now there are 
thousands of English who won't go see my films anymore.
 <https://twitter.com/SteveMartinToGo/status/804806240924815360> December 2, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/SteveMartinToGo/status/804806240924815360> 
Forest took only seven minutes of the second half to break Newcastle’s 
resolve, albeit only after Darlow had made another fine save to initially deny 
Bendtner. The Dane reacted quickest, prodding the ball home from close range. 
He later almost added a second but sent Thomas Lam’s cross just over the bar.

Lansbury, Britt Assombalonga and Mustapha Carayol all had efforts on goal, but 
Darlow’s only real save in open play came from the latter’s low shot.

The other former Forest player in the Newcastle ranks played a part in the 
game’s decisive third goal. When Lansbury whipped in a superbly-flighted corner 
it caused chaos in the box and, as Matt Mills and Cash pressured at the far 
post, the unfortunate Lascelles made got the final touch, steering the ball 
over his own linein the 86th minute.

Benítez was unconvinced with the referee’s performance: “It is very difficult 
to understand what happened. We had a penalty that was not given, I thought 
their first goal was offside. We had two penalties given against us, two red 
cards and I hope he [Lansbury] is proud of his reaction for the first one.

“I have not spoken to the referee. But I think we did really well, considering 
the first goal was offside. We did what we had to do. We tried to play on the 
counterattack, but that was always going to be difficult when we had nine men 
for 45 minutes.”
 