
Sometimes English football is so conservative you feel it should wear a blue 
rosette, serve cucumber sandwiches with the crusts sliced off and be done with 
it. Last week was one of those occasions. Brentford – the chief cymbal-clappers 
for analytics in football – had sacked their manager,Marinus Dijkhuizen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/28/brentford-sack-marinus-dijkhuizen-appoint-lee-carsley>
, eight games into the season. And so came the cackles and told-you-sos from 
former players and some in the media. How dare they try to do something 
different. And look where it got them.

The truth behind the story is slightly more complicated. Brentford insist 
Dijkhuizen’s sacking had little to do with results, but what was happening on 
the training pitch. Some even knew they had the wrong guy before the season 
started. Even so, it was embarrassing for a club with so many smart people to 
get it so spectacularly wrong. And doubly so when Mark Warburton, who took
Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> to the play-offs 
last season only to leave when asked to give up his veto over transfers, is 
flying with Rangers in the Scottish Championship.

But to use Dijkhuizen’s dismissal as a stick to put analytics back in its box, 
as some have done, seems strange. We all understand the numbers game a little 
better these days, helped by Sky’s Monday Night football and Match of the Day 
using strikers’ goals per 90 minutes rather than goals per game, or a 
midfielder’s key passes rather than assists, to provide a deeper context.

And while Brentford struggle, the analytics approach is working at 
Midtjylland, the club in which the Brentford owner Matthew Benham invested last 
summer. Eleven months later, they clinched their first Danish Superliga, and 
have won theiropening two Europa League group games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/27/southampton-midtjylland-europa-league-report>
, a feat no British club has achieved. Last season, Midtjylland, along with 
Atlético Madrid, led European football in set-piece goals. They believe that is 
not down to chance.

So why does analytics provoke such a gag-reflex in some quarters? When it 
comes to former professionals such a reaction is not hard to understand. They 
have decades of experience and knowledge. Having some youngish maths whizz 
explain why their team has been lucky in matches based on statistical 
techniques is hardly going to go down well. Few old pros learned regression 
analysis on YTS schemes.

But it does not help the cause of analytics when clubs are coy about how much 
they use it, although that is understandable – if someone knows they have an 
edge, they are hardly going to reveal their secret source.

Liverpool’s director of research Ian Graham has a PhD in theoretical physics, 
Arsenal boughtStat DNA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/17/arsenal-place-trust-arsene-wenger-army-statdna-data-analysts>
 to help with scouting, tactical insights and game preparation, and Aston Villa 
recently recruited Hendrik Almstadt from Arsenal as their first sporting 
director. But we do not know whether these analysts are an essential cog in the 
wheel – or modern day Bertha Antoinetta Masons in Jane Eyre, squirrelled away 
in the attic, far from prying eyes.

That said, almost every Premier League and Championship club pays Prozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/12/why-clubs-football-manager-scouting-tool>
 and/or Opta for their services. I know of Premier League clubs who get an SMS 
at half-time and full-time saying if they deserve to be winning or losing based 
on an expected goals model, which assigns each shot a probability of going in 
based on the location on the pitch and other factors. And there are clubs who 
use analytics to see whether their league position accurately reflects their 
performances on the pitch.

That is analytics, right there. At boardroom level there is an increasing 
willingness to use data to make decisions – which extends to evaluating the 
success rates of transfers and, in some cases, their academy. Such an approach 
has yet to percolate down to the most coaches. Perhaps it will, perhaps it 
won’t. But it is worth stressing that embracing analytics shouldn’t turn 
managers into automatons.

Ruthless Birmingham ruin Lee Carsley’s first game as Brentford manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/brentford-birmingham-championship-match-report>
The former Midtjylland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/midtjylland> 
manager Glen Riddersholm said Benham’s approach was “fantastic” precisely 
because it was different “in what is a very traditional and conservative 
world”. But he said that when the technical scouts found a potential player he 
always wanted to look them in the eye and “talk about his values as a human 
being” before agreeing a deal. Analytics is simply one of many tools at a 
club’s disposal.

Bill Gerrard, a technical analyst with Saracens who now helps out his friend 
Billy Beane at AZ Alkmaar, is concerned at the reluctance of some in English 
football to embrace analytics. “When a team adopts a more analytical approach 
and things go wrong, it gives an opportunity for the anti-analytics brigade to 
voice their deep-rooted prejudices,” he says of the Brentford situation. “But I 
would actually broaden the discussion and ask if there is any link between the 
resistance to embrace evidence-based practices including analytics, the 
relaxation of budgetary pressures through the increased media deals, and the 
failure of British teams to compete effectively in Europe. Perhaps we are too 
attracted to quick-fix solutions – buying a new player, replacing the manager, 
etc – and have lost a sense of the art and science of building successful 
teams?”

That is an argument for another day. What we can say is this: Brentford got it 
horribly wrong with Dijkhuizen, and they will get plenty more wrong in the 
future. But despite this nasty hiccup they still believe they have an edge. And 
over the long run they intend to prove it.
 