
Beyond the staple diet of bragging rights and bigotry, it is questionable 
whether there has ever been a less relevant Old Firm fixture. When the dust 
eventually settles, nothing on the SPFL landscape will have meaningfully 
altered.

Mark Warburton confident his improving Rangers side can beat Celtic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/mark-warburton-rangers-manager-celtic-old-firm-scottish-premership>
Celtic’s grip on Scotland’s top flight is such that victory at Ibrox on 
Saturday lunchtime will extend their advantage over Rangers to 19 points – and 
with a game in hand. Rangers’ key aspiration, not that anyone will admit as 
much, lies in becoming the first domestic team to beat Celticsince Brendan 
Rodgers took office in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/celtic-appoint-brendan-rodgers-manager>
. Such an outcome would sting for Celtic’s fans but the ultimate prize of 
another title is a formality.

Rodgers has enjoyed the buildup this week, as well he might. Celtic’s manager 
insisted the Old Firm result “doesn’t matter” and that “huge pressure” lies upon
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>. Celtic are fully 
entitled to cherish their dominance, not only by virtue of previous years 
playing clear second fiddle to their city rivals but because their overall 
business model is efficient and sustainable. In Rodgers, Celtic have a manager 
who has raised the bar.

Instant success has allowed Rodgers to dictate the narrative around him, a key 
home defeat in the Champions Leagueby an understrength Borussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/celtic-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
 curiously disappearing from analysis of what has transpired during the 
Northern Irishman’s early Glasgow months. At the time, this was a stark 
disappointment.

Rangers’ situation is more complex. Their manager, Mark Warburton, spent 
pre-match media duties emphasising the financial gulf between the old 
adversaries. Realism, of course, does not always sit well in an environment of 
constant comparison. In cold analysis, Rangers occupy the runners-up spot in 
the SPFL as was always their most sensible target for the season.

It may be that Warburton was aiming this sentiment at his absentee chairman, 
Dave King, for whom grand spending plans have not come to fruition. In reply, 
King could reasonably point to Rangers having by far a superior budget to 
Aberdeen and Hearts, their challengers for second place, plus the string of 
Ibrox arrivals – Joey Barton among them – who have not justified outlay. 
Warburton’s inevitable frustration will arrive, if it has not already, with the 
realisation thatCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> will not 
be hauled back anytime soon.

“We can’t compete anywhere near with the wages currently being paid or fees 
being paid at Celtic,” Warburton said. “That’s not a negative on Rangers. We 
have to get back to those levels. We can’t buy our way out of this one at the 
moment. What we have to do is build. The one commodity we need is time.

“Referring back to Brentford, I’m looking at players like Andre Gray, James 
Tarkowski, Moses Odubajo. They were £200,000 or £400,000 players now going for 
£20m or more. All they had was time. There was no expectation on them. 
Brentford weren’t expected to go and beat Derby. That time allowed those boys 
to develop. Adam Forshaw, playing at Middlesbrough, was a free from Everton. 
Jake Bidwell was 50 grand from Everton.

“All they had was time to develop their talents. You don’t get that time in 
Glasgow, I understand that, but that’s what we need right now because we are 
not going to spend £50m. Our supporters, I’m sure, appreciate that.”

This marks Celtic’s 36th game of the season, nine of that number coming in 
December alone in what offers a nod towards farcical Scottish scheduling. It is 
to the credit of Rodgers and his players that they have won games while 
wholesale personnel changes have been implemented, just as victories have taken 
many forms. Celtic were 2-0 and 3-2 behind at Motherwell, for example, before 
summoning the spiritto prevail 4-3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/motherwell-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
. The determination to maintain an unbeaten run throughout the domestic season, 
as has not transpired in Scotland since pre‑1900, is strong.

“We want to win this game, of course we do,” Rodgers said. “But however it 
goes for us, we have had a brilliant opening period to the season.”

Celtic will head for Dubai during the winter break, which follows the derby, 
with Rodgers simultaneously seeking to add three players to his squad. That 
recruitment is with a view to preparation for next season’s assault on Europe. 
Long‑term planning is a positive by-product of Celtic’s current status. Ibrox 
really is nothing more than 90 minutes in manic isolation.
 