
Two versions of Scots sportsmanship were played out on Sunday, across two 
hemispheres. The earlier ended with a punishing defeat for Andy Murray by Novak 
Djokovic in the final of the Australian Open. But as Scottish viewers gritted 
their teeth through Murray’s double faults, Glasgow was bracing itself for the 
long-anticipated meeting of Celtic and Rangers at Hampden Park, a fixture that 
– despite the absence ofMurray’s profane girlfriend Kim Sears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/29/kim-sears-andy-murray-outburst-australian-open>
 – was expected to be an altogether more fraught affair.

Concerns that this first pairing of the clubs for nearly three years could 
unleash pent-up aggression between rivals fans, and spark the sectarian 
tensions at their root, resulted in a huge policing operation, with leave 
cancelled and highly visible patrols across the city centre. PoliceScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> also delivered personal warnings to 
known domestic abusers as part of their pioneering strategy responding to 
dramatic spikes in such violence around Old Firm games.

The match was watched by millions worldwide, one suspects as much for the 
spectacle as the technical merit, but not in every pub in Glasgow as the JD 
Wetherspoons chain and others chose not to screen it, while elsewhere staff 
were advised to clear tables promptly to avoid leaving glass within grabbing 
reach.

Social media was peppered with abuse from early morning, though Police 
Scotland helpfully tweeted before the match: “Please remember that you can’t 
report a crime on Twitter – call 101 to report any concerns. Always dial 999 in 
an emergency.”

Around midday the city centre of Glasgow is preternaturally quiet. Enjoying 
the winter sunshine outside the Two Heided Man pub by Central station, Tommy 
explains that his security firm had every man in the company out working for 
the day. “Nobody knows what to expect, because there hasn’t been an Old Firm 
game for so long, but security has been beefed up everywhere, especially for 
after 4pm when they all head into town after the game.”

Within the station itself the segregation happens naturally: Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> fans take the train to Mouth 
Florida, Celtic supporters to Kings Park, depositing them at opposite sides of 
the stadium.

One Scotrail supervisor notes that the station was quieter than he expected 
and speculates that there would be a lot of buses put on by individual 
supporters clubs providing the majority of transport. He recommends taking a 
hard hat for the game itself.

But Hampden feels like the safest place in the country. Police Scotland are 
nothing if not experienced in dealing with such events, with the entire ground 
– including the main steps – well segregated to avoid any unnecessary 
escalation. The kick-off of 1.30pm smartly truncated pre-match pub time, though 
evidently not for everyone.

On the train with Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fans 
the mood is of quiet confidence and how could it not be as their team lead the 
Premier League following Rangers’ descent into economic turmoil and relegation 
to the lower leagues? One young man who works in an off-licence is concerned 
about early alcohol consumption. Friday night was “like a Hogmanay shift”, he 
observes, noting on his train into Glasgow that one man had downed a bottle of 
white wine by 10.30am.

Walking up to the stadium, Steven, a long-time Celtic fundraiser, is 
complaining about the hype around the match. “Most fans just want to see a good 
game but there’s a minority on both sides who want to fuel the fire. And with 
the press talking about how it’s the first game for a long time, that makes it 
worse.” For Steven, Sunday is a chance to showcase the majesty of Hampden. “We 
need to show the outside world that Scottish football isn’t finished.”

It is a sentiment shared by Billy McNicol, a Rangers fan for 35 years who is 
at the stadium with his 17-year-old son. “We want to let Celtic know we’re 
still here,” he says. As with even the most dedicated of Rangers supporters, he 
is practising expectation management: “I hope to see my team give a good 
account of themselves and I hope that the match passes without any trouble,” he 
adds carefully. “I’d like to see how far the team has come. Rangers fans accept 
where they are but I’ve seen the highs and lows over a long time.”

The noise inside the 52,000-capacity stadium is deafening; the stands a sea of 
green and blue, with the occasional flash of orange. (Outside the ground one 
stand is selling scarves declaring fealty to the controversial Protestant 
fraternal society the Orange Order.) In the Celtic stands there are Basque 
flags fluttering; in the Rangers ones the traditional union regalia as well as 
a stray Israeli flag.

As the fairly lacklustre football match progresses on the pitch, the 
overwhelmingly male fans return to well-worn chants with the familiarity of 
pulling on a favourite jumper. On the Rangers’ side it is “no surrender”, “we 
are the people” and, displaying an impressive historical memory, specific 
references to a 1960s sexual abuse scandal involving the Celtic boys’ club.

The Celtic fans are a little more inventive, performing a bobbing zombie dance 
– because, according to their particular narrative, the ‘real’ Rangers is a 
dead club following its sale – and the more explicit “you’re not Rangers any 
more”, a subversion of the standard chant “you’re not singing any more”.

There are complaints from across the park about the state of the pitch, which 
is swiftly churned up and seems not to have recovered from Kylie Minogue’s 
closing ceremony performance at last year’s Commonwealth Games.

What the match itself lacked in tension may well be played out in the city 
centre streets some Saturday night. But the brute divisions of Rangers/Celtic 
sit uneasily in Scotland’s post-referendum landscape after a year in which the 
country and its people asked itself profound questions about what it means to 
be Scottish and what kind of Scotland they would wish to live in. It is 
undeniable those divisions still exist, and they are comfortingly familiar to 
some, but their usefulness is increasingly under scrutiny, and not only in 
terms of providing decent football to watch.

Andy Murray, who last week brought the country’s three (female) party leaders 
together in a shared Twitter joke about missing First Minister’s Questions to 
watch his semi-final, is arguably far more emblematic of this emerging new 
Scotland.
 