
Forget all the talk about Olivier Giroud’s scorpion kick – the real sting in 
the tail was delivered by the Frenchman 48 hours later as he scored an 
injury-time header that was nothing like as spectacular as hisgoal against 
Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/01/donkey-scorpion-olivier-giroud-volley-arsenal-crystal-palace>
but every bit as important as Arsenal staged a remarkable comeback.

With little more than 20 minutes remaining Arsenal were staring at the 
prospect of a chastening defeat afterBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> had run the visitors’ 
defence ragged. Eddie Howe’s team were 3-0 up, the travelling Arsenal 
supporters had turned on their own team and it was hard to see a way back for 
Arsène Wenger’s players.

Laurent Koscielny had departed with cramp, Héctor Bellerín was enduring what 
must go down as one of the most difficult nights of his career and there was no 
hint of a recovery. Yet in the 70th minute Alexis Sánchez headed in at the far 
post and, as Howe would ruefully later reflect, that was the key moment in this 
helter-skelter match.

Arsenal gained some belief and the balance of the game shifted – not just 
because of Sánchez’s goal. Ryan Fraser, who scored Bournemouth’s third goal and 
won the penalty that led to Callum Wilson converting from the spot earlier in 
the match, had been forced off through injury, meaning that the home team no 
longer had that lightning quick outlet on the left to stretchArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>.

It became a question of whether Bournemouth could hold their nerve and keep 
Arsenal at bay for long enough, yet within five minutes Wenger’s side had a 
second when Lucas Pérez volleyed beautifully into the far corner of the net. 
Incredibly Bournemouth came close to scoring a fourth but Dan Gosling curled 
wide and the significance of that miss soon became clear.

With eight minutes left, Simon Francis went into a full-blooded challenge with 
Aaron Ramsey that Michael Oliver, the referee, deemed worthy of a straight red. 
It seemed a little harsh and left Bournemouth, who were retreating deeper and 
deeper, desperately hanging on.

The game had ticked into the 92nd minute when Granit Xhaka delivered a cross 
that Giroud, towering above Steve Cook, headed beyond Artur Boruc. Arsenal had 
somehow rescued the most unlikely point, breaking Bournemouth hearts in the 
process. The home changing room, Howe admitted, was a desperately quiet place 
after the match.

Arsenal, in fairness, deserve credit for turning the game around, especially 
in light of the fact that this was their second fixture in the space of two 
days. It was not as if Wenger made wholesale changes – he retained eight of the 
side that started against Palace – and it says something about their character 
and resilience that they never gave up. Yet defensively Arsenal were all over 
the place at the times and it was alarming to see how easily Bournemouth 
exposed their weaknesses at the back.

Arsenal’s start was about as bad as it gets and Wenger was soon wearing that 
familiar pained expression on his face. His side conceded twice in the opening 
20 minutes, Francis Coquelin limped off before the half-hour mark and, in 
another sign that everything was unravelling for Arsenal, Sánchez and Ramsey 
were raging at one another.

Bournemouth, on the other hand, were enjoying themselves and reaping the 
rewards of Howe’s bold tactics. Despite being without Benik Afobe, who was 
unable to play because Democratic Republic of Congo had not provided 
international clearance in the wake of the striker’s decision to withdraw from 
their Africa Cup of Nations squad, Howe still went with two up front. Wilson 
and Joshua King filled those positions and troubled Arsenal time and again with 
their pace in behind.

Yet it was Charlie Daniels, the Bournemouth left-back, who opened the scoring 
with a superbly taken goal. Running into the space that opened up behind 
Bellerín, Daniels controlled Junior Stanislas’s crossfield pass, stepped inside 
the Arsenal right-back and beat Petr Cech at his near post. Four minutes later 
Wilson scored from the spot after Xhaka pushed Fraser over in the area as the 
Scot scampered clear. Wenger felt that it was a soft penalty but Xhaka was 
playing with fire when he placed his left hand on Fraser’s back.

It seemed inevitable there would be an Arsenal response after the restart and 
so it proved for a period, yet it was Bournemouth who struck again. Daniels 
slid a pass into the inside left channel and Bellerin, who is no slouch, had a 
headstart on Fraser. Yet Fraser not only caught up with the Arsenal defender 
but was too strong for him. Darting into the area after Bellerin had felt the 
force of his shoulder charge, Fraser slipped the ball through Cech’s legs and 
Bournemouth were in dreamland.

Arsenal, however, were not done. Sánchez nodded in at the far post after 
Giroud flicked on Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain’s cross and in the blink of an eye it 
was 3-2 following a fine piece of play involving Sánchez, Xhaka and Giroud that 
ended with Pérez spearing a lovely left-footed volley beyond Boruc. Then was 
all about Giroud, who has started 2017 with a bang.
 