
The curiosity about Olivier Giroud is that on a good day he can look like, as 
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> chose to put 
it after one of his most bullish performances, “an animal”. At full power he is 
the kind of beast that throws his weight around and makes a big noise. On 
less-good days he can morph into a noticeably more ponderous creature. Those 
are the displays which prompted Thierry Henry to wonder not so long ago whether 
Arsenal could win the league with Giroud leading their line.

Arsenal’s recovery complete after Olivier Giroud’s treble sinks Olympiakos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
In Athens, when Arsenal needed boldness to triumph in an intimidating, 
pressurised environment, Giroud was in king-of-the-jungle mode. A hat-trick 
that bristled with intent eased Arsenal’s complicated path into theChampions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> knock-out round. 
The pivotal moment, arguably, came early in the second half, when having opened 
the scoring, he turned an ankle with his full body weight adding a lot of 
stress to the situation. It was such an anxious moment for Wenger, who is 
already without so many attacking options and could ill afford to lose Giroud 
for even a minute with the tie finely balanced, never mind any longer.

So what happened next? Three weeks out? Three months? The script tilted 
beautifully forArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> as Giroud 
hauled himself up, ambled back into action, and went about the total 
destruction of Olympiakos’s resistance. His second goal was unerringly struck. 
His third, a penalty, full of confidence.

This competition this season has been an extraordinary experience for the 
French striker. It began ignominiously, with a foolish red card in Arsenal’s 
opening-daycrumple at Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/dinamo-zagreb-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
. That meant he was suspended for the second match day, a nightmare against 
Olympiakos at the Emirates which left the team on zero points and their big 
No12 entitled to feel a bit guilty.

He has made up for that superbly. Having scored home and away against Bayern 
Munich, his treble in Greece bought deliverance for his team.

Wenger has placed a lot of faith in Giroud since signing him from Montpellier 
in 2012. Apart from anything else, what the manager really admires is his 
resilience, his desire to respond when he endures rough periods. He won’t 
easily forget a humiliating set of misses in last season’s defeat at home to 
Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/25/arsenal-monaco-champions-league-last-16-match-report>
. But Wenger never doubted that Giroud would recover. “When a guy plays in 
division three in France at 20 and gets up to the national team there is some 
mental strength there,” he observed.

While the headlines will be Giroud’s, he will be the first to appreciate the 
team effort that saved Arsenal’s Champions League campaign. There was defensive 
excellence from Petr Cech, attentiveness from Laurent Koscielny, absolute 
control and an added threat going forward from Nacho Monreal, bustling energy 
from Aaron Ramsey, dangerous running and a fine assist from Joel Campbell, and 
of course, the leader of the orchestra – Mesut Özil.

Given the key personnel that were missing – Francis Coquelin, Santi Cazorla 
and Alexis Sánchez would all have been positioned in key roles – the challenge 
for Arsenal to find the balance between defensive caution and attacking 
ambition was complex.

It took a while for them to overcome early nerves, but once the flickers of 
optimism turned into a flow, Arsenal constructed the result they deserved. It 
was a perfect night for the Arsenal manager, who values his run of consecutive 
qualifications – not just in terms of participation in the Champions League but 
also in the annual passage to the knockout stage. This result extended that 
sequence to 16 seasons in a row.

His overall Champions League run, 18 successive seasons, is a well of huge 
satisfaction and importance Wenger, right, likes to draw upon. When he is under 
scrutiny he mentions it often, and with feeling. He is fond of asking how many 
other clubs have a record to match? The answer, as he has no qualms about 
reminding anybody, is that there are some very elite names that have not 
managed to match Arsenal’s regularity in the competition. Not Barcelona. Not 
Bayern Munich. Not Milan. Not Manchester United. Not Juventus. Not Ajax. Only 
one, Real Madrid, has a better record in that respect. Of course, critics can 
disregard a statistic like that as a sort of European version of the infamous 
“fourth place trophy”, a mirage-like prize. What’s the point of clocking up the 
miles if you never get to your destination? What is the glory in qualification 
if you never win the trophy?

But to Wenger – particularly in reference to the decade when he felt the squad 
was underpowered as they dealt with the financial limits imposed by their 
stadium move from Highbury to the Emirates – those repeated appearances at 
Europe’s top table are regarded as an achievement in their own right.

The morale booster of this safe passage from the group stage is reward enough 
for now after an indisciplined start to this campaign. To claim this result 
without so many key personnel can only be helpful to the rest of the squad.

Arsenal had a lot of wrongs to put right in Athens with their slimline squad. 
Giroud, more than anyone, knew that and reacted in the strongest possible way.
 