
It was back in early April when Olivier Giroud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud>, in a question and answer 
session with the local daily Midi Libre, reflected on his sudden surge into the 
public consciousness. Montpellier stood on the brink of their first league 
championship, his goals sustaining Hérault's unlikely challenge against the 
limitless resources of the Qatari-backed Paris St Germain, and scouting reports 
of the forward's prowess were arching eyebrows from the Bundesliga to the 
Premier League.

For a player whose progression from lower leagues to top flight had been 
steady rather than spectacular, all the newfound attention must have felt 
unfamiliar. Even unnerving. "I have had my own particular path to reach this 
point," he had said in the spring. "Things have only really accelerated over 
the last few months after a rather 'linear' career. But I made sure it happened 
for me. When things do come off, it makes you very proud. All the effort is 
worth it. What has happened since has been amazing."

If that was then, Giroud must be pinching himself now. A league title winner 
in May, and a member of Laurent Blanc's albeit under-achieving France squad at 
Euro 2012 through June, the 25-year-old will formally become anArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> player on 1 July. Prior to 
arriving at the French base in Donetsk, Giroud had only ever played two games 
outside France – a Europa League qualifier against the Hungarians Gyori two 
years ago and a friendly against Germany in Bremen in February – though now he 
is a high-profile export, and a man whose arrival Arsène Wenger hopes will help 
to appease Robin van Persie. Arsenal's manager has tracked the 6ft 3in forward 
from afar. He does not believe a fee of £13m represents a gamble.

The club's supporters may reserve judgement for now, if only because they once 
pinned their hopes on Marouane Chamakh maintaining the form that had claimed 
Bordeaux a Ligue 1 title upon his arrival at the Emirates Stadium. Yet the 
comparisons with the Moroccan should end there. Giroud feels different. The boy 
who grew up in a well-off Catholic family in the Rhône-Alpes with posters of 
Marco van Basten and Zinédine Zidane on his bedroom wall has, like Didier 
Drogba before him, earned this opportunity through steady progress in the 
French lower leagues. It is no surprise that he spoke of his "pride" at how he 
had ended up in London: from the boys' team Olympique Club de Froges to 
Grenoble's youth academy; from a loan spell at Istres in the third tier to a 
move to Tours of Ligue 2.

There, alongside Laurent Koscielny, he made his mark and put a sports science 
degree on hold, his goals attracting interest from Celtic before Montpellier 
secured his services for €2m in January 2010. Last season's French golden boot 
at Stade de la Mosson was earned as the focal point in a surprise package of a 
team.Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> was supposed 
to be all about rugby union, not football league championships. They were still 
an amateur side in the mid-1970s. Yet a club with upper mid-table attendance 
figures and lower mid-table resources held off PSG's new money with a team of 
academy graduates and journeymen. The reality that Middle-Eastern money does 
not always prevail was football's romantic story of the season.

Giroud contributed 21 league goals to ensure his reputation precedes him now. 
On the pitch he has tremendous stature and physical presence, with his aerial 
ability surely to prove an asset in the Premier League, but he can be just as 
quick-witted and nimble in possession. His Montpellier team-mate, Jamel Saihi, 
has compared him favourably to Zlatan Ibrahimovic in terms of his touch and 
presence – there were nine assists as well last term – while pointing to his 
work-rate and desire to defend. His coach at La Paillade, René Girard, 
described his goalscoring ability as "innate", which should make an attacking 
trio of Van Persie, Lukas Podolski and Giroud feel mouth-watering.

"I can play as a lone forward, in partnership with a second forward, or in 
front of a No10," he said. "I'll adapt my game to different situations. That's 
my job. I've worked hard to add some explosive power to the first few metres 
when I make a run with or without the ball. I still need to work on my game 
when I have my back to goal. That's the hardest part." That acknowledgement 
suggests a desire and willingness to maintain his education at Arsenal, and a 
realisation that, despite being an international, there is plenty more still to 
come. Wenger will tap into that appetite to improve.

He will need time to settle. London-life will be very different to what he has 
grown used to back in Montpellier, where he, his father and brother would 
regularly take themselves off to wine tastings in Languedoc-Roussillon to stock 
the striker's cellar with vintages from Pic Saint-Loup and Montpeyroux. "Je 
suis un epicurien," he once told Le Parisien. He has also become a gay icon 
back home having appeared topless on the front cover of the French magazine 
Tetu, alongside the pull quote: "Je n'ai pas de tabou." Indeed, in a city 
renowned for its liberalism, he is France's metrosexual man of the moment, 
complete with model looks and a legion of female fans, though his focus is 
fixed. "I still want to learn, to progress," he has said. His arrival at 
Arsenal will not quench that thirst.
 