
The former Doncaster Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster> 
chairman John Ryan hopes the One Direction star Louis Tomlinson can still help 
the club following the collapse of their joint takeover bid.

The pop star announced last month, after weeks of speculation, that he was 
teaming up with businessman Ryan and their takeover of the League One club was 
expected to be formalised on Friday. But efforts to raise enough cash for the 
deal – through the Crowdfunder.co.uk website – have faltered with only £757,796 
of the £2m target raised by Thursday’s deadline, from 514 backers.

A statement issued by the Tomlinson Ryan Trust, established by the pair, said 
the failure to reach their target meant they were unable to meet the Football 
League’s “fit and proper person” test for club ownership.

Tomlinson has said he had been “misled” but hopes to stay involved, while 
Ryan, who last November stepped down as club chairman, confirmed the joint 
venture was over and that he was finished with football for good. Ryan said: 
“When Louis says he was misled, he’s certainly not referring to me, I spoke to 
him on Thursday. I don’t want to go into the ins and outs. As far as I’m 
concerned the whole thing is finished.

“I’m finished with football. I just want to live my life a different way now. 
I hope Louis does stay involved because he’s a great supporter of the club and 
I know he will do all he can. But the reality is, in my opinion, it’s over.

“Maybe down the line, certainly where Louis is concerned, he will be able to 
get involved again. But our partnership hasn’t worked out. The crowd-funding 
was an absolute failure, but it’s been a combination of that and the Football 
League’s stance. I don’t want to go into details. I don’t want to go there.”

Tomlinson, a life-long Rovers fan, and Ryan hosted a press conference last 
month outlining their plans for the takeover and launching the crowd-funding 
bid. Those who have pledged cash will not lose out as they do not have to pay 
up if a project does not meet its target under Crowdfunder’s rules.

A spokesman for the investment site said: “Crowdfunder is an all-or-nothing 
model. If a project doesn’t reach its target, no money is taken from backers.”

The trust’s statement on Thursday said the takeover was in “serious doubt”, 
although it had previously stated that it would take place irrespective of the 
success or failure of its crowd-funding project. Ryan is understood to have met 
withFootball League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> 
representatives this week in a bid to reassure them he and Tomlinson had the 
finances to run the club.

He added: “I’ve given my all for 20 years, including about £10m, and although 
I wouldn’t say I feel embittered I’ve had enough. I’ve got two daughters and 
they’re both telling me I look ill. They’ve said they want a dad, not an owner 
of a football club any more.”

The Football League issued a statement on Thursday night saying it had yet to 
receive an acceptable business plan from Ryan and Tomlinson. Tomlinson insisted 
he would not benefit financially from the club if the deal had occurred.

In a series of posts online, Tomlinson wrote: “I’m absolutely gutted the 
Doncaster Rovers deal is not going ahead. I am desperate for the club to be 
given the recognition it deserves. I was explicitly told that the deal to buy 
the club was not dependent on the money raised by Crowdfunding. Unfortunately I 
was misled.

“My passion for Doncaster Rovers remains as strong as ever, and I hope that I 
can still be involved with the club moving forward. And to all the Doncaster 
Rovers fans , I will do all in my power to help the club succeed. I really do 
love the club.”
 