
I've just spent three months in New York performing my play, An Oak Tree. Next 
month I'll start a run in London. The play has two actors - I'm one of them; 
the second changes each time, and walks on stage having never read a word of 
the play. The second actor plays the father of a girl who has been killed. 
Here's how it went in New York.

Frances McDormand and RK

The producers placed an advert in Time Out New York every week, announcing 
which second actor was doing which night. This was never meant to be the deal, 
and it came with a downside. It meant that audience turnout became a barometer 
of the success of each actor who did the show.

One Sunday night, I worked with a lovely Chicago actor called RK (Curb Your 
Enthusiasm, The Producers, Scrubs). RK had just made the move from LA to New 
York, a risky move for any actor. He was fantastic in the show, but there were 
only 40 in the audience. You could see his heart contract as he took in what 
this might mean.

Two shows completely sold out. Three-time Oscar nominee Joan Allen, who hadn't 
been on stage since Burn This with John Malkovich, 17 years ago. And Frances 
McDormand. Frances played the piano with her feet, she flicked me the finger, 
she got us both to deliver the final speeches of the play in a way that was a 
total revelation. At the curtain call, she sat down in the audience and 
demanded that I take the bow by myself. She was lovely, and she loved it, and 
her husband, Joel Coen, was in, with his brother, Ethan. We all had several 
beers afterwards, and I spun home that night knowing that I'd just had a "life 
moment", an unrepeatable experience. The next night it was back to 40, with 
another self-doubter.

X and the exit

I met each actor an hour before the show - an essential time to establish a 
rapport, convince them they can do nothing wrong. One night, a hero of mine, X: 
not a well-known actress but someone for whom I have the highest respect. When 
we met, it was as if we were old friends. We sparred, we joked, we clicked 
absolutely. She understood everything I was trying to do with the play. I got 
very excited. Then, when she walked on stage . . . nothing. She put one hand in 
her pocket and just seemed to drift. It's a fragile process. Everyone has their 
own idea of what being "open" means. For her, this was it.

The audience didn't help much. At one point, a silver-haired woman got up to 
walk out. There were three aisles in the auditorium. Only one of them led to 
the exit; the other two were dead ends. She started by going up the left-hand 
aisle. I stopped the show and gently told her she couldn't get out that way. 
She started making her way up the centre aisle. I told her she couldn't get out 
that way either. Time stood still. There I was on stage with someone who wasn't 
giving me anything, watching a lovely old lady try to do an inconspicuous 
walk-out.

Lili Taylor

There are 33 photographs of Lili Taylor on the Internet Movie Database, and in 
each she looks more beautiful and brilliant than the last. The night she played 
the father, I sat in the lobby with butterflies in my stomach, waiting for her 
to show. And then in came this woman without makeup, a real person who was 
gracious and human, and not a little nervous.

An Oak Tree has a natural filtering effect on its actors. The fact that 
someone has committed to doing something they know nothing about means they're 
already in a good place. The play seems to connect with an actor's sense of 
their beginnings: they want the raw stage experience that got them into acting 
in the first place, without having to repeat it seven times a week for three 
months. This, coupled with the realisation that no one is like their photograph 
and we're all pretty much the same, was the foundation of each performance. 
Lili was great in the show.

The Really Big Name

One night my second actor ran really late. The show started at 8pm. At 7.05pm 
I talked to my producer and discovered that nobody had a contact number for 
him. At 7.10, I started thinking about Plan B. Plan B means walking on stage 
and telling the audience I'm looking for an actor. I had never had to instigate 
Plan B, although a part of me was excited at the prospect - in theory. This 
particular night, however, would have been a very bad night for Plan B, since 
99% of the audience were there not for my theatrical chutzpah; they were there 
specifically for my second actor. The show was a sell-out; people were queuing 
for returns.

At 7.18pm Mike Myers strolled up to the theatre. He was sorry he was a bit 
late; he had misjudged the distance between SoHo and the West Village. We went 
into the theatre and I gave him the abbreviated version of the pre-show chat. 
He told me that he dreams about these moments - going on stage with nothing in 
his head. For most people this would be a nightmare, but in his dreams, he 
says, he's actually really good; he's happy and successful and everyone loves 
him! I took this to be a good sign.

I strolled on stage, invited Myers to join me and the audience went crazy. 
Then we got to work, and immediately Myers became the 46-year-old father of a 
dead girl - volunteering for a hypnotism act hosted by the man who was driving 
the car that killed her. He was great - light and dark, playful and serious. 
The play gives the second actor an unusual connection with the audience because 
both are discovering the story at the same time. Myers understood this 
connection. He flung the audience subtle sideways glances, was both knowing and 
unknowing. It was beautiful. At the curtain call I couldn't compete with Myers 
when it came to comedy bows, so I left him to it and he curtseyed.

Maura Tierny 

Before each performance, I took a Polaroid of my second actor and put it on a 
noticeboard in the lobby - actors tall, short, thin, fat, foreign, famous, 
ordinary, beautiful. One night Maura Tierney, Abby in ER, did the show. I don't 
watch ER much; it's a private thing for my wife and my 16-year-old daughter, 
Nel. Maura lives just around the corner from the theatre. She didn't bring any 
friends to see the show; it was like a private challenge for her, and she was 
wonderful. Afterwards I asked if she would sign a second Polaroid for my 
daughter. At the top of it she wrote "Nel". At the bottom she wrote, "Your 
father is a twat. Sincerely, Maura T." (The insult wasn't entirely random: we 
had talked about the difference between the English word 'twat' and the 
American pronunciation, 'twot'.) My hope was that the fact that her father 
could get a signed Polaroid of Abby from ER cancelled out the sentiment. That 
was my hope, anyway.

The A-lister, her husband and the film

One weekend an actor called Mark Consuelos appeared in the show. Google him. 
Consuelos is a very beautiful man - flashing white teeth, thick hair, toned and 
cashmered body. He is married to Kelly Ripa, one of the highest-paid television 
celebrities in the US. She and Mark met on a famous soap opera called All My 
Children. She now co-presents Live with Regis and Kelly every weekday morning 
at 9am. She earns around $36,000 for every programme, and there was an episode 
of Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous all about her.

Ripa came to see her husband, and she brought a couple of LA-based 
scriptwriters with her. Mark was great in the play, despite his looks. He was 
blown away by it, as was his wife, as were the scriptwriters. Kelly mentioned 
it on her programme on Monday morning. She told her viewers it was the "most 
compelling piece of theatre she had ever seen". Her recommendation brought a 
woman from Maine all the way to the West Village to see the show. Sadly, the 
demographic for Live with Regis and Kelly is not really into experimental 
British theatre, so she didn't solve our audience problem, but it was good to 
know we had a fan.

Then, on Tuesday, I got a phone call from Mark's manager: Kelly and Mark 
wanted to meet. After the show that night, I went into the lobby and there was 
TV's A-list personality, her husband and the scriptwriters. We went to a bar 
and Kelly ordered a bottle of Sancerre. They told me that, since seeing the 
show, they had talked of little else. And they had an idea. They'd been talking 
about making a film of the show.

I said that what distinguishes An Oak Tree is its unique theatricality: it 
can't be transposed into any other medium. They assured me it was this 
theatricality they wanted to capture. They talked of filming it live again and 
again, and then editing so the nature of the play in performance is revealed. 
We talked about filming the pre-show discussions, filming each actor in the 
lead-up to their performance, filming me getting into "character". We talked 
about similar experiments - Louis Malle's films Vanya on 42nd Street and My 
Dinner With Andre. They mentioned film festivals and Kelly talked passionately 
about TV being the only art form most Americans ever see. She said she could 
get any actor we wanted - Cate Blanchett, or Harvey Keitel. I said that if we 
were to use big names, we would also have to use a couple of complete unknowns. 
They agreed, and we had another bottle of wine. The next day, full of 
enthusiasm, I wrote a long email to the writers in LA. I'm still excited about 
my film career, but I haven't heard a word since.

An Oak Tree is at Soho Theatre, London W1, with guest stars, from February 7. 
Details 0870 429 6883;www.sohotheatre.com <http://www.sohotheatre.com>
 