
I spend almost as much time scrubbing whisks, bowls and tins as I do actually 
baking. While there’s a joy to seeing so many separate elements come together 
to form a really impressive layer cake or an elaborate dessert, the thrill 
quickly fades when the time comes to wash up. Here are a couple of simple 
recipes – ones that you can mix in just one bowl – no mess, no kitchen chaos.

Self-saucing mocha pudding

With self-saucing puddings, a sponge mixture topped with a thick layer of 
sugar and covered in boiling water goes into the oven a sloppy, muddled mess, 
but emerges as soft, damp sponge cake sitting over a layer of sweet sauce. It’s 
a kind of kitchen magic, but whether you manage to pull off pure alchemy or 
just a fumbled card trick depends on the care you put into the flavour of the 
thing. Because so much sugar goes into the sauce, you’ll need a hit of either 
acidity or darkness to balance it (most self-saucing pudding recipes are either 
lemon or chocolate, with this in mind). In this mocha version, I’ve used plenty 
of cocoa powder and a coffee sauce to counter that sickliness.

Serves 4
60g butter
60g soft light brown sugar
150ml sour cream
1 large egg
1 tbsp whole milk
1½ tsp vanilla extract
110g plain flour
40g cocoa powder
1½ tsp baking powder
½ tsp ground cinnamon
A pinch of salt

For the sauce
100g soft light brown sugar
25g cocoa powder
3 tsp instant coffee granules

1 Set the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4.

2 Melt the butter in a large, heatproof mixing bowl in the microwave. Use a 
little of the melted butter to grease a 1.2 litre ovenproof dish. To the 
remaining butter, add the soft brown sugar, sour cream, egg, milk and vanilla 
extract. Whisk for a minute. Sieve in the flour, cocoa powder, baking powder, 
cinnamon and salt, then whisk to combine everything into a smooth, thick batter.

3 Scrape the batter into the greased tin and put the kettle on to boil. To 
make the sauce, add the sugar, cocoa powder and instant coffee granules to the 
mixing bowl (no need to wash it up or scrape it out first) and stir. Sprinkle 
this mixture in a thick layer over the top of the batter.

4 Pour 200ml boiling water very gently all over the top of the pudding. Don’t 
stir anything; don’t agitate the tin or try to make it even. It won’t look very 
promising at this point, but it will right itself as it bakes.

Whether you manage to pull off pure alchemy or just a fumbled card trick 
depends on the flavour

5 Bake the pudding for 25-30 minutes, until the cake is firm and set, and the 
sauce is bubbling up around it. Take care not to overcook it, or the sauce will 
just congeal to a layer of soggy sponge at the bottom. Serve straight away with 
ice-cream.

Cheat’s bakewell tart

Typically, with a bakewell tart, you would have to make a separate pastry 
crust, almond frangipane mixture and, if you’re particularly fastidious, a 
homemade jam. This simplified version cuts out all of that rolling, shaping, 
cutting, chilling, mixing and washing up, making both crust and filling from 
one simple mixture: a butter and amaretti crumb, half of which is pressed into 
the base and sides of the tin, the other half of which is then whisked with 
eggs and sugar for a rich “frangipane” batter to fill up the tart. It has the 
same sweet almond kick of a traditional bakewell tart, without the trouble of 
working with difficult pastry. I used blackcurrant jam, but a seedless 
raspberry or blackberry version would also work well.

Serves 10
175g amaretti biscuits
250g plain flour
A generous pinch of salt
150g butter, firm, but not fridge-cold

For the filling
100g caster sugar 
1½ tsp baking powder
2 large eggs
¾ tsp almond extract
2-3 tbsp jam
3 tbsp flaked almonds

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Take a 20cm-diameter 
loose‑bottomed cake tin out of your cupboard and set to one side.

2 Put all the amaretti biscuits in a plastic sandwich bag, then thoroughly 
crush them using a rolling pin. You want to reduce them to a fine powder. Pour 
the biscuit crumbs into a large bowl, then stir in the flour and salt. Cube the 
butter and add it to the bowl. Rub it in really thoroughly, working it between 
your fingertips until the mixture comes together in small, slightly greasy 
clumps.

3 Pour half the lumpy dough mixture into the cake tin and press down firmly 
into the base and 2-3cm up the sides. Pack the base down even more compactly by 
carefully pressing it under the bottom of a strong glass tumbler or by using 
the back of a metal spoon. Line the pastry shell with baking parchment, taking 
care to press the parchment right into the edges, then fill the parchment with 
baking weights, or dried pulses or lentils.

4 Blind-bake the pastry in the preheated oven for 15 minutes, then gently 
remove the baking parchment parcel and bake uncovered for a further 5 minutes, 
until the base is dry and sandy to the touch. Leave to cool and firm up for a 
few minutes before filling.

5 While the pastry shell is cooking, you can turn your attention to the 
filling. Rub the caster sugar and baking powder into the remaining crumbly 
amaretti dough mix. Add the eggs, one at a time, whisking well as you go, until 
the lumpy dough relaxes into a smooth batter. Stir in the almond extract. If 
there are any clumps left in the mixture, you should have no trouble pressing 
them out under the back of the spoon.

6 Spread the jam over the base of the baked pastry shell, then ladle the 
batter carefully on top. Sprinkle the batter with the flaked almonds and bake 
at for around 45 minutes or until the filling is well-risen, golden brown and 
set in the centre. Leave the tart to cool completely before removing it from 
the cake tin to serve.
 