
This little piggy went to market, this little piggy stayed at home, this 
little piggy ate roast beef, this little piggy had none. Andthis little piggy 
got rounded up with 11 of his mates, painted red and blue, tossed in a trailer, 
driven across Navarre, cuddled before a crowd of well-wishers, photographed by 
the press, and whacked in the oven so that a bunch of footballers can stuff 
their faces. Anything to help save one of La Liga's toughest teams, the hard 
men fallen upon hard times. Outside the stadium formerly known as El Sadar, 
they were handing out stickers declaring "rojillo hasta la muerte". Osasuna 
'til I die? Pah! Is that all? These heroic little piggies are dying forOsasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna>.

When Xabi Alonso played for Real Sociedad, his mates rewarded him with a sea 
bass every time he scored. Secretly praying it's not Maniche, one Atlético 
Madrid supporters' club in Toledo offers your weight in wine to the first 
player to score each season. And the scoreboard at Real Oviedo used to announce 
"every goal a lobster", publishing alangosta league table of top scorers led by 
striker Oli. But even by Spanish standards, this particular offering was a 
little bit special, the kind of inspired incentive that could just have rescued 
therojillos. As for rescuing Pinkie and Perky, forget it. This ain't Babe, you 
know. As they left the Vicente Calderón in the evening sunshine yesterday,
Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> were 
licking their wounds after a 4–2 hammering. Osasuna, meanwhile, were licking 
their lips.

It all started a couple of weeks ago when a local breeder decided that, 
desperate for the points against fellow strugglers Espanyol, the best way to 
help Osasuna drag themselves out of the relegation zone was to offer them a 
bonus. "Win," announced Pamplona piggy purveyor Luis Miguel Arraztoa, "and I'll 
give you 12 suckling pigs." So Osasuna did win. There was, however, one teensy 
problem: like Oli, Osasuna had a couple of crushed Asians on their hands. Javad 
Nekounam, the man who scored the dramatic 92nd-minute winner against Espanyol, 
doesn't dig on swine, what with being Iranian and all. And nor does his 
countryman Masoud Shojaei. "No worries," announced Arraztoa, trying to console 
the devastated duo, "we'll chuck them a couple of chickens or something."

And so it was that club captains Patxi Puñal and Carlos Cruchaga took delivery 
of 12 tiny cute little piggies, all of them under a month old, squealing and 
wiggling and an odd shade of pink. Arraztoa admitted: "We painted them blue and 
red but they got a bit agitated on the way here and the colour ran." It was the 
biggest event of the season with cameras and fans packing Osasuna's Tajonar 
training ground. "There are more people here than we get when we unveil a new 
player," laughed Cruchaga. "People were begging for us to beat Espanyol, so 
they could see the real life pigs," added Puñal, the irony lost on him. "We'll 
eat them when we have a big victory to celebrate."

Better prepare the apple sauce, then. That'll be this week. Because as 
victories go, yesterday's was as big they get. 4–2 against Atlético, the side 
against whom they couldn't even score from the penalty spot last time they met. 
A first away win this season. A first away win in a year, in fact. An away win 
that, thanks to Sevilla's 1–0 victory over Recreativo de Huelva and Betis's 
bizarre 3–3 draw with Numancia, carries Osasuna out of the relegation zone for 
the first time in six weeks. Better still, one that, thanks to Athletic's 2–1 
victory over Mallorca and Getafe's defeat to Valencia, takes them to 14th – 
their highest position in 24 weeks. Suddenly, after 19 weeks in the relegation 
zone, 11 of them rock bottom, Osasuna look set to survive.

"The key," said coach José Antonio Camacho after the game, "is luck". It was 
the least convincing explanation heard at the Calderón since José Antonio Reyes 
protested against a red card by insisting, "I didn't shit on the referee's 
prostitute mother, I shat on mine". Sure, Atlético defended like Trojan 
doormen, but there was nothing lucky about it. "Osasuna," wrote El País, "were 
fantastic; brave, perfectly organised, convinced by what they were doing and 
inspired". They'd hit the post and had one disallowed within six minutes and 
taken the lead within seven, through Walter Pandiani. Although Diego Forlán 
equalised, they retook the lead, thanks to more comedy defending, and dominated 
the second half. Pandiani made it three before Masoud scored a truly wonderful 
goal, leaving one defender on his arse and another with his knees facing the 
wrong way – not so much kicking the ball across the turf as sliding it like he 
was playing on a bowling alley – before finishing to a standing ovation.

More to the point, "luck" does not convince, because Osasuna's surge up the 
table was not born yesterday. When Camacho took over, Osasuna looked doomed. 
Unable to score, they werethe worst top-flight side in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/nov/10/osasuna-la-liga-jose-antonio-camacho>
. But they rediscovered the intensity and aggression that had always been their 
calling card and, bit by bit, things improved. It wasn't always subtle – in 
fact, despite some classy moments, most of the time it made a 
custard-pie-clutching clown look like a nuanced, multi-layered critique of 
modern society – but there was hope. Lump it up and head it in worked.

They were unfortunate to be beaten 3–2 by Barcelona; they were robbed blind in 
Madrid; and then the results came. The side that had won just two in 19 have 
now been beaten just once in 10 since the start of the second half of the 
season, collecting five victories and taking points off Espanyol, Betis, 
Racing, Numancia, and Mallorca – all of them relegation rivals. It may be just 
two points, but six teams now sit below Osasuna. No wonder they were salivating 
in the early evening sun, defender Sergio departing the Calderón rubbing his 
belly and shooting pained looks at suggestions that Osasuna's piggies should be 
kept as mascots instead.

As for Atlético's fans, they were spitting mad, while the club were kicking 
themselves at yet another campaign gone wrong. Following a tradition running 
from the one little year in hell that turned into twoto their disastrous 
centenary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/apr/28/europeanfootball.sport2>, 
yesterday the Calderón was packed with tiny tots in football kits. Not because 
the Barcelona midfield had been invited along but because it was kiddies' day, 
with Under-12s getting in for free. It was the perfect chance to show children 
what the Calderón is all about. And to secure a whole new generation of Real 
Madrid fans.

Week 29 talking points

• Three penalties. Three goals in the last five minutes. Three red cards, two 
of them in the dying minutes. One of them for a goalie. A player injured 
celebrating the opener. And an outfield player in a dreadful pink top trying to 
stop a penalty. Oh, and a coach very definitely on the ropes. Betis were one 
up, 2–1 down, 3–2 up and finally blew it in the 95th minute with a ridiculous 
penalty. "The lunatics take over the asylum," said the headline in Marca. But 
didn't that happen in 1992?

• Real Madrid's triumphant march continues. They have now won 13 of their last 
14 inLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>. The 
question is, how? Actually, that's not the only question. There are others, 
like: why doesn't Higuaín always play? And whose idea was Guti's hair and tache 
blond Hitler combo?

• Espanyol gave themselves hope with a 3–1 win over Deportivo, thanks to some 
of the worst defending seen since … well, since the Atlético game. They're now 
five points from safety and Ivan de la Peña is their top scorer. On four.

• They say you wouldn't wish a terrible injury on your worst enemy. Let's face 
it, they're lying. Most football fans would love their worst enemy to get 
injured. How many Real Madrid fans wouldn't want Messi to break down? And as 
for Cristiano Ronaldo, well … However, one man that no one but no one could 
wish on is Villarreal's Santi Cazorla. He suffered a broken leg during his 
side's 3–0 defeat against Almería that rules him out for the rest of the 
season. And, sadly, it genuinely couldn't have happened to a nicer bloke. Get 
well, Santi.

• Fredi Kanouté is now the top-scoring foreigner in Sevilla's history on 90, 
level with Davor Suker. Class, just class.

Results: Atlético 2-4 Osasuna, Espanyol 3-1 Deportivo, Sporting 0-2 Racing, 
Valencia 4-1 Getafe, Almería 3-0 Villarreal, Athletic 2-1 Mallorca, Malaga 0-1 
Real Madrid, Betis 3-3 Numancia, Recreativo 0-1 Sevilla, Valladolid 0-1 
Barcelona.

Latest La Liga table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=29>
 