
Didier Drogba was told once that in China they considered him to be a 
reincarnation of an ancient god. They called him “The Almighty” and he always 
remembers the reaction on his first training session after following Nicolas 
Anelka to the bags of gold at Shanghai Shenhua. Their new colleagues would 
“just stare in wide-eyed amazement at some of our moves, what we did in 
practice, how we played within a team”. Both players were drifting towards the 
end of their playing careers, but they were still vastly superior to all their 
team-mates.

Which is probably what you would expect given that China’s solitary appearance 
in a World Cup came in 2002, losing all three games without scoring a single 
goal, and we are talking about the nation that is 83rd in Fifa’s latest world 
rankings, directly below Antigua and Barbuda and one above the Faroe Islands, 
whose combined population could fit into any Shanghai suburb with room to spare.

Diego Costa sends Chelsea soaring at Palace with 11th straight league win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
It is certainly easy to understand why, after Graziano Pellè signed for 
Shandong Luneng 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/13/graziano-pelle-china-34m-chinese-super-league-southampton>
, one football magazine carried a spoof interview from the Italian expressing 
his joy to be joining “what I presume to be a football club in China or 
thereabouts”. Pellè will apparently earn £34m in two and a half years, which 
breaks down to £260,000 a week, reputedly putting him in the top five best-paid 
footballers in the world, while leaving the firm impression that whoever runs 
Shandong hadn’t noticed the second L in his surname.

Remember when Juninho joined Middlesbrough back in the 1990s in one of those 
transfers that seemed to shape English football? “Juninho will need to learn 
only three words of English: pound, thank you and bye‑bye,” Jan Aage Fjortoft, 
one of his new team-mates, said at the time. It is the same now in China and it 
did raise a smile when Ramires, on his way out of Chelsea earlier this year, 
insisted the huge financial incentives had not underpinned his transfer to the 
Chinese Super League. No, presumably every young boy from Rio de Janeiro grows 
up dreaming of playing for Jiangsu Suning, in the nation that has just lost a 
World Cup qualifier at home to Syria – a country, you might imagine, that has 
other things on its mind than putting out a football team.

Oscar, an increasingly peripheral figure at Chelsea, is the latest to be 
tempted and, however muchhis impending £60m transfer to Shanghai SIPG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/chelsea-ready-to-sanction-60m-sale-of-oscar-to-shanghai-sipg>
 is dressed up, it is difficult not to think it deeply unsatisfying to see 
someone of his age abandoning any real sense of ambition and, without wishing 
to be too cruel, a certain amount of respectability. At 25, he is approaching 
what should be the greatest years of his career, even if it seems apparent they 
will not be with his current club. He is also exceedingly rich already, most 
people would assume, after four and a half years on Chelsea’s payroll, and 
surely talented enough to attract potential buyers from Europe’s top leagues. 
Good luck to him, I suppose, but however many noughts are added to his salary, 
I do wonder how much job satisfaction there can be for a footballer with his 
gifts at a level several rungs down even from Major League Soccer.

Chelsea’s Antonio Conte: Chinese Super League is a danger to all teams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/antonio-conte-chinese-super-league-danger-oscar-move-chelsea>
If that sounds slightly harsh, the reality is we are probably just going to 
have to get used to players heading that way, judging by the mind-boggling 
amounts on offer, and presumably it won’t be too long before a high‑profile 
English footballer is added to the number.

Wayne Rooney has already had one offer and, though it didn’t get very far at 
all, he hasn’t completely ruled out the idea of China even if, money aside, he 
hasn’t heard too much that is appealing. Rooney’s advisers went on a 
fact‑finding mission to China last spring and reported back that the pitches 
were appalling, the standard as bad as everyone thought, and the referees even 
worse, in a league blackened by tales of match-fixing and bribery.

Rooney might also remember Manchester United’s pre-season friendly against FC 
Shenzhen in Macau in 2007 and what came out, four years later,about the referee 
taking 100,000 Hong Kong dollars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/20/chinese-referee-fixing-manchester-united>
 (roughly £8,000) to fix the coin toss. Yet the key detail is what a climb-down 
it would be, football-wise, for someone whose career has been spent at the high 
end of the Premier League. The money is sensational but, to remember the old 
Rodriguez song, a monkey in silk is still a monkey.

The difference between Rooney and Oscar is that one is skidding towards the 
end of a rapidly decelerating career whereas the other should be five or six 
years away from the point where he might be thinking about one last payday. 
That is the shame of it all, why Jamie Carragher has called it embarrassing and 
why, unless there is a late change of heart, it feels like such a waste that a 
super-rich footballer would follow the yuan rather than stay in Europe and play 
in the competitions that really matter to the people in his profession.

Graziano Pellè and glory v money: would you turn down £34m in his position? | 
Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/13/graziano-pelle-china-34m-chinese-super-league-southampton>
Yaya Touré is often accused of being driven by ego and money – mostly, it 
ought to be said, because of a particularly dislikable agent, rather than the 
player himself – but it is not widely known the Manchester City midfielder 
turned his back on one offer from China last summer that would have earned him, 
after tax, £360,000 per week. Touré simply decided he was already an extremely 
wealthy man, that he would earn huge wages anyway and that, at the age of 33, 
he still wanted to be involved in a competitive league rather than one where 
its star imports counted their dosh but, in sporting terms, found little 
satisfaction.

Rio Ferdinand was the same when he left Manchester United and had 
money-spinning offers from teams in China, the Gulf and the United States. He 
opted for QPR and hopefully Alexis Sánchez will also decide that life in London 
is preferable for a category-A footballer now he is a target of China. Sánchez 
could feasibly earn £400,000 a week but it would be disappointing, in the 
extreme, if it turns out we have misjudged him and he decides the higher salary 
would be better for him, career-wise, than earning millions with Arsenal 
instead.

To give him his due, there is nothing to suggest that is the case, but not 
everyone thinks the same, plainly. Alex Teixiera could have moved to Liverpool 
before pitching up at Jiangsu Suning. Gervinho, Ezequiel Lavezzi, Demba Ba, 
Papiss Cissé, Jackson Martínez and Hulk all now play in the country where Paul 
Gascoigne once had a two-week trial at one club – “The name escapes me now,” he 
wrote, rather brilliantly, in his autobiography – and a brief spell at Gansu 
Tianma.

In Oscar’s case, he has clearly been shunted to the edges at Chelsea since 
Antonio Conte took control, and the natural comeback in these kind of debates 
is to ask how many people in any walk of life would say no to trebling their 
wages – for the Brazilian, increasing his salary to £350,000 a week.

Antonio Conte wants special future after Chelsea beat Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/antonio-conte-chelsea-future-crystal-palace-diego-costa-ngolo-kante-football>
All the same, Arsène Wenger made a good point recently, discussing Arsenal’s 
contract negotiations with Sanchez, when he said the Premier League’s top 
players were hardly on a pittance anyway and needed to be careful about getting 
their priorities in the wrong order. “I believe personally, and maybe I am a 
bit naive, that it’s more about getting to meet the player’s needs … the way 
the club has values, the way the club has ambition, the way the club respects 
the players,” Wenger said. “The money is good everywhere for everybody.”

Maybe I am a bit naive, too, but I cannot help agree. Oscar is too good for 
China. It is no place for any footballer with genuine ambition and surely, if 
he has to leave Chelsea, he could find another club that allows him to be a 
multimillionaire, with everything done for him and all the superstar’s 
accessories, in a country where the sport is not a national embarrassment.

China’s defeat to Syria in October finished with swarms of people protesting 
on the streets, just as they did in 2013 after the national team lost 5-1 
against a Thai youth side and their Spanish coach, José Antonio Camacho, 
resigned in disgrace. China’s president, Xi Jinping, has made it clear he wants 
to start the country’s rise as a football power, meaning the sport is now a 
compulsory part of the national curriculum and tens of thousands of new pitches 
are being created, but it will take many years before they catch up. The wages 
are out of this world but they probably have to be because any top-level player 
heading to China might just find this is the point when the rest of football 
stops taking their careers seriously.

Clarke redefining transparency

Greg Clarke, chairman of the Football Association, did not make any attempt to 
downplay the seriousness of the child sexual-abuse scandal and the potential 
repercussions for the relevant clubs and, indeed, his own organisation. 
Everybody at the FA knew the importance of getting this one right, he said. 
“It’s certainly the biggest crisis I can remember and we’re trying to be 
completely transparent.”

Clarke was formerly the chairman of the Football League and you might remember 
him promising transparency back then, too. “I have a propensity to think that 
transparency is a wonderful thing,” he said. “When you see countries and 
companies who are not transparent, terrible things happen.”

Absolutely. And now here he was again, in his new role, promising everything 
would be out in the open and the FA, conducting its own inquiry, would keep us 
all in touch. “We will bring information to the public domain as quickly as 
possible,” he added, reassuringly.

Except this was 29 November and, as we know now, four days earlier the FA 
suspended Dario Gradi, director of football at Crewe Alexandra, from all 
football-related activities. Clarke, promising transparency and an open line of 
information, had stood in front of the television cameras and somehow failed to 
mention it once.

On 6 December I wrote that the FA intended to interview Gradi about what he 
knew and, before and after publication, had several conversations with the 
governing body. Again, no mention was made that Gradi, by that stage, was 11 
days into his suspension. In fact, the FA still hasn’t uttered a word on the 
subject – not even a one-line confirmation – despite it being reported 
everywhere and even though Crewe, possibly the least transparent club I have 
ever dealt with, have put out a brief statement.

Is this the FA’s idea of transparency? It feels more like a deliberate attempt 
to hush everything up, which is precisely what the FA promised it would not do. 
Perhaps Clarke thought nobody would notice when Gradi stopped turning up for 
matches but more fool us, I suppose, if we were daft enough to believe the FA 
might actually mean it this time.

For the time being, it feels about as transparent as a pint of Guinness and, 
on a similar theme, it would be appreciated if the FA could be good enough to 
explain what a suspension from all football‑related activities actually 
entails. Sorry to be pedantic, but it does feel like a relevant question when 
the man who has supposedly been told to keep away from the sport is filmed 
going in and out of his club’s ground.

Rowett’s swings and roundabouts

Gianfranco Zola in last chance saloon but relishing challenge at Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/gianfranco-zola-birmingham-city>
Gary Rowett has had a lot of sympathy, understandably, over the last few days, 
bearing in mind the nature of his sacking at Birmingham City and the 
announcement of Gianfranco Zola’s appointment with barely enough time in 
between for the last man to clear out his office.

It is a cut-throat business and, not for the first time, it makes me wonder 
whether the League Managers Association, so quick to criticise clubs for the 
speed at which they hire and fire, should remember its own members can be 
pretty ruthless, too.

At the same time, it is probably worth pointing out that when José Riga was at 
Blackpool, already suffering the excesses of the club’s ownership, Rowett not 
only spoke to the Oyston family about nabbing his job but also cheerfully 
announced as much on the website of Burton Albion, his club at the time.

That was the first time Riga found out that interviews were taking place for a 
job he had not even vacated. Rowett, one imagines, might understand a little 
better now that it is a shame some of the people in his profession don’t bother 
too much with managerial etiquette.
 