
Never mind hygge, the new Danish buzzword is folkeligt and it’s going to give 
Britain’s organic food industry a Scandi makeover.

Organic supremos in both nations are drawing up plans for a charm offensive 
after securing €10.4m (£9m) from the EU to turbocharge industry growth. Britons 
spend only a tiny portion of their food budget on organics, and the marketing 
push aims to bring them into line with the Danes, who are the world’s biggest 
consumers of organic food and drink.

Paul Moore 
<http://www.organictradeboard.co.uk/Staff%20&%20Committee/Paul%20Moore>, chief 
executive of industry campaign group the Organic Trade Board, said the money 
would help the movement become a major player in the UK’s £197bn grocery 
market. “We need to increase availability of organic products, and that means 
convincing retailers that organic should be a key part of their sales 
strategy,” he said. “That’s where our partnership with Denmark will be crucial 
as we share the insights and strategy they have pursued to get more organic on 
shelf in the UK.”

With some organic products costing up to 30% more in the UK, the market has in 
the past been dismissed as a luxury that can only be afforded by affluent 
foodies. In Denmark, eating organic food is consideredfolkeligt, says Paul 
Holmbeck, head of OrganicDenmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>. 
The word is used to describe something people feel proud of and a part of, he 
says. “Half the population buys organic products every week and 80% at least 
every month. We estimate organic is 10% of all food sales in 2016, taking 
organic from niche to mainstream.”

The extent to which Danes have embraced organics is captured by Økodag, or 
Organic Day, in the spring when almost a quarter of a million people don 
wellies to witness the so-called “dancing cows” as the animals rush back into 
fields to graze after the long winter.

In Denmark organic is for everybody, so it is affordable. In the UK it is more 
elite and the price premium is bigger
Claus Juel-Jensen, Danish supermarket boss 
During the financial crisis, the organic industry suffered a big setback after 
major retailers slashed their ranges to focus on cutting prices. Although UK 
sales grew sharply last year, increasing 5.6% to £1.4bn, the average Briton 
spends £24 a year on organic foods, compared with £141 in Denmark, with the 
market amounting to less than 2% of UK grocery sales.

Denmark’s organic industry has benefited from the long-running support of 
major retailers, including Netto, the discount supermarket chain owned by Dansk 
Supermarked, the Danish equivalent of Tesco. “The reason organic is so big in 
Denmark is a number of big retailers invested heavily in the 1990s and 2000s,” 
says Netto chief executive Claus Juel-Jensen. “We made it affordable by making 
a lower [profit] margin on organic products for a number of years. We also did 
a good job of explaining the issues around the environment and creating 
awareness.”

The success of Netto’s organic ranges spurred on rivals to enter the fray and 
in turn expand the market. That scale has helped to reduce the price of organic 
food in Denmark, although it still costs 10-20% more. The cause has also been 
given a leg-up by Danish government policy, which includes the target that 60% 
of food served in public-sector kitchens, be it in schools, nursing homes or 
prisons, is organic. “In Denmark organic is not for the elite but for 
everybody, so it is priced so everybody can afford it,” says Juel-Jensen. “In 
the UK it is a little bit more elite and high end and the price premium is 
bigger. Even during the financial crisis our organic sales kept growing because 
consumers identified with the organic message.”

The new EU money, which is shared with Denmark, which is substantially more 
than it has received in previous funding rounds, will be used to fund national 
advertising campaigns and retailer promotions. The £9m includes a £340,000 
contribution from 60 Organic Trade Board members, including Tesco, Sainsbury’s 
and Rachel’s. The three-year funding is guaranteed despite last summer’s vote 
for Brexit.

Malcolm Walker, founder of the frozen food giant Iceland and organic chain As 
Nature Intended, says the organic market is a tough one to crack. Iceland had a 
go in 2001 but says its customers “weren’t ready at the time”. “People say ‘I’d 
pay more for this or that’ but when it comes to the purchasing decision they 
don’t,” he says, adding that As Nature Intended, run by his daughter Caroline 
Gooding, succeeds only in “cafe society type places”.

“Organic is a mindset. It’s someone who reads the Observer, drinks red wine 
and grinds their own coffee. They’ve got to be reasonably affluent, but it’s 
not about being rich … it’s more about mindset and beliefs.”

But if the UK organic industry is going to enjoy anything like Denmark’s 
success, there will have to be a step change in organic farming. Currently only 
548,000 hectares are organic, accounting for less than 2% of total agricultural 
production. Moore says there is an export opportunity as the US, which is the 
biggest organic market with annual sales of more than £35bn, is a net importer. 
“I would say to the farming community: take a look at where the growth is and 
what you are doing and consider going into organic,” says Moore. “It’s the 
market of the future.”
 