
Genital surgery to create so-called “designer vaginas” should be outlawed 
under legislation designed to prevent female genital mutilation, according to a 
group of MPs.


A report from the home affairs select committee  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmhaff/961/96102.htm>
has called the laws governing female genital cosmetic surgery ambiguous and 
said the 2003 FGM law must be changed so it covers the procedures, which have 
no medical purpose.


“We cannot tell communities in Sierra Leone and Somalia to stop a practice 
which is freely permitted on Harley Street,” saidKeith Vaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/keithvaz>, the chairman of the select 
committee.


The government has previously stated that the Female Genital Mutilation Act 
2003 does not contain any exemption for cosmetic surgery, and it had no plans 
to amend the act. But “evidence demonstrates that the police, midwives and 
campaigners would all like to see greater clarity on this point,” stated the 
report.


The select committee also risked creating a diplomatic spat with the Royal 
Colleges – which represent medical professionals – accusing their members of 
not doing enough “to encourage their members to report cases of FGM”.


The report notes that in Heartlands hospital in Birmingham, 1,500 cases of FGM 
were recorded over the past five years, with doctors seeing six patients who 
have undergone the procedure each week. “There seems to be a chasm between the 
amount of reported cases and the lack of prosecutions,” it says. “Someone, 
somewhere is not doing their job effectively.”


The first ever FGM case was brought to trial this year, but in February the 
NHS doctor Dhanuson Dharmasena, 32, was acquitted in less than 30 minutes amid 
claims that theCrown Prosecution Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> had brought the 
case because of political pressure.


Given the failure of the prosecution, there may be an “even greater 
reluctance” to report, the study said, but it urged the Royal College of GPs to 
give training to every doctor about FGM: “Doctors are on the front line. Their 
professional organisations must do more to encourage their members to report 
cases of FGM. Without their active reporting of these cases, the full extent of 
FGM will remain hidden.”


Decrying the prevalence of FGM in the UK and the lack of prosecutions, the 
report accused the Crown Prosecution Service, police and health professionals 
of playing pass the parcel.

“The DPP informed the committee that she could only prosecute on the basis of 
evidence, the police said that they could only investigate on the basis of 
referral, and the health professionals told us that they could not refer cases 
because their members were not fully trained and aware of the procedure,” it 
states. “While agencies play pass the parcel of responsibility, young girls are 
being mutilated every hour of every day. This is deplorable.”


The select committee welcomed the government’s decision to make reporting FGM 
mandatory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/13/reporting-of-female-genital-mutilation-to-be-made-mandatory>
, but said it remained unclear what would happen in the event that a 
professional should fail to make a report. It called on the government to set 
out the sanctions that would apply and establish an advisory panel of FGM 
campaigners, to be consulted before any major policy decisions are taken.

Equality Now, a campaign group, said the focus should not be on prosecution, 
but prevention.

“Mandatory reporting should go hand-in-hand with mandatory training of those 
professionals who have a child safeguarding obligation,” said Mary Wandia, the 
FGM programme manager at Equality Now. “Such training is urgently needed and is 
the next step. It should come before holding those people to account.”
 