
Earlier this year a correspondent, picking up on the fact that I regularly 
make positive remarks about an Oxford dictionary, asked which one I was 
referring to, since theOUP publishes several <http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/>. The 
answer is that I have indeed become a fan of the one-volume Oxford Dictionary 
of English, first published in 1998, with a second edition in 2003, revised in 
2005 (and not to be confused with the grandfather of them all, the OED). The 
other two dictionaries in constant use are Chambers and Collins. Chambers is 
usually considered to be the crossword setters' dictionary of choice, partly 
because it offers them authority for a wider range of the more arcane words, 
especially Scottish, Australian, Shakespearean and Spenserian words and those 
whose usage is now regarded as archaic (or as being well on the way to that 
status). I willingly concede that these qualities, attractive to setters, may 
not be selling points for solvers.

The bane of the most recent edition of Collins is that, for some unknown 
reason, it has chosen to drop all proper nouns. Some crosswords ban people's 
names entirely as solutions, so for them this does not create a problem (the 
Times allows people's names, but only if they are dead). The Guardian has 
always allowed them, which limits the usefulness of the new Collins. The 
attraction of the Oxford Dictionary of English is that it has a good selection 
of proper nouns, though not as many as the old Collins, and has a clearer 
presentation of words and phrases than Chambers. It lists them separately in 
alphabetical order, where Chambers still tends to group them under one head 
word, which makes them more difficult to find. A couple of years ago a 
correspondent recommended to me theOneLook site <http://www.onelook.com/> as a 
useful source for gathering new information and answering clues for those 
without the strength and energy to search through printed dictionaries and 
other works of reference.

As to the great multi-volume Oxford English Dictionary itself, here is a top 
tip. I cannot imagine that many of you have the space to house it (or the money 
to buy it). But it isavailable online <http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/lclogin> 
and costs you nothing to access in the UK, if you take the simple step of 
registering to get a membership card from your local authority library. Armed 
with that membership number you can access the OED (and other key reference 
works) from the comfort of your own home. Let us hope that this boon does not 
become a victim of the current or any future round of public spending cuts.
_____

There was considerable response to my comments last month on Googling and 
cheating. First, my apologies for having been guilty of ageism in suggesting 
that there might be a generational difference in attitude towards the internet. 
"At 76 I may well be in the bracket 'a certain age' but for a year or two now I 
have been an inveterate and unashamed Googler" was a typical response. Another 
was that, in doing a crossword, you were "essentially competing against 
yourself and attempting to improve your own par", so what aids you use are up 
to you.

Second, Americans and other foreign persons find Google absolutely essential 
in tackling British cryptic crosswords in order to pick up on specifically 
British cultural references. And the 'cheat' button is a godsend to those 
starting out on cryptics for the first time, as they could otherwise be 
permanently stuck at square one. A couple of you, while agreeing with the 
general proposition that Google is a brilliant and legitimate tool of the 
solvers' trade, were not happy if a themed puzzle could, in practice, only be 
solved by recourse to the internet. Araucaria's August Bank Holiday tribute to 
Alan Plater was mentioned here. Both Araucaria and I were aware of this problem 
but came to the conclusion that Plater was such a quintessentially Guardian 
figure (he and his wife also did the Guardian crossword daily) and such a great 
modern playwright that an exceptional memorial puzzle was legitimate.

Third, I owe an apology also to King Canute (or Knut) for saying that any 
attempt to keep the internet away from crosswords was Canute-like. In trying to 
keep back the rising tide he was, of course, not showing that he was a twit but 
was demonstrating the limits of his authority to his sycophantic supporters.
_____

September's Genius (No 87 by Lavatch) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-26211,00.html> attracted 
302 entries. First in was Tony of Ealing, London W5 at 02:14, pipping Ian of 
London N14 by just two minutes. (Incidentally, my apologies to Ian for 
relocating him in recent newsletters to London N16. He points out that N16 is 
Arsenal territory, which is upsetting for a Spurs fan.) The first correct entry 
from abroad came from Jeremy at Harrison, Canberra at 03:08 and there were 25 
in by the end of the first day.

Congratulations to Nora Boswell from Thornton, Bradford, who is September's 
Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with it, 
please emailsubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com> . If you 
have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 