
Rory McIlroy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> has reason to 
regard the Abu Dhabi Championship as a cursed event. Two years ago, the 
Northern Irishman was pipped to first place by a stroke and Robert Rock. 
McIlroy had been penalised two shots during round two for illegally brushing 
sand away while not on a putting surface.

Another penalty situation undermined McIlroy this time round. After his 
Saturday sanction, again two shots, for not taking full relief from a spectator 
walkway, McIlroy watched history repeat itself. Pablo Larrazábal claimed the 
trophy, at 14-under par, by a shot from McIlroy andPhil Mickelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-mickelson>, who also had just cause to 
ponder what might have been.

Whereas on Saturday evening McIlroy's temper snapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/18/rory-mcilroy-abu-dhabi-penalty>, 
he was outwardly more relaxed 24 hours later. Perhaps the surprise appearance of
his fiancee Caroline Wozniacki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/01/caroline-wozniacki-rory-mcilroy-engagement>
, who arrived in Abu Dhabi on Sunday morning after her third-round exit from 
the Australian Open, lightened his mood. Understandable traces of frustration, 
though, remained.

"I feel like I'm standing here and I should be 15-under par for the tournament 
and win by one," McIlroy said. "But that's the way it goes. I played the least 
shots of anyone this week. So I can count it as a moral victory more than 
anything.

"It's frustrating. I have played well the whole week. It's a very positive 
start to the season so I'm not going to let one little negative ruin that. This 
is going to be my third second-place finish at this tournament. I have had a 
few good finishes here and not quite won it.

"On the 18th it started to dawn on me if that [penalty] had not happened, I 
would have won. But that's the way it goes. I tried to win today and nearly did.

"Pablo played very well. I can't take anything away from him. When he needed 
to, he hit the shots, and the two shots he hit into 18 were straight out of the 
top drawer. So fair play to him. It's good to see, he's a good guy, one of my 
closer friends out here and good to see him get the win."

Mickelson's aberration was every bit as bizarre as that of McIlroy. The Open 
champion's wild tee shot at the 13th came to rest under a bush. As he attempted 
to play his way – backhanded – out of this terrible predicament, Mickelson 
performed a double-hit. A triple-bogey seven followed and while the American 
came roaring back with typical appetite, the affair cost him victory.

"It never crossed my mind it might double-hit," Mickelson said. "I was just 
trying to dribble it out of the bush because I couldn't get the unplayable lie 
to give me a shot without stroke and distance. I felt it was worth the risk.

"When it hit the club, not only did it cost me a penalty stroke but it also 
stopped the ball from going to a spot where I could hit it again. So it was 
like a two-shot hit of the club essentially. If I could just have got the ball 
to go 10 feet, it would have been fine. I make my bogey, I try to make up 
ground later on. It happens, though, unfortunately."

Mickelson took heart from playing himself into contention in a tournament at 
which he had toiled in the early stages. McIlroy, who will spend the coming 
week practising and fulfilling sponsors' commitments in Dubai, also has every 
cause to display a positive mindset in the cold light of day.

It seems inconceivable that he will not compete regularly at the top of 
leaderboards this year, in contrast to his troubled form throughout the vast 
majority of 2013.

As much as victory in Abu Dhabi would have been welcome, McIlroy knows his 
career is once again on an upward curve. His next competitive appearance will 
be at the 25th anniversary of the Dubai Desert Classic on Thursday week, where 
he will lock horns with a certain T Woods.

"I feel good about my game and feel like I'm back to the place that I want to 
be," McIlroy said. "I'm driving the ball well, hitting the ball solidly and 
giving myself plenty of chances for birdies. And if I can keep doing that, the 
wins will come. I am really excited for the rest of the season."

Larrazábal's name had barely appeared in dispatches until two birdies in his 
first four holes on Sunday. The Spaniard followed up rounds of 69, 70 and 68 
with a 67 which was aided in no small part by a back nine of 33. He retained 
his nerve wonderfully well to hole from seven feet for birdie on the 72nd 
green, given Mickelson's presence in the group behind.

"Thank God it went in, because I would not be here if I had to go to a playoff 
with Phil and Rory," Larrazábal said. Instead, he collected a cheque for 
£272,446 to mark his firstEuropean Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> victory since 2011.

"I beat two of the three most talented guys in my era and in the last era, as 
well," Larrazábal added. "I was sitting in the prize ceremony saying: 'Pablo, 
what are you doing here?' I had Rory McIlroy to my left and I had just shaken 
hands with Phil Mickelson. It was very special to me."
 