
The funniest sketch I’ve ever seen 

Shenoah Allen: Arsenio Hall having a bad day in Amazon Women On The Moon. This 
is my 10-year-old self talking, but I think it still holds up, as does the 
entire movie.

All hail the Pajama Men: the Velvet Underground of comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/30/pajama-men-velvet-underground-comedy>
The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen 

Mark Chavez: I once saw an episode of [TLC show] My Strange Addiction where a 
woman was addicted to eating “cushion”. She snacked on the foam rubber inside 
of couches. I think it was the way she kept saying “I eat cushion” that was so 
funny.

The funniest film I’ve ever seen 

SA: Waiting For Guffman, but The Day After Tomorrow is a close second.

The funniest person I know

 MC: Either Shenoah Allen or Steven Wright. But I don’t know Steven Wright, so 
there you go.

The funniest heckle I’ve ever had 

SA: Once we were doing these hippy characters in Seattle, and this woman got 
up on stage and said, “You’re making fun of people who are trying to make a 
difference!” She then scolded the audience, shouting “and you’re all laughing 
at it!”, then stormed out. Being that I’m a conservationist, vegetarian 
feminist who does yoga and was raised by gay parents on a commune, I don’t 
think she was choosing her battles very well.

The funniest item of clothing I’ve ever owned 

MC: A gold chain. I used to wear a gold chain on my neck. Who did I think I 
was?

The funniest meal I’ve ever eaten 

SA: I stayed at this posh hotel once and had a very expensive set menu. It was 
seven courses called Textures of Cauliflower. They just kept bringing out 
cauliflower in different forms: steamed, pureed, raw-and-plain. It sucked.

The funniest thing that shouldn’t be funny 

MC: A person who is addicted to eating “cushion”.

The funniest dream I’ve ever had 

SA: I once dreamed of a life in showbiz. What a joke.

Pajama Men are at Marine Theatre, Lyme Regis, Sat; Norwich Playhouse, Thu; 
Colchester Arts Centre, Fri <http://www.pajama-men.com/>
 