
As a dress rehearsal for Sunday's home date with Manchester United, this 
European interlude could barely have been bettered. Responding to Alan Pardew's 
request to "up their levels" Newcastle rediscovered some of last season's power 
and rhythmic poise in time to not only overwhelm an initially awkwardBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> but also offer Sir Alex 
Ferguson reason for anxiety.

Along the way Pardew's players enhanced their chances of qualifying for the 
Europa League's knockout stages, particularly as Bordeaux were many pundits' 
favourites to win the group.

"I wanted us to play with a bit more energy, verve, audacity and ambition and 
we did that against strong opponents who were on a 17-game unbeaten run," said 
Pardew, who this week had reportedly "read the riot act" to his squad. "Our 
control, our passing was terrific," he added. "It's a relief; we set ourself 
standards last year that we hadn't reached this season – until tonight."

Fast, fluid and frenetic it all began in exhilaratingly open mode. Yohan 
Cabaye dispatched an angled shot narrowly wide of a post, Bordeaux's Ludovic 
Obraniak headed over the bar after connecting with Jaroslav Plasil's cross and 
then, in the 16th minute, Newcastle were ahead.

The ever dangerous Gabriel Obertan, deployed, unusually, on the left of 
Pardew's front three, met Cabaye's wonderful pass and, thanks to a mixture of 
scorching pace and slick changes of feet, outwitted his marker, Mariano. All 
too often Obertan- who began his career at Bordeaux - betrays much thrilling 
approach work with substandard crosses but this time his left-wing centre was 
low and ideally measured for Shola Ameobi to tap in at the far post.

At that stage Bordeaux's passing and movement remained far too clever for 
Pardew to relax and he could have done without Cheik Tioté collecting yet 
another yellow card for a late tackle on Henri Saivet. With the Ivorian's 
abrasive style restricted not only by the need to watch his step but an ankle 
knock, Ludovic Sané, Bordeaux's midfield enforcer, temporarily exerted a bigger 
influence on proceedings than Tioté might have hoped. No matter; Danny Simpson, 
back at right-back following a hamstring injury, soon met Ameobi's ball and 
supplied a cross so teasing and testing that Henrique turned it into his own 
net.

Although Hatem Ben Arfa, Demba Ba, Jonás Gutiérrez and Davide Santon were 
rested, much of Newcastle's old fluency was returning and, despite forcing a 
flurry of early chances and corners, Bordeaux folded after Papiss Cissé scored 
his team's third. Cissé had been having a quiet evening to Ameobi's right but 
when Shane Ferguson, promising at left-back, unleashed a splendid delivery the 
Senegal striker, albeit marginally offside, swept a left-foot shot past Cédric 
Carrasso. For the third time Bordeaux could summon no answer to a stellar cross.

A streaker briefly interrupted things, wrestling with stewards before, 
eventually, being arrested, but there was to be no stopping Newcastle.
 