
Paris Saint-Germain’s record unbeaten run in Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> came to an end when they 
lost 2-1 to Lyon at Parc OL on Sunday. The French champions had gone 36 league 
games without losing – a sequence stretching back to a 3-2 defeat at Bordeaux 
in March 2015 – but first-half goals from Maxwel Cornet and Sergi Darder earned 
Lyon a first win over them in eight attempts.

Lucas Moura gave PSG hope with a 51st-minute strike but the leaders were well 
below their best without the injured Marco Verratti and Ángel Di María, andLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> should have won by a more handsome 
margin, but their fourth victory in five games took them back into the 
Champions League places.

Serge Aurier meets PSG officials to discuss disparaging comments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/serge-aurier-psg-disparaging-comments>
Lyon, who had already lost four times to PSG this season, including a 5-1 
league thrashing at the Parc des Princes in December, made a positive start 
which was rewarded after 13 minutes when Alexandre Lacazette found Cornet on 
the edge of the area and he was allowed too much space by Gregory van der Wiel 
to cut back on to his right foot and score.

Kevin Trapp soon had to turn away Darder’s powerful 20-yard drive and PSG were 
lucky not to be reduced to 10 men after 22 minutes when Thiago Motta tangled 
with Jordan Ferri and struck him with his left arm, but the referee showed only 
a yellow card.

Lyon were forcing PSG into mistakes by pressing high and launching quick 
counterattacks. Trapp saved a deflected shot by Rachid Ghezzal, who missed out 
again after more excellent one-touch football from Lyon.

It took 35 minutes for PSG to offer any threat but Moura’s acrobatic attempt 
was pushed around the post by Anthony Lopes before the goalkeeper held Thiago 
Silva’s header from the resulting corner. Lopes then denied Zlatan Ibrahimovic, 
but PSG’s growing momentum was halted in the second minute of added time.

Barcelona’s Lionel Messi and Gerard Piqué seal victory over Sevilla
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/28/barcelona-sevilla-match-report-lionel-messi>
Lacazette slipped in Rafael down the right and the former Manchester United 
full-back was allowed time to measure his centre. His cross was behind Darder 
but the Spaniard managed to retrieve the ball, lift it over Silva and beat 
Trapp with the outside of his right foot.

PSG quickly halved the deficit thanks to the persistence of Javier Pastore, a 
half-time substitute for Benjamin Stambouli, who set up Moura for his eighth 
goal of the season.

Despite the setback, Lyon still showed real attacking intent with Ferri firing 
wide after a breathtaking Cornet run and Trapp saving point-blank from Ghezzal 
after the PSG defence went absent without leave.

Trapp won his personal battle with Ghezzal again in the final 10 minutes but 
Lyon were beginning to tire as PSG made one final push to maintain their 
unbeaten record, but Lyon held out.
 