
Paris St-Germain head into the winter break as Ligue 1 leaders after taking 
advantage of Montpellier's 4-2 defeat at Evian.

PSG, David Beckham's possible destination, came away from St Etienne with a 
1-0 win courtesy of Mathieu Bodmer's 32nd-minute goal, moving to 40 points.
Montpellier <https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> 
would have reached the same total with a better goal difference had they won at 
Evian.

René Girard's side had looked on course for victory in the final game before 
the three-week hiatus, after Ligue 1's leading goalscorer, Olivier Giroud, and 
Younès Belhanda struck either side of Cédric Barbosa's goal for the home side.

But after Saber Khelifa equalised again, Evian claimed a fourth successive 
home win with goals from Cédric Cambon and Brice Djadjédjé.

The third-placed Lille were also pegged back, drawing 4-4 against Nice as 
François Clerc's injury-time leveller ended a thrilling contest at Stade 
Métropole.

The champions were on course for all three points after goals from Aurélien 
Chedjou, Joe Cole, Eden Hazard and Florent Balmont had them 4-3 ahead entering 
stoppage time, but Clerc popped up in the dying seconds to grab an equaliser 
that means Nice will spend the festive period above the drop zone.

Nice were more than a match for their fancied hosts, twice equalising through 
Renato Civelli and Franck Djadjédjé, whose second of the night had put them 3-2 
up at the break.

Lyon suffered a shock 1-0 defeat at lowly Valenciennes after Ally Cissokho 
scored an unfortunate own goal at the Stade du Hainaut.

Jirès Kembo-Ekoko's 25-yard rocket earned Rennes their first win in six games 
as they beat Bordeaux 1-0. The striker fired home in the 52nd minute to end Les 
Girondins' run of 10 points from their previous four games in which they had 
not conceded a goal.

Ajaccio recorded their first away win of the season as Sochaux's woeful run of 
form continued at the Stade August-Bonal. Benjamin André's opener and a Mathieu 
Peybernes's own goal were enough for the league's bottom club, who have now 
recorded back-to-back victories.

Sochaux dropped to second bottom in the standings having scored just one goal 
and taken one point from six matches.

The substitute Issam Jemâa grabbed a last-gasp equaliser for Auxerre to grab a 
valuable 2-2 draw against fellow strugglersDijon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dijon>. The Tunisia forward scored in 
stoppage time to salvage a draw after his fellow substitute Anthony Le Tallec 
had got the hosts back in the game by reducing the deficit in the 81st minute. 
Benjamin Corgnet and Brice Jovial had given the promoted visitors a two-goal 
cushion.

Toulouse versus Brest and Lorient against Caen ended goalless.
 