
Financial problems at Parma has forced the postponement of Sunday’s Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> game with Udinese.

Parma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parma> have not paid wages to 
players or staff since the summer and new owner Giampietro Manenti has failed 
to make the minimum payments against debt due on 16 February.

With cash levels at the Stadio Ennio Tardini reportedly dipping below €40,000 
(£29,700) this week, Parma were unable to fund matchday stewards for Sunday’s 
game and therefore requested it be held behind closed doors.

But players and coaches from both clubs have “expressed discomfort” over that 
proposition, leading the Italian football federation to order a postponement 
following a meeting held in Parma on Friday.

A federation statement read: “The president has taken note of Parma’s request 
that Parma-Udinese, originally scheduled for February 22, take place 
exclusively behind closed doors.

“He has heard from the Italian Footballers’ Association and the Italian 
Association of Soccer Coaches who have expressed discomfort of players and 
coaches from both teams about playing behind closed doors.

“Decision: the rearrangement of the game to another date which will be decided 
by the Lega Serie A.”

Manenti’s Slovenian-based company Mapi Group are Parma’s third owners this 
season.

After team coaches and club vehicles were seized from the Collecchio training 
base earlier in the week, the first team’s training session on Friday was 
cancelled with players growing increasingly frustrated.

The Parma captain Alessandro Lucarelli said: “We’ve had a meeting with the 
president [Manenti] and what has emerged is the difficulty in bringing the 
money to Italy. He has reiterated that he will try to give us some guarantees 
in the next 24 hours.

“But our patience has a limit. We are a united group and we have given the 
club an ultimatum. The time is running out. We need action, not words.”

Parma have won only three games all season and sit at the foot of the table, 
13 points shy of safety following last weekend’s goalless draw at Roma. Roberto 
Donadoni’s side have collected one point from their last six league games.
 