
Pat Symonds, the man behind the remarkable transformation at Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>, remains an admirably dissatisfied 
figure. The team’s chief technical officer masterminded their progress from 
ninth in the constructors’ championship in 2013 to third last year. Their 
dismal performance two years ago represented their nadir, with only five points 
won; in 2014 they collected 320.

“But my disappointment about last year is that we didn’t win a race,” says 
Symonds. “That rankles with me, so I’m pretty desperate to win this time.”

Felipe Massa’s fourth position in the opening grand prix in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/f1-australian-grand-prix-race-report>
 earlier this month [Valtteri Bottas was not fit enough to race] was 
confirmation that Williams would once again be competitive, although Symonds 
admits: “Ferrari were quicker than us in Australia, so we have work to do.”

Two years ago Williams were simply unable to compete but now it’s any time, 
any place, anywhere for the team sponsored by Martini. Symonds is convinced 
they can go one better and take the winning flag this year. “Whenever Mercedes 
failed last year, Red Bull picked up the pieces but this year we want to be the 
team picking up the points when Mercedes don’t get it right.

“Mercedes have a significant advantage over everyone else. We believe 
ourselves and Ferrari are very close. We see Ferrari as strong competition. 
They have a better power unit and aerodynamically they have stepped up, too. 
Red Bull will still be good aerodynamically but their engine may not have moved 
on as much as Ferrari.”

A great deal is made of the fact that Williams are strong because they have a 
Mercedes power unit. Before then, however, they struggled with a Renault 
engine, which they shared with Red Bull, the dominant team inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> for four years until last year.

Engines are now even more important than before but Symonds, preparing for 
Sunday’s Malaysian Grand Prix, has brought about a profound change in the 
attitude at Williams. “When I arrived [in 2013] there was no confidence in the 
team,” he says. “I was really proud of what we did last year after what 
happened the season before – and by the end of the year we were a damn sight 
closer than we were at the beginning. That was very satisfying. It made 
everyone believe in themselves. It’s so important as a team that you believe 
you can win and it was a great way to finish the season,with two podiums at Abu 
Dhabi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
. We had a real shot at it.

“Our job in the winter was to keep that momentum going; not just the physical 
aspects of designing a good and competitive car but attitude of mind and 
fostering a winning spirit. That’s what we’ve really worked on.

“Some people get worn down by lack of success. It takes a lot to convince 
people that this time it’s for real.In 2012 our win in Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/13/pastor-maldonado-spanish-grand-prix>
 was a bit of a false dawn and after that a lot of people became quite cynical. 
So even when we started to get results in 2014, with 10 points in each of the 
first three races, one of my biggest problems was that everyone was happy with 
that. I was saying this is not good enough, we need more. By the end of the 
year they were beginning to believe.”

The pre-season has been dominated by big-money moves by Fernando Alonso and 
Sebastian Vettel but Symonds is insistent he would not change his drivers for 
anyone.

“They are a great combination,” he says. “And they are absolutely what 
Williams need at the moment. They are a perfect fit for the team. If, last 
year, we had had Alonso and Vettel, we wouldn’t have been ready for them as a 
team.

“The expectations and demands would have been too high. I really believe 
Valtteri can win the championship one day. He’s quick, he’s intelligent, he 
continually learns from everything he does. I’ve seen those characteristics in 
champions over many years.

“I was very pleased to employ Felipe. He’s a great guy. He was written off too 
early. It wasn’t that long ago that he nearly won the world championship [in 
2008]. I wasn’t quite sure what to expect but he’s been a revelation. He’s a 
fabulous team player, he’s so popular with everyone and by God he’s quick. He’s 
enjoying life again, that’s part of the reason he’s quick. He’s relaxed, he 
likes motor racing again. He wasn’t enjoying it very much before. So I wouldn’t 
change what we’ve got.”

From the early signs this year the best battle will be for second place, 
between Williams and Ferrari. Last year, despite a huge disadvantage in terms 
of resources, Williams beat off the Italian giants and few would bet against 
Symonds achieving a similar result this season.

Symonds, however, is worried about the sport’s finances. “There is too much of 
a divide between the teams. We must concentrate on the sustainability of the 
business. We need clear direction and clear targets – and we have neither at 
the moment. You need targets before direction, so this is a troubling time for 
F1. It’s such a strong brand it will survive it but it could be so much better.

“Is there a five-year plan in Formula One? Of course there isn’t. In most 
cases a business won’t last five years unless it has a five-year plan.”
 