
A Patrick Roberts double helped Celtic to a 3-1 win over Hearts and took 
Celtic seven points clear at the top of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

Jamie Walker fired the visitors ahead in the sixth minute of a feisty, 
absorbing lunchtime encounter at Parkhead before Gary Mackay-Steven levelled in 
the 15th minute with a fine strike.

Roberts, on loan from Manchester City since January, had Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> ahead at the interval with his 
first senior goal and the 19-year-old grabbed his second four minutes after the 
restart to clinch the points with Hearts’ Juwon Oshaniwa sent off in injury 
time for picking up the second of two yellow cards.

It was only Roberts’ second start since joining: “He was very good,” Ronny 
Delia said. “He was involved maybe seven or eight times on the ball and scored 
twice, what more can you expect? It will be hard to leave him out.”

Celtic have played the same number of games as second-placed Aberdeen who have 
the opportunity to reduce the deficit at home to Hamilton on Sunday.

However, games are running out for the Pittodrie men and it was a tough test 
in more ways than one that Deila’s side came through ahead of their visit to 
Dundee on Tuesday.

The Norwegian freshened his side up after the international break, with 
Dedryck Boyata, Stefan Johansen, Tom Rogic, Roberts and Mackay-Steven coming 
into the starting line-up.

The Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> manager, Robbie 
Neilson, also made five changes, with the captain Alim Ozturk, Igor Rossi, 
Oshaniwa, Prince Buaben and Sam Nicholson returning.

The third-placed Hearts took an early lead after Erik Sviatchenko was held off 
by Hearts’ striker Juanma at the edge of the box and when the ball fell to 
Walker he struck high past Celtic’s Craig Gordon. Celtic played through some 
growing anxiety among their fans before Mackay-Steven levelled.

Hearts’ keeper Neil Alexander made a fine save from Leigh Griffiths’ free-kick 
at the expense of a corner, which the Edinburgh side failed to clear, and when 
Roberts’ cross was knocked out by Juanma, Mackay-Steven shot from 22 yards into 
the corner.

The game sped from end to end and after Alexander blocked a Griffiths effort 
with his legs, Ozturk clipped the top of the bar with a curling free-kick.

In the 34th minute Juanma volleyed high over the bar from close range 
following a Nicholson cut-back.

A minute later Celtic were ahead, Rogic cleverly slipping in Roberts who 
confidently dinked the ball over Alexander from 10 yards. There was a lot of 
pushing and shoving between players from both sides when Rogic and Oshaniwa 
clashed, the Hearts player was booked when it had all calmed down and he waited 
to get back on to the pitch with a bandage on his head, with yellow cards also 
for Buaben and Griffiths.

The groggy Rogic was replaced by Nir Bitton just before the interval and there 
was time for Alexander to save two more free kicks from Griffiths.

Boyata began the second-half action with a header from a Roberts corner which 
Alexander clawed away on the line but in the 49th minute the Hearts keeper had 
no chance when Roberts curled a shot from 16 yards past him and into the far 
corner. Hearts tried to respond but to no avail.

Chances were made and missed at both ends – Gordon made a great finger-tip 
save from the substitute Abiola Dauda’s header with two minutes remaining – 
before Oshaniwa was shown a second yellow in the third minute of injury time 
for a foul on Bitton.
 