 If ever there was a time for the whole, plainness of the truth, though nine of 
every ten denied it, that time is now. We intend to express that truth without 
mitigation. Our forecast a week ago of the paper-peace was right to the letter. 
A distinguished neutral, staunchly friendly to our own country, calls it with 
keen wit Peace with a Vengeance. Yet at the same time it is peace with folly. 
Instead of a settlement with security, it is a patchwork hinting peril in every 
seam.
These terms give no fundamental solution to any European problem. They raise 
more dangers than they lay. They revolve in the vicious circle of the old 
diplomacy. They repeat the fatal precedents which have always led back to war 
and made the end of one struggle the direct cause of another. In the 20th 
century, with all its democratic movements and portents, despite all the 
lessons of Armageddon, these terms try to do what Louis the Fourteenth, 
Frederick, the Napoleon's great and less, Bismarck attempted. The failure of 
them all has been written on ruined walls in letters of fire.

All the Treaty - apart from the incorporated and saving Covenant of the League 
- scatters Dragon's teeth across the soil of Europe. They will spring up as 
armed men unless the mischief is eradicated. Nothing is more clear and certain 
than this, and we are bound to state it. All the vaunted realism of the 
provisions will prove in the long run as artificial, untenable and futile, as 
the morals are absent or execrable. For civilisation there is now one hope, and 
no other. That hope lies in the development of the League of Nations by the 
more united democracies of the world. Apart from that the Treaty fondly 
designed to operate for 15 or for 30 years would not stand for five. Within 
half a decade another and more representative, more sovereign, Congress will 
have to meet to reverse much indeed of the work of the Conference which is now 
closing. There will be quarrels, conspiracies, agitations, assassinations, 
revolutions, collapses. The motley patchwork which has been stitched together 
will have to be unpicked almost throughout, thread by thread.

The choice for civilisation will lie between drastic revision, and disruption 
and war. The democracies will prefer drastic revision. The English-speaking 
democracies above all, never will mobilise and fight again for the arrangements 
which are proposed. No fact is surer than that one. The people have to be 
reckoned with, not the statesmen. When passions are cooled, when 
ill-consequences are evident, when alternatives are clear, the peoples will 
think and act very differently from the statesmen of today. The victorious 
democracies have had their quarrel just. Never in this world will they travail 
and bleed, never will they sacrifice their sons and give their toil, for the 
maintenance of a wrong, and for the assertion of a lie.

 Paris, Saturday. The following official Note has been issued apropos the 
conquest of the Bois le Pretre:- Since the autumn there has been continuous 
fighting in the wood. In September we were in front of the outskirts of the 
forest. Througout the winter we have advanced under cover of the trees in the 
work of sapping, and by vigorous attacks our offensive has never slackened. The 
Commander has directed his efforts proportionately to the strength of the 
troops engaged, but at no time has the enemy obtained the ascendancy over us. 
Whenever we have lost the ground that we had previously won a renewed attack 
has contrived to carry us beyond the ground gained in the first instance. After 
seven months of incessent warfare we have attained our end.

One of the hardest fights took place on 17 January when we captured 450 metres 
of trenches. A month later, on 15 February, we captured a second line. On the 
28th we seized a strongly fortified blockhouse.

Hence that day the enemy has counter-attacked and has launched aerial 
torpedoes and hand grenades. On 15 March they dynamited our trenches, but the 
same afternoon our infantry reinstated themselves in the ruins of the 
earthworks. Complete success was finally obtained after seven months' 
continuous fighting. The final phase necessitated the destruction of a 
subterranean fort by the artillery. The position was then seized at the point 
of the bayonet, when our soldiers charged magnificently. - Exchange.
 