
If love and marriage go together like a horse and carriage, so too do 
crosswords and pedantry. There is the regular diet of fruit and vegetables. Are 
tomatoes and cucumbers vegetables (which is certainly the section where they 
are to be found in my supermarket) or, in order to keep the biologists happy, 
must they be 'fruit eaten as a vegetable'; is the potato a vegetable (as in 
'meat and two veg') or must it be an edible tuber? (Rhubarb, of course, is a 
vegetable eaten as a fruit.) Then there are the chemists who get upset if, for 
example, you call magnesia a carbonate (as my chemist does when I ask for 
something for my indigestion) on the grounds that (chemically) it is an oxide 
(of magnesium). With clues involving homophones, there are those who would say 
that the first bit of 'defamation' rhymes with 'deaf' but that the first bit of 
'defamatory' does not, rhyming with 'skiff' instead. And so on.

In April a solver took objection to Shed's use of the word 'penises' (No 
24,681 11 ac, 23 April), not as might have been expected on grounds of taste 
and decency, but because the plural of 'penis' should properly be 'penes'. I 
was tempted to reply that it was Guardian house style not to use pedantic Latin 
spellings when perfectly good English ones are available, but didn't in order 
to keep my options open for a later date.

I put up both hands at once, though, when Christine of Nantwich objected to 
'octopi' appearing as a solution in Quick No 12,176 (15 ac, 19 May). As octopus 
comes from Greek not Latin, the pedantically correct plural is 'octopodes', but 
Guardian house style is firmly 'octopuses'.

In my view though, there is still a position that can be held against a 
belated complaint that the answer to 'Wheel such as the Eye (6)' cannot be 
FERRIS (Quick No 11,813 6 ac, 19 March 2008), because a ferris wheel revolves 
on a spindle that is supported on both sides, whereas the London Eye is of an 
entirely different and new design, ie it is a cantilevered observation wheel 
(with 32 passenger capsules, one for each of the Greater London boroughs, if 
you have an appetite for useless information) and is only supported on one side.

As everyone, of course, knows, the first such wheel was built by George 
Washington Gale Ferris Jr for the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 
1893 with the aim of trumping the Eiffel Tower, which had been the iconic 
symbol of the 1889 Paris Exposition. It is true that all subsequent large 
observation wheels except the London Eye have rotated round an axle that is 
supported on both sides. But, when Mr Ferris's name was adopted as the word for 
such wheels, I can find no evidence that the exact method of construction 
and/or operation became an integral part of the dictionary definition: which 
seems to be 'an upright wheel with observational gondolas for passengers 
attached'. Certainly, the London Eye features in all lists of the world's 
tallest Ferris wheels, though now (at 135 metres) it can only claim to be 
Europe's highest, not the world's. It has been topped by others, with the 
Singapore Flyer, opened in March last year, the highest of them all at 165 
metres. To be forced to define the London Eye as a "cantilevered observation 
wheel" rather than as a Ferris wheel seems a touch pedantic (and also a bit 
unfair to the memory of the good GWG Ferris Jr).

_____

I am regularly asked why the time at which the daily puzzles appear on the 
website fluctuates. The two groups that seem most upset by the variations are 
those living in time zones west of Greenwich, who want to do tomorrow's puzzle 
before they go to sleep, and those living in Europe, who want to download them 
in order to take to work. The answer is that in principle, the next day's 
puzzles should load automatically at midnight UK time. Even when this timed 
program works as it should, there will be (often surprisingly long) variations 
in when you can actually get a given puzzle on your computer, which depends on 
the route your service provider chooses to take on its way to the Guardian 
server. On the unhappy days when there is a hitch, the fact that the puzzles 
have not uploaded properly will not be discovered until the morning shift comes 
into work. In these cases, discovery and correction of whatever has gone wrong 
may not be possible until about 8am UK time, or perhaps even slightly later. 
If, to this news, you react that in 2009 computers and their programs ought to 
be more reliable, I shall not disagree but shall just say that I am only the 
messenger bringing you the news.

_____

For some reason not clear to me there was a period in May when the PDF 
downloads of the daily puzzles contracted some disease, which caused them to 
use up around 10 times more disc space per PDF, ie up from about 44K to about 
420K, which obviously slowed transmission especially for those without 
broadband. I am told that the cause of this problem has been identified and was 
quarantined before it led to a full-scale pandemic, but please let me know if 
there is any similar outbreak in future.

_____

The Genius entry numbers seem to be creeping upwards. The May puzzle attracted 
319 correct entries. The first was received at 08.27 GMT from Jeremy at 
Canberra, Australia and the first from the UK from Tony at Uxbridge, Middlesex 
27 minutes later. In all there were 31 correct entries on the first day.

In passing I have to say that I got some satisfaction from the fact that there 
was only one complaint to the effect that all the letter counts for the across 
clues in the May puzzle were incorrect: eg that for 7 ac (9,3) was indicated 
for a space that did not have 12 letters available. Even in the recent past, I 
think, there would have been a flood (some in anger, some in sorrow), asserting 
that we had made another spectacular cock-up.
 