
Pet food taste-testing by humans rose to a new level of formality this year, 
with the publication of two scholarly studies.

A paper called Optimising the Sensory Characteristics and Acceptance of Canned 
Cat Food: Use of a Human Taste Panel appeared in February. Its author, 
Professor GJ Pickering, of Brock University in St Catharines, Ontario, Canada, 
reports: "Cats are sensitive to flavour differences in diet, very 
discriminative in food selection, and clearly unable to verbalise their likes 
and dislikes. These issues have dogged the industry for decades." Pickering 
explains that taste tests with volunteer cats suffer three drawbacks. They are 
"expensive to maintain, time-consuming, and yield limited and often equivocal 
data".

He offers an alternative: "In-house tasting trials by a human taster are 
commonly conducted in the industry, although there is a paucity of relevant 
information in the scientific literature."

His study serves up a hearty helping of information. Human volunteers rated 13 
different commercial pet food samples, concentrating on 18 so-called flavour 
attributes: sweet; sour/acid; tuna; herbal; spicy; soy; salty; cereal; caramel; 
chicken; methionine; vegetable; offaly; meaty; burnt flavour; prawn; rancid; 
and bitter.

The tasting protocols depended on the texture of what was being tasted. When 
munching on meat chunks people assessed the hardness, chewiness and grittiness 
("sample chewed using molars until masticated to the point of being ready to 
swallow"). But they gauged gravy/gel glops for viscosity and grittiness 
("sample placed in mouth and moved across tongue").

The knowledge thus gained is only a first step. "It is now necessary," 
Pickering writes, "to determine the usefulness and limits of sensory data 
gathered from human panels in describing and predicting food acceptance and 
preference behaviours in cats."

In April, a team of independent scholars - John Bohannon, Robin Goldstein and 
Alexis Herschkowitsch - published a study called "Can People Distinguish Pâté 
From Dog Food?" This dog food trio address a societal concern: "the potential 
of canned dog food for human consumption by assessing its palatibility alone".

(Palatability studies can have still other purposes, of course. A 1971 study 
called On the Comparative Palatability of Some Dry-Season Tadpoles from Costa 
Rica, described here previously, examined a subtle biological question.)

The Bohannon/Goldstein/Herschkowitsch study concludes somewhat perplexedly 
that (1) "human beings do not enjoy eating dog food" and (2) are "not able to 
distinguish its flavour profile from other meat-based products that are 
intended for human consumption".

The dog and cat food studies share a connection to wine. The dog monograph is 
published by the American Association of Wine Economists. The cat paper is 
written by a professor of biological sciences/wine science, and appears in the 
Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition, which in 2007 featured a 
study called The Influence of Polyphenol Rich Apple Pomace or Red-Wine Pomace 
Diet on the Gut Morphology in Weaning Piglets.

(Thanks to Andrew N Stephens for bringing the cat food study to my attention.)

• Marc Abrahams is editor of the bimonthly Annals of Improbable Research and 
organiser of the Ig Nobel prize
 