
“Sometimes you have to hit rock bottom before the improvement starts,” said 
the Peterborough manager, Graham Westley, before the match atDoncaster Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster>. Their previous seven games 
had yielded a single point. Rovers had taken one from nine. A draw seemed the 
only solution to League One’s battle of the new year boobies but in the 93rd 
minute The Posh stole a 2-1 victory against the rush of play, tipping Rovers 
into the relegation places.

Westley lauded his players’ character. Darren Ferguson, his opposite number 
and twice ofPeterborough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough>, 
called it “a devastating defeat”, adding: “I would have been disappointed if we 
had drawn. I have to stay strong for my players and I can’t really criticise 
them.”

The match was loaded with negative statistics. The clubs filled the bottom two 
places of the six- and 10-match form tables. Neither has won at home this year 
– so much for the fortress image of the Keepmoat. And it all looked so 
promising at the turn of the year after both managers, new to their clubs after 
ropy starts under others, had raised their fortunes. After away wins on 2 
January Peterborough lay sixth and Rovers, 23rd when Ferguson was installed in 
mid-October, were 11th. Westley referred to “a horrible vein of form”, Ferguson 
to “a horrendous run”. Rovers’ rock bottom is still elusive.

Fortunately both clubs’ fans are familiar with such fluctuations. Four seasons 
ago they met in the Championship. Westley believes his current group of players 
will take The Posh back there, while sticking to the owner Darragh MacAnthony’s 
“passion for attacking football”. Stability is Westley’s new promise after 
admitting to too much tinkering. He followed that with only five changes on 
Saturday.

Sustainability is Rovers’ watchword. Their chief executive, Gavin Baldwin, 
wrote of “the manager’s exciting plans as he looks to build his own squad with 
their own Doncaster Rovers DNA, philosophy and identity from youth to the first 
team”. The philosophy is inclusive. “We have to recognise that without 
supporters the club is nothing,” Baldwin added. He did not say what it iswith 
them but reduced ticket prices led to above-average home numbers, boosted by a 
strong away contingent. For a match between near dedicated losers it had a 
cracking atmosphere.

Baldwin described the run-in as “10 cup finals” and said: “Everyone at the 
club is now working to find a way of winning games and winning games quickly.” 
Rovers scored inside five minutes, which was a bit too quick to start 
defending. The giant Ricardo Santos tried to shepherd the ball over the byline, 
Andy Williams robbed him and James Coppinger, 35, smacked home the cross. As 
the game hurtled from frantic to frenetic Coppinger was a model of cool and 
vision. He has made almost 500 Rovers appearances.

It took Peterborough the rest of the half to equalise. Marcus Maddison, 22 and 
also wide on the right, picked out Aaron Williams for an even easier 
conversion. Maddison, not the only Newcastle discard questioning that club’s 
judgment, was a Ferguson signing and constant threat. It was his late centre 
that Williams headed against a post before Santos found redemption. Doncaster 
fans rose for the exits with a collective shrug of familiarity.

Heaven knows what Maurice Setters, a former Rovers manager, would have made of 
the fuchsia shirts (Posh, of course) and fluorescent ballet boots but he would 
have loved the robust spirit of the game. Remarkably Peterborough are now 
nearer the play-offs than relegation. Doncaster face Colchester then Blackpool, 
fellow strugglers. For them it is as it was – desperate.
 