
Mark Hughes’s preference for false No9s this season has left his conventional 
one frustrated and contemplating a future elsewhere.Peter Crouch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peter-crouch> might sport the No25 shirt 
but he is an old-fashioned English centre-forward in every other sense. 
However, the 34-year-old’s attributes have proved surplus to requirements in 
the Stoke evolution.

Past the halfway point in the Premier League season the former England 
international is yet to start a league match. So knockout football has proved 
his refuge and with the twinkle-toed trio of Bojan Krkic, Xherdan Shaqiri and 
Marko Arnautovic left in the Potteries at the weekend, he marked only his 
fourth start in 2015-16 with the opening goal asStoke booked a seventh 
consecutive appearance in the FA Cup fourth round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/doncaster-rovers-stoke-city-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Crouch has scored more Premier League goals than Dennis Bergkamp and Cristiano 
Ronaldo but has been left frustrated at his lack of opportunity to add to his 
tally. Now, in the twilight of his career, he is desperate for more game time.

“That’s the thing. I do want to be playing. If I can’t play here then maybe I 
do have to move on. At the moment all I can do is work hard and try and get 
back in the team,” Crouch said.

Stoke City weigh up making bid for West Brom’s Saido Berahino
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/stoke-city-west-brom-saido-berahino-mark-hughes-tony-pulis>
“There’s been times when it has been hard. When you’re running on the pitch 
after games, you’ve been watching but haven’t been part of it. You say that 
you’re part of it, of course, but it doesn’t feel like it at times and to be 
training when the other lads are resting can be very frustrating. Those are the 
times when you have to dig deep and be strong mentally, but hopefully I’ve 
proved I can come in and do a job when required.

“I played 33 or 34 Premier League games last season so to have not featured 
this season has been very frustrating. All I can do is try and take the 
opportunities when I’m given them and try and force my way back in. We’re a 
top-10 Premier League side. I’d like to stay and be a part of that, obviously.”

Hughes, who made nine changes here with Wednesday’s Premier League match at 
home to Norwich in mind, insists Crouch remains part of his plans.

“We gave him a new contract at the beginning of the year so I think that shows 
how much we value him. I would like to give him more game time but sometimes 
it’s not possible, other players are playing well, the team is functioning well 
and you have to be patient. When I do give him opportunities you hope he comes 
in and shows his quality.”

Crouch did just that with the classy finishing touch to Joselu’s precise cross 
on the quarter-hour. A dozen minutes into the second half his blushes were 
saved after he failed to untangle his feet, but Jonathan Walters drove in 
Stoke’s second seconds later.

In between the visitors’ goals League One Doncaster belied the 45 places 
between the teams with some incisive passing and the better chances. Nathan 
Tyson equalised from their best move, turning in at the second attempt, and 
their general play suggested their pursuit of a play-off place is not out of 
the question.

“Sometimes you find one team comes out of the pack and goes on a run and if we 
were to continue what we’ve done in the previous 12 games we probably would do 
it. But it would have to be one hell of a run,” said the manager, Darren 
Ferguson, whose side are six points off sixth place.

“The fans have been entertained which is really important, they are seeing 
good football and a bunch of lads really having a go. We just hope more come in 
to see the nitty gritty of the league games.”

Man of the match Craig Alcock (Doncaster)
 