
Phil Parkinson reaped on Saturday a bit of what he sowed at Colchester United 
in 2006. The Bradford City manager led United to the best days of their life 
when, in his first such position and third full season, he took them to the 
second tier for the first time. Though he moved on before their first game in 
the Championship and the U’s have been inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> since 2008, his 
high-flying Bantams, fifth before kick-off, could be glad of their point from a 
high-intensity 0-0 which showed Colchester in far better light and spirit than 
their position, now 23rd, suggests.

On and off the field the match was a fine advertisement for the division, 
played with honesty and discussed with generosity. Colchester are into their 
second manager of the season, Tony Humes, who stepped up from five increasingly 
successful years at the club’s centre of excellence to replace Joe Dunne after 
a draw and four defeats running. Five points from four games point to a climb 
up the table before long. This match reflected the tightness of the division.
Colchester <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester> were as close to 
getting all three as they were on Tuesday when, leading 2-0 at home to 
Sheffield United in the 82nd minute, they lost 3-2.

“It was a good, solid performance,” Humes said, “especially after that end 
against Sheffield United. The first half was cagey but in the second we tried 
to shift them about a bit more with the movement of our wide players, getting 
Freddie on the ball.” Freddie is Sears, once the coming thing at West Ham and, 
at 24, in his third year at Colchester. It nearly worked as their 4-5-1 became 
more expansive and picked out his runs. Bradford’s 4-3-1-2 had come to play 
patience. They were fully stretched by Colchester’s racing demon.

Beyond the hour Sears, bursting down the right, beat the advancing Jason 
Pickford, only for Stephen Darby, hurtling from right-back, to appear as the 
ball rolled for goal and the crowd celebrated. City’s captain, and not the 
ball, ended in the net. Sears tested the keeper to left and right, high and low 
and, a doubtful starter, he moved like the finisher of old, the spearhead of a 
midfield brimming with verve and possibilities. George Moncur was man of the 
match but it might have been Gavin Massey. Both are 21.

“We did try to win the game and I hope the fans can see what we are trying to 
do,” said Humes, a defender with Ipswich and Wrexham, now 48. “There’s a lot of 
energy in the team and everybody wants the ball. The average age is about 21.” 
The fans are a consistent 3,500 in a stadium holding 10,105 and not all are 
happy with what Robbie Cowling, the owner and executive chairman, is doing. In 
announcing the new manager he warned that the club was “punching above its 
weight” and “going to have a couple more tough years”.

In a change of tack from funding the U’s, taking them from Layer Road in 2008 
and building a training facility and centre of excellence at Tiptree, he is 
trying to eliminate his subsidy by 2016 by cutting the playing budget to comply 
with financial fair play. “What goes out on the pitch is dictated by the budget 
and that’s dictated by how many fans turn up,” he said. The founder of JobServe 
might as well have said: “Go forth and multiply.” Some think he smacks now of 
TimeServe.

Cuckoo Farm, where the new ground is, sounds like a euphemism but this is one 
of the saner houses in the League. Colchester have never been in administration 
and, judging by Saturday, the set-up at Tiptree is jam-packed with talent and 
promise.

Parkinson got off lightly on the field and warmly as he entered. The same went 
for Mark Yeates, now withBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> but scorer of the first U’s 
goal at the Farm. The manager wore the blue top of Colchester, perhaps for old 
time’s sake or equally because claret and amber turns men into humbugs or tiger 
beetles. He said of Cowling: “Robbie’s pumped money into youth and is reaping 
the dividends. I have so many good memories of the club and it’s a result I 
always look for. A point away is not the worst thing.”

Official directions were given to Joe Dunne’s post-match interview. Things are 
moving fast at Colchester and Tony Humes could be the new Phil Parkinson.
 