
It was an act of solidarity that will live long in the memory. The sight of 
the Wycombe manager, Gareth Ainsworth, and hisSouthend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> counterpart, Phil Brown, 
holding hands and exchanging what the latter referred to as “man hugs” as their 
two sides slugged it out in the penalty shootout showed that, despite some 
reports to the contrary, football does still a heart.

“I made a big point of standing next to Phil and saying, ‘I’m not going to 
celebrate every penalty that goes in. I’m not going to put that in your face’. 
He agreed he wouldn’t do that to me either,” explained Ainsworth. “We had a 
moment of respect on the halfway line because for 120 minutes of the game, we 
were in charge and involved in every kick but penalties are always a lottery. 
Phil gets some stick from various places but I respect him and he’s always been 
good to me.”

The feeling was clearly mutual. Brown’s career in management is finally on the 
up again after a few years in the wilderness following his success in guiding 
Hull to the Premier League via the play-offs in 2008. Having endured a 
difficult year at Preston, the 55-year-old was out of work for almost 15 months 
until he replaced Paul Sturrock at Roots Hall in March 2013 and combined work 
as a radio summariser with appearances on the BBC quiz show Fighting Talk.

But even in his moment of triumph at Wembley after seeing his excellent young 
goalkeeper Dan Bentley push Sam Wood’s penalty – the 16th of a topsy-turvy 
shootout – onto the post to seal Southend’s victory, Brown’s first thought was 
for his opposite number. “You do lose that bit of dignity at times – it’s 
almost a hatred for the opposition. So we agreed immediately to do that and 
that shows the class of the guy,” he said. “People say managers and good guys 
don’t go hand in hand. You’ve got to be ruthless, you’ve got to be horrible and 
make tough decisions. But you can do that and be a decent guy at the same time 
as long as you are honest and truthful to yourself and your players.”

Retaining key players such as Bentley, the midfielder Michael Timlin and the 
striker Barry Corr would mean there is no reason why Southend could not thrive 
at the higher level next season. Their manager’s deal was due to expire at the 
end of next month but Brown insisted he never had any doubts his future 
remained in Essex, regardless of Saturday’s result.

“I don’t think so. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t want to be in the second 
division all my life,” he said. “I’ve got ambitions and those ambitions remain. 
I want to be back in the Premier League if I get a second stab at it. I’m a 
lucky man. I’ve managed four different clubs and there’s a lot of young talent 
out there who only get one chance. But this is up there with my best 
achievements.”

For the impressive Ainsworth, there were only positives to be drawn from a 
heartbreaking defeat. The momentum from Wycombe’s great escape from relegation 
on the final day of last season took them all the way to the play-off final and 
with their manager signed up for another four years, the future does look 
bright.

“We’ve got players on less money a week than what some of the tickets cost for 
the match so I’m very proud of their efforts,” said Ainsworth. “We wanted to 
bring the buzz back to the club and that’s what we have done. We have a 
five-year plan to make this club sustainable in League One and we’re way ahead 
of that already.”
 