
Once classed among the most colourful managers in the Premier League, Phil 
Brown has in the last five years got used to passing mostly under the radar. 
Yet he was still surprised this week to discover many people seem more 
interested in him as the former manager of a top-flight club than as the leader 
of a side who will contest Saturday’sLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-off final at 
Wembley.

“The disappointing part of the media this week has been that everybody wants 
to talk to me about Hull City,” saysPhil Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/phil-brown>, who was sacked by the club 
just before their last Premier League relegation in 2010. “As far as I’m 
concerned there’s only one game this weekend and that’s Southend United versus 
Wycombe Wanderers.”

In truth, even Southend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> fans 
were initially unenthused by the play-offs. A run of eight clean sheets and 
seven successive victories going into the last day of the regular season had 
ignited hopes of automatic promotion but all that optimism unravelled when a 
1-0 defeat to Morecambe sent them into the post-season knockout competition 
they have learned to dread, having lost in the semi-final twice in the previous 
three years.

Brown had to remind everyone to be happy before this year’s semi-final against 
Stevenage. “I went to a player of the year and sponsors’ dinner on exactly the 
same date as I did last year and the difference was phenomenal,” he says. “Last 
year everyone was so positive about reaching the play-offs but this year it was 
all doom and gloom. So I had to take the microphone and – no, not sing – just 
give a few words about what a good achievement we’ve had this year. We achieved 
a points total [84] that in 19 of the last 20 seasons would have been good 
enough for automatic promotion.”

Brown’s players showed no ill effects of the Morecambe defeat as they 
deservedly prevailed over Stevenage in the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/14/southend-stevenage-league-two-play-off-match-report>
, while Wycombe disposed of Plymouth Argyle. The showdown, then, will be 
between the two teams who finished just outside the automatic promotion slots, 
separated only by goal difference.

Brown is generous in his praise of the rookie manager who stands between him 
and promotion, saying Gareth Ainsworth’s transformation of Wycombe has been one 
of the greatest managerial feats of the season. After escaping relegation on 
the final day last term, Ainsworth inspiredWycombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> to a haul 34 points bigger than 
in the previous campaign.

“People talk about José Mourinho being manager of the year, but for Gareth 
Ainsworth to go almost from relegation last year – being in the bottom right up 
until the last day of the season and then surviving – to what he’s done this 
year, he’s got to be close to one of the managers of the season, for sure.

“Ronnie Moore [of Hartlepool United] is the only one I’d give other plaudits 
to. They are the kind of managers that people need to be giving accolades to 
because it’s fantastic what they’ve achieved. Ainsworth has had a great season 
but unfortunately I’ve got to put a spanner in his works this weekend. He’s 
after me and I’m after him; that’s the nature of the game.”

Brown has yet to get the better of Ainsworth this season. Wycombe inflicted 
Southend’s heaviest defeat of the campaign in December when they won 4-1 at 
Adams Park before the sides drew 2-2 at Roots Hall in March.

“What has surprised me about Gareth and his team is the way they’ve kept 
going,” Brown says. “He’s complained about not having the biggest squad and 
he’s had a lot of injury problems but he has been able to replace them – for 
instance, by bringing the two lads in from Brentford, Nico Yennaris and Sam 
Saunders, who’ve played a big part in the final 10 games for them – so he can 
obviously spot a quality player and that’s key to a manager. So he’s surprised 
me in how he’s kept going. He’s there on merit.”

Brown has spent this week trying to plot a surprise of his own. “There are 
formation and teams selections to be played with and we have a number of 
options based on the fact we have the whole squad to choose from except for 
Adam Thompson [dislocated shoulder], so there are one or two little twists left 
to play, something they’re not expecting.”
 