
The coming year is the 200th anniversary of the birth of Edward FitzGerald; 
so, as the year turns, what better celebration than some stanzas from his free 
translation of that great meditation on life's transience, The Rubáiyát of Omar 
Khayyám?

FitzGerald <http://www.biographybase.com/biography/Fitzgerald_Edward.html> was 
a friend of Thackeray and Tennyson, but initially had few writerly ambitions of 
his own. Scruffy, eccentric, a bit of recluse and very rich, he was drawn to 
younger men, and it was from one of these, Edward Cowell, he began learning 
Persian in 1853. Cowell also passed on his discovery in the Bodleian Library, 
Oxford, of verses written by Khayyám, a Persian polymath whose life spanned the 
11th and 12th centuries. FitzGerald was enthralled and declared that the poems 
had "the ring of true metal".

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry>
 and Poetics quotes the tradition that the Persian quatrain-form, the ruba'i, 
originated in the gleeful shouts of a child, overheard and imitated by a 
passing poet. "Succinctness, spontaneity and wit" are its essence, the 
encyclopaedist writes, coolly noting FitzGerald's "venial infidelity to his 
Persian model". FitzGerald got the rhyme-scheme right but missed the rhythmic 
subtlety of the original prosodic pattern; some of the quatrains are 
paraphrased, some mashed together, others invented. Furthermore, Khayyám's 
750-plus quatrains certainly did not constitute one long poem.

The 101-verse semi-narrative FitzGerald finally assembled is the product of a 
ruthless editorial job – but how much poorer English poetry would be without 
it. His endeavour might more generously be termed "transcreation". Khayyám, an 
agnostic famed duringhis lifetime <http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/khayyam.htm> as a 
mathematician and astronomer rather than a poet, and his mediator, a 
nineteenth-century English sceptic who believed that "science unrolls a greater 
epic than the Iliad", may not meet in a true linguistic union, but there seems 
to be a "marriage of true minds" nevertheless (and, yes, you'll note a passing 
trace of Shakespeare in FitzGerald's diction).

The speaker that emerges with such authority and panache, despite the stiffish 
western dress of iambic pentameter, has a voice unlike any other in Victorian 
poetry, and a philosophical sensibility which, while it has been compared to 
that of Epicurus and Lucretius, is new and distinct. A whole culture must have 
suddenly seemed within the imaginative reach of the poem's first audience.

Though initially published as an anonymous pamphlet, once the Rubáiyát was 
discovered by Rossetti, Swinburne and others, it swiftly became famous. It is 
said that its effect on Victorian England was no less considerable than that of 
Darwin's On the Origin of Species, published in the same year, 1859.

Everyone will have their favourite stanzas. My selection – from the fifth and 
final edition of the poem – begins with one of the most majestic and is 
followed by a less familiar episode, the Potter and his pots, a sustained 
narrative that literalises the creation myth and exudes a strong sense of 
Fitz-Omar's humour and his almost magic-realist imagination. The Rubáiyát's two 
concluding stanzas round it off. I hope you'll be enticed to read, or re-read, 
thewhole poem <http://www.gutenberg.org/files/246/246.txt> and savour its 
homely yet memorable rhetoric, its vivid images, gloriously yearning sighs, 
twinkling jokes and keen-edged rational arguments. Meanwhile, let's raise a 
glass to a new year in which the spirit of translation – the spirit, in fact, 
of the luminous conversation between Edward FitzGerald and Omar Khayyám – 
presides over public affairs, especially those in the Middle East. "Ah, make 
the most of what we yet may spend,/ Before we too into the Dust descend;/ Dust 
into Dust, and under Dust, to lie,/ Sans wine, sans Song, sans Singer and – 
sans End!"

71
The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ,
Moves on: nor all your Piety nor Wit
     Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
Nor all your Tears wash out a Word of it.

 ******
82
As under cover of departing Day
Slunk hunger-stricken Ramazán away
     Once more within the Potter's house alone
I stood, surrounded by the Shapes of Clay.

83
Shapes of all Sorts and Sizes, great and small,
That stood along the floor and by the wall;
     And some loquacious Vessels were; and some
Listen'd perhaps, but never talk'd at all.

84
Said one among them – "Surely not in vain
My substance of the common Earth was ta'en
     And to this Figure molded, to be broke,
Or trampled back to shapeless Earth again."

85
Then said a Second –"Ne'er a peevish Boy
Would break the Bowl from which he drank in joy;
     And He that with his hand the Vessel made
Will surely not in after Wrath destroy."

86
After a momentary silence spake
Some Vessel of a more ungainly Make;
     "They sneer at me for leaning all awry:
What! did the hand then of the Potter shake?"

87
Whereat some one of the loquacious Lot –
I think a Súfi pipkin – waxing hot –
     "All this of Pot and Potter – Tell me then,
Who is the Potter, pray, and who the Pot?"

88
"Why," said another, "Some there are who tell
Of one who threatens he will toss to Hell
     The luckless Pots he marr'd in making – Pish!
He's a Good Fellow, and 'twill all be well."

89
"Well," murmured one, "Let whoso make or buy,
My Clay with long Oblivion is gone dry:
     But fill me with the old familiar Juice,
Methinks I might recover by and by."

 *******

100
Yon rising Moon that looks for us again -
How oft hereafter will she wax and wane;
     How oft hereafter rising look for us
Through this same Garden – and for one in vain!

101
And when like her, oh Sáki, you shall pass
Among the Guests Star-scatter'd on the Grass,
     And in your joyous errand reach the spot
Where I made One – turn down an empty Glass!

Tamám [It is ended].

Notes: Ramazán – Ramadan.
Sáki – a maid or manservant who pours wine.
 