
The defining feature of this tournament has been the number of teams lacking a 
discernible attacking plan and it seemed somehow appropriate that Portugal won 
the game in this manner. Before the tournament their coach, Fernando Santos, 
eschewed a traditional centre-forward in favour of playing two wingers, 
Cristiano Ronaldo and Nani, up front – yetPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> played their best football here 
after introducing Éder, an old-school No9. Few would have predicted, however, 
that the striker would settle the game in such spectacular fashion.

This was a defensive, cagey match between two teams attempting to regain 
possession in deep positions and lacking the tools to create regular chances. 
It started at a good tempo, with Moussa Sissoko moving inside from the right 
flank to charge forward from central positions. Portugal looked to play on the 
counterattack, although through long passes rather than quick combinations and 
rapid transitions. Their first chance came when Nani sprinted on to a 60-yard 
ball from the right-back Cédric Soares before firing over. The approach was 
obvious: get the ball towards the front two immediately.

Portugal beat France to win Euro 2016 final with Éder’s extra-time goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
The tactical battle was essentially 4-4-2 versus 4-4-2. There were nuances to 
the systems: Portugal’s shape was arguably more of a diamond midfield, with 
Adrien Silva given licence to drift forward, leaving William Carvalho 
protecting the defence, but without the ball the diamond became a flat four.
France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> had Antoine Griezmann 
dropping off into deeper roles behind Olivier Giroud, while Dimitri Payet 
drifted inside and Sissoko, the first half’s best player, was arguably an extra 
midfielder. For long spells, however, this match was about two sides failing to 
penetrate the opposition’s two banks of four.

Ronaldo’s injury significantly altered the plan: France, who had started 
brightly, lost momentum while Portugal lost their key man and were forced to 
change shape. Ricardo Quaresma was summoned but played wide on the right, with 
Nani becoming a lone striker and Portugal switching to a 4-3-3 system. Nani 
struggled to receive service but Santos’s side now looked more threatening down 
the flanks, particularly the left – where João Mário positioned himself 
intelligently to draw Bacary Sagna inside, opening up space for Raphaël 
Guerreiro to fly forward on the overlap.

There were few genuine scoring opportunities, although France were threatening 
down the left flank. This was partly because Soares stuck tight to his direct 
opponent, first Payet and then the substitute Kingsley Coman, which created 
space in the channel on the outside of Pepe, inviting Giroud and Griezmann to 
run on to good passes in that zone before forcing Rui Patrício into action. 
Portugal have looked poor in the right-back zone throughout this tournament, 
with notable mistakes in that position for their concessions against Iceland 
and Poland.

Portugal 1-0 France: five talking points from the Euro 2016 final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/10/portugal-france-five-talking-points-euro-2016-final>
Coman’s introduction, meanwhile, provided the match with the attacking spark 
which had been desperately lacking, and his cross created a fine headed chance 
for Griezmann. Of the 15 passes France played which resulted in a shot, 11 were 
played from the left of the pitch, four were hit from deeper, central zones and 
none came down the right. It was a lopsided approach but France appeared the 
more likely to break the deadlock.

The introduction of a striker for either side, André-Pierre Gignac and Éder, 
would prove crucial. Gignac replaced Giroud and brought freshness and more 
dangerous runs into the channels while Éder proved efficient at holding up the 
ball and allowing Portugal to gain ground, particularly by winning free-kicks. 
Gignac came closest to opening the scoring in normal time with a quick spin and 
a scuffed shot which hit the post; Éder settled the contest with an 
extraordinary, out-of-character long-range drive.

This is not a vintage Portugal side, and their lack of invention from midfield 
has been surprising for a nation that traditionally produces wonderful 
playmakers. But a strong defence generally proves decisive in this competition: 
the three previous winners – Greece in 2004, then Spain in 2008 and 2012 – did 
not concede a single goal in the knockout stage; Portugal have conceded just 
one here. Santos has created a resilient, well-drilled unit and understandably 
relied on individual magic up front. Even he, however, will be amazed that Éder 
proved the hero.
 