
Portugal (4-1-3-2)

Rui Patrício 8

Excellent performance, but for an unconvincing attempt to collect a Griezmann 
corner in the 53rd minute. Eye-catching saves from Griezmann and Sissoko. 
Booked for time-wasting near the end.

Cédric Soares 7

Booked for a flying kick on Payet, but otherwise had a reasonable night on the 
right, and his excellent fourth-minute long pass created a chance for Nani.

Portugal beat France to win Euro 2016 final with Éder’s extra-time goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
Pepe 8

One early slip, falling on the right wing, put his team in trouble but 
otherwise excellent, though having dived into a challenge will be grateful that 
Gignac’s shot hit the post.

José Fonte 7

Dominant in the air, both when keeping the ball from Giroud in his own defence 
and from set pieces at the other. Headed over the bar from a 39th-minute corner.

Raphael Guerreiro 8

A strong game, though France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> 
focused early attacks down his flank through Sagna and Sissoko. Hit the bar 
with an excellent free-kick in extra-time and overlapped well.

William Carvalho 7

Mature performance from the base of Portugal’s midfield, offering himself to 
team-mates in possession and circulating the ball wisely when it came to him.

Renato Sanches 6

Nervous at the start, making a few errors including letting a Carvalho pass 
run through his legs. Improved for a while and then faded before his 
substitution.

Adrien Silva 6

Easily turned by Sissoko in the penalty area in the 33rd minute, allowing the 
Frenchman a shot on goal. Had a shooting chance in the 23rd minute but volleyed 
high from 20 yards.

João Mário 7

Booked for a cynical trip on Giroud with an hour played. Became more 
influential as game went on, after moving into a front three when Ronaldo 
departed, and excellent in extra-time.

Nani 8

A fine, effervescent display. Had Portugal’s best first-half chance, shooting 
his on the run, and nearly scored with a cross in the second. Took over as 
captain after Ronaldo’s departure.

Cristiano Ronaldo 5

A disaster. Had just seven touches before he collapsed in pain and in tears 
after being fouled by Payet. Came back on to have one more before leaving for 
good.

Substitutes

Ricardo Quaresma (for Ronaldo, 25) 7

Started inauspiciously, needing treatment after a tackle from Umtiti and after 
a clash of heads with Evra, but went on to play well on the wing. Tested Lloris 
with an overhead kick.

João Moutinho (for Adrien Silva, 67) 6

His most memorable contribution was to go down clutching his face when Matuidi 
– already booked – raised a boot near, but not into, him.

Éder (for Sanches, 79) 8

Held the ball up well and worked hard, nearly scored with a header from a 
corner, and then decided the match with a fine low shot.

Not used Lopes, Bruno Alves, Carvalho, Vieirinha, André Gomes, Rafa Silva, 
Eliseu, Eduardo, Danilo Pereira.

France (4-2-3-1)

Hugo Lloris 7

Took 36 minutes before he was called into action, and that was just to put the 
ball into touch. Later palmed Nani’s cross away and saved Éder’s header, and 
not at fault for the winner.

Bacary Sagna 7

Provided good attacking width on right, especially important with Sissoko 
frequently coming inside, but his crossing remains unreliable.

Laurent Koscielny 7

Played with his left knee heavily strapped, but looked fairly assured and made 
some fine tackles – until Éder shrugged off his limp challenge before scoring 
the winner.

Samuel Umtiti 6

Good distribution – though one long pass sailed out of play – and brought the 
ball out of defence well. But booked for a foul on Éder, and slow to close him 
down before the goal.

Patrice Evra 6

Caught the eye with one early run out of defence, which took him past three 
players and nearly to the halfway line, where he nutmegged Adrien Silva and 
passed to Sissoko.

Paul Pogba 6

Had a relatively quiet game, memorable for a moment in the first half when he 
took on Cédric, performed a few feints and shimmies, and then had the ball 
nicked off his toe. Booked in extra-time.

Blaise Matuidi 7

Excellent, dynamic midfield performance, closing down, winning or stealing 
possession, using it well and coming forward to attack when the opportunity 
arose. Harshly booked.

Moussa Sissoko 8

Outstanding, especially in the first half when his driving runs from midfield 
repeatedly troubled thePortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> 
defence. He had two shots, one deflected wide, one saved.

Antoine Griezmann 5

Subdued, and sent Coman’s 66th-minute cross high when he should have scored. 
Also saw a fine, looping header – from Pogba’s fine, looping chipped pass – 
saved in the first half.

Dimitri Payet 6

Will be remembered for the foul on Ronaldo (he had dived into a tackle on 
Sanches moments earlier and was lucky to miss). A few decent crosses, then 
taken off after 57 minutes.

Olivier Giroud 6

Headed at Rui Patrício from a corner and blasted at the goalkeeper in the 
75th. Less impressively, got in the way of Griezmann two minutes later and was 
swiftly taken off.

Portugal 1-0 France: five talking points from the Euro 2016 final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/10/portugal-france-five-talking-points-euro-2016-final>
Substitutes

Kingsley Coman (for Payet, 57) 7

Added pace to the French attack and created their best chance of the game for 
Griezmann with a fine cross. Probably the hosts’ best attacking performer.

André-Pierre Gignac (for Giroud, 57) 7

Nearly won the game for France in the final moments of second-half stoppage 
time when he turned inside Pepe and scuffed a shot on to the near post.

Anthony Martial (for Sissoko, 110) 6

Had little time to influence the game.

Not used Mandanda, Jallet, Rami, Kanté, Cabaye, Schneiderlin, Mangala, Digne, 
Costil.

Referee

Mark Clattenburg (England) 7

Will have been glad to see Raphael Guerreiro’s extra-time free-kick hit the 
bar, having awarded the set piece incorrectly when it was Éder, not Koscielny, 
who handled. Otherwise little to criticise.
 