
The mud-spattered Mercedes van is parked up pitch-side, its back doors flung 
open and all the training paraphernalia pouring out on to the grass. Cones, 
metal-framed dummies, energy drinks, bibs and strapping fall to the turf. The 
surrounding area is littered with flip-flops and trainers, some snazzy, others 
scuffed and worn, with the entire squad having laced up their boots al fresco 
on the touchline. This could be park football on a Sunday morning. It is 
actually a professional team reborn.

The setting is Langstone student village, mid-morning on a Friday, and on the 
university campus's main pitch the players of Portsmouth Football Club are 
preparing for a critical game againstHartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool>. Pompey, FA Cup winners in 
2008, a side who confronted Milan in the Uefa Cup the following season and 
seven years a Premier League club, are five points above the condemned at the 
foot of League Two, with their third manager of term, Andy Awford, barking 
orders. "Be physical. Get in their faces. Be horrible. Squeeze the line. Rash 
him, as tight as you can."

It is Awford's second spell in caretaker charge this season and, backed up by 
Alan McLoughlin, Paul Hardyman and Martin Hinshelwood, his tenure will extend 
to the summer at the very least. The players are revived in his company.

This is the modern-day Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth>, the top-flight club brought 
to their knees by financial mismanagement now transformed into a setup proudly 
owned by their supporters and whose ability to thrive as a Football League 
member may yet define the perception of community-run clubs. Their story 
requires some context, though there is no need to linger over what brought them 
to their lowest ebb before the fans provided salvation.
 The main entrance to Fratton Park from Frogmore Lane. Photograph: Sean Ryan 
for the Guardian 
The decline is well-documented. There were two long periods in administration: 
the first after the Russian-Israeli owner, Sacha Gaydamak, cut off the funding 
in 2009; the second, in 2012, followed the arrest for alleged bank fraud in 
Lithuania of a subsequent owner, Vladimir Antonov, who left £35m debts, plus 
£17m owing to another former owner, the Hong Kong moneylender Balram Chainrai.

Mention of the names will for ever provoke shudders of apprehension down the 
spines of those associated with this club. There were three relegations in four 
seasons, the squad stripped bare even if it was liquidation that was the truly 
sickening fear, before the city bit back. The Pompey Supporters' Trust and 
their partners, 11 local businessmen "presidents", mounted their bid and, on 10 
April last year, Chainrai finally agreed to release his charge over the 
stadium, Fratton Park, and settle for a price of £3m.

Saturday marks the first anniversary of the takeover's completion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/20/portsmouth-supporters-trust>, 
the trust having raised £2.3m with the presidents investing £1.7m. This is the 
country' biggest community-owned club, backed by 10,600 season-ticket holders, 
3,500 trust members, and a vociferous support. They are a club with a chance to 
heal and grow organically.

A once-bankrupt institution is fast becoming a financial success story, no 
longer reliant upon sugar-daddy funding – with the coffers in their healthiest 
state for 40 years. Ticket sales, corporate hospitality and renewed commercial 
activities, allied to cost savings, have led them to outperform their original 
budgeted forecasts. This club committed to pay in excess of £8m still owed to 
21 former players by July 2016, though those debts are being cleared quicker 
than expected. "For the first two years we were going to have to pay more to 
players who don't play for us than the ones that do," says Ashley Brown, 
chairman of the Pompey Supporters' Trust and one of the body's three members 
elected to the board. "Welcome to the crazy world of football.
 John Portsmouth Football Club Westwood. Photograph: Sean Ryan for the Guardian
"We had a loan of £1.45m from the city council, which we paid off in two 
months, and a loan of £1.2m from our property-development partner, Stuart 
Robinson, which we agreed to pay off within a year and that's on schedule. 
We're ahead of schedule on the football creditor debts. The final parachute 
payment, which runs out this summer, has helped us to do that, but what has 
been achieved has been quite amazing considering where we started: no players; 
no management structure; no kit sponsor; no shop; we had to rip up all the 
hospitality and bring it in-house. The transformation has been astonishing."

It had felt almost like starting from scratch but the talk now is of £1m in 
summer developments at Fratton Park – new drainage, a relaid playing surface, 
better facilities for disabled supporters – and an £800,000 investment in a new 
training ground at Roko, Hilsea, which will mean the days spent changing on the 
sidelines at Langstone will soon be over.

"We've been in discussions for five or six months, some quite sensitive 
because, as a community club, we clearly can't displace another community 
club," says Mark Catlin, their Barking-born chief executive who arrived via 
Bury. "But everything's been verbally agreed, we're at the solicitors stage 
now. Having that base for the team and the academy will give us some of the 
stability the football side of the business has needed."

The hope is the diggers will move in next month, with the facility – 
designated changing rooms, initially two pitches and a Championship-quality gym 
area – to be ready by September. The club's high‑net‑worth fans are funding a 
large proportion of the development, with other monies to be raised through 
schemes over the weeks ahead. "This has been an eye-opener for all of us, but 
we are committed to making it work," adds Catlin. "The real pressure is the 
fact all these people have scrimped and scraped and put their hard-earned cash 
into the club to keep it going, and that is one hell of a responsibility to 
take on."

The city has been galvanised by the reclaiming of its club, the Pompey brand 
no longer toxic and, instead, restored as a source of local pride. Those 
overseeing Pompey in the Community, the charity arm of the club, are best 
placed to confirm as much. "There's a different feeling now," says Clare 
Martin, the body's chief executive. "People feel as if they belong to 
something. We were delivering at a lot of schools, even during the two 
administrations, but we're now picking up new schools all the time. Pompey is 
the city as well as the club, and people want to be associated with Portsmouth 
again."

The 46 projects run by the community scheme touch about 37,000 individuals, 
aged from three and 93, the Pompey brand engaging all-comers, whether it be on 
educational projects, health and inclusion initiatives or football coaching 
courses. The club's study centre is a constant hubbub of activity, the projects 
benefiting from player appearances or free tickets, and all offered under the 
Pompey umbrella.
 Inside the stadium, celebrating bygone days. Photograph: Sean Ryan for the 
Guardian 
"Our 'extra time' project for the over-60s was supposed to run for five weeks 
but two of the old boys burst into tears when we said it was the last session 
so we extended it to 13 weeks," says Martin. "We've also run a 10-week 'back to 
work' programme and, at the end of the course, 62% of the participants found 
full-time employment. Whenever one of them got a job, we all felt as if we got 
the job."

In a city where a study conducted last year by the Campaign to End Child 
Poverty suggested 27% of children are living in poverty, such initiatives are 
invaluable. "Portsmouth has some of the most deprived areas in the country, 
it's a tough city, so a lot of the work is centred on literacy, numeracy, core 
skills the kids don't necessarily get otherwise," says Brown. "We talk about 
being a community club but if this branch of the organisation didn't exist, we 
wouldn't deliver anywhere near as much as we ought to.

"People had become disassociated with the club, there was disillusion, so the 
last year has had a cleansing effect. A lot has been achieved. But, to be 
honest, there has been so much concern recently about the league form we 
haven't had a chance to look back at the last year with any great sense of 
pride. We've been focused solely on the league table. When we have enough 
points and everyone breathes a sigh of relief, we'll have a quick reflection on 
what we've done and think about how we can do things better. We're not having 
this again."
 Players leave their street shoes on the sideline while they train. 
Photograph: Sean Ryan for the Guardian 
Full-time is approaching against Hartlepool and the strain is starting to 
show. Awford, suited and booted, is pacing his technical area, cursing his 
team's slackness in possession and bellowing instructions to anyone who will 
listen. Above him in the south stand the chairman, Iain McInnes, feels as if he 
has been kicking every ball, thumping the front of the directors' box in 
frustration and forever leaping to his feet to join in with the clapped 
encouragement emanating from the Fratton end. Noel Blake and Vince Hilaire, 
former players of pedigree, are fidgeting due to the tension.

Catlin, further down the front row, has been consumed with nerves since well 
before kick-off, his jitters hardly eased pre‑match when news filtered through 
that the Tannoy announcer had broken down at traffic lights on the A27 at 
Farlington en route to the game. A few frantic phone-calls to a local pick-up 
firm later and he was delivered. "That's a community club in action," offers 
one trust member.
 Memorial wall inside the stadium. Photograph: Sean Ryan for the Guardian 
Pompey score in the second minute, miss a penalty in the fifth, and endure six 
minutes more of added time with their lead still fragile. "This is just the way 
we do things," McInnes says once the whistle has shrilled. "Nothing's ever 
simple when it comes to Pompey."

Where progress has been marked off the pitch over the past year, it has 
continued to be traumatic on it, a campaign best summed up in numbers: four 
contracted players at the start of last summer; two permanent managers since; 
two assistants, four goalkeeping coaches and two physios; 46 players used; 51 
points accrued. Guy Whittingham, the manager who began the season, was a club 
stalwart and his exit in November was painful. Richie Barker came highly 
regarded, along with Steve Coppell – employed in an advisory role and only 
claiming expenses – but lasted only 109 days. Barker's tenure encompassed 20 
games, four wins and 11 goals, with the team failing to score in six home 
fixtures.

In the context of four years of blood-letting, that the framework was weak was 
perhaps inevitable. "I always imagined our biggest challenge would be off the 
pitch, but it's been on it where we've been really tested," Catlin says. "Every 
time we thought we were up and running we've been kicked in the teeth again."

League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> is 
unforgiving. The bookmakers had installed Portsmouth as pre-season favourites 
for promotion, hoodwinked by the optimism generated by the takeover. The 
immediate target is very much survival.

"It goes back well beyond the summer," says Awford, whose association with the 
club stretches to 25 years as player, coach, head of academy and now caretaker 
manager. "Two administrations in three years scarred us, and the rebuild is a 
bigger job than people thought. It will heal, but it can't be a quick fix 
because there was so much wrong. Even I lost track of who actually owned the 
club at one point. Crazy times … The FA Cup, Milan, I wouldn't give it up for 
the world, but ultimately it was to the detriment of the club."

Images from that most superficially glittering period in Portsmouth's recent 
history, of Peter Crouch and Sol Campbell, or Kanu and Jermain Defoe, wearing 
blue and white, still adorn the corridors at Fratton Park. Yet once they were 
demoted from the elite, all semblance of stability on the pitch evaporated. The 
Austrian midfielder Johnny Ertl, once of Crystal Palace and Sheffield United, 
feels like a veteran of this squad. He initially signed in the autumn of 2012 
on a succession of short-term deals – "nine or 10 of them" – before finally 
earning a three-year contract last summer. "I've trained with 80-odd players in 
my two years here, and we must have signed 15 last summer alone, players we had 
to try and integrate at four different training venues at the start of the 
season. The club is like a big tree which blossomed in the Premier League, 
giving night fruits with the FA Cup, and then they chopped it down. But the 
fruits were rotten. Now, as a League Two club, we need to lay down new roots so 
we can grow again.
 Goalscorer Adam Webster celebrates with Jed Wallace. Photograph: Sean Ryan 
for the Guardian 
"We don't have the resources of the past. We are a community club, we don't 
have a chairman who will pump money in and buy instant success, but everyone is 
trying his best to rebuild, laying the foundations with the academy, the 
training centre. That's why I stayed here. I love the people, the club, the fan 
base. But we knew it would start in a difficult way." Ertl has just completed a 
masters in business administration, affiliated to Wels University back home and 
supported by the Professional Footballers' Association, examining the financial 
situation in British football. He envisages a future as a director of football. 
He may be needed.

The 31-year-old was cast aside by Barker but returned to the lineup, as 
captain, in the victory against Newport in Awford's first game back. His steel 
and commitment helped curtail a six-game winless run. Against Hartlepool the 
caretaker manager restored Simon Ferry after a 14-game absence, his young side 
bustling with vitality from the outset. Jack Whatmough, an England Under-18s 
defender who has just signed a three-year contract, excelled at centre-half to 
the coos of the 11 scouts sitting in the south stand, while Nicky Shorey, an 
England left-back under Steve McClaren, scuttled up the flank.

A crowd of 15,273 bellowed their encouragement and defiance – "We own our own 
club", "We will never die" – as McInnes went through his agonies in the 
directors' box and Hartlepool mustered a flurry of stoppage-time corners. The 
relief was palpable at the final whistle, even if the visitors' threat had been 
fitful. It was the first time in more than a year that Pompey had secured 
successive league wins.

The result left them five points clear of the cut-off, their timely surge of 
momentum maintained at Dagenham & Redbridge last Saturday, when a side with 
faint play-off aspirations were dismantled and defeated 4-1. Northampton's own 
flurry of recent results has seen the gap from the bottom two shrink to four 
points, though other clubs have been leapfrogged and the contests with Bristol 
Rovers on Saturday and at Sixfields against the Cobblers on Monday will surely 
prove decisive. A fourth relegation in five years is unthinkable but, while it 
would be a huge blow to the community club's pride, it would not threaten them 
as a going concern. That, in itself, speaks volumes.

"But we won't go down," Awford adds. "Although there's a long-term target to 
put the club back into the Championship, that process would be set back unless 
we sort out the here and now, and that's what we'll do. I'm all about 
longevity, but my immediate task is short-term. Four games, two weeks, stay 
up." Then the rebuild kicks on.
 