



It is said that any substitution is inspired when it works, so Paul Cook, the 
Portsmouth manager, was obviously doubly inspired last night. Conor Chaplin 
scored five minutes after taking the field from a pass by Enda Stevens, another 
substitute, to send League TwoPortsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> through to the second round 
at Derby County’s expense as another Championship side made a premature exit.

Pompey are the bookmakers’ favourites to win promotion from League Two as 
champions and this display justified it as the Hampshire side showed spirit to 
match their energy, scoring the winner only three minutes after Derby had 
levelled through Jason Shackell, and working hard to deny the visitors any more 
clear chances.

Woking fans crowdfund over £6,000 to help pay for striker’s operation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/12/woking-crowdfund-6000-to-help-pay-striker-scott-rendell-recovery>
Cook, who arrived from Chesterfield in May, has brought in 14 new players and 
shipped the same number out, and his reign has started promisingly on the pitch 
with two home wins, this following Saturday’s 3-0 victory over Dagenham & 
Redbridge in front of almost 17,000 fans. But he was keeping his feet firmly on 
the ground even after last night’s giant-killing.

“It’s just another game. We’re not so proud,” he said. “We expected it, we’re 
a professional club – we haven’t turned up to be beat. It’s a good night for us 
but nobody should be getting carried away because we’ve only played two games 
this season. The most pleasing thing for me [was] the lack of chances we 
allowed them to create, the honesty of our work ethic.”

He was more generous in praise of the home crowd, who reacted to Derby’s 
equaliser by attempting to lift their players – successfully, as it turned out. 
“That was one of the best atmospheres I’ve been involved in,” he said. “When 
Derby scored, I’ve never heard a noise like that.”

Derby, also under new management in the shape of the former Real Madrid coach 
Paul Clement, were disappointing, rarely matching the home side’s enterprise 
and aggression until they went behind early in the second half. “That’s a big 
wake-up call for us,” he said. “We’ve got to recover quickly. I’m learning 
about them all the time to see what kind of characters they are. Over the 90 
minutes we just weren’t good enough.”

In fairness any pointers to either side’s prospects in the league were limited 
as both managers made extensive changes to the teams they had fielded in the 
opening games of the season last Saturday, Cook seven and Clement eight. It 
made for a predictably disjointed opening but Portsmouth settled first, Kyle 
Bennett going past two challenges before hitting a low shot just past Lee 
Grant’s right-hand post before Brandon Haunstrup struck what might have been a 
shot or a cross but demanded a save from Grant nevertheless.

Al-Nassr and Al-Hilal bring a taste of Saudi Arabia to Shepherd’s Bush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/12/al-nassr-al-hilal-saudi-arabia-match-report-shepherds-bush>
Too often the story of the first half from both sides was one of crosses that 
failed to find any target other than the head of a defender. It looked as 
though it would take an error to force the firs tbreakthrough and so it proved 
early in the second half as Adam McGurk’s header from Jason Stockley’s cross 
slipped through Grant’s hands and into the Derby net. Grant partly redeemed 
himself with a save from Stockley’s shot on the turn before Clement sent on 
Chris Martin and Tom Ince and saw his team level when Shackell headed home 
Johnny Russell’s corner after 73 minutes.

Anyone who thought Portsmouth would cave in had an answer three minutes later 
as Chaplin hit Stevens’ low cross between two defenders and past the diving 
Grant. The home side were not in the mood to let a second lead slip and Derby 
could manage only the most rudimentary pressure as they tried in vain to get 
back on terms.

“To get back into the game and then concede immediately at the other end is 
very naive,” Clement said. “We didn’t have enough to create any more 
opportunities. After the first game there were a lot of players disappointed 
not to play but when they get the chance they’ve got to do better.”
 