
The Russian former owner of Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> football club has lost his 
high court bid to block extradition to Lithuania where he faces £400m in fraud 
charges.

Vladimir Antonov, 39, and his Lithuanian business partner, Raimondas 
Baranauskas, 57, are wanted to stand trial but say they are being used as 
scapegoats following the controversial nationalisation of Snoras, a leading 
Lithuanian bank they controlled.

They argue the extradition request was made in bad faith and was politically 
motivated by the Lithuanian government’s desire to end criticism from a 
newspaper owned by the bank.

But on Wednesday two high court judges in London dismissed their challenge and 
said there was no evidence to support their claims. Lord Justice Aikens and Mr 
Justice Simon dismissed all grounds of challenge to extradition, including that 
Antonov was being prosecuted because of his Russian nationality and political 
opinions.

The judges agreed with the Lithuanian prosecutor general’s office that the 
decision to issue the European arrest warrants (EAWs) was valid and justified. 
They ruled: “There is simply no evidence, direct or indirect, from which it can 
be established, directly or by inference, that there was a causal link between 
the issue of the EAW to prosecute Vladimir Antonov and his Russian nationality.”

Antonov was chairman of the bank’s board of observers and also a substantial 
shareholder; Baranauskas was chief executive and chairman of the board until 
the bank was nationalised by the Lithuanian government in November 2011.

They are accused of stripping €470m (£396m) and $10m (£6m) in assets and funds 
from Snoras. Both men are also alleged to have submitted false documents to the 
Lithuanian central bank to conceal their systematic plundering of Snoras, 
involving 33 transfers to Swiss and other offshore accounts controlled by them, 
between 2008 and 2011.

Lithuanian prosecutors issued an EAW for them in November 2011 after naming 
them as the main suspects in a pre-trial investigation. Antonov was forced to 
quit Portsmouth FC that year because of the case against him. He and 
Baranauskas challenged a ruling by district judge John Zani, sitting at 
Westminster magistrates court, that extradition could go ahead.

Zani concluded in January last year that they would receive a fair trial on 
the fraud charges and rejected claims that extradition would breach their human 
rights.

At a recent high court hearing, John Jones QC accused Zani of “failing to 
engage with the significant quantity of evidence” which he said proved the 
extradition request was politically tainted. Jones, for Baranauskas, said the 
evidence showed that “the president and then government ofLithuania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lithuania> for political reasons decided to 
destroy Snoras bank”.

A key reason for nationalising the bank was the government’s desire to end 
criticism from Lieutuvos Rytas, the Lithuanian morning daily newspaper owned by 
the bank, said Jones. “They used the central bank to achieve that aim and it 
became necessary for the figureheads of the bank to be scapegoated by being 
subjected to criminal charges.”

He said “sufficient political pressure” was brought to bear on the Lithuanian 
prosecutor general’s office to issue the arrest warrants without first being 
given an opportunity to investigate the case more carefully.

But the high court ruled the case “wholly without merit” on all grounds of 
challenge. These included the claim there was a serious possibility that both 
men would be prejudiced in their trial, or subjected to violence because of 
“uncontrolled inmate violence” in Lithuanian prisons.
 