
1) Portugal’s resilience has been rewarded

For all that this final provided only the occasional spasm of quality, the 
victory was one for Portugal, with its substantial immigrant community here in 
France, long to savour. This nation has regularly threatened such success but 
never previously delivered it. Yet, having squeezed unconvincingly out of their 
group andwon only one match in 90 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
 all tournament, Fernando Santos’s team are champions. Their match winner, 
Éder, played 267 minutes of Premier League football for Swansea City last 
season as an understudy to Bafétimbi Gomis. The manager, who has not lost in 
any of his 14 competitive games in charge, has worked wonders integrating 
players from last summer’s impressive under‑21s into his senior squad. The 
likes of Renato Sanches – the youngest player ever to feature in this final – 
João Mário, Raphaël Guerreiro and William Carvalho will play huge roles in this 
team’s future. Yet Santos has also drawn form from elder statesmen such as Nani 
and Ricardo Quaresma, while harnessing the supreme quality of Cristiano 
Ronaldo. Santos was given the celebratory bumps by the dugouts at the end. 
Coming crashing back down to earth can never have been more pleasurable.
Éder 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=%C3%89der&team=Portugal&isSimple=true>
2) An occasion remembered for Ronaldo’s tears

This was not how it was supposed to be but, even so, Cristiano Ronaldo 
remained the centre of attention. Portugal’s captain had arrived at the Stade 
de France wearing his gold-trim, noise-cancelling headphones and aviator 
sunglasses and sporting the air of a man who knew his record 21st game at the
European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> would provide a 
stage on which to make history. Thereafter the script veered off piste. Dimitri 
Payet’s early robust challenge saw to that, the Portuguese creasing to the turf 
clutching his left knee and, even after two bouts of treatment, he could not 
continue. The first flood of tears came once he had ripped off his strapping 
while sitting on a stretcher. He had touched the ball eight times. Yet his job 
was not done. Ronaldo first played the cheerleader, urging on his team-mates 
during their huddles in extra-time. Then, most dramatically of all, he turned 
manager, patrolling the technical area bellowing instruction. The tears which 
greeted Éder’s winner were those of joy. Whether denied his chance out on the 
pitch or not, this was evidence of how much he cared.

Portugal beat France to win Euro 2016 final with Éder’s extra-time goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
3) France have missed their opportunity

Didier Deschamps trudged through the post-match ceremony clutching a hefty 
Uefa badge as a meagre consolation prize. The days ahead will bring 
soul‑searching. This had been a strangely conservative and passive display from 
France’s manager of four years. Where he had previously toyed with his tactics 
and selection during the match, never afraid to admit his original choice had 
been wrong, this seemed more a collection of poor choices. Why was Antony 
Martial, a player who has tormented these opponents before, not given more than 
a cameo deep into stoppage time? Why was Moussa Sissoko sacrificed instead of 
one of the more ineffective Paul Pogba or Blaise Matuidi? Where was the 
innovation, the fluidity of tactics, that was supposed to mark the manager out, 
and would have helped his team better exploit Ronaldo’s departure? After the 
opening half-hour this was horribly flat and made all the footage circulating 
on social media of the open‑top bus, to be used in the celebrations, en route 
to Paris on Sunday afternoon all the more excruciating.

4) Will the real Moussa Sissoko please stand up?

Those television viewers back on Tyneside must have performed a double take 
midway through the first half. There was one of their own in possession just 
inside his own half, spying a gap and surging up-field with such pace and 
aggression that the Portuguese were left gasping in his vapour trail until his 
shot flew narrowly over the bar. He was the one real positive in the French 
ranks over the course of the evening, begging the question: if Moussa Sissoko 
is capable of brilliance like this, why on earth did he spend so much of last 
season shuffling around Premier League grounds ineffectively as Newcastle 
United slipped miserably into the Championship? This was a throwback to the 
midfielder of three or four years ago, turning away from markers to fizz shots 
at goal or bursting to the by-line to cross for his team-mates. It was 
certainly the type of player Steve McClaren and Rafael Benítez had required 
last term. As Sissoko marauded forward, forcing Rui Patrício into a fine save 
in the 84th minute, it was hard to be sure which French player should be 
provoking talk of a nine-figure transfer fee: him or Pogba.
Moussa Sissoko 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Moussa%20Sissoko&team=France&isSimple=true>
5) Relief in the success of the security operation

Before this tournament the principal fear gripping France, the travelling 
supporters and, indeed, some of the players was of a terrorist attack. Paris 
and Saint-Denis had suffered last November when130 people were killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/13/shootings-reported-in-eastern-paris-live>
 in a wave of atrocities across Île-de-France. The one innocent bystander who 
died at the Stade de France that night was Manuel Colaço Dias, a 63-year-old 
retired chauffeur originally from Mértola, south-east Portugal. His wife and 
son were invited to the final as guests of the French government but they 
cannot bring themselves as yet to return to this venue. There are too many 
painful stories like that but there is also relief to be had that the finals, 
either inside the stadia or at the fanzones in the host cities, were not 
blighted by a repeat. The police did use tear gas at the Eiffel Tower zone on 
Sunday attempting to disperse fans trying to enter an area crammed with 90,000 
people two hours before kick-off, yet the major flashpoints in France were from 
hooliganism, not terrorism. For all the inconvenience caused by the odd false 
alarm, the anti-terror security appears to have worked.
 