
Jermaine Beckford stole the show as Preston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> booked their first Wembley trip 
since 1994. The Lancashire side moved one step away from laying their play-off 
curse to rest after advancing past Chesterfield in the League One play-off 
semi-finals.

Seven days after his side missed out on automatic promotion to the 
Championship following an agonising loss at Colchester United , Beckford’s 
volley and incredible lob from near the halfway line helped Preston to a 3-0 
victory and 4-0 aggregate success.

His goals came either side of a penalty from the division’s top scorer, Joe 
Garner, and ensured Preston were feeling altogether different emotions this 
Sunday afternoon.

Thursday night’s 1-0 win in Derbyshire was followed up in style as Simon 
Grayson’s side looked to make the most of their second opportunity having ceded 
second spot to MK Dons last weekend.

The former Everton striker Beckford, who five years ago this week sent a Leeds 
side managed by Grayson into the second tier, rifled in the opener with a smart 
volley on the turn.

After Garner converted a spot-kick for his 27th goal of the season after the 
break Beckford rounded off the victory with a precise long-range loft into the 
top corner over a hapless Joe Murphy.

After suffering heartache in each of their previous nine play-off campaigns, 
North End fans will head to Wembley in two weeks’ time to face either Swindon 
or Sheffield United with trepidation.

However, having lost just one of their past 21 League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> games, they can be 
cautiously optimistic that the hoodoo could finally be banished at the 10th 
time of asking, particularly with a strikeforce of Beckford and Garner in their 
arsenal.

Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> included the 
debutant goalkeeper Murphy, drafted in on Saturday because of an injury to 
Tommy Lee, in their starting lineup but it was Preston’s shot-stopper who made 
the first big contribution nine minutes before the break. Sam Clucas got behind 
the Lillywhites’ back four and was fed by Sam Morsy, yet his left-footed try 
hit the outstretched leg of the on-loan goalkeeper Sam Johnstone and looped on 
to the roof of the net.

It proved a pivotal save as, just two minutes later, the hosts were ahead with 
their first real chance. Calum Woods’ free-kick from near halfway was met by 
Garner’s flick-on and Beckford took one touch before hooking beyond Murphy on 
the half turn.

It was his goal four days ago that had given North End a first-leg lead and 
this was his 11th strike in 17 games since returning from a serious ear 
infection that he conceded had made him contemplate retirement back in February.

The Spireites looked to hit back before half-time as John Welsh diverted Gary 
Robert’s dangerous cross behind and Paul Gallagher cleared Sam Hird’s header 
off the line.

But their slim chances of joining Walsall and Manchester United as the only 
teams to beat North End at Deepdale in six months were ended when Murphy 
conceded a penalty just after the hour mark. Another Garner flick-on engineered 
the move and although Neil Kilkenny’s pass was wide of former Spireites loanee 
Daniel Johnson, he got there before Murphy and was tripped heading out of the 
area. On this day last year Garner’s incredible volley against Rotherham had 
proved in vain over the two legs but, at the same end, he slammed home a 
penalty which meant far more in the grander scheme of things.

Jimmy Ryan saw a deflected effort fall narrowly wide and Jay O’Shea’s effort 
came back off the woodwork, yet this was to be Preston’s day and Beckford 
provided an exclamation mark with three minutes remaining. The on-loan Bolton 
forward spotted Murphy off his line and lofted the ball home supremely from 
long range to spark a premature mini pitch invasion, which was followed by a 
much bigger one on the final whistle.
 