
Oprah Winfrey’s position as America’s most sought-after author interviewer may 
be under threat after a surprise new contender showed their hand in the New 
York Review of Books:Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>.

The American president interviewed the Pulitzer-winning novelist Marilynne 
Robinsonin a lengthy piece 
<http://www2.nybooks.com/articles/s3/2015/nov/05/president-obama-marilynne-robinson-conversation.html>
 which has just been published by the literary magazine, taking the author of 
Gilead through topics from Christianity to democracy. He told Robinson, who he 
has known since 2012 when he presented her with the National Humanities Medal, 
that “one of the things that I don’t get a chance to do as often as I’d like is 
just to have a conversation with somebody who I enjoy and I’m interested in … 
and so we had this idea that why don’t I just have a conversation with somebody 
I really like and see how it turns out. And you were first in the queue.”

Informing Robinson that her creation John Ames, a pastor from Iowa, is “one of 
my favourite characters in fiction”, Obama asked her “how your interest in 
Christianity converges with your concerns about democracy”. He also inquired 
how, given the importance of faith to Robinson, “at least in our democracy and 
our civic discourse, it seems as if folks who take religion the most seriously 
sometimes are also those who are suspicious of those not like them”?

“I believe that people are images of God,” Robinson told Obama. “There’s no 
alternative that is theologically respectable to treating people in terms of 
that understanding. What can I say? It seems to me as if democracy is the 
logical, the inevitable consequence of this kind of religious humanism at its 
highest level.”

Christianity, she said, is “supposed to be difficult”, and “when people are 
turning in on themselves – and God knows, arming themselves and so on – against 
the imagined other, they’re not taking their Christianity seriously”.
 Homespun values … Obama and Robinson 
Obama went on to quiz the novelist on her family and upbringing, and on the 
“certain set of homespun values of hard work and honesty and humility” held by 
her parents. “That’s part of what I see in your writing. And part of my 
connection to your books, I think, is an appreciation for – without 
romanticising Middle America or small-town America – that sense of homespun 
virtues,” said the president. “And that comes out in your writing. And it 
sometimes seems really foreign to popular culture today, which is all about 
celebrity and being loud and bragging.”

Robinson responded that “I really think that you have to go very far up in 
American culture to get beyond the point where people have good values”, Obama 
agreeing that “the issue to me, Marilynne, is not so much that those virtues 
that you prize and that you care about and that are vital to our democracy 
aren’t there. They are there in Little League games, and emergency rooms, and 
in school buildings. And people are treating each other the way you would want 
our democracy to cultivate. But there’s this huge gap between how folks go 
about their daily lives and how we talk about our common life and our political 
life.”

Obama also asked Robinson about race – “I know at least in Gilead that factors 
into one major character, trying to figure out how he can love somebody in the 
50s that doesn’t look like him” – and about the genesis of Gilead and Home. The 
almost 4,000-word interview, the audio of which canbe heard online 
<https://itun.es/i6S77mD>, is the first of two pieces, with the conclusion of 
Obama’s interview of the novelist to be published in the next issue of the 
magazine.
 