
Half an hour of this contest still had to be played but Preston’s supporters 
knew their play-off jinx was finally over. They had just seen Jermaine Beckford 
sweep the ball in to complete a hat-trick and put his team 4-0 up and, almost 
as one, those in white rose to their feet and chanted: “We are going up! We are 
going up!” The sense of joy and relief was tangible.

On nine previous occasions Preston have attempted to secure promotion via the 
play-offs and every time they have been denied. It has become a weight on the 
club’s shoulders, a sequence they have been desperate to end, and Simon 
Grayson’s men did just that here.

They were simply too much for Swindon, from first minute to last, playing with 
a level of intensity and ruthlessness that had Mark Cooper’s men gasping for 
air as early as the third minute, when Beckford struck for the first time. It 
was 3-0 by half-time and, ultimately, it could be said justice was done given 
Preston narrowly missed out on automatic promotion on the final day of the
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> season and 
finished 10 points above Swindon. Whichever way you look at it, they fully 
deserve this long-awaited triumph.

“We had two weeks to prepare for this match and it’s full credit to the 
players that they turned up on the day and executed the gameplan to a tee,” 
said Grayson. “We showed character and determination and finished off a job we 
should have completed two weeks ago.”

Beckford was the undoubted star. Cooper said as much when he identified the 
forward as the fundamental reason why his team were so soundly beaten, and on a 
muggy evening came a display to remind people why five years ago he was being 
signed by Everton and deemed good enough to play in the Premier League.

The 31-year-old was a constant menace as part of Preston’s three-man attack 
alongside Paul Gallagher and Joe Garner, bullying defenders, running into space 
and, crucially, scoring goals. His first was a close-range finish from a 
free-kick he won himself, while the second was a precisely placed curled finish 
from the edge of the area after he had quickly turned Jordan Turnbull.

The third was a left-footed finish into the far corner of the net after he had 
been sent clean through by Garner, and with it came a place in the history 
books as he became just the third player to score a hat-trick in a Wembley 
play-off final, following on from Charlton’s Clive Mendonca and Swansea’s Scott 
Sinclair.

Not surprisingly Beckford was given a standing ovation from the Preston fans 
upon being substituted on 67 minutes – with two fans later accused of taking 
the shirt he had given to a young boy upon finding his place on the bench and 
immediately putting it on eBay. Having now scored 18 goals since arriving from 
Bolton on loan in November Preston’s hope will be that he is part of the club’s 
Championship squad next season. Beckford has already been told by his parent 
club that he is no longer required there.

“[Getting promoted] makes it easier to keep Jermaine as we can now compete 
financially,” said Grayson. “But money has never been his motivation, he just 
wants to enjoy what he’s doing and that’s what he has here. We have a special 
relationship and I hope we can keep that going.”

Another player Grayson will hope he can now keep is Gallagher, who is on loan 
from Sheffield United and made a telling contribution prior to being replaced 
on 37 minutes after taking a kick to the calf. Having set up Beckford for the 
opener with a left-sided delivery, he did the same 10 minutes later, this time 
putting in a cross that Paul Huntington converted from close-range with the 
inside of his knee.

Huntington was completely unmarked as he struck, which summed up Swindon’s 
sloppiness and lack of focus on a day when, as Cooper admitted, the team let 
themselves down.

Having conceded five times in their madcap semi-final second leg tie against 
Sheffield United, the Robins were far too open again at the back, while going 
forward they rarely looked liked the fluid, possession-based team that had 
secured fourth place in League One against all expectations.

In fairness, they were put off their stride by a Preston side that displayed 
ravenous hunger all over the pitch, and in particular in midfield where Neil 
Kilkenny, John Welsh and Daniel Johnson made numerous interceptions and tackles 
whenever their opponents in red did advance. Indeed it was telling thatSwindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> had their first, and only, 
effort on target in the 65th minute – a Jonathan Obika header that was 
comfortably held by Sam Johnstone.

“The players are sore but they should feel proud, we’ve had a brilliant 
season,” said Cooper. Not as brilliant as Preston, though. They have been 
promoted via the play-offs. Finally.
 