
Preston have been charged over the crowd trouble which followed their League 
One play-off semi-final victory overChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> at Deepdale last month.

North End sealed their Wembley play-off final berth with a 3-0 victory over 
the Spireites on 10 May but there were ugly scenes during the pitch invasion to 
celebrate that achievement.

The Chesterfield defender Ian Evatt, a previous employee of the Lilywhites’ 
rivals Blackpool, was assaulted by a 20-year-old apprentice mechanic who was 
later given a three-year ban from football.

The Football Association has now alleged Preston failed to ensure spectators 
at the fixture “refrained from provocative and/or abusive and/or threatening 
and/or violent behaviour” and has given the Championship newcomers until 15 
June to respond.

Evatt had claimed he was punched, kicked and spat at during the pitch invasion 
and had suggested the FA take action against Preston to stop more violent 
scenes in the future.

Speaking to Talksport 
<http://talksport.com/football/i-was-punched-kicked-and-spat-chesterfield-captain-tells-talksport-about-pitch-invasion>
 at the time, Evatt said: “How long is it going to go on for until a player 
gets seriously injured? All it takes is one idiot with a knife or whatever 
else. It’s going to happen one day, until something is done about it.

“The only way people are going to learn is if the clubs get punished. I don’t 
want that but how else are fans going to learn not to go on the pitch? We can’t 
bring back the cages.

“There’s got to be a way round it so maybe it is time for the FA to stand up 
and start punishing people for doing it.

“I was terrified, I’m a big guy but in the changing room afterwards I was 
distraught because I have never been faced with such anger. It was scary, 
especially being on my own.”

Fans had originally started to huddle down at the Deepdale advertising 
hoardings during the closing stages of the second leg when it became obvious 
North End were heading for their first Wembley appearance since 1994.

Multiple announcements were made over the speakers in the ground encouraging 
supporters not to enter the field of play, but these were not heeded and some 
fans had spilled on to the pitch when Jermaine Beckford scored an 87th-minute 
goal from the halfway line.
 