
This musical boasts an impeccable pedigree. It is based on the 1960 Billy 
Wilder filmThe Apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/dec/03/culture.features>. It has a book 
by Neil Simon, marks the only excursion of composer Burt Bacharach and lyricist 
Hal David on to Broadway, and had a long New York run in 1968. Yet, as an 
archetypal product of the 60s, it feels faintly anachronistic, both in style 
and content, in today’s world.

 Part of the problem lies with the story. The Wilder movie offers an acerbic 
study of a corrupt society in which a young insurance clerk, CC Baxter, gains 
promotion by allowing his superiors to use his apartment for their extramarital 
affairs. The bitter twist comes when he discovers that his boss is using the 
flat for assignations with an employee, Fran Kubelik, with whom Baxter himself 
is besotted. It’s an acidic fable but a musical demands uplift, which Bacharach 
and David liberally supply. The most grating moment comes when four adulterous 
department heads sing Where Can You Take a Girl?, sounding less like a satire 
on misogyny than a surreptitious endorsement of it.

 Even the form of the musical seems at odds with the subject. The show has 
what Mark Steyn called “the scene-song-scene-song format”, which I happen to 
like but which is also somewhat inflexible. After Fran has tried to kill 
herself with an overdose, Baxter and the doctor from the next door apartment 
try to cheer her up by singing A Young Pretty Girl Like You and cavorting round 
the apartment doing jokey business with surgical implements: it seems the wrong 
response to the situation. It doesn’t help that this production overloads the 
evening, as in the 2010 Broadway revival, by interpolating two hit songs,I Say 
a Little Prayer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kafVkPxjLYg> and A House Is 
Not a Home, from the Bacharach/David back catalogue.
 Scene-song-scene … Emily Squibb in Promises, Promises. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
 Fortunately, a classic Bacharach and David number, I’ll Never Fall in Love 
Again <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzQBOBoPg04>, springs naturally from the 
action, and the Simon book is consistently witty. Simon has Baxter narrate the 
story, which allows him to be the first critic of his own spineless actions. 
There are also some vintage Simon lines, as when Baxter, after watching a 
desperate Fran frenziedly downing a drink, remarks: “I’d hate to see her eat.” 
Often thought of as a mechanical gag-dispenser, Simon has the dramatist’s 
ability to place a line.

 But, if the show is a mixed salad, so too is Bronagh Lagan’s production. The 
band is too loud for a small space and the set, with a vast door that never 
properly closes, is clumsy. Yet Gabriel Vick brings a good deal of charm to the 
self-deprecating Baxter, Daisy Maywood is a soulful, well-sung Fran and there 
is striking support from Alex Young (“Do you like this coat? It’s owl”) as a 
bar-room pickup and from John Guerrasio as the disgruntled doctor. The evening 
has its pleasures but it seems marinated in the 60s where they did things 
differently.

•At Southwark Playhouse, London 
<http://southwarkplayhouse.co.uk/show/promises-promises/>, until 18 February. 
Box office: 020-7407 0234.

 