
Javier Pastore’s double inspired a weary Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> to a 3-1 victory at Nice 
as the French champions reclaimed top spot in Ligue 1, at least until Sunday.

PSG, who lost 3-1 at home to Barcelona in their Champions League quarter-final 
first leg on Wednesday, now have 65 points from 32 games and lead second-placed 
Lyon by one point.

The absence of the suspended Zlatan Ibrahimovic was barely felt as the 
Argentinian Pastore scored either side of the interval with Edinson Cavani 
netting from the penalty spot for his team’s third.

Nice <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice>, who are 11th on 41 points, 
levelled before the break through Mathieu Bodmer but were overrun in the second 
half.

Lyon can move back to the top if they beat their arch rivals St Etienne at 
home in France’s most volatile derby on Sunday but they will have then played a 
game more than PSG.

The PSG coach Laurent Blanc started the match with full-backs Gregory van der 
Wiel and Maxwell and midfielder Blaise Matuidi on the bench as he looked to 
keep the squad fresh for Tuesday’s return leg at the Camp Nou.

PSG went ahead six minutes before the interval after playmaker Pastore coolly 
slotted home after being played through by Lucas.

Nice were quick to react, with Bodmer deflecting Albert Rafetraniaina’s 
long-range volley into Salvatore Sirigu’s net on the stroke of half-time.

Early in the second half, Carlos Eduardo easily beat PSG’s Marquinhos and 
David Luiz in the air but his header was tipped on to the left-hand post by 
Sirigu.

David Luiz then proved more effective in the air in the Nice area as his 
downward header bounced on to the bar, but it was another shaky defensive 
performance by the Brazilian after Wednesday’s poor display against Barça.

Thankfully for PSG, Pastore struck again and then Cavani put the result beyond 
doubt in the 69th minute from the penalty spot after the Uruguay striker had 
been brought down by Jordan Amavi.
 