
In the end, the surprise was not that Paris St-Germain lost the opening match 
of their brave new world but that Lorient, visitors in front of a near-capacity 
42,000 at a pouring Parc des Princes,only won 1-0 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/julien-quercia-psg-14657727/>. 
Before Julien Quercia scored their winning goal, Mamadou Sakho was lucky not to 
have conceded a penalty for handball, while Kévin Monnet-Pacquet missed an open 
goal from three metres and Arnold Mvuemba rattled the crossbar.

"A Cold Shower for the PSG Galactiques", ran Journal du Dimanche's headline, 
while L'Equipe went for irony: "That's a good start…" It actually had started 
OK, before the game began that is, with €43m signing Javier Pastore given a 
huge ovation on the pitch. "At least his hair looked nice," wrote So Foot, 
looking for positives. There weren't many others.

Nerves clearly got the better of Sakho, the skipper, and he looked a shadow of 
the imposing figure he cut last season. "He played in the first half like I've 
never seen him play," said coach Antoine Kombouaré after the game. "Lots of 
them had their heads in their shoes. But you need time to build relationships, 
so we must not panic." Sakho's fellow centre-back, Milan Bisevac, according to 
one French reporter, "needs a three-metre run-up to make a tackle". Guillaume 
Hoarau "has reason to fear for his place", (L'Equipe) while Jérémy Ménez "is 
not the solution" (20 Minutes).

It's no major surprise that a team with five debutants – Salvatore Sirigu, 
Blaise Matuidi, and Kévin Gameiro, as well as Bisevac and Menez – four of whom 
missed pre-season training with their new club, struggled for cohesion. Of more 
concern, perhaps, was the lack of leadership, especially in midfield. The 
team's average age was 25 and the absence of an on-pitch leader was apparent: 
last season's veteran trio Grégory Coupet, Claude Makélélé and Ludovic Giuly, 
all vocal, all leaders, were missed. Perhaps Lassana Diarra, watching from the 
stands and out of favour at Real Madrid, should have brought his boots.

PSG's sports director Leonardo – who said last week: "Don't expect things to 
start with a great party, that doesn't exist in football," – left his 
directors' box seat just before the end, and with a tight smile, headed 
straight for the dressing-room. "What was said will remain between us," added a 
grim-faced Kombouaré.

The fans, whose banner, 'Dream Bigger', could be up for while, jeered Ménez 
when he was subbed off, and booed the team at the final whistle. "It was 
inevitable really," added So Foot. "The Qataris were so focused on signing 'a 
crack' that they forgot to buy proper defenders."

Next week, PSG face a tricky trip to early-season leaders Rennes. Mathieu 
Bodmer, playing as a No10, is likely to replace Hoarau, though Pastore, whose 
first PSG press conference will be this afternoon, won't appear until 
September. He needs to start well: if not, said today's Le Parisien: "The 
disappointment would be immense and Leonardo's recruitment will be called into 
question."

For all the focus on PSG, credit has to go to Lorient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lorient>, and in particular coach 
Christian Gourcuff. The longest-serving boss in Ligue 1, Gourcuff's obsession 
with playing football "the right way" means he's happier to lose beautifully 
than to win ugly. He was nominated for Coach of the Year last season (Lille's 
Rudi Garcia won) and every summer it's a surprise that no bigger club tries to 
hire him.

This off-season he lost his three best players, Gameiro and Marseille-bound 
Morgan Amalfitano and Jérémy Morel, but efficiently recruited replacements: 
Mathieu Coutadeur and Lucas Mareque for the latter two, and for Gameiro, two 
strikers on a free: Quercia, dumped by Auxerre but Man of the Match in Paris, 
and Jérémie Aliadière, who impressed in a 20-minute cameo on Saturday night. 
"He'll be interesting for us, he's intelligent and I like that," said Gourcuff. 
His next job is keeping his players: Bruno Ecuele Manga, the centre-back bought 
last year to replace Laurent Koscielny, is already a target for Premier League 
clubs.

Lorient's net profit for the summer was €8m, so it's no wonder Gourcuff was 
smiling after beating PSG, who have splashed out €83m. "It shows that money and 
buying names is not the only way to win. There are other values in football; 
like playing well, for example," he said. "At Lorient, the team is the star 
unlike at PSG," added his president Loic Fery.

Lorient has the potential to finish in the top 10 this season. As for PSG, 
they will have to recover quickly from the first Qatar-strophe of their new era.

Week one talking points

• Lucho González has made no secret of his desire to leave Marseille, but with 
every recent performance his price-tag must be rising. Back in March, Lucho was 
the seventh Marseille player to be a victim of home-jacking (Vitorino Hilton 
recently became the eighth, and he quickly left for Montpellier) and his family 
want to leave the city. In Saturday'sexciting 2-2 draw with Sochaux 
<http://www.coupfranc.fr/buts-om-sochaux-2-2-et-resume-video/>, Lucho scored 
with an excellent volley, and he almost won the game late on. The previous week,
he excelled in OM's 5-4 Champions Trophy win over Lille 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/lille-marseille-13988506/>. 
Marseille already have Amalfitano and Mathieu Valbuena to cover for him, and 
Lucho's departure would free up the salary-bill to bring in a centre-forward on 
loan (Alberto Gilardino has been linked). "As long as he is here, I will use 
him, the guy loves football," said coach Didier Deschamps. Malaga's €6m bid was 
rejected last month while negotiations with Roma stalled when Marseille wanted 
€12m. On current form, it would seem a fair price.

• Last season, this is just the type of game that Lyon would have lost. A goal 
down at Nice, for whom ex-Lyon winger Anthony Mounier scored the season's 
quickest goal, Lyon levelled after some sharp work by Lisandro López, and the 
visitors soon gained in confidence.Goals from Bafe Gomis and Maxime Gonalons 
sealed the 3-1 win 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/lyon-off-winning-start-nice-14672126/>
. It was obvious straightaway that the new coach, Remi Garde, has got the 
players on his side – which is more than Claude Puel managed in three years. 
"What's changed here is that the smile is back on everyone's faces," said the 
president, Jean-Michel Aulas, pointedly. There is more to come from Lyon, too: 
they were missing three creative midfielders, Yoann Gourcuff, Miralem Pjanic 
and Ederson. A tough Champions League qualifier against Rubin Kazan awaits, but 
the mood is upbeat.

• What an opening weekend! There were 31 goals and some were absolute 
crackers, among themGrégory Proment's long-range blockbuster which won the 
match for Caen 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/caen-valenciennes-14659291/>. Alain 
Traoré scored an equaliser for Auxerre in their defeat at Montpellierfrom even 
further out (goal after 1min10secs) 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/montpellier-auxerre-14671850/>, 
while Oliver Sorlin put new boys Evian ahead with abrilliant edge-of-the-area 
volley in their 2-2 draw at Brest 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/brest-evian-thonon-gaillar-14659230/>
. Last season there was some talk that shots from outside the area were a 
rarity in this division. The players have obviously been practising over the 
summer.

Week One Results: Marseille 2-2 Sochaux, PSG 0-1 Lorient, Ajaccio 0-2 
Toulouse, Nice 1-3 Lyon, Nancy 1-1 Lille, Caen 1-0 Valenciennes, Montepellier 
3-1 Auxerre, Brest 2-2 Evian TG, Dijon 1-5 Rennes (the early leaders were 
helped byDijon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dijon> having two early 
goals disallowed), Bordeaux 1-2 Saint-Etienne.
 