
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> made 
up for another European failure by clinching their third Ligue 1 title in a row 
on Saturday after a tense season as they took the second step towards what 
would be an unprecedented domestic treble.

PSG lifted the title after winning 2-1 at Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> while their 
nearest challengers Olympique Lyonnais were held to a 1-1 draw at home by 
Girondins Bordeaux. The Parisians have 80 points, with Lyon on 72, with one 
round of matches left.

PSG agreed to significantly limit their spending after a Financial Fair Play 
settlement with Uefa and, while that arguably hit their chances in the 
Champions League, it did not damage their domestic ambitions.

After lifting the league title and the League Cup, which they won against 
Bastia last month, PSG take on second division AJ Auxerre in the French Cup 
final on 30 May.

Laurent Blanc’s side, eliminated in the last eight of the Champions League by 
Barcelona, were pushed hard domestically by Olympique Lyonnais whose president, 
Jean-Michel Aulas, hit out at PSG’s supposed favourable treatment by the 
football authorities.

The Parisians made a slow start to the season, with Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
sidelined for two months with a heel injury from mid-September, allowing 
Olympique de Marseille to take command.

The talismanic Sweden striker, who has scored 19 league goals this term, had 
less impact than last season and plunged the club into a mini crisis with 
derogatory comments about France after a league defeat by Girondins Bordeaux in 
March.

He also insulted a referee that day in a rant that earned him a four-match 
ban. The suspension was later reduced to three games after the French League 
(LFP) accepted a recommendation from the French Olympic Committee, a move that 
drew heavy criticism from Aulas.

PSG’s standout player in the closing stages of the season was the Uruguay 
striker Edinson Cavani with eight goals from his last four outings.

The champions went top on 20 March after beating Lorient 3-1 – the first of an 
eight-match winning streak as Lyon’s form went downhill.

Seven-times champions Lyon were hoping for a first Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> title since 2008 but 
slipped to second after a home defeat by Nice and were then always playing 
catch-up.

Behind them, Monaco, with 68 points, Olympique de Marseille and St Etienne 
(both 66) are fighting for third place to win a spot in the third qualifying 
round of the Champions League.
 