
As Matt Oakley prepares to face Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> for the 17th time in his 
career, Exeter City’s evergreen 38-year-old can be forgiven for needing a 
gentle reminder that the first of those meetings took place at Anfield so long 
ago that John Barnes was lining up against him.

It was December 1995, Oakley was 18, making the second of his 251 Premier 
League appearances, and Southampton came away with a 1-1 draw. While the 
memories of that day are a little hazy – much like the 3-2 win at Anfield three 
years later when Oakley was unable to continue after David James cleaned him 
out when conceding an early penalty – playing against Liverpool left a deep 
impression on him in one sense.

“Anfield was the first place where I’d ever seen a crowd influence a game,” 
Oakley says. “I remember Liverpool had a spell of play where they were on top, 
the crowd just went through the roof and I’ve never felt anything like it. It 
was as if you’d gone deaf. There was this noise going on, I couldn’t 
communicate with a team-mate five yards away. They were passing the ball with 
ease, like Liverpool can, and they tore us apart. And I just thought: ‘Oh my 
God.’ You kind of realised why the home team usually wins. That day at 
Liverpool was the loudest thing I’d ever heard.”

Exeter’s Paul Tisdale ready to battle Jürgen Klopp in hipster stakes and Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/paul-tisdale-exeter-city-liverpool-fa-cup>
St James Park is a long way from Anfield in every respect but the Exeter 
supporters among an 8,300 sellout crowd will be doing their best on Friday to 
raise the decibel levels for a classic third-round FA Cup tie and an occasion 
that has given Oakley, who was in the Southampton side thatlost to Arsenal in 
the 2003 final <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/may/18/match.facup>, 
plenty to think about.

Long fascinated by analytics in sport as well as psychology, which he hopes to 
study at university after passing a couple of exams, Oakley is partly 
responsible for plotting Liverpool’s downfall as the man in charge of preparing 
the dossiers on Exeter’s opponents. With one eye on the future, the former 
Southampton, Derby and Leicester midfielder is a player, scout and GCSE student 
wrapped into one these days.

“I don’t want to go into a coaching role, I don’t get a buzz from that,” says 
Oakley, who has clocked up 135 games for Exeter since arriving on loan in 2011 
to help out Paul Tisdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/paul-tisdale-exeter-city-liverpool-fa-cup>
, the League Two club’s manager and a former Southampton team-mate. “I like 
puzzles and I like working things out, so the analysis stuff is something that 
interests me. I spent a bit of time with Chris Anderson, who wrote the book The 
Numbers Game, to see how his brain works.

“My thinking is that when I’ve been at clubs we’ve had analysis people doing 
presentations for games and they’ll show a bit of footage but it’s more 
computer-techy-university people, not players. I’m not saying they can’t do it 
and they can’t see it but they don’t get what I think I can give. I guess I’m 
trying to create a bit of a niche – I’ve played at the top and every level, so 
I understand what players are thinking.”

Unable to see opponents play live because he is still regularly turning out 
for Exeter, Oakley receives a report from a scout attending the match and 
combines their thoughts with his own analysis after watching a full rerun of 
the game on his computer. He then gives a presentation to Tisdale a couple of 
days before the match so that they can prepare tactics.

“The beauty of this particular game is we’ve been able to get great footage of 
Liverpool,” Oakley says. “But it’s also the first time I’ve had to look at a 
Premier League team and say: ‘If I’m playing against them, how am I going to 
break them down?’

“Obviously I tried to do it as a footballer but I was told by someone else. 
Or, as was the case with a few of my managers, just told to go out and play and 
get stuck in. So I’ve really enjoyed this, but I’m not going to tell you what 
I’ve broken down about Liverpool.”

Fresh-faced and still full of running, Oakley looks much younger than his age 
and it seems remarkable to think he made his debut at Goodison Park at a time 
when Neville Southall was in goal for Everton. Oakley can still see Anders 
Limpar delivering a cross that he worried he was going to head into his own net 
with his first touch in professional football and he also smiles at the memory 
of Southampton players lighting up cigarettes on the coach on the way home.

He was a trainee at the time and on a nice little earner as Matt Le Tissier’s 
boot boy, who agreed to pay him £5 for every goal he scored during that 1994-95 
season (Le Tissier had parted with £150 come the end). Oakley was never quite 
sure Le Tissier appreciated all his hard work. “I remember spending hours 
cleaning his boots, shining them as much as I could, and he would then go and 
stick them in the sink and wet them because he wanted them more supple.”

Oakley spent 12 years with Southampton and was probably playing some of the 
best football of his career whenhe suffered a cruciate ligament injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/nov/18/newsstory.sport4> in 
September 2003 that kept him out for 15 months. Gordon Strachan, who was 
Southampton’s manager at the time, had been pushing Oakley’s claims for a full 
England call-up in the previous campaign, which ended with a 1-0 defeat against 
a superb Arsenal sidein a largely forgettable FA Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/may/18/match.facup>.

“Up until that point in the Cup we’d have a go at teams and thought we would 
overpower them but we tried to do the same at Highbury in a league game just 
before the finaland got battered 6-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/may/08/match.sport1>,” Oakley says.

“I remember Gordon, in the buildup to the final, sitting us down and saying: 
‘We can go two ways with this. We either go for them and get done 5-0, which 
will be embarrassing. Or we slightly adjust what we’re doing.’ We went down the 
latter route. Robert Pirès scored, we had the odd couple of chances but it was 
a little bit flat.”

By that stage Oakley had already developed a serious interest in sports 
psychology, which started while working under Glenn Hoddle at Southampton – he 
remembers feeling “gutted” when the former England manager telephoned him to 
say he was leaving to take over at Tottenham Hotspur – and continued throughout 
his career, so much so he decided to try to take things further last year.

“I applied to go to the University of Roehampton to do a sports psychology 
degree. I went to the open day and met with the head of the psychology side, 
talked about what I’d done, with 22 years of professional football behind me, 
and she said she thought I’d be fantastic for the course because I can talk 
about real-life situations that they try to educate people on.

“But I failed at the application stage because you needed five GCSEs, which 
I’ve got but I don’t have English and maths. That deflated me a little bit. But 
my wife works as a teaching assistant and she supports a maths teacher, so my 
first step is get maths sorted and then do the English one.”

Having played under some colourful characters, including Sven-Goran Eriksson, 
Nigel Pearson and Ian Holloway at Leicester, Billy Davies at Derby, and 
Strachan and Hoddle at Southampton, Oakley will not be short of material for 
his case studies when he finally enrols on the psychology course.

In the meantime, he is thoroughly enjoying life at Exeter and hoping his 
latest appearance against Liverpool – and probably his last – will deliver one 
of those magicalFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> moments.

“It’s chalk and cheese in terms of quality,” Oakley says, “but the pitch is 
going to be crap, the changing rooms – bless the club – are what they are, and 
the weather is probably going to be rubbish. And, as the old saying goes, it’s 
a one-off game.”
 