
Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, the Queens Park Rangers manager, has denied any 
wrongdoing after beingnamed in the Daily Telegraph investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
 into corruption in football. The Telegraph alleged the Dutchman requested a 
fee of £55,000 to work for a fake Far Eastern firm seeking to sell players to 
the club.

In video footage collected by the newspaper, Hasselbaink is seen asking his 
suitors to “come up with a nice figure” for a role, which the newspaper says he 
is told would involve a number of trips to meet with the firm in Singapore.

Hasselbaink says: “You said the word business. That’s all, it’s business, so 
it depends what you put down, you know … At the end of the day, it has to be 
worthwhile to go all that way.”

The Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> club have 
not suspended Hasselbaink, saying they have confidence in him, but added that 
the 44-year-old will be investigated. In a statement, QPR said: “The club is 
aware of the allegations made against QPR manager Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink in 
the Telegraph.

Sam Allardyce leaves 'dream' England manager job after one game in charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
“First and foremost, the club takes very seriously any alleged breach of the 
rules. With this in mind, the club can confirm that there will be a thorough 
internal investigation regarding this matter. However, we have every confidence 
in our manager and the robust systems and processes the club has in place.”

Hasselbaink, who took over at QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> 
in December, issued a statement in which he denied any impropriety and said he 
saw nothing unusual in the prospective deal. Hasselbaink said: “I have today, 
through my lawyers, responded in full to the accusations levelled against me by 
the Telegraph.

“I was approached by Mr McGarvey and Ms Newell of the Telegraph purporting to 
be players’ agents. They offered me a fee to make a speech in Singapore. I do 
not see anything unusual in being offered to be paid to make a speech. I did 
not make any promises in return. I did not ask QPR to purchase any of the 
players who were said to be managed by Mr McGarvey and Ms Newell and did not 
and would not recommend the purchase of a player for my personal gain. I deny 
any accusations of wrongdoing on my part.”

Sam Allardyce: a history of suspicion and a dream job that ended after 67 days
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-history-suspicion-dream-job-ended-67-days>
In a separate development, Barnsley have suspended their assistant head coach 
Tommy Wright following allegations that he took a £5,000 bung to help place 
players at his club. TheDaily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> said that Wright accepted 
the money during a series of meetings during which he agreed to help sign 
players part-owned by the firm.

The Championship club said in a statement: “Barnsley FC is aware of 
allegations made by the Telegraph against Tommy Wright. The club has today 
suspended Tommy pending an internal investigation into these allegations.” A 
spokesman for Wright is quoted as saying: “Any suggested acts contrary to 
criminal law or those of the FA and Fifa are categorically denied.”

The Telegraph further alleges the Leeds owner, Massimo Cellino, explained ways 
to circumvent FA and Fifa rules on transfers. In video footage obtained by the 
Telegraph of a meeting between the 60-year-old and a fictitious investment 
firm, the Italian appears to suggest to the firm it could become a club 
shareholder in order to receive a portion of players’ sell-on fees. FA and Fifa 
rules ban third-party ownership of players, and third parties receiving any 
percentage of a player’s transfer fees. Cellino said in the video: “I tell you, 
I spend eight million this year … on new players. You want to finance that? You 
want to come 20% in that? You got 20% of the player – it’s the only way. As a 
shareholder you can finance the club, asking everything you want – percentage – 
you are allowed to do it in England.”

In a statement issued late on Wednesday night, Leeds described the allegations 
relating to Cellino as a “non-story”. The statement read: “The club has 
reviewed the supposed ‘evidence’ that the Daily Telegraph have published 
tonight. At no time in this video clip has Mr Cellino suggested getting around 
the FA’s rules on third-party ownership of players.

“In complete contrast to what has been suggested, Mr Cellino has made a 
perfectly proper suggestion which is entirely consistent with the FA’s 
regulations, as the only parties entitled to take benefit from ownership of a 
player is the club itself.

“If a company commits money to a club by way of investment, taking on the 
potential for profit but also the risk for loss, then that is a normal, 
every-day corporate process. This is plainly not a suggestion as to how to 
circumvent the rules, but rather, an accurate albeit concise explanation of how 
to operate within the confines of the rules and effectively become ‘the club’. 
The club intends to make no further comment on this non-story.”
 