
Mark Hughes expects to complete one of the most surprising transfers of the 
summer as Queens Park Rangers close in on the signing of Brazil goalkeeper 
Júlio César.

The 32-year-old passed a medical examination and agreed personal terms on a 
four-year contract at Loftus Road as QPR's comfortable victory overWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> was overshadowed by news of the 
imminent signing of a player who won the Champions League with Internazionale 
two years ago.

"It's not a done deal yet, there are still some papers to go to and fro but 
we'll be delighted if it goes through," said Hughes, who foresees no 
complication with the formalities. César will earn a net annual salary of £2m 
and his arrival will constitute QPR's most forceful statement of intent in a 
summer in which they have already signed eight players and let 13 perceived 
lesser ones go.

The goalkeeper, who has won 64 caps for his country, was a crucial component 
of the Inter team that became European champions and attracted many suitors 
this summer despite Inter demoting him to a back-up following their purchase of 
Slovenia's Samir Handanovic from Udinese. Hughes said that "the opportunity to 
sign him only arose in the last couple of days and when you get a chance to 
sign a player of that quality, you have to pursue it to its conclusion".

That spells bad news for another of QPR's recent signings, Rob Green, who 
committed a costly error during his debut against Swansea City 11 days ago and 
now must fear a long stint on the bench looms. "I will sit down with Rob and 
talk him through it," said Hughes. "What we're trying to do here is improve the 
quality of the group and pose challenges to everyone."

César is unlikely to be QPR's last recruit before the transfer window shuts as 
Hughes presses on with his radical revamp of a squad that avoided relegation on 
the last day of last season. He declared that a centre-back remains his top 
target.

"That was the plan at the start of the window and is the one area that we 
haven't been able to address but we'll keep looking at options right up until 
the window closes," said the manager, whose first choice is Tottenham's Michael 
Dawson. Hughes also indicated that Joey Barton proposed move to Marseille may 
yet go through after an initial setback. "It may not be dead in the water," 
said Hughes. "This option has attracted Joey's enthusiasm so hopefully 
something can be done."

Amid all the haggling at Loftus Road, Hughes will be glad his team disposed of 
Walsall with little fuss.

Shaun Wright-Phillips opened the scoring in the 29th minute, poking the ball 
into the net from six yards after a fine pass from Bobby Zamora. Early in the 
second half Green gave a reminder of why César is likely to replace him, as the 
former England No1 fumbled a long range shot by Jamie Paterson early in the 
second half and Will Grigg headed against the crossbar from the resultant 
corner. Rangers secured their victory in the 66th minute when Zamora received a 
deft pass from Kieron Dyer and sent a chip over David Grof and into the net.

On a night in which Alejandro Faurlin made a strong return after missing eight 
months through injury, José Bosingwa, crowned his home debut by adding a third 
goal in the 84th minute.
 