
There are no half measures when it comes to October showers in Rome. The 
clouds pile in, our bright kitchen goes dark, and the rain comes down so 
straight and hard it rebounds off the pavement. Crossing Via Galvani is never 
simple, thanks to trees, gaping cracks, potholes, a meaningless zebra crossing 
and desperate drivers lurching. When it is raining, you take your life in your 
hands as leaves and water join forces in slipperiness. For a moment I become a 
deranged middle-aged woman with a child, shouting in both English and Roman, my 
gestures a universal language.

There are no half measures on the other side, either. As quickly as it starts, 
it stops. The clouds scud away and the light floods back. You are in another 
Rome, bright and brilliant, you steam under your kagoul, as do the streets, and 
the air is clean and smells of wet metal and damp earth. Within the hour almost 
everything is dry and a T-shirt enough. October in Rome is glorious.

This summer, I finally bought myself a copy of Gillian Riley’s translation of 
Castelvetro’s exquisite and still relevant 17th-century book,The Fruit, Herbs 
and Vegetables of Italy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fruit-herbs-and-vegetables-of-italy.html>. In 
it, he suggests:L’autunno per la bocca, et la primavera per I’occhio – Spring 
is for looking, autumn for tasting. It is true, a temperate autumn with 
occasional showers means good things. Grapes and more grapes, apples, pears and 
the last of the figs, honeyed and so fat they have split and are surrounded by 
a halo of tiny fruit flies. There are polished chestnuts, quince and porcini 
mushrooms. Also the last of summer’s vegetables, still full of sun, tomatoes 
have happily given in to being fat and marked (and all the better for it) and 
red peppers, both still curiosities from the new world in Castelvetro’s time.

Isn’t a pile of red peppers one of the most brilliant sights, wherever you 
find them, at a market or corner shop? I like them raw.Molly O’Neill 
<https://twitter.com/onebigtable> sums up their “sweet, sometimes herbaceous, 
always sunny crunch”. But when cooked they become another thing entirely, 
transforming from crisp to soft and silken, their flavour sweetly intense and 
ever so slightly smoky. I’m a sucker for roasted peppers. The best way of 
roasting is over charcoal. In Sicily, markets often have a stall with a huge, 
black, coal-fired grill on which whole peppers are roasted until charred. You 
take them home, pull off the skins, dress the silky strips with olive oil and 
red wine vinegar.

Peppers can also be roasted over a gas hob flame. Use a long fork, be patient 
and turn them steadily. They can also be roasted whole in the oven or roast 
halves, stuffed – I have always known these as Piedmontese peppers. I first ate 
them at a Christmas party in St Albans nearly 30 years ago. I was impressed by 
everything that night, especially the son of the family, the rugs on the walls, 
and that huge tray of roasted peppers, rich red and wrinkled.

Rachel Roddy’s recipe for pasta all’amatriciana | A Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/04/bucatini-allamatriciana-recipe-rachel-roddy-kitchen-in-rome>
It is an Italian idea that has been put into words well by Elizabeth David, 
Simon Hopkinson and Nigel Slater among many others. And no wonder – it is such 
a good idea, one I have never stopped making, one of my faithfuls. Having 
stuffed them with tomatoes and garlic, you roast the peppers until they are 
wrinkled and charred at the edges, which exaggerates their smoky potential.

They can can be topped with anchovies, which I am sure is some sort of unami 
ideal. If you like anchovy that is. They can be a starter, a partner for fish, 
lamb, plain roast chicken, rice or ripped into pasta. You can eat them straight 
out of the oven, but they are better after a rest, better still the next day. 
Forget the annoying October puddle right outside your door, the best puddle is 
the one of precious roasting juices, oily and rust-tinted, whose sweet and 
smoky complexity reminds us that autumn is a consequence of summer, and that 
puddles can be enjoyed. The last half – wallowing in its puddle with the same 
appreciation my son has for his – tastes the best, especially squashed on a 
piece of toast with a fried egg on top.

Peperoni alla piemontese

Serves 4
4 red peppers
Salt
16 small or 4 medium-size ripe tomatoes
2–4 garlic cloves, sliced thinly
100ml extra virgin olive oil 
Fresh basil
8 anchovies (optional)

1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Cut the peppers in half lengthways 
– if you like try to cut the stalk in half too, which is purely aesthetic. Use 
a sharp knife to pare away any white pith and flick out the seeds. Rub a baking 
tray with olive oil, then sit the peppers inside it and sprinkle the hollows 
with salt.

2 Peel large tomatoes, if you wish, by plunging them in boiling water, then 
cold, at which point the skins should split and slip away. Cut large tomatoes 
into quarters, small ones in half.

3 Peel and thinly slice the garlic. Share – first the garlic and then the 
tomatoes – between the pepper halves. If you like, tuck some basil in right at 
the bottom. Sprinkle with a little more salt.

4 Pour the oil over the peppers. Roast for 30 minutes, then turn the heat down 
to 170C/335F/gas mark 3½ and roast for 45-60 minutes, by which point the 
peppers should be soft, wrinkled and slightly charred at the edges. Let the 
peppers rest before serving – overnight even.

5 When ready to serve, bring the tray to the table, or lift the peppers on to 
a serving plate, pouring on any precious juices. If you are serving with 
anchovies, drape 1 or 2 over the top of each half. Alternatively tuck in a 
little more fresh basil in each half.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award  