
This morning as I walked into the kitchen I was met by the smell of 
just-after-Christmas. Despite the cold, the scent from the bowl of mandarins in 
the middle of the table conjured up my parents’ hallway in late December. The 
memory was only a flash, but it stopped me in my anti-slide sock tracks. It was 
all there: a house full of family, the weary tree hitting the ceiling and under 
it, among the dry needles and great tangle of fairy-light wires, a crate 
half-full of orange fruit. Is it because food is destined for our stomach that 
memories stir there?

The word nostalgia is a compound of two Greek words: nóstos (homecoming) and 
álgos (ache). At 7 o’clock this morning I felt both: an unusual thing for me. I 
put the oven on for heat and toast, and a pot of coffee, then sat in the 
nostalgia. As the kitchen warmed, the smell got stronger. Such power from a 
bowl of fruit! It was then I realised it wasn’t the bowl of fruit at all, but a 
heap of yesterday’s mandarin peelings in the rubbish bin, which was warming up 
next to the oven. But this discovery didn’t rubbish everything; it amused me. 
It put things nicely in persective, and the kitchen still smelled lovely.

A mouthwatering mussels with potato and pasta recipe from southern Italy | A 
Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/15/pasta-with-potato-and-mussel-recipe-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>
We were away for only 12 days, but in that time Rome has descended into a 
chilly vortex. Our communal heating has failed to clunk back on, which is the 
reason we are wearing many layers and why the suitcases are still unpacked, 
lying there like great open mouths, spewing clothes. I haven’t unpacked in the 
kitchen either, in the sense that I am not really back in a cooking rhythm, 
despite the fact it is my job to be. I was meant to be writing about poached 
fish “in crazy water” as the Italians have it, but that will have to wait. For 
now, we are on running on any reassuring basic that will provide heat: soup, 
beans with pasta, and, tonight, frittata.

You don’t need telling how to make the fat, open-faced egg dish Italians call 
frittata. As Pelegrino Artusi says in his introduction toScience in the Kitchen 
and the Art of Cooking Well 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/science-in-the-kitchen-and-the-art-of-eating-well.html>
, who doesn’t know how to make a frittata? But even the simplest things – or 
perhaps especially the simplest things – deserve to be well made. A frittata 
should be tender and well seasoned, the eggs should be beaten lightly, it 
should be cooked in good fat – olive oil or butter (or both) – and in the 
shortest time possible. On one side only.

Non girare la frittata – don’t flip the frittata – is a phrase I am familiar 
with. It is not just cooking advice: in Italy, to flip the frittata means to 
change your tune, and apparently I am an expert at doing so. Against the advice 
of some, I also flip my real frittatas. The reasoning behind not flipping, 
simply inverting on to a plate, is that the fritatta remains tender, like the 
heart of a good omelette I suppose. My mother-in-law is a firm believer in this 
theory, although she does appreciate my way of doing things, too. Like most 
people, she agrees a flip, then brief cooking on the second side, gives a 
lovely golden coat without compromising tenderness too much. Finishing in the 
oven is another option that avoids plate acrobatics, and it is neater, but the 
result is on the sturdy side.

I was stuck in my ways with frittata – pea and potato, gangly wild asparagus 
my eccentric neighbour finds for me, ricotta and mint – until I read a recipe 
for pumpkin frittata inKatie Parla’s fine book  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tasting-rome.html>about Roman food. For a 
moment I felt like my grandma when we told her our childhood discoveries: “Well 
I never.” I now know what you already knew: that pumpkin in fritatta is 
delicious. It is a dish traditional to Roman Sephardic Jews, one often made 
during Rosh Hashanah, when gourds or pumpkins are eaten to ward off evil and 
bring a trouble-free year.

You want to cook the pumpkins slowly, letting them collapse into a sweetly 
savoury mess, which is then encased by eggs. Sage – musty, assertive and virile 
– loves pumpkin, so it works well here. Whether you flip or not, let the 
frittata rest briefly, then serve in slices with green salad, some cheese and, 
for afters, mandarin oranges. Don’t forget to put a curl of peel on a radiator, 
or by the oven. It makes the kitchen smell lovely.

Potato and pumpkin frittata

Serves 4
1 white onion
1 large potato (about 400g)
500g pumpkin or butternut squash
Olive oil
1 tbsp sage, finely chopped 
Salt and black pepper
8 eggs
Butter

1 Peel and slice the onion, potato and pumpkin. In a medium-size frying pan 
with a lid, fry the onion in 4 tbsp of the olive oil.

2 After 2 minutes add the potato and pumpkin. Stir until each slice is 
glistening, then cover the pan, lower the heat and cook for 15 minutes, 
stirring occasionally. If it looks as if it’s sticking, add a little water. By 
the end of cooking time the vegetables should be really soft and collapsing.

3 Add the sage, salt and pepper and cook for a minute longer, uncovered.

4 Beat the eggs in a large bowl with salt and pepper. Either pour this over 
the vegetables or – if you are afraid of the egg sticking or you are using an 
iron pan – scrape the vegetables into the egg bowl, wipe the pan clean, smear 
with butter, then pour it all back in the pan, stirring until the eggs begin to 
cook.

5 Let the frittata cook over a low heat. As the edges start to set, use a 
spatula to ease them away from the pan sides. Once the frittata is golden 
underneath – mostly set but with a wobbly top, which takes about 10 minutes – 
you can either serve as is, or, if you want it crisper, either finish the 
frittata in the oven, or invert twice on to a plate and put it back briefly in 
the pan to cook the other side.

• Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award
 