
She bites into the pepper, then, satisfied by its sweetness, buys four kilos. 
Later inthe same short film <https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=YMRY2DFWBos>, she 
almost throws the most enormous knife at the chicken, then joints it with 
abandon, at one point nearly taking the fingers offGigi Ballista 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gigi_Ballista>, who is interviewing her like an 
impassioned bear with gravel in his throat. I am not sure how many times we 
have watchedSora Lella <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elena_Fabrizi>, playing a 
rumbustious Roman matriarch, cookingpollo alla Romana on YouTube 
<https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=YMRY2DFWBos>. It must be 10 times. On each 
occasion my five-year-old, half-Roman son snorts with laughter at this black 
and white film made in 1967. Is it that his habit of taking a bite from 
vegetables on the market stall is now vindicated, or is it the ever-exciting 
knife, or perhaps the familiarity with the broad Roman dialect he is 
delightedly absorbing at his school in Testaccio – which makes him shake his 
pinched fingers at my Italian dressed in an English accent?

“Pollo alla Romana, il piatto piu forte di Roma.” Chicken Roman style, the 
strongest dish in Rome, she says. Itis a strong dish, chicken with a stew of 
tomatoes, red peppers and olive oil which is as rumbustious as Sora Lella 
herself. It is a dish that tastes of Roman summer: sun-soaked, fullsome and a 
bit much if you are not in the mood. But if you are, it is gorgeous, the stewed 
tomatoes and peppers like a well-matched couple, balancing each other out, 
acidity tempered by sweetness and vice-versa, smothering the chicken.

In Rome, pollo alla Romana is often eaten on 15 August, Ferragosto, a holiday 
that dates back to 18BC when Emperor Augustus added a day offerie (holiday) to 
the other ancient festivals Vinalia (in honour of the grape harvest), and 
Consualia (in honour of harvest and stored grain). This allowed a longer August 
rest after the backbreaking agricultural labour of the previous weeks. In the 
past the whole city would shut down to celebrate. Nowadays the city, already 
quiet and parched in August, becomes even more subdued, as those who can head 
to the beach or the hills, while those who remain enjoy a good lunch.

I am going to avoid the word authentic here, because authenticity is a tricky 
notion, and to use it here anyway seems at odds with the joyful anarchy of home 
cooking, in which there are as many recipes as there are cooks. Sora Lella’s 
recipe though is an iconic way to make it. The chicken, once jointed, is 
browned then cooked with wine and tomatoes until tender. The peppers are cooked 
separately with more tomatoes and onion, then mixed with the chicken at the 
end. My friend Alice, who makes a mean version, cooks all the ingredients 
together, the peppers and tomato collapsing into a scarlet stock in which the 
chicken simmers. I like both these ways. My version lies somewhere inbetween, 
with a roasted pepper twist, which I think is my invention but isn’t. Isn’t the 
smell of roasting peppers drifting through the kitchen a sultry one? You want 
the flesh to char and blacken, then, after a steam, the thin skin should pull 
away easily but messily to reveal sweet, velvety flesh that wraps around your 
fingers. Just before the end I add the roasted peppers to the tomato and 
chicken. I let the dish sit and sit – until the next day if I can.

Chicken with peppers transforms after a rest, the flavours deepen and sink 
into the chicken flesh, which becomes rosy. In Rome, pollo all Romana is 
usually served for lunch, as most Romans can’t digest peppers after 4 o’clock – 
something they may well mention in conversation with you. Bread is essential to 
mop up the juices. I also like boiled potatoes, cooked until soft and blurred 
at the edges, so easily mashed into the red juices. To follow, green salad 
perhaps or green beans with olive oil and lemon, then sliced white peaches 
dropped in the end of your wine so they too are a bit drunk. Then a long nap.

Chicken with peppers

I think it is worth peeling the tomatoes, but it is up to you. Tinned plum 
tomatoes also work.

Serves 4
1.5 kg chicken, jointed into 8, or 8 thighs
60g pancetta or bacon
Extra virgin olive oil
1 garlic clove
A sprig of rosemary, finely chopped (optional)
Salt and black pepper
150ml dry white wine
800g ripe, fleshy tomatoes, peeled and chopped
4 large or 6 small red or yellow peppers

1 Joint the chicken, making sure the pieces are at room temperature and dry. 
Cut the pancetta into short batons. In a large deep frying pan or heavy 
casserole, warm 2 tbsp olive oil, then fry the pancetta until the fat has 
rendered. Working in batches, if necessary, add the chicken pieces skin-side 
down and cook until a light golden crust has formed – about 8 minutes – then 
turn and brown the other side.

2 Assess how much fat is in your pan, adding more olive oil or pouring fat 
away. Peel and gently crush the clove of garlic and add to the pan along with 
the chopped rosemary, if using. Season with salt and pepper.

3 Add the wine and let it bubble away for a minute or two, then add the 
tomatoes. Cover the pan for 10 minutes, lifting the lid to stir halfway 
through. Then half-cover and cook over a medium-low heat for 45-60 minutes or 
until the tomatoes have reduced to a rich sauce and the chicken is tender. If 
the sauce looks dry, add a little water.

4 Meanwhile, prepare the peppers by roasting them whole at 200C/400F/gas mark 
6 until they are charred and floppy. Tip them into a bowl and cover with 
clingfilm for 10 minutes, by which time the skin should pull away. Discard the 
skins and pips, then rip the pepper into thick strips.

5 In the last 10 minutes of cooking time, add the peppers to the pan so the 
flavours can mingle. Allow the dish to sit for at least an hour – overnight 
even. Eat room temperature or re-heat gently.

• Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290678/s/five-quarters/>
 (Saltyard, 2015) and winner of the 2015 André Simon food book award
 