
It is a good thing if, when you walk into Passi bakery, there is no pizza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/jul/13/top-10-pizza-places-rome> 
bianca sitting on the wooden board behind the domed glass counter. It means it 
is still in the oven. Let it be known you are waiting, then step aside (but not 
too far – there will be others). Be suspicious of the older lady wearing a 
purple jacket who is refusing to catch your eye. Nearly three feet long, golden 
and glistening like a model in an 80s Pirelli calendar, the hot pizza bianca 
makes an entrance, often lifted above someone’s head. The pizza is upended and 
cut in a way that reminds me of fabric in that, once the knife has started, its 
weight tears the pizza in two strips, crispy fragments pinging away like tiny 
bullets.

You don’t need any words – use your hands to show them how long a piece you 
want. Unless you want the crispy end, that is – in which case, practise the word
scrocchiarella. For eating straight away, your piece is wrapped in brown paper 
as you would roll up a beach towel. If you are taking it home, the baker will 
leave the bag open, so the steam can puff gently away, rather than making 
everything soggy. Either way, it is perfectly acceptable to take a bite 
straight away. Take the receipt, then pay at the cash desk near the door.

For eight years I lived three floors above Passi, which is one of Rome’s 
traditionalforni (bakeries), its windows opening into the same internal 
courtyard as my kitchen door. In the morning, my door open as the kitchen had 
no other window, while coffee erupted into the top of the angular pot, I would 
often catch the smell of pizza bianca. The combined scent of coffee and yeasted 
dough is a heady one. My partner Vincenzo, still half sleeping but possessed, 
would be down and back with hot pizza before I could really speak. It is a fine 
breakfast, coffee and a slice of hot white pizza, with a firm bottom, but then 
cushiony top – a proper mouth-arresting chew, leaving lips glistening and salty.

Rachel Roddy’s Roman rice croquettes | A kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/29/suppli-all-romana-roman-rice-croquettes-recipe-pork-chicken>
For breakfast, a merenda at 11, lunch, or on the way home from school or after 
a night out: pizza bianca – a large plain (“white” as opposed torosso red pizza 
servedal taglio – by the slice) – is the most accommodating Roman institution, 
sold by weight all over the city, enjoyed by almost everyone. For many, 
including my son, pizza bianca is a necessity: fingers of it were among the 
first things he put in his mouth; it is bought each day by one of the mums as 
we herd them from school to park; it is present at every party and festival. 
Soon he will be one of the restless hum of teenagers who gather at 11 at 
another forno near our new house, in their hands pizza filled with prosciutto 
that hangs from the edges. In summer, when figs are ripe and sticky, they too 
are stuffed with prosciutto into pizza bianca for one of the most sublime 
combinations.

Like fancy tarts, or fish and chips when you live next to a decent chippy, I 
had never thought to make pizza bianca at home. It was something best left to 
the floury-handed pros who paddle it in and out of the ovens so deftly. But 
then I did make it, following a recipe by the masterfulGabriele Bonci 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pizza.html>. I will admit any recipe that 
needs 24 hours makes my heart sink, briefly. I have been converted, though, by 
the atavistic alchemy of flour, yeast and water, the puffing rise of the dough 
... and my chest – I made that! You mix the ingredients until you have a really 
sticky mixture. Then with floured hands and a dough scraper (good investment) 
you do thepiegature di rinforzo – reinforcing folds – which develops the gluten 
and incorporates air. Then the dough rests – not a nap but a serious sleep – in 
the cool of the fridge, which inhibits a fast inflate, allowing the dough to 
work and stretch.

The key to making pizza bianca for a crowd – a Christmas gathering maybe – is 
to enlist an enthusiastic co-pilot in stretching, lifting, brushing. Make the 
dough the day before, get the oven hot and set up your work station with olive 
oil, paint brush and salt. You can serve PB in squares or split them and fill 
with prosciutto or thin slices of parmesan and watercress/rocket. There is a 
reason Romans wait in line! Wise guests will cotton on quick, fill up their 
glass and wait by the oven. Just watch the one in the purple jacket.

Pizza bianca


You will need a pizza tray, baking stone or flat baking tray. My friend Jenny 
Chandler suggests using lipped trays upside down and pre-heating it first. If 
you have a sourdough starter, use that – if you have any good advice please 
leave it in the comments below.

Makes 5 pizzas
1kg strong white flour, or Italian 0
20g salt, plus more for sprinkling
10g fast-action dried yeast, or 20g fresh yeast
700ml water
40ml extra virgin olive oil, plus more for brushing

To serve (optional)
Prosciutto, parmesan and rocket/watercress

1 If you are using fresh yeast, dissolve it in 100ml water (subtract this from 
the amount of water added later). Mix the flour, salt and dried yeast in a 
large bowl, then add the yeasty-water/water, and stir firmly until you have a 
soft, sticky putty-like mixture. Cover the bowl with a clean tea towel and 
leave in a draught-free spot for an hour.


2 Dust your work surface with flour, then scrape out the dough. With lightly 
floured hands or a dough scraper, pull the sides of the dough up and out, then 
fold them back over. Do this several times. Wait 10 minutes and repeat. Scrape 
the dough back into a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover with clingfilm and leave 
in the fridge for 12-24 hours.

3 Dust the work surface again. Cut the dough into five equal pieces. Now, as 
before, fold each piece several times. Leave to rest for 30 minutes.

4 Preheat the oven to 260C/500F/gas as high as it will go. Heat a baking 
tray/stone in the lower half of the oven. Working on a floured surface, gently 
stretch the dough using your floured fingertips to pummel and spread it out 
into rough circles or squares. Paint with olive oil and then lift/flop it on to 
the baking tray. Bake for 12–15 minutes or until the surface is pale golden and 
puffed with bubbles, the underneath slightly darker and firm. Pull from the 
oven, brush with more olive oil, sprinkle with salt, cut and eat. You can split 
the dough at this point and fill it with prosciutto, parmesan and rocket as you 
would a sandwich.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award
 