
As the bus swerved round a long bend into Testaccio, I remember thinking how 
stern and linear it all looked. It was my first visit and it was 12 years ago. 
Itis stern – compared with, say, the echoing cobbled streets and ruins and 
glories of the historic centre. Testaccio was built in the late 19th century on 
a grid system: the undistinguished buildings – many of them still council-owned 
– are functional. I got off the bus on Via Galvani and walked and walked, past 
tenement blocks and courtyards, groups of chatteringsignore, a school, a 
market, a peculiar hill, and as I did the place softened. It was the colours. 
Testaccio, I discovered, was like the rest of Rome, in that its buildings with 
their shades of orange, ochre, dusty yellow and tawny brown give off a deep 
warm glow, even when it is pouring down. Add to that the Roman light – soft and 
fluid. The buildings, like us, soak it up.

Twelve years on (I never left) I am still soaking it up in matter-of-fact awe 
– especially in autumn, a season that suits the city: its grand sights, but 
also everyday ones, like the numerous street markets that still – just– 
punctuate the city. Nature’s timing is good: when the sun stops blazing quite 
so hard, fruit and vegetables do it instead. These days, Testaccio market is 
splashed with orange. There are new-season oranges and mandarins, persimmons: 
some hard, the flesh astringent and puckery – Italians say it ties up your 
mouth – others as soft and heavy as a small balloon filled with water. Then, 
right in the middle of many stalls, is a great pumpkin; a slice removed looking 
rather like a great orange smile.

I have written about pumpkins before, for one of my first columns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/pumpkin-risotto-recipe-rome>
. You find various varieties in Rome but the most common – the one in the 
middle of the stall – is a squat variety with smooth orangy-green skin known 
simply aszucca. These zucca are fluted, providing neat portions to be cut away 
and taken home in clear plastic bag. The flesh looks impressive – bright, 
high-vis orange – but it can seem a bit flabby compared with the creamy 
mantovanas and sweet, dense butternuts. As with Halloween pumpkins, the flesh 
can easily seem lacklustre – which means, like Bonnie Tyler, these pumpkins are 
holding out for a hero; some coaxing to bring out the best in them.

No trick, just treats: Yotam Ottolenghi’s pumpkin and squash recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/31/pumpkin-squash-recipes-stuffed-soup-roast-yotam-ottolenghi>
Hot oil is one such hero and the answer given to me by Flavio, the owner of a 
local trattoria. Fry the flesh, he suggests, until tender and ever-so- slightly 
golden, then marinate it in a mixture of vinegar, sugar and a little mint. 
After a few hours the elements come together into a melodious but formidable 
whole, with sweetness from the fried pumpkin (helped by the sugar), sharpness 
from the vinegar, heat from the chilli and garlic and the contradictory 
musty-freshness of the mint. This dish is knownzucca alla scapece in Rome, 
which – like the Spanishescabeche – is a dish cooked or marinated in vinegar; a 
habit brought to Europe by the Arabs. This dish is a powerful reminder that the 
origins of what we eat, therefore who we are, are wide-reaching. A vital 
reminder too, in these contentious times.

Another answer is to bake it – a Sicilian variation on the same theme. Baking 
can make lacklustre pumpkins good and dense butternut ones divine, although 
teetering on the edge of slightly too sweet for my taste. That’s where the hero 
onion comes in – a streetwise Hercules, sweet but also sour and sharp with 
vinegar – the ideal match for the pleasing orange flesh with its fashionable 
caramelised fringe. Like zucca alla scapace,zucca in agrodolce needs a rest: a 
few hours – overnight even – giving it time to soak up the favours. It makes a 
good antipasti with cheese, olives or salami. Both dishes are good with fish or 
meat – particularly lamb. I also like a blazing pile in the middle of some 
emerald- green leaves.

Zucca alla scapece – Roman-style marinated pumpkin

Serves 4
400g pumpkin or butternut squash flesh
200ml olive oil, for frying, plus extra
100ml red wine vinegar
50ml water
1 garlic clove, peeled and sliced
2 tbsp sugar
1 small dried red chilli, crumbled or chopped
A handful of mint leaves
Salt

 1 Cut the pumpkin into 5mm thick slices, then each slice into 3 cm sections. 
Heat the oil in a small pan and, once it is hot, fry the pumpkin in batches 
until it is soft and golden. Lift from the oil and blot on kitchen towel.

2 In another small pan, heat the vinegar, water, garlic, sugar and chilli. 
Bring to the boil for 4 minutes and then remove from the heat.

3 Arrange the pumpkin in a bowl or dish, rip over some fresh mint, pour over 2 
tbsp olive oil then pour the dressing on top and leave it to sit – turning 
every now and then – for a few hours.

Zucca in agrodolce – Sicilian-style sweet-and-sour pumpkin

Serves 4 
400g pumpkin or butternut squash flesh
Olive oil
Salt
A large red onion
80ml red wine vinegar
20ml water
2-3 tbsp sugar

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Rub a baking tray with olive oil. 
Slice the pumpkin and lay on the tray. Sprinkle with salt, drizzle over a 
little more oil and bake for 20 minutes or until soft and golden at the edges.

2 Meanwhile, peel and slice the onion. Fry the onion in 6 tbsp olive oil in a 
small frying pan until soft.

3 Add the vinegar, water and sugar and cook – stirring and tasting often – 
until the mixture is slightly syrupy, but not too thick, with the right balance 
of sugar and vinegar.

4 Once the pumpkin is ready, put it in a serving dish, then pour over the 
onion and any sticky juices. Leave to sit – turning every now and then – for a 
few hours.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award
 