
Let the meatballs rest. That’s the advice that seems to be agreed upon. Beyond 
that, freedom reigns: the type of meat, the inclusion of bread, eggs, herbs and 
seasonings. Everybody knows how to make meatballs their way, and our 
experience, preferences and secrets are kneaded into the mixture, then rolled 
between our palms. Matters of size; whether you flatten them into UFOs or 
lengthen them into submarines; to fry or not to fry? And do you serve them with 
sauce, or not? Some people feel strongly about meatballs, while others – like 
my Italian family – just shrug and tell you thatnonna’s were second to none, 
which is surely just another way of saying there is no taste like home. My own 
recipe is partly inherited, partly practice.

I wasn’t meant to write about meatballs today. I was going to write about 
semolina gnocchi. Which is why on Wednesday we went toil Piccolo Alpino 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/uv?hl=en&pb=!1s0x132f603005e036e5:0x9a6785f4bd9b4171!2m10!2m2!1i80!2i80!3m1!2i20!16m4!1b1!2m2!1m1!1e1!3m1!7e115!4s/maps/place/il%2BPiccolo%2BAlpino,%2Btestaccio/@41.8801582,12.4729708,3a,75y,18.01h,90t/data%3D*213m4*211e1*213m2*211sRvbyfXQ3wtZpfm58shn5zw*212e0*214m2*213m1*211s0x0:0x9a6785f4bd9b4171!5sil+Piccolo+Alpino,+testaccio+-+Google+Search&imagekey=!1e2!2sRvbyfXQ3wtZpfm58shn5zw&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj11MnHj-LPAhVySZoKHVHSBKYQpx8IeDAK>
, a small, traditional trattoria on the far side of Testaccio. It is an old 
haunt of my partner Vincenzo, and a favourite of several friends. The thing is, 
every time I have tried to visit, I’ve found it closed. On Wednesday the 
shutters were up, door open, and inside the TV was beaming out a lunchtime 
cookery programme. The handful of tables were unlaid though, and no one around. 
“Buon giorno?” Nothing. Then a rattle from the kitchen. “Buon giornoooo” – at 
which a man in checked chef’s pants came out. Yes, they were open, but there 
was no point looking at the menu, because it was the first day back after two 
days closed and he had only just got cooking. No gnocchi, but he had just 
grilled aubergines and madepolpette (meatballs) and of course he could make us 
a plate of pasta. We sat down.

The grilled aubergine came with slices of mozzarella – good stuff, milky and 
sweet; and basil leaves – a remarkable combination. Then, as Vincenzo ate his 
generous plate of pasta, I had three big, fat meatballs in a pool of tomato 
sauce. Like the trattoria itself they were ordinary and absolutely good, plump 
and so tender that only the edge of the fork was required, the sauce rich and 
right for scooping. Yes! As we ate the man moved in and out of the kitchen, his 
wife arrived with bread, and the TV added to the domestic glow. It reminded me 
of arriving at a friend’s house before the friend, and the mum saying make 
yourself at home, so you do and feel extremely comfortable, but also ever so 
slightly intrusive. I complimented the chef on the meatballs and next thing 
he’d brought a great sloshing tub from the kitchen to the table, balls bobbing 
in a sea of sauce. Yes, he confirmed, he is known for his meatballs. His wife 
rolled her eyes, and told him to put them away, but not before both of them 
gave us advice, which I would then squeeze into my meatballs.

There was confirmation from Roberta, my butcher, the following morning: if I 
wanted really soft, plump meatballs I should poach them. Now you have probably 
known this for years, but to me it was a little revelation. No more browning 
and sealing, which of course gives you a crusty coat, but direct heat, like 
bitter cold, can make things seize – at least for me. Poaching gently, however 
– a steady bob over a low flame – keeps things tender and plump, which is 
exactly what I want in a meatball, for now at least.

So, here is another meatball recipe, old and new advice squashed together on 
to larger balls, which are poached. The ingredients are pretty standard: beef – 
twice minced if you can, bread soaked in milk, eggs, a little finely chopped 
garlic and parsley, and lots of salt and pepper. You want a rich, soft sauce 
that has the right balance of acidity and sweetness – a mix of fresh and tinned 
tomatoes works well. No rules though; the recipe is merely a guide – tweak as 
you see fit, then let the sauce bubble and spit at the back of your stove until 
it is rich and thick.

The meatballs should bob for 15 minutes or so, turning the sauce a deep rusty 
red. Once done, you turn the heat off and leave them in the sauce: they are 
better after a rest. In plate-separatist Rome, polpette are served alone, with 
bread and vegetables on the side. Last night we had them with buttery mashed 
potato, which was comforting. Today, I will have the last one, squashed in some 
pizza bianca; after all, freedom reigns.

Polpette al sugo (meatballs in tomato sauce)

Serves 3-4
2 slices of day-old bread (about 50g), crusts removed
A little milk
500g minced beef
2 eggs, lightly beaten
A small garlic clove
A sprig of parsley
Salt and black pepper

For the sauce
750g ripe, fresh tomatoes
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
1–2 garlic cloves, peeled or crushed
A pinch of red chilli flakes (optional)
A tin of peeled plum tomatoes, chopped roughly in the tin 
1 tbsp tomato puree (optional)
Salt

Rachel Roddy’s recipe for stuffed peppers | A kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/11/piedmontese-stuffed-red-peppers-recipe-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>
1 Rip the bread and soak in a little milk until soft, and easily crumbled. 
Squeeze out excess milk. Put the crumbs in a large bowl along with the beef and 
lightly beaten eggs.

2 Peel and chop the garlic very finely along with the parsley, salt and 
pepper. Add to the meat, then use your hands to mix everything together.

3 Divide the mixture into 12 meatballs: if the mixture is very sticky, flour 
your hands lightly. Let the meatballs rest.

4 Meanwhile, make the sauce. Peel the fresh tomatoes by plunging them first in 
boiling water, then in cold, at which point the skins should slip off. Then 
chop them roughly.

5 Peel the garlic and crush for a milder flavour or finely chop for stronger. 
Put 4 tbsp of the olive oil in a large, deep frying pan or cassarole and cook 
the garlic gently over a low heat until it is fragrant. At this point you can 
remove the whole garlic if you wish.

6 Add the chopped tomatoes and chilli. Cook for 5 minutes, then add the final 
2 tbsp oil and the tinned tomatoes. Add 1 tbsp tomato puree if you feel it 
needs it. Cook for 20–40 minutes, or until the sauce is rich and thick.

7 Drop the meatballs in the sauce, making sure they are submerged. Turn the 
heat to low, cover the pan and poach for 15 minutes, by which time the 
meatballs should be cooked through but still tender.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award  