
Today’s recipe is a door-stopper. Not in the sense of keeping the door open – 
although it is probably heavy enough. A door-stopper in that it may make people 
stop, for a moment, at your door. A least, that’s what happened to mine 
yesterday.

Our whole building – seven floors, each with three flats – had new meters 
attached to the radiators before they clonk back into action next month. An 
efficient team of fitters took over the building and the lift, moving in and 
out of the flats so often that most of us got the message and left our front 
doors open. For a morning, the building reminded me of Sicily this summer, 
doors open allowing glimpses of life inside: a stove, a pair of legs, a bike, a 
sense of neatness, or a sense of chaos (in our case the latter).


Then, by midday, there were cooking smells, toast, bacon in a hot pan, 
something with Indian spices, and also my baked vegetable dish, which fills the 
kitchen with a blast that sums up this time of year – the last gasps of summer, 
the first slow autumn cooking. All the fitters stopped at the door and nodded, 
one wafting his hand to his nose as if to say: “Not bad.”

This dish is from Greek Food by Rena Salaman 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/recipes-from-my-greek-kitchen.html>, a book 
of my mum’s I have had my eye on for years. I didn’t intend it to find its way 
into my suitcase, but it did, and now it alternates between my bedside and the 
kitchen. The subtitle is “an affectionate celebration of traditional recipes”, 
which is exactly what it is; it’s also rich and evocative in a way few books 
are. Having just spent a long summer in Sicily, where no family recipes were 
written down, and – as my father-in-law puts it – the people who really knew 
have all died or gone quietly mad, this book provides missing pieces in a vast 
jigsaw.


The similarities and connections between Greek and Sicilian food are many. 
There are differences too, but the similarities are much more interesting: 
ideas about hospitality and celebration; the triptych of olive oil, grapes and 
wheat; the unbridled use of lemons, sesame seeds and oregano; and an attachment 
to simple, seasonal, understated everyday food. This dish is typical. It is 
Greek, but also exactly like a Sicilian dish that Vincenzo ate as a boy. I 
think it would make itself at home anywhere, especially now, when we are all 
enjoying the summer’s last sun-filled vegetables.

This was a dish that was traditionally prepared at home and then taken to the 
local bakers to cook in the residual heat of the cooling bread ovens, a habit 
that ceased as people got ovens at home. When we were in Sicily, Vincenzo’s 
uncle Liborio poked fun mercilessly at my idealism about the days of communal 
baking. He had plenty of stories of how nasty life could be: of burns, of 
mistaken dish identity, the walloping slap on the back of the head he got from 
his mum if he was late back.

Three sun-drenched recipes inspired by Crete | Cook residency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/04/fishermans-soup-recipe-tomato-and-oregano-fritters-crete-marianna-leivaditaki-cook-residency>
But the spirit of the dishes cooked in bread ovens persists when we make them 
at home; when we put disparate ingredients, seasoning and enough liquid 
together in one dish, then let time and heat work their alchemy. The end is 
when everything has come together into a mellow whole: soft (but not too wet) 
underneath, sticky at the edges and golden on top.


Plenty of oil and the same of amount of water is vital to the transformation. 
You could argue that pulling it out and stirring it defeats the object – once 
in, leave it be. I do poke and stir, several times – an attempt to tempt 
radiator fitters maybe – but then leave it alone for the last 20 minutes, when 
I crank up the stove so the edges get crisp and sticky.

In Greece, this is served with young white cheese (I am hoping someone might 
tell me which one). We ate it with salted ricotta, the soft and chalky cheese 
softening in the warm layers of oily vegetables. It is incredibly 
straightforward to put together. This is the most basic version – you could add 
aubergine, peppers or beans. Don’t skimp on the oil, or time. Yesterday, as I 
pulled it out of the oven, it did cross my mind – for a nanosecond – to invite 
the workmen in for some, but they had all gone to the bakery on the corner.

Baked courgettes, potatoes and tomatoes

Serves 4
600g courgettes, sliced into 3mm discs
600g potatoes, peeled and cut into similar-sized slices or wedges
500g ripe tomatoes, sliced
A large red onion, peeled and sliced
2 garlic cloves, chopped (optional)
Salt and black pepper
Oregano (optional)
100-150ml olive oil
150ml water

1 Preheat your oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Wash and top and tail the 
courgettes. Cut into 3mm thick discs. Peel the potatoes and cut into similarly 
sized slices or wedges. Slice the tomatoes, peel and slice the onion, and chop 
the garlic, if you are using it.

2 Put all the vegetables in a large baking tin, season with salt, pepper and 
oregano if you are using it. Drizzle with the olive oil and then toss 
everything together thoroughly with your hands. Pour the water into one corner. 
Bake for 1–1½ hours, mixing every 20 minutes or so, and making sure some 
potatoes come to the top for the final 20 minutes, so they are crisp – you can 
raise the heat for the last 20 minutes. Serve at room temperature with sheep’s 
cheese (feta or ricotta salata).

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard, 2015) and 
winner of the 2015 André Simon food book award  