
A major nuclear power accident in the Soviet Union yesterday sent a cloud of 
radioactivity drifting across much of Scandinavia.
The alarm was first raised at a Swedish nuclear plant at Forsmark, on the 
Baltic coast, where staff at first thought their own reactor was leaking. But 
as further reports of unusually high radioactivity began to come in from 
Stockholm, Helsinki and elsewhere the Soviet authorities admitted than an 
accident had occurred at one of their plants in theUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. A nuclear power reactor had been 
damaged and there were casualties.

Although the Tass news agency report was slightly ambiguous, the Chernobyl 
plant which has suffered the accident is believed to be one of a complex of 
four light water reactors built by a lake just north of Kiev - about 800 miles 
from the Scandinavian coastlines where the radioactive plume was being 
monitored.

Helsinki reported six times the normal background level, Stockholm twice the 
usual level and Oslo 50 per cent higher than normal. Swedish scientists 
compared the abnormal readings with those recorded during the 1970s, when China 
was testing nuclear bombs in the atmosphere. But analysis of the isotopic 
content of the Scandinavian dust samples confirmed the Tass statement that a 
nuclear power reactor was the source, probably as a result of cooling failure 
and severe overheating.

For the Russians to admit to an accident of any kind sets a precedent, which 
may be a reflection of Mr Gorbachev's policy of greater openness. But Tass 
sought immediately to put the incident in perspective by listing several 
foreign nuclear disasters, including the near meltdown of the American Three 
Mile Island reactor in 1979. The Chernobyl accident, the Soviet news agency 
said, was the first to have occurred in the Soviet Union, ignoring reports 
reaching the West of a serious accident in the Urals in 1958 which is believed 
to have killed many people and contaminated a vast area when a nuclear waste 
dump exploded.

Yesterday's announcement said simply: 'An accident has occurred at the 
Chernobyl nuclear power plant as one of the reactors was damaged. Measures are 
being taken to eliminate the consequences of the accident. Aid is being given 
to those affected. A government commission has been set up. '

In Sweden, 700 workers at the Forsmark plant north of Stockholm were evacuated 
and radio warnings were broadcast for other people to stay away, before it 
became clear that the radioactive plume was drifting in across the Baltic with 
the south-easterly winds.

At first, suspicion was directed towards the Soviet Baltic republic of 
Lithuania, where the Ignalina power station is reckoned to be the world's 
largest nuclear plant. Finally, the Soviet announcement put the source in the 
Ukraine, whose distance from the Baltic suggests that the Russians have a major 
disaster on their hands.

Three Mile Island was a disaster as far as the American nuclear industry was 
concerned, but it did not release large amounts of radioactivity as this 
accident has evidently done.

Accidents like this are extremely difficult to disguise or hide because even 
the smallest sample of wind-blown dust, when put through a gamma ray 
spectrometer, will indicate that the level of radioactivity is unusually high, 
and that the source is either a nuclear explosion, a leaking reactor, or an 
accident involving a reprocessing plant for spent power station fuel.

The Chinese nuclear tests conducted in the atmosphere during the 1970s, for 
example, were readily identified within a couple of weeks by laboratories 
attached to British nuclear power stations as well as Swedish ones. All that 
was needed was a scrap of sticky muslin stretched on the roof and a 
spectrometer - admittedly a highly sophisticated piece of scientific equipment 
- to analyse the gamma rays given off by the minute particles of dust it 
collected.

If the Soviet plume begins to drift towards Britain - and there have been 
easterly winds - the National Radiological Protection Board will quickly pick 
up the signs from its fallout monitoring stations in Glasgow, London, Belfast, 
Bridgend, Shrivenham, Glos, and Chilton in Oxfordshire.

Sweden's Environment Minister, Birgitta Dahl, said yesterday that while the 
contamination reaching her country was not considered harmful to health, her 
government was concerned that it had not been given any warning by the Soviet 
authorities, and had still not been given any real information about the 
source, or whether the leakage must be expected to continue. Despite her 
reassurance, however, it was clear last night that many Scandinavians intend to 
stay indoors until they are certain it is safe to go outside.

Britain has no need to fear the radiation, the Protection Board said. The 
fall-out reaching Scandinavia was only twice the natural background level of 
radiation. This was so low that it should not cause any harm if it was ever 
carried to Britain. There was no need for any special precautions to be taken 
in this country.

By ANTHONY TUCKER 

The two nuclear reactors at Chernobyl , near Kiev, are each of 1,000 megawatts 
electrical - comparable with the largest stations in Britain - but are of a 
water-cooled and graphite moderated design that is used only inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

The graphite cores have no secondary containment. Both reactors have been in 
use for several years and each would contain about 10,000 million curies of 
radioactivity in fission products and about 3,000 million curies of what are 
called heavy actinides - which is the uranium fuel and its derivitives such as 
plutonium.

Accident planning always assumes that, at worst, about 10 per cent of any 
radioactive core will be vaporised and that the volatile elements - such as 
iodine and the rare gasses - will dominate releases of radioactivity when 
accidents are small.

But reports already suggest that caesium is a measurable component of the 
radioactive cloud coming from Russia. This suggests that a substantial 
proportion of a reactor core may have vaporised with massive releases of 
radioactivity.

Close to the plant the radiation dose levels may be lethally high, but the 
amount of radioactivity so far detected in the west presents no immediate 
hazard especially as the isotopes are apparently of a kind which do not 
accumulate in bone or other tissues.

The caesium isotopes which have half-lives of 2 1/2 and 30 years respectively 
behave like salts in the body and therefore are excreted fairly rapidly. 
However, when they fall out on land they may remain for years raising the local 
background radiation levels. If fallout is heavy as it will be in Russia, areas 
may remain too hazardous to enter for many years.
 