
Rafael Benítez <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rafael-benitez> failed to 
deliver Champions League football to Napoli as his final act before leaving the 
Serie A club for pastures new ended in a 4-2 defeat at home to Lazio.

Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> were three points clear in 
third place heading into Sunday night’s end-of-the-season encounter in Naples, 
but the hosts’ superior head-to-head record meant a win would see the teams 
swap places.

While Marco Parolo and Antonio Candreva asserted Lazio’s authority with 
first-half goals, Benítez was eager to sign off in stylebefore completing his 
reported move to Spanish giants Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/31/real-madrid-vice-president-rafa-benitez>
.

During half-time he motivated his players to hit back, and Gonzalo Higuíin’s 
quickfire brace rocked theBiancocelesti before the Argentinian missed a penalty 
to cool Napoli’s comeback.

Substitutes Ogenyi Onazi and Miroslav Klose then rubber-stamped Lazio’s 4-2 
victory and with it a third-placed finish.

Elsewhere, Andrea Belotti’s last-gasp goal spoiled Roma’s end-of-season party 
but the 2-1 defeat could not take away the joy of finishing second.

Palermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> have enjoyed a 
promising return to the top flight and proved to be unfazed by the bright 
lights of the Stadio Olimpico by taking the lead through a first-half Franco 
Vázquez penalty.

An under-par Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> looked to have 
salvaged a point as Francesco Totti closed to within a single goal of the 300 
mark with a classy strike at the death, but Belotti had the last word.

Mauro Icardi grabbed a share of the coveted Capocannoniere award by scoring 
twice to boost Inter to a 4-3 final-day victory over Empoli.

The young Argentinian managed to match 38-year-old Hellas Verona striker Luca 
Toni on 22 goals for the now-completedSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> campaign when dragging 
Inter past plucky Empoli at San Siro.

Rodrigo Palacio and Marcelo Brozovic were also on target, with Levan 
Mchedlidze bagging a brace for 15th-placed Empoli, whose odd goal was supplied 
by Leonardo Pucciarelli.

But with Sampdoria taking a point from Parma to secure seventh place, Inter’s 
win was not enough to steer them into the Europa League and a summer of 
rebuilding awaits boss Roberto Mancini.

Plucky Parma salvaged a 2-2 draw from their last game in the top flight - an 
exciting 2-2 draw against Samp at the Stadio Luigi Ferraris.

The bankrupt club have been doomed for months but relegation has removed the 
shackles and the hosts could not open the scoring through Alessandro Romagnoli 
until after the break.

Raffaele Palladino grabbed Parma’s penultimate goal in the top division and, 
after Lorenzo De Silvestri re-established Samp’s lead, Silvestre Varela 
plundered a confidence-boosting late leveller.

Fiorentina finished the league campaign on a five-game winning streak by 
beating 10-man Chievo 3-0.

The triumph capped an impressive season for the Tuscan outfit, who leapfrogged 
Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> into a fourth place.

Josip Ilicic put the Viola on their way with their opening goal in the 12th 
minute.

The visitors lost midfielder Isaac Cofie to a second yellow card after the 
hour mark and Fiorentina took advantage of their numerical superiority with 
substitute Federico Bernardeschi adding a second goal in the 76th minute before 
Milan Badelj made it 3-0 deep into stoppage time.

Simone Zaza struck twice as Sassuolo ened with a 3-1 win over 10-man Genoa.

Domenico Berardi opened the hosts’ account in the third minute, and Zaza 
extended their lead soon after before adding his second in the 32nd minute. 
Genoa’s Leonardo Pavoletti reduced the arrears four minutes before half-time.

In the 67th minute, Zaza could have completed his hat-trick but saw his 
penalty saved by Genoa goalkeeper Eugenio Lamanna, but the visitors’ hopes of a 
comeback ended five minutes later when defender Armando Izzo was shown a red 
card for a last-man foul on Nicola Sansone.

Sassuolo finished 12th in the standings, while Genoa ended an impressive 
campaign in sixth place but their participation in the Europa League remained 
up in the air as they have not been granted a Uefa licence. TheGrifone have 
appealed against the decision and will hear if they have been successful on 3 
June.

Torino put in a five-star display against Cesena on Sunday evening to finish 
the season in ninth place and pile on the agony for their already-relegated 
opponents.

Goals from Josef Martúnez, Maxi López and Marco Benassi saw the hosts race 
into a 3-0 lead after just 31 minutes.

But things got worse still for Cesena as Emiliano Moretti added a fourth four 
minutes into the second half and López capped a wonderful evening for the 
Granata in the 70th minute.

The 5-0 defeat was Cesena’s 22nd loss of their cameo year in Serie A and they 
finished second bottom.

Cagliari drew a line under 11 years in the top flight beating Udinese 4-3 in 
their last game before also submitting to relegation.

The Sardinians’ return to the second tier was confirmed weeks ago despite a 
mini revival under new head coach Gianluca Festa, who on Sunday oversaw his 
fourth win since replacing Zdenek Zeman.

Marco Sau and João Pedro gave fans reason to be optimistic about the future 
with confidently taken first-half goals and, after Rodrigo Aguirre’s first goal 
for Udinese dragged the northerners back into contention, Paul-Jose M’Poku 
restored the two-goal advantage.

A frantic finale was on the cards when Bruno Fernandes clawed the scoreline 
back to 3-2, and the Portuguese midfielder then steered the hosts back towards 
swansong victory with a late own goal.

Had he not put through his own net then Cyril Thereau’s 87th-minute goal would 
have denied Cagliari a winning send-off.
 