
Mark Warburton suffered his first defeat as Rangers manager as St Johnstone 
dismissed the Championship leaders from theScottish League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> with a 3-1 win at 
Ibrox.

The third-round encounter was deemed to be the biggest test of the season for 
the Englishman whose team had won 11 consecutive games in all competitions 
since he took over in the summer.

Goals from the midfielders Murray Davidson and Simon Lappin gave the 
Premiership side a comfortable interval lead which would have been increased 
had Steven MacLean not missed a sitter.

Michael O’Halloran added a third seconds after the restart and, though the 
right-back James Tavernier pulled a goal back in the 61st minute to giveRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> some hope, it turned out to be 
no more than a consolation amid what many will see as a reality check, 
especially defensively.

Saints had been beaten 1-0 in the quarter-finals of the same competition in 
Govan last season and had yet to win away from home this term and Rangers 
seemed to sense a hesitancy at the start.

However, the Perth men almost stole ahead in the fourth minute with their 
first foray up the pitch. The right-back Joe Shaughnessy’s throw-in from the 
right ended up at the feet of Lappin 20 yards from goal and his thunderous 
drive was tipped past the post by Rangers’ keeper, Wes Foderingham.

Rangers survived the corner but the visitors took the lead in the 18th minute 
when the lively O’Halloran’s cross from the right was cleverly flicked on by 
MacLean to Davidson, who knocked the ball in from three yards for his first 
goal of the season.

Rangers should have been further behind three minutes later when O’Halloran 
drove into the box and set up MacLean for an easy tap-in, only for the former 
Rangers striker to balloon the ball over the bar from inside the six-yard box.

The midfielder Gedion Zelalem and striker Kenny Miller had decent attempts for 
Rangers but defensive fragility proved costly again just before the half-hour.

David Wotherspoon’s corner from the left found the unmarked Lappin at the edge 
of the box and he smashed a wonderfully executed left-foot drive past 
Foderingham.

The supporters had barely taken their seats for the start of the second half 
when O’Halloran raced through the centre of the defence, past Danny Wilson and 
Rob Kiernan, to poke a MacLean ball past Foderingham.

The tie looked in danger of causing Rangers some embarrassment but they fought 
their way back into the match. Nathan Oduwa clipped the bar with a shot in the 
55th minute before Tavernier weaved his way into the box to fire the ball high 
past Alan Mannus to send a surge of energy through Rangers’ players and fans.

Their striker Martyn Waghorn headed a Zelalem header just past the post 
moments later butSt Johnstone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone>
, despite some huffing and puffing in the latter stages, saw the game out to go 
deservedly into next Monday’s quarter-final draw.
 