
The Rangers manager, Mark Warburton, insists there will be no negativity 
around Alloa’s artificial surface when he takes hisRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> side to Recreation Park on 
Sunday.

There have been regular complaints from the Ibrox club about playing on 
plastic pitches since they re-emerged at the bottom tier of Scottish football 
in 2012 following financial meltdown.

In the last meeting between the sides at the Wasps’ ground in January, which 
Rangers won 1-0, interim manager Kenny McDowall said: “It’s not the easiest 
pitch to play on … it’s really difficult actually.”

Warburton took his squad for a training session at Alloa’s stadium earlier in 
the week and while he is no fan of synthetic surfaces, he is determined it will 
not become an issue. “There will be absolutely no complaints from my squad, 
before, during or after the game,” said the former Brentford manager.

“We are looking forward to it. It’s a challenge, it’s part of the league. It’s 
what we have to do and we are relishing Sunday’s game and there will be no 
negativity from us.

“It is always good to get a view of the surroundings. Not just the pitch but 
the dressing rooms, the stadium, to get used to it. But I’m not a fan. I like 
consistency of product.

“But that is a far bigger conversation than five minutes. I understand these 
pitches for a financial situation but for me the consistency of product, 
especially the higher the leagues you go up, is really important.

“The players have trained very well, they are in good shape, they have had a 
strong start to the season and we look to continue that.”

The Rangers new arrivals Dominic Ball and Nathan Oduwa could come in to 
contention. Ball, 20, a defender who can also play in midfield, and the 
19-year-old Oduwa, a left-sided forward, both joined from Tottenham on 
season-long loans on Thursday.

Warburton is set to bring in another player nextweek. He said: “The loan 
market is of vital significance but it has to be right for both parties. A lot 
of work has gone into it and I am delighted that we have got them.

“The Spurs academy has been very productive and it is good for us to get 
linked to such clubs.”
 