
The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> defender Bilel 
Mohsni received a post-match red card after clashing with the Airdrie manager, 
Gary Bollan, following his team's 1-0 victory at the Excelsior Stadium.

Mohsni had been booked for an off-the-ball incident with the Airdrie striker 
Jim Lister in the second half and he was pulled away by a team-mate after the 
final whistle as the teams left the park.

Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist>, whose team 
won the Scottish League One game thanks to Lewis MacLeod's 20-yard strike in 
the 18th minute, said: "Bilel received a second yellow coming off the park. I 
wasn't there, I was up the tunnel, but the referee told me he received a second 
yellow for acting in an aggressive nature."

Mohsni was angered on several occasions after challenges by players from 
Airdrie, who had five men booked, while the Rangers midfielder Ian Black was 
also cautioned for reacting angrily to a tackle.

McCoist felt there was a hostile atmosphere in Lanarkshire and during their 
4-0 win at Dunfermline on Monday. "Whether I think it's over the top or not, I 
think it's just something we are going to have to handle," he said. "There was 
an attitude around East End Park and around the stadium tonight which I don't 
think is necessarily a good attitude for women and children to be involved in 
at a football game.

"Let's just leave it at that. But if we're going to have to handle it that 
way, we are going to have handle it that way."

McCoist added: "I'm a big enough boy and have been around Scottish football 
long enough that the fans and opposition aren't going to open the door and let 
them trample all over you. That's just the way it is."

Bollan had little to say about the post-match incident with Mohsni: "I was 
just trying to get my players off the pitch when he gave me a mouthful. I have 
no idea [what it was about]." He also defended his team's approach: "We needed 
to let Rangers know they were in a game. My players did that. I told them they 
would have to be in their faces and let them know they were in a game. They did 
that, they battled away great and I'm extremely proud of them."
 