
Alex McLeish refused to read too much into his side's prospects after 
yesterday's routine win overLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston>.

The Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager, who saw 
his title rivals Celtic drop two points and concede four goals at Motherwell on 
Saturday, was at pains to point out the unpredictability of the Scottish title 
race, especially after his side's dramatic last-day championship win just nine 
weeks ago.

Dado Prso, Jose Pierre-Fanfan and Peter Lovenkrands were the scorers as Paul 
Lambert's reign as Livingston manager got off to an inauspicious start. The 
former Celtic and Borussia Dortmund midfielder fielded a young team, and their 
inexperience was all too apparent against an efficient Rangers side.

"I don't pay a lot of heed to the way the table looks just now. Last season, 
we weren't top of the league after day one and people were writing us off. In 
fact, we were still being written off four or five weeks into the campaign," 
McLeish said.

"We know that we have to keep our heads down and keep working, without taking 
anything for granted at all. Our aim was to start this season the same way we 
finished the last one, and we've done that today.

"We have to fine-tune and get sharper over the next few games, especially with 
a hectic schedule of domestic and European matches coming up."

The Rangers' starting XI for the opening day of their championship defence 
bore a strong resemblance to the one which finished last term. Ian Murray, the 
former Hibs captain, took the place of the injured Michael Ball at left-back 
while Pierre-Fanfan was paired alongside Marvin Andrews for the first time at 
centre-half. Ronald Waterreus was preferred to Stefan Klos in goal.

Rangers were rarely troubled during this victory. In fact, given the weather 
and pedestrian nature of much of the match, there were all the hallmarks of a 
pre-season friendly for long spells. Lambert adopted the familiar tactic at 
Ibrox of deploying just one striker, a move which meant the home defence was 
never unduly troubled. Indeed, Liviingston were reduced to long-range efforts 
at best, which seldom concerned Waterreus.

Prso prodded home his first goal of the season midway through the first half. 
Livingston's goalkeeper Roddy McKenzie had acrobatically saved a 20-yard volley 
from Alex Rae, but the Croatian striker was on hand to knock the rebound into 
the empty net.

Nacho Novo came within inches of doubling Rangers' lead just seconds later, 
while Thomas Buffel blazed high and wide when clean through on goal shortly 
before half-time. It was Pierre-Fanfan who showed all the predatory instincts 
of a striker to score Rangers' second, poking the ball in from just a yard out 
after a cute flick from the impressive Prso.

McKenzie was then called into action several times as Rangers launched an 
assault on his goal, while Livingston's Richard Brittain was dismissed for a 
wild lunge on the debutant Ian Murray after 73 minutes. Lovenkrands, who still 
interests Midlesbrough, gave the scoreline a more realistic look in the dying 
seconds, the Danish winger capping a fine solo run with a neat finish low to 
McKenzie's left.
 