
Rangers these days seem to have a matchless ability to win unimpressively, 
making Ibrox the only ground in the country where victory meets with loud 
disapproval.

 This latest lifeless performance was an improvement on last week's engagement 
with Dunfermline only because, on this occasion, they managed to retain the 
advantage they had established in the early stages.

 More significantly, the home side took a clear lead in the championship, 
leaving Kilmarnock to regret their own lack of incisiveness in attack in a 
match in which they were otherwise at least the equal of their opponents. 
Perhaps Rangers' general blandness should not have been entirely unexpected 
after their midweek exertions in Italy.

 Given what happened to them there, Rangers could hardly be said to be fresh 
from their adventure in Parma; there were certainly periods of an intriguing if 
not exhilarating match when there were clear signs of a tormented spirit.

 These usually took the form of great swathes of pedestrianism, as the play 
became anchored in midfield. In that department, especially in the first half, 
Rangers were notably ill-served by Van Bronckhorst, who has been one of their 
best players since his arrival from Feyenoord in the summer.

 The Dutchman appeared a little jaded, his touch uncharacteristically clumsy, 
as though the messages from what is normally an astute and quick brain were 
being waylaid.

 Some time before the Ibrox side took the lead, Van Bronckhorst's untypical 
error had allowed Vareille the opportunity from which he should have given 
Kilmarnock the lead.

 Vareille was also involved in the incident later which would cause the 
visitors an unwelcome, forced change to their formation. After a clumsy tackle 
by Van Bronckhorst, Vareille landed awkwardly on his right shoulder and had to 
be replaced by Mahood.

 This was no straightforward switch, as Mahood took to the midfield and 
Mitchell was pushed forward to partner Wright in attack. It would have helped 
if Vareille had executed his role with a little more poise in the sixth minute.

 McGowne's clearance from defence seemed to be covered by Amoruso, but Van 
Bronckhorst strained to intercept and managed only to divert the ball into the 
path of Vareille, leaving the striker an unchallenged run at Niemi.

 The Frenchman overplayed his hand, however, holding the ball until Niemi had 
closed the gap and narrowed the angle. Vareille's shot, along the ground to the 
right of the goalkeeper, was not struck firmly enough and Niemi was able to 
make the save.

 Rangers had given some notice of their capabilities in attack when Guivarc'h 
had a beautifully-volleyed goal from Wallace's header disallowed for offside 
just three minutes before the latter gave the home side the lead.

 There was no chance of offside on this occasion as Wallace came in from the 
left to meet Ferguson's centre from the other side. Indeed, it seemed that the 
Kilmarnock defenders believed it would run harmlessly wide.

 As they stood, Wallace moved and untidily pushed the ball to the left of 
Marshall from the corner of the six-yard box.

 There was, for much of the time, a lack of conviction about the attacking of 
both sides, with Rangers gaining little profit from the lumbering Kanchelskis 
on the right and their visitors tending to lose their coherence whenever they 
moved forward into a threatening area.

 Rangers had been forced into a change, too, after 28 minutes, when Numan left 
the field with a leg injury and, after an attempt at treatment on the 
sidelines, was replaced by Vidmar.

 None of these alterations managed to change the largely tedious pattern of 
the match, with Kilmarnock particularly disappointing in midfield.

 Durrant, who has been in extraordinary form since his transfer from Rangers, 
appeared to have enormous difficulty in finding his rhythm against his old 
club, most of whom these days could not be described as former team-mates.

 The four strikers the visitors eventually used in the course of the game - 
Wright, Vareille, McCoist and Mitchell - were all, by and large, neglected, 
although their counterparts at Rangers could claim similar poor treatment. From 
the moment he had his early 'goal' removed, Guivarc'h became anonymous, making 
way for Durie after an hour and letting the substitute suffer from ball 
starvation. Wallace, too, must have felt as though he had been ostracised. The 
fans must have wished they had treated the game similarly.
 