
Ally McCoist, the Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
manager, admits his plans for next season have been left in limbo while Graham 
Wallace carries out his 120-day review of the club.

The chief executive at Ibrox Park is just over halfway through the period of 
calm he asked for to examine how the League One leaders' off-field business 
operates and to draw up a plan that will put the club on a level footing. He 
has already secured a £1.5m loan announced morning from the football board 
chairman Sandy Easdale and investment group Laxey Partners which will keep the 
club afloat until they bank season-ticket monies at the end of the season.

But with Rangers certainties for promotion to the Championship this season, 
McCoist has had to put preparations for next term's push for the Premiership on 
hold until after Wallace finishes his review. Asked if his preparations have 
been left in limbo, the manager said: "I think that is a fair point, 
absolutely. But I understand the fact Graham has asked for 120 days and I think 
we should respect that and certainly give him that."

Wallace's 120-day period ends on 18 April and McCoist believes he will still 
have time to get his squad into shape before the new season starts. "I would 
hope we would have enough time to make the preparations we need after the 
120-day review is completed," he said as he prepared for league game at 
Stranraer. "We are keen to get the football side of things moving and to 
continue to move forward. There are lots of issues we have to address on the 
scouting, medical, transfer and contract fronts.

"On our side of the business we are keen to get moving, so I would be very 
hopeful that we would have enough time."

The club's record scorer admitted to slight concerns that the club had to 
borrow money from Easdale and Laxey Partners but said he had been assured it 
was part of a plan drawn up by the board to see the club out of danger after 
last year's £14.4m loss.

McCoist added: "How beneficial this will be for the club is not really a 
question I can answer – that's one for the chief executive and the board – but 
I have been told it's part of a plan that they had. I would hope it would be a 
positive step but to my knowledge, it will not have any impact on my plans for 
the squad. I will have a better idea of what we have for next year's budgets in 
terms of players coming in after Graham has completed his 120-day review."

Easdale has offered Rangers a £500,000 sum on a no-fee basis, while Laxey 
Partners will lend the club £1m, with both sums secured against the Edmiston 
House and Albion car park facilities near Ibrox.

The loans are repayable by 1 September and Laxey Partners, the club's 
single-biggest shareholder with an 11.64% stake, stands to make £150,000 on its 
part of the deal.

However, the details of the agreement have drawn fresh criticism from the 
Ibrox support – the three main fan groups joined forces to express concern 
about the "unduly onerous" terms. In a statement, the Rangers Supporters 
Association, Rangers Supporters Assembly and Rangers Supporters Trust said: "We 
have been contacted by a number of Rangers supporters, who are also current 
shareholders, indicating they would have provided a secured loan of £1.5m on 
more favourable terms than the combined Laxey Partners/Easdale loans.

"The terms of the Laxey loan in particular seem unduly onerous.

"We are concerned that not all shareholders are being treated equally. Fans 
and shareholders both deserve an explanation as to why other shareholders were 
not approached to provide this loan. The three groups call on Rangers, or the 
nomad Daniel Stewart, to clarify the matter. Either in public or through a 
direct meeting with fan representatives. We have contacted both companies with 
our concerns." The Isle of Man-based hedgefund may opt to take repayment in the 
form of fresh shares, but that would require shareholder backing at an AGM. 
Rangers say the cash will be used for working capital over the "next few 
months".

The League One leaders' raised £22m when they were floated on the stock market 
in December 2012, but the former financial director Brian Stockbridge sparked 
concerns the club might be heading into administration for a second time last 
year when he claimed the club would be down to their last £1m by April after 
burning through the rest of their eight-figure stockpile in little more than 15 
months.

But the money loaned to them will now tide them over until season-ticket 
renewal payments start arriving at the end of the season. A club statement 
added: "The directors of Rangers, having taken advice from their nominated 
adviser, Daniel Stewart & Company plc, believe that the terms of the Laxey 
Facility are fair and reasonable as far as shareholders are concerned."
 