
Jaap Stam felt Reading showed resilience in the face of difficult opposition 
in their dramatic victory at Ewood Park. In a seesaw match George Evans’s 
stoppage-time goal gaveReading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> 
the win that their character and control merited.

Dominic Samuel opened the scoring in the 32nd minute with an assured finish 
but his goal was cancelled out by Danny Graham’s eighth of the season just 
before half-time as relegation-threatened Blackburn powered back.

Alex Neil vows not to quit as Norwich lose at home to Huddersfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/norwich-city-huddersfield-town-championship-match-report>
The game swung towards Reading on the hour when Liam Moore chested home after 
Liam Kelly’s strike hit the crossbar, but again, Rovers fought back and Wes 
Brown headed home on his debut 17 minutes from time.

Reading delivered the knockout blow in the second minute of injury time when 
Evans tucked the ball away after fine work from Garath McCleary. They moved 
back up to third in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> after ending an away 
sequence that saw them lose two games and concede seven without reply. It was 
also the first victory at Ewood Park in the club’s history.

Stam felt his team needed to show some backbone in the face of a difficult 
Blackburn team. He said: “We deserved [the win] I think. We’re always looking 
for a certain way of playing, dominating with possession and creating chances.

“We knew from the start in how Blackburn played that if you give them a 
chance, they can go very direct with the physical players they have up front 
and the runners from midfield.

“We still tried to control the game but every time we scored they got back and 
that gives the opposition confidence. I think after it went 2-2 we regained 
possession and controlled the game a bit more and went forward more as well.

“In doing that, we’re very happy, but they made it very difficult. It’s 
difficult to control the game for 95 minutes. You can’t do that because the 
opposition have got qualities, certain players and certain physique. You need 
to be resilient in certain situations.”

It was a familiar tale for Blackburn who conceded the first goal for the 
fourth game in a row and have lost 3-2 in their past three matches.

They are two points behind 21st-placed Burton and Owen Coyle felt the result 
was hard to take. “I felt over the game we were the better side. We knew they 
would have possession, but that being said, we have created eight, I would 
suggest, gilt-edged chances. I’m talking about ones that should be in the back 
of the net.

“As well as we played, we have to be clinical at one end and at the other. I 
know we’re decimated with centre-backs missing but we’ve got to make sure we 
don’t give up the goals and the softness of them that we did today. We put so 
much into the game, we should be leaving with points, there’s no doubt about it.

“It’s hard to take, we’ve given everything but we have got to tidy up on 
individual errors. If Reading had played us off the park, you have to hold your 
hands up and say Reading were better on the day, but I don’t think they were. 
That’s the galling and frustrating thing about it.”
 