
Times are tough at Reading – but not perhaps all that tough just yet. Bottom 
of the Premier League and 1-0 down at League OneCrawley Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crawley-town> after 14 seconds, Brian 
McDermott's team will have felt the first stirrings of another FA Cup third 
round ragging to follow last season's defeat by Stevenage. In the event, 
Reading continued to play the patient, passing football that distinguished 
their promotion season, running out comfortable winners in a free-flowing game 
played out in the murk of the Broadfield Stadium's Subbuteo-wattage floodlights.

"It was probably the first time this season we've been favourites," McDermott 
said. "It's easy to panic when you go 1-0 down like that but the players 
reacted well and it's turned out to be an OK day."

The game's most dramatic point arrived with its flying start. Lining up in 
front of a club record crowd of 5,880 in the Broadfield's low rise corrugated 
stands,Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> might have sensed 
a dilution of the usual pitfalls of playing away at a lower division club – 
right up to the moment they went behind without having touched the ball. The 
goal was a beauty, Nicky Adams picking possession up on the right wing and 
spanking a left-footed shot past Adam Federici into the top corner.

Briefly Crawley were rampant, cheered on by the ultras in the Bruce Winfield 
stand, which is named after the now-deceased svengali behind Crawley's recent 
rise – albeit that the identity of the club's chief investor remains a mystery. 
Local rumour has it his name is Paul. The Hong Kong restaurant business has 
also been mentioned.

Wherever he was watching this match Hong Kong Paul will have been heartened by 
Crawley's early energy, even if their lead lasted only 12 minutes, Adam Le 
Fondre shooting low past Paul Jones after Garath McCleary's lovely cushioned 
header to the edge of the area. After which Reading asserted themselves and it 
was no great surprise when they took the lead just before half-time. McCleary 
left Mat Sadler in a corkscrewed heap inside the penalty area and crossed for 
Noel Hunt to finish calmly.

Three minutes after the break Reading made it three from the penalty spot 
after Joe Walsh tripped Hunt. "Joe said he got the ball," the Crawley manager, 
Richie Barker, said. "I believe the referee's made a mistake."

Le Fondre smashed the spot-kick into the top corner. After which the second 
half turned out to be something of a canter.
 