
The Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> side 
Reading have sacked Brian McDermott as their manager for the second time.

The 54 year-old took the Berkshire club into the Premier League during his 
first spell in charge,but was fired in March 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/mar/11/brian-mcdermott-victim-success-reading>
 with the team in the relegation zone.

“After careful consideration, the board of Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> Football Club have taken the 
difficult decision to relieve manager Brian McDermott of his duties,” read a 
club statement.

“We would like to sincerely thank Brian for all his hard work since his return 
to the club in December 2015 and wish him well in his future career.

“The board will now undertake a rigorous recruitment process over the next few 
weeks to identify the right man to lead this club forward and into the 2016-17 
season. The club will make a further announcement to our supporters in due 
course.”

The former Manchester United defender Jaap Stam has already been linked with 
the Reading job. The 43-year-old has most recently been working as assistant 
coach at the Dutch club Ajax.

Since taking over the club in September 2014 the Thai consortium that own the 
club have sacked three managers. McDermott’s departure also follows the exit of 
Nicky Hammond, the long-serving director of football who joined West Bromwich 
Albion in April.

The sacking brings down the curtain on the former Arsenal winger’s long 
association with the Berkshire club. After managerial roles at non-league 
Slough and Woking, McDermott joined Reading in 2000 as chief scout where he 
worked under the then manager Alan Pardew.

He had a spell as caretaker manager during the 2009-10 season following the 
sacking of Brendan Rodgers before getting the job on a permanent basis and 
steering the club to a ninth-place finish in the Championship that year.

In his first full season in charge he took Reading to the play-off final where 
they were beaten by Swansea but the Royals immediately bounced back from that 
Wembley disappointment by winning promotion as champions in 2011-12.

Reading lasted just one season in the Premier League and McDermott was 
replaced by Nigel Adkins. He returned to Reading after a brief spell at Leeds 
but after a bright start lost six of the final seven league games, culminating 
in his dismissal.
 