
I love few things more than a cheese counter where buying involves tasting – 
preferably everything. So this swap’s shop was a delight. I went to the 
mothership – AKANeal’s Yard Dairy <https://www.nealsyarddairy.co.uk/>, my alma 
mater – and tasted Colston Bassett stilton, stichelton, crozier, cashel, 
harbourne, devon and spa blue … each one a blue to knock your socks off, and a 
palette of flavours – surprising sweetnesses, varying saltinesses, degrees of 
creaminess – that come with built-in pairing suggestions. Your recipes tapped 
into that potential with great flair.

The winning recipe: Roasted cauliflower with pear, walnuts and stilton

Anna Thomson <> scoffed most of her test trayful here in one sitting, and I 
totally see why. Her blue take on cauliflower cheese is sophisticated: light 
(not an easy thing to pull off with a wedge of stilton), fragrant and full of 
texture.

Serves 4-6
1 medium cauliflower, broken into florets
1 turnip, cut into wedges
Olive oil
Salt and black pepper 
4-5 bay leaves
1 garlic clove, finely minced
1 firm pear, chopped
100g stilton or other blue cheese
50g walnuts, broken into chunky pieces

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. In a shallow baking tray, mix the 
cauliflower and turnip with a generous amount of olive oil, season well with 
salt and pepper and add the bay leaves. Bake for 25-30 minutes until soft.

2 Mix the minced garlic with a little olive oil and stir into the cauliflower. 
Add the pear, cheese and nuts. Bake for a further 10 minutes or so, until the 
pear is soft and the cheese melted.

Related: Readers’ recipe swap: clementines | Dale Berning-Sawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/07/clementines-recipe-swap-pistachio-pilaff-polenta-chocolate-drizzle-cake>

Stilton, shallot and pancetta tartlets

You’d think Lara Derham’s stilton-pancetta combo would be too much. You’d be 
wrong. Make these the day before you need them – cold and a day old, they make 
for the perfect bite.

Makes 24
For the pastry
225g plain flour
150g cold butter, cubed
1 egg, beaten

 For the filling
200g pancetta, cubed
4 shallots, finely diced
3 tbsp Bénédictine
150g stilton, crumbled
100ml light creme fraiche
Salt and pepper

1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Pulse the flour and butter in a 
food processor, or rub together by hand, till the mixture resembles 
breadcrumbs. Add the egg and 1 tbsp of water and mix to form a dough.

2 Turn out on to a floured surface and roll out to about 3mm thick. You will 
need a tartlet tray with 6cm wide x 2cm deep holes, or a muffin tray. Cut out 
circles of pastry slightly bigger than your tartlet holes. Lay them over the 
holes and push the pastry gently against the base and sides. Refrigerate the 
cases for about 20 minutes.

3 In a nonstick pan, fry the pancetta until a good deal of fat has rendered – 
about 1-2 minutes. Transfer to a bowl with a slotted spoon and set aside.

4 Add the shallots and Bénédictine to the pan. Fry until softened and just 
starting to brown, about 1-2 minutes. Allow to cool.

5 Add the stilton and creme fraiche, season lightly with salt and pepper and 
gently combine. Divide the mixture evenly among the tart cases.

6 Bake for 17-20 minutes, until the tartlets are golden brown and bubbling. 
Allow to cool slightly before removing from the tray and transferring to a wire 
rack. Serve warm or at room temperature.

Blue cheese and honey on toast

Rachel Kelly <http://marmadukescarlet.blogspot.co.uk/>, I thought this would 
be my favourite recipe – I bought a block of beenleigh blue especially. But 
then I remembered that I love all kinds of cheese and that I’d happily do 
exactly the same thing with ash-rinded goat’s cheese, mascarpone, caerphilly … 
you name it. A generic cheesy winner, then, of a toast topping.

Serves 1
Toast
Crumbly blue cheese (I like stilton, but roquefort or shropshire blue work 
well)
Runny honey

1 Lightly toast the bread on both sides. (Any colour bread will do, but I 
think that wholemeal does add a nice nutty flavour).

2 Crumble one side with blue cheese. Drizzle over runny honey – not too much, 
but a quick zigzag will do.

3 Return the toast to the grill until the cheese has begun to melt.

Roast beetroot, cranberry and gorgonzola salad

Any blue shines bright with something sweet, so pairing gorgonzola with beets 
and berries, asDetoutcoeurLimousin 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/detoutcoeur%20Limousin> does here, is a 
great idea. I made a version withRachel Kelly’s pickled cranberries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/cranberries-salad-tart-pickle-sponge-cake-readers-recipe-swap>
 from last month, and oh what a good idea that was.

Serves 2-4
4-5 medium-size raw beetroots, peeled and roughly chopped into 3-4cm chunks
2 tbsp cooking oil
1 sprig rosemary
Salt and black pepper, to taste
2 handfuls fresh cranberries
1 large garlic clove, peeled
2 handfuls bread, torn into bite‑size pieces
7 tsp gorgonzola dolce (or equivalent creamy, soft blue cheese)

1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Put the beetroot in a roasting pan 
and mix with 1 tbsp oil, a rosemary sprig, salt and pepper. Roast for 35-40 
minutes or until just tender.

2 Add the cranberries to the beetroot and cook for a few more minutes until 
the berries soften and start to burst.

3 While the cranberries and beetroot are cooking you can get on with making 
the garlic croutons: heat 1 tbsp cooking oil in a frying pan with the whole 
garlic clove, and fry the torn bread pieces until crisp and golden. Remove the 
garlic clove.

4 Take the cooked beets and berries out of the oven, remove the rosemary 
sprig, add spoonfuls of gorgonzola and the croutons and mix. Serve warm.

Related: 2016 Readers’ Recipe Swap home cook of the year | Readers’ recipe swap
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/31/readers-recipe-swap-home-cook-of-the-year-2016>

Beef and cashel blue pasties

Cashel blue has a delectable sweet tartness that lifts Niamh Mannion’s beef 
and mushroom parcels. Best eaten straight out the oven.

Makes 4-5
For the filling 
1 tbsp vegetable oil
A small knob of butter
125g button mushrooms, sliced
Salt and black pepper
250g sirloin beef, chopped into 1cm dice
200g potatoes, peeled and chopped into 1cm dice
50g onion marmalade
1 tbsp thyme, finely chopped
A few splashes of Worcestershire sauce
75g-100g cashel blue, crumbled

For the pastry
400g plain flour
½ tsp salt
125g butter
150ml water
1 egg, beaten, to glaze

1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Line a large baking tray with 
nonstick baking parchment and set aside.

2 Melt the oil and butter in a small frying pan over a medium-high heat and 
add the mushrooms. Season with a little sea salt and freshly ground pepper and 
fry until the mushrooms have softened slightly and turned a golden brown 
colour. Remove from the heat, drain on kitchen paper and allow to cool.

3 Put the chopped beef and potatoes in a mixing bowl and add the cooled 
mushrooms. Next add the onion marmalade, chopped thyme, Worcestershire sauce 
and cashel blue. Season well. Mix together to disperse everything evenly but 
try not to break up the cheese. Set aside while you make the pastry.

4 Sift the flour and salt together in a bowl. Put the butter and water in a 
medium saucepan over a high heat and bring to the boil. Immediately remove from 
the heat once the butter has melted and add the flour, stirring with a wooden 
spoon until the mixture comes together.

5 Turn the dough out on to a lightly floured surface and knead briefly until 
smooth, but do not overwork.

6 Using a large rolling pin, roll out the dough to 3-4mm thick. Using an 
upturned side plate as a guide, cut out 4 or 5 discs of about 20cm in diameter.

7 Divide the mixture evenly in mounds on one half of each circle, leaving a 
good edge clear all around. Brush around the edge of each disc with a little 
beaten egg and bring one side over to meet the other edge to wrap the filling. 
Pinch and crimp the edges together to ensure they are well sealed and put on 
the prepared baking tray.

8 Brush the pasties with a little more egg wash and cut a small slit in the 
top of each to allow steam to escape.

9 Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes and then lower the heat to 
180C/350F/gas mark 4. Continue to bake for a further 25-30 minutes. Remove from 
the oven and allow to cool slightly.

10 The pasties can be served hot or cold but I like to eat them when they are 
still slightly warm and the cashel blue oozes out seductively.

Have a go at our next theme, leeks.
Three easy ways to take part:
Upload: theguardian.com/witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58774fb8e4b0f10ba20b7559>;
email: recipes@theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/recipes@theguardian.com>;
Instagram: @guardian_cook <https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/>
by noon on Wednesday 18 January. Selected recipes will appear in Cook and 
online on28 January.
 