
Jose Mourinho started the season by poking a Barcelona coach in the eye. 
Nothing new there then, just as he meant to go on. It was a typical pantomime 
act from the Portuguese genius and one that brought its fair share of 
opprobrium from all corners, excluding Marca, of course. At the time, it looked 
like the act of a man who knew he was beaten: after winning the league and the 
farcical Champions League semi-final between the two sides, Barcelona had 
overcomeReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> in a 
fractious Super Cup, which ended with Cesc Fabregas in a heap after an assault 
by Marcelo and a Jose-induced cartoon brawl on the touchline. If you can't beat 
them, beat them black and blue instead, seemed to be the general approach 
emanating from the Bernabeu (and then claim a lizard conspiracy in the media 
afterwards).

But here, look who's top of the league: Mourinho's Madrid. And although it's 
only by a point, they should extend it to four by beatingOsasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna>, while Barcelona have a tricky 
trip to Athletic Bilbao tonight. Generally Mourinho doesn't let go of a lead, 
his titles with Chelsea characterised by building up insurmountable advantages 
early in the season and then cruising into the distance, perhaps flicking a few 
Vs at Liverpool fans and Arsene Wenger along the way.

However it is interesting to note that the situation at the moment is not too 
dissimilar tothis time last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/oct/30/barcelona-sevilla-live>, when 
Madrid were on top. Which was the way it stayed untilEl Clasico at the end of 
November, whenMadrid were given what for (or should that be five?) at Camp Nou 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UbRQi27ZWBY>. The date for the fixture is 11 
December and the key for Madrid until then is to keep on winning these matches 
and avoid the sort of slip-ups they had against Levante in September. Barcelona 
will only give Mourinho so many chances before they click - and probably beat 
them in December. Osasuna are unlikely to provide much resistance, even if they 
did heroically keep the score down to single figures against Barcelona two 
months ago, only losing 8-0.

Real Madrid: Casillas; Arbeloa, Pepe, Ramos, Coentrao; Khedira, Alonso; Di 
Maria, Ozil, Ronaldo; Higuain.Subs: Adan, Varane, Raul Albiol, Nuri Sahin, 
Callejon, Lass  Diarra, Benzema.

Osasuna: Andrés Fernández; Damiá, Lolo, Flaño, Satrústegui; Raúl García, 
Nekounam, Puñal, Calleja; Nino; Ibrahima.Subs: Riesgo, Rubén, Annunziata, 
Timor, Marcos, Manu, Lekic.

An email! At this hour! "To this American newbie, Roberto Martinez's comments 
about Spain are astonishing," says Paul Taylor. "Young players are bought by 
EPL teams and then don't play? How idiotic! In American football they play four 
years at university. In ice hockey and baseball each club has a "minor league" 
team where youngsters play until ready for the big leagues. If it's true that 
England have no such set-up for football, no wonder they are losers." Yeah, but 
you can just pay an Italian a gazillion pounds and everything will be all right.

1 min: Before kick-off, the astonishing Cristiano Ronaldo was awarded the 
European golden boot. Surprisingly it's a full house at a sunny Bernabeu, 
despite the early kick-off, the reason for which being that Getafe and Atletico 
Madrid are playing each other in the Spanish capital tonight. Madrid, kicking 
from right to left, get us going and Ozil instantly looks to spring Ronaldo 
clear on the left, but his pass is too long.

2 min: I can't remember the last time I saw a sunny Bernabeu, so often do they 
play in the evening. It's a novel experience then.

3 min: Real Madrid only won this fixture 1-0 this season and Osasuna can be 
difficult to beat, that 8-0 evisceration at the hands of Barcelona 
notwithstanding. Madrid have been known to hard work of it against tight 
defences.

5 min: It's been a bitty start, with plenty of fouls from both sides, though 
the game is being played exclusively in Osasuna's half. The visitors, you won't 
be surprised to hear, are here for a 0-0. "An MBM!?" parps Ryan Dunne. "At this 
hours? Man alive!! Hope you didn't have to like set your alarm especially or 
anything Obviously Messi's da man, but I agree with all those who are saying 
Ronaldo needs some more respect for his simply (nearly) peerless goalscoring 
record. Any chance of getting Sid in Madrid to whip an article? And are this 
Osasusna any good or is there indeed some credence in the notion that Spanish 
Diddy Teams are even worse than Scottish ones?" I set my alarm for 8am and 
chucked it out the window when it went off.

8 min: A sprightly atmosphere in the Bernabeu so far, not that anything;s 
happened yet as we wait for Madrid to fashion an opening. "Vamos Osasuna!" says 
Cecilia Marjakangas. "Too bad to see that the promising Finnish left-back Jukka 
Raitala is not playing against RM and is not even on the subs' bench. Still 
hope Osasuna do well, especially after the way Levante have fallen. Even as a 
Culé, I always support the underdog. I wonder if the Osasuna fans are chanting 
"Messi! Messi! Messi!" at Cristiano, as fans all around Spain and elsewhere 
also tend to do. Hope so. Re: the Barcelona vs. RM rivalry... it's more than 
possible that Madrid will win the league but that still leaves the Champions 
League, and there I'd say it's a case of ABM. My bet is on the dark horse 
Chelsea." Mine's not. Villash-Boash is doing a good job, but he doesn't quite 
have the tools yet. The defence is currently a joke.

10 min: The twinkle-toed Di Maria brilliantly diddles his way past Satrustegui 
on the right and wins a corner after his cross is headed behind. From it, a 
half-chance for Khedira. Di Maria sent it high to the far post where it was 
headed up in the air by Ramos. The ball stayed alive though and Ramos headed it 
back across the area, the ball falling to Pepe, who came out on top in a 
scramble with his marker and scuffed a shot into the six-yard box where 
Khedira, onside and unmarked, was unable to react quickly enough as he tried to 
swivel and turn the ball past Fernandez.

12 min: Everything's coming through Di Maria on the right at the moment. From 
a deep position, he swings a high cross into the area where Higuain manages to 
get above his marker, but directs a weak header straight at Fernandez. A bit 
more on that and he might have been able to loop it over the goalkeeper, who 
was slightly off his line.

14 min: Possibly the worst cross of all time from Raul Garcia, trying to 
volley into the area first-time and instead only succeeding in shanking it out 
for a goal-kick, the ball pranging off his shin and skewing away. Dear me.

15 min: "But if Chelsea make a good signing in January, a new centre-back, 
Essien returns, fully fit, and Fernando Torres gets his groove back, too... you 
never know," says Cecilia Marjakangas. "It's not likely, but stranger things 
have happened. The same team has never won the CL twice in a row. Chelsea have 
their bad run now; they can only get better. Plus if the Manc teams run away in 
the Premiership, AVB can concentrate on the CL 100%. And they are still very 
entertaining to watch. Especially for a neutral. And I would love to see AVB 
teach Mou a lesson." All true, but this does seem like a season for Villas-Boas 
to settle in; hopefully we'll see him imprint his style more on the side next 
year. There's still a few squad members he'll be looking to replace, I'll be 
sure.

18 min: Calleja sends in Osasuna's first corner from the right, but Nekounam 
is penalised for a foul on Pepe. Up the other end, Coentrao's fine pass from 
the left skitters through to Higuain, completely clear in the middle, but he's 
on his heels, allowing Damia to recover and hustle him out of it.

19 min: Di Maria and Ronaldo switch sides for the first time, and between them 
create a chance to give Madrid the lead. Ronaldo torments Sartrustegui on the 
right and then stands up a cross to Di Maria at the far post, but he doesn't 
catch his volley with his right foot from 15 yards out properly and it bounces 
harmlessly to Fernandez.

21 min: It's coming. A high ball from left to right finds Ronaldo in the area. 
A couple of stepovers earn him a sight of goal, but his low left-footer is 
deflected just past the near post by Sartrustegui. Ozil's corner is punched 
away by Fernandez, the goalkeeper charging through the bodies to clear.

GOAL! Real Madrid 1-0 Osasuna (Ronaldo, 23 min): Guess what, Ronaldo's scored, 
his 15th of the season. On the right flank, Di Maria is allowed to come inside 
on to his left foot and curl an inswinging cross into the area, where Ronaldo 
rises highest to use the pace of the delivery and just guide his header into 
the left corner, Fernandez utterly helpless. He was awarded the golden boot 
before the game and here's why.

24 min: It should have been 2-0 straight away. The hapless Satrustegui gifts 
possession to Di Maria, who sprints past the creaking Osasuna defence, only to 
drag a dreadful shot wide of the right post with his left foot from the edge of 
the area. A poor miss.

27 min: Emails please! It's grey outside, it's not as if you're doing anything 
else.

28 min: Blimey. Nekounam takes aim from fully 35 yards out but his shot 
screams inches past the left post. Casillas flew through the air but may well 
have been beaten by that if it was on target. "Man, that's a stylish kit Madrid 
are playing in - and great to see a "Real" side with some regal gold stripes 
(they should really still have that purple third kit too)," says Ryan Dunne. 
"More teams should have literal strips, e.g: "Racing" ones with Go-Faster 
Stripes, CSKA Moscow with Army Fatigue, "Athletico" teams with, er, spandex and 
so on.... Suppose West Ham could get a kit with lots of wee hammers on it, like 
a novelty tie!"

GOAL! Real Madrid 1-1 Osasuna (Ibrahima, 30 min): Real Madrid are furious, 
once again feeling they've been done over by the officials. As this attack 
unfolded, Pepe was off the pitch after getting treatment for an injury. As 
Osasuna went forward, Pepe was trying to get back on to the pitch, only to be 
ignored by the referee, who then gave the visitors a free-kick as Ramos bumped 
into Nino on the edge of the area. With Madrid arguing about both the award of 
the free-kick and Pepe not being allowed back on, Osasuna took the free-kick 
quickly, the quick-witted Nekounam slipping a pass through to Ibrahima, who 
slotted it confidently past Casillas from 16 yards out. Boos ring around the 
stadium, but they've got little to complain about, not that that's ever meant 
anything in these parts.

GOAL! Real Madrid 2-1 Osasuna (Pepe, 34 min): Well that didn't last long. It's 
come from another cross from Di Maria's left foot from the right, Sartrustegui 
making it far too easy for him. The Argentinian hung the ball up high to the 
far post, where Pepe directed it back across goal and agonisingly into the far 
corner. Ronaldo tried to get a touch on the ball on the line, but wasn't fast 
enough. Marca will probably give that one to him though.

37 min: It seems I've missed a couple of bookings for Osasuna players, Puñal 
and Satrustegui going into the referee's notebook. "Re all the goals scored by 
Ronaldo and Messi, I don't want to come over all Jonathan Wilson, but there's 
more to their games than that isn't there?" says Gary Naylor. "Like Robin van 
Persie when fully fit, they are both scorers and playmakers - two players in 
one. After all, Marco Negri scored 32 goals in 30 games for Rangers."

GOAL! Real Madrid 3-1 Osasuna (Higuain, 40 min): What a goal. An unerring 
message is being sent to Barcelona here. Again Di Maria provides the assist, 
poking a pass through to Higuain on the left side of the area. Faced by Lolo, 
he brilliantly dupes the Osasuna defender, jinking inside him and curling a 
delightful finish into the top-right corner from 10 yards out. All that Osasuna 
equaliser did was wind Real Madrid up. But still. They scored at the Bernabeu!

42 min: When England played Germany at Euro 96, I remember Ruud Gullit saying 
at half time that England shouldn't have scored so early because it riled the 
Germans so much. Strange logic, but you could see his point, and it's easily 
applied to this match.

43 min: This could be anything. Another Di Maria cross from the right somehow 
goes all the way to the far post, where Ozil tries to place the ball past 
Fernandez at his near post from a tight angle. The goalkeeper reads his 
intentions though and sticks out a foot to deflect the ball on to the post and 
behind for a corner. It's taken short and Ronaldo cuts inside, before walloping 
one miles over from the corner of the area.

Peep! Peep!  The half time whistle blows to bring an end to an entertaining 
first half. Real Madrid are well worth that lead, although their hot funk after 
that Osasuna equaliser was probably the moment of the match so far.

Half time: Real Madrid 3-1 Osasuna.

46 min: Here we go again. Say, this is a bit better than Wolves v Wigan, isn't 
it? ThisLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> business 
could catch on.

47 min: Di Maria's down, clutching his thigh. It came from when he sprinted to 
keep the ball from going out for a throw-in and incredibly backheeled it on the 
run to Arbeloa, but in doing so, he's managed to injure his hamstring. His 
afternoon's over, then, a real shame given his wonderful first half, all three 
Real Madrid goals made by him.

49 min: Di Maria is taken off on a stretcher and Karim Benzema comes on in his 
place. Di Maria is quite distressed on the stretcher, grimacing and holding his 
hands to his face. A rare outing for Benzema and Higuain alongside each other 
then.

51 min: Ibrahima does well to turn away from Ramos and squeeze a cross towards 
the near post, where Nino gets across Pepe and rams a fierce effort high into 
the side netting. For a moment, as the net rippled, it looked like that was in.

53 min: PENALTY TO REAL MADRID! AND A RED CARD FOR THE HAPLESS SARTRUSTEGUI! 
It's a second yellow card for the youngster, who's endured a horrendous La Liga 
debut. He lunged across to try to tackle Ozil as he raced to reach a pass 
through the middle, but got his timing all wrong, and sent the German soaring 
through the air with a wild challenge.

GOAL! Real Madrid 4-1 Osasuna (Ronaldo pen, 54 min): Did you expect anything 
else? Ronaldo, bristling with confidence, sends Fernandez the wrong way and the 
ball into the bottom-right corner, before lapping up the acclaim of the 
Bernabeu.

GOAL! Real Madrid 5-1 Osasuna (Ronaldo, 58 min): Can Real Madrid beat the 
eight goals Barcelona past Osasuna in September? It's starting to look that 
way. It's so easy for Real Madrid now. Just before this goal, Benzema should 
have scored but missed the ball completely from Coentrao's cross into the 
six-yard box. No matter, they stayed on the attack, Ozil finding Arbeloa on the 
overlap. He hung the ball up into the six-yard box again and there was Ronaldo 
to loop a header beyond the helpless Fernandez. That's his 12th hat-trick for 
Real Madrid. He joined them just over two years ago. He is a remarkable force 
of nature. Perez replaces Nino for Osasuna.

61 min: "It'll hardly be one in the eye for Barcelona if Real romp to a big 
victory today," says Justin Kavanagh. "But I notice Ronaldo has made most 
critics' Team of the Ferguson Era this weekend. And yet there's a real lack of 
any warmth or regard for him in these retrospectives, a very British begrudgery 
about his brilliance. That's what endless self-regard and a lack of any sense 
of humour buys you, I suppose. So is he the most hated big-name player ever?" 
What about Maradona?

62 min: "Paul Taylor is right, young players not playing is daft," says 
Alexander Wilson. "But there is an English equivalent to the 'Minor Leagues'. 
Its called the Championship. I swear, half the second tier is made up of 
on-loan Manchester United players or alumni. Indeed, loaning someone from a big 
club is the only way to get a decent young striker at this level. Alex Wilson, 
Hull City supporter (Joe Dudgeon, James Chester, Corry Evans, Cameron Stewart 
all currently in or near the first team)." Commiserations for yesterday, Alex, 
I thought you were unlucky.

GOAL! Real Madrid 6-1 Osasuna (Benzema, 63 min): They only need two more. The 
excellent Coentrao embarrasses Damia on the left and his cross is deflected to 
Benzema at the far post. With all the time in the world, he takes the ball down 
and then easily slots it past Fernandez. It's men against pygmies.

66 min: "Jose Mourinho!" rings around the Bernabeu.

67 min: Sami Khedira is replaced by Nuri Sahin, making his Real Madrid debut 
at last after his move from Borussia Dortmund in the summer. His last game was 
16 April following a nasty knee ligament injury. Callejon also comes on for 
Ozil, who rarely completes a 90 minutes.

69 min: Callejon turns and finds Benzema, who shuffles past Lolo and then 
makes a mess of the finish, poking it well wide of the left post from 12 yards 
out.

71 min: We haven't had a goal for eight minutes. This is rubbish.

73 min: Real Madrid are currently suffering a 10-minute goal drought.

74 min: Osasuna bring on Ruben for Punal.

75 min: "Ronaldo the most hated big name player ever?" says Gary Naylor. 
"Maybe - but only as a result of the internet's almost limitless ability to 
spread hate. How about Bernd Schuster, Georghi Hagi and Effen Steffenberg, who 
seemed to be disliked by plenty. And we're betting without El Haji Diouf I take 
it?" Plus John Terry.

76 min: The first glimpse of Sahin, who curls a free-kick from 25 yards out 
over the wall with his left foot, the ball drifting a yard wide and clipping 
the side netting on its way behind. Right, that's the last time he'll be 
allowed a free-kick by Ronaldo again.

78 min: I hate it when big teams get to five or six after an hour and then 
declare. Forget about professional decency, I want my entertainment.

80 min: Ronaldo pierces the Osasuna defence with a glorious pass through to 
Callejon, but the flag is up for offside. That was tight.

GOAL! Real Madrid 7-1 Osasuna (Benzema, 81 min): Real Madrid wake up again and 
look what happens. Arbeloa is the unlikely creator of the goal, winning the 
ball 30 yards from goal and slipping it straight through for the middle for 
Benzema, who didn't bother with any fancy tricks and just rifled it 
emphatically into the top-right corner from 16 yards out. A 
blink-and-you'd-miss it finish.

85 min: "If England is the competitive league and Man City have won 10 of 
their first 11 and drawn the other game that they were leading 2-0 I believe at 
one stage and beat the 2nd place team 6-1 on their home ground, what exactly 
does that say for Spain?" says David. "They have scored 39 goals in 11 games 
btw and Madrid have 39 in 11 as it stands." I think it says that money talks.

86 min: Calleja is replaced by Timor.

87 min: Ronaldo hits the bar with a miscued cross. Even when he's bad, he's 
good. He raced behind Lolo on the left and then tried to find Benzema in the 
middle, only to slice the ball miles off target with his left foot, over 
Fernandez and on to the face of the bar.

89 min: A long clearance from Osasuna goes all the way through to Casillas. In 
the context of this match, that counts as a shot on target for them.

Peep! Peep! Peep! The referee plays four seconds of stoppage time and promptly 
decides Osasuna have had enough. Real Madrid go four points clear ahead of 
Barcelona, who play Athletic Bilbao tonight. Madrid were brilliant, before and 
after the red card, with Ronaldo (yet another hat-trick) and Di Maria the 
stand-out players. Poor Osasuna. At least they got a souvenir goal. Thanks for 
reading. Bye.
 