
Arbroath <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arbroath> is famous for 
smokies, the Declaration of Independence and the highest score in a senior 
British match when the local team beat Bon Accord 36-0 back in 1885. But there 
was never any chance of that list of achievements being threatened with 
something new at the weekend.

The current team are an ordinary First Division side battling against the 
threat of relegation. On Saturday, predictably, their goalkeeper Craig 
Hinchcliffe was their most effective player.Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were simply professional. It was 
thus a hugely disappointing third-round tie.

Even the bitterly cold, wet and windy weather proved no ally for Arbroath, who 
have been known to take advantage of the North Sea gales whipping through the 
little stadium. It did not frighten class acts such as Barry Ferguson, Ronald 
de Boer and Arthur Numan, even if it was a bit of a shock immediately after 
their midwinter break in the sunshine and luxury of Dubai.

The Ibrox players simply changed their glad rags for their working gear, and 
for no more than 26 minutes, while they sought the breakthrough, did they have 
any cause for concern.

Even then Ferguson signalled his intent by shooting against the bar after only 
two minutes, and it was one-way traffic until the Rangers captain broke the 
deadlock with a left-foot drive.

Further goals from Craig Moore five minutes later and Shota Arveladze after 58 
minutes left Rangers questioning all the pre-match hype about giantkilling.

Yet the Premier League leaders paid a price for victory, losing both Lorenzo 
Amoruso and Fernando Ricksen to head injuries after a collision late on.

The Italian walked straight off to spend the night at a Dundee hospital, and 
his Dutch team-mate received on-the-spot stitches. Rangers' manager Alex 
McLeish will sign the Bordeaux defender Jérôme Bonnissel today and step up his 
interest in the Alaves centre-half Dan Eggen in light of Amoruso's injury, 
which will keep him out of the midweek match against Hibernian and probably 
beyond.

Amoruso's central defensive partner Craig Moore was nevertheless happy enough. 
"Before the tie people won dered how we would approach it after drawing with 
Berwick Rangers in similar circumstances last season," he said, "but we were 
positive and professional and after we scored we were also comfortable.

"I'm looking forward to Ayr United in the next round, although it didn't 
matter who it was because we want to win the competition and you can't pick and 
chose who you play on the way."

It all left Arbroath wondering what romance remained in the cup. "We can't 
have any complaints about the score," conceded their manager John Brownlie.

 Man of the match: Barry Ferguson (Rangers)
 