
Cristiano Ronaldo continued his rich vein of form by scoring twice in Real 
Madrid’s 2-1 home win over strugglingSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> on Saturday, although the 
La Liga leaders got a lucky break when the visitors squandered a second-half 
penalty.

The prolific Portuguese put Real ahead from the spot in the fifth minute and 
dived in to head the second in the 18th, claiming his eighth goal in four 
league games to go top of the scoring charts with 10 this season.

Despite the early goals, Real struggled to control the game on a rainswept 
afternoon at the Bernabéu, and Carlos Carmona pulled one back for the visiting 
side 10 minutes before half-time.

Sporting had a golden opportunity to level in the 78th minute after Nacho was 
punished for a shove on Victor Rodríguez but Duje Cop sent the penalty sailing 
over the bar to hand Real a somewhat fortunate sixth successive league victory.

Real top the standings on 33 points, seven ahead of Barcelona, who visit Real 
Sociedad on Sunday. Sevilla, third on 24 points, host Valencia later on 
Saturday.

“It was a game to forget for us because nothing went how we wanted it to. We 
lacked a bit of everything but we’re happy with the three points, which is the 
most important thing,” Real’s coach, Zinedine Zidane, said.

“We can’t be happy with our display but sometimes this happens. Above all I’m 
annoyed because we had the game in our hands and their goal changed the game, 
they came out more motivated in the second half. The game got complicated but 
we can be happy by the fact we’re still top and unbeaten.”

Sporting went to the Bernabéu in the relegation zone and without a win in 
their last nine games but gave Real two early frights, Cop and Carmona 
squandering clear chances.

The league leaders quickly made them pay. Standing in for the injured Gareth 
Bale, Lucas Vázquez won a penalty after being tripped by Sergio Álvarez.

Ronaldo squeezed the penalty under the grasp of Diego Marino to add to his 
hat-trick inthe 3-0 win against Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/atletico-madrid-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report-ronaldo>
 last week and did not have to wait long for his second, sliding in to nod home 
Nacho’s cross.

An uncharacteristically sloppy ball from Luka Modric led to Sporting striking 
back, Carmona turning Isma López’s cross past Keylor Navas after Moi Gómez had 
robbed Real’s Croatian maestro.

Ronaldo and Karim Benzema spurned chances to seal the points against a dogged 
Sporting side and should have been punished by Cop, but the Croat lacked the 
composure needed to silence the Bernabéu and Real survived.
 