
Real Madrid booked their place in the Club World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/worldclubchampionship> final by beating 
Club América 2-0 in Yokohama , although Fifa’s video technology was again the 
talking point after confusion reigned following Cristiano Ronaldo’s injury-time 
goal.

Real will play the Japanese champions Kashima Antlers in Sunday’s final, 
looking to become world champions for the second time in three years and earn a 
record 21st international title.

Kashima Antlers beat Atlético Nacional to reach Club World Cup final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/kashima-antlers-beat-atletico-nacional-reach-club-world-cup-final>
Karim Benzema’s classy one-touch finish put them ahead in first-half injury 
time, easing their nerves after they had struggled to find their rhythm in the 
opening 45 minutes against the Mexican side.

Ronaldo, the Ballon d’Or winner,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/cristiano-ronaldo-ballon-dor-fourth-lionel-messi>
 rounded off a far stronger performance from Real after the interval with a 
powerful finish in the 93rd minute.

The goal looked to have been ruled offside by the referee, Enrique Cáceres, 
before, in consultation with the video referee, he gave it. The confusion arose 
because the referee did not view the incident on the video monitor before 
restarting the game and awarding the goal. In the other semi-final, the referee 
halted the game after being alerted to an incident by his assistant, then 
viewed footage on a monitor and gave a penalty to Kashima in their win over 
Atlético Nacional. This year’s Club World Cup is the first football tournament 
to use video-assistant referees, with a pitchside monitor available to referees 
to check decisions.

Real initially struggled to break down the Concacaf champions in a tight first 
half and the only opportunity before Benzema broke the deadlock was a Ronaldo 
header which struck a post.

Zinédine Zidane’s side took full control after the break and hit their 
opponents with frequent counter attacks. Benzema spurned a free header and 
Ronaldo saw his stinging effort repelled by the goalkeeper Moises Munoz, while 
the substitute Morata wasted a late chance to finish off the game before 
Ronaldo’s late goal.

“We got what we came for – a place in the final. It has been difficult, but 
now we move on to the final,” Zidane said. “The first part of the match was a 
bit complicated with the tempo. The field was hard and the ball did not pass 
well, so we had some difficulty. The second half was much better.”

Zidane also commented on the use of video technology and the confusion over 
Ronaldo’s goal. “I have my ideas and it is true there has been some confusion 
on our second goal,” he said. “We cannot control what they want to do to 
improve things with technology. If it is to improve football for the better 
[then good], but things have to be clearer.”
 