
And so in the 21st week they finally nailed it with two words they never 
intended to write. 8.53pm on an intense, cold, dark and sometimes violent 
Sunday night and something terrible had happened. The question was: what? Like 
some odd twist on Orwellian doublethink, like some odd twist ontheir 
doublethink, not knowing was knowing everything. Marca's website was down. 
Those typing www.marca.com were greeted instead by a simple message:

Forbidden Error.

You couldn't make it up, which is ironic really. But there it was in a 
nutshell: forbidden error. This was a forbidden error, all right – the most 
forbidden of all. A technical problem had delivered the perfect verdict and the 
perfect punchline. And, like all great comedy, the secret was in the timing. At 
20.53, the unthinkable had happened; the world turned upside down. Jellyheaded 
referee César Muñiz Fernández had looked at his watch. It said: 95.35. It was 
time. At 20.53, the final whistle went at the Reyno de Navarra stadium in 
Pamplona.

And Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> had lost.

You could be forgiven for thinking that the system had gone into meltdown, 
wires fizzing and sparking, a digitalised voice like a Dalek bleating 
"malfunction, malfunction" before slumping to a halt with a fading electronic 
"boooop"; you imagined them running round the control centre, sweat pouring 
across faces illuminated red by flashing warning lights, screaming: "Shut it 
down! Shut it down!" while someone sinister simmered in the shadows. Ignore it 
and it'll go away; silence it and it never happened. Or maybe it was more 
basic, more childish than that. The technical equivalent of sticking your 
fingers in your ears and going: "La, la, la, la, la! I AM NOT LISTENING, la, 
la, la!"

But they were listening and they were watching. There was no getting round 
this one. Madrid had lost 1-0 toOsasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna>. For all the mitigating 
circumstances – the extra balls thrown on to the pitch by fans when they tried 
to attack, Cristiano Ronaldo complaining that all their opponents had done was 
"kick us" – they had deserved to lose too. They couldn't even complain about 
the referee this time. Not that that stopped José Mourinho. When Barcelona came 
here, he recalled (probably rightly), they should have had a penalty given 
against them.

Madrid had two shots on target in 90 minutes and just one clear chance. 
Ronaldo, largely kept at a distance, was reminiscent of a trembling small-time 
gangster bursting out the kitchen to open fire on Jukes Winnifield. Lassana 
Diarra and Sami Khedira had the flair and creativity of a lump of wood. And the 
night's outstanding player, producing an immense display, was Carlos Aranda, a 
Madrid youth-teamer whose record reads "Champions Leagues played, two; 
Champions Leagues won, two" and who now plays for Osasuna.

Worse, the result appeared to confirm a worrying trend which poses a number of 
questions. Just not many about whether Mourinho is the right man: despite his 
complaints of being under attack, he has had a level of protection that Manuel 
Pellegrini could only dream off.

Madrid have now dropped 12 points away from home – two at Mallorca, Levante 
and Almería and three at Osasuna and Barcelona. The last four clubs they have 
failed to beat were 17th, 18th, 20th and 2nd when they played them; Mallorca, 
whom they faced on the opening day, are currently 11th. Three of the bottom 
five have taken points from them. They have not scored more than one in any of 
their past five. Implausibly brilliant though he has been, can a team always 
rely on Ronaldo? Do they have the creativity against teams that close up? How 
badly do they miss Gonzalo Higuaín? Can they survive without Xabi Alonso, in 
whose absence they desperately lack fluidity? Why hasn't Mourinho rotated?Can 
Mourinho rotate? Are they tired? Is the squad good enough? ("No", says Marca's 
editor this morning – the same Marca editor who previously declared it "the 
best squad in the world".) Did that battle over a striker – a battle Mourinho 
eventually won – do them damage?

Problems, problems. But, let's face it, they're not really the problem. And it 
was not just about this defeat, it was about what it meant. It was about the 
context as much as the content. It is not that the final whistle blew on the 
match at 20.53 last night, it was that the final whistle blew on the league 
title. In 2007-08, Madrid won the league in Pamplona; last night, they lost it 
there. Pamplona, one headline had it, was their "Waterloo". And we're not even 
in February. Last night could have been excused as a simple error but it was a 
forbidden one. And whenwww.marca.com <http:> was finally up and running, the 
headline said: "The league escapes Madrid". Over at El Mundo Deportivo, they 
were talking about a "death blow" and in the primate enclosure that doubles up 
as the studio for late-night mass debate show Punto Pelota, even mad Madridista 
Tomás Roncero announced: "Fighting for the league only to lose it in week 36 is 
a waste of effort now."

In the crush in the corridor at the Reyno de Navarra, Madrid's players were 
insisting that it's not all over. Which of course they had to. But, said the 
man on the radio, "no one believes them – not even them" – 85% of those polled 
by Marca said the league title was finished. All the fish was sold.

This morning's papers continued in the same vain. In Marca, Roberto Palomar 
was imagining the Spanish league as a supermarket, with the PA announcement 
echoing: "FC Barcelona to our offices, please; Barcelona to our offices. You 
have a league trophy to collect." Santi Segurola had them "on the edge of the 
abyss". Madrid had been "KO'd". Sport said Madrid were "sinking". "Colorín, 
Colorado …" declared SportYou – two words that are always followed by: "The 
End". "The league is dead! Long live the Cup! Long live the Champions League!" 
cried AS's cover. Inside, Roncero was still rambling. This, he said, "is a 
total write-off: a team that can't win at Mallorca, Levante, Almería and 
Osasuna cannot expect to win the league."

But it is not just about those games. It is also about other games. 
Barcelona's games. As one Madrid first-teamer put it privately way back in the 
summer: "We're not the problem; Barcelona are." If 85% of supporters throwing 
in the towel sounds too much with 17 games still to go, consider this: Madrid 
now trail Barcelona by seven points – Villarreal are closer to them than they 
are to Barça – and that's a gap they've not turned around before. It's also 
effectively eight points, because if the teams finish level, head to head goal 
difference decides. And Barcelona won the first game 5-0. Last night, some even 
floated the idea that Barcelona might almost gift them the second clásico in 
April – by resting their players for the Copa del Rey final three days later, 
safe in the knowledge that the title race is sewn up.

It isn't, of course. But you can understand why most people thought it was; 
you could understand the meltdown, the search for solutions. The panic. Manuel 
Pellegrini never slipped more than five points behind and he was sacked. That 
said, his team had picked up fewer points than Mourinho's have at this stage. 
And that's the point. The gap is effectively eight points in 17 games, which 
would be nothing but Barcelona have only dropped five in 21. Those five came 
early on, too: they have now won 15 on the trot – a newLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> record. Madrid would lead 
any league in Europe except this one. Alvaro Arbeloa put it best: "Anywhere 
else, with a seven-point gap we'd still be in the race, but in this league it's 
very, very hard."

Losing in Pamplona is not particularly abnormal – Madrid have lost 11 of 33 
there. What is abnormal is the number of points being racked up. What is 
abnormal is the pressure and the obligation that lays on a team. In a league in 
which draws are the new defeats, defeats are the end. A forbidden error.

"Time to go out for copas," ran the Marca's punning headline. Time to go for 
the Copa del Rey and the Champions League, time to go for a drink. For the 
second time, they were right. Time for a drink. After the night they'd had, 
they needed one.

Talking points

• Barcelona. New record. Goals. Messi. Etc. Etc.

• Atlético Madrid are out of the Cup. The rumours insisted that their players 
were soon to be out of the club. And the club's majority shareholder was out of 
his mind,Miguel-Angel Gil Marín boasting that he had turned down a huge bid for 
Sergio Agüero 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2011/writers/sid_lowe/01/29/atletico.buyouts/index.html?eref=twitter_feed>
 only for the club's president, Enrique Cerezo, to roll his eyes. "If I had 
been here, this would not have happened," he said, when he got back from Miami 
where he had been celebrating Enrique Cerezo day (no, really). Like nothing 
bloody stupid ever happens when he's around. Meanwhile, the fans were getting 
more and more agitated. So, amidst the fall out, Atlético decided to use 
yesterday's game with Athletic Bilbao to celebrate 100 years of wearing red and 
white stripes. Meanwhile, the coach Quique Sánchez Flores described it as an 
"amnesty", a "peace match", a day for "happiness".

So how did that go? Ah. Atlético lost 2-0 to an Athletic Bilbao side who may, 
just, be able to challenge for a Champions League place and ended with the fans 
chanting for the head of Gil Marín, whistling and booing Diego Forlán and, in 
the pouring rain, deciding that they were leaving early. Very early. It was a 
pretty bad performance (just for a change, like) and although Quique will stay 
in a job this week at least – because no one sees any point in burning a new 
coach with a defeat at Camp Nou on Saturday night – he may not be around for 
very much longer.

• Oh, the irony. Atlético fans chanting "Gurpegui, you're a junkie" … while 
puffing away on the funny fags. They also chanted for Gurpegui to die and 
continued to shout abuse about Aitor Zabaleta – the Real Sociedad fan that was 
killed by supporters from Atlético's ultras. Charming. And completely ignored.

• Deportivo in quite entertaining shock! Their match with Sevilla finished 3-3 
on Saturday night but goodness knows how. Sevilla did absolutely nothing but 
somehow found themselves back at 2-2 having been 2-0 down and a man down after 
Andres Palop, who still had the bloody cheek to complain, made a save outside 
the area. He'll miss the Copa del Rey semi-final against Madrid on Wednesday. 
Sevilla fought back with two extremely spawny goals, then Alvaro Negredo scored 
a brilliant goal to make it 3-2. But Depor got what they deserved – yes, they 
really did deserve it – with a 88th-minute equaliser. The linesman's flag went 
up but play continued, the referee waving an advantage. Furious, Sevilla's 
players surrounded the linesman in protest and so did serial wind-up merchant 
and match day delegate Cristobal Soria. But however bonkers they went, there 
was one flaw in their argument: the ref was right.

• That's when the rain came down, pouring down. And yet Real Sociedad-Almería 
continued. The pitch was a joke. For Almería, the result wasn't. And nor were 
the rest of the weekend's results: Zaragoza, Sporting, Levante, and Osasuna all 
won, leaving Almería are second bottom. Still, at least Málaga lost. Again.

• Three wins in a row? 4-0 at Mallorca? 12th place? Four points clear of the 
relegation zone? Are we talking about the same Sporting?

• And this column has a new hero. Hércules midfielder Francisco Farinós. After 
seven months out injured, he finally came back as a sub this weekend … and was 
almost immediately sent off for two yellow cards against Barcelona. But did he 
whinge and whine and moan? Did he bitch about the refs being out to get him? 
Did he spy a conspiracy? No. He put his head in his shirt and screamed at 
himself. "We won't appeal the cards because they were both cards," he said 
afterwards. "I acted like a little kid – I didn't need to make those 
challenges, I was just so overexcited. It's all my own fault." Farinós, we 
salute you.

• Gah! Given in again. OK, OK, Barcelona have equalled a record that has stood 
for half a century by winning 3-0 at Hércules at the weekend. Pedro got the 
opener – he's now scored in the last six, the best run at the club since the 
Original Ronaldo in 1996-97. Over 20 goals in all competitions enhance his 
claim to be the league's player of the season, beyond the obvious pair. 
(Perhaps after Rossi for Villarreal – who scored a belter to beat Espanyol). 
Messi meanwhile had just about his worst game for weeks … and scored twice.

Results: Mallorca 0-4 Sporting Gijón, Malaga 1-2 Zaragoza, Levante 2-0 Getafe, 
Real Sociedad 2-0 Almería, Hércules 0-3 Barcelona, Deportivo 3-3 Sevilla, 
Atlético 0-2 Athletic, Osasuna 1-0 Real Madrid, Espanyol 0-1 Villarreal.
 