
Cristiano Ronaldo continued his hot streak with the opening goal as an 
under-strengthReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> 
beat Eibar 3-0 in La Liga to move within two points of Barcelona, after the 
leaders were held later 2-2 at Sevilla.

The Portuguese struck a free-kick from distance – and the ball moved 
deceptively in the air to catch out Xabi Irureta, in theEibar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eibar> goal – to put Real ahead after 21 
minutes at the Bernabéu.

Ronaldo’s form dropped after Christmas, which coincided with Real losing top 
spot inLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, but he 
has now bounced back with eight goals from four games.

Real were missing several regular starters against the Basque side, who posed 
little threat, and Javier Hernández nodded home the second on the half-hour. 
Jesé Rodríguez wrapped up the victory with a strike from the edge of the area, 
eight minutes from the end.

“It was a good result for us, particularly with the players missing,” the Real 
full-back Álvaro Arbeloa said. “We played with those who haven’t had that many 
minutes so far this season, but they responded well and it showed the strength 
that we have in the squad.”

Hernández and Jesé made rare starts in attack, with Gareth Bale injured and 
Karim Benzema rested. Asier Illarramendi and Isco began in midfield, with Toni 
Kroos and James Rodriguez suspended.

With Eibar pressed back, it appeared only a question of time before Carlo 
Ancelotti’s side scored and they were unlucky with the ball hitting the post 
three times in succession.

Ronaldo flicked a corner on for Sergio Ramos, who hit the crossbar with a 
strike after 18 minutes, and then the ball fell to the edge of the area for 
Isco, whose shot was parried by Irureta on to his left post. The ball spun on 
to the other post and was finally knocked in by Hernández, who was offside.

Ronaldo did put Real ahead with a free-kick that Irureta should really have 
blocked and Hernández headed in an Arbeloa cross to put Madrid in a commanding 
position.

Real cantered through the second half and Eibar looked well beaten before 
Jesé’s final goal.
 