
Given that motivation is so central to our lives, what do we really know about 
it? What do we truly understand about how it operates and about its role in our 
lives? The assumption is that it’s driven by a positive, external reward. Do 
this, get that. But the story is much more intricate and complex.

One of the most striking aspects of motivation is that it often drives us to 
achievements that are difficult, challenging and even painful. You may think 
that you would be happy to spend all your time sitting on a white-sand beach 
drinking mojitos (feel free to replace with a different activity of your 
choice) and that as long as you get to fill your days this way, you would be 
happy forever. But while a few days of hedonistic bliss might be fun from time 
to time, I can’t imagine that you would be fulfilled by spending your days, 
weeks, months, years and even your life this way.

You wouldn’t be fulfilled spending your life in hedonistic bliss

Research that examines the differences between meaning and happiness finds 
that the things that give us a sense of meaning don’t necessarily make us 
happy. Moreover, people who report having meaningful lives are often more 
interested in doing things for others, while those who focus mostly on doing 
things for themselves report being only superficially happy. Of course, 
“meaning” is a slippery concept, but its essential quality has to do with 
having a sense of purpose, value and impact – of being involved in something 
bigger than the self.

Friedrich Nietzsche argued that life’s greatest rewards spring from our 
experience of adversity. We all know people who garner a great sense of meaning 
even in the most unpleasant of circumstances. A friend of mine who works as 
a hospice volunteer, for example, has spent years in companionship with people 
as they go through their last steps in life. “It’s the other end of birth,” she 
says, “and I feel lucky to help them go through that door.”

Other volunteers clean smelly, sticky stuff off oil-soaked birds following a 
spill. Many people spend portions of their lives working in dangerous, war-torn 
areas trying to keep disease and death from innocent civilians or teaching 
orphans to read. Their pain is real; their sense of doing something truly 
meaningful is substantial. They demonstrate how our ingrained desire to believe 
that our lives have purpose beyond our lifespan drives us to work extra hard, 
even to the point of our own personal suffering, in order to gain more meaning.

The point is that these seemingly odd and irrational motivations get us to do 
things that are complex, difficult and unpleasant. But they go beyond helping 
people in need. They motivate us in every aspect of our lives – whether in our 
personal relationships, in our individual pursuits or in the workplace.

This is because human motivation is actually based on a time scale that is 
long, sometimes even longer than our lifetimes. We’re motivated by meaning and 
connection because their effects extend beyond ourselves, beyond our social 
circle and maybe even beyond our existence.

We care deeply about meaning, we care about it more as we become aware of our 
own mortality – and if we have to go to hell and back in the search for meaning 
and connection, we will, and we will get deep satisfaction along the way.

Dan Ariely’s Payoff: The Hidden Logic that Shapes Our Motivations is published 
by Ted Books at £8.99. To order a copy for £7.37, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/payoff.html>
 