
Martyn Waghorn has pleaded with Mark Warburton to let him loose against Celtic 
after finally ending his four-month scoring drought. Until Friday, the striker 
had not found the net in the Premiership since the opening day of the campaign 
but his two goals felled Hamilton asRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> registered three straight league 
wins for the first time this season.

Martyn Waghorn rediscovers scoring touch to fire Rangers past Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/hamilton-academical-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
After the 2-1 win over Accies at the SuperSeal Stadium, Waghorn – who also 
made his first start since mid-October – immediately set his sights on Brendan 
Rodgers’ rampantCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, who visit 
Ibrox on Hogmanay. He told Rangers’ website: “Personally I am very pleased to 
get back in and get a couple of goals. It has been a long time coming so it was 
nice to be back and it was a good three points away from home.

“I didn’t necessarily have a point to prove but it was about staking my claim 
for my starting place in the team. It was nice to get in, do my job and take 
the three points home, which is the most important thing.

“I have done what I needed to do, played well, scored goals and technically 
that is what you need to do so I am pleased but I need to get back working hard 
and try to keep my place in the team.

“The aim is to still be in the starting lineup come Celtic but it is up to me 
to keep my place, keep working hard, do my bits on the training pitch and when 
it comes to Saturday I have to do my job.

“It was crucial to win to keep the momentum going approaching a busy schedule. 
It is always nice to win games back to back and playing for Rangers you need to 
do that so it was important we built on the two good performances that we 
produced at home.

“It would be nice to keep the winning run going, having a week or so off in 
January will be difficult but to get a good couple of wins and performances 
under our belt before then is key. It is positive that we go into the Christmas 
schedule off the back of a couple of good wins.”

Hamilton have gone eight games without a win and with Celtic and Aberdeen next 
up for Martin Canning’s men, their captain, Michael Devlin, is starting to grow 
concerned.

Devlin said: “The manager reiterated after the game he’s been pleased with our 
commitment but you do have to start picking up points at some stage.

“Although we’re drawing games, they’re not going to get us where we want to 
be. We want to finish as high as we can.” 
 