
The Rev John Graham, who compiled crosswords for the Guardian for over 50 
years and who was better known to readers by his pseudonym, Araucaria, has died 
aged 92.

Graham revealed in a puzzle in January this year that he was dying of cancer, 
in a cryptic crossword that included a set of special instructions: 
"Araucaria," it said, "has 18 down of the 19, which is being treated with 
13,15".

Those who solved the puzzle found the answer to 18 was cancer, to 19 
oesophagus, and to 13,15 palliative care. The solutions to some of the other 
clues were: Macmillan, nurse, stent, endoscopy, and sunset.

Graham, who compiled his first crossword for the Guardian in 1958 and adopted 
his pseudonym from the Latin for monkey puzzle tree, died in the early hours of 
Tuesday morning.

Asked why he had decided to reveal details of his illness in a crossword, 
Graham said: "It seemed the natural thing to do, somehow."

Araucaria's last puzzle for the Guardian, the prize crossword no 26,107, 
published on 16 November, also had some hidden meanings.

The solution for 18 down, "Warning not to outstay welcome I encountered in 
African country (4,2,2)", was: time to go.

Other solutions included: second wind, nil by mouth and cottage hospital.

Graham, who lived in Somersham, Cambridgeshire, donated his oesophagus to the 
MRC cancer unit at Cambridge University, for research.

Taken on by the Guardian (then the Manchester Guardian) after winning the 
Observer's crossword-setting competition two years running, he was later made 
an MBE for services to the newspaper industry.

As well as writing crosswords for the Guardian, he contributed puzzles to 
publications including the Financial Times, under the pseudonym Cinephile (an 
anagram of Chile pine, another name for the monkey puzzle tree), the Church 
Times and 1 Across, the monthly subscription magazine that he founded.

One of the most admired and best-known crossword setters in the English 
language, Graham was known for his idiosyncratic style and extended anagrams.

Credited with evolving the artform of the cryptic crossword, he also produced 
themed puzzles on topics as varied as the UK shipping forecast and the 250th 
anniversary of the death of Bach.

He also invented the "alphabetical jigsaw puzzle".

Oxford-born Graham read classics at King's College Cambridge before joining 
the RAF in 1942. He returned to King's after the war to read theology and was 
ordained in the Church of England in 1948.

Twice married – his second wife died in 1994 – Graham revealed that he had 
inoperable cancer in a puzzle printed in the December 2012 issue of 1 Across 
before it was reprinted in the Guardian on 11 January this year.

He said he had been overwhelmed by the volume and warmth of the tributes that 
followed. "People have been ringing and sending me cards," he said. "It's been 
very nice, but I can't reply to them all."

Graham is survived by two brothers and his youngest sister, and by two 
stepdaughters from his second marriage.
 