
It was a breathless climax to the 82nd Rhine derby between Borussia 
Mönchengladbach <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> 
and FC Köln, on and off the pitch. Following Granit Xhaka’s stoppage-time 
winner, Gladbach’s players saluted the Borussia–Park crowd, and were quickly 
joined on the pitch by a group of figures in matching white boiler suits. 
Nothing too unusual, you might think, over Karneval weekend in this part of the 
world.

Unfortunately, it was not planned choreography. The “30 white-clad 
anarchists”, as Bild called them, were unauthorised pitch invaders who had 
scaled the barriers out of the visitors’ section, and appeared to be moving 
towards the home fans. All manner of chaos ensued, with riot police moving in – 
one officer was injured.Video shot by fans also appeared to show some home 
supporters attacking the invaders <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vGov15gHmAM> 
– and stewards stepping aside to allow them to do so.

If Gladbach can expect some comeback from these ugly events, Köln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> know they’re in trouble. Last 
season’s second division champions were already under probation from the 
Deutscher Fussball–Bund (DFB) after incidents involving pyrotechnics in matches 
against Duisburg and Eintracht Frankfurt last year. As a result, a heavy fine 
or even stadium closure are among the possible punishments for this latest, and 
perhaps most serious flashpoint.

In response, Köln released a strongly worded statement pledging an 
investigation and condemning the behaviour of fans who they said had shamed the 
club. A second statement on Sunday announced their intention to remove the Boyz 
group’s status as an official fan club and cancel its members’ season tickets.

Something like this had always seemed like it was coming, despite the efforts 
of Köln’s likeable coach Peter Stöger to calm tensions in the lead-up to the 
game. Before the first derby of the season at RheinEnergie Stadion in 
mid-September, a group of Gladbach fans had attacked a factory where Köln 
supporters were putting the finishing touches to their choreography for the 
game, before being disturbed by police. A police security detail was even 
allocated toKöln’s billy goat mascot, Hennes 
<http://www.bundesliga.com/en/liga/news/2012/0000235369.php>, following the 
attack.

It’s an intense rivalry. If Bayer Leverkusen should come into the equation in 
geographical terms, they don’t in reality. Leverkusen’s match with Wolfsburg on 
Saturday may have been a goal-laden spectacular (see below in Talking Points) 
but was viewed by many German fans as the derby of the plastic clubs – the two 
factory teams who are exempt from the 50+1 ownership model.

Gladbach’s meetings with Köln are rich in history, and abound with famous 
names, too. Berti Vogts is Gladbach’s record-holder for playing in the most 
Rhine derbies (25), while goalkeeper Harald ‘Toni’ Schumacher, perhaps best 
known by the wider world in connection with Patrick Battiston, made more derby 
appearances than anybody else for Köln (27).

That autumn meeting had been the first derby in almost two-and-a-half years, 
following Köln’s two-season spell in the second tier, and the events around it 
had clearly not been forgotten. When theEffzeh fans did unfurl their tifo back 
in September, it was of an eagle clutching the severed head of a foal (the 
Gladbach mascot) in its claw. The Borussia-Park fans responded in kind on 
Saturday, with their banner in club black and green depicting a stern-looking 
man spanking a billy goat.

If this all shows that little has changed off the pitch while Köln have been 
away, the season so far has demonstrated that it’s pretty much as you were on 
it, too. The sole aim of Stöger’s side is to stay up, courtesy of a dogged, 
no-frills defensive approach, while Lucien Favre’s team are reaching for a 
return to the Champions League, with Saturday’s win moving them back up to 
third.

Incidentally, Gladbach last achieved a top four finish in 2011-12 – the 
campaign in which Köln were relegated. That season, under the charge of Stale 
Solbakken, descended into an utter shambles despite 18 league goals for local 
hero Lukas Podolski. While the derby created plenty of anticipation, Karneval 
week reminded plenty of fans that this was the point at which it all went south 
for Köln in their last top-flight campaign.

Interacting with the fans during the week is important – Stöger gave an 
address at the Karnevalssitzung (an annual, Karneval curtain-raising party held 
by the club) on Tuesday dressed as a pirate, while Podolski could often be seen 
at the front of the club’s float chucking lollipops down to revellers during 
the parade. The class of 11/12 took it too far, though.

Defender Miso Brecko was arrested for drink-driving after one party, and Kevin 
Pezzoni had his nose broken during an altercation at another. It gave the 
impression that Solbakken had lost control of his squad – he was fired with a 
few weeks of the season remaining and the ship already sinking.

Avoiding a repeat of those scenes is paramount as Köln aim to secure their 
place in the top flight for another season. If Xhaka’s joyously-celebrated goal 
meant it was, all in all, a deflating week forEffzeh in which to celebrate the 
club’s 67th birthday, both team and club need to move on from the more 
unsavoury moments of the last few days quickly.

Talking points

• Though they’re hardly two peas in a pod, you wouldn’t have blamed Bas Dost 
for feeling a bit twitchy when Wolfsburg signed André Schürrle. Anybody who 
picked him as the odd man out in Dieter Hecking’s Armada might have to think 
again, though. Having scored twice in nine matches before the winter break, the 
Dutchman’s tally is now seven in four since the resumption after his four goals 
at the Bay Arena on Saturday afternoon. The crucial goal was a winner in the 
final minute of stoppage time, after Bayer Leverkusen had recovered from a 3-0 
interval deficit to level at 4-4 in an incredible match. Drop Dost if you dare.

• Bayern limbered up for their Tuesday night return to Champions League action 
against Shakhtar Donetsk by pulverising Hamburg 8-0 at the Allianz Arena on 
Saturday afternoon. It wasDer Dinosaurier’s heaviest Bundesliga defeat – though 
they’re no strangers to a thrashing at the Allianz, having been whacked 9-2 
there some 23 months ago. It might not have taught us anything new, but the 
sizzling nick of Arjen Robben in particular (14Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> goals now this 
season) suggests that Bayern are aching to make up for last season’s Champions 
League disappointments.

• Marco Reus celebrated signing his new contract with Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/10/marco-reus-new-contract-borussia-dortmund>
 – the news story of the week – with a fine performance as BVB racked up a 
second successive win on Friday night. They beat Mainz 4-2, with Reus scoring 
one and creating another for Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang with a sublime 
outside-of-the-foot pass. With that said, the ashen, what-could-have-been looks 
on the faces of the visiting players reminded us that Signal Iduna Park is not 
regarded as a fortress anymore. Mainz boss Kasper Hjulmand looks on shaky 
ground once again – Bild claims that against Eintracht Frankfurt next Saturday, 
“only a win will save him”. Dortmund face bottom side Stuttgart and another 
under-pressure coach, Huub Stevens, next on Friday.

• How they needed that. Paderborn ended their winless run at 10 with victory 
at Hannover in the weekend’s final game. Alban Meha’s direct free-kicks assumed 
a legend of their own in the team’s promotion campaign but have been lesser 
spotted in the top flight; Sunday’s dipper over Ron-Robert Zieler won the game 
and proved how crucial the Albanian midfielder can still be in the run-in. With 
their three next fixtures against Bayern at home, Gladbach away and then 
Leverkusen at home, stopping the rot couldn’t have come at a better time for 
André Breitenreiter and company; their next three opponents are Bayern (h), 
Gladbach (a) and Leverkusen (h). Tayfun Korkut’s beaten side, only four points 
above the relegation play-off spot after this loss, could easily get dragged 
into the scrap at the bottom.
 