
Cambridge United need not have worried about replacing the toilets at the 
Abbey Stadium, something their chairman promised to do after holdingManchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> to a goalless 
draw in the FA Cup. Now five companies are offering such facilities for nothing 
at the creaking ground, one of the many perks the League Two club are savouring 
before their big night at Old Trafford.

A famous result has got them as far as this and, even if they do not progress 
further in the competition, the benefits should remain for years to come. 
Cambridge are likely to earn more than £1m from Tuesday night’s fourth-round 
replay in Manchester, income that will have lasting, tangible effects at a club 
whoreturned to the Football League only last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/18/cambridge-united-gateshead-conference-premier-play-off-final-match-report>
 after a nine-year hiatus.

A gym at the training ground, a facility for the youth academy – commodities 
taken for granted elsewhere – will be the legacy spawned by a Premier League 
side’s profligacy. Manchester United were bitterly disappointed after failing 
to beat a team ranked 82nd in the English pyramid but in the end even Louis van 
Gaal may not begrudge Cambridge a windfall that could have a decisive impact on 
their immediate future.

Sixty-four coaches and 6,500 supporters will make the trip north for an 
evening to be remembered. Amid the hubbub of pre-match hype there was one word 
used by both the manager, Richard Money, and the chief executive, Jez George: 
respect. Cambridge want to leave with their heads held high, returning to the 
Abbey with reputation enhanced and galvanised for the remainder of the season.

Such has been the mood for the past week and a half, with Cambridge buoyed by 
increased exposure and renewed local interest. Money compared drawing United 
out of the hat to winning a Las Vegas jackpot and now the club have a ticket in 
the EuroMillions.

For Dave Doggett, the club’s chairman and a fan since 1957, there have been 
other fruitful times but few in recent memory. After initially claiming funds 
from the replay would be used to give the stadium a lick of paint and new 
toilets, he has been inundated with proposals.

“Five toilet manufacturers came to us offering free urinals and what have 
you,” he said. “We could have toilets in one stand dedicated to one 
manufacturer and others elsewhere in the ground. So I’m raising the stakes now 
– we need a new stand if someone would like to offer us one.”

More significant has been the shift in local attitude towards the club. In 
2013 the council did not back plans for a stadium elsewhere in the city but 
Doggett has noted a change in tone from many within Cambridge since the 
hard-fought 0-0 draw.

“They [the council] didn’t identify the need for a football club and sporting 
facilities; they said we hadn’t demonstrated it,” he said. “I think we have 
demonstrated it now. They all want to be part of it. It’s great for the town. 
We are not just a university town, we are a football town.”

Cambridge’s heroics were almost lost during an FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> weekend that produced some 
incredible results. Bradford City’s victory at Chelsea the following day 
dominated the headlines but Tuesday night’s fixture represents another 
opportunity under the spotlight for Money’s side. Since Van Gaal and co rolled 
into town Cambridge have drawn with Dagenham & Redbridge and lost to Luton but 
Money hopes he will not have to introduce himself to the Dutchman this time.

“I introduced myself to him before the game because I wasn’t sure he would 
know who I was,” Money said. “I thought that was the courteous thing to do. I 
didn’t want an embarrassing situation on the touchline. You shake hands before 
the game as you usually do and he would be wondering who was the coach, so I 
made a point of introducing myself to him as we walked out the tunnel.

“I shook his hand [at full-time]. I’ve worked abroad. It’s not easy sometimes. 
Things get lost in translation and it’s not easy. Ryan [Giggs] and his staff 
came in afterwards and were very complimentary. I probably didn’t see the 
manager because I spent so much time with the press. They’re at home tomorrow 
and we may get more of a chance to spend a bit of time after the game.”

Cambridge’s players will look to savour every moment. United donated their 
shirts without asking for one in return after the first game but may not be as 
generous on the pitch for a successive match after producing such a tepid 
display at the Abbey.

For Cambridge and Money, though, they have already won. “If you go to Las 
Vegas and you play those fruit machines and you win the jackpot – that’s 
probably what the draw was, in terms of Cambridge versus Man United,” he said. 
“To get the replay probably means we bought a lottery ticket and won. Now we’ve 
bought a EuroMillions ticket.

“The percentage of chance diminishes because of it but because you’ve got a 
ticket you do have a chance. That’s how I feel. To go there with no belief 
would be dangerous but we’re well aware of the task in front of us.”
 