
Crawley Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crawley-town>, alone in 
Leagues One and Two, acknowledged possible interest in the Rugby World Cup 
final on Saturday and kicked off against York City before lunch. Little good it 
did them in terms of the crowd (1,950 is nearly 800 below average) so maybe 
fans at Broadfield Stadium are not as broad-minded as the club imagined. Or 
perhaps shopping rituals rule; this was new town against ancient city. But they 
got their reward in a 1-0 victory through a late and fortunate penalty.

It was tough on York and especially Richard Cresswell, in his first match as 
caretaker after Russ Wilcox’s nine games without a win. He may draw comfort, 
though, from the experience of Crawley’s new manager. Mark Yates has followed 
one league win in his first nine games with five out of seven to take the club 
from the danger zone York still occupy inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> to a level closer to 
play-offs than relegation.

Compared with Guy Fawkes, Cresswell is an adopted son of York, who began and 
ended his playing career as a striker with City. At least he got to light his 
fireworks. He said last week: “To be in my team you need to be trim” – 
evidently a pointed remark at a couple of pumpkins – and, if he had looked as 
trim in his playing days as he did on the touchline, there might have been a 
greater proportion of rockets to squibs.

He is promoted from first-team trainer and head of football operations, with 
Jonathan Greening, the youth team manager, assisting. He, too, started out 
playing for York before their eight seasons in the Conference, from which they 
followed Crawley up in 2012, and both sides could have done with his vision. 
The match displayed many of rugby’s features, notably the up-and-under, which 
seemed more suited to Crawley’s Matt Harrold and Rhys Murphy than to York’s 
Vadaine Oliver. Corners and free-kicks into the area were like lineouts, 
touchline progress was applauded and the midfield play was ruck and maul, muck 
and whistles.

Oddly the opening promised more. In the first minute Mitch Hancox’s cross from 
the left would have been better left by the straining Murphy for Harrold 
pleading beyond. In the second Emile Sinclair laid his centre from the right 
perfectly but Oliver shinned it wide from six yards. It should have been 1-1. 
Instead, but for a handful of Crawley snapshots out of nothing, which gave 
Scott Flinders the chance to show his prowess in point-blank palm, parry and 
smother, and a shot dragged wide by Bryn Morris from Oliver’s pass, it never 
looked like progressing from 0-0.

Then, at another lineout, Crawley’s captain, Sonny Bradley went down, Eddie 
Nolan was deemed to have caused it and Simon Walton rammed in the penalty. If 
there was any justice, it lay in Bradley having done the work of two in 
Crawley’s central defence, as he had to alongside the edgy Josh Yorwerth. But 
York knew how Scotland felt in theirrugby quarter-final defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/australia-scotland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 by Australia.

Yates admitted the penalty “looked a little soft” while Cresswell, delighted 
with the effort as York’s fans seemed to be, called the award “dubious while I 
know I’ve got to watch my words”. He is watching them over the full-time post 
too, maybe unsure if he is ready for it. No sooner had York advertised what 
they are after – someone with success at this level in line with what they can 
afford – than they had 103 applicants. Over the weekend Greg Abbott, five years 
in League One with Carlisle, emerged as favourite. Another fit would have been 
Yates, five years at Cheltenham, where he had played with distinction before. 
On this day of tick or tweet Cresswell may have ticked the boxes of player 
respect, fan support and least upheaval.
 