
Golf’s aristocracy has been enlarged to a quartet. Cynics once claimed Rickie 
Fowler <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickie-fowler> could not be classed 
among the elite, that colour and character were not backed up by tangible 
reward. An anonymous survey of fellow players even claimed he was among the 
most overrated in this sport.

Fowler’s reply? A run since May that has seen him win the Players 
Championship, the Scottish Open, the Deutsche Bank Championship and now the 
HSBC event in Abu Dhabi. He has come of age, with a trophy collection as proof. 
The employment of Butch Harmon as his coach two years ago seems to have been 
key to Fowler’s rocket-like acceleration.

Fowler is the fourth-ranked player in the world. The average age of the group, 
which also includesJordan Spieth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth>, Jason Day and Rory McIlroy, 
is under 26. In the midst of constant concerns regarding golf’s allure and 
participation its upper echelons have rarely exhibited such youthful vigour.

Smiling Rickie Fowler believes first major win is not far away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/03/rickie-fowler-first-major-> 
“I want to be playing against the best players in the world and beating the 
best players in the world,” Fowler said. “I’m looking forward to going into 
battle with those guys all year long and for the rest of our careers.”

Two moments of Fowler genius in Abu Dhabi encapsulated his brilliance. Having 
double-bogeyed the 7th on his final round, halving a four-shot lead, he drilled 
a driver from the 8th fairway straight into a green-side bunker. The 
extroverted Californian proceeded to hole out for eagle.

By the 17th Fowler’s advantage had been slashed to one. McIlroy, who holed a 
stunning 35ft putt on the last, and Henrik Stenson lurked with intent. Fowler’s 
response was an astonishing one as he chipped in from off the green, inflicting 
a fatal blow on those around him.

Fowler has every right to class himself as one of the sport’s 
standard-bearers, having moved inside the world’s top five for the first time. 
All that remains to be added to his résumé is a major championship; Royal Troon 
and the Open in July already look a target even if Fowler has more immediate 
aims.

“The ultimategoal this year is to go win a major and this is a step in the 
right direction for sure,” he said. “It’s nice to have that added confidence 
now, really having the belief and knowing that, come Sunday when I’m in the 
mix, I know I can go get it done.

“This is a great way to start 2016. It is nice to have the game where it’s at 
right now going into the season, instead of trying to work on things and trying 
to find stuff.

“Right now I can go and fine tune and really build, ultimately for Augusta. 
I’d say this is really the first time I’ve had it in my career: how good I feel 
about my game and knowing where it’s at.”

In exalted company Fowler reached 16 under par for a one-shot win. The seeds 
of impending triumph had been sown duringa third round of 65 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/rory-mcilroy-tied-leaderboard-abu-dhabi-golf-championship>
, in which he did not record a single bogey.

McIlroy was among the first to welcome Fowler to the fab four party. “Everyone 
is talking about the big three and Rickie sort of needing to do something but, 
if the four of us are top four in the world, it’s a nice narrative going into 
the meat of the golf season,” he said.

Jordan Spieth, displaying the tenacity so evident during a stunning 2015, 
raced through the field to the brief position of tied-fourth. He had to settle 
for one place worse and the admission after a closing 68 that the result 
probably outweighed the performance.

“We were off this week,” Spieth said. “I didn’t make anything on the greens. 
Sometimes that happens and we kind of ground out eight under on the weekend in 
what really could have been something special but it also could have been 
worse.”

Rory McIlroy glad not to worry about lenses: ‘It has to help putting’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/25/rory-mcilroy-laser-eye-surgery-spieth-olympics>
McIlroy actually led the field on shots gained at 23, including 19 birdies and 
two eagles. Not for the first time at this venue problems with the putter 
undermined his aspirations of glory. There was also a highly damaging spell 
during the Northern Irishman’s back nine to the third round and front half of 
the fourth, played in one over par.

“I’ve always struggled with the greens here,” McIlroy said. “I felt like it 
was a bit better this week but I still missed a lot of opportunities.

“But at the same time, if I holed every putt that everyone thinks I should 
make, then I would win by 10. That’s just what it is. I do give myself so many 
chances. You can’t hole all of them but I’d like to at least hole my fair 
share. And I know if I do that, most weeks I’m going to be really close.

“I feel my game is in good shape going into this run that I’ve got coming up. 
It’s a busy schedule going into the Masters. I would have liked to have started 
the season just that little bit better with a win but I feel my performance 
here, I can take plenty away from it and build on it and build gradually up 
towards the first major of the season.”

The highly rated, huge-hitting Belgian Thomas Pieters upstaged McIlroy and 
Stenson by claiming second place. Pieters bounced back from a second-round 73 
with a 64 and 67.

“I did a lot of work Friday night with my coach, Pete Cowen, just trying to 
find some more fairways because I wasn’t really finding any,” Pieters said. 
“Just finding those fairways and working on the swing a little bit, I gave 
myself more chances. I’m a little bit disappointed, some more putts could have 
dropped for me but that’s just the way it goes.”

Pieters continues to take baby steps. Fowler, on the other hand, has been 
afforded large strides; the Masters cannot come quickly enough, for onlookers 
as well as protagonists.
 