
Junior Hoilett scored his first goal for Cardiff as they beat promotion-chasing
Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> 3-2 at home.

First-half strikes from Sean Morrison, Hoilett and Rickie Lambert ensured it 
was another away day to forget for the Terriers. Huddersfield were thumped at 
Fulham in their last away game before the international break and did not fare 
any better at theCardiff City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity>
 Stadium.

Tommy Smith pulled a goal back for Huddersfield at 2-0, while Phil Billing’s 
wonder-strike made it a nervy ending for Cardiff. But they held on, meaning the 
Terriers have won just once in their last six games, slipping to fourth in the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>.

Glenn Murray landmark league strike earns Brighton point against Aston Villa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/brighton-aston-villa-championship-match-report>
“It’s games like these that keep me out of retirement,” said the Cardiff 
manager Neil Warnock. “You can’t replicate the feeling when you hear the final 
whistle and get a result like that.

“Everyone gave everything on the pitch – there were no shirkers. It was just a 
cracking Championship game.”

Huddersfield’s Nahki Wells had the first real chance of the game and should 
have done better when Kasey Palmer played him in on goal, but the striker’s 
shot was too tame to trouble Ben Amos, the Cardiff goalkeeper.

Cardiff took the lead in the 15th minute through their captain Morrison, who 
connected with Peter Whittingham’s corner to head past Danny Ward.

Warnock’s men doubled their goal advantage two minutes later after Ward 
spilled Anthony Pilkington’s shot, and it fell to Hoilett who slotted home. It 
was the Canada international’s first goal for the club since arriving on a free 
transfer last month.

Huddersfield pulled one back through Smith after Palmer’s clever through ball 
found the skipper who smashed the ball past Ben Amos. But the Bluebirds 
restored their two-goal advantage just five minutes later as the Terriers 
failed to deal with another set piece.

Whittingham’s pumped ball into the box was headed on by Morrison and volleyed 
in by Lambert, who was making his first home start since recovering from injury.

Cardiff could have gone into the break 4-1 up, but Whittingham was just inches 
away from connecting with Lambert’s chipped cross.

Substitute Billing’s half-volley from 20 yards out made it a nail-biting final 
20 minutes for Cardiff manager Warnock, who had a spell managing the West 
Yorkshire side in the mid-1990s.

The goal breathed new life into the visitors as Wells did well to hold the 
ball up, and his cross was agonisingly close to reaching the onrushing Sean 
Scannell.

Huddersfield kept on pushing for the equaliser, with a dangerous Scannell 
cross headed away by Sol Bamba. Despite going 16 games without a clean sheet 
for the first time since 1989, Bamba and Morrison defended their box valiantly 
in the closing stages of the game.

“We have to blame ourselves for how easily we gave the goals away,” said the 
Huddersfield manager, David Wagner. “We were aware about it, we worked on it, 
but defending set pieces is always about one against one and we lost too many 
of them.”
 