
Araucaria's Saturday prize puzzle for 29 January (No 25,232) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/25232> had eleven solutions that 
included the names of rivers, which were not further defined in the relevant 
clues. A common comment was that the puzzle looked at first glance to be a bit 
tough, but then proved to be solvable once you went with the flow, or meandered 
about a bit, or used some other bit of fluvial analogy. Ten of the rivers were 
British and one was "sacred" (ie Alph, Coleridge's sacred one). However, Mary 
M. wrote to say that she thought that Araucaria had uncharacteristically missed 
a couple of chances.

First, the River Bush [6,26 across BUSHMEAT], which flows through Co. Antrim 
in Northern Ireland from its source in the Antrim hills to the sea at 
Portballintrae, passing on the way by the village Bushmills, home to the oldest 
licensed distillery in the world (original licence granted under King James I 
in 1608, it is said), producer of a fine range of Irish whiskeys, including 
some notable single malts.

Second, the River Am [10 across GAMBIT], which flows through the beautiful Am 
Valley to Borchester, passing on its way through the village of Ambridge, the 
long-established seat of the Archer family and sacred to generation after 
generation of BBC Radio 4 listeners.

_____

Continuing my occasional series on how to beat the crossword system, here is a 
tip relating to the archive search facility on the right-hand side of the home 
page. From time to time, we publish in the paper a complex cryptic puzzle that 
the software used to produce an interactive version for you to solve online, 
cannot cope with. We could simply ban all complicated puzzles unless and until 
the software can be made to cope, but that would seem to be cutting off one's 
nose to spite one's face. So in these relatively rare cases we just provide you 
with a PDF that you can print off and then solve.

However, if you type the serial number of such a puzzle into the archive 
search facility it will tell you that it does not exist. For example, 
Araucaria's last Christmas offering (No 25,197), published on 18 December, will 
behave in this way. But, if you go to "Latest Prize crossword" on the left-hand 
side of the home page and there click on "All Prize crosswords", you will get a 
list of them in date and number order. (You can even go for all prize 
crosswords by Araucaria, or by any other setter for that matter, if that takes 
your fancy.) Click on the relevant entry there and up should come a PDF version 
of No 25,197 plus, as a bonus, the chance to look at my annotated solution 
notes.
_____

January's Genius (No 91) was by Tramp, a setter new to the Guardian. Several 
of you asked whether Tramp was Paul in disguise, as the four key letters for 
his first puzzle were P, A, U and L. But the answer is that he and Paul are not 
related in any way. There were 34 entries on the first day and 430 by the 
deadline. But there was also a quite common error in the solution given for 17 
across. The one required was PETIOLE (the stalk that joins a leaf to a stem), 
but PEDICLE cropped up quite frequently instead, which was worrying. PEDICLE is 
certainly another kind of stalk (eg a bony one that forms the base for a deer's 
antler) and it fits with the down solutions. But I can't really see how it can 
be derived from the cryptic part of the relevant clue (16 across) ["European 
with uncle in Spain and the French"], which does give P + E/TIO/LE.

The first correct entry received was again from Tony in Ealing, West London, 
at 01:03. But for PEDICLE, the first from overseas would have been either from 
our old friend Peter in Queensland, Australia or from David in Victoria, 
Australia. In fact, however, we had to wait until 17:08 for a correct overseas 
solution from Hymie in the Algarve, who thus gets his first mention here in a 
monthly update.

Congratulations to Alan Hook from York, who is January's Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please email userhelp@theguardian.com. If you have any comments or 
queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 