
Robbie Keane kept up his impressive scoring rate for Celtic as his second-half 
penalty helped the Parkhead team to a comfortable 3-0 Scottish Premier League 
victory overSt Johnstone.

Teenage defender Josh Thompson's first goal for the Hoops gave them a 
half-time advantage before Saints keeper Graeme Smith conceded a penalty in the 
67th minute for fouling Marc-Antoine Fortuné, allowing the on-loan Republic of 
Ireland striker to take his tally to nine in nine games since arriving from 
Spurs in January. Keane has now matched his tally for his permanent employers 
this season.

Georgios Samaras, on for Fortune, made it 3-0 with three minutes remaining 
when he slotted the ball past Smith from 14 yards. However, despite their 
victory Tony Mowbray's men are still 10 points behind leaders Rangers.

The league's other two fixtures both ended in 2-2 draws. The New Firm derby 
betweenAberdeen and Dundee United ended level at Pittodrie, with the struggling 
Dons giving a spirited display to fight back from 2-0 down to claim a point.
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> have now gone 11 games 
without a win, having only twice previously gone on such a dire run, in 1917 
and 1927. But under-fire manager Mark McGhee can take some solace from this 
performance.

The hosts made a bright start with United's Slovakian goalkeeper Dusan Pernis 
called upon to punch clear a Derek Young free-kick inside four minutes.

However, some careless Aberdeen defending gifted United the lead after only 
eight minutes. Irishman Jon Daly took advantage of some hesitant play between 
Zander Diamond and Charlie Mulgrew to advance on goal before thrashing the ball 
high past Jamie Langfield for the opening goal.

The visitors scored a second goal after 24 minutes when Daly outjumped a 
static Dons defence to head home a Danny Swanson free-kick.

McGhee's team fought back with a Diamond header and a Michael Paton penalty in 
first-half stoppage time. Steven MacLean and Fraser Fyvie were introduced into 
the action for the Dons in place of the tiring Michael Paton and Sone Aluko, 
while the visitors introduced the lively Jennison Myrie-Williams and Francisco 
Sandaza for Prince Buaben and David Goodwillie.

Both sides pressed for a winning third goal in the closing stages but some 
poor finishing and resolute defending ensured the two teams had to settle for a 
draw.

The winger Ryan Flynn earned Falkirk a crucial point in their battle to avoid 
relegation as the Bairns came from behind to draw a see-saw encounter atHamilton
. The visitors earned themselves the advantage at half-time thanks to Scott 
Arfield's 26th-minute strike but Accies drew level through a Mickaël 
Antoine-Curier header and went ahead with a Simon Mensing penalty. The Accies' 
lead lasted only three minutes, however, as former Liverpool youngster Flynn 
volleyed in what could prove to be a vital equaliser on the hour mark.

Three league fixtures take place this midweek. St Johnstone host Steven 
Pressley's Falkirk side on Tuesday night while Kilmarnock play Hamilton. 
St Mirren host Celtic, who will seek to reduce Rangers' advantage. The leaders 
follow up their League Cup final against St Mirren with a visit toDundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> for a Scottish Cup 
sixth-round replay on Wednesday evening.
 