
Ian Henderson was already having an impressive game against Leeds United in the
FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> third round when he scored 
the goal that sealed Rochdale's victory with a deft volley, at which point the 
Radio 5 Live commentator declared him to be one of the best kept secrets in the 
lower leagues.

The well-travelled 29-year-old will take all the compliments coming his way, 
though he actually wouldn't object to being a bit more of a household name at 
this stage. That was what was on the cards at the start of his career, after 
signing for Norwich at the age of eight and growing up to make over 60 first 
team appearances in the company of players such as Dean Ashton and Darren 
Huckerby. With selection for England at under-18 and under-20 level also coming 
his way a top end football career seemed mapped out, then Nigel Worthington 
lost his job as Norwich manager and Henderson quickly found out that nothing in 
the professional game can be taken for granted.
"I wasn't part of the new manager's plans, and I had had a few injuries," he 
explains. "I was only 22 and I wanted to stay in football, so I had to take 
what came along. I spent 18 months at Northampton and hardly got a game. So I 
went searching again and ended up at Luton, the year they were relegated from 
the league after being deducted 30 points at the start of the season. That was 
when I decided I might have to look further afield, as my opportunities in this 
country had become limited. I took myself off to Turkey and joined a club 
called Ankaragucu, where I was with Darius Vassell and enjoying my football 
again, until the club was taken over by the president of a rival club, 
Ankaraspor. He brought his international players with him, there are rules 
about how many you can have at one club, and suddenly I was out in the cold 
again."

Back in England, a call from his old youth team coach Aidy Boothroyd led to 
three years at Colchester, where he top scored in the 2010-11 season and began 
to attract the interest of bigger clubs. When another managerial change left 
him on the sidelines again he had his contract cancelled, though at least when 
he fetched up atRochdale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> he 
knew he would be working for someone who shared his footballing outlook. "One 
of the reasons I signed here was because I had an incredible belief in Keith 
Hill and his philosophy about how he wants to play the game," Henderson says. 
"I didn't really know him but every time I played against his teams they were 
always well set up. He's very good tactically and he's good at spotting a 
player.

"Jamie Allen and Scotty Hogan, to name just a couple, are setting the pitch on 
fire at the moment. These guys are young now but they will progress to a higher 
level."

Henderson says that with no trace of bitterness, no resentment that his own 
career has not turned out quite that way. He is not the type to get 
disheartened, or it would have happened by now. "I'm a positive person and the 
way I look at it is that a footballer is basically self-employed," he says. 
"I've got to keep my career going in any way I can, because the minute I stop 
believing there will be no career. My father taught me one of the most simple 
principles in life – you never give up – and it has held me in good stead. I 
don't want an easy life, I'm a massive believer in taking on personal 
challenges. I don't want to be someone who just plods along in his own comfort 
zone, and what my career has taught me is that you learn more through defeat, 
disappointment and adversity than you do if you are always at the top. I never 
stop believing, and you only have to look at the likes of Rickie Lambert and 
Adam le Fondre to see that you should never give up hope. They both played for 
Rochdale, so it shows you what's possible. The dream can still become a 
reality."

The dream at the moment is to beat another Championship side in Sheffield 
Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> and reach 
the fifth round, a place where even Henderson's travels have never taken him 
before. That might earn him some more useful exposure, though the overriding 
priority is promotion from League Two. Rochdale are going well at the moment, 
have their eye on an automatic promotion spot, and Henderson feels they have 
the right balance and energy in the squad to achieve it.

"That would be great for the team and the club," he says. "It's not about me, 
or any other single player, it's about the team. Players win games but teams 
win championships, and that's what I'm about. I want to be able to put some 
medals on the table."
 