
On the walls inside the main entrance there was a poster about the days when 
Rochdale’s fans were running an SOS to help the club pay for pitch repairs. The 
Save Our Spotland campaign was set up in 2006 because the drainage was so 
nonexistent that any spell of prolonged rainfall put games at risk. Supporters 
were asked to pay for a £10 section of the pitch and the poster has been there 
ever since to thank everyone who chipped in.

The programme informed us that the match was sponsored by “the lads and lasses 
from Inter Malagar FC” and, before the scale of their ignominy became apparent, 
theNottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> 
supporters in the opposite stand could be heard, en masse, questioning the 
aesthetic beauty of the old cotton town. They have heard it all here before – 
and they have a nice line in self-deprecating humour as a prepared response. 
“Rochdale is a shithole,” they sang back. “We already know.”

Spotland is certainly a venue with all the necessary ingredients for the 
classic FA Cup third-round giantkilling, even if the giant in question has 
actually been cut down to size so often in the years post-Clough that it is not 
possibly the right term any more. Two years ago, four of the players in Keith 
Hill’s squad – Jamie Allen, Joel Logan and Callum Camps, all 19, and the 
20-year-old Scott Tanser – were in theRochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> side that lost to Forest in the 
fourth round of the FA Youth Cup.

Two others from that 2013 game – Andy Cannon, 18, and Johny Diba, 17 – were on 
the bench on Saturday. “It was the furthest the youth team had been in the 
history of the club,” Chris Beech, the former youth team manager and now Hill’s 
No2, recalled. “Five of them started that FA Youth Cup tie and now they’re 
playing against £5m players like Britt Assombalonga. It’s unbelievable.” And 
these young players gave absolutely everything for the League One club.

The other players who ensured that Rochdale made it to the fourth round in 
back-to-back seasons for the first time all had something else in common. “Not 
one of them cost a penny,” the chairman, Chris Dunphy, explained. “I would 
think our wage bill would be one of the lowest even in League Two. There were a 
lot of young kids out there. They stepped up to the plate. They showed what 
Rochdale is all about. But I can’t tell you how we do it – or everybody would 
be doing it.”

So where does all this leave the Forest manager, Stuart Pearce? In deep 
trouble, presumably, bearing in mind the Championship’s early pacesetters have 
won only two out of their last 19 games. Their owner, Fawaz Al-Hasawi, is 
hardly renowned for his patience,once firing Sean O’Driscoll after a 4-2 win 
against Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/dec/26/nottingham-forest-sean-odriscoll-sack>
, and the cold, harsh reality is that has to make Pearce vulnerable, no matter 
how revered he is in Nottingham from his 12 years as the club’s formidable 
left-back.

Pearce was asked to explain what had gone wrong – not just in the form of 
Peter Vincenti’s winning penalty but on a wider basis over the last few months 
– and his first response was that his team had been undermined by injuries: 
“Losing Chris Cohen, Andy Reid and Jack Hobbs in the same week was the big 
change.”

His team at Spotland, however, featured their record signing, Assombalonga; a 
centre-half, Kelvin Wilson, who once faced down Lionel Messi in the Champions 
League; various others with Premier League backgrounds; no space in the 
starting XI for the two players, Karl Darlow and Jamaal Lascelles,who have 
already been signed, and loaned back, by Newcastle for a joint fee of £8m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/04/stuart-pearce-nottingham-forest-newcastle-lascelles-darlow>
. Forest have a squad that should have realistic aspirations of promotion to 
the Premier League. And yet, strangely, this result did not feel like an 
absolute shock.

Man of the match Rhys Bennett (Rochdale)
 