
Chris Dunphy’s refreshing take on how Rochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> should operate is best summed 
up in the song regaled to the chairman by fans at Spotland. As a self-made man 
whose business is church heating and who has written a tome on energy-saving 
entitled How Green is my Church, Dunphy’s acumen has proved invaluable since 
taking over in 2006.

“Rochdale is an unusual club. We know fans have bought into it because last 
season they were chanting on the terraces: ‘Top of the league and paying our 
bills.’ They are proud of the fact Rochdale have never been wound up, not 
reinvented themselves,” Dunphy says.

“You’ve got clubs nearby that have either disappeared off the map all together 
– your Darlingtons and Halifaxes – or clubs that wound themselves up and 
started again, like Leicester City, that wrote off £50m of debt, Bradford City, 
£38m. I’m not just picking them out [but] Rochdale have been trading since 
1907.”

Keith Hill’s team welcome Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> and their beleaguered 
manager, Stuart Pearce, to their home for Saturday’s FA Cup third round tie and 
Dunphy is hardly putting pressure on Hill. “It’s one of those games that even 
if we lose we’ll have a great deal of respect. It’s not a must-win.”

Rochdale have famously never risen above the third tier but are only two 
points off a play-off berth. Dunphy’s realism is again evident when discussing 
the prospect of reaching the Championship. “It’d be lovely but I don’t think 
it’s realistic for this season. We have a policy of bringing young players 
through the ranks. We’re not the sort of club who can afford to buy players and 
bring them in. We’ve got a low budget, low attendance, so we’ve got to 
constantly punch above our weight and we’ve done that quite successfully. 
Promotion to the Championship is achievable but I always think it has been a 
pretty good season if we’ve finished mid-table.”

Dunphy has overseen some smart player sales that continue to benefit Rochdale. 
While not wishing to disclose how muchRickie Lambert’s summer move from 
Southampton to Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/02/rickie-lambert-joins-liverpool-southampton-adam-lallana>
 was worth to his club – it is understood this was more than £220,000 – he does 
say of the striker who was at Rochdale in 2005-06 before Bristol Rovers bought 
him: “Lambert was the first person I ever sold. Initial fee £200,000 and there 
were add-ons if [Bristol] got to the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy final.”

Dunphy has juggled the challenge of lower-league football finance with the day 
job of running Christopher Dunphy Ecclesiastical, which has been “designing and 
installing church heating systems since 1973”. He says: “There’s about 50,000 
churches in the country – I know more about them than about football. We’ve 
probably heated close to 1,000 churches. If you’ve got a solid medieval or 
Victorian building you’re looking at walls that can be up to 2-7ft thick, so 
once you’ve warmed the fabric you retain the heat within the wall. They act 
like storage heaters.

“The worse nightmare is if a church was built in the 1960s or 70s – you’ve got 
low heat retention. Give me a good old Victorian or medieval church.”

Also give Dunphy occasions such as Saturday when the 64-year-old will again be 
at the ground he walked to when a young boy growing up in nearby Milnrow. 
“You’d get a gang of lads and you used to knock on every house on the way 
down,” he says. “My dad wasn’t interested in football and I remember opening my 
front door one evening and there were about 80 lads in his garden. He used the 
phrase I’ve never heard since. He said: ‘I was pudding-struck.’”

Rochdale will be underdogs but Forest have not won a match since 22 November, 
with Pearce under serious pressure, his side having taken only three points 
from their past six matches. By 5pm on Saturday it could be Pearce and his men 
who are pudding-struck.
 