
"The capital's shame" said Bild. Rude taxi drivers? Ultra-naff 1990s office 
tower architecture clogging up the city centre? Or accordion-wielding gangs of 
street "musicians" terrorising tourists in Mitte? No, according to the tabloid, 
it's Hertha Berlin – now bottom of the table after five defeats on the trot. On 
Sunday afternoon,Lucien Favre's men conceded four at home against the new boys 
Freiburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/3085625> "to arrive at a 
point where one would hope to locate the nadir", as the local broadsheet Der 
Tagesspiegel wrote, "if it weren't for the knowledge gained in the past weeks 
that they could always go lower still. At least that's no longer possible in 
terms of the table."

It's quite a steep drop, to be sure, for a side who had gone into the last 
weeks of May harbouring realistic title hopes. Favre's ambitious promise to be 
genuine challengers for the championship in 2010 appears almost surreal in 
light of this season's results. The Swiss coach looked shell-shocked in the 
wake of a performance that the general manager Michael Preetz described as 
"incredible" and "absolutely intolerable", and his post-match interview made 
for very uncomfortable viewing. "We're all to blame, the players and me," said 
the 51-year-old. "We're no longer ready to fight and to defend. We can't go on 
like that."

"Nobody could expect a repeat of last season's heroics but such a uniquely 
brutal fall from grace wasn't on the cards either," lamented Der Tagesspiegel.

Purists might contend that Hertha's fate is nothing but divine retribution for 
last season's attempt to put the whole league to sleep with near-lethal 
injections of anti-football; the last Lehman Brothers' balance sheet couldn't 
have been more negative. But the real reasons for their misadventures are more 
mundane. Up front, they lack the killer instincts of Marko Pantelic (Ajax, 
free) and Andriy Voronin (back on the Anfield bench), both of whom had, unlike 
Alan Wiley (fourth official at Old Trafford on Sunday), terrible hair and 
excellent timing. In the middle, the new buy Florian Kringe (on loan from 
Dortmund) broke his metatarsal nine minutes into his first match to leave the 
rather excellent Gojko Kacar as the loneliest man in the blue and white 
midfield.

At the back, the veteran hard man Joe Simunic defected to Hoffenheim while the 
goalkeeper Jaroslav Drobny is out for two months after tearing a thigh muscle 
in the embarrassing 1-1 draw with Latvia's Ventspils last Thursday. And up in 
the gods, everybody (and this column) misses the former general manager Dieter 
Hoeness as the ready-made scapegoat. Uli's younger brother was forced out by 
the president Werner Gegenbauer in the summer.

The captain Arne Friedrich is playing like a man who is still coming to terms 
with Favre's ill-advised decision to leave him out at the business end of the 
last campaign. He was at fault for two goals but, to his credit, the 
centre-back didn't try to defend the indefensible. Instead, he set out to show 
that "sorry" needn't be the hardest word. "I can only apologise for my 
performance, I can only apologise for the team's performance," said the 
30-year-old. "I must thank the fans for their support. Considering we lost 4-0 
to Freiburg at home, it was incredible. There can be no apology for our 
behaviour. I apologise in my name and in the name of my team for this 
disastrous performance."

Gegenbauer was seen making frantic phone-calls yesterday but it seems that 
Favre will be allowed to keep on "weiterwursteln" (Kicker), to muddle through a 
bit longer. The hardcore supporters have remarkably decided to stand behind the 
Swiss master of "Betonfußball" (concrete football), a stance that is possibly 
informed by a subconscious, West-German longing for the re-erection of the 
Berlin Wall.

The Bochum fans, on the other hand, have shown far less patience with their 
manager from the land of army knives,Luxemburgerli 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/22/Luxemburgerli_2.JPG> and 
discrete tax evasion. Following their3-2 home defeat against Mainz 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/3452218/>, hundreds of irate 
supporters blocked the exit routes of the players' car park and called for 
Marcel Koller's head. The very same thing had happened the year before, the 
year before that and three years ago. Three times the club persisted with their 
Swiss coach, three times they were rewarded for their idiosyncratic 
intransigence. But not this time. At 7.30 yesterday evening, Koller became the 
third Bundesliga coach to lose his job this season, a mere four hours after an 
over-excited member of the press office had posted the news on the club's 
website. The assistant coach Frank Heinemann will be on the bench for the cup 
match against Schalke tomorrow night.

Koller, an expert in relegation dogfights, might have well saved them a fourth 
time after all but the small club could no longer afford the discontent of the 
masses. "We were in danger of losing the emotional connection with the crowd," 
said the sporting director Thomas Ernst in view of the lowest turn-out in eight 
years. Only 16,000 fans had bothered to see Mainz out-play and out-fight their 
own side in the Rewirpowerstadion. "It's a shame when the home supporters help 
the opposition," said the Mainz general manager Christian Heidel. "It's partly 
their fault that this match turned around."Bochum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bochum> had led 2-1 at the break. "They 
can't refuse to support us and demand that we put things right at the same 
time," complained the defender Mergim Mavraj.

Bochum supporters, hardened by a life of constant downs and few ups, are 
entitled to see things differently. Before the game, the club hung up posters 
that read: "Others have trophies – we have you." This proclamation was met with 
a frosty response. "Others have trophies – we only have you," read a sarcastic 
banner on Saturday.

Results Schalke 1-2 Wolfsburg (the champions are back), Bayern 2-1 Nürnberg, 
Stuttgart 0-2 Köln (Markus Babbel's honeymoon in Swabia is over), Hannover 1-1 
Dortmund, Bochum 2-3 Mainz, Gladbach 2-4 Hoffenheim, Frankfurt 1-1 Hamburg 
(enough for HSV to stay top), Hertha 0-4 Freiburg, Leverkusen 0-0 Bremen.

The latest Bundesliga table 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 