
At this season of comfort and joy I should have liked to report that the 
switch to the new crossword site had gone smoothly. But that would be pushing 
things a bit. At least, however, it has been nothing like the last major shift 
of the crosswords to a new format in 2008. In those distant days you had to pay 
the princely sum of £24 a year for the pleasure of being able to get the 
crosswords online. The solverdom’s reaction then was quite negative over quite 
a long period, evoked by the treasured email that I still have before me: ‘How 
many times have you made pathetic excuses and tried to shuffle the blame onto 
someone else? You, sir, are unfit to run a whelk stall. Stand down, please, and 
let someone with more clout, more guts, more pride and more self-respect take 
over.’

Thankfully, this time it has been nothing like that. In fact, a few people 
have even written in to say that they like the new layout and its 
functionality, which is gratifying and, in my experience, unusual. But therehas 
been a significant trickle of complaints and suggestions for further 
improvement. The two largest groups in this correspondence have been about: a) 
difficulties in printing puzzles on to one sheet of paper and in having grids 
and clues sufficiently large to be legible; and b) difficulties in connectiong 
properly to a particular puzzle. The development team has already responded to 
many of these complaints and suggestions and is looking at what more can 
realistically be done within the inevitable staffing and budget restraints.

The most intractable problems with the new site are those that stem from your 
use of one of the older browser programs. These are likely to be made worse, if 
you are combining use of an old browser with old computing equipment, such as 
older iOS systems, MacBooks, Android apps, or Blackberries. If you are using a 
dial-up connection for getting at the web (rather than broadband), that in 
itself should not cause problems, though it may well make things painfully slow 
for you. The development team has had success in getting older browsers to show 
you crossword grids properly, as opposed to just as black squares, but there is 
a limit as to what they can do with obsolescent software, especially when 
operated on older machines. So your first remedial action should be to try 
upgrading your browser to its latest version. Some systems, particularly Apple 
products, come with a built-in brower, such as Safari, that makes it impossible 
to upgrade to the latest version without updating the whole system, which is 
like taking the hammer to the nut. Some Android devices also come/came with an 
Internet Explorer browser as part of the original package, which also does not 
allow you to upgrade to the latest version.

In these cases your could profitably look at the independent website, What 
Browser <http://www.whatbrowser.org/>. This provides links to the latest 
versions of six modern browsers (Chrome, Opera, Edge, Firefox, Internet 
Explorer and Safari). There are many others out there, each with different 
strengths and weaknesses when used with different systems, but latest versions 
of these six seem to work well with crosswords. They can all be downloaded and 
installed easily and for free to iPads, tablets and mobile phones, as well as 
to PCs and laptops.


But I fear that, even at this season of comfort and joy, I have no helpful 
suggestion to make (other than to find a new and more tolerant job) to those 
who tell me that they do the crosswords at work on an office computer network, 
where they cannot touch or alter the search engines already installed. 
Meanwhile, please keep sending me information about any continuing problems 
that you may be having, together with details of the computer system, operating 
program and browser that you are using. [NB Everyman, Speedy and Azed issues 
should go tocrosswords.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crosswords.editor@observer.co.uk>.]
____
Note: The Christmas bumper prize puzzle set by Maskarade will be published on 
Saturday 19 December, with the entry deadline of New Year’s Eve and with the 
results announced on 4 January.
_____
The November Genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2015/nov/02/genius-crossword-no-149> 
(No 149 by a new setter, Jack) produced 301 entries by the deadline (20 on the 
first day). PSC from Australia was first in at 02:51, followed by m1f at 03:43. 
There was then quite a gap to GM at 10:14. Congratulations to Emile Wolfe from 
Bristol, who is the winner of the November Genius competition.
If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.

 