
Antonio Di Natale reacted as only he knows how. After the Udinese striker was 
flagged offside during the second half ofhis team's game against Roma on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/27/roma-beat-udinese-serie-a-report>
, he marched straight over to the linesman who had made the call. The official 
braced himself for an earful;instead he got a kiss on the forehead 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/394484077803225088/photo/1>.

Soon afterwards, Di Natale was spotted pinching the cheek of referee Mauro 
Bergonzi <https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/394492517841793026>. He 
received no punishment, of course. Di Natale has always had a knack for getting 
away with more than he should. When he first asked his now wife, Ilenia, out on 
a date as a teenager, she jokingly asked if he had really wanted to go with her 
twin sister, Genny.He replied with a shrug 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/counterattack/2011/11/01/bandini-snubbed-by-the-ballon-dor-udineses-di-natale-fears-death-not-football/>
, saying: "Either of the two would be fine."

But if Di Natale's mischievous charm has taken him far in life, then it is his 
goals which have carriedUdinese <https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese>. 
He scored 103 of them across the past four league campaigns, twice finishing as 
Serie A'scapocannoniere. Such consistency has also helped to turn Udinese's 
Stadio Friuli home into a fortress; Roma arrived on Sunday knowing that no 
visiting team had won there since September 2012.

The Giallorossi were better equipped than most to threaten that record. Five 
points clear at the top, they had won all eight of their league games to date. 
And yet they would be missing two key starters up front, with both Francesco 
Totti and Gervinho ruled out due to injury. That pair had already combined for 
six goals and seven assists.

As brilliant as Roma had been, furthermore, some observers remained sceptical 
of their squad depth. They had used just 17 players through the first eight 
games, fewer than anyone else in the division. TheRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> manager, Rudi Garcia, hardly 
soothed fans' concerns with his pre-game remark that "nature abhors a vacuum, 
so someone will have to play".

In reality, of course, Garcia knew that he still had some solid options 
available to him. Totti's shoes would be filled by Marco Borriello, while Adem 
Ljajic replaced Gervinho. The former scored 12 goals while playing for a far 
more modest Genoa team last year, while the latter had found the net three 
times in five appearances (four of them off the bench) since joining from 
Fiorentina in the summer.

Nevertheless, Roma did start poorly on Sunday. Within three minutes of 
kick-off, Luis Muriel had hit a post for Udinese. A quarter of an hour later, 
Di Natale went clean through only to see a disappointing shot saved easily by 
Morgan De Sanctis. By that point Udinese were sweeping forward in waves, 
hitting their opponents hard on the counter. Only an athletic goalline 
clearance from Leandro Castán saved Roma from falling behind to a Gabriel Silva 
strike shortly before half-time.

The visitors improved after the break, defending more cohesively and beginning 
to apply pressure down the flanks, but any hopes of a victory seemed to have 
been fatally undermined when Maicon was sent off for a needless second booking 
in the 66th minute. Garcia re-shaped his team into a cautious 4-4-1, with 
Vasilis Torosidis replacing Miralem Pjanic. Soon the manager would replace 
Borriello with an additional midfielder, Michael Bradley.

This was only the American's third appearance of a frustrating season. Bradley 
has been out of action since injuring an ankle while warming up for a World Cup 
qualifier against Costa Rica in early September, and has since watched Roma 
excel without him.

Anxious observers in the US had already begun to ask what the player's 
prospects would look like when he returned. A midfield trio of Pjanic, Daniele 
De Rossi and Kevin Strootman has arguably been the greatest strength of 
Garcia's new-look Roma. Their success left no room for Bradley to force his way 
back into the starting XI – especially given the new manager's reluctance to 
rotate.

Speculation began that the player might seek a January transfer. Such talk was 
entirely premature. Bradley has shown no interest in leaving, nor his club in 
selling. Both parties were entirely focused on getting the player fit and back 
in position to help Roma's cause.

He did that on Sunday in dramatic fashion, scoring the game's only goal with 
less than 10 minutes left to play. Roma had not done much attacking in the wake 
of Maicon's sending off but after De Rossi picked out Strootman with a direct 
ball forwards from midfield, the Dutchman laid it off to Bradley on the edge of 
the D. From there, he stroked an immaculate first-time finish into the bottom 
corner of the net.

It was enough to secure Roma their ninth consecutive win to start this season. 
Only Juventus, in 2005-06, had ever achieved such a feat inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. Their achievements in 
that season have since been expunged from the official record books as a result 
of the Calciopoli scandal.

In fact, Gazzetta dello Sport claimed on Monday that the longest-ever winning 
sequence to start a season in any of Europe's top leagues stands at just 11 
games – set by Tottenham in 1960-61. For Roma, matching that total no longer 
seems inconceivable. They have scored the joint-most goals of any team in Serie 
A (23) and conceded just once. Their next game is at home to last-placed Chievo 
on Thursday night.

Of course, there are some who believe Roma have been riding their luck. 
Sunday's game was the second in a row in which their opponents had both hit the 
woodwork and had a shot cleared off the line. "But you earn your luck, it 
doesn't arrive on its own," argued Garcia. "If someone gives everything on the 
pitch, and throughout the week, they can get rewarded for it."

Bradley might just be the poster boy for such beliefs – a player whose entire 
career has been built on hard work and a refusal to be deterred. As a child, 
after determining that the two training sessions and one weekly match offered 
by his own team were not enough,he took to showing up at his local club every 
day until coaches gave in 
<http://sports.espn.go.com/sports/soccer/news/story?id=5077789> and let him 
play with the older kids on the days when his own group was not practicing.

In his professional career he has taken every setback as further motivation, 
joining Chievo in 2011 in order to get back to playing regularly after a 
frustrating spell at Aston Villa, and then forcing Italy's biggest clubs to 
take notice with his all-action performances. It is hard to imagine his spirit 
being broken now by a little competition for places.

"We still have 29 games to go, and we need everyone," said Bradley after 
Sunday's game. "You won't win anything with 11 soloists. We all need to makes 
sure that we are ready at the right moment. I will give everything, just as I 
did when I was out injured."

Hard work itself, though, still might not be the whole picture. Shortly after 
full-time on Sunday Totti posted on his own website the unique qualities that 
he thought had contributed to Roma's victory. "Congratulations to my 
team-mates," he wrote. "Each one showed courage, strength and, as we say around 
here, two massive balls!"

He went on to praise the club's supporters, roughly 1,000 of whom were waiting 
for the team when they returned to Fiumicino airport. After a start to the 
season that has gone beyond all realistic expectations, they too had reacted as 
only they know how.

Talking points

• Mario Balotelli shaved off his Mohawk on Friday, a symbolic gesture designed 
to represent his turning over of a new leaf after one too many distractions 
over the past few weeks. And then, on Sunday, the player turned in one of his 
worst performances in a Milan shirt, getting hauled off by Massimiliano Allegri 
early in the second half of his team's game at Parma. TheRossoneri were 2-0 
down at the time, but, inspired by Kaká – himself on as a substitute – they 
rallied to equalise, only to then blow it all by conceding again in second-half 
injury-time. Nine games into the season, Milan are already 16 points behind 
Roma, although Allegri did try to raise the mood by confirming in his post-game 
interviews that the club would sign Keisuke Honda from CSKA Moscow in January.

• Juan Cuadrado was the star of the show for Fiorentina at the weekend, 
scoring both his team's goals in a win at Chievo. It was subsequently reported 
by Sky Italia that Arsenal had submitted a bid to sign the player in January 
but that it had been turned down by the Italian club. Vincenzo Montella refused 
to discuss the matter afterwards, saying: "Now is not the time for transfers."

• Adidas let it be known before the weekend that Mauro Icardi would be playing 
this weekend in a quite remarkable new pair of "lion-dog boots", designed by 
Yohji Yamamoto. Inevitably, Icardi never actually made it off the bench in 
Internazionale's 4-2 win over Verona. Still, the boots are quite something to 
behold,so I'm sure we'll be seeing them in action before too long 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1824697-adidas-release-japanese-inspired-lion-dog-boots-stars-to-wear-them-this-weekend>
.

• Juventus and Napoli each won 2-0, beating beating Genoa and Torino 
respectively, to stay within five points of Roma. Notably, this was only Juve's 
first home clean-sheet of the season.

Results: Bologna 1-0 Livorno, Catania 0-0 Sassuolo, Chievo 1-2 Fiorentina, 
Inter 4-2 Verona, Juventus 2-0 Genoa, Lazio 2-0 Cagliari, Napoli 2-0 Torino, 
Parma 3-2 Milan, Sampdoria 1-0 Atalanta, Udinese 0-1 Roma.

• Latest Serie A table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>
 