
Romaine Sawyers grabbed his first Brentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> goal to help secure a 2-0 
victory over their neighbours Queens Park Rangers. Josh Clarke had fired the 
Bees ahead just before half-time and Sawyers, the free summer signing from 
Walsall, opened his account with a second-half cracker to end their 52-year 
wait for a win at Loftus Road.

This was only the sixth time Brentford have made the short trip to Rangers in 
that period but this did not stop their fans revelling in a rare success over 
their historically more illustrious neighbours. Rangers left the field to boos 
from the home supporters who had bothered to stay until the end.

Football League investigates Watford over alleged forged banking letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/football-league-investigate-watford-alleged-forged-banking-letter>
Victory was no more than Brentford deserved after they created a host of 
chances although their eight-goal striker Scott Hogan was uncharacteristically 
wasteful. He could have had a hat-trick in the first half alone. After Alex 
Smithies palmed a Sawyers shot into his path Hogan could not adjust his feet in 
time as the ball rolled agonisingly past him, a yard from an open goal.

Moments later Sawyers broke quickly and fed Hogan, who expertly turned Steven 
Caulker only to curl his effort inches wide.

Clarke was next to tee up Hogan with a cut-back from the byline but this time 
he scooped his effort over the crossbar. Rangers, too, had their chances in the 
first half, with Tjaronn Chery’s delicious backheel setting up Conor 
Washington, whose shot was blocked by John Egan.

The Brentford keeper, Daniel Bentley, had to be on his toes to tip a Jordan 
Cousin’s cross over as it threatened to dip under the crossbar and he also made 
saves from Washington and James Perch.

Clarke made the breakthrough three minutes before the interval after a neat 
exchange of passes between Sawyers and Josh McEachran.

Clarke feigned a one-two with McEachran but instead skipped inside Nedum 
Onuoha and rolled the ball past Smithies into the net. Rangers pushed for an 
equaliser and Chery fired wide but Sawyers put the game to bed in style in the 
74th minute.

The winger caught Maxime Colin’s low cross first time with a side-footed 
finish which flew into the top corner from the edge of the area.

Rangers, suffering another inconsistent season and marooned in mid-table, knew 
it would not be their night when Idrissa Sylla’s goalbound header was cleared 
off the line by Egan.
 