
Garry Monk thought his Leeds side fully deserved their win even though they 
needed a superbly struck long-range effort from the teenager Ronaldo Vieira in 
injury time to take the three points.

Norwich, under pressure after a 5-0 defeat at Brighton last week, led at 
half-time through Robbie Brady’s header, only for Leeds to deservedly turn the 
game on its head with goals from Pontus Jansson – his first for the club – and 
Chris Wood.

Kyle Lafferty put Norwich back on level terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/05/west-ham-v-stoke-city-fa-cup-first-round-and-more-clockwatch-live>
 on 87 minutes with virtually his first touch after coming off the bench, but 
the Leeds substitute Vieira, who is 18, had the final say.

“Over the course of the game I thought we were the better team and got what we 
deserved in the end,” Monk said. “The first 20 minutes was the best start to a 
game we have had since I have been here.

“We looked sharp, should have put some of our chances away and then found 
ourselves behind when we conceded a really poor goal.

“I told the lads at half-time that if they repeated those first 20 minutes in 
the second half there was a result to be had and full credit to them, they went 
out there and did just that.

“We showed the spirit in the group to get back in front and when they 
equalised we came back at them again and got the result we deserved at a very 
difficult place to come. It was a great strike from Ronny, a goal worthy of 
winning any game.”

Monk was keeping his feet on the ground after being told the victory had 
lifted his side into the top six, one point and one place behind Norwich. 
“That’s one for the fans to enjoy,” he said.

Chelsea 5-0 Everton: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/05/chelsea-v-everton-premier-league-live>
“It’s a great result but there is nothing to be won yet. We know we are not 
the finished article but we are making good progress, with a lot of young 
players in the group, when you consider we have only been here for four or five 
months, as have a lot of the players. It is work in progress – and if everyone 
keeps working hard then we should keeping getting good results.”

Norwich, now without a win in four league games, were second best in the 
opening period but somehow went in behind after Brady’s looping header from a 
corner crept in in the 24th minute.

The impressive visitors then turned the game on its head, with defender 
Jansson nodding home his first goal for the club and Wood blasting home a 
cut-back from Luke Ayling to make it 2-1 with 16 minutes to play.

Norwich looked as though they had rescued a point they scarcely deserved three 
minutes from time when substitute Lafferty slid the ball home.

The drama was not over, however, as Leeds won a free-kick 35 yards from their 
next attack and Vieira fired home from distance after Eunan O’Kane had touched 
the ball to him.

The Norwich manager, Alex Neil, felt his side still had last week’s 5-0 
drubbing on their minds as they let the game slip in the second half. “We were 
a bit nervy early on but once we got our goal we settled down and at half-time 
I told them to go out and get the second goal.

“But once Leeds scored there was a fear about us and although there was 
nothing wrong with the lads’ effort it was a very disappointing result.

“It’s a difficult time but three weeks ago we were top of the league. I don’t 
think I have become a bad manager in three weeks and I don’t think the players 
have become bad players in three weeks either.

“Having said that I accept the buck stops with me – if we do well I get 
praised and if we are doing badly I get criticism, I fully accept that.

“We just need to raise our game and turn this around. We need to start winning 
games, it’s as simple as that.”
 