
My friend Rona Hart, who has died aged 88, was a celebrated dancer and teacher 
who in 1946 founded the Rona Hart School ofDance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance>, in Hampstead, north London. She 
taught there until her retirement in 1998, and the school still flourishes.

Her formative years were spent in Africa. The daughter of Iris (nee Goose) and 
Arthur Hart, Rona was born in Uganda, where her father worked for the colonial 
service as a surveyor. Rona was taught traditional local dances by her ayah. 
Her family returned to the UK, settling in Cornwall, when Rona was seven, and 
initially she was educated at home. During the second world war, they moved to 
Hertfordshire, and Rona boarded at Abbot’s Hill school, Hemel Hempstead, where 
she excelled in mathematics. But despite her parents’ desire for her to study 
the subject at university, she knew that dance would be her life.

Banging on the door of the Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> 
Rambert in London, Rona insisted on an impromptu audition, and so impressed 
them that she was given a scholarship on the spot. After finishing her training 
(alongside Audrey Hepburn), she realised she preferred teaching to performing, 
and decided to set up her own school. Her great love was classical Greek dance.

Many of her students , who included the actor Helena Bonham Carter and the 
Royal Ballet choreographer David Dawson, kept in touch with her over the years. 
An exhibition in her honour was held at Burgh House, Hampstead, in 2013.

In 1958, Rona married George Newson, a carpenter, and they moved to Suffolk, 
from where Rona commuted to London for part of each week, into her 70s. Always 
smiling, welcoming, warm and thoughtful, she was a generous host at the family 
home in the village of Aldringham.

She was a stamp collector, with a special interest in Africa, and a member of 
the Leiston and District Philatelic Society. She was also a keen family 
historian and a founder member of the Alde Valley Suffolk Family History Group, 
which is where I met her. She became a committee member, organising speakers 
for our meetings, and gave a memorable talk to us on her life in ballet.

It was peppered with amusing anecdotes: she told us that from the window of 
her flat in London she had a splendid view of Vivien Leigh sunbathing on a 
neighbouring rooftop; and that on one occasion during her childhood in Uganda 
she had met Queen Mary, who apologised to Rona for nearly tripping her up with 
her walking stick.

She is survived by George, their three children, Jeremy, Melanie and 
Charlotte, five grandchildren and five great-grandchildren.



 