
League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> Hartlepool 
are facing strong criticism after their manager, Ronnie Moore, admitted he 
wants to sign the convicted rapist Ched Evans – with the town’s MP attacking 
the move as “entirely wrong”.

Evans, the former Sheffield United and Wales striker, is still looking for a 
way back into football after his release from prison in November.His former 
club retracted an offer to allow him to train with them in the wake of fierce 
local opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/20/ched-evans-training-offer-withdrawn-sheffield-united>
.

Moore, who took over this week with the club bottom of their division, 
revealed after their 1-1 draw with Oxford that he would welcome a deal for the 
25-year-old.

Moore said: “It’s a possibility. If it could happen, I would want it to 
happen. He is a proven scorer; he’s served his time and the boy wants to play 
football. If there is a chance he might come here, I don’t see any reason why 
he shouldn’t.

“He has made a mistake and maybe he hasn’t apologised in the right way – and I 
know he has an appeal case pending – but if he gets on the park, he would go a 
long way to getting us out of trouble.”

Hartlepool’s MP, Iain Wright, said that signing Evans, who served two and a 
half years of a five-year sentence for raping a 19-year-old woman in 2011, 
would send the wrong message to young fans.

“I love my club, I love Hartlepool United,” said Wright. “There’s a reason why 
no other team in theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> wants to sign him – he 
is a pariah. I was at the match and there were lots of young lads there 
supporting Hartlepool United. I just think it sends out such a wrong message to 
young men in terms of it being OK for a rapist to play football. It’s entirely 
wrong.”

Sarah Green, a spokeswoman for the campaign group End Violence Against Women 
Coalition, said: “Ched Evans is an unrepentant convicted rapist. Any club who 
sign him need to think hard about the message they are sending to their fans, 
to the local community and to all football supporters.”

There were mixed views on the potential signing from fans on the club’s Poolie 
Bunker forum. While some supporters of the struggling side took the view that a 
proven international goalscorer could be a huge boost to their chances of 
staying in the league, others feared the wider reaction to such a controversial 
move.

PoolieinNottingham wrote: “I really hope this is just a rumour. Thanks to Jeff 
Stelling [the Sky Sports presenter andHartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> fan] loads of people have a 
soft spot for Pools, whereas if this is true we’ll get no end of bad will. If 
we’ve got money to spend on wages now there will be other players who can do 
the job instead of him.”

But in the next message another user replied: “I would take him in a 
heartbeat, what’s done is done, served his sentence, move on people!”

Evans was released by Sheffield United in 2012 after his conviction, but had 
been due to return to the club for training before opposition from local 
politicians and club patrons, including Nick Clegg and Jessica Ennis-Hill, 
ended the possibility.

Ennis told the club that if Evans were offered a contract she would have her 
name taken off the Bramall Lane stand that had been named after her, saying: “I 
believe being a role model to young people is a huge honour and those in 
positions of influence in communities should respect the role they play in 
young people’s lives and set a good example. If Evans was to be re-signed by 
the club it would completely contradict these beliefs.”
 