
Rangers missed the chance to go second in the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> as they were held 
to a 1-1 draw by Falkirk on Friday evening. The visitors took a first-half lead 
with a goal from the defender Darren McGregor but Falkirk replied instantly 
through a header from Rory Loy, who this week signed a pre-contract deal to 
join Dundee in the summer.

Peter Houston’s side move up to fourth after a result that extended their 
unbeaten run to nine matches, although they will feel they could have secured 
all three points after having the best of the chances.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> stay third in the 
table, with the disappointing draw meaning they reduce the gap to Hibernian to 
one point.

Falkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> made a bright start in 
the early minutes, with Loy flashing in a tantalising early cross that only 
just evaded a cluster of players in the six-yard box before John Baird had an 
effort well blocked by McGregor after he had been played in by Mark Kerr.

It was the visitors, though, who took the lead on 20 minutes. Nicky Law 
delivered a deep free-kick from only a few yards inside Falkirk’s half and Kris 
Boyd’s flick-on kept the ball alive. After the home defence failed to clear, 
McGregor was on hand to power his shot past Jamie MacDonald.

The goal had come against the run of play and the hosts wasted little time by 
replying two minutes later. Craig Sibbald found Baird down the left and he 
whipped in an excellent cross to his strike-partner Loy, who escaped the 
attentions of Bilel Mohsni to divert a precise header inside the far post.

The Rangers defence was struggling to get to grips with Falkirk’s quick 
movement in attack and another last-ditch McGregor intervention was required to 
deny Sibbald after he had turned neatly in the box.

Will Vaulks was only just off target with a long-range shot and Haris Vuckic’s 
tame finish after a swift counter-attack was the closest Kenny McDowall’s side 
came to restoring their lead prior to half-time.

The game was more even after the break but clear chances were few and far 
between, with Rangers’ final ball letting them down on a number of occasions. 
At the other end Luke Leahy shot narrowly over and Baird forced Lee Robinson 
into a low save with a shot from the edge of the box.

The visitors brought on Kenny Miller and David Templeton with 15 minutes 
remaining in an attempt to find a second goal. Templeton was immediately 
involved, drawing a foul from Kerr at the edge of the area. Boyd, who was 
captain on the night in the absence of the injured Lee McCulloch, fired a 
powerfully wide of the far post from the resulting free-kick in what would 
prove to be the last key chance of the match.
 