
Rubbish skips crammed with scraps of damp carpets and other ruined remnants of 
once cosy but now cold and empty homes lined the streets around the ground.

No matter that Carlisle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> 
United’s hopes of pulling off a giantkilling were all too swiftly reduced to 
similar tatters, this tie was a testament to the powerful, often indomitable, 
community spirit which has carried the Cumbrian city through the devastation 
inflicted by December’s floods.

Considering much of Brunton Park’s innards require reconstructive surgery – 
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> had to change in 
temporary buildings in the car park – and a new playing surface was needed, the 
club’s ability to host Roberto Martínez’s team appeared a miracle in itself.

In the event Everton, albeit very politely, threw all this effort and 
hospitality back in their hosts’ faces. With Ross Barkley in imperious mode, 
they took their League Two opponents apart with ruthless precision. Barkley’s 
goal, sublimely executed, at the end of a wonderful Everton passing sequence 
featuring around 22 interchanges, summed up the elegance and incisiveness of 
both his and his team’s play.

If the game was a little one-sided, watching Barkley strut his stuff was a 
treat, with the only cloud on the horizon being the suggestion Everton’s Arouna 
Koné and Steven Pienaar were subjected to an isolated incident of alleged 
racist abuse from the stands after Koné scored the first goal.

After condemning a racist incident that is the subject of a police 
investigation, Keith Curle praised those who made this match possible and 
Everton’s football. “It’s been a triumph and an awful lot of work from a lot of 
people to get this game on,” Carlisle’s manager said. “It’s been an excellent 
effort. Unfortunately we gave Everton a two-goal start.” And Barkley. 
“Quality,” Curle said. “He showed what a phenomenal talent he is. He’s a joy to 
watch. The simplicity of how Everton played the game is something we can learn 
from. But my players didn’t go under.”

Very shortly after the kick-off, the long hours of scouting, research and 
meticulous planning he had undertaken must have seemed a little futile. When 
Seamus Coleman lifted the ball over the top of Carlisle’s defence, Aaron Lennon 
was left free to cross, low and smartly, for Koné to extend a boot and open the 
scoring from around a yard.

Less than 100 seconds was on the clock and Curle’s bold game plan revolving 
around a back three in a 3-4-1-2 formation was looking vulnerable. Yet as 
befits a side who scaled mountains carrying boulders and swam across icy lakes 
during a boot camp in the Lake District last summer, Carlisle refused to fold. 
Attempting to use the full width of the pitch they tried to pass and move in a 
manner that must have appealed to Martíinez.

They also threatened to equalise when Derek Asamoah curled in a shot from the 
edge of the area. It was a dangerous moment but Joel Robles proved equal to the 
threat, saving competently before watching Lennon score his side’s second goal. 
The winger was thoroughly enjoying himself down the right but had drifted into 
a much more central position when adroitly cued up by Bryan Oviedo, who had 
played a cute one-two with Barkley. Lennon took a splendid first touch and, 
wrong-footing two defenders, lashed an assured shot beyond Mark Gillespie.

Still Carlisle declined to surrender. They gave Everton’s defence a bit of a 
fright when Asamoah broke through and, after advancing unimpeded for a 
considerable distance, sent a shot curving tantalisingly wide.

Barkley emphasised precisely why he enjoys such a glowing reputation. Sure 
enough, at the end of that 22-pass exchange he met Leon Osman’s delivery, 
stepped inside and unleashed a fabulous shot which took a slight deflection off 
Mark Ellis’s head on its way past Gillespie.

When Barkley was replaced by Darron Gibson he received a standing ovation. 
“For the home fans to show their appreciation when Ross came off was 
great,”Martínez said.

“We were very aware Carlisle are tactically flexible and can play a back five 
but, because of the way we started, it became comfortable for us. Ross helped 
turn it into a real special occasion but Carlisle United deserve incredible 
credit for getting the game on. They’ve given us all a lesson of how to face 
adversity in life and football.”

Man of the match Ross Barkley (Everton)
 