
If the claiming of a domestic treble was key to Ronny Deila’s Celtic 
longevity, he is in serious trouble now. The manager’s inability to make the 
club progress has been evident for some time, most pertinently in Europe, but a 
clean sweep at home had still been cited as significant. That Celtic prospect 
has now vanished with a 10-man, error-strewn and laboured performance the 
backdrop to aRoss County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> 
triumph in the League Cup semi-final.

The tiny Dingwall club will take their place in the final for the first time, 
with Hibernian in wait. County are due immense credit but attention will be 
fixed upon Celtic’s shortcomings in Deila’s 100th match in charge.

Celtic midfielder Gary Mackay-Steven wary of treble complacency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/celtic-midfielder-gary-mackay-steven-wary-of-treble-complacency>
Within 26 seconds of kick-off, the landmark looked likely to be celebrated in 
style. Gary Mackay-Steven putCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> in front, taking advantage of a 
fine Callum McGregor pass and unselfish work by Leigh Griffiths.

That was as good as it got for Deila. The wider context is that a weakness 
under pressure and defensive flaws have been a recurring theme of his tenure. 
Improved fitness and drive are a supposed bedrock of the Norwegian’s approach 
but neither was in evidence again here.

“We have to show more character when we get something against us,” Deila 
admitted. “We are a little bit too weak and give away things too easily.”

Deila added that he was “not worried” about his job. “I have big ambitions and 
I am as disappointed as anybody else.”

With 13 minutes played, Efe Ambrose – who had already passed up two chances to 
score – prevented a clear scoring opportunity for Alex Schalk with a foul 
inside his own penalty area. Martin Woods scored from 12 yards to restore 
parity as Ambrose walked towards an early shower.

Paul Quinn sent County ahead from close range after Andrew Davies headed a 
corner back into his path. Deila rightly bemoaned a foul on Craig Gordon before 
the ball reached Davies.

County’s third came via Schalk, leaving Celtic less than half an hour to 
source salvation. Deila’s men were awarded a highly soft penalty but even that 
mattered not; Griffiths watched his effort batted away by Scott Fox.

Celtic next appear on league business in Aberdeen in midweek. Even privately, 
Deila must know he is rapidly running out of lives.

Man of the match Martin Woods (Ross County)
 