
Steve Evans refused to discuss speculation linking him to another Championship 
job after seeing his position at Leeds become even more precarious following a 
dramatic 2-1 loss at his former clubRotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham>. Evans’s return to the New 
York Stadium, where he enjoyed so many good times in a three-and-a-half-year 
spell, was ruined by Greg Halford’s 89th-minute penalty, which made it five 
wins in six for the Millers.

Defeat would have been inconceivable for the Scot when Luke Murphy cancelled 
out Lee Frecklington’s opener in the 79th-minute, as the Millers were down to 
10 men thanks to Matt Derbyshire’s red card and on the ropes. But Rotherham 
have specialised in late drama under Neil Warnock and won it when Frecklington 
was fouled by the Leeds goalkeeper Marco Silvestri, who also received a red 
card, and Halford scored from the spot.

It was a second successive Yorkshire derby loss for Evans, whose future at 
Elland Road gets bleaker by the match. If he does get the chop at Leeds, he 
might not be out of work for long after speculation linking him with an unnamed 
Championship club.

Evans said: “That’s not for today, I have just lost in a derby at a club that 
is very close to my heart and it’s hard to take. I have not had any phone 
calls, the people that look after me, what they have had is not for me to be 
talking about because I want to beLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> head coach. All I have to 
think about now is QPR on Tuesday. This result doesn’t hurt my future, it hurts 
me today and tomorrow and until next time we play. I didn’t want to come back 
to Rotherham and lose, I wanted to come back and win and for large parts of the 
second half I thought as sure as night follows day that we were going to win. I 
know these Rotherham fans and not for one minute did they think in the last 25 
minutes they would get a goal.”

While Evans is fighting for his job, the situation could not be more different 
in his old dugout as Neil Warnock’s resurrection of the Millers continues. They 
have won five of their last six games, registering an 11-point swing on MK 
Dons, whom they now lead by five points.

But Warnock is not getting carried away: “We still haven’t achieved anything, 
we are good group of lads with our feet on the floor. There are going to be 
hiccups, but I don’t think a hiccup will bother us for the game after. We have 
to scrap for every point and that’s what we will be doing. At 1-1 with 10 men 
most people would have taken the draw, but we’re not like that.”

“You have to work hard to get spirit like that, it’s a good recipe, I have 
done it all my career and I enjoy it. It shows that we don’t know when we are 
beaten. I am enjoying it. We have to enjoy every moment. To get the three 
points now is a bonus because we were up against it.”

Football League: your thoughts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/apr/02/football-league-your-thoughts>
Michael Keane’s last-minute header earns Burnley crucial point at Brighton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/brighton-and-hove-albion-burnley-championship-match-report> 