
Forfar Athletic were ruthlessly brushed aside as Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> warmed up for the altogether 
more difficult task of trying to beat Feyenoord in their own backyard on 
Thursday night.

In this Scottish Cup quarter-final a crowd of 4,504 watched the Ibrox team win 
6-0 despite missing a penalty, as the cows behind the main stand were disturbed 
from their Sunday afternoon routine. In Rotterdam, 45,000 spectators will pack 
the De Kuip Stadium to see the second leg of a Uefa Cup tie poised at 1-1, and 
after fan trouble in the first game at Ibrox the atmosphere will be tense. For 
Rangers, football this week will be at both ends of the scale.

They were certainly professional enough against Forfar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/forfar>, and it is just as well the 
locals enjoyed the build-up to their big day because their dreams of cup glory 
were shattered after only 39 seconds when Rangers took the lead through the 
first of Billy Dodds' three goals.

Forfar regrouped and through Paul Tosh had the temerity to trouble Stefan Klos 
three times, but having failed to score in that threatening 20 minutes and with 
the game plan of keeping it tight early on well and truly scuppered they 
ultimately paid the price.

Rangers sensed the game had to be put beyond the upstarts from the Second 
Division and they did just that with three goals in the last 15 minutes of the 
first half.

Shota Arveladze finished a fine move in style after 30 minutes and then took a 
delightful pass from Stephen Hughes to chip Michael Brown for the third 10 
minutes later. Andrei Kanchelskis added a fourth in the 42nd minute.

Rangers took off Fernando Ricksen and Arveladze and introduced Maurice Ross 
and Russell Latapy on the restart, and 16 minutes later they made it 5-0 
through Dodds. But soon afterwards the Ibrox striker missed a chance of the 
hat-trick when he failed to beat Brown with a penalty awarded after he himself 
had been brought down by Tosh.

Not that it mattered much, for after Allan McGregor was handed a debut in goal 
on 75 minutes in place of Klos the hit man did get his third, and Rangers' 
sixth, right on the final whistle.

It left Alex McLeish, who denied any imminent move for Liverpool's Gary 
McAllister, well satisfied. "We made a great start and although we were a bit 
sloppy for a while thereafter the second goal was important and we killed it 
off before half-time."

The Forfar manager Neil Cooper, who had spent most of the week preaching to 
his players the need to avoid conceding an early goal, admitted: "Unfortunately 
that's exactly what happened and although I felt we reacted quite well they 
took their chances like a top team would."

The satisfaction for Forfar, aside from a brave display, was the money, which 
should amount to over £150,000 eventually and will take them out of the red. It 
was some consolation.

Rangers were the only club to go through over the weekend, after 2-2 draws on 
Saturday between Dundee United and Ayr and between Partick and Inverness 
Caledonian Thistle. The replays will be held on March 6. Aberdeen face Celtic 
tonight in the other tie.

· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, as sharp or 
as stupid as you like, to the <a 
href="mailto:football.editor@theguardian.com">football.editor@theguardian.com.
 