
Andy Carroll is likely to miss out on England’s Euro 2016 squad despite calls 
for the West Ham United striker’s inclusion after hiseye-catching hat-trick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/west-ham-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 against Arsenal. Roy Hodgson praised Carroll’s attributes but the coach 
appeared to suggest the towering centre-forward would struggle to make the trip 
barring a spate of injuries.

“Who do you want to leave out? We have such a wealth of talent in attack, we 
have all these players you all seem to agree are as good as any,” said Hodgson 
as he prepares for England’s final trio of warm-up matches for the tournament 
in France.

Pointing out that he had room for 12 midfielders and forwards in a squad of 
23, he said: “The moment I decide to go for Carroll, someone is going to be 
criticising me enormously for leaving out one of the other ones there.”

After an injury-hit season, Carroll has won plaudits since he returned to the 
West Ham starting lineup, but Harry Kane, Wayne Rooney, Jamie Vardy, Danny 
Welbeck and Daniel Sturridge are likely to be guaranteed places in the squad if 
fit and Theo Walcott, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Raheem Sterling are jockeying 
for position.

“We know Andy, we know his qualities. In an ideal world, certainly, if you had 
a lot of places at your disposal you’d include a guy like him because he is 
exceptional in the air,” said Hodgson. “But whether or not I’d be able to 
include him with all these others I don’t know.”

Hodgson refused to rule Carroll out altogether, but said it was important to 
remember the performances of those who helped England to qualify with an
unblemished record of 10 wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/12/lithuania-england-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
, albeit in a straightforward group. Before the traditional bout of speculation 
about who would make the squad before he names his final 23, Hodgson also 
betrayed irritation at the inevitable calls for inclusion of those who had 
recently run into form. “Maybe before we start wanting to throw out the guys 
who have done so well for the latest shout, the latest ice cream flavour, we 
should show a little bit of respect to what they have done as well.”

England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> will play Turkey in 
Manchester, Australia in Sunderland and Portugal at Wembley before they travel 
to France and Hodgson said his side for the first game would be partly dictated 
by which players were involved in the European finals and the FA Cup final. He 
will look to balance the need to ensure that all of his squad receive game time 
while working towards his preferred starting XI for the opening match with 
Russia in Marseille on 11 June.

“It is a balance. It will be a lot of thinking on our feet, a lot of 
discussions, and the more we can get groups of players playing together that we 
want to play in the opening game, the better it will be,” he said.

But he cautioned that the younger members of his squad who excited in the 
recent friendly against Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
 should be given time to develop together. “All they lack in my opinion is 
experience and that is nothing we can do for them except give them a chance to 
play. We do that and the experience will come.”

Hodgson said he, alongside his assistants Ray Lewington and Gary Neville, 
would have to carefully assess the claims of a clutch of first-choice players 
who would be returning from injury: Jack Wilshere, Sterling, Jordan Henderson, 
Oxlade-Chamberlain and Rooney.

“A year ago they were five players who were getting into every squad,” he 
said. “Things have happened to them and we have to reassess. If we can be sure 
they are at the level of fitness and level of capability to produce the 
performances they produced a year ago and we are convinced they can do it – 
they will be serious contenders. If we are not convinced we have to give it 
some thought.”

Hodgson also added to the chorus of tributes for the achievements of Claudio 
Ranieri’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/10/sunderland-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 Leicester City and said their tilt at the title had been good for English 
football. “What Leicester have taught us is that it is not necessarily a direct 
correlation between the money you spend and the success you have,” he said. 
“What they have done is more a salutary lesson for football and Premier League 
football than [for] the English national team.”
 