
We start 2010 with the news that the redesign of the Guardian crossword site 
is almost complete and will be launched shortly. Sadly, it has not been 
possible at this stage to bring in all the many sensible suggestions that you 
have made for improvements over the years. All changes, even clear 
improvements, take some initial getting used to, but I hope that you will 
welcome these when you see them.

I need to give you advance warning of a transitional consequence of the move 
to the newly designed site. Puzzles saved using the current program may not 
reappear in the new format. Starting from now, you should print out what you 
have done in the current program as an aide-memoire, just in case you don't 
return to your puzzle until after the relaunch. I apologise for this 
inconvenience but no practical way has been found of getting round it and we 
shall put a reminder of this on the crossword homepage nearer the time.

_____

I read somewhere recently that, after more than half a century of decline in 
favour of received pronunciation, regional accents have been making a strong 
comeback in England since the 1970s and continue to do so. This is beginning to 
create something of a problem for crossword setters who like to sprinkle 
homophones among their clues and solutions. There has always been something of 
a problem in this regard for Scottish, Welsh and Irish crossword solvers, for 
whom RP is not the natural way of things, and for those in other lands who 
speak a non-English variety of English. To take an example recently sent to me, 
when it rains heavily we experiencedownpour. If I wanted to make use of the 
word homophonically, would it be legitimate to make the final syllable rhyme 
with "paw" (as in pawpaw or the foot of a dog) or can it only rhyme with "Ur" 
(as in Ur of the Chaldees)? If we are to allow departures from RP in crossword 
clues, should there be a requirement and some indicator word to this effect 
worked in?

_____

As we are starting a new year, may I repeat for newcomers to the Guardian 
crossword site two messages that I have sent before?

First, while we provide annotated solution notes for the Saturday prize 
puzzles and for the monthly Genius puzzle, we do not do so for the others. 
However, there is an excellent site run by a group of crossword enthusiasts 
where the clues in Guardian (and other) puzzles are analysed and commented 
upon. It is http://fifteensquared.net .

Second, while I try to keep up to date with correspondence addressed to 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk, if you have any questions or problems 
of a technical nature, please send them to subshelp@theguardian.com rather than 
to me, because you should get a quicker and better answer from that quarter.

_____

Brummie's December Genius puzzle attracted another large field of entries, 375 
in all. Once again Ian of London N14 was first in with a correct entry at 02:19 
on the first day. There were five others in that day as well.
 