
All that is virtuous or spartan about bread quickly disappears when butter, 
sugar and eggs are kneaded into the sticky dough. Enriched dough requires a 
little more work than normal bread might, and takes longer to rise, but it's 
well worth the effort. The addition of fat and sugar lend the bread a tender, 
yellow crumb, and a soft, deeply coloured crust.

A couple of things to bear in mind when working with enriched dough: it's 
imperative that you take the time to knead the dough thoroughly. Resist the 
temptation to add more flour to it. It will be heavy, it will be sticky, it 
will weld itself to the work surface and to your hands. Be patient with it – 
put on some music and knead for a good 10‑15 minutes. You'll find that with a 
little work, the dough will begin to lose its stickiness and become smoother 
and more elastic.

You can swap the first rise for a far longer stint in the fridge. At a cooler 
temperature the yeast's activity will slow even more, but the bread will taste 
better for it. Just mix and knead as specified, tightly cover its container 
with clingfilm and leave in the fridge for 8-10 hours.

Basic sweet dough
 Cook - Ruby Tandoh dough Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
This dough can be adapted to play host to any combination of guest flavours. 
Add spices, stud the dough with candied peel, chocolate chips, nuts or dried 
fruit, layer or plait it, roll it up or just drizzle it with water icing. 
Simple iced fingers, Bath buns as big as your head, toffee cinnamon swirls and 
even doughnuts can all be created from the same basic sweet dough recipe. 
Simply follow the steps below, adding any spices into the flour before adding 
liquid, and kneading in anything else.

Makes 12
100g unsalted butter, at room temperature
500g strong white flour
1 x 7g sachet of instant yeast
7g salt
40g caster sugar
230ml milk
2 large eggs

1 Crumb the butter into the flour, rubbing it in with your fingertips 
until integrated.

2 Add the yeast, stir, then add the salt and sugar. Heat the milk very gently 
until luke-warm, whisk in the eggs, and pour this into the dry mixture. No 
point messing around with a spatula here – use your hands to mix the dough so 
that it comes together in the bowl.

3 Tip the dough on to a clean work surface and knead well. For a wet dough 
like this, I like to knead by using both hands to gently stretch the dough out, 
then turn it over, slap it back down on to the surface, and fold both ends back 
into the centre. Rotate the dough by 90 degrees and repeat. You'll feel the 
dough gain elasticity: that's the gluten developing that will underpin the 
crumb structure of your bread.

4 Once kneaded, let the dough rise in a large, covered bowl until doubled 
in size (about an hour, but up to two). Gently push down the dough, turn out of 
its bowl, and divide into 12.

5 Shape each piece into a little ball, rolling in circles under a cupped palm 
on an unfloured surface.

6 Arrange in a large, deep tray or roasting dish (dimensions roughly 
20 x 30cm) so each bun sits a little apart from its neighbour. Let it rise for 
30-45 minutes, or until nearly twice their original volume. Meanwhile, preheat 
the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Bake for 30 minutes, though adjust cooking 
time to dough quantity.

Semlor (Scandinavian cardamom cream buns)
 dff Photograph: fff/ff 
If you don't like cardamom you can omit it, but its citrussy fragrance really 
does offset the sweetness of the filling.

Makes 12
1 batch of basic sweet dough
8 cardamom pods, seeds only, finely crushed
60g almond flakes (or ground almonds)
50g unsalted butter, very soft
60g caster sugar
250ml double cream

1 Make a batch of a dozen sweet buns as before, adding the crushed cardamom to 
the flour along with the salt and sugar.

2 While they're baking, toast the almond flakes in the oven for 10 minutes, 
then grind them in a coffee grinder or food processor. Alternatively, use 
ready-ground almonds but, if so, add a little almond essence to boost the 
flavour.

3 Beat the butter and sugar, then add the cooled almonds.

4 In a separate bowl, whip the cream to soft peaks. Slacken the almond mixture 
a little by beating in some of the cream, and then gently fold in a third of 
the remaining cream.

5 Once the buns are cool, halve them, add a little almond cream, spoon on some 
whipped cream, sandwich, and enjoy. A scattering of flaked almonds in the 
middle would be nice, too.

• This aricle was amended on 9 December 2013. An earlier version referred to 
Selma buns. A single bun is a Semla, plural Semlor.
 