
Pastry’s good when it’s short, buttery and pressed neatly into the grooves of 
a fluted tin. I also like it well enough when it’s draped over a pot pie or 
moulded into elegant flan dishes or gently crimped, glazed and scored. When I 
really love pastry, though – and when it truly comes into its own – is when it 
toys with messiness; verges on greedy crumbliness rather than knife-and-fork 
order.

The best pies, for me, are the handheld sort: pasties filled with rich gravy 
and meat; pies that you can hold by a thick crust, eating as you walk; pastry 
slices that leave your fingers and lips greasy and your appetite calling for 
more.

Aubergine, mozzarella and thyme pasties

Sturdy hot-water pastry encases the aubergine filling in these pasties. The 
key to hot-water crusts is all in the name, but don’t panic if you’ve always 
worked to the mantra that cold hands, cold butter and cold water make better 
pastry. Though it’s an unusual method, adding boiling water to the butter and 
flour mixture yields a far more workable, robust pastry than the usual 
shortcrust. This durability may come at the expense of shortcrust’s crumbly 
bite, but it makes hot-water pastry perfect for handheld pies, where the pastry 
case needs to be strong and sturdy. Often, hot-water pastry uses lard but here 
I’ve swapped it for butter, to keep this recipe vegetarian.

Makes 12
For the filling
4 tbsp olive oil
2 medium aubergines, cut into 1cm cubes
2 small garlic cloves
3 tbsp fresh thyme leaves
50g pine kernels
225g mozzarella, torn into small chunks

For the pastry
250g plain flour
150g salted butter, cubed
3 tbsp fresh thyme leaves
50-60ml boiling water
1 egg, beaten with a pinch of salt

1 Add the oil to a large pan and put it over a high heat. Once hot, add the 
diced aubergine and cook for 5 minutes or so, stirring regularly. The heat 
ought to be fierce enough to brown the aubergine pieces as they sizzle. Reduce 
to a medium-low heat and add the garlic, thyme and pine kernels, cooking for a 
further minute or two. Leave to cool completely while preheating the oven to 
200C/400F/gas mark 6.

2 In a large bowl, rub the butter into the flour using your fingertips (you 
could also blitz in a food processor, if you have one). Once no visible chunks 
of butter remain and the mixture is sandy in texture, stir in the thyme. Add 
the boiling water and stir together to give a smooth, pliable dough. Knead 
lightly for a couple of minutes then leave to cool uncovered at room 
temperature, until slightly firmer but not too stiff to roll out.

3 Stir the mozzarella into the cooled filling mixture and season to taste. 
Roll the pastry out on a well-floured surface to roughly 25x50cm, and a 
thickness of no greater than 5mm. Cut out 8 large circles, each 13-14cm in 
diameter, gathering and rerolling any offcuts if necessary.

4 Put 2 tbsp of the filling mixture on one half of each pastry circle, leaving 
a border of 1cm or so around the edge. Fold the other half of the circle over, 
stretching lightly between your fingers if you need to, and press the edges 
together. Roll the edge over on itself, crimping as you go, to fully seal. You 
should be left with a small, half-moon pasty.

5 Repeat the filling, shaping and sealing with the remaining mixture. Move the 
pasties to a large, lightly greased baking tray and brush each with the beaten 
egg to glaze. Pierce a hole in the top of each one. Bake for 25 minutes in the 
preheated oven, and serve either hot or cold.

Raspberry lemon cheesecake slices

A dose of cornflour in the filling and a high-temperature oven help to keep 
these turnovers crisp and stop the cheesecake mixture leaking from the pastry. 
Though I’ve used raspberries, blackberries or blackcurrants would also work 
well here, and the lemon zest in the cream-cheese filling could easily be 
swapped for orange or lime.

Makes 12
375g cream cheese
175g caster sugar
4 tbsp cornflour
Zest 1 lemon
2 tsp vanilla extract

150g unsalted butter
6 large filo sheets, roughly 50x25cm each, 275g total
200g raspberries

1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Grease a large baking tray.

2 In a large bowl, beat the cream cheese until it is smooth and creamy, then 
add the sugar, cornflour, lemon zest and vanilla extract and stir to combine.

3 Melt the butter over a low heat. If your filo sheets are smaller than the 
ones specified, just use more, overlapping them and sticking them together with 
a little of the melted butter. If yours are too big, just trim them to size.

4 Cut one filo sheet in half along its long axis to divide it into two 50x12cm 
rectangles, then brush all over the upper surface of one of the halves with 
melted butter. Cut the sheets as you need them, rather than all at once, so the 
filo doesn’t dry out while you shape the pastries. Place three raspberries near 
one end of the rectangle, then dollop a heaped tablespoon of the cheesecake 
mixture on top. You’re going to be folding one corner of the pastry diagonally 
across the filling to form a right-angled triangle, so try to add the 
cheesecake mixture with that in mind.

5 Fold the corner of filo diagonally over the filling, lining up the pastry 
edges to form a neat right-angled triangle. Carefully fold this filled triangle 
over, so it is parallel with the length of the filo sheet, and in so doing 
wrapping the filling in pastry as you go. Fold this parcel over again 
diagonally. Keep rolling the filling in pastry – repeatedly folding across and 
then diagonally – until you reach the edge of the filo sheet, and the parcel is 
several pastry-layers thick.

6 Repeat the folding process with the remaining filo, cheesecake and 
raspberries. Brush the pastries with a little more butter and arrange on the 
prepared baking tray. Pierce a small hole or slit in the top of each to allow 
steam to escape.

7 Bake for 25 minutes, until crisp and golden. Leave to cool completely before 
eating.P
 