
ost of us have tried rock cakes or rock buns at some point. Some were 
blunderingly put together in home economics, others in a fit of summer holiday 
boredom. They’re the kind of easy cake you can rustle up with not much more 
than a bag of old flour and some sad-looking currants lurking at the back of 
the cupboard: no fancy techniques, no tins, no fuss ... no art.

But while we’re happy to revisit other simple tastes of childhood (fairy 
cakes, gingerbread men, flapjacks ...) long after our tastes and baking prowess 
have evolved beyond them, we’re happy to leave rock cakes firmly in the past.

No more! I know that at their best, rock cakes can be tender, sweet and 
flavourful. The difficulty lies in balancing the texture. The dough needs to be 
firm enough to hold its shape as it bakes freeform, without tins or moulds, but 
rich enough that the finished cake tastes of something other than 
disappointment. In the spiced apple cakes below, tea-soaked dried fruit keeps 
the cake moist without giving too loose a batter; in the gingerbread rock buns, 
a glaze and plenty of glace ginger impart sweetness without the need for the 
added sugar, which would encourage the cakes to spread as they bake.

In terms of technique, the trick to rock cakes that don’t live up to their 
name is to handle the dough as little as possible. The more you work the flour, 
the more you’ll develop gluten and the tougher and heavier the cakes will be. 
Just mix the wet and dry ingredients until they’re barely combined then scoop 
straight into rough mounds on the baking tray.

No baking necessary for these fridge cake recipes | Ruby Tandoh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/22/fridge-cake-salted-caramel-chocolate-mousse-cake-recipe>
Apple spice cakes

Any tea will do for soaking the sultanas in these lightly spiced rock buns, 
but I think that Earl Grey sits well alongside the citrussy lightness of the 
crushed cardamom seeds.

Makes 8
100g sultanas
1 earl grey teabag
150g plain flour
100g wholemeal flour
3½ tsp baking powder
125g soft light brown sugar
½ tsp cinnamon
4 cardamom pods, seeds only, crushed
A pinch of salt
125g butter
100g apple (from 1-2 cox or braeburn apples)
1 large egg
2-3 tbsp demerara sugar

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Line a large baking tray with 
baking parchment.

2 Measure out the sultanas with the teabag in a small heatproof bowl, and add 
enough boiling water to cover the fruit. Leave the fruit to soak and plump up 
until the liquid’s cool, then pass through a sieve, collecting the tea in a 
separate bowl.

3 While the sultanas soak, combine the plain and wholemeal flours, the baking 
powder, sugar, spice and salt. Cut the butter into chunks and rub it into the 
dry ingredients between your fingertips until there are no visible pieces left 
and the flour mixture is coarsely sandy.

4 Peel, core and chop the apples, cutting into ½ cm chunks. Toss the apple and 
drained sultanas through the flour and butter mix. Lightly beat the egg, then 
add to the rest of the ingredients. Work the egg in until you’re left with a 
slightly sticky dough. If you can pick a ball of it up without it sticking a 
little to your fingers, it’s too dry. Add a splash of the reserved tea if this 
is the case.

5 Spoon the batter into 8 portions spread well apart across the baking trays. 
Sprinkle the demerara sugar over their tops, to give a welcome crunch against 
the buttery softness of the cake. Bake for 20-25 minutes in the preheated oven, 
until well-risen and golden brown.

Lemon-glazed gingerbread rock cakes

These will spread a little more than the apple spice rock buns above, but that 
means a softer texture, too. They’re halfway between a soft gingerbread cookie 
and a traditional rock cake. If the heat of glace ginger isn’t to your taste, 
try raisins instead.

Makes 12
400g plain flour
5 tsp baking powder 
1 tsp bicarbonate of soda 
2 tbsp ground ginger
1 tsp cinnamon
½ tsp allspice
½ tsp salt
225g butter
200g soft dark brown sugar 
200g chopped glace ginger

2 large eggs
200g icing sugar
50ml lemon juice

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Line a baking tray with baking 
parchment. Stir the flours, baking powder, bicarbonate of soda, spices and salt 
together in a large bowl. Cube the fat and rub it into the dry mixture. Stir 
through the dark brown sugar and glace ginger. Stir in the eggs to get a rough, 
sticky dough. Spoon into 12 equal heaps spaced well apart on the prepared 
baking tray.

2 Bake for 15-20 minutes, until the rock cakes have risen, spread and set. 
They should be reasonably firm, not spongy, to the touch. While they bake, 
prepare the glaze by stirring the lemon juice into the icing sugar a little at 
a time until the glaze is smooth and pourable.

3 As soon as they emerge from the oven, brush the rock cakes liberally with 
lemon glaze. Sprinkle a little lemon zest or extra glace ginger on top of each 
if you feel like dressing them up. Leave to cool for a while on a wire rack and 
eat while still slightly warm.M
 