
The opening paragraph of Thomas Babington Macaulay's famous Essay on Lord 
Clive contains these two sentences: "Every schoolboy knows who imprisoned 
Montezuma, and who strangled Atahualpa. But we doubt whether one in ten, even 
among English gentlemen of highly cultivated minds, can tell who won the battle 
of Buxar, who perpetrated the massacre of Patna, whether Sujah Dowlah ruled in 
Oude or in Travancore, or whether Holkar was a Hindoo or a Mussulman."

Dying as he did in 1859, Macaulay never had the pleasure of doing a crossword, 
because the first one was not published until 1913 (90 years ago on December 21 
in the New York World, for those who like to store away trivia for some future 
pursuit).

 But, forgiving him his Victorian sexist assumptions about schoolboys and 
English gentlemen, Macaulay was explaining the problem facing every crossword 
compiler: those who try to solve Guardian crosswords can be assumed to have 
highly cultivated minds, but what is reasonable to assume those highly 
cultivated minds will know?

 In 1913, every schoolboy and schoolgirl probably did know who Clive of India 
was. But times change, and crossword clues must change with them. I think, for 
example, that Montezuma, Clive and Macaulay himself could all still 
legitimately feature in a Guardian crossword today, but none of the others in 
Macaulay's list. But on what basis, other than personal prejudice, does one 
draw a line?

 In editing the Guardian's crosswords, I own to being influenced by Collins, 
first published in 1979 and the only standard dictionary to include a selection 
of biographical entries. But Collins certainly includes a large number of 
people, living and dead, who would be ruled out as too obscure even by 
University Challenge standards.

 Other resources I use include books made up of lists of people and things, 
aimed at crossword solvers and compilers: for example, The Complete Crossword 
Companion by Jeremy Howard-Williams (Harper Collins); Crossword Lists by Anne 
Stibbs (Bloomsbury); or The Ultimate Book of Lists: People, Places and Things 
edited by Michael Cader (Pan).

 Which names are sufficiently famous to be included as a solution is one 
problem. Related is the question of which names can fairly be used cryptically 
in the clues. It can safely be assumed that Guardian crossword solvers, being 
on the ball, would today accept clues revolving round Clive / Jonny / Lawrence 
/ Woodward / Wilkinson / Dallaglio. And in 1966, a previous generation would 
have accepted clues reflecting that other World Cup win.

 But how long does sporting fame of the moment last in the world of 
crosswords? Which names become a permanent part of the crossword argot and 
which fade? Bobby Moore would still probably be fair, but you could not really 
get away in 2003 with a clue based on the great Nobby Stiles.

 Actors have always been a significant part of the world of crosswords. 
Indeed, a disproportionate number of the profession are crossword addicts. 
Prunella Scales, Timothy West and Simon Russell Beale, for example, admit 
openly to their habit. In fact, Scales wrote the foreword to the new Chambers 
Book of Araucaria Crosswords, signing off thus: "Where will it all end, wonders 
confused Cruel Penal Lass (8,6)."

 Perhaps it is that actors spend a lot of time waiting around with nothing 
else to do at rehearsals and in their dressing rooms. But which living actors 
can be fairly used in composing a clue and how long can dead ones continue 
fairly to be used?

 No Guardian solver could possibly have thought that the following homophonic 
clue by Araucaria for a car was anything other than brilliant: "Fall, O Simon 
Russell" [autumn/o/beale]. And it has come to be accepted that certain actors, 
some long since gathered, have become part of the accepted shorthand of the 
trade; Charles Chaplin, Laurence Olivier, Mae West or Rudolph Valentino can 
still all be pressed into service as building blocks to a solution.

 But I am beginning to wonder how much longer we can go on accepting that 
ACTOR = TREE. Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree (1853-1917) is still firmly there in 
the latest edition of Collins and was clearly one of the great actor-managers 
of all time.

 His family name has been a gift for years to compilers trying to construct a 
clue with a gardening theme: his over-the-top Shakespearean productions are 
part of theatrical legend, and he was half-brother to satirist Max Beerbohm. 
But how much longer can we go on assuming that every schoolboy and schoolgirl 
knows who he was, or that new solvers will accept this particular bit of 
compiling shorthand?
 