
Benfica’s coach, Rui Vitória, believes his side will have to work hard if they 
are to progress in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> but has warned his 
quarter-final opponents, Bayern Munich, against writing them off.

Having reached at least the semi-final stage of the past four editions of the 
Champions League,winning it in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/25/borussia-dortmund-bayern-munich-champions-league>
, Bayern are overwhelming favourites to see off the Portuguese league leaders 
and keep their hopes of a treble alive.

However, while Vitória is well aware of the task facing his team before the 
first leg in Munich on Tuesday, he says they are not going to roll over for the 
German side.

“Sometimes the only way to neutralise tougher opponents is to recognise their 
strengths, be aware that it will be a hard match and understand that to achieve 
anything you have to go through difficulties and be ready for them,” the 
Portuguese told Uefa.com.

“We go into this game knowing our opponents are candidates to win the 
Champions League but we won’t be backing down.”

Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> can be proud of what 
they have already achieved this season, reaching the quarter-finals for the 
first time in four years, but they are not looking to stop there and a first 
semi-final appearance in 26 years is within reach.

“We know we’ve done something the club have not been able to do recently,” 
Vitória, said. “Any team that makes this stage won’t say they don’t want to win 
the competition.

“We will think about beating Bayern, regardless of how strong they are, but I 
am also proud to see this team, in a transitional phase, getting so far in the 
Champions League with such young players.”

While making the semi-finals would be considered a huge achievement in Lisbon, 
falling at this stage would be deemed a failure for Pep Guardiola’s Bayern.

They came close to elimination in the last round, beating Juventus only after 
extra-time with a stoppage-time Thomas Müller goal saving them from defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/16/bayern-munich-juventus-champions-league-match-report>
, and they also lost 3-1 to another Portuguese side, Porto, a year ago.

“That should be enough of a warning for us,” the Bayern chairman, Karl-Heinz 
Rummenigge, said on his club’s website. “Just like before the Porto game, 
everybody was very optimistic and that made the criticism even greater after 
that game.”

Bayern turned around the tie against Porto in Munich with a 6-1 victory, but 
the Bundesliga leaders would rather not have to come from behind once again. 
“We’re the favourites and, if we play to our ability, then we’re going to go 
through,” the Bayern captain, Philipp Lahm, said.

Lahm will be the experienced link in Bayern’s defence which has been bolstered 
by the return to action of Javi Martínez, although Jerome Boateng is still 
missing. Arjen Robben also misses out due to injury but Guardiola otherwise has 
no major injury concerns for Tuesday night’s Allianz Arena match.

Luisão is Benfica’s only major absentee and he is set to miss out on both legs 
with a broken arm.
 