
Recently, the Yorkshire based herb-and-spice company Steenbergs held a 
competition to find the oldest unused packet of spices in anybody’s cupboard. 
The winner: a pot of Sainsbury’s pickling spices bought in 1975 for 19p 
<http://www.steenbergs.co.uk/blog/2015/04/40-years-on-the-shelf-the-winner-of-our-oldestspice-competition-was-pickling-spice-from-1975/>
. Clearly we should celebrate such Olympic standard procrastination. I’m sure 
they were planning to get round to their brilliant home-pickling project, just 
as soon as they had rearranged the cutlery drawer. But for me that response was 
overlaid by something else: recognition.

For, purely by coincidence, while Steenbergs was encouraging the nation to 
excavate their kitchen cabinets, we were also giving our own walk-in larder a 
clean out. I say “we”. It was entirely my wife’s doing. I was minded to let 
sleeping condiments lie. Two of my unbending rules for a happy life: never look 
under a teenager’s bed and never, ever mess with the kitchen cupboards.

But she was determined. And so the great work began. I stood by and watched as 
the kitchen surfaces were quickly covered with a Manhattan of bottles and jars 
of ancient vintage. This brought me face to face with all my unrealised 
ambitions as a domestic cook. My desire to be an endlessly inventive kitchen 
warrior with a seemingly boundless repertoire, piled up unceremoniously before 
me.

There were the jars of buttercup-yellow preserved lemons, and the dinky pots 
of harissa paste, the colour of coagulating blood, from the period when I was 
determined to explore the wilder shores of the Levantine culinary tradition. 
There were things called “marmalade” which didn’t involve oranges, and 
pitch-black pastes made from damsons which I seem to recall needing for my home 
experiments in neo-rustic British nose-to-tail eating. And don’t get me started 
on the Asian stuff: the fermented bean pastes with endless permutations of 
chilli and dried shrimp; the misos of ever darkening shades; the rice wines and 
soys and vinegars.

Some of these had been opened. I peered inside to find a few with a deep 
dimple where I had sampled this new genius purchase, and then realised I didn’t 
have a clue what to do with it. Others had developed furry moulds so thick I 
didn’t know whether to scoop them out or stroke them and get them baptised. And 
then there were those – oh the shame – where the seal hadn’t even broken.

I should beat myself up here over the disgusting waste, and I do. It doesn’t 
matter how long it takes to throw something away: waste is still waste. But 
even more than that I mourn all those dishes that could have been. They were 
not undermined by lack of ingredients. I reckon I had even accumulated the 
makings for a couple of Yotam Ottolenghi’s simpler recipes. They were 
undermined by lack of commitment.

I’m sure when I bought the myriad jars I meant it. I really was going to 
become a different kind of cook. I really was going to stop making the same old 
things. But I was going to become that different cook tomorrow. Or perhaps the 
day after that. Or next week. And all of a sudden it’s six years later and you 
can’t find the Marmite for the tubs of ras el hanout spice mix. But this has 
stiffened my resolve. I will do better. I will be a more adventurous cook. And 
I will start all this a week next Thursday.

What’s the oldest product you’ve found in the back of your cupboards? Let us 
know in the comments below
 