
Cardiff City’s manager, Russell Slade, accused Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> of “parking the bus” 
after the Bluebirds fell further off the Championship play-off pace with a 1-1 
home draw.

Forest had led through 18-year-old Oliver Burke’s ninth-minute strike - his 
first senior goal - but were pegged back by a deflected Aron Gunnarsson effort 
four minutes later.

Cardiff had over 60 per cent of possession and 17 shots to Forest’s six but 
they could not make it pay and ended up six points behind the top six, much to 
Slade’s frustration.

Ipswich’s Daryl Murphy condemns Brighton to second defeat of season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/brighton-ipswich-match-report>
“We are disappointed. We had some very good chances in that first half,” said 
Slade. “They parked the bus in the second half, sat very, very deep and made it 
difficult for us.

“They lived on the counterattack and we could not unlock the door which is 
very frustrating, even though we did a lot of very good things in the game.

“They tried to kill the game and see it out from an early stage but we should 
have been adding to our tally with the three good first-half chances we had.

“We will just keep working at it and we played well against a good Forest side 
who, had they been any deeper, they would have needed snorkels.”

The draw, in which Tony Watt, Anthony Pilkington and Gunnarsson missed 
excellent chances, leaves Cardiff with three wins in 12 and Slade admits they 
need to find a ruthless edge.

“That run is probably not quite good enough for where we are wanting to be,” 
he said. “The return for us over this festive period has been poor and we need 
to start taking our chances and be clinical when we have teams under pressure 
and are creating opportunities.”

Slavisa Jokanovic sees Fulham beat Rotherham for first win in 10 games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/fulham-manager-slavisa-jokanovic-rotherham>
Despite Cardiff’s dominance Forest had late chances to win the game, with 
Jamie Ward and the substitute Nelson Oliveira failing to convert gilt-edged 
chances.

But their manager, Dougie Freedman, was happy enough with a point that 
extended Forest’s unbeaten run to seven games. “I think we should have won it 
at the end. We had the two best chances of the game during that last 15 
minutes,” he said.

“We tried to slow everything down and quiet their fans down and we felt that 
was the best way to do it.

“We made a lot of changes and we didn’t complain about the number of fixtures. 
The younger guys we had come in gave us some freshness and allowed us to keep 
some guys on the bench and bring them on to try and win the game.

“So I am very proud of the players. They just got on with it and knuckled 
down. With our transfer embargo I am going to need to be able to call on these 
players to get us through to the end of the season.

“My January will be easy and it is about these lads helping to freshen us up 
and keep us going.”
 