
Fired from his job at Granada Television at the age of 40, Lee Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/lee-child> was suddenly on the scrapheap 
with a family to support. Refusing to panic, he spent £3.99 on paper and 
pencils with the ambition of writing the biggest-selling book in the world's 
biggest market: America.

Thirteen years later, Child reaches the summit today when his 12th novel, 
Nothing to Lose, starring his anti-hero Jack Reacher, goes straight to number 
one in the New York Times hardback fiction list, 10 places ahead of Sebastian 
Faulks's James Bond rework Devil May Care. It is the culmination of a 
breakthrough year in which he has also had the number one paperback in America 
and topped both charts in Britain - a quadruple thought to be unique for a 
crime writer.

Child, 53, raised in Birmingham, is beating American thriller writers at their 
own game, just as Londoner Jackie Collins did with the 'bonkbuster'. He is now 
the multi-millionaire owner of two flats in a Manhattan apartment block and two 
houses in St Tropez - one each for living, one each for writing. 'London is 
next on the shopping list,' he says matter-of-factly. He drives a supercharged 
Jaguar built at the now defunct Browns Lane plant 30 yards from the hospital in 
Coventry where he was born.

He is not yet a household name, but a planned Hollywood film adaptation could 
turn his hard-boiled creation into the next Bond or Bourne.

Reacher, 6ft 5in tall with a 50in chest, is something of a blokeish fantasy. 
Faced with six heavies in a bar, he slugs his way out of trouble. When his 
clothes need washing, he throws them out and buys new ones. He is irresistible 
to women, both those in the books and, seemingly, those who read them. An elite 
military policeman turned rootless drifter, Reacher has sleuthed his way 
through a dozen novels sprawling across America, righting wrongs and getting 
the girl, but riding off into the sunset alone - usually by bus. Or as the 
Cambridge academic Andy Martin put it: 'Reacher is a moody, modern outsider 
figure, one of the great anti-heroes. He is anti-capitalism, anti-materialism, 
anti-religion, with a fondness for anarchy and revolution: a liberal 
intellectual with machismo, and arms the size of Popeye's.'

Reacher also has no interest in self-grooming or self-doubt. Child said: 'He's 
whatever the opposite of metrosexual is. He's post-everything. He's 
post-politically correct, post-feminist, post-macho. He wouldn't recognise a 
gym if you showed him one, but he just is what he is, a big strong man who will 
do to you whatever you deserve. It doesn't matter whether you're a man or a 
woman, he'll help you, or he's just as likely to kill you if you deserve it.'

Child was born Jim Grant, but chose his pen name because it was more memorable 
and came earlier in the alphabet. He won a scholarship to JRR Tolkien's old 
school, King Edward's in Birmingham, studied law at Sheffield University and 
worked part-time in theatre. He then joined Granada in Manchester and spent 18 
years as a director during the company's heyday when it produced blue-chip 
dramas such as Brideshead Revisited, Prime Suspect and Cracker

In 1995 Child lost his job as a result of 'corporate restructuring'. He 
started writing 'with a fury that was a perfect balance of creativity and 
financial necessity'. The result, Killing Floor, unleashed Jack Reacher. Since 
then he has steadily built sales, now 15 million copies worldwide, and a loyal 
army of fans.

The author follows in a tradition of literary emigrés telling a nation new 
stories about itself. Many Americans read his short, punchy sentences without 
suspecting his foreign roots. His novels explore the country's geography and 
curiosities with a tourist's relish. He is married to an American, Jane, and 
has lived in New York for 10 years.

'America suited the book I wanted to write much more than Britain,' he 
explained. 'British crime stories tend to be very internal, psychological, 
claustrophobic, very limited in terms of geography. If you think about Ian 
Rankin, it's a small area of Edinburgh. I wanted to do something that was more 
wide-ranging in terms of geography, empty spaces, distant horizons.'

But his protagonist is a universal character type, he believes. 'Almost 
retrospectively, what I realised with Reacher is that he's the same character 
who's always existed in fiction. People say he's from American westerns, 
meaning he's a mysterious drifter who shows up unexplained in the nick of time, 
and I say yes, but that was merely a version itself of the old medieval figure, 
the knight errant.' Tom Cruise's production company has bought movie rights, 
although Child says he would want a Lawrence Dallaglio lookalike in the lead 
role.

Despite the violent content of the high-testosterone adventures, published by 
Bantam, they have proved popular among women. Child added: 'Women are very 
offended by injustice and the story of each book is something very unjust, and 
by the end of the book Reacher has made it just, and women cheer that on.'

The Aston Villa and New York Yankees fan, who has a grown-up daughter, 
dismisses literary snobbery towards the thriller genre. 'Thrillers are the 
direct survivor of what must have been the first type of stories told way back 
whenever it was, the Stone Age or before. We must have told stories about 
danger and peril and then survival and order to console or encourage ourselves. 
I think the thriller form is 100,000 years old and the reason people learned to 
tell stories. Other genres are welcome to ride along.'

His success was assured from the moment he submitted his first manuscript in 
March 1995, according to his agent, Darley Anderson. 'My reader and I knew we 
just had hit gold dust. I told everybody at the time I had a number one 
bestselling author. Lee thought very, very big: his idea from the start was to 
conquer America. I wish more Brits were thinking on that scale.'

Veteran writer Frederick Forsyth said: 'Reacher is clearly going to be another 
Bond-type character. Maybe the American Bond. They've always longed for one of 
their own. How funny if it's created by a Brit.'

What the critics say ...

'Electrifying ... utterly addictive ... dazzles. Not for nothing has the cover 
art of his recent books depicted a bull's-eye.'
New York Times

'It's difficult to decide whether to adore or despise Jack Reacher, the 
enigmatic and indestructible hero ... I find Reacher insufferably smug and 
unbelievable in all his certainty and invulnerability.'
Guardian

'Slots a series of bone-crunching brawls into a surprisingly sinuous and 
zeitgeisty plot ... Reacher's bare-knuckle sleuthing certainly keeps the 
adrenalin up.'
Financial Times

'Lee Child is currently walking all over American thriller writers.'
Mirror

... And how he writes

O'Donnell asked, 'What are you running from?'

'I'm not running from anything.'
 