
 Vinny's Las Palmas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> blood-lust

Colleagues of ex-Spurs man Vinny Samways - said last week to be 'desperately 
trying to save his career in Spain' - have denied that the midfielder's 
disciplinary record is wrecking his future. Currently serving his 16th 
suspension after ten red cards in 88 games with Las Palmas, Samways has also 
picked up 47 cautions. But according to teammate and captain Paquito Ortiz 
(left), Vinny is just misunderstood.

'Vinny is not monsterous', says Ortiz. 'I know him well. He is just a typical 
virile British player who wants to win every single ball. He does get 
frustrated when things go wrong and he starts swearing and speaking with 
himself in English - nobody can understand a word what he is saying then. But 
sometimes he can just lose completely the plot'.

In ten years in England, with Spurs, Everton and Birmingham, Samways - more 
playmaker than hard man - was sent off just once. Las Palmas, though, has 
changed him. Now 31, he is attracting a booking every 155 minutes in an effort 
to help the Amarillos recapture their glorious 1980's form under ex-Spanish 
national coach Miguel Munoz.

'But I'm not an animal like they say,' Samways tells us. 'I've not changed at 
all. The refs over here just don't allow you to do anything. I used to think 
English officials were bad but compared to this lot, they are sensational. I 
admit I have been to blame for a couple of red cards but in Spain they're just 
not used to players who tackle.'

'I think the main problem with Vinny on the pitch,' says Ortiz, 'is that he 
cannot hide his actions during the 90 minutes. Some other rival players slap 
your face and spit on you but hardly ever are caught. Very often, Vinny is 
their target because they know he is easy to put on fire. He particularly 
doesn't like to be called 'El Giri', which means 'foreign scum', and gets 
provoked in this way in almost every single game.

'But he learns. El mister (the manager) shouted at him after he was sent-off 
against Tenerife. Then he went five games without a red card. I think it is him 
who is the victim. Vinny knows the dressing room are right behind him.

Captain Paquito adds that far from 'desperately trying to save his career' - 
Samways is actually now enjoying hero status. 'He is a marvellous man. When he 
arrived, from the first day Vinny never reacted like a typical foreign player 
who needs time to recharge his batteries. He arrived here with his batteries 
already recharged.

'And we have 100 fans who have named their fan club after him: 'Pena Vinny 
Samways.' They always stand in the same terrace behind the goal with a British 
flag singing 'Vinny, Vinny, Vinny Samways el mejor' (Vinny the best).

'Vinny is simply not nasty,' Ortiz assures. 'He is in fact a very homely 
person. Recently he bought a massive house in the south of the island in a 
tourist resort called San Fernando de Maspalomas. He is very happy here and is 
loved by all. It would not surprise me if Las Palmas becomes his full-time home 
once he decides to hang up his boots. That, indeed, would be very nice'.

 God's own God squad 

The captain of Brazilian club side Gremio this week denied that their 
appalling form in the national championship is down to the team having too many 
religious players.

Fifteen of the 29 strong-squad belong to 'Atletas de Cristo' (athletes of 
Christ), a loosely organised group of evangelical footballers who organise 
regular prayer meetings, usually on the eve of matches in the team hotels. Last 
week the Porto Alegre press claimed the religion had turned Gremio soft - but 
captain Luis Carlos Goiano, one of the faithful, hit back. 'When our team was 
winning,' he says, 'nobody made comments about our beliefs, and now this. It is 
all absolutely nonsense.'

But 'athletes of Christ' has also been hit by new accusations of hypocrisy. In 
June, members joined a massive brawl which led to the abandonment of the 
Paulista championship final between Corinthians and Palmeiras - after which 
they unfurled a banner announcing 'Jesus, the victory is yours.'

And now, in the same month as Gremio players were accused of shrugging off 
defeats as 'God's will' on the one hand, and claiming credit for rare victories 
on the other, Palmeiras manager Luis Felipe Scolari launched a scathing attack 
on Marcelinho Carioca as a 'preacher' off the field, but a 'violent fool' on it.

'The players throw themselves like gladiators at the shins of opponents, then 
attribute their victory to Jesus, to God, to the Lord,' wrote columnist 
Fernando Calazans in o Globo last week. 'Their hypocrisy is tiring.'

Gremio, South American champions in 1995, are now 18th, and falling fast.
 