
There may yet be a Manchester derby with a difference. Salford City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/salford-city> will enter Monday’s 
third-round draw with the prospect of facing Manchester United, giving some of 
Old Trafford’s old boys divided loyalties. First, however, they have to 
negotiate a second clash with an altogether lowlier United, in Hartlepool, on 
15 December before Salford’s owners from the Class of ‘92 can be pitted against 
former and current employers.

A team who have already triumphed in replays against Whitby and Bradford Park 
Avenue have shown they can take the scenic route to the latter stages. 
Salford’s board members claimed 112 winners’ medals, 16 of them in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, during their playing days. Now 
they have helped steer a team from the seventh tier into uncharted territory. 
They owed their replay, however, to a man whose CV features Aston Villa and the 
Republic of Ireland, not United and England.

The left-back Stephen O’Halloran, capped twice by his country, provides proof 
of Salford’s pulling power. Signed by Ryan Giggs, he served as City’s rescuer. 
His recruiter was not there to witness it. Giggs’ job as Louis van Gaal’s 
assistant meant he was preparing for Manchester United’s meeting with West Ham. 
With the new-look Valencia management duo of Gary and Phil Neville also 
missing, only Paul Scholes and Nicky Butt of Salford’s illustrious owners were 
present. “They own a semi-professional football club and will walk away saying 
our little club has held its own against full-time teams three times,” said the 
co-manager, Bernard Morley.

Even in absentia Salford’s owners still contrived to intimidate Hartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool>, according to their manager. 
“The Class of ‘92 can’t play,” said Ronnie Moore. “It’s not like we are playing 
them. We are playing Salford City. I could have given more than some of them in 
that first half, honestly. It’s unacceptable.”

His side nevertheless took the lead. Rhys Oates marked his 21st birthday by 
bursting beyond the Salford defence before being tripped by Andy Dawson and 
converting the resulting penalty. Yet Salford,conquerors of Notts County in the 
previous round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/06/salford-city-notts-county-fa-cup-match-report>
, have displayed an ability to compete with their supposed superiors.

The Evo-Stik Northern Premier League side bridged a gap of 52 league places in 
a redemptory moment for Dawson. He met Scott Burton’s free-kick with a header 
that O’Halloran swivelled to finish. Gary Neville tweeted in celebration. 
Mischievously, Scholes had suggested his friend would still try and run the 
non-league club. “Gaz likes to be in control,” he said, tongue wedged firmly in 
cheek. The elder Neville’s attentions have to be focused on the Mestalla more 
than Moor Lane now, but, on a flying visit back to Manchester, he had met the 
Salford players at Hotel Football, another of his business interests, in the 
afternoon to wish them luck.

With more fortune, they could have won the game. “I’m gutted we didn’t,” said 
Anthony Johnson, the other co-manager. James Poole’s free kick whistled inches 
wide. Captain Chris Lynch’s swerving long-range shot drew a fine save from 
Trevor Carson. Johnson was nonetheless downcast. “It feels like a defeat,” he 
said.

It could have been one. Rakish Bingham and Scott Fenwick spurned glorious 
chances to deliver a winner, the substitute heading over and the winger 
misjudging Oates’ enticing cross completely. “I would have scored both 
chances,” said the 62-year-old Moore, an accomplished finisher in his day.

He cut a frustrated figure. Hartlepool have spent 95 years in the Football 
League but languish 88th on the ladder and, with 12 defeats in their last 20 
games, are unaccustomed to being cast as giants. The burden of expectation sat 
uneasily on their shoulders. An irritated Moore said he was losing his voice 
from yelling at his charges.

Moor Lane was raucous. This was a 1,400 sellout at a ground on the backstreets 
just off the A56, which connects the centre of Manchester with the Nevilles’ 
home town of Bury. The half-time soundtrack, with the playlist compiled by Tim 
Burgess of the Charlatans, consisted of Mancunian music. Salford have a local 
identity but are benefiting from an injection of glamour. They are a blend of 
the homely and the legendary, with a digger behind one goal and Champions 
League winners in the crowd.

They have emerged from obscurity and ventured into prosperity and popularity. 
They banked another £72,000 in broadcast rights. They hope for plenty of 
backing at Victoria Park. “Hopefully the nation will be behind us again,” said 
Morley, struggling to comprehend Salford’s swift progress. “The thought of 
being in the third-round draw is just not realistic. It is something you dream 
of as a little boy and as a manager and a player.”

His co-manager’s thoughts have already strayed to potential opponents. “We are 
in the hat for the third round of the FA Cup,” Johnson said. “That is 
unbelievable: Manchester City, Manchester United, whoever…” There may soon be 
another local rivalry in Manchester.

Northwich’s Jim Gannon flies non-league flag with Northampton test in store | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/northwich-jim-gannon-non-league-northampton> 