
This stadium is not a place that holds many happy memories for Tony Pulis, 
whose six months in charge of Bristol City back in 1999 were a largely 
forgettable experience for all involved, yet theWest Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> manager enjoyed a happy return 
to Ashton Gate on Tuesday night courtesy of Salomón Rondón’s well-taken 
second-half goal.

With a composed finish eight minutes after half-time, Albion’s club-record 
signing registered only his fourth goal since arriving for £12m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/10/west-brom-salomon-rondon-zenit-st-petersburg>
 in the summer to book the Premier League club a place in the fourth round and 
set up a home tie against Peterborough on Saturday week.

For Pulis, who picked his strongest available team, the hope is that the goal 
will do Rondón the power of good after a difficult first season in English 
football in which the Venezuelan has showed plenty of willing but lacked that 
clinical touch when it matters.

While the other good news for Pulis was Ben Foster keeping a clean sheet on 
only his second appearance since returning from being sidelined for nine months 
with a cruciate ligament injury, the Albion manager appears to have lost 
another key player before Saturday’s derby against Aston Villa.

Chris Brunt limped off in the 17th minute after pulling a calf muscle and 
joins James Morrison, Jonas Olsson and Darren Fletcher on the sidelines. Saido 
Berahino was also absent from the Albion squad with illness and speculation 
continues that Newcastle are weighing up an £18m move for the striker. “The 
valuation will be determined by the chairman,” Pulis said. “I was going to play 
Saido tonight. But he has picked up a bug that Rickie Lambert and a few other 
players had.”

In truth there was little to choose between the teams on a bitterly cold 
evening when a humdrum game did nothing to warm the hearts of the supporters. 
Bristol City will ruefully reflect ontheir failure to hold onto a 2-1 lead at 
The Hawthorns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/west-bromwich-albion-bristol-city-fa-cup-match-report>
, where Morrison scored an injury-time equaliser, and this game could also have 
panned out differently for them if Wes Burns had converted a presentable chance 
in the 14th minute.

Burns was City’s best player and caused Albion a few problems in the second 
half, when he saw one shot blocked by Craig Dawson and Foster parry another in 
the closing stages. Yet City never really played as if they believed they could 
cause an upset and their seasonnow hinges on recruiting a new manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/14/bristol-city-sack-manager-steve-cotterill>
 to steer them clear of relegation.

Albion’s goal was simple enough and exposed some poor marking in City’s 
defence. Dawson floated in a cross from the Albion right and Rondón, afforded 
far too much time in the City area, was able to take the ball down on his chest 
before beating Max O’Leary, the 19-year-old home keeper who was making his full 
debut, from no more than six yards. It was Rondón’s first goal since October.

“Salomón is going to be a good player,” Pulis said, before outlining the 
problems the forward has encountered. “He’s found it difficult, the Premier 
League is so intense, which has not been the case where he has played. But the 
players love him because he works so hard, he’s such a genuine kid, and you 
could see that in the way they celebrated with him.”

Although Gareth McAuley had a good chance earlier in the match, when the 
defender headed over the bar from six yards, and Craig Gardner thrashed a 
left-footed volley from the edge of the area narrowly wide, Albion created 
relatively little. City could, and possibly should, have been ahead when Burns 
had that excellent opportunity. Running onto Bobby Reid’s pass in the inside 
right channel, the 21-year-old striker had only Foster to beat but dragged a 
low shot beyond the far upright.

Rondón was not so generous when opportunity knocked at the other end. “There 
was not a lot in it, but I think the experience showed in the end,” said John 
Pemberton, who is City’s interim manager following Steve Cotterill’s dismissal 
last Thursday. “They’re so well organised and they don’t make mistakes. I think 
they had one chance and it ended up in the back of our net.”

Bristol City sack manager Steve Cotterill after dismal league run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/14/bristol-city-sack-manager-steve-cotterill> 