
Sam Allardyce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce> was 
thrilled to witness a performance from Andy Carroll which he rated among the 
striker’s most accomplished in the colours of West Ham. Carroll scored two 
towering headers against Swansea City to propel his side towards their third 
win in eight days and up to third place in the Premier League table.

“I’d have to say it’s very close,” said Allardyce, who went on to imply that 
even better could be round the corner as Carroll is still improving in terms of 
match fitness. The manager considered taking off his marauding No9 but 
resisted. “We thought: ‘No, we’ll leave him on and enjoy what’s been a very 
good eight days for us.’ ”

With another aerial challenge Carroll assisted West Ham’s third goal that 
Diafra Sakho dispatched with aplomb. The former England striker, who had not 
scored since March, was overjoyed. “I’ve played a couple of games and I’m back 
but until you score you don’t feel like you are definitely back. Now I’ve 
scored I am definitely back.”

In terms of his playing style Carroll looks as if he represents the spirit of 
a striking ideal from years gone by and Allardyce was at pains to point out 
that the values he represents should not be overlooked in modern football. 
“It’s got lost in the game somewhat today,” he said. “People don’t seem to talk 
about the technical ability you need to meet a ball that’s in the air at the 
right time and guide it into the right place.”

With Carroll finding his best form, Sakho effervescent on his return from 
injury and Enner Valencia working his way back to fitness, Allardyce is hopeful 
he has the firepower to sustain West Ham’s run. That he was able to replace 
Valencia, who was not at his best, with Sakho – who dazzled – at half-time 
augurs well. “We get players back from injury and sometimes it’s like they’ve 
never been away but Valencia wasn’t as good as we know he can be so we brought 
our leading goalscorer on,” Allardyce said.

“Enner will be back, no doubt about that. He’ll be disappointed. But fact of 
the matter is there is competition for places, everyone has to continue to play 
at their best or someone will take their place. We have really good options on 
the front line.”

Allardyce hinted Valencia will soon be open to negotiations about renewing his 
contract, which expires at the end of the campaign. “This season was a 
difficult start. Nobody knew more than me that, if the first 10 games didn’t go 
well, it would probably be the end. Sooner or later we’ll sit round the table 
and talk about it.”
 