
Sam Baldock has insisted that an injury-hit Brighton & Hove Albion can still 
shake off both bad luck and a two-goal deficit to reach the Championship 
play-off final againstSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> .

The forward admitted that Brighton had been forced to grin and bear their 2-0 
defeat at Hillsborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/07/middlesbrough-v-brighton-championship-promotion-decider-live-boro-albion>
 – as much for picking up four pivotal injury blows as the result. Connor 
Goldson, Tomer Hemed, Steve Sidwell and Anthony Knockaert were all forced out 
of Friday’s defeat in Sheffield and all are now expected to miss the return leg.

Dale Stephens remains suspended after his red card in the 1-1 draw at 
Middlesbrough that led to the Teessiders edging out Brighton for automatic 
promotion. Baldock admitted the catalogue of misfortune could easily unsettle 
the Brighton squad, but he insisted his team-mates remain bullish about their 
chances of reaching the final.

“We’ve had a fair amount of bad luck over the last couple of weeks and quite a 
lot of it in Friday’s game,” Baldock said.

Middlesbrough 1-1 Brighton: Boro promoted to Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/07/middlesbrough-v-brighton-championship-promotion-decider-live-boro-albion>
“If you don’t laugh, you cry, with four key players picking up injuries and 
going down to 10 men. When you look at the spells of possession they pretty 
much dominated the entire game. But we showed a lot of resilience and I think 
they’ll be disappointed it was only two.”

Andrew Crofts could be drafted into Brighton’s midfield as the manager, Chris 
Hughton, aims to make light of the stretched resources that could leave him 
shorn of 10 players on Monday. Baldock hopes Brighton can seize upon a 
pressure-free attitude now, with the odds stacked against them.

“We’ve got nothing to lose now and the pressure is completely on them,” 
Baldock told Brighton’s club website. “We’re positive and we’re going to go for 
it. We’ve got 90 minutes for them to come to the Amex with a full stadium, with 
screaming fans egging us on. Stranger things have happened. I came off the 
pitch thinking, ‘Come on, bring on Monday,’ because believe me, this tie is not 
over.”

Wednesday, managed by Carlos Carvalhal, are bidding to return to the Premier 
League for the first time since being relegated at the end of the 1999‑2000 
season.

“We are absolutely and 100% focused and ready to go. As far as we are 
concerned, the score is 0-0 when we kick off,” the Portuguese said. “Brighton 
are a dangerous opponent and they know what they must do. But we do also. And 
we are feeling fresh mentally and physically.

“We will prepare for this game exactly the same as every game we have played 
this season. There is no other way. I do not even think about the final. I 
think 100% about the second leg and we are going to Brighton to give our 
absolute best.”
 