
Sam Winnall’s double helped keep Barnsley on course for a return trip to 
Wembley as a 3-0 first-leg win against Walsall gave them a big advantage in 
theirLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
play-off semi-final.

Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> lifted the 
Johnstone’s Paint Trophy in the capital at the start of April and are big 
favourites to head back there on 28 May after Jason Demetriou’s first-half own 
goal and two from Winnall in the second period left Walsall with it all to do 
in Thursday’s second leg.

Both sides were unchanged from the last day of the regular season when 
Barnsley won 4-1 at champions Wigan to secure the final play-off place and
Walsall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> missed out on automatic 
promotion by a single point, despite beating Port Vale 5-0.

Where did the season go wrong for your club?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/where-did-the-season-go-wrong-for-your-club>
Barnsley’s Lloyd Isgrove had the game’s first chance after a cagey opening 
when his thumping 14th-minute drive from outside the penalty area was tipped 
over by Neil Etheridge.

Tom Bradshaw fired straight at Barnsley’s goalkeeper Adam Davies at the other 
end soon after as a high-tempo first half gathered momentum.

Barnsley’s Adam Hammill clipped a fine ball into the penalty area for Isgrove 
to steer home in the 22nd minute, only for his effort to be ruled out for 
offside. Television replays showed this was the wrong decision with Adam 
O’Connor playing the midfielder onside.

Walsall full-back Demteriou’s low effort was gathered by Davies after a strong 
run into the area before Bradshaw spurned a golden chance from Milan Lalkovic’s 
low cross and the visitors were made to pay on the stroke of half-time.

Winnall burst into the box and pulled the ball back for Adam Hammill, whose 
right-footed shot was heading wide until a significant deflection off Demetriou.

The linesman Mark Duncan, whose flag had ruled out Isgrove’s first-half 
effort, was spared further abuse from home fans after being replaced at the 
interval by fourth official Jeremy Simpson because of a calf injury.

Simpson was soon in action down his line as Barnsley tore forward after the 
restart. Isgrove wasted a clear chance when opting to shoot straight at 
Etheridge, who was outnumbered three to one but two goals in as many minutes 
saw the home side seize control of the tie.

Winnall let fly from 25 yards in the 54th minute and his shot deflected off 
James O’Connor before nestling in the top corner.

Less than 60 seconds later the former Wolves trainee took his tally for the 
season to 24, taking Josh Brownhill’s fine pass in his stride and sliding the 
ball home from eight yards.

Walsall, all at sea, gathered themselves and chased a way back into the tie 
but were left to rue Anthony Forde’s low cross-shot, which flew inches wide, 
and Sam Mantom’s glaring miss.
 