
Go to Shoreditch Grind, near a roundabout in the middle of London’s hipster 
district. It’s a coffee shop with rough-hewn wooden tables, plentiful sunlight 
from wide windows, and austere pendant lighting. Then head to Takk in 
Manchester. It’s a coffee shop with a big glass storefront, reclaimed wood 
furniture, and hanging Edison bulbs. Compare the two: You might not even know 
you’re in different spaces.

It’s no accident that these places look similar. Though they’re not part of a 
chain and don’t have their interior design directed by a single corporate 
overlord, these coffee shops have a way of mimicking the same tired style, a 
hipster reduction obsessed with a superficial sense of history and the remnants 
of industrial machinery that once occupied the neighbourhoods they take over. 
And it’s not just London and Manchester – this style is spreading across the 
world, from Bangkok to Beijing, Seoul to San Francisco.

It’s not just coffee shops, either. Everywhere you go, seemingly hip, unique 
spaces have a way of looking the same, whether it’s bars or restaurants, 
fashion boutiques or shared office spaces. A coffee roaster resembles a WeWork 
office space. How can all that homogeneity possibly be cool?

In an essay for the American tech website The Verge 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/8/3/12325104/airbnb-aesthetic-global-minimalism-startup-gentrification>
, I called this style “AirSpace”. It’s marked by an easily recognisable mix of 
symbols – like reclaimed wood, Edison bulbs, and refurbished industrial 
lighting – that’s meant to provide familiar, comforting surroundings for a 
wealthy, mobile elite, who want to feel like they’re visiting somewhere 
“authentic” while they travel, but who actually just crave more of the same: 
more rustic interiors and sans-serif logos and splashes of cliche accent 
colours on rugs and walls.

Am I a hipster? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Joel Golby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/am-i-a-hipster-google> 
Hence the replicability: if a hip creative travels to Berlin or Tallinn, they 
seek out a place that looks like AirSpace, perhaps recommending it on 
Foursquare or posting a photo of it to Instagram to gain the approval of 
culturally savvy friends. Gradually, an entire AirSpace geography grows, in 
which you can travel all the way around the world and never leave it.

You can hop from cookie-cutter bar to office space to apartment building, and 
be surrounded by those same AirSpace tropes I described above. You’ll be 
guaranteed fast internet, strong coffee, and a comfortable chair from which to 
do your telecommuting. What you won’t get is anything interesting or actually 
unique.

There are several causes of AirSpace. The first is that mobility is 
increasing: more people move more quickly around the world than ever before, 
mostly passing through the same urban hotspots (London, New York, Los Angeles, 
Hong Kong), and carrying their sense of style with them. It’s globalisation, 
but intensified, made more accessible to a wider economic spectrum of people, 
more of the time. Mobility is not just for the rich any more: working remotely 
is increasingly common; you can take a sabbatical to work from Bali and not 
miss a beat.

Taste is also becoming globalised, as more people around the world share their 
aesthetic aspirations on the same massive social media platforms, whether it’s 
Facebook, Instagram, Pinterest or Foursquare, with their hundreds of millions 
or billions of users. As algorithms shape which content we consume on our 
feeds, we all learn to desire the same things, which often happens to involve 
austere interiors, reclaimed wood, and Edison bulbs, like a metastasised 
real-life version of Kinfolk magazine or Monocle.

Startups are also growing to provide these experiences of sameness as a 
product, predicated on the fact that we now prefer consuming ready-made generic 
spaces to creating new ones of our own. We’ve been infantilised. The companies 
use technology to foster a sense of easy placelessness; Roam, for example, is 
an international chain of co-living and working spaces that offers the same 
lifestyle (and same furniture) in Madrid, Miami and Ubud, and residents can 
live anywhere for £1,500 per month. WeWork’s WeLive branch creates wan 
dormitories for mobile tech workers, each with its own raw-wood furniture and 
mandated techno-kitsch interior decorating.

Airbnb: from homesharing cool to commercial giant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/18/airbnb-from-homesharing-cool-to-commercial-giant>
But the king of AirSpace is Airbnb. The platform enables users to travel 
seamlessly between places, staying in locals’ apartments. Its slogan is “you 
can belong anywhere”. But all Airbnbs have a way of looking like AirSpace, too 
– consultants who work with Airbnb hosts as well as the company’s own 
architects told me that a certain sameness is spreading, as users come to 
demand convenience and frictionlessness in lieu of meaningful engagement with a 
different place. Heading to yet another copycat coffee shop with your laptop 
isn’t “local”. Why go anywhere if it just ends up looking the same as whatever 
global city you started from?

It’s not just boring aesthetics, however. AirSpace creates a division between 
those who belong in the slick, interchangeable places and those who don’t. The 
platforms that enable this geography are themselves biased: a Harvard Business 
School study showed that Airbnb hosts are less likely to accept guests with 
stereotypically African-American names.

There’s also the economic divide: access to AirSpace is expensive, whether 
it’s a £3 cortado or the rent on a WeLive or Roam apartment. If you can’t 
afford it, you are shut out.

AirSpace is convenient, yes. It helps its occupants feel comfortable wherever 
they are, settled in amid recognisable reminders that they are relevant, 
interesting, mobile and global. You can change places within it with a single 
click, the same anonymous seamlessness of an airport lounge but distributed 
everywhere, behind the facades of local buildings that don’t look like hotels, 
but act like them.

Yet the discontent of this phenomenon is a creeping anxiety. Is everywhere 
really starting to look just the same? Glance around and you might be surprised.

The next time you pick out a cafe or bar based on Yelp recommendations or 
Foursquare tips, or check into an Airbnb, each system driven by an audience of 
similar people, check if you see reclaimed wood furniture, industrial lighting, 
or a certain faux-Scandinavian minimalism. Welcome to AirSpace. It will be very 
hard to leave.
 