
The Cardiff manager, Russell Slade, claimed things are not all bad after his 
side struggled to a 0-0 draw at home toBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity>.

A turgid game sprang into life in the last 10 minutes as both sides came close 
to snatching the three points.

The Bristol wing-back Elliot Bennett had an opportunity to win it late on when 
David Marshall pushed Joe Bryan’s shot into his path and he cracked a shot 
against the goal-frame.

Socceroo Luke Brattan loaned to Bolton after signing for Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/27/socceroo-luke-brattan-loaned-to-bolton-after-signing-for-manchester-city>
And Sammy Ameobi could have broken Bristol City hearts but he could only poke 
a shot wide with the goal gaping in time added on.

Marshall was in fine form to keep Bristol City at bay. First he kept out 
Jonathan Kodjia’s close-range header before he dived full-stretch to push 
Bryan’s shot on to a post.

Joe Mason had two chances to give Cardiff the lead in as few minutes after the 
break but failed to convert crosses from Lee Peltier and Alex Revell.

Slade said: “We were below par in the first half. We didn’t have a creative 
edge. We are tight and organised but we need to be doing more, particularly at 
home, to be creating more opportunities.

“Sometimes in football you cannot always find the level you’ve set yourself 
but there’s no need for doom and gloom. If we had won this game, then we would 
have been two points off second place. You have to be positive about what we’re 
doing.

“We have to back this point up with a win like we did when we drew with 
Preston and beat Middlesbrough. We have to go to Ipswich now and back it up 
again to keep our momentum going.

“There could be bids for David Marshall in January. We’ve not had any contact 
and he’s enjoying it atCardiff City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> and playing well, which is 
the most important thing for us right now.”

Steve Cotterill, the Bristol City manager, said: “I’m disappointed for the 
boys not disappointed in them, had that last chance gone in from Ameobi it 
would have been a catastrophe.

“We did enough to win the game, some of our football was excellent and we had 
some great efforts on goal.

“For the second game running their goalkeeper was man of the match. We had the 
same at Brighton in midweek. Marshall was absolutely outstanding.

“We’ve got a very young team, our boys are doing a lot of learning and the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> is a tough 
learning curve for them but they are coming through it with flying colours.

“We’ve played like we did here all season. That was not a one-off. Things will 
turn around for us during the season and it will come back to us.

“You never know what is going to happen in the Championship or the Football 
League because it is full of honesty.”
 