
I enjoyed the happy, prototypical American childhood of Norman Rockwell 
paintings: family dinners, football weekends, stockings hanging from the 
mantelpiece. And yet, from the time I graduated from high school until my 
now-husband entered medical school in New Orleans, Louisiana, 10 years later, I 
lived in two different countries and five states. I loved discovering new ways 
of life and never considered staying anywhere permanently, and certainly not 
returning to the small Wisconsin town where I grew up.

New Orleans was like nothing I had ever seen, heard or tasted before. From our 
first days there, living on one side of a renteddouble-shotgun house 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shotgun_house> half a block from a major Mardi 
Gras parade route, I felt like I had found the home I was meant to have all 
along but never knew to miss. We could walk to Casamento’s for raw oysters and 
cold beer, to Guy’s Po-Boys for fried catfish sandwiches that we dressed with 
potato salad, and to Hansen’s Sno-Bliz for cups of shaved ice sugared with root 
beer syrup and sweetened condensed milk.

I’ve decided that gumbo is infinite, which allows me to continue cooking, 
eating and writing about it forever

While my husband studied, trained, and ultimately worked long hours as a 
paediatric emergency room physician, I kept myself marginally employed by 
writing about New Orleans and its food culture. Above all else, this meant 
talking about, eating and learning to cook the city’s most iconic dish: gumbo. 
Chicken and sausage gumbo, seafood gumbo, creole gumbo, turkey gumbo, green 
gumbo, gumbo made with hard-cooked eggs, gumbo made with canned wieners, duck 
gumbo, okra gumbo, filé gumbo, Cajun gumbo, gumbo sealed in airtight jars and 
stored for the next hurricane. The topic of gumbo in and around New Orleans is 
so great that I wrote a book about it and only touched on the superficial. I’ve 
decided that gumbo is infinite, which conveniently allows me to continue 
cooking, eating and writing about it forever.

We moved to California last summer after 17 years in New Orleans. The reasons 
are various and sound enough that I left willingly and even without taking any 
crucial gumbo ingredients with me (you can make gumbo anywhere, but 
Louisianians tend to travel with their favourite sausage and spice mix). I was 
almost belligerent in the belief that in order to adjust to my new life I 
needed to leave gumbo and all of its culinary cousins behind for a while, to 
immerse myself in California’s food culture, which is rich in a much different 
way.

But I neglected to consider the presidential election of 2016. Come that tense 
first week of November, I scrambled to think of what I could possibly serve on 
election night that would taste celebratory if my candidate won and feel 
medicinal if she didn’t. I ran through all the favourites of our new California 
kitchen: grilled guacamole and pizzas,heirloom bean 
<https://www.ranchogordo.com/collections/heirloom-beans> stews, flap steak 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flap_steak> tacos, fresh tomato and goat’s 
cheese pastas. Nothing fit the scale of the occasion. Neither did any of the 
all-American comfort foods of my youth.

I swear that my heart rate slowed when I finally allowed myself to consider 
gumbo. Never mind that Californiaandouille 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andouille> wouldn’t have the ideal smoke or 
spice of the Louisiana variety. Never mind that the dish’s provenance is a 
state whose collective vote I knew wouldn’t reflect my own. Never mind that my 
gal lost that night. Gumbo is for everyone.

Chicken and sausage gumbo

For election night 2016, I decided to make the first gumbo recipe I ever 
attempted, mostly following a recipe from New Orleans chefPaul Prudhomme’s 
Louisiana Kitchen <http://www.kpauls.com/about/>. Over the years I’ve adjusted 
it by adding parsley and green onions, and a bright splash of acid at the end. 
We always eat gumbo at home with potato salad, which is common in Louisiana but 
not required.
 Sara Roahen’s gumbo: ‘Louisianians tend to travel with their favourite 
sausage and spice mix.’ Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
Serves 4
2 chicken breasts, 3 chicken thighs, and 3 chicken drumsticks, all skin-on
Salt
Garlic powder
Ground cayenne pepper
150g (1¼ cup) plain flour
½ tsp garlic powder
½ tsp cayenne pepper
About 1.7 litres chicken stock
Vegetable oil for frying
1 medium white onion, finely chopped
1 medium green pepper, finely chopped
2 stalks of celery, finely chopped
225g andouille smoked sausage (preferred), or any other good pure smoked 
<http://www.buzzle.com/articles/andouille-sausage-substitute.html> pork 
sausage, cut into 3-4mm half-moons
2 tsp garlic, crushed
1 bay leaf
1 bunch flat-leaf parsley, leaves picked and chopped 
1 bunch spring onions, green tops chopped
Ground white and/or black pepper
1 lemon
Hot pepper sauce such as Tabasco
Hot cooked rice for serving

1 Remove the excess fat from the chicken pieces. Rub a generous amount of 
salt, garlic powder and cayenne pepper on both sides of each piece, making sure 
each is evenly covered. Let them stand at room temperature for 30 minutes.

2 Combine the flour, ½ tsp salt, ½ tsp garlic powder and ½ tsp cayenne pepper 
in a plastic bag. Once the chicken has sat in its spices for 30 minutes at room 
temperature, add the pieces to the bag of flour and shake until the chicken is 
uniformly coated. Reserve about 4 tbsp of the flour.

3 Meanwhile, put the chicken stock in a large saucepan. Bring it to a boil, 
then reduce the heat to low and cover, keeping the stock warm on a back burner 
until needed.

4 In a large, heavy skillet, heat about 5cm of oil until very hot: 190-200C/ 
375–400F. Working in batches, fry the chicken until the crust is brown on both 
sides and the meat is just cooked, 5-8 minutes each side. It’s better to 
undercook than overcook it at this stage. Drain on kitchen paper.

5 Carefully pour the hot oil into a glass measuring jug, leaving as many of 
the browned particles in the skillet as possible. Wipe out the skillet with a 
paper towel. Return about 120ml of the hot oil to the skillet.

Related: Embrace the 80s with this almond waffle recipe | A taste of home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/06/bee-wilson-almond-waffles-recipe-1980s-sitcoms-taste-of-home>

6 Put the skillet over a high heat again. Using a long-handled metal whisk (or 
a wooden roux spoon, which I prefer), gradually stir in the reserved 4 tbsp 
flour. Cook, whisking or stirring constantly, until the roux is dark red-brown 
to black (the colour of 80% dark chocolate), being careful not to let it scorch 
or splash on your skin. Chef Paul says it takes him 3½-4 minutes to attain the 
proper colour. It generally takes me 20-30 minutes. It’s important not to burn 
the roux, because burnt roux completely ruins a gumbo, so take your time. If 
the temperature feels too high, or if the roux begins to darken too quickly for 
comfort, decrease the heat for a bit. You might see dark specks in your roux. 
This is usually a bad sign when making gumbo, as it can indicate a burnt roux, 
but it always happens to me with this particular gumbo because remnants from 
the chicken frying remain in the oil, and they darken up. So proceed with 
courage.

7 When you’re happy with your roux colour, remove the skillet from the heat 
and stir in the onions. Moisture from the onions will create a good deal of 
steam when they hit the hot roux, so be careful. Return the skillet to a low 
heat and let the onions caramelise for a couple of minutes, then add the pepper 
and celery and continue to cook, stirring constantly, until the vegetables are 
soft – about 5 minutes.

8 Bring the pot of stock to a front burner now and return the liquid to a low 
boil. Add the roux mixture by spoonfuls to the boiling stock, stirring gently 
until dissolved between each addition. Do not overstir. The stock and roux 
should come together naturally. Reduce the heat to a simmer and stir in the 
sausage, minced garlic and bay leaf. Simmer uncovered for about an hour, 
stirring often.

9 While the gumbo is simmering, bone the cooked chicken and cut the meat into 
bite-size pieces. After an hour or so, stir in the chicken, along with half of 
the chopped parsley and half the spring onions. Season to taste with white 
and/or black pepper, a good squeeze of lemon, and hot pepper sauce if desired. 
You will probably want to add more salt. Don’t be afraid to season. This is not 
a demure dish. That said, you do want to taste a roundness of flavours – a 
balance of salt, smoke, spice and acid. There should be a lot happening on your 
palate, but it should taste harmonious, with no sharp edges.

10 Chef Paul instructs serving this gumbo immediately, but I find it’s always 
best to let the flavours mingle at room temperature for a few hours if you have 
the time. Refrigerating the gumbo overnight and reheating it the next day is 
ideal. Remove the bay leaf before eating.

11 Serve the gumbo with rice, and garnish it with the remaining chopped 
parsley and spring onions.

 * Sara Roahen is a food and travel writer and author of Gumbo Tales 
<http://books.wwnorton.com/books/Gumbo-Tales/> (WW Norton).
 