
MAN OF THE DAY

Mario Balotelli: Cometh the hour, cometh the man. Roberto Mancini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-mancini> must have been in need 
of some cheering up and who better to provide the comic relief than the 
Italian? At Ewood Park Balotelli proved he is so much more than just a man with 
ridiculous clothes, hair and hats. He agrees to play, for a start.

LEAST AVID FAN OF THE DAY

As a Norwich fan Stephen Fry was excited about his trip to Old Trafford, 
though he admitted that he was "exhausted to point of spaced out hysteria". 
Perhaps not surprising, then, that shortly before half‑time BBC Radio 5 live 
reported Fry was seen having a nap in the directors' box. "Did doze off a 
couple of times. A result of my shameful Thurs and Fri," he tweeted.

ANSWERED QUESTION

Are Newcastle back for good? Very much so. A 2-1 victory away to Wolves moved 
them up to third and maintained their unbeaten start to the season. Now Alan 
Pardew just needs to start talking about how much he'd love it – love it! – if 
they beatManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. Then the glory days 
really will be back.

SCORELINE OF THE DAY

East Fife 4 Forfar 3: Unfortunately the visitors failed to add the two goals 
needed to give James Alexander Gordon, the voice of BBC Radio's classified 
results, a historic announcement. The closest we've come remains Forfar 5,East 
Fife <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eastfife> 4 in Scotland's old Second 
Division – in 1963-64.

A ROCKET SCIENTIST WRITES

Tim Howard's penalty save from Dirk Kuyt won the Everton goalkeeper plaudits, 
some of them unexpected. "I want to be Tim Howard when I grow up," tweeted the 
former West Ham keeperShaka Hislop. It's a bit late for that.

PUNDIT OF THE DAY

Chris Kamara: According to Soccer Saturday's on-the-spot reporter, Aston 
Villa's Stilian Petrov was denied a goal by a wonderful stop from Wigan's 
"Elmohamady". It must have been some save – Elmohamady is a Sunderland 
full-back and was in action 200 miles away against West Brom. Wigan's 
goalkeeper is Ali al-Habsi.

REALITY CHECK

At last, something to challenge Robbie Savage's burgeoning self-regard. In the 
first weekend ofStrictly Come Dancing judges liked his hair but rated him below 
the far-from-snake-hipped Audley Harrison and Russell Grant. "Knew I shouldn't 
have done it," he tweeted.

CHANT OF THE DAY

"We're Norwich City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity>, we've 
come for our scarves."Canaries fans ask Manchester United supporters if they 
still need their green-and-gold anti-Glazer neckwear.
 