
I've got the blues, what shall I do? (Marvin Jenkins)

The defence was a shambles, the midfield disorganised, the attack shamefully 
dependent on one key player. The whole team were simply going through the 
motions on Saturday and another poor result plunged them deep into mid-table 
mediocrity. Shockingly, they have won only two matches in the league so far. 
And there's a very tough Champions League away game to contend with, too.

Oh boy, oh boy. How badly Schalke 04 could do with somebody like David Moyes 
right now. Or perhaps not. You might remember that the Scotsman was a very 
strong contender for the Royal Blues job in the minds ofone or two very 
imaginative UK reporters 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-2304132/David-Moyes-wanted-Schalke.html>
 ("he likes the Bundesliga and his team wear blue – he's on the Schalke 
short-list!") but it's of course impossible to know how things could have 
worked out for all parties if the S04 sporting director, Horst Heldt, had 
indeed taken inspiration from Fleet Street. As it is, the club who are always 
threatening to become Germany's bona fide third force but never quite deliver, 
are still saddled with Jens Keller as manager, and surprise, surprise nothing 
has changed: Schalke remain incapable of stringing two convincing halves 
together, let alone three matches.

Things started well enough in the Rhein-Neckar-Stadion. A wonderful goal from 
Kevin-Prince Boateng, who was employed as a striker in the absence of other 
qualified staff, gave the visitors the lead inside three minutes. Joel Matip 
(13) and Marco Höger (40) made it 3-1 at the break; Anthony Modeste had scored 
for the quite comprehensively outplayed Hoffenheim (16). Schalke were coasting, 
in complete control. But then they went "out of their minds", as Heldt put it. 
Dennis Aogo unlocked the gates of madness with a senseless foul in the box; 
Roberto Firmino made it 3-2 (48). The TSG defender David Abraham scored the 
equaliser with a fine free-kick (61), and thenSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> did their very best to lose the 
game in the dying minutes, when the visitors' erstwhile composure drowned in a 
sea of crass mistakes.

Boateng, one of only a couple of Schalke players who weren't affected by the 
sudden onset of brain-freeze, complained that complacency had led to "tralala 
football", as Bild put it. "You're 2-0 and 3-1 up – everybody thinks it's so 
easy," he said. "Then you backheel and flick it, and the opponent gets back 
into the game. I'm angry." So was Heldt. "These things happen too often," said 
the 43-year-old. "It's unacceptable. A top team would have won this game. But 
we kept inviting them after the equaliser and could have conceded two more 
goals."

Keller professed "total disappointment". Was it a question of attitude, the 
man from Sky wanted to know? "Stop it with this shit question about attitude – 
we made some horrendous individual mistakes," Keller shot back. "This is not 
about attitude but with one or two people's heads." Was Keller saying that some 
of his players were too stupid? Or did he allude to a lack of concentration?

For Heldt, Schalke's two-faced performance brought on a moment of Rumsfeldian 
logic. "We know we have certainty of uncertainty," he said.

This is where this story of a typically nuts 3-3 draw in the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> could have ended. But 
Heldt felt he had to go the extra mile in order to quash recurrent doubts about 
Keller's competence. "What is the manager to do?" he asked rhetorically, before 
shifting the blame solely on to the players and questioning their suitability 
for the job. "We will exchange views and then make changes," he threatened. 
"The club will examine who's reliable and who isn't."

The next day the midfielder Jermaine Jones was banned from the squad for the 
Champions League game at Basel. The 31-year-old told Sport Bild that he'd use 
the opportunity to have knee surgery but then backtracked via Twitter the 
following day: "On my way to training soon!! Surgery ?? No... Schalke 04 is 
more important atm!! Reading BILD is always the funniest moment of my day!" 
That change of heart was probably motivated by a talk with his agent, 
speculated Königsblog.

"The coaching team" had made the decision to suspend a player who had featured 
in all games this season and been declared "a leader" by Keller only a few days 
before, explained Heldt, and it sounded as if he himself had been party to that 
peculiar move. Such drastic measures have become quite popular in the 
Bundesliga, even though they always smack of managerial weakness or at least of 
a strong urge to be seen to be doing something tough. In the club's defence, 
WAZ reported that Jones had immediately handed in a sick-note after coming in 
for some personal criticism in a team meeting. Maybe the punishment was 
warranted to a certain extent but it's hard not to see Jones as a convenient 
scapegoat for the current malaise. He's out of contract in the summer and 
Schalke have little interest in renewing his €4m-a-year deal. There's little 
support for him in the dressing room either.

Whether making an example of Jones will get Schalke to perform to their 
potential with a bit more consistency is less sure, however. Felix Magath went 
down the same route a couple of years ago in a vain effort to deflect from his 
own shortcomings. Heldt's attempts to move the discussion away from the man he 
appointed at a time when Markus Gisdol, the widely respected Hoffenheim coach, 
was working as Huub Stevens' assistant and was thus available are similarly 
transparent, if not to everyone on the Schalke board.

Heldt, a man who's become German football's leading authority in surviving 
self-afflicted problems, surely has already prepared a narrative in case 
Schalke slip up in Europe and get left further behind in the league. "Keller 
was a great manager but it didn't work out between him and the [nasty] 
players," he'll tell us, before appointing another hard-man in the 
Magath/Stevens mould. Schalke's plight is worse than a crisis, it's become a 
condition: they seem forever stuck in their own little, melancholic niche, 
somewhere between quite-but-not-really-good and occasionally terrible.

Talking points

• Stefan Kiessling didn't score in Leverkusen's 2-0 win over Hannover but the 
29-year-old could count himself among the big winners of matchday seven: the 
national manager Joachim Löw announced that he'd call him up. On the telephone, 
possibly. "I have never written him off, we'll talk internally and then see," 
explained Löw, who was drawing the fixtures of the next DFB Cup round – 
"Losfee", draw fairy, Germans call that role – in Sportschau on Sunday night.

It would make for an extraordinary comeback after Kiessling had declared he'd 
never play under Löw again only a few weeks ago. The Germany boss might have 
little choice but to go cap (or shawl) in hand and beg for him to reconsider. 
Mario Gómez is definitely out with a knee injury and Miroslav Klose is likely 
to miss the next two World Cup qualifiers, too.

•The new Hamburg manager Bert van Marwijk won a point in somewhat fortuitous 
fashion – a last-minute equaliser from Marcell Jansen – at Frankfurt. The 
post-match reactions were a posthumous settling of accounts with his 
predecessor Thorsten Fink. "We now have a manager with a clear idea," said the 
goalkeeper Rene Adler, one of manyHamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> players who felt this way.

• Dortmund destroyed Freiburg 5-0 with Marco Reus and Robert Lewandowski each 
scoring a brace. Jürgen Klopp will have to spend Tuesday's Champions League 
game against Marseille in the stands after he was sent off against Napoli for 
looking too scary – but reckons he won't need wired-up woolly hats or laundry 
trolleys to get his message across. "Me and [assistant] Zeljko Buvac work 
together telepathically," said the coach. Hopefully there won't be too much 
interference on Tuesday night.

Results Augsburg 2-2 Gladbach, Dortmund 5-0 Freiburg, Bayern 1-0 Wolfsburg, 
Hertha BSC 3-1 Mainz, Frankfurt 2-2 Hamburg, Leverkusen 2-0 Hannover, 
Hoffenheim 3-3 Schalke, Werder Bremen 3-3 Nürnberg, Braunschweig 0-4 Stuttgart.
 