
Matchday 23 provided the usual, much-loved mix of low-score dross and 
high-score bonanzas (including Hoffenheim's 6-2 over Wolfsburg in "El 
Plastico", as theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> afficionado Archie 
Rhind-Tutt put it somewhat uncharitably).

Teutonically incorrect goalkeeping blunders (see the 1-1 between Braunschweig 
and Gladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/01/both-goalkeepers-score-own-goals-braunschweig-monchengladbach>
)and a man in a moose costume stumbling over an advertising board and losing 
his (moose) head in the process 
<http://sport.bt.com/video-01363814401986?videoid=3281889611001%E2%80%9D 
http://sport.bt.com/video-01363814401986?videoid=> – an instant classic in the 
sparsely populated/nuclear wasteland area known as German humour.

But amid all that enchanting heedlessness, two matches also provided a real 
glimpse of clarity, a cold, hard look at the nature of the beast numbered 13/14.

The first one was Bayern v Schalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/01/bayern-munich-schalke-bundesliga-match-report>
. Pep Guardiola had praised the Royal Blues as "one of the best teams in the 
league" before that fixture. He was right, of course, but these days that 
statement amounts to little more than a backhanded compliment. Schalke, 
mathematically the fourth best side in the land, were even worse than in the6-1 
defeat by Real Madrid on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/26/schalke-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
.

This is not an exaggeration. Against the Spaniards, Jens Keller's men had 
started reasonably enough and at least troubled Iker Casillas once. But at the 
Allianz Arena they were 1-0 behind thanks to a deflected free-kick from David 
Alaba and down and out from the kick-off.

The manager's idea to line up in deep rows outside the box resulted in Bayern 
flooding the midfield with up to eight players at a time. Schalke never got 
close to the ball, let alone into the game. "This was the worst thing I have 
ever seen," said Keller (probably not true, strictly speaking 
<http://mediadb.kicker.de/news/1000/1020/1100/3000/artikel/743514/keller_bobic-1286973611_zoom25_crop_800x600_800x600+108+0.jpg>
). "It was catastrophic, a truly extraordinarily abysmal performance," he added 
in relation to the first half. Bayern were 4-0 up at the interval. If it hadn't 
been for some fine goalkeeping from Ralf Fährmann it could have been 14.

"We have to be more [like] men," demanded the goalkeeper after the final 
whistle, which provided a relatively gentle 5-1 scoreline. But insufficient 
manliness isn't so much Schalke's problem as the huge gap between the 
undoubtedly talented players in the squad and those who should never share a 
pitch with Bayern or Real Madrid in the first place. There is enough money 
available to do much better. The real issue is quality control, in other words, 
and that pertains to the manager, too.

"We didn't even get 10% of our tactics right," admitted Keller. He's a 60% 
coach, at best. It's become painfully obvious that the 43-year-old is unable to 
get anything like the maximum out of the potential at his disposal, to say 
nothing about takingSchalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> to a 
different level altogether.

"If we look for excuses now, it's already a wrong step," said Horst Heldt when 
asked about the manager's (surely non-existent) future beyond May. You guessed 
it: the sporting director expertly put the blame on the players instead. "You 
can get to each one of them in the end, the club is always more powerful," he 
threatened, "decisions will be made".

Heldt has become so good at questioning the motivation or ability of employees 
that he himself has hired that no one has ever seriously questioned his own 
role in the stasis.

The Peruvian winger Jefferson Farfán (who was seen sharing a joke with his 
international team-mate Claudio Pizarro after the final whistle) and 
Kevin-Prince Boateng ("the superstar enjoys all sorts of privileges but was 
again not fit," wrote Bild) are this week's convenient fall-guys, while Teflon 
Horst escapes scrutiny once again.

Schalke – this is the key point – are not even a club in crisis. They are more 
or less on course of hitting their targets but the game in Munich made it 
incredibly easy to see why the Bundesliga suffers from a lack of 
competitiveness at the very top. The Royal Blues have become specialists in 
failure under Heldt; the banal but devastating failure to use their 
considerable resources – they are the 13th richest club in Europe in terms of 
turnover – in a competent manner. No wonder the league's a friendly place for 
the Bavarians, if their potential worst enemies are this feeble.

Leverkusen v Mainz also made for an instructive lesson about everything that 
is wrong as well as right in German club football right now. Bayer, praised as 
a "results machine" by Jürgen Klopp in the autumn, have looked a broken side 
since December. Results are still being produced, albeit those of an 
exclusively faulty variety. The 1-0 defeat by Thomas Tuchel's team was the 
fifth loss in the league in a row for the "Werkself".

No one is quite sure what is wrong. The coach Sami Hyypia had brought in some 
psychologists to wake his side from their stupor but the performance on 
Saturday was the stuff of trauma again. The sporting director Rudi Völler 
admitted that this was more than a blip. "We have obviously got it wrong with a 
few players," he said, "we have to have a better set-up, mentality wise, in the 
future".

Leverkusen's phlegmatic tendencies have been a problem for many years and it's 
hard to see how things will ever change fundamentally. Bayer, a company-owned 
minnow of a club with deep pockets, are aware that the players they attract 
either see the club as a stepping stone for bigger and better things or are 
only there for their money. Or both. The kind of player who takes real 
responsibility and identifies strongly with a club is – by definition – 
elsewhere.Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> and 
Hoffenheim have similar issues.

These kind of clubs will never get to the next level – and stay there – as 
long as their squads are packed with players who define professionalism as 
switching off when the probabilities point to a defeat. There are only two ways 
out of this conundrum. The first is to spend even more money on players who are 
so much better than the opposition that the lack of motivation will be 
outweighed by the gulf in quality.

You might call that the "Monaco" option. But none of these teams are in a 
position to do so. The other way is to find an almost manically motivated 
manager who infects the side with his own ambition. Christoph Daum nearly 
succeeded at Leverkusen in that respect.

Talking of managerial talent, Tuchel's Mainz are the mirror image of the 
Schalkes, Leverkusens and Wolfsburgs of this league. They have no money but 
make up for it with an incredible amount of know-how in all aspects. Augsburg 
could also be mentioned in the same breath but there are natural limits to 
these sides' progress, too, of course. They will either lose their best players 
or their coaches at some stage and will then have to embark on a rebuilding 
process.

So this is where we are at. The league is incredibly competitive below first 
place because the biggest, and many of the smallest, clubs have arrived at 
similar levels of performance but from two very different directions. The 
former spend fortunes on mediocrity, the latter have managers (and sporting 
directors) who work wonders with very little.

Seen in this light, Bayern's peerlessness (and Dortmund's, to a lesser extent) 
is neither accidental nor the product of dark magic. They just happen to be the 
one club/two clubs who have been able to combine huge resources with a 
comparable level of expertise. It shouldn't be this rare a constellation.

Talking Points 

• Thomas Schneider looked a goner after VfB Stuttgart's eighth defeat in a 
row, 2-1 at Frankfurt, on Sunday. "I don't rule out anything," the sporting 
director Fredi Bobic announced darkly but on Monday morning, Schneider was 
still in charge of training. The Swabians are seemingly willing to give the 
40-year-old one last shot at the weekend, when they meet the bottom side 
Eintracht Braunschweig.
 The moose loses his head in the match between Hoffenheim and Wolfsburg. 
Photograph: Alex Grimm/Getty Images 
• One of the league's worst-kept secrets was revealed on Monday: Armin Veh 
will leave his position as Frankfurt manager at the end of the season. The 
53-year-old would have been able to continue as manager but has seemingly lost 
interest. "We haven't talked to any possible successors," said the executive 
chairman Heribert Bruchhagen. That's not quite true, naturally.

• "I didn't know I was such an egotistical pig," said Zlatko Junuzovic after 
the 1-0 win in the "Nord-Derby" against HSV. The Werder Bremen midfielder 
scored the winning goal to pile more relegation worries on to Mirko Slomka's 
side but had managed to waste two more opportunities when it might have been 
better to pass the ball.

Rafael van der Vaart's comeback for the away team, meanwhile, only served to 
proved the doubters right. "He was a discreet runner who hardly got involved in 
the game," wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung. Hamburg's attack was "hapless like 
Schäferhund without teeth". To make matters worse, the bite of Slobodan 
Rajkovic will also be missed in the remaining fixtures. The defender suffered 
ligament damage in a knee. Two words sum up Hamburg's predicament: Heiko and 
Westermann.

Results: Hertha 0-0 Freiburg, Braunschweig 1-1 Gladbach, Augsburg 1-1 
Hannover, Bremen 1-0 Hamburg, Leverkusen 0-1 Mainz, Dortmund 3-0 Nürnberg, 
Bayern 5-1 Schalke, Hoffenheim 6-2 Wolfsburg, Frankfurt 2-1 Stuttgart.
 