
A recurrent theme of mine is the shock to the system of having to admit the 
possibility that the dictionaries are wrong. I have had an unsettling 
correspondence of the subject of strong drink, following a clue in the Quick 
crossword for April 20: "Dutch clear alcohol (8)". The solution required was 
SCHNAPPS.

A solver, working for a Dutch bank in London, protested. "My Dutch colleagues 
here are up in arms at the suggestion that schnapps is Dutch. One suggestion is 
that the word is being used incorrectly to describe the spirit jenever. The 
consensus is that schnapps is only used in the Netherlands to describe an 
Austrian/German drink."

It is not the purpose of the Quick crossword to waste the time of busy 
professionals working in Dutch counting houses by provoking debate about the 
correct word for what they drink at home (or to cause further problems within 
the European Union at this difficult time). I accept at once that they are 
right. But, in mitigation, Collins says:

schnapps or schnaps 1. a Dutch spirit distilled from potatoes. 2. (in Germany) 
any strong spirit.

And Chambers says:

any of various strong alcoholic drinks, esp Holland gin.

How can it be that such authorities believe that schnapps is a Dutch drink, 
when the Dutch do not? And, while we are on the subject of drink, what is the 
Dutch for "Dutch courage" and how did this xenophobic slight get into the 
English language?

_____

A number of those who struggled (with or without success) to solve Paul's May 
Genius puzzle have asked for guidance as to where the "more common names" of 
his 10 themed creatures were to be found "elsewhere in the puzzle". For those 
interested, here is the list:
12 ac: HIRUNDO, a swallow (in the clue for 5 dn: "Fool swallowing curry") 
20 ac: BOS, an ox (in the clue for 23 dn: "kind of boxing") 
21 ac: CULEX, a gnat (in the solution for 10 ac: DESIGNATE) 
26 ac: MUSTELA, a mink (also in the clue for 23 dn: "harm in kind") 
32 ac: FELIS, a cat (in the clue for 27 dn: "education") 
2 dn: VIPERA, an asp (in the solution for 5 dn: ASPHALTS) 
13 dn: GADUS, a cod (in the clue for 7 dn: "encoded") 
14 dn: LEPUS, a hare (in the solution for 31 ac: BUCHAREST) 
25 dn: AQUILA, an eagle (in the clue for 3 dn: "Beagle")

An apology is due about the 10th creature. 28 ac was VESPULA, a wasp. The 
first draft of the clue for 30 dn read: "One who swings round pole to show a 
space in church". In the final version the words "to shoW A SPace" were deleted 
and the waspicide involved unfortunately overlooked. My apologies to all those 
who, as a result, have wasted time looking for the wasp in vain.

_____

There was a lively response to last month's Irish cry for help not to reach at 
once for the "cheat button" when stuck for an answer. There was considerable 
support for the notion of disabling the button until, say, the afternoon. But, 
in the global crossword village, an Irish afternoon is a California dawn. And 
my instinct is that we should be deluged with complaints from the (until now) 
silent majority, if we went down that route.

As is so often the case, a simple low-tech solution to a problem would seem to 
be a better answer. It has been suggested by Mary Ingman from Florida. Those 
unable to control their habit online should just download the puzzle, log off 
and take the hard copy and a pencil to the beach, the pub or any other place 
without internet access.

_____

A final technical note: your emails to 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk are welcome and, I hope, normally get 
some kind of reaction, but with a delay if I am away. So if you have problems 
or questions of a technical (rather than an editorial) nature, you are likely 
to get a quicker and more sensible reply by going direct to
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>.

· Hugh Stephenson is the crossword editor
 