
Scones are one of those rare things that are as good as they are simple. Sat 
somewhere between the richness of a cake and the body of a loaf of bread, 
scones are perfectly light, fluffy and tender – the ideal vessel for everything 
from butter to fruit to jam and clotted cream.

The method is easy: just mix flour and a little butter, a raising agent and 
some liquid to give a heavy, slightly sticky dough. The rest is yours to 
experiment with: try wholemeal flour, add a drop of heavy cream, sweeten the 
dough with sugar, or golden syrup. Even a handful of honeycomb fragments or a 
few chocolate chips can be a welcome addition.

While the purists squabble over pronunciation and whether you’re meant to put 
the cream on before the jam, take your scones far from the stagnant pedantry, 
go off-piste, and adapt them to suit your tastes.

Spelt, blackberry and lemon cream shortcake

Strawberry shortcake might be the archetype, but I find the slight tartness of 
blackberries a better match for the richness of cream, sugar and butter. With 
the addition of a little torn mint, too, it steps away from simple sweetness 
and towards a brighter, fresher summer flavour. This is in essence just a big 
scone – you can easily make smaller, individual ones if you prefer.


Serves 4 generously
250g blackberries, halved
25g caster sugar
150g white spelt flour 
50g wholemeal spelt flour 
50g unsalted butter
60g caster sugar
2 tsp baking powder
¼ tsp bicarbonate of soda
A pinch of salt
1 large egg
225ml double cream
75g whole natural yoghurt
Zest of 1 lemon
30g icing sugar
A handful of mint leaves, roughly torn
Icing sugar, to dust

1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Lightly grease a baking tray. 
Combine the blackberries and caster sugar and put in the fridge to rest until 
ready to serve.

2 Mix the white and wholemeal spelt flours in a large bowl then rub in the 
butter using your fingertips.

3 Stir in the sugar, baking powder, bicarbonate of soda and salt. In a 
separate bowl or jug, whisk the egg together with 75ml of the double cream.

4 Pour the cream mixture into the dry ingredients, stirring lightly to 
combine. The dough should be soft and a little sticky – if it feels tight or 
floury, add a drop more cream.

5 Gather the dough into a soft and crumbly ball and knead lightly a few times, 
taking care not to handle it for longer than 30 seconds or so. Pat down on the 
prepared baking tray to a fat disc 15-16cm in diameter. Put in the oven 
straight away (if you leave it sitting around too long, the bicarbonate of soda 
will exhaust itself, and the shortcake might not rise as well as it should) and 
bake for 20-25 minutes – or as long as it takes for the shortcake to rise, 
gently dome and set firm.

6 Leave the shortcake to cool a while before transferring to a wire rack to 
cool completely. It’ll be really hot from the oven, so it’s important that you 
give it this time to rest before slicing and serving.

7 Whisk the remaining double cream, yoghurt, lemon zest and icing sugar 
together until thick enough to hold in soft peaks. Halve the shortcake 
horizontally to give two flat discs (they’ll be fragile, so take care to handle 
them gently). Spoon the cream all over the lower half, then spread over the 
blackberries and sprinkle on the mint. Sandwich with the other half of the 
shortcake and dust liberally with icing sugar. Serve straight away.

Saffron, honey and sultana scones

These aren’t the kind of scone meant to be served heaped with cream and jam. 
Infused with fragrant saffron and sweet with honey and fruit, they are perfect 
as they are – just split and spread thickly with salted butter.

Makes 12-15
200ml milk
A couple of pinches of saffron threads
75g unsalted butter
350g plain flour
4 tsp baking powder
¼ tsp bicarbonate of soda
¼ tsp salt
175g sultanas
4 tbsp runny honey
2 tsp vanilla extract
1 egg, lightly beaten with 2 tsp milk, to use as a glaze
4-5 tbsp demerara sugar

1 Heat the milk and saffron gently until just shy of the boil, then leave to 
cool and infuse. By the time the milk’s at room temperature, it should be a 
rich yellow colour, and deeply fragrant. While the milk cools, preheat the oven 
to 200C/400F/gas mark 6 and lightly grease a large, heavy baking sheet.

2 Rub the butter into the flour using your fingertips, mixing until no visible 
bits of butter are left. Stir in the baking powder, bicarbonate of soda and 
salt. Stir in the sultanas. In a separate bowl, whisk the honey and vanilla 
together with 160ml of the milk (some of the milk will have evaporated when it 
was heated, which is why we started with a little more than we needed).

3 Add the liquid slowly to the flour mixture, stirring gently as you go. The 
dough ought to be soft, very slightly sticky but robust enough to cut into neat 
rounds. A wetter dough will yield lighter scones, while a drier one will leave 
you with hockey pucks. Add a dash more milk, if necessary. Resist the urge, 
too, to overmix the dough – the less you work it the better. Just stir until 
roughly combined then use your hands to finish mixing the ingredients, taking 
care to distribute the fruit evenly throughout. Tip the dough on to a lightly 
floured work surface and knead just a couple of times to bring the mixture 
smoothly together.

4 Dust the work surface with a little more flour and pat the dough down gently 
to a thickness of roughly 2cm. You can roll it if you prefer, but there’s no 
need to be too particular. Use a 6cm round pastry cutter to stamp out circles, 
and gently transfer these to the prepared baking tray.

5 Brush the tops of the scones with the egg to glaze them then sprinkle with 
demerara sugar. Bake in the preheated oven for 15 minutes, until well-risen, 
firm and golden brown. Leave to cool completely before serving.
 