
A powerful display by Inverness resulted in them comprehensively beating Dundee
 3-1 at the Caledonian Stadium. Goals from Lonsana Doumbouya, Greg Tansey and 
Liam Polworth put them in control before Nicky Low’s late consolation free-kick.

It was a dominant performance from the hosts against an under-par Dundee team 
who have not won since the opening day of the season. The victory puts Caley 
Thistle within touching distance of the top half of the table, a point behind
Ross County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> and Rangers.

Scott McDonald headed a late equaliser for Motherwell after Partick Thistle 
failed to take advantage of their dominance at Firhill. Chris Erskine pounced 
on Steven Hammell’s mistake in the 31st minute to score his sixth goal of the 
season, but Ade Azeez passed up three one-on-one chances to double the home 
side’s lead.

McDonald excelled after moving from left midfield to a more central striker’s 
role and he had a goal controversially disallowed before he rose to head home 
Richard Tait’s 83rd-minute cross to seal a 1-1 draw.

Mark McGhee, the Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> 
manager, revealed that his in-form striker Louis Moult almost missed their 1-1 
draw after being injured by a soft toy. Moult had scored four goals last 
Saturday against Hamilton to take his season’s tally to seven in 210 minutes of 
action, but struggled to make an impact, along with the rest of his team-mates, 
in the first half at Firhill.

McGhee said: “We were poor in the first half, we never really got going. One 
of the things was that Moulty has not trained all week. Moulty hurt his 
hamstring when he stood on his child’s toy.

“So that was a worry all week, but he declared fit this morning after a 
fitness test. But that’s why we took him off. So there was that, – and the 
first half we weren’t connected – and didn’t have the team performance we had 
of late.”

The Thistle manager, Alan Archibald, rued the missed chances to finish 
Motherwell off. “We controlled the first half and created a number of chances, 
but at the moment we look like we need to score two goals to win a game,” he 
said.

“It’s very frustrating. Motherwell came out in the second half and probably 
controlled the midfield for 10-15 minutes, but in that time we had two very 
good chances. If we take one then the game’s dead and buried. But every team 
you play will always create a chance.”

Ross County held Hearts to a 0-0 draw at Tynecastle. Hearts dominated the 
contest before and after the break, but County had their goalkeeper, Scott Fox, 
to thank after he made two good first-half saves from Tony Watt and Conor 
Sammon. Hearts lacked the cutting edge to win the contest.The draw means Hearts 
slip further behind the leaders, Celtic, after the champions’ win against 
Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/celtic-kilmarnock-scottish-premiership-match-report>
.

In the Championship, Queen of the South retain top position after a 0-0 draw 
withHibernian at Palmerston Park. Neil Lennon’s side had to play the majority 
of the second half with 10 men after Lewis Stevenson was sent off for a second 
yellow card with 55 minutes played.
 