
Billy McKay's penalty sealed a 2-1 home win for Inverness against Highland 
rivalsRoss County, lifting them above the Staggies into third place in the 
Scottish Premier League.

The Northern Ireland striker's 24th goal of the campaign ended County's 
11-game unbeaten run and pushed Inverness closer to their first ever top-six 
SPL finish. McKay scored the winning goal in the 59th minute after the referee 
Iain Brines pointed to the spot when Charlie Taylor went down, but there were 
strong suggestions that the full‑back had dived.

It came after Andrew Shinnie's close-range opener after five minutes for Caley 
Thistle was cancelled out by a 30-yard equaliser from County's Paul Lawson. The 
defeat left County fourth, two points behind Inverness.Dundee and Dundee United 
face each other in the derby at Tannadice tomorrow.

Hearts face St Mirren in the Scottish Communities League Cup final against St 
Mirren at Hampden tomorrow.St Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> could field the captain Jim 
Goodwin, Lee Mair and new signing Sander Puri, who are all in contention. 
Darren Barr returns from suspension for Hearts and Dylan McGowan is winning his 
fitness battle to overcome an ankle injury.

James Forrest will miss Scotland's World Cup qualifying double-header against 
Wales and Serbia, Celtic boss Neil Lennon has confirmed.

The winger missed the 4-3 SPL win over Aberdeen at Parkhead with a 
back problem. "He is going to see a specialist on Tuesday, he may need an 
injection in his back which might keep him out for another couple of weeks," 
Lennon said.

In the First Division Dunfermline are moving towards a supporter-led ownership 
model following "positive" talks , according to the steering group set up in a 
bid to keep the club in business. Talks between the club and the Pars Community 
(TPC) broke down in acrimonious fashion on Friday after the fans' group failed 
to secure acceptance of their offer to the majority shareholder Gavin 
Masterton. The club also received confirmation from Her Majesty's Revenue and 
Customs over a winding-up order, which gives them until 26 March to pay a 
£134,000 tax debt.

In the Third Division, Lee McCulloch's second half penalty earned Rangers a 
1-0 win atElgin.
 