
Inverness continued their superb run in Highland derbies at the Global Energy 
Stadium with a convincing 3-0 victory overRoss County in Dingwall.

It was County’s first home match since their League Cup triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/hibernian-ross-county-scottish-league-cup-final-match-report>
 last Sunday, but it was the visitors who stole the show with a display of 
top-class finishing, although County almost got on the scoresheet within 20 
seconds. Richard Foster fired a cross over from the left, but Alex Schalk’s 
point-blank header was brilliantly turned behind for a corner by Owain Fon 
Williams.

After an evenly contested first half-hour, it was Caley Thistle who went ahead 
with a stunning finish from Liam Polworth. Ross Draper doubled the lead with an 
angled drive after 37 minutes. Liam Hughes headed the ball on for Draper, who 
struck home an angled drive from inside the penalty area. When Miles Storey 
added a third goal with a superb effort from 30 years out early in the second 
half, it was all over as a contest.

A first-half Murray Davidson brace and a late Darnell Fisher strike handed St 
Johnstone a stunning 3-0 Premiership victory over Hearts at Tynecastle. Saints 
had Hearts on the back foot from the first minute. Davidson twice headed in 
Liam Craig corners inside 21 minutes to swarm aHearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> team that had not conceded a goal 
in their previous four matches.

Fisher added a third in the closing stages to add gloss to a fine afternoon in 
Gorgie when David Wotherspoon found Fisher in the box and the right-back angled 
a drive into the far corner.

Jamie Walker had opportunities for the home side in the first half when he was 
denied by a good save by Alan Mannus at the keeper’s near post after flicking 
Jordan McGhee’s low cross goalward. In the second half, Walker’s dipping volley 
from the edge of the box just came down on the wrong side of the bar.St 
Johnstone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> were rewarded for 
taking the game to their counterparts, with the home side falling well short of 
the standards that have taken Robbie Neilson’s side clear in third place.

A spirited second-half comeback earned Partick a crucial 2-1 victory over 
Hamilton at New Douglas Park. Accies will see it as an opportunity wasted 
having led 1-0 at the break through Greg Docherty.

Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> took the lead on 10 
minutes when a terrific crossfield pass picked out Gramoz Kurtaj on the left 
and his cut-back found its way to Docherty, who kept his composure at the back 
post to slam the ball high past Tomas Cerny for his second goal of the season.

Thistle levelled five minutes into the second half when Steven Lawless’s cross 
from the left was headed in at the back post by Mathias Pogba – only his second 
goal for the Maryhill club. The substitute Kris Doolan was on the park for 
three minutes before his cross from the right was headed in at the near post by 
Ryan Edwards for his first goal of the campaign. The win moved Thistle four 
points clear of their hosts in the Premiership table.
 