
Motherwell made a winning start to their 2014-15 Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> campaign with a 
goal from Lee Erwin enough to beat 10-manSt Mirren 1-0 at Fir Park.

Last season’s runners-up were off the mark in the 64th minute as Erwin scored 
his first goal for the club by following up a parried Lionel Ainsworth shot, 
and their opponents’ misery was compounded when player-coach Jim Goodwin was 
sent off nine minutes later.

Inverness also opened with a win, Billy McKay and Ryan Christie getting on the 
scoresheet early on in their 2-0 victory at newly promotedHamilton.

In wonderful conditions at New Douglas Park, both teams were eager to get the 
ball down and pass it on Hamilton’s artificial surface. Making the most of a 
Mikey Devlin error, McKay lifted the ball over goalkeeper Michael McGovern and 
into the net in the 10th minute, and Caley added a second in the 25th through 
Christie’s tap-in. In the end it was a comfortable victory for Inverness, and
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> may be in for a long 
season unless they can cut out some of the simple errors that cost them so 
dearly here.

Aberdeen and Dundee United will contest the New Firm derby at Pittodrie on 
Sunday, withRoss County hosting St Johnstone, who will be without striker 
Stevie May who signed for Sheffield Wednesday on Saturday on a four-year 
contract for an undisclosed fee. The Scotland international scored 27 times for 
the Saints last season.

In the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship>, Hibernian defeated
Livingston 2-1. Alan Stubbs’ side escaped an early scare when Livingston’s Kyle 
Jacobs struck the crossbar but Hibs recovered to take a two-goal lead into the 
half-time interval. Farid El Alagui headed the home side into the lead after 16 
minutes. Goalkeeper Mark Oxley’s long clearance travelled the full length of 
the pitch before the bounce of the ball deceived opposing keeper Darren 
Jamieson to find the net. Declan Gallacher scored 15 minutes into the second 
half but the goal proved only a consolation.

There were also opening day wins for Raith Rovers, 3-1 against Dumbarton, while
Queen of the South beat Alloa 2-0. Cowdenbeath and Falkirk shared a 2-2 draw. 
Rangers host Hearts on Sunday.
 