
A fossil fuel-free Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is not 
only technically achievable but could prove a cheaper and safer option than 
pursuing fossil fuel-based development, according to a new WWF-backed report.

The study by consultancy giant DNV-GL tested the viability of the Scottish 
government’s current policy goal of decarbonising the country’s electricity 
generation by 2030, setting a target of bringing carbon intensity down from 271 
grams of CO2 per kilowatt hour to 50g CO2/kwh.

The target is separate to the goal of providing 100% of electricity demand 
from renewables by 2020, which still allows for coal and gas to remain on the 
grid.

The 2030 decarbonisation policy assumes carbon capture and storage (CCS) 
technology will be operating at scale, fitted to 2.5GW of gas power plants. WWF 
deems this a risky strategy considering there are no commercial-scale CCS 
operations in the UK and the government has yet to decide a winner for its £1bn 
commercialisation competition for the technology between the Peterhead CCS 
project and the White Rose project at Drax.

However, the report says CCS is not needed to decarbonise Scotland’s 
electricity sector and concludes “a renewables-based, efficient, flexible, 
electricity system is perfectly feasible by 2030” given Scotland’s abundance of 
wind and wave energy resources and strong tradition of engineering innovation.

While electricity production accounts for around a third of Scotland’s 
emissions, renewables are already the country’s biggest electricity generator - 
outstripping nuclear, coal and gas - and in Novemberwind turbines alone 
produced more than 100% of the country’s domestic electricity needs 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/2385476/wind-farms-powered-107-per-cent-of-scottish-homes-in-november>
.

WWF says the current pipeline of renewables projects will be “more than 
adequate” to hit the decarbonisation target, while allowing for substantial 
electricity exports to the rest of the UK - particularly if Scotland makes 
progress on energy efficiency and pumped hydro energy storage.

Furthermore, the report calculates the cost of meeting the 2030 goal with a 
renewables-based system is £663m a year - substantially cheaper than the 
£1.85bn price tag of a system with CCS-fitted thermal plant - because the cost 
of new wind power is deemed cheaper than CCS.

“Our technical analysis shows that a system with an extremely high proportion 
of renewable electricity generation located in Scotland can be secure and 
stable,” said Paul Gardner, lead author of the report for DNV GL. “There is no 
technical reason requiring conventional fossil and nuclear generation in 
Scotland.

“Scotland has plenty of renewables in the pipeline to cut the carbon from its 
power supply by 2030, particularly if we see progress on reducing electricity 
demand. And crucially, Scotland can continue to be an electricity exporting 
nation.”

However, the report outlines a number of policy recommendations needed to 
attract the investment needed to realise the vision of a renewables-powered 
Scotland. These include a “clear regulatory signal” that the government will 
not incentivise coal by tightening the emissions performance standards for 
existing coal plants and setting a UK-wide decarbonisation target to match that 
in Scotland.

The report goes on to argue that the amount of funding remaining for clean 
energy projects under the government’s levy control framework budget is only 
enough to support one additional large renewables project through to 2020 and 
as such more funds will need to be released to boost growth in the sector.

Greater joint efforts between Westminster and Holyrood will also be required 
to support initiatives reducing demand for energy, the report states, as well 
as initiatives to provide more timely grid connections for projects in outlying 
areas and boost investment in wave and tidal energy technologies and pumped 
storage.

Gina Hanrahan, climate and energy policy officer at WWF Scotland, said that 
CCS should still remain part of the government’s plans, but given the slow 
progress of the technology ministers should be looking to explore alternative 
paths to reach their 2030 goal.

“The report shows that not only is a renewable, fossil-fuel free electricity 
system perfectly feasible in Scotland by 2030, it’s actually the safe bet,” she 
added. “Pursuing this pathway would allow Scotland to maintain and build on its 
position as the UK and Europe’s renewable powerhouse, cut climate emissions and 
continue to reap the jobs and investment opportunities offered by Scotland’s 
abundant renewable resources.

“We need to see the phasing out of conventional generation in Scotland, 
clarity about the future market for renewables across the UK and more emphasis 
on demand reduction and storage in Scotland so the vision can be achieved.”
 