
Richie Foran scored with a deflected shot in the fifth minute of added time to 
earnInverness a replay in a 3-3 thriller at Ross County.

Billy McKay had put the visitors ahead at the Global Energy Stadium on the 
half-hour only for Rocco Quinn to restore parity four minutes into the second 
half.

Foran put Caley back in front with 16 minutes to go but County were level 
again when Iain Vigurs netted with four minutes left. Richard Brittain put the 
home side ahead for the first time in the second minute of added time but 
Foran, the Inverness captain, ensured the spoils were shared.

Aberdeen and Motherwell will have to do battle again as Niall McGinn continued 
his potent form in front of goal this season as he headed in a last-minute 
equaliser to earn a 1-1 draw at Pittodrie.

It had, for the most part, been an even match between the two SPL sides 
although the Steelmen looked to be heading through thanks to Jamie Murphy's 
superb strike with 10 minutes remaining before McGinn levelled the scores.

St Mirren progressed with a comfortable 2-0 victory over Brechin City thanks 
to goals from Kenny McLean with a well-struck free-kick just after the 
half-hour mark and Jon Robertson four minutes before half‑time.

Johnny Russell's hat-trick and two goals from Jon Daly secured a comfortable 
5-0 win forDundee United at Stranraer, while Kilmarnock saw off Queen of the 
South 2-1 thanks to goals from Cillian Sheridan and Borja Pérez, with Nicky 
Clark on target for the visitors.

Forfar progressed to the next round after a 2-1 win over Ayr, while first-half 
goals from Steven Milne and Ryan Conroy gaveDundee a 2-0 win at Livingston.

Dunfermline won 1-0 at Partick Thistle thanks to a ninth goal of the season 
for Andy Barrowman,Raith Rovers beat Deveronvale 2-1, Falkirk were 1-0 winners 
atStenhousemuir, while the Highland league side Turriff United drew 1-1 against 
Morton.

Hibernian host the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> holders Hearts on Sunday in 
the Edinburgh derby at Easter Road and the top two teams in the Third division 
meet at Ibrox in the fourth-round tie betweenRangers and Elgin.
 