
Sometimes risks pay off but the Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> manager, Tim Sherwood, 
acknowledged he may not take quite as many when he sends out his team to play 
Birmingham City in the next round of this competition.

“We knew it was going to be an open game but we had players who needed the 
game time,” said Sherwood, who made nine changes to the sidebeaten at Crystal 
Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/22/crystal-palace-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday. Scott Sinclair was one and the former Chelsea, Swansea and 
Manchester City winger responded with a hat-trick, though eight goals, six in 
normal time, was a minimal return given the number of chances created by both 
sides. League Two Notts County could consider themselves unfortunate after 
Villa needed a distinctly debatable penalty to take them into extra time.

While Villa’s fans might consider their club to have seen a big turnover of 
players this summer, it was as nothing compared to County, where 18 new faces 
have arrived since the Dutchman Ricardo Moniz took charge at Meadow Lane 
followingthe departure of Shaun Derry last March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/23/notts-county-shaun-derry-sacked-league-one>
.

Capital One Cup: QPR lose to Carlisle and Watford lose to Preston
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/capital-one-cup-qpr-carlisle-preston-watford>
The beating of Huddersfield Town away in the first round was proof the 
new-look Magpies had the capacity to embarrass higher division opposition 
though, and a similar upset looked to be on the cards when Genaro Snijders’ 
long-range shot took a deflection that looped past the wrong-footed Villa 
goalkeeper Mark Bunn in the 16th minute.

His opposite number, Roy Carroll, saved at the feet of Sinclair, the County 
striker Izale McLeod drove inches wide, but in the 24th minute Villa were 
level, Jack Grealish dancing through a series of attempted tackles before 
putting the ball on a plate inside the penalty area for the hugely promising 
Adama Traoré to thump past Carroll.

County’s goalkeeper, 37, again thwarted Sinclair, this time with his left 
foot, while at the other end Bunn had to dive to his right to palm away Graham 
Burke’s attempted curler. He was less adept just before the interval, running 
out to try and push away an underhit backpass and succeeding only in bringing 
down McLeod: having given the penalty, it was hard to understand why the 
referee, Chris Kavanagh, did not send Bunn off. Jon Stead hit the penalty into 
the roof of the net.

It took only five minutes of the second half for Grealish to once again 
present a team-mate with an unmissable chance, Sinclair this time being the 
fortunate recipient. Those who thought County would fold, however, were quickly 
disabused of the notion by Burke, who received the ball on the right touchline 
in the 56th minute, turned and curled a glorious left-footed shot beyond the 
desperately reaching Bunn .

Just when Villa were beginning to panic, however, the referee decided Kieran 
Richardson had been pulled back in the area, a debatable interpretation of what 
looked a fairly innocuous coming together. Sinclair drilled the penalty past 
Carroll with 12 minutes of normal time remaining.

Having run themselves into the ground, County understandably tired in extra 
time, and Joe Cole laid on the hat-trick goal in the 99th minute before Joe 
Bennett made the game safe 12 minutes later.

Moniz was livid. “I’m disappointed with the referee. Their goalkeeper must be 
sent off, and then it was no penalty against us. It was 100% stolen. The truth 
is the truth,” he said.
 