
Rangers added to a dismal week with a goalless draw against Ross County in the 
Premiership.Following their Old Firm humiliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/rangers-celtic-mark-warburton-scottish-premiership>
 andthe Joey Barton fall-out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/joey-barton-rangers-fallout-after-celtic-defeat>
, Rangers were held at Ibrox. The closest they came to goal was a second‑half 
header from the substitute Michael O’Halloran which came back off the crossbar. 
Rangers could fall further behind Celtic should Brendan Rodgers’ leaders beat 
Inverness on Sunday.

Hearts were denied top spot in the Premiership when a Graham Cummins strike 
earnedSt Johnstone a 1-0 victory at McDiarmid Park. The Irishman diverted a 
mis-hit Liam Craig shot into the goal in the 58th minute to earn the Saints 
successive wins over Hearts after last month’s League Cup success. TheHearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> head coach, Robbie Neilson, was 
sent to the stand late on and the defender Callum Paterson almost grabbed an 
equaliser with two minutes remaining but his header bounced back off the bar.

Partick Thistle climbed off the foot of the table after Liam Lindsay’s late 
goal gave them a deserved 2-2 draw againstKilmarnock at Rugby Park. In an open 
contest the Killie striker Kris Boyd opened the scoring in the 16th minute 
before the Jags attacker Steven Lawless levelled in the 32nd minute with a 
composed finish on the turn.

In the 65th minute Souleymane Coulibaly headed in a Dean Hawkshaw cross to put 
the home side in front but with seven minutes remaining Lindsay pounced from 
close range before Thistle’s captain, Abdul Osman, was sent off in the 88th 
minute after picking up two yellow cards.

In the Championship, 10-man Hibs were beaten 2-1 by Ayr United at Easter Road. 
Jason Cummings scored his sixth goal in six games to give the hosts the lead. 
The momentum of the match shifted when Marvin Bartley was sent off for the home 
team after 67 minutes for a challenge on Jamie Adams, Ayr equalised seven 
minutes later through Conrad Balatoni, then Brian Gilmour met a Kevin Nisbet 
cross to score the winning goal. Queen of the South won 3-1 at home to Raith to 
take advantage of the Edinburgh side’s slip and move to the top of the league 
with two goals from Stephen Dobbie and Dean Brotherston’s right-foot shot. 
John-Yves Mvoto replied for Raith, with all the goals in the second half. 
 