
St Johnstone earned a first win in five matches as they comprehensively beat 
10-manInverness Caley Thistle 3-0. Liam Craig scored a 14th minute goal and the 
home side were helped when the Inverness skipper, Gary Warren, was sent off in 
the 61st minute following two yellow cards in the space of just 60 seconds.

Murray Davidson added a second and Danny Swanson’s strike nine minutes from 
time ensured it was a terrific afternoon for Tommy Wright’s side. It was a 
fourth consecutive defeat for Inverness, who are now five without a victory, 
and they plummeted to the foot of the table with results elsewhere.

Lee Clark tried to keep his players grounded after Kilmarnock shifted into the 
top half of the Premiership.

Killie’s 2-0 home victory over Dundee saw them rise to sixth place.

Goals either side of the half-time interval from Rory McKenzie and Souleymane 
Coulibaly earned the Ayrshire team a resounding win.

Clark said: “The league’s crazy. Even though we’re delighted with the 
performance and we thoroughly deserved the result, which could have been by a 
bigger margin, we know that the league’s going to just swing around every 
weekend really because it’s so tight.”

Jamie Walker saw his stoppage-time penalty saved by Scott Fox as Hearts had to 
settle for a 2-2 draw withRoss County at the Global Energy Stadium.

Liam Boyce restored parity for the hosts with a penalty kick on 86 minutes, 
after Alim Ozturk was found guilty of handling in the box. Jay McEveley had 
given County the advantage against the run of play in the 43rd minute before 
two quick-fire goals from Arnaud Djoum and Callum Paterson midway through the 
second half looked to have swung the game Hearts’ way.Rangers moved above the 
Edinburgh side with their 2-1 victory over Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/rangers-aberdeen-scottish-premiership-match-report>
.

Partick Thistle’s good record over Hamilton continued as the Maryhill side 
maintained their impressive 10-match unbeaten run with a 1-1 draw at the 
SuperSeal Stadium.

Alex D’Acol opened the scoring for Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> when he took advantage of a 
Liam Lindsay error to steal the ball and slot home with 15 minutes played. 
Chris Erskine replaced Ade Azeez after 60 minutes and within a minute Thistle 
were back on level terms. Erskine’s cross was poorly dealt with by Dan Seaborne 
and Sean Welsh controlled the ball with his chest before slotting into the net.
 