
Hearts remain in touching distance at the top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> after Callum 
Paterson’s fourth goal of the season helped them on the way to a 2-0 home 
victory overRoss County.

The Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> captain, Blazej 
Augustyn, was sent off in the second half but it did not prove to be costly as 
Osman Sow added a second goal to leave them three points off top.

The Hearts manager, Robbie Neilson, said that his players had trained with 10 
men due to the referee’s penchant for handing out red cards – but he is 
unlikely to face any action this time after seeing his side hold on to claim 
back-to-back victories.

“I thought we were pretty comfortable, even when we went down to 10 men. I 
have said before, and it got me into trouble, but we do practice with 10 men in 
training,’ he said.

“We were very disciplined, kept it tight and were able to hit them on the 
counterattack. The whole team worked hard and it was a really good team 
performance to get the three points.”

Tommy Wright was pleased St Johnstone collected three points in what he 
conceded was a terrible game atInverness. Liam Craig’s last-minute penalty was 
the only goal.

The sending-off of Dave Mackay at the start of the second half was the only 
meaningful action before Craig’s spot-kick, which he won after being hauled 
down by Danny Devine.

Despite the win, Wright felt his side’s performance still left a bit to be 
desired. “We’re delighted with the result but not the performance in terms of 
what we did with the ball. I make no apologies for it.

“It was a terrible game but we had to get something out of it and we stayed in 
the game. When you stay in the game I always believe you’ll get another 
opportunity and we got it with the last kick of the ball.”

Josh Magennis continued his good form with his seventh goal of the season and 
Steven Smith added a second goal asKilmarnock won 2-1 at Dundee, with Rhys 
Healey grabbing a consolation for the home side.

Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> had beaten Killie 4-0 
earlier in the season but the Ayrshire side started with more intensity and 
Magennis got his side off the mark with a header after eight minutes.

Smith added a second goal minutes into the second half after good build-up 
work from Rory McKenzie, who beat three Dundee players before setting up the 
scorer. Gary Locke’sKilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock>
 move up to eighth place in the league one point behind their opponents.

Dougie Imrie salvaged a point for 10-man Hamilton for the second week in a row 
to earn the visitors a 1-1 draw atPartick.

Thistle opened the scoring on the hour through Mathias Pogba after Lucas 
Tagliapietra was dismissed late in the first half by the referee, Euan 
Anderson, for a push on Pogba.

But they were unable to hold on for the three points as Imrie struck 12 
minutes from time for his fourth goal of the season.
 