
Celtic extended their lead at the top of the Premiership to 14 points with 
victory over Partick Thistle, their 16th win in 17 league matches this season 
and their 12th in a row. But the convincing win expected given the teams’ 
respective league positions – Partick are bottom of the table with just three 
wins – did not materialise.Partick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> might have come away with 
something had they taken their chances.

Scott Sinclair scored the only goal in the 17th minute at Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> Park, his 11th of the season. The 
former Chelsea and Manchester City forward was quickest on to Liam Henderson’s 
low free-kick across the area and scooped a smart first-time effort past Tomas 
Cerny in the Partick goal.

Celtic survive late fightback after Leigh Griffiths and Nir Bitton stun Dundee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/celtic-dundee-scottish-premiership-match-report>
For Celtic’s manager, Brendan Rodgers, the major plus apart from the win was 
the display of the 18-year-old Calvin Miller on his debut. Miller is a forward 
but he played at left-back and Rodgers compared him to Ryan Bertrand. “I was 
delighted for a young player who has just moved position,” he said. “I thought 
he did very well and he wants to learn and develop. I did a similar thing with 
Ryan Bertrand when I was at Chelsea.”

Partick had their moments and Ade Azeez drew a save from Craig Gordon just 
before half-time and proved a threat throughout with his pace and power but 
Celtic could have added to their lead in the second half.

Patrick Roberts twice went close just after the break, with his first effort 
from close range brilliantly saved by Cerny and his second attempt zipping over 
the Partick bar.

Cerny was called into action again midway through the half, denying Sinclair a 
second as he broke through on goal and then doing well to turn a Moussa Dembélé 
effort behind. Stuart Armstrong also tested the former Czech under-21 
international goalkeeper with 10 minutes to go.

Despite their failure to add a second, Celtic held on comfortably for the 
three points that moved them further away from the chasing pack led by Rangers.
 