
Goals in the first half by Roy O'Donovan and Leigh Griffiths were enough to 
beat First Division sideAyr United and put Hibernian into the semi-finals of 
the Scottish Cup.

O'Donovan, on loan from Coventry, had the ball in the Ayr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ayr> net in the fourth minute at Somerset 
Park after Ivan Sproule's drive from 16 yards was spilled by Kevin Cuthbert, 
but the flag was up for offside.

The travelling fans only had to wait two more minutes for the opening goal, 
though, when O'Donovan headed in a George Francomb free-kick. When the loanee 
from Norwich City whipped his delivery in from wide on the left it found 
O'Donovan unmarked drifting into the box and his header beat Cuthbert and went 
in off a post.

In the 16th minute, after the Hibs defender Paul Hanlon fouled Keigan Parker 
wide on the right, the home side missed a great chance to draw level. Michael 
McGowan's free-kick was met by the Ayr defender Chris Smith only six yards out 
but he failed to make proper contact, allowing the goalkeeper Graham Stack to 
smother.

Three minutes later Griffiths made it 2-0 from the penalty spot after the Ayr 
defender Andrew Geggan had fouled the Hibs midfielder Isaiah Osbourne at a 
corner. Such was the force of the penalty that it took the netting away from 
its support. '

Griffiths then missed a great chance to finish Ayr off when he raced clear on 
goal, only to slash his shot wide.

The home side persevered, throwing bodies forward, but in the 76th minute 
Hanlon's header from a Francomb corner was cleared off the line by Jonathon 
Tiffoney, before Osbourne miscued in front of goal when he looked poised to 
score.

There was a vociferous appeal for an Ayr penalty in the 82nd minute when the 
Hibs substitute Matt Doherty appeared to handle the ball as he fell in the area 
but the referee ignored the penalty claims.

Ayr battled hard to get back into the game but, having given themselves too 
much to do after going behind so early in the game, ran out of steam. Hibs will 
look forward to Sunday's draw and also a semi‑final at Hampden Park.

In the only Scottish Premier League fixture this weekend, Roman Golobart made 
amends for a spectacular own goal by scoring the equaliser in a 1-1 draw between
Inverness and Kilmarnock. It was just reward for Inverness, who dominated at 
the Tulloch Caledonian Stadium.

Inverness were better in the opening stages until the defender Golobart scored 
his second own goal of the season after 31 minutes.

Danny Buijs struck an angled attempt from outside the penalty area high and 
wide as the visitors looked to add to their lead early in the second half.

Shane Sutherland's rising shot from the edge of the penalty area was just over 
the crossbar for Terry Butcher's side.

The Caley Thistle captain Richie Foran missed a gilt‑edged chance in the 
closing stages when his side‑footed effort from 10 yards was blocked by Cammy 
Bell. The keeper then tipped over Billy McKay's shot.

But moments later after he denied Richie Foran's header, McKay found Golobart 
who scored from close range to level the scores with seven minutes remaining.

Michael Nelson was picked out by Lee Johnson's free-kick but headed the ball 
straight at Esson as the two teams settled for a share of the points. 
 