
Falkirk secured their place in the semi-finals of the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> with a 2-1 victory over 
Hamilton at New Douglas Park. Blair Alston struck just before half-time to give 
the Bairns the lead against the run of play and he doubled their lead with a 
stunning effort from the edge of the box after 71 minutes. Substitute Andy Ryan 
pulled a goal back for the hosts but they were unable to score an equaliser in 
the closing stages of the contest. A disappointing afternoon for Billy Reid's 
side ended with Jonathan Page being sent-off in injury-time.

In the Scottish Premier League, Michael Higdon scored his 20th goal of the 
season asMotherwell scored two goals in the first eight minutes to secure all 
three points in a narrow 2-1 win atHearts. Higdon calmly swept in the opener 
for the visitors before Dylan McGowan scored an own goal when he failed to keep 
out a Nicky Law effort. Former 'Motherwell striker John Sutton pulled one back 
just before the hour mark asHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts>
 put the Steelmen under pressure, but Stuart McCall's side held on to go three 
points clear of Inverness in second place as the Tynecastle side suffered their 
fifth straight loss.

Ross County and Inverness drew their derby 0-0 at Victoria Park. Chances were 
few with neither side controlling possession for sustained periods during the 
match. After a cagey start Mihael Kovacevic broke into the Caley box but he 
overran the ball before he could cut it back into a dangerous position. At the 
other end Richie Foran struck the ball across the County goalmouth but Billy 
McKay just failed to connect in front of goal.

The Rangers manager, Ally McCoist, claimed he was "neither surprised nor 
disappointed" by Celtic's response to the ruling by an independent commission 
that Rangers gained no competitive advantage from years of making undisclosed 
Employee Benefit Trust payments to players. Celtic had issued a statement 
declaring they were "surprised by the parallel conclusion that no competitive 
advantage was gained from these arrangements." McCoist's comments followed 
Rangers' 3-1 defeat ofEast Stirling at Ibrox in the Scottish Third Division.
 