
Aberdeen secured their Scottish Premier League status for next season despite 
conceding a late equaliser in the 1-1 draw atSt Johnstone.

Derek McInnes's side started the contest stronger, with Chris Millar forcing a 
fine save from Stuart Nelson inside 50 seconds and the resulting Danny Grainger 
corner saw Davidson mistime a header, Dave Mackay have a shot cleared off the 
line and Jody Morris fire wide following up.

But, in remarkably similar fashion, it was the visitors who opened the scoring 
in the 16th minute. Graeme Smith tipped a Davide Grassi header on to the bar 
from a Paul Marshall corner, Darren Mackie steered the follow-up goalward and 
Steven MacLean got the final touch on the line.

As the Dons finished the first half strongly, MacLean beat Grainger to 
Marshall's deflected cross but was under enough pressure for his volley to 
strike the bar.

The Saints' second-half pressure was finally rewarded with an 88th-minute 
equaliser. Nelson could only parry a Liam Craig free-kick and injury-plagued 
Saints striker Andy Jackson was first to the rebound to scuff the ball against 
the post, off the goalkeeper and over the line. The draw bolsters the home 
side's position in seventh.

A first-half header from Marco Paixão gave Hamilton all three points at Falkirk
 but the visitors had to withstand a second-half onslaught.

There were 19 minutes on the clock when the Portuguese midfielder found 
himself with lots of time to steer a Dougie Imrie cross past Robert Olejnik, 
and the Lanarkshire side were good value for their interval lead.

After the break it was one-way traffic towards the Accies' goal but the 
equaliser failed to arrive leaving the Bairns at the bottom of the table. 
Accies enjoyed some luck in the 70th minute when a Pedro Moutinho corner from 
the right was met by Darren Barr whose header struck the post, rebounded off 
the unwitting Mikaël Antoine-Curier and back into the arms of Sean Murdoch. The 
visitors were now in retreat mode and they brought on Joel Thomas for 
Antoine-Curier in a bid to take the game toFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk>.

With four minutes left Moutinho had an effort from distance that went just 
wide, and the home side passed up several chances to level in a dramatic 
finale, leaving their SPL future in doubt.

Andy Dorman snatched the late winner as St Mirren took a massive step towards 
SPL survival with what could be a crucial 1-0 victory over relegation rivals
Kilmarnock. Dorman struck late on with the only goal in what was a scrappy game 
at newSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> Park as both 
sides desperately tried to haul themselves away from the danger zone.

In a further boost for the Paisley club, with Falkirk suffering defeat against 
Hamilton, Saints are now four points clear of the drop zone, while Killie 
remain a single point ahead of rock-bottom Bairns.Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> and Falkirk meet on the final 
week of the season.

Scottish Cup Finalists Dundee United host Celtic at Tannadice today and Walter 
Smith'sRangers travel to Easter Road to play fourth-placed Hibernian.

Inverness Caledonian Thistle's manager, Terry Butcher, hailed his club's 
"absolutely brilliant" supporters as his side celebrated winning the First 
Division title with a 7-0 away victory againstAyr United. Seven different 
scorers helped the Highlanders to an SPL return. Butcher's team are undefeated 
in their last 20 matches.Nial Briggs
 