
Dundee United retained hope of staying in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a 2-1 win over 
Hearts at Tannadice as both teams finished the game with 10 men.

Paul Paton was the hero for Mixu Paatelainen’s men as his spectacular 
88th-minute winner from 25 yards out helped them to reduce the gap on 
second-from-bottomKilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> 
to 11 points with a game in hand.

Guy Demel broke the deadlock in the match to put United ahead a minute before 
the interval, only for Jamie Walker to equalise with some panache for Robbie 
Neilson’s visitors after 48 minutes.

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> had defender Jordan 
McGhee sent off after 40 minutes after picking up a second yellow card, while 
the hosts had substitute Henri Anier dismissed in the closing minutes, also for 
a second yellow, just after Paton’s long-range volleyed winner.

A superb strike from Ian McShane clinched victory for 10-man Ross County in an 
all-action game withHamilton at the Global Energy Stadium.

McShane fired home a superbly executed free-kick with 12 minutes remaining and 
with the Premiership game in the balance.

The Dutch striker Alex Schalk had scored his first goal for the Staggies in 
first-half stoppage time to give the home side the lead, but the dismissal of 
Jamie Reckord, just after the break, for denying Dougie Imrie a goalscoring 
opportunity, allowed Hamilton back into the game.

Imrie made it 1-1 in the 66th minute when he headed home, but McShane curled 
the ball around the defensive wall and into the top left corner of the goal to 
seal the win.

Tam Scobbie headed a last-minute winner against Motherwell at McDiarmid Park 
to endSt Johnstone’s nine-game run without a victory. St Johnstone’s manager, 
Tommy Wright, praised his players and their “character to get back in the game 
and keep going right to the end.”

The visitors went ahead when Louis Moult nodded James McFadden’s corner home 
in the 33rd minute, but David Wotherspoon beat Connor Ripley at his near post 
with a superb strike two minutes before the interval.

Saints stepped up their level after the game entered the final quarter and 
Scobbie converted a Simon Lappin free-kick just as proceedings were coming to a 
close to seal a 2-1 victory and push Saints back into the top six.

It was the sixth time in 2016 that Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> have lost a last-gasp goal - 
five of them proving crucial.

Lee Clark secured an important point in his first Scottish Premiership game in 
charge ofKilmarnock, courtesy of the performance of his goalkeeper, Jamie 
MacDonald.

The home side had the best of the first half, but failed to convert any of the 
chances they created before they appeared to run out of steam.

It is a game that Dundee will feel they should have won as they had the better 
chances, but they could not find a way past the outstanding MacDonald and the 
game finished 0-0.
 