
Motherwell booked their place in the last eight of the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> with an emphatic 6-0 win over
Morton at Fir Park.

The home side left their First Division opponents shellshocked as they raced 
to a 5-0 half-time advantage. Tom Hateley scored directly from a corner before 
Jamie Murphy, Shaun Hutchinson, Henrik Ojamaa and Nicky Law all added goals for 
the hosts.

Jamie Murphy heaped further misery on the visitors when he scored his second 
midway through the second half to complete the scoring.

The First Division side Ross County had to settle for a home replay against 
Scottish Premier League opponentsSt Mirren after Richard Brittain missed a late 
penalty in a 1-1 draw.

The County captain had put his side ahead from the spot five minutes before 
half‑time, only for the lead to be cancelled out within three minutes by a 
headed goal from theSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> 
striker Steven Thompson.

County came close when Iain Vigurs struck a half-volley from the edge of the 
area after a free-kick had been cleared back out to him, but his powerful drive 
went wide as Craig Samson scrambled to cover it. Colin McMenamin then headed 
too high from Stuart Kettlewell's cross from the right.

Thompson almost doubled his tally 10 minutes from time with a good volley from 
a cross by the substitute Graham Carey– then McMenamin hit the side‑netting 
after holding off Marc McAusland as he bored down on goal.

Brittain had a glorious chance to win the game for the First Division side 
with a second penalty three minutes into stoppage time after Lee Mair brought 
down Mark Corcoran following a swift counterattack– but this time the County 
captain blasted his spot-kick well over the bar.

A first-half Eoin Doyle goal earned Hibernian a place in the quarter-finals as 
they beatKilmarnock 1-0 at Easter Road.

The Irishman's goal was fitting reward for a fine display by the home side 
during an opening period in which they also had an effort by James McPake ruled 
out and Tom Soares went close. Paul Heffernan struck the visitors' best chance 
straight at the recalled Graham Stack.

Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> finally created a 
clear opportunity with 10 minutes remaining when Liam Kelly cut through the 
Hibs defence with a fine pass, but Heffernan's low shot was well saved by Stack.

The former Arsenal youth player was sharp again as the full-time whistle 
approached, pushing an awkward Danny Racchi shot to safety.

Aberdeen fought back to earn a replay against Queen of the South at Pittodrie.

The visitors made the perfect start to the second half when, after weathering 
a period ofAberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> pressure, 
they broke upfield and scored against the run of play.

Sam Parkin fed Scott McLaughlin who kept his composure and slotted the ball 
past the goalkeeper Jason Brown to give the Doonhamers hope of pulling off a 
shock against their SPL opponents, who have suffered several cup upsets in 
recent seasons.

Rory McArdle struck the crossbar with a header before Scott Vernon scrambled a 
leveller after 67 minutes following a long Kari Arnason throw-in.

The visitors defended bravely in the closing stages as the relentless Aberdeen 
attacks continued with a chorus of boos ringing around the stadium as the home 
support made their feelings known .
 