
Adam Rooney and Jonny Hayes each scored a second half goal as Aberdeen ended a 
run of six games without a win, overcoming a weakDundee United side.

United remain at the foot of the table after the 2-0 defeat, as Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> applied some pressure to the 
league leaders Celtic, who travel to Ross County tomorrowtoday.

Ten-man St Johnstone recorded a 2-1 comeback victory against Kilmarnock as 
they claimed their fourth successive win. The home side fell behind after only 
a couple of minutes at McDiarmid Park when Steven Smith fired Killie ahead. 
Saints fought back through Michael O’Halloran and Chris Kane goals to secure 
the win and maintain their recent fine form before they lost Liam Craig to a 
red card late on.

Prince Buaben and Arnaud Djoum give Hearts an assured win over Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/07/hearts-hamilton-scottish-premiership-match-report>
A retaken penalty and a spectacular strike from Iain Vigurs helped Inverness 
to a 3-1 victory overMotherwell at Fir Park after a winless run of four 
matches. Greg Tansey broke the deadlock from the penalty spot at the second 
attempt in the 11th minute before a Miles Storey shot deflected into the net 
and a Vigurs volley either side of half-time put the visitors three goals to 
the good. Louis Moult soon replied forMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell>, but Inverness held on for 
three comfortable points.

A late goal from the substitute Kane Hemmings gave Dundee a share of the 
points against aPartick side who led for 80 minutes at Dens Park. Hemmings 
earned Paul Hartley’s side a battling draw by equalising in the 85th minute 
after second-bottom Thistle had taken a fifth-minute lead when Liam Lindsay met 
a Stuart Bannigan corner to head home. Alan Archibald’s Partick looked like 
holding out for victory until Hemmings’ struck his fifth goal of the season for 
a 1-1 draw.

Rangers returned to normal service at the top of the Scottish Championship 
with a 4-0 thrashing ofAlloa at Ibrox. Mark Warburton’s side had lost for the 
first time in the league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/01/rangers-hibs-scottish-championship-mark-warburton>
 against challengers Hibernian last weekend but there was no prospect of a 
surprise result against the league’s bottom side as the striker Martyn Waghorn 
scored two goals either side of a trademark free-kick from the right-back James 
Tavernier to give the home side a 3-0 interval lead. Alloa’s Eddie Ferns was 
sent off in the 78th minute for a challenge on Jordan Thompson before the 
substitute Nicky Clark made it 4-0 in injury time.

James Keatings scored a hat-trick as Hibernian maintained their formidable 
form with a 4-1 win atSt Mirren. Sean Kelly had given Saints an eighth-minute 
lead following a short corner but Jason Cummings levelled within two minutes 
with a low finish, scoring for the seventh successive game. Two goals inside 
four minutes from Keatings then put Hibs in the driving seat. Keatings drilled 
into the far corner following a quickly-taken free-kick in the 37th minute and 
added another by curling into the top corner after a flowing move. The 
substitute Lawrence Shankland hit a post for Saints before Keatings claimed the 
match ball from the penalty spot after Liam Henderson was brought down by 
Cameron Howieson. The win extends Hibs’ unbeaten run in all competitions to 13, 
winning 12 of them, while Saints are still searching for their first home 
league victory.
 