
Two goals from Jamie Walker helped lift Hearts into second place in the 
Scottish Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>
 after Robbie Neilson’s side came from a goal behind to beatHamilton 3-1.

After Hearts controlled a one-sided first half at Tynecastle, Accies stormed 
ahead in the 50th minute when Ali Crawford powered a volley into the net. But 
Walker restored parity with a powerful header, before converting a 
controversial penalty after Sam Nicholson’s run into the penalty area was 
stopped by theHamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> 
substitute Shaun Want.

Nicholson then added shine to the scoreline with a injury-time, far-post 
volley. The victory movesHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> 
two points clear of Rangers after they lost the Old Firm derby at Celtic.

Second-half goals from Niall McGinn and Iain Vigurs gave Aberdeen and Inverness
 a share the points in a 1-1 draw. McGinn cut in from the left to curl home a 
fine opening goal for the hosts as they looked to bounce back with a win after 
losing 4-1 to Celtic before the international break. But his goal was bettered 
by a superb long‑range equaliser from Vigurs in the 68th minute, as Caley 
Thistle earned a point.

Louis Moult came off the bench to rescue a point for Motherwell against Ross 
County at the Global Energy Stadium, in a match that sparked into life in the 
second half.

Liam Boyce gave County the breakthrough in the 61st minute, but Motherwell 
were thrown a chance when they were awarded a penalty six minutes later. Scott 
McDonald was fouled in the box and Moult converted the spot-kick to clinch a 
1-1 draw. County played the last 20 minutes without defender Jay McEveley, who 
was sent off for two bookable offences.

Goals from Steven Anderson and Steven MacLean gave St Johnstone their second 
league win of the season againstPartick at Firhill.

In the first half, Anderson met Danny Swanson’s cross with a superb finish 
from an acute angle. Swanson also assisted for the second goal, setting up 
MacLean for a 20-yard strike after 64 minutes.

In the Championship, Hibs recorded their fifth win in a row as Jason Cummings 
scored with a penalty in their 1-0 victory atDumbarton. Cammy Bell saved three 
first-halfDunfermline penalties as 10-man Dundee United beat the Pars 3-1 at 
East End Park with goals from Simon Murray, Tony Andreu and Paul Dixon. Dixon 
was later sent off.
 