
A spectacular 88th-minute strike from recent signing Kevin McHattie gave 
Kilmarnock their first victory of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> campaign, as they 
left it late to defeatDundee United 2-1 at Tannadice and move off the foot of 
the table. The result was a relief for the under-pressure Killie manager, Gary 
Locke, with the strain now transferred to his Dundee United counterpart, Jackie 
McNamara, after the home fans made their disdain felt.

Billy McKay’s second-half penalty for United had cancelled out Kallum 
Higginbotham’s 44th-minute opener from the spot forKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock>. The defeat meant McNamara’s 
side suffered a fourth straight league defeat, to leave them second-bottom in 
the standings. There was a minute’s silence prior to kick-off in memory of 
former United forward Ralph Milne, who died last Sunday at the age of 54.

Dundee were victorious courtesy of a fine second-half goal from Greg Stewart, 
asPartick Thistle’s winless run continued despite hitting the woodwork three 
times at Firhill. The hosts dominated the bulk of the play, particularly in the 
first half, but their failure to find the back of the net remained their 
achilles heel. Thistle were punished 14 minutes from time when Stewart’s cool 
finish earned a 1-0 victory for the visitors.

Louis Moult scored his fourth goal in four games to earn Motherwell a 1-1 draw 
againstRoss County with a stoppage-time equaliser at Fir Park. Moult was on 
hand to convert a driven cross from substitute Marvin Johnson from close range 
in the first of five minutes added on. County had been heading for a fourth 
consecutive win after Michael Gardyne scored in the 33rd minute whenMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> failed to deal with a basic 
free-kick into the box.

In-form Steven MacLean ran the show for St Johnstone for the second successive 
home match, as his expertly executed hat-trick inspired a fine 4-1 win over
Hamilton. The 33-year-old’s two close-range finishes and composure to convert a 
penalty took his tally for the season to six goals in seven matches. MacLean 
also assisted for Liam Craig’s first-half opener.Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> responded when Lucas 
Tagliapietra headed home an Ali Crawford cross, but the visitors will rue 
Andrew Dallas’s decision not to award an early penalty.

In the Championship, Rangers maintained their perfect start with a 3-0 win 
over Livingston at Ibrox thanks to goals from Lee Wallace, Martyn Waghorn and 
Nicky Law.
 