
Murray Davidson’s superb volley kept St Johnstone in the race for fourth place 
in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> as the Saints held 
Dundee United to a 1-1 draw at McDiarmid Park.

Davidson’s stylish finish in the 77th minute was out of keeping with his 
team-mates’ previous efforts after Saints missed a series of first-half 
opportunities including a Dave Mackay penalty, which Radoslaw Cierzniak saved 
with the last touch of the 45 minutes.

John Rankin opened the scoring when he headed United in front from close range 
after 68 minutes but Davidson’s equaliser means the teams are level on 53 
points. United hold a three-goal advantage as the pair fight for a potential 
European place – albeit if Inverness win the Scottish Cup.

Substitute Greg Docherty’s late header gave Hamilton a 1-1 draw against 
Partick Thistle at New Douglas Park. Alan Archibald’s 100th game as the Thistle 
manager appeared to be on the road to three points when Stephen O’Donnell 
struck a shot past Michael McGovern in the 72nd minute. But with five minutes 
remaining Docherty, on in the 80th minute for Darian MacKinnon, headed in a Ali 
Crawford corner to hold Accies’ five-point gap over Thistle with two games 
remaining.

An injury-time penalty from Stephen Thompson earned relegated St Mirren a 2-1 
win againstRoss County at Victoria Park. County controlled the game but came 
away empty handed. A Martin Woods penalty opened the scoring in the 31st minute 
but parity was restored eight minutes later when Stephen Mallan scored with a 
deflected shot.

As the game moved into stoppage time Mark Brown raced from his goal to bring 
down the Saints substitute Lewis Morgan and Thompson struck home the penalty 
kick.

Alloa progressed into the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> play-off final 2-1 
on aggregate despite losing 1-0 at home toBrechin. Forfar will be the opponents 
after completing a 4-1 aggregate win after drawing 1-1 atStranraer. 
Stenhousemuir and Queen’s Park will contest the League One play-off final.
 