
Kilmarnock’s preparations for their Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> play-off final 
against Falkirk suffered a setback following a 4-2 home defeat to relegated
Dundee United in the final round of Premiership games.

Mark Durnan headed United into a 12th-minute lead with only his second goal of 
the season – his other also coming against Killie in January – but the 
much-changed home side turned the game around with two strikes inside seven 
minutes. Craig Slater’s shot was too powerful for the goalkeeper, Luis Zwick, 
to handle and Kallum Higginbotham slotted in the rebound - his third goal in 
four games - in the 27th minute. Tope Obadeyi then beat the onrushing Zwick to 
register his first goal of 2016 to put the hosts 2-1 in front.

Simon Murray equalised in the 74th minute with a solo effort that found the 
bottom corner and made it 3-2 eight minutes later. Harry Souttar rounded off 
the scoring in the 86th minute, three minutes after coming off the bench, with 
his first senior goal.

The Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> manager, Lee 
Clark, said his focus was on the Falkirk games. “It’s obviously disappointing 
but the bigger picture was always Thursday,” he said. “That’s why we left so 
many players out and that’s why I had to make the decisions at 2-1 to take the 
two senior lads out.”

Clark was advised of the danger of suspension with Conrad Balatoni and Lee 
Hodson carrying bookings when the director Michael Johnston visited the dugout 
in the second half. “You want to win every game but Thursday and Sunday are too 
big for us to take any risks. I hate losing the game but I would have felt 
worse if Balatoni or Hodson had got another yellow card. The team will be 
completely different in terms of personnel, and with the freshness they will 
have, because one thing we will need about us on Thursday and Sunday is 
freshness.”

Inverness scored four second-half goals as they beat Dundee 4-0 to seal 
seventh place ahead of the Dens side in the Premiership. Miles Storey opened 
the scoring 16 minutes into the second half when he broke the visitors’ offside 
trap to round Scott Bain and slot the ball home. The game was settled with two 
goals in two minutes. On 69 minutes, Iain Vigurs floated a corner to Danny 
Devine to poke the ball in at the back post. Nick Ross was caught in possession 
at the edge of the area by Ross Draper, who drove at theDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> goal before slotting past Bain. 
Richie Foran completed the scoring with a late penalty.

Partick and Hamilton ended their seasons with a 2-2 draw, with all the goals 
coming in the first 20 minutes of an entertaining contest at Firhill.

Thistle’s opening goal came in the third minute after Accies keeper Alan 
Martin made a fine save down at his left-hand post from David Amoo. The 
visitors failed to clear the resultant James Penrice corner and Kris Doolan was 
well placed at the back post to head in his 14th goal of the season. Accies 
drew level when the Thistle keeper Ryan Scully was adjudged by referee Alan 
Muir to have fouled Danny Redmond. Eamon Brophy showed composure to score the 
penalty. Thistle restored their lead when Penrice’s corner was cleared and 
returned into the box by the defender Freddie Frans, where it was knocked on 
for Amoo to head in from a yard out. Accies levelled again a minute later when 
the 20-year-old Brophy latched on to a Greg Docherty through-ball, rounded 
Scully and stroked in the ball from three yards.

Joey Barton, who helped put Burnley back in the Premier League, visited 
Rangers’training ground on Saturday with a view to the 33-year-old midfielder 
joining the promoted side on a free transfer.

In the Scottish League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-one> play-off, Queen’s 
Park lost 1-0 to Clyde, who scored through a Scott Linton penalty, but won 3-2 
on aggregate to return to the third tier after seven years.

The Lowland League champions Edinburgh City defeated League Two’s bottom side 
East Stirlingshire1-0 (2-1 on aggregate) to take their place. It marked the end 
of East Stirling’s 61-year stay in the senior leagues.
 