
Hearts collected a fifth straight Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> victory with a 
comfortable 3-0 victory overPartick Thistle to maintain their perfect start to 
the season. The hosts went ahead through Osman Sow in the 29th minute before 
Sam Nicholson added a second after Juanma Delgado’s penalty was saved. Delgado 
made up for his miss from 12 yards to put the contest beyond doubt.

The result keeps Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> two 
points clear at the top.

Aberdeen preserved their 100% record in the league as Adam Rooney’s double 
delivered a 2-0 home win overDundee. A header midway through the second half 
and his injury-time penalty saw off aDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> side who were distinctly second 
best.

The Dons were in control of the contest from the start, but struggled to test 
Dundee goalkeeper Scott Bain during an otherwise dominant first-half 
performance. Dundee rallied after the interval but they failed to seriously 
test the opposition goalkeeper and Rooney’s goals, added to the late red card 
Gary Harkins received in conceding the spot-kick, proved a painful lesson for 
the visitors.

Inverness are still waiting for a first victory of the season after sliding to 
a 2-0 defeat againstHamilton. Carlton Morris’s confident 18th-minute strike 
gave Accies the advantage at the Caledonian Stadium. With Inverness struggling 
to find a killer touch in front of goal they conceded a second to Louis 
Longridge in the late stages to put the game to bed.

Two goals from Steven MacLean helped St Johnstone to come from behind and beat 
Motherwell 2-1 at McDiarmid Park for their first league win of the season. 
Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> controlled 
possession in the first period and took the lead through Louis Moult’s first 
goal for the club. The Saints turned the contest around in the second half and 
MacLean’s two close-range strikes ended a poor start to the season with an exit 
the Europa League and failure to find a win in their first four league matches. 
The away side’s bad day was compounded when Jake Taylor was shown a second 
yellow card for simulation with four minutes left.

Kilmarnock are still searching for their first win of the season as they 
conceded four first-half goals in a 4-0 defeat at home toRoss County. Once 
again Killie fell behind to early goals at Rugby Park with the visitors scoring 
through Liam Boyce and Jonathan Franks within five minutes. Boyce then struck 
again before Andrew Davies completed the haul in what was a perfect first half 
from the Highlanders.
 