
Fine strikes from Frédéric Frans and Stephen O’Donnell earned Partick Thistle 
a 2-1 victory atRoss County in the first post-split matches of the Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

Michael Gardyne gave County the advantage in the 21st minute, but a majestic 
finish from Frans levelled the scores five minutes later. The visitors took the 
lead in the 54th minute when O’Donnell met a clearance from Scott Boyd and 
struck the ball past Mark Brown from a tight angle.

St Johnstone increased their chances of playing European football next season 
with a deserved 2-0 win overDundee at Dens Park. Tommy Wright’s side moved above
Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> United into fourth 
position courtesy of second-half goals from Danny Swanson and David 
Wotherspoon. The home team’s downfall was complete when striker Greg Stewart 
was dismissed on the hour.

Steven Thompson scored two as St Mirren beat an understrength Kilmarnock 4-1. 
Thompson scored two second-half penalties to treble his account in an 
injury-plagued season and earn the Scottish Premiership’s bottom club a 
survival lifeline as they move seven points behind Motherwell with four games 
left.

Goals from Sean Kelly and Kieran Sadlier gave them a deserved half-time lead, 
and they quickly cancelled out Kilmarnock’s fightback hopes after Josh Magennis 
scored.

Hearts broke the record for the most points in a Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> season, previously 
held by neighbours Hibernian, as St Johnstone-bound Brad McKay’s late penalty 
saw offCowdenbeath 2-1. The visitors hit the crossbar in the opening minute 
when a long ball down the field found Callum Paterson but his volley smacked 
off the woodwork. Cowdenbeath, who lost 10-0 to Hearts earlier this season, 
took a shock lead in the 14th minute when Colin Marshall found the bottom 
corner from the edge of the area. Hearts were level in the 32nd minute when 
Jamie Walker’s cross was headed home from close range by the lively Paterson. 
With 90 minutes played, McKay scored his first-ever goal for the club to seal 
victory.Queen of the South sealed the third play-off place with a 2-1 win at 
Dumbarton.

Hibernian climbed to second place after a convincing 4-1 home win against Alloa
.Rangers fought back to draw 2-2 at home to Falkirk. A header from Haris Vuckic 
and Nicky Law, in stoppage time, cancelled out goals from John Baird and Tom 
Taiwo and earned the Ibrox side a point and within two points of second-placed 
Hibs.
 