
Melvin de Leeuw's 77th-minute strike gave Ross County a 3-2 win over Partick 
Thistle in a enthralling Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> finale at Firhill.

Jordan Slew first goal since joining on loan from Blackburn in January opened 
the scoring for the visitors and Yoann Arquin extended the advantage with a 
second goal three minutes after the interval when he headed in a Graham Carey 
free-kick. Thistle's striker Lyle Taylor reduced the deficit two minutes later 
and the substitute George Moncur, on for Chris Erskine, restored parity in the 
73rd minute with a drive for his first Thistle goal since arriving on loan from 
West Ham in January. De Leeuw, replacing Arquin, put County 3-2 up in the 77th 
minute with a deflected shot and the visitors held on for three points, which 
left them in seventh place in the table, with the Jags dropping down to 10th.

Hearts ended 31 years in the top flight with a 1-1 draw against St Mirren. The 
already relegated Tynecastle club fought back from Conor Newton's 27th-minute 
opener to level through Dale Carrick a minute and a half into the second half. 
It was another encouraging display for Gary Locke's young side as they prepare 
for life in the Championship next season. The draw meantSt Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> failed to get the win they 
needed to secure seventh place and their highest top-flight finish since 1989 
and are rumoured to be parting company with their manager, Danny Lennon, in the 
coming days.

Lennon led the Buddies to their first major trophy in 26 years last season 
when they won the League Cup at Hampden, but the Paisley club's hierarchy is 
frustrated by their team's failure to breach the top six. The match saw 
assistant referee Kylie McMullen become the first woman to ever officiate in 
Scotland's top flight.

The result of the play-off matches in the Scottish League means that Falkirk 
are to meetHamilton in the Scottish Premiership play-off semi-final for the 
right to meet Hibs in the final.

Cowdenbeath and Dunfermline will play-off in the Championship final and 
Stirling Albion and East Fife will contest the League One final.
 