
A first half hat-trick from the Aberdeen striker Chris Maguire eased his 
side's passage to the fifth round of theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> with a 6-0 victory.

Scott Vernon was also on target with two goals but missed two gilt-edged 
chances for his hat-trick and Josh Magennis scored his first goal as manager 
Craig Brown ensuredEast Fife would not be the latest lower league side to claim 
the scalp ofAberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> in a cup 
competition.

The Dons, who have been dumped out of the Scottish Cup by lower league sides 
in the last three seasons, strolled through with a comfortable win over the 
Second Division club.

Nigel Hasselbaink was the hero as Hamilton finally claimed their first home 
win of the season as they progressed past 10-manAlloa into the fifth round of 
the Scottish Cup.

Simon Mensing saw a late penalty saved after the Alloa goalkeeper Stephen 
Robertson had been sent off before Flavio Paixao sealed the win in injury time 
as the majority of the 1,054 crowd headed home happy for once.

Ross County gave themselves another chance to avenge their Scottish Cup final 
defeat byDundee United after holding the defending champions in the fourth 
round at Tannadice.

The underdogs had the ball in the net as they pressed following a poor first 
half but Andrew Barrowman's goal was disallowed for a foul on the goalkeeper.

United forced them back in the final half-hour but they lacked a clinical edge 
in the absence of the suspended David Goodwillie and County earned a fifth 
opportunity to beat the Tayside club in cup competitions in two seasons. Only 
4,041 fans turned out as United began the defence of their trophy against a 
County side who had won just three league games since their 3-0 Hampden defeat 
in May.

Two stoppage-time goals from Inverness saw them dump the lower league side 
Elgin Cityout of the fourth round of the Scottish Cup at the Caledonian Stadium.

The resilient visitors were applauded off by the home fans and their 1,200 
travelling supporters after almost forcing a replay against their SPL hosts.

Resolute defending kept City in the tie up until the second minute of stoppage 
time when the substitute Dani Sanchez broke the deadlock. Their top scorer Adam 
Rooney settled things two minutes later when he fired home from close range to 
seal a 2-0 victory for Terry Butcher's side after Sanchez had nodded a Jack 
Ross cross down to him.

The Morayshire visitors, who are fourth in the Scottish Third Division, can 
return home 40 miles east proud of their performance in the first competitive 
meeting of the sides but Inverness proved their superiority in the end.

St Mirren face a tricky trip to Peterhead for their Scottish Cup fourth-round 
replay after being held to a goalless draw at home by the Second Division side.

The Buddies midfielder Patrick Cregg cracked a shot against the post early in 
the first half but that was as close as the SPL side came to scoring in a 
frustrating afternoon for them at New St Mirren Park.

Danny Lennon's side dominated for most of the match but the part-timers 
defended with dogged resilience.

The Buddies simply ran out of ideas and were met with a chorus of boos from 
their angry supporters at the final whistle and neither they, nor the St Mirren 
players, will look forward to the trip north.

Paul Tosh scored an injury-time equaliser at Links Park to earn Third Division 
Montrose a replay against Dunfermline, as the sides shared a 2-2 draw. Tosh had 
put the home side ahead after 26 minutes before Patrick Clarke found the net 
with a strike from outside the penalty area to draw the sides level.

It appeared that it would be the First Division leaders who would progress 
when Andy Kirk gave the Pars the advantage with 10 minutes remaining. Tosh's 
strike inside the penalty area gave his side a second opportunity to progress 
to the fifth round of the Scottish Cup .

Burst pipes have forced the tie between Hearts and St Johnstone at Tynecastle 
scheduled for today to be postponed, with Hearts hoping the match will go ahead 
on Tuesday evening. Four other Scottish Cup ties were postponed due to 
weather-related problems.
 