
Hearts replaced Aberdeen as Celtic’s nearest title challengers in the Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> after a 
clinical 4-0 victory overPartick Thistle at Firhill.

Robbie Neilson’s side faced a resurgent Jags team who were looking to build on 
their three-match unbeaten run. But two goals each from Juanma and his strike 
partner Osman Sow putsHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> six 
points from top spot.

Partick, who finished with 10 men after goalkeeper Ryan Scully was sent off 
near the end, now have just a two-point cushion over bottom placed sideDundee 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited>.

Despite the victory, Neilson insisted his side were still aiming for top six 
in the Premiership and “will not get carried away” despite their league 
position.

Graham Cummins scored two goals as Hamilton went down to a second heavy defeat 
of the season toSt Johnstone.

Accies had previously endured their worst result of the campaign so far against
St Johnstone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> – a 4-1 defeat.

David Wotherspoon and Michael O’Halloran were also on target in St Johnstone’s 
4-2 win as the Perth side earned all three points and moved up to fourth in the 
league.

The newest managers installed at Premiership teams enjoyed their maiden 
victories asDundee United and Motherwell collected maximum points. United 
picked up their first league win since early August as they defeated an 
off-colourRoss County 1-0 with Billy McKay’s late penalty at Tannadice.

McKay struck after 81 minutes following a foul on Scott Fraser by Martin 
Woods, to give Mixu Paatelainen his first victory since replacing Jackie 
McNamara.

The home team had substitute Aidan Connolly sent off for a second bookable 
offence in injury time but still had enough to hold out for the three points.

Louis Moult came off the bench to give Mark McGhee a first win in his second 
spell as the Motherwell manager. Moult prodded home from 10 yards with three 
minutes remaining as Motherwell capitalised from a throw-in near the corner 
flag and record a 1-0 victory overKilmarnock at Rugby Park.

A Greg Tansey penalty rescued a 1-1 draw for 10-man Inverness against Dundee. 
Rory Loy put the visitors ahead from the penalty spot after David Raven had 
been dismissed but Tansey restored parity with a late penalty which broke their 
three-game losing streak.
 