
A late winner from the substitute Ryan Dow earned Ross County a 2-1 win over 
Aberdeen at the Global Energy Stadium, despite having Kenny van der Weg 
sent off.

Dow, who replaced Tony Dingwall with 30 minutes remaining, headed home from 
six yards out to snatch victory two minutes from time.

Liam Boyce had given County a deserved lead in the 26th minute, but the Dons 
started the second half strongly with Kenny McLean and Jonny Hayes having 
opportunities before Niall McGinn restored parity for the visitors after 68 
minutes.

A Gary Warren header past Jamie MacDonald six minutes from time earned 
Inverness Caledonian Thistle a 1-1 draw with Kilmarnock at Rugby Park.

A powerful second-half strike from Souleymane Coulibaly – his 11th goal of the 
season – appeared to have decided the contest prior to Warren’s intervention.

The Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> manager, Lee 
Clark, said: “We haven’t won it, which we deserved to. We’ve made an error that 
we’ve talked about. We’ve made an error and it has cost us a big three points. 
[With] our first-half performance we were the dominant side. Jamie MacDonald 
hasn’t had a lot to do.

“They had a little spell in the second half where their striker was getting 
hold of the ball but in general terms we were the team in the ascendancy. A win 
would have been a deserved result but we haven’t got it, and we move on.”

Chris Kane’s fortuitous strike earned St Johnstone a 1-1 draw with Motherwell 
at McDiarmid Park.

The Saints goalkeeper Zander Clark palmed a Richard Tait cross into his own 
net to give Motherwell a 12th-minute lead and the hosts struggled to penetrate 
the Motherwell rearguard until the ball ricocheted in off Chris Kane in the 
62nd minute.

The first match at Tynecastle for the new Hearts head coach, Ian Cathro, was 
an anticlimax as his side were held to a 1-1 draw byPartick Thistle.

Following on from last weekend’s defeat at Rangers, the 30-year-old was 
looking for a better result. Bjorn Johnsen’s goal gave him the start he was 
looking for after 18 minutes against Thistle, but when his side failed to 
extend their leadPartick <https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> came 
into the match and dominated possession.

The Jags levelled the scoring two minutes into the second period with a Sean 
Welsh goal. It took Thistle until two minutes into the second half to muster 
their first shot on target but they made it count. Ryan Edwards picked out 
Welsh with a low cross as the midfielder drifted past Igor Rossi and scored a 
fine header.

The Tynecastle side left the field to boos from the crowd., leading Cathro to 
say: “We all feel the same. I can’t boo because I’ve got to try and help find 
the solution. But players, fans, staff – our reaction is the same because we 
feel the same thing. We just have to stay together - and we will.

“Was I surprised by the booing at the end? No, because it’s a natural human 
reaction – ‘We didn’t get what we wanted, we’re not happy.’

“If we reach the point down the line where we draw at home and everyone is 
fine with it, I’d be upset with that.”
 