
Aberdeen fought back to win 3-1 at Inverness and cut the deficit on 
Premiership leaders Celtic to 10 points.

The Dons went a goal down in the 15th minute to striker Lonsana Doumbouya’s 
header but Kenny McLean levelled in the 28th minute and five minutes later 
Jonny Hayes was upended in the penalty area by Gary Warren and Adam Rooney 
converted a penalty to put his side in the ascendancy.

The Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> midfielder McLean 
got his second goal of the game to seal the points in the 89th minute.

The Inverness manager, Richie Foran, gave an honest assessment in a post-match 
interview with BBC Radio Scotland: “We scored against the run of play. We were 
poor, Aberdeen were very good. A poor, poor performance. One of our poorest of 
the season. I take the blame. I sign the players and I pick the team.”Rangers’ 
last-gasp win overDundee meant they remained a point behind the Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/rangers-dundee-scottish-premiership-match-report>
.

Ross County beat St Johnstone 4-2 at McDiarmid Park to climb off the bottom of 
the table.

First-half goals from Jay McEveley and Christopher Routis had County in charge 
at the break and they moved 3-0 in front through Craig Curran’s 63rd-minute 
goal.

The Saints midfielder Danny Swanson pulled a goal back from the penalty spot 
two minutes later and Steven MacLean made it 3-2 with 10 minutes remaining, but 
striker Liam Boyce settled any County nerves in the 83rd minute.

Motherwell also claimed a much-needed three points as they won 2-0 at home to 
Partick Thistle. Louis Moult capitalised on a mistake by the Thistle goalkeeper 
Thorsten Stuckman to turn in Scott MacDonald’s cross. Moult then assisted 
McDonald, who curled in precisely past Stuckman to move the Lanarkshire side 
above Inverness and into the top six.

In the Championship, league leaders Hibs increased their advantage to three 
points as they recorded a 4-0 home win overQueen of the South. Brian Graham 
opened the scoring for the home side after eight minutes and Chris Higgins 
scored an own-goal before half-time. David Gray headed in the third goal seven 
minutes after the restart and Martin Boyle completed the scoring. Second-placed
Dundee United drew 0-0 with Morton at Cappielow.
 