
Cammy Bell saved a penalty to keep Kilmarnock in the fourth round of the 
Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> at Dens Park, 
when he held Matt Lockwood's 64th-minute effort, after Steven Milne levelled for
Dundee 20 seconds after the restart.

Manuel Pascali headed Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> into the lead in the 32nd 
minute after the visitors had earned a reprieve when Milne had a goal 
disallowed.

The referee Stevie O'Reilly initially gave Milne's strike in the 15th minute 
but, then awarded a free-kick for offside after consulting with his assistant 
Charlie Smith.

Pat Fenlon earned his first win as Hibernian manager as his side survived a 
scare to beatCowdenbeath. The Second Division leaders stunned Hibs by taking 
the lead after only 15 seconds through Greig Stewart, but goals from Leigh 
Griffiths and Eoin Doyle gave the visitors a half-time lead, and another from 
David Wotherspoon put them 3-1 up shortly after the break.

A superb Jon Robertson goal midway through the second period gave Colin 
Cameron's side hopes of a comeback but despite waves of pressure late on they 
could not find an equaliser.

At New Broomfield, Johnny Russell scored a second-half hat-trick to help 
Dundee United hammer Airdrie United 6-2. The 2010 winners went ahead after 16 
minutes when John Rankin scored his first goal for the club, and were cruising 
at 6-0 with five minutes to go, before Ryan Donnelly gave Airdrie some solace 
with two late goals.

St Mirren and Hamilton face a replay after their fourth-round goalless draw in 
Paisley. The SPL hosts had the best chances but the First Division side held 
out.

Jonny Hayes netted a last‑gasp equaliser for 10-man Inverness Caledonian 
Thistleto ensure a replay at East End Park against Dunfermline. The Pars looked 
as if they had a secured a fifth-round place thanks to Andy Barrowman's header, 
until goalkeeper Chris Smith made a dreadful mistake in stoppage time, and the 
Irish winger tapped in.

St Johnstone scraped their way into the fifth round with a narrow victory 
against Second DivisionBrechin City, who were more than a match for their SPL 
opponents throughout and levelled through Paul McManus after Murray Davidson's 
opener.

Francisco Sandaza scored the winning goal in the second half and try though 
they might, City could not find a second comeback.

Aberdeen made sure there was no repeat of their CIS Cup humiliation by East 
Fife, with a 4-0 win againstForfar at Station Park.

Jamie Murphy scored twice and Henrik Ojamaa scored on his debut, as Motherwell 
eased pastQueen's Park 4-0.
 