
Scotland’s followers are in danger of wanting to stop the world before leaping 
off. In what has curiously grown as a theory relating to the country’s troubled 
international set-up, some would have us believe the identity of manager is 
irrelevant because of the pitiful resources he has at his disposal. Shoulders 
shrug as bad results accumulate.

This does a disservice to what Scotland can call upon. It also offers tacit 
admission of one of Gordon Strachan’s most glaring failings: not maximising 
what he has at his disposal. Nations who have achieved far more than Scotland 
in recent times would gleefully have Ross McCormack, Jordan Rhodes, Charlie 
Adam, Matt Phillips and Tom Cairney among their group. Scotland have discarded 
them while simultaneously bemoaning everything they do not have. Just because
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> do not have a 
multitude of strengths, there is no reason not to accentuate those they do 
enjoy.

Gordon Strachan refuses to discuss his Scotland future after England defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/gordon-strachan-refuses-to-discuss-scotland-future>
Nobody can legitimately cite Scotland as a football powerhouse. However, they 
retain more talent than is represented by the international team. The manager 
is wholly responsible for that. For all that Scotland have become horribly 
accustomed to blundering between international letdowns, it remains legitimate 
to apportion blame.

In the build-up to Friday’s meek surrender at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
, Strachan’s sentiment contradicted the very thing Scotland should be doing. 
That is, adopting a system and perfecting it. Instead, the 59-year-old has 
fumbled around in the dark for the three games as Scotland’s World Cup 
aspirations have been trashed.

“We’re not a team that can say, ‘That’s the way we play.’ It’s not like a 
Barcelona where we’re that good to say, ‘That’s the way we play and we never 
change,’” said Strachan on Thursday. “Because of where we are and what we do 
and the players we have, we have to adapt to who we’re playing at different 
times.

“It would be great to just say, ‘That’s the way we play,’ like Barcelona, and 
not think about tactics. Man City play that way, brilliant, or Chelsea play 
that way, three at the back. We’re a bit different from that. We have to 
understand who we’re playing against. If you’re fighting a heavyweight boxer 
you can’t just fight the same way as him, if he’s a big puncher you have to do 
something else.”

Teams need not be at the upper echelons to land upon a suitable style. 
Arguably, this is more beneficial to struggling sides. In Scotland’s case what 
is needed is obvious: a style that allows the team to be defensively compact 
and hard to beat while playing on the counterattack. Pretty? Perhaps not, but 
effective. Strachan’s inability to employ pragmatism has been seriously costly, 
just as his approach towards certain players is counterproductive.

England 3-0 Scotland: five talking points from the World Cup qualifier | 
Dominic Fifield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/12/england-scotland-five-talking-points-world-cup-qualifier>
Against England, despite a decent enough start, Scotland’s defensive 
organisation was abysmal and they were horrendously blunt in forward areas. If 
the insistence is that the manager does not miss chances or tackles, coaches 
would forever be handed lifetime contracts. Soon this surely will not be 
Strachan’s concern. The Scottish FA do not intend to make a snap decision on 
the manager, with a thorough debrief to be undertaken before a board meeting 
scheduled for early next month, but Strachan may resign even before the dust 
properly settles on the visit to London. If he does, retirement almost 
inevitably beckons, with this an inauspicious way to end a managerial career 
that had several high points.

With four months until Scotland play again and the prospect of four home 
fixtures in 2017 that currently have little or no commercial appeal, the 
governing body must utilise a fortunate gap in the calendar.

Michael O’Neill is by far the outstanding candidate to replace Strachan if, 
and it is a huge if, he can be convinced that Scotland represents a sensible 
career step from Northern Ireland. Even then, the SFA would be required to flex 
financial muscle that has been softened by this interminable absence from major 
tournaments. Put simply, O’Neill may be unaffordable.

With the search for a performance director already ongoing, there is suitable 
scope to properly alter the direction of travel. Strachan never showed much 
interest in that broad scene at all untilthe failed qualifying campaign for 
Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/09/scotland-euro-2016-gordon-strachan>
 meant a public relations boost would come in useful. The SFA, to their credit, 
have been heavily supportive of Strachan, to an extent that pushed boundaries 
of generosity.

Gordon Strachan’s Scotland time must be over after gamble against England 
fails | Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/gordon-strachans-scotland-time-must-be-over-after-failed-gamble>
At Wembley, Strachan spoke of deep pride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/gordon-strachan-refuses-to-discuss-scotland-future>
 in his players. Lee Wallace, who performed reasonably enough in his return to 
the team at left-back, was hailed as phenomenal. This analysis, for merely the 
latest time, made no sense. Strachan’s spiky approach to any questions relating 
to his own position, coupled with his noticeably reflective approach before 
kick-off, told a story.

The wider picture remains a damaging one. A generation of players does not 
know what it is like to play international tournaments. This resonates in the 
game’s grassroots with the lack of inspiration harmful. It would be ludicrous 
to land such issues at Strachan’s door, but the harsh reality is, after almost 
four years in office, he has provided no tangible progress.

Strachan’s own mood could negate the SFA’s need to be decisive but if a 
sacking is required, there should be no regret. Even mediocre teams can benefit 
from good management.
 