
Jackie McNamara has been relieved of his duties as Dundee United manager but 
still remains an employee of the club. BBC Scotland reported McNamara met with 
the chairman, Stephen Thompson, afterSt Johnstone fought back to beat Dundee 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> 2-1, despite playing 
most of the match with 10 men at McDiarmid Park.

Saints had goalkeeper Alan Mannus sent off in the 22nd minute after conceding 
the penalty from which United took the lead.

Saints roared back from Billy McKay’s spot-kick with two second‑half goals 
that consigned United to a sixth defeat in nine games.

Graham Cummins equalised with a 64th-minute header and substitute Simon 
Lappin’s 80th-minute winner left the Tannadice side consigned to their to a 
sixth defeat in nine games.

Stephen Craigan enjoyed a winning start as Motherwell caretaker manager as his 
side edged out bottom clubPartick Thistle 2-1 at Fir Park.

Craigan’s reign was kick-started by a Freddie Frans own goal in the 26th 
minute and Scott McDonald doubled the advantage in the 69th minute, with Lionel 
Ainsworth setting up both goals.

Thistle struck the woodwork either side of substitute David Amoo netting only 
their third goal of the season.

Hamilton claimed a 2-1 victory at Kilmarnock inspired by Ali Crawford. Accies 
trailed to a Greg Kiltie goal at half-time at Rugby Park. But they bounced back 
in the second half to win when Crawford set up Dougie Imrie for the equaliser, 
before scoring the winner.

Dundee came back from two goals down to secure a 3-3 draw against Ross County 
at Dens Park.

Paul Hartley’s side losing 3-1 at half-time to County, but a second-half 
double from Rory Loy deflated Jim McIntyre’s men whose task was not assisted by 
the dismissal of captain Andrew Davies in the 53rd minute. County took a 
19th-minute lead through Liam Boyce before Greg Stewart levelled for the hosts 
a minute later.Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> defender 
James McPake headed an own goal to put the visitors back ahead and Michael 
Gardyne looked to have killed the contest when he scored against for County two 
minutes before the break, but the game changed with Dundee’s fine comeback.

In the Championship, Hibernian’s winning run came to an end and they had to 
come from a goal down to rescue a 1-1 draw withSt Mirren at Easter Road.

A Martin Boyle header just before half-time restored parity after Calum 
Gallagher’s low finish to grab a point for Hibs, who had won their last five 
matches in all competitions but now sit eight points behindScottish Championship
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> leaders Rangers, 
who play tomorrow againstMorton at Cappielow.
 