
Scurvy, an 18th century disease caused by a lack of vitamin C, appears to have 
made a surprise comeback in Australia.

Historically associated with sailors on long voyages, scurvy has been detected 
in a number of diabetic patients at Westmead hospital in western Sydney.

Prof Jenny Gunton from the hospital’s centre for diabetes, obesity and 
endocrinology said several of her patients with long-running unhealed wounds 
had been cured by a simple course of vitamin C.

Vitamin myths debunked: what should you be taking?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/jun/14/vitamin-myths-debunked-what-should-you-be-taking>
A lack of vitamin C in the body results in the defective formation of collagen 
and connective tissues, which can cause bruising, bleeding gums, blood spots in 
the skin, joint pain and impaired wound healing.
When the patients were asked about their diet, some were eating little or no 
fresh fruit and vegetables. The rest ate fair amounts of vegetables but were 
over-cooking them, which destroys the vitamin C.

Gunton fears the problem could be much more widespread.

“Human bodies cannot synthesise vitamin C, so we must eat foods containing 
it,” she said.

Most Australians don’t meet World Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation standards for 
vegetable consumption.

Research by University of Sydney PhD candidate Reetica Rekhy, recently 
published in the journal Nutrition & Dietetics, found that while almost one in 
two Australians ate the recommended two serves of fruit daily, only 7% of 
adults consumed the recommended serves of vegetables.

Her research found most of the 1,000 respondents did not have a good 
understanding about specific nutritional benefits of most vegetables.

“If we are not eating what we are meant to eat, it will have a reflection on 
our health and there will be all these conditions [like scurvy] that will 
emerge or re-emerge,” Rekhy said.

Tim McMaster an accredited practising dietitian and spokesman for the 
Dietitians Association of Australia said that while the number of scurvy cases 
reported was small, it was still “scary”.
“The only time it should be common in this day and age is for people who are 
in hospital for a long time with repeated surgeries, or cancer patients or 
burns patients, but not in the general population,” said McMaster, who also 
works for Diabetes Victoria.
He added vitamin C deficiency had started to pop up among those following a 
low carbohydrate diet, mainly because they were cutting back on their fruit 
intake.
He said it was important for people to remember that when they eat fruit it’s 
not just the carbohydrate and sugar they are consuming, but other important 
nutrients that are good for health, such as fibre.


Common foods that are high in vitamin C include oranges, strawberries, red and 
green peppers including capsicums, broccoli, kiwi fruit and grapefruit. 
Overcooking any food is likely to destroy the vitamin C.

How to cook at university (without getting scurvy)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/03/how-to-cook-at-university> 
The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating recommends people eat two to eight 
serves of vegetables and legumes each day, based on age, physical activity 
levels and body size.

One serve is described as about one cup of uncooked or half a cup of cooked or 
canned vegetables or beans.

Potatoes are not considered vegetables for the purposes of the requirements 
but tomatoes, although officially a fruit, are.
 