
Despite an effort before the Hungarian Grand Prix to clarify the rules 
governing radio communication between Formula One teams and their drivers, 
their implementation has been derided as “bullshit”by Ferrari’sSebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel>.

The rules limiting what information can be passed on during a race were 
brought in to prevent driver coaching and intended to put more control in their 
hands and away from engineers.

Lewis Hamilton and Kimi Raikkonen had problems in Baku that Mercedes and 
Ferrari were prevented from helping to solve from the pit lane, while at the 
last race at Silverstone,Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> was judged to have broken the 
rule when Mercedes advised him to change through a malfunctioning seventh gear. 
He was given a 10-second penalty that demoted him from second to third.

Vettel said it was “complete bullshit all the radio issues that we had.” The 
rules were initially popular as a means of putting drivers back in control but 
their looseness has left them open to interpretation on what can and cannot be 
passed on, while also denying fans a closer insight into a race.

“I think it’s a joke,” Vettel said. “I watched the race at Silverstone 
afterwards and I found as a spectator it was quite entertaining to hear a 
driver panicking on the radio and the team panicking at the same time, it was 
the human element in a sport that is arguably very complicated and technical. 
So I think [the ban] is the wrong way.”

Rosberg, who following the setback at the British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/lewis-hamilton-british-grand-prix-silverstone-nico-rosberg>
 leads Hamilton by only one point in the world championship, accepted the 
rationale behind the rules. “It’s come about because fans have said we’re like 
puppets out there,” he said. “Just doing what the engineers are saying. So now 
we’re trying this, and I think it’s OK. It makes it more challenging for us out 
on track, which is good.”

I’m firing on all cylinders, says Lewis Hamilton after British Grand Prix win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/lewis-hamilton-british-grand-prix-silverstone-nico-rosberg>
Vettel is adamant technology is fundamental to the issue. “If you want to 
change it you should change the cars,” he said. “Let’s go back to V12s, manual 
gearbox, just two buttons, one for pit speed limiter and one for radio and just 
confirm that we’re coming in.” But this was not realistically an option the 
German said. “All the buttons we have on the steering wheel are there for a 
reason. It’s not our fault the cars are so complicated these days you need a 
big manual and a steering wheel full of buttons to operate them .”

The major revision to the rule requires teams to call drivers into the pits to 
receive instruction on a problem with the car – the intention being to prevent 
them deliberately taking a penalty in order to pass on information.

Vettel remained unconvinced at the Hungaroring. “There’s a lot of boring stuff 
on the radio that got banned, I don’t see the point,” he said. “We’re going the 
wrong way, it’s bad, we should just go back to saying what we want.”
 