
In the very last breaths of the very last day of 2016, I noticed a seedling of 
Protea montana 
<http://www.blackhalls.co.uk/on-the-ninth-day-of-christmas-my-true-love-gave-to-me-96-seeds-of/>
 had pushed off its fluffy little seed coat and revealed itself to the world. 
My glee at seeing this new life made me grin from ear to ear and do what has 
become known in our house as “the germination dance”.

P. montana is a threatened species from the very highest peaks of the Western 
Cape of South Africa. The fluffy seed coat it was so eager to lose allows it to 
be blown - after a fire has released it from the prison of a dead flower head - 
to a site where the same fluff allows it to corkscrew into the shallow soil and 
wait for winter rain.

However, my dance was not only because another member of this incredible 
species had come into the world. It doesn’t matter to me if its a rare species 
or a Spencer sweet pea, my reaction to seeing a seed germinate is the same. The 
idea that new life has arisen from what is in effect a little time capsule is 
something astonishing and implausibly special. The potential packaged up so 
safely within the seed coat excites and captivates me. The process of being 
involved in the unwrapping of that potential is something I find addictive.

Each plant species produces its own unique and beautiful seeds. Beyond that 
beauty and uniqueness are the processes that place them into dormancy until the 
conditions are just right, distribute them, bring them out of their stasis and 
cause them to germinate. Not to mention the pollination processes that allow 
species to produce more seeds.

For things that are often so small, seeds bear a heavy burden; the future 
existence of their species. For some, if things go wrong for the seeds, it 
could mean potential extinction. In some, like the proteas from South Africa, 
the future may depend on a bank of seed in the soil.Mimetes stokoei 
<https://www.ispotnature.org/species-dictionaries/sanbi/Mimetes%20stokoei>, the 
mace pagoda, has been declared extinct twice. because there were no actual 
plants of this species growing anywhere on Earth. What wasn’t considered at the 
time was that the mace pagoda had placed its entire future security as a 
species on seed buried just under the surface of the soil, and was waiting for 
the right kind of fire to trigger germination. Like a phoenix, the mace pagoda 
arose from extinction among the ashes of destruction.
 Seeds of the mace pagoda, which has been declared extinct twice. Photograph: 
Cordelia Molloy 
I think the thing that excites me most about seeds is the hope they give. I 
cannot throw away a half-used packet of seed because I know that, if I store 
them well, there is a second chance to grow that plant in the future. This 
hope, so inextricably tied up in seeds, has led to them being one of our most 
important backup plans for the planet, and subsequently humanity. There are 
people out there all over the world busily collecting and storing seed; they 
are guardians of our future. The wild relatives of our crops, endangered 
species and culturally important varieties are all grist to the mill of the 
seed-bankers. In some countries, it’s the only way they may have the resource 
to preserve the sheer levels of genetic diversity the country may hold. South 
Africa, home to my beloved proteas, is in this situation.

But what is the point of collecting and preserving this genetic diversity as 
seed, if it should remain in perpetuity in a seed bank? The answer is simple; 
amazing potential.

We don’t really know what the future holds, and as such we certainly must 
cover all bases. Come the day when we need to put endangered species back into 
restored habitats, bring back genetic diversity to our crops or re-realise an 
ornamental or esculent variety thought lost to our gardens, we will have all 
that potential at our fingertips; locked away in the form of a seed just 
waiting for a gardener to grow it.

Sometimes the seeds never make it as far as the -20C storage facility of a 
seed bank. In a world where damage to ecosystems is happening now, that 
potential often needs unpacking straight away. Ecosystem restoration projects 
across the globe depend entirely on seed, along with the people collecting them 
and those that know how to grow them. With some forethought, often on the part 
of enlightened governments, people are coming together to make sure the 
possibilities of seeds are realised. In Thailand, rainforest is being restored 
using seed bombs dropped from army planes and in the USA theNative Seed Network 
<http://www.nativeseednetwork.org/> and the Plant Conservation Alliance 
<http://www.plantconservationalliance.org/> are bringing together a united 
force of native seed collectors, growers and landscape restoration experts in 
an attempt, instigated by the Obama government through itsNational Seed 
Strategy for Rehabilitation and Restoration 
<https://www.blm.gov/wo/st/en/prog/more/fish__wildlife_and/plants/seedstrategy.html>
, to make sure all degraded habitats are restored using seed of local 
provenance as a matter of utmost urgency.

Those little time capsules really are at the front line when it comes to 
righting some of the wrongs of humanity. Seeing that little seedling on 
December 31 renewed hope. I saw all that future, locked up in a seed, realised. 
After all the turmoil that 2016 brought with it, I was leaving the year behind, 
and watching a new year, begin with such tremendous potential that I could not 
help but celebrate.
 