
Serbian police moved the prime minister, Aleksandar Vucic, and his family to 
“a safe location” after uncovering a weapons cache including a rocket-propelled 
grenade launcher near his parents’ home.


 The weapons, which also included hand grenades and rifle ammunition, were 
found in bushes in the neighbourhood of Jajinci, near a crossroads where 
Vucic’s motorcade normally slows down on his regular visits to see his parents, 
said the interior minister, Nebojsa Stefanovic.

Refugees stuck in Serbia begin marching towards Hungarian border
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/serbia-refugees-hungarian-border-macedonia-bulgaria>
 Vucic and his own family live in downtown Belgrade. Stefanovic made clear he 
had been moved elsewhere since the weapons were found.

 The discovery, which followed a tipoff police said, exacerbates an already 
tense atmosphere in the region, which isbearing the brunt of Europe’s refugee 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/tens-of-thousands-migrate-through-balkans-since-route-declared-shut>
 and where rival Balkan countries routinely swap allegations of interference in 
each other’s domestic affairs.

 “The prime minister is now safe, as well as his family … it is worrying that 
weapons were in the place where his motorcade has to slow down to almost 10km 
(six miles) per hour,” Stefanovic said.

 Serbia’s military intelligence agency (VOA) is responsible for the security 
of the prime minister, while members of Cobras, an elite army unit, serve as 
his personal bodyguards.

 Stefanovic declined to say where Vucic was when the weapons were uncovered. 
“This is confidential … in any case he is at a safe location now.”

 No arrests have yet been made in connection with the incident, which comes 
five days after authorities detained a number of people over a suspected plot 
to sway the outcome of Montenegro’s 16 October election and after several 
mafia-style assassinations among criminal groups in Belgrade.

 “The key to the safety (of the prime minister) will be to do intelligence 
work so we can find out … who has such intentions and and to do everything we 
can to prevent that,” Stefanovic said.

 Security around Serbian prime ministers and top officials was tightened after 
the 2003 assassination of Zoran Djindjic, the first pro-western head of the 
government after the ouster of former strongman Slobodan Milosevic in 2000.

 In a statement, Ivica Dacic, Serbia’s foreign minister and the head of the 
co-ruling Socialist party, said that many people opposed Vucic and his policies.

 “They will always find a Serb hand to do their dirty work for them, therefore 
investigations … must be completed and the operators and masterminds arrested,” 
Dacic said.

Serbia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia> is awash with hundreds of 
thousands of illegal weapons, including assault rifles, anti-tank weapons and 
explosive ordnance that remained in private hands after the Yugoslav wars of 
the 1990s. Many of the weapons got into the hands of criminal groups.


 