
Roma moved within five points of the Serie A leaders, Juventus, after Mattia 
Destro scored his first hat-trick in a 3-1 win atCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> on Sunday.

Destro reinforced his case for a place in Italy's World Cup squad as well as 
bolstering Roma's title hopes ahead of Juventus' home match against 
relegation-threatened Livorno on Monday.

He scored his first goal shortly after the half-hour, firing home Gervinho's 
cross from close range after he had started the move. The 23-year-old doubled 
his tally 15 minutes into the second half, beating the offside trap to run on 
to a ball from the on-loan Cagliari midfielder Radja Nainggolan and slot past 
Vlada Avramov. Destro completed his hat-trick in the 73rd, tapping in 
Alessandro Florenzi's cross, before Mauricio Pinilla scored a late consolation 
from the spot.

It was Roma's first win at Cagliari since 1995, excluding the 3-0 victory they 
were awarded last season when the Serie A game was postponed for safety reasons 
after Cagliari defied orders to play in an empty stadium, and the defeat 
resulted in Diego López being sacked bythe prospective Leeds United owner 
Massimo Cellino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/06/massimo-cellino-football-league-leeds>
. López, a former Cagliari player, had been in charge of the club for nine 
months but his departure means that Cellino has gone through 36 coaching 
changes in 22 years.

Roma's coach, Rudi Garcia, said: "A club which makes its mark on history is 
one which wins titles. The race for first place is not over yet, but it doesn't 
depend on us … The only thing we have in our hands is second spot, and we will 
try to keep that position until the end of the season."

Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> maintained their 
push for a Europa League spot with a 2-1 win over Udinese. Juan Cuadrado scored 
and earned a penalty against his former club, Gonzalo Rodríguez converting 
before Bruno Fernandes got one back to make things tight at the end.

Parma also remained in the hunt after turning around a poor run of form to 
beat third-placedNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> 1-0 
courtesy of a Marco Parolo shot from the edge of the penalty area. "I'm happy 
for the lads who had a great game, full of suffering and sacrifice, given that 
we also had important players out," Parma's coach, Roberto Donadoni, said. 
"When we play like this we manage to get results, now we'll look forward and I 
think that with certain players coming back we can have our say."

Lazio kept up the pressure with a comfortable 2-0 win over Sampdoria and 
Torino reignited their European hopes as Ciro Immobile moved back to the top of 
the goalscoring table with the winner in a 2-1 victory at Catania, his 18th of 
the season. Catania later sacked their coach Rolando Maran for the second time 
this season.

Atalanta lost ground in the race for Europa League places with a 2-0 defeat at 
home to lowly Sassuolo.
 