
Have we reached the end already? Of the Scudetto race, of the battle for 
Champions League places, and of Francesco Totti’s Roma career? The fixture list 
shows there are still seven rounds of matches left to be played in thisSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> season, but this was a 
weekend that felt decisive on so many fronts. It certainly was for the Lazio 
manager, Stefano Pioli, fired at the end of a 4-1 derby defeat.

But let us wind back to the beginning. Specifically: to the beginning of this 
season, when Juventus stumbled out of the gate with consecutive defeats. They 
had won only once by the end of September, and after 10 games were already 11 
points adrift of first place. Few would have predicted that they could find 
themselves top of the pile with seven matches remaining. Fewer still that they 
would hold a six point advantage over the team in second. But that is the 
reality afterJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> beat 
Empoli 1-0 in Turin on Saturday night, before Napoli lost away to Udinese.

The first of those results came as no surprise. Empoli, although comfortable 
in mid-table, had not won a game since 10 January. They enjoyed more than 58% 
of possession at J-Stadium, but rarely threatened to pull level after Mario 
Mandzukic had headed the hosts in front at the end of the first-half.

And so it was over to second-placed Napoli to maintain their pursuit. On 
paper, they too had reasons to feel confident. Udinese were in freefall, 
plunging towards the relegation zone after collecting just seven points from 
their previous 12 matches. They had scored fewer goals as a team (26) than 
Gonzalo Higuaín had managed on his own (29).Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, though, were not in ideal shape. 
Pepe Reina was injured, and Higuaín had only returned on Thursday from 
international duty in Argentina. In defence, Kalidou Koulibaly and Faouzi 
Ghoulam must also have felt drained after they each played the full 180 minutes 
of their respective countries’ Africa Cup of Nations qualifiers during the 
international break.

The latter two players gave away penalties inside the opening half-hour on 
Sunday. The first was scored, but the second saved by Reina’s replacement, 
Gabriel. Higuaín equalised in-between with a fine effort from the edge of the 
box, but Napoli’s celebrations were premature. They conceded again in 
first-half injury time. Gabriel was entirely at fault. Far too casual in 
receiving a back-pass on the corner of his six-yard box, the keeper’s heavy 
touch gifted possession to Udinese’s Duván Zapata (a former Napoli player, no 
less). The damage might yet have been mitigated if Gabriel had retreated back 
to his line, with the striker moving away from goal and Koulibaly covering.

Instead, Gabriel followed the ball out of the box, and Zapata hooked a cross 
back into the middle. Bruno Fernandes met it with a beautiful overhead kick. 
The ball flew off his boot and into the empty net. Udinese’s third arrived 
early in the second half, Cyril Théréau converting after Silvan Widmer got 
ahead of Ghoulam to send a ball over from the right. Any lingering hopes of a 
Napoli comeback were dashed when Higuaín then got sent off for a second yellow 
card. The Argentinian’s reaction might have been even more damaging to their 
cause than the initial offence. Higuaín confronted the referee, Massimiliano 
Irrati, putting two hands on his chest. It took a host of team-mates, opponents 
and Napoli staff members to drag him from the pitch. There is every chance now 
that he will be suspended for more than one game.

It might be that the title is beyond Napoli in any case. Juventus would need 
to lose twice in their remaining seven matches to allow their rivals any 
opportunity to pull level. When you consider that theBianconeri have dropped a 
total of two points in their last 21 Serie A fixtures, such a scenario starts 
to look rather improbable. But an extended absence for Higuaín would put 
another nail in Napoli’s coffin. He has scored 30 of his club’s 63 league goals 
this season. Without him, trips to Inter andRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> over the next month would look even 
more daunting.

Only a catastrophic collapse could jeopardise Napoli’s place in the top three. 
They are 11 points clear of fourth-placed Fiorentina and 12 ahead of Inter, 
both of whom failed to win at the weekend. But Roma could yet overtake Napoli 
in second, denying them automatic access to the Champions League’s group stage.

The Giallorossi have their tails up after that emphatic victory in the Derby 
della Capitale – their ninth win in 10 matches. The Stadio Olimpico was a sad 
sight on Sunday, its stands semi-deserted as ultras on both sides stayed away 
as part of a season-long protest against the introduction of barriers that 
split the Curve behind either goal in two. It was Rome’s city prefect, Franco 
Gabrielli, who imposed this change in the summer, citing reasons of public 
safety. Ultras, however, have also accused the leadership at Roma andLazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> of not doing enough to stick up 
for their cause. Both clubs’ owners, James Pallotta and Claudio Lotito, had 
already butted heads with supporters on other matters besides.

But empty stands should not be interpreted as evidence of a dwindling interest 
in this fixture. Both sets of ultras hosted huge gatherings elsewhere in the 
city, with close to 1,000 Lazio fans gathering to watch the game on a big 
screen in Tor di Quinto, and at least twice that number of Roma supporters 
marching to do the same at their team’s former home inCampo Testaccio 
<https://twitter.com/BLNadeau/status/716600450506731520>. 

There was no mistaking how much this occasion meant to Alessandro Florenzi, 
playing in his eighth derby with Roma but his first while wearing the captain’s 
armband. After scoring the goal that put his team 3-1 ahead in the 82nd minute, 
he sprinted directly to the bench to celebrate with fellow local boy Daniele De 
Rossi.

It was an expert finish from Florenzi, and also a crucial one – restoring 
Roma’s cushion at a point when Lazio had been threatening to pull level. The 
symbolism, though, also felt significant. Both De Rossi and Totti were unused 
substitutes, and there is no guarantee that either will get the chance to play 
in another of these derbies. Was this the day on which a torch was passed?

De Rossi is no longer a fixed part of the starting XI and as such his 
team-high salary of €6.5m per year is increasingly hard to justify. He does 
still have one year left on his contract, though, unlike Totti – who is yet to 
secure a new deal, and who has played a total of 246 minutes across all 
competitions in this campaign.

Lazio sack Stefano Pioli and replace him with Simone Inzaghi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/04/lazio-sack-stefano-piolo-simone-inzaghi>
The painful reality is that the King of Rome’s reign appears to be drawing to 
a close. And if this was indeed Totti’s last-ever derby, then many fans will 
never forgive Luciano Spalletti for failing to give him at least a brief 
appearance off the bench. The manager, in his defence, was focused on winning. 
He used his final change when the game was still finely poised at 2-1.

Totti did not appear to complain. He celebrated Roma’s goals and was seen 
smiling with Morgan De Sanctis as the final minutes of injury time ticked away. 
But when the cameras cut back to him at full-timehe looked distant, melancholic 
<https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/716642495170547713>, as though the 
reality of never playing this fixture again might be starting to hit home.

For a man who has celebrated his successes in this fixture with such aplomb – 
from the customised T-shirts 
<http://www.squawka.com/news/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Screen-shot-2014-09-27-at-18.06.28.png>
, tothe selfies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/12/francesco-totti-selfie-roma-lazio-serie-a-blog>
, tocommandeering a TV camera <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6LaHVO1FJs> – 
the contrast was stark. It was Pioli who lost his job on Sunday night. But such 
an emphatic win for Roma without Totti can only accelerate us toward that 
moment in which the forward himself must decide whether to move upstairs or 
move on.

Results: Inter 1-2 Torino, Atalanta 2-1 Milan, Chievo 3-1 Palermo, Fiorentina 
1-1 Sampdoria, Genoa 4-0 Frosinone, Lazio 1-4 Roma, Udinese 3-1 Napoli, 
Juventus 1-0 Empoli.

Talking points 

• Fewer fans at the stadium apparently did not eliminate the risk of 
derby-related violence in Rome on Sunday. A group of 400 or so Lazio supporters 
are reported to have descended on their own club’s training ground after 
full-time, with some throwing rocks and other objects at the team bus when it 
returned. Police eventually used tear gas to disperse the crowd and several 
arrests were made. One policeman is also said to have been injured.

• There were minutes of silence or applause held all over the peninsula to 
mark the passing of Cesare Maldini on Sunday. He is remembered by a generation 
as the father of Paolo, but before that he was a brilliant player in his own 
right – a defender so intelligent that he was trusted to reshuffle tactics 
mid-game, as he famously did in the 1963 European Cup final, adjusting Milan’s 
marking schemes to help his team beat Benfica and become the first Italian side 
ever to win the competition. Later, as a manager, he led Milan to a Cup 
Winners’ Cup win and oversaw a period of sustained success for Italy’s Under-21 
team in the early 1990s. But perhaps the greatest testament to him is that even 
supporters of sides that he never represented made special efforts to honour 
him this weekend. Before Atalanta hosted Milan in Bergamo, the home fans hung a 
banner saluting both him and Johan Cruyff as “champions of the much missed 
football of yesterday”.

• Atalanta went on to win that match against Milan, recovering from a goal 
down with the help of yet anotheroverhead kick from Mauricio Pinilla 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/716630230996103168>. Afterwards he 
joked that if he had got a tattoo for every such strike in his career, “I would 
not have a centimetre of skin left free”.

• This was actually a rather fantastic weekend for goals in Serie A, and no 
individual contributed more on that front than Suso (yes, Liverpool fans, that 
Suso), who grabbed ahat-trick of the highest order 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/716898117241540608> as Genoa routed 
Frosinone 4-0. The Grifone have been a team transformed since the middle of 
this season. Only Roma, Napoli and Juventus havecollected more points since the 
start of 2016 <https://twitter.com/OptaPaolo/status/716953820891377664>.

• Frosinone, meanwhile, stay 19th after that defeat, though still only one 
point behind Carpi and Palermo – who suffered chastening defeats of their own 
against Sassuolo and Chievo respectively. It looks increasingly likely that two 
out of those three will join Verona in dropping down to Serie B, especially in 
light of Udinese’s victory.

Results: Atalanta 2-1 Milan, Carpi 1-3 Sassuolo, Chievo 3-1 Palermo, 
Fiorentina 1-1 Sampdoria, Genoa 4-0 Frosinone, Inter 1-2 Torino, Juventus 1-0 
Empoli, Lazio 1-4 Roma, Udinese 3-1 Napoli

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 31 40 73 
2 Napoli 31 36 67 
3 Roma 31 34 63 
4 Fiorentina 31 18 56 
5 Inter Milan 31 11 55 
6 AC Milan 31 8 49 
7 Sassuolo 31 6 48 
8 Lazio 31 -3 42 
9 Chievo 31 -3 41 
10 Genoa 31 -1 37 
11 Torino 31 -4 36 
12 Bologna 30 -5 36 
13 Atalanta 31 -6 36 
14 Empoli 31 -9 36 
15 Udinese 31 -17 34 
16 Sampdoria 31 -5 33 
17 Carpi 31 -20 28 
18 Palermo 31 -25 28 
19 Frosinone 31 -30 27 
20 Verona 30 -25 19  