
Mauro Icardi inspired a superb comeback win for Internazionale as Juventus saw 
their perfect startto the new Serie A campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/18/juventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli>
 shattered at the San Siro on Sunday.

Stephan Lichtsteiner had given the champions a 66th-minute lead but Icardi 
drew Inter level almost immediately, then set up the winner for Ivan Perisic 10 
minutes later. It was a stunning response from Inter after their midweek Europa 
League defeat by Hapoel Be’er Sheva and was barely spoiled by a last-minute red 
card for Ever Banega for pulling back Alex Sandro.

Genoa also saw their 100% start to the season evaporate as goals from Matteo 
Politano and Gregoire Defrel sentSassuolo up to third with a 2-0 win. The game 
turned in Sassuolo’s favour when Lucas Orban conceded a 58th-minute penalty, 
which Politano converted, and Defrel extended the home side’s lead with a 
brilliant header eight minutes later.

Genoa’s misery was completed when the Portugal midfielder Miguel Veloso was 
sent off after receiving a second yellow card four minutes from time.

Juventus to dominate Serie A title race but there will be plenty of drama | 
Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/18/juventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli>
Fabrizio Cacciatore scored with virtually the last kick of the game to give 
Chievo a dramatic 2-1 victory at Udinese. Cacciatore struck in the fifth minute 
of stoppage time as the Verona side completed a comeback sparked when Roberto 
Castro equalised with eight minutes remaining.

The Colombian striker Duván Zapata had given Udinese a 25th-minute lead after 
connecting with Emil Hallfredsson’s inch-perfect cross.

Marco Borriello scored twice as Cagliari claimed their first league win of the 
season, 3-0 againstAtalanta. Marco Sau scored the other goal.

Crotone moved off the foot of the table after a 1-1 home draw against Palermo. 
Marcello Trotta gave the hosts a 24th-minute lead before Ilija Nestorovski 
equalised with a stunning 66th-minute strike.

Joe Hart kept a clean sheet on his home debut as Torino and Empoli shared the 
spoils in a dire 0-0 draw at the Stadio Olimpico di Torino.

Roma sank to their first defeat of the season as Milan Badelj’s controversial 
82nd-minute winner gave hostsFiorentina a 1-0 win. Badelj beat Roma goalkeeper 
Wojciech Szczesny with a low drive from outside the box but his shot went 
through the legs of his team-mate Nikola Kalinic, who was one of three home 
players standing in an offside position.

The visitors had the better of the first-half chances with Edin Dzeko 
whistling a header wide from Alessandro Fiorenzi’s lofted pass, then volleying 
straight at the keeper, Ciprian Tatarusanu.
 