
And so the new Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
season is upon us. Or rather it isn't. After the league's owners and its 
players failed to reach an agreement, it was confirmed on Friday morning that 
the scheduled first weekend of the season will be lost to strike action. How 
far things could go is anybody's guess.

"If necessary we can wait till December," harrumphed the Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> vice-president Adriano Galliani 
last week. "Basketball is running the same risk in the United States with a 
labour dispute involving NBA players. I have heard from a good few presidents 
and there is a widely held intention to not hand victory to the players in this 
matter."

If Galliani's words were alarmist – nobody is yet suggesting that Serie A is 
at risk of losing an entire season, a possibility that has been openly 
discussed in the NBA's case – then the reaction to them was perhaps rather too 
complacent. His warning was issued eight days before the league's owners would 
vote on the new collective bargaining agreement. Wednesday's announcement that 
it had been rejected, by a margin of 18-2, was hardly a surprise, and nor was 
Friday's news that the first round of matches had been called off.

The two sides had been thought to be close to agreeing on a new deal last 
December, when a threatened strike was avoided after a series of last-ditch 
negotiations. The contract drawn up in the wake of those negotiations was 
signed off by the Italian Footballers' Association (AIC) in May, yet it has 
taken until just a few days before kick-off for the owners to confirm that they 
are not prepared to do the same.

The owners have cited a lack of clarity over who would pay a new "solidarity" 
tax set to be imposed on Italy's highest earners but the AIC say this is a red 
herring. Damiano Tommasi, the association's president, has insisted his members 
would pay whatever taxes the law should pass down, while the Italian Football 
Federation's offer on Thursday to raise a €20m fund to help cover the payments 
was rejected out of hand.

Instead the greater sticking point would seem to be that of differentiated 
training. Following recent high-profile cases of players, includingAntonio 
Cassano at Sampdoria and Federico Marchetti at Cagliari 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/footyblog/2010/10/05/bandini-federico-marchettis-fall-from-grace/>
, being frozen out by their club's owners, the AIC had sought a wording that 
would restrict teams' ability to bar players from training. The owners, 
however, feel such a clause would impinge on their managers' autonomy. (We can 
only hope the irony is not lost on Maurizio Zamparini et al.)

"We aren't trying to wage war on anyone," insisted Napoli's Aurelio De 
Laurentiis after the results of the vote were confirmed. "This is a cultural 
problem that needs to be overcome for the good of football. The [collective 
bargaining agreement] is out of date, something that belongs three decades ago. 
There's no point renewing it, we need to modernise it."

De Laurentiis of course, may be quietly hoping that this strike drags on a 
while yet, given his displeasure with his team's early-season fixture list. So 
enraged was he to discover that Napoli had been cast against Milan and 
Internazionale on weekends following Champions League dates that he stormed 
straight out of a league meeting, threatening to quit football altogether, 
beforeflagging down a passing moped and disappearing into the distance 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uj_WzBg1t-k>.

In the end, of course, he relented, and for that Serie A must be grateful. How 
many other owners, after all, would arrange for theirstar summer signing to be 
unveiled on a yacht, wearing a lion mask 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/soccer/blog/dirty-tackle/post/Napoli-unveil-Gokhan-Inler-in-a-lion-mask-?urn=sow-wp3214>
? Beneath the mask was a player who De Laurentiis believes can help his team 
mount a sustained challenge for the Serie A title. Gökhan Inler, a €16m arrival 
from Udinese, represents a significant upgrade to an area of weakness in 
central midfield.

Inler's unveiling provided a moment of levity in a summer that was often 
overshadowed by the twin scandals ofCalciopoli and Calcioscomesse. In July the 
publication of Stefano Palazzi's 72-page report into the former reopened 
five-year-old wounds, the Italian Football Federation investigator concluding 
that Inter, too, had been guilty of sporting fraud. Due to the statute of 
limitations on such offences, however, no punishment could be handed down. 
Inter resisted calls to abandon their claim to that year's title, leading to a 
bitter war of words between their president, Massimo Moratti, and Fiorentina's 
Diego Della Valle.

The sporting investigation into Calcioscomesse concluded with newly promoted 
Atalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> receiving a six-point 
deduction, and their captain Cristiano Doni a three-and-a-half-year suspension. 
The former Lazio captain Giuseppe Signori received an even more severe 
punishment, banned from any involvement with the game for the next five years.

Against that backdrop, the timing of this strike seems even more unfortunate. 
"Don't betray the faith of the fans," read a statement released by Sky Italia 
on Thursday as the strike loomed. In reality the broadcaster will be more 
concerned about the sponsors and advertisers, whose patience had already been 
tested by both scandals and the departures from the league of marketable 
players such as Alexis Sánchez, Samuel Eto'o and Javier Pastore. And should Sky 
lose out on deals in the short term, it will be Serie A that pays in the long 
run, when the TV deal comes up for renewal at the end of this season.

As much as the owners and the players might each want to avoid "handing 
victory" to the other side, it is hard to see sense in a solution from which 
everybody stands to lose.

But we must assume that the season will start eventually. When it does, here's 
what to expect:

Atalanta: On the positive side, Atalanta have recent experience of the top 
flight, and their new technical director, Pierpaolo Marino, has a track record 
of unearthing talented players. On the negative, they are a newly promoted team 
starting the season with a six-point deduction and without their captain, 
Cristiano Doni – a man so integral to the club that their president, Antonio 
Percassi, had previously named him as a potential successor. Survival will be a 
challenge.

Bologna: What to say about a team so hapless they lost their Italy 
international goalkeeper overan administrative error 
<http://www.football-italia.net/jun25a.html>? Emiliano Viviano (who, as fate 
would have it, went on to suffer a cruciate ligament tear shortly after 
departing for Inter) has at least been replaced with the capable Jean-François 
Gillet, while Marco Di Vaio will appreciate the assistance of Robert 
Acquafresca and Alessandro Diamanti up front. Without improved leadership, 
though, Bologna will always feel vulnerable.

Cagliari: A team who struggled following the departure of their top scorer 
Alessandro Matri in January could ill afford the departure of Acquafresca too. 
New arrival Thiago Ribeiro, on loan from Cruzeiro, needs to pick things up 
quickly or a relegation battle is a possibility.

Catania: After losing his post at Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> to Luis Enrique, Vincenzo Montella 
lands in Sicily to take over a team of rather more limited means. To get the
Rossazzurri soaring, the Little Aeroplane will need Maxi López back on the form 
he showed in the first few months after joining the club in January 2010.

Cesena: Adrian Mutu: discuss. If the Romanian can produce anything close to 
his best, then Cesena may just have enough pieces in place for a top-half 
finish. Oh, and don't fret too much about their brand new "plastic pitch". 
Man-made it may be but, just like the much-discussed surface atNovara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/novara>, Cesena's new pitch is covered 
with real, living grass.

Chievo: The starting XI at the Bentegodi could feature as many as seven new 
faces, but at least the man on the bench is familiar. Mimmo Di Carlo returns 
after an ill-fated stint at Sampdoria.

Fiorentina: On paper the Viola aren't in a terrible state. Alberto Gilardino 
and Juan Vargas remain, Stevan Jovetic is back from injury and Mattia Cassani, 
one of the better full-backs in the division last season, has joined on loan 
fromPalermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> with an option to 
buy. But with Riccardo Montolivo seeking a way out and the Della Valles 
seemingly more interested in picking fights than running their club these days, 
an air of gloom prevails.

Genoa: You'd like to get excited about astute signings such as Sébastien Frey 
and Kevin Constant, but on recent form you wouldn't be shocked to see them sold 
again before the week is out.

Inter: OK, so Samuel Eto'o is off to Dagestan, and the new boss doesn't 
exactly come with much experience. But isn't this still most of the team that 
won the treble two years ago? Nobody is suggesting a repeat, but with Ricky 
Alvarez added to the mix and legs refreshed from a proper summer break there is 
every reason to believe Inter will make a strong push to reclaim their domestic 
crown.

Juventus: New stadium, new manager and, crucially for anyone familiar with the 
name Marco Motta, a new right-back. The signing of Stephan Lichsteiner resolves 
a problem that needed fixing; if Mirko Vucinic can remember what a smile looks 
like and Andrea Pirlo can get his head round the idea of not passing to the 
guys in the red and black shirts then this could be the most competitive Juve 
side in some time. Not having to worry about Europe will be a blessing.

Lazio: If this picture <http://twitpic.com/6akcig> of Djibril Cissé holding a 
massive eagle – the club's mascot, Olimpia, no less – doesn't convince you that 
Lazio are serious this season, then perhaps nothing will. But if you were 
wondering, they've also added Miroslav Klose, Lorik Cana, Abdoulay Konko and 
Federico Marchetti. With greater consistency from Hernanes, improving on last 
year's fifth-place finish is not inconceivable.

Lecce: With a squad that is among the weakest in Serie A, a relegation scrap 
seems inevitable, unless the outgoing Semeraro family can find a buyer who is 
ready to spend in the January window.

Milan: So Mr X is Alberto Aquilani? Milan fans may have been hoping for 
something more grand, but if he can stay fit (yes, yes, I know) then he could 
be a perfect fit as the creative outlet in Massimiliano Allegri's midfield. 
Furthermore, the club's fitness coach, Daniele Tognaccini, reckons he may have 
found the solution to Zlatan Ibrahimovic's late-season slumps: "He was not 
having breakfast; since he started having breakfast, his performance has 
improved."

Napoli: Blerim Dzemaili joins Inler in an upgraded central midfield, but depth 
remains a worry. If everyone stays fit, the sky's the limit, but could this 
team withstand an injury to Edinson Cavani or Ezequiel Lavezzi?

Novara: The joint-second highest scorers in Serie B last season saw both of 
their starting strikers depart in the summer. Their expected replacements, 
Takayuki Morimoto and Riccardo Meggiorini scored two goals between them last 
season. The manager, Attilio Tesser, will have his hands full.

Palermo: Over to you, Josip Ilicic. Maurizio Zamparini got the €40m he wanted 
for Javier Pastore, but the greater loss may turn out to be the goalkeeper 
Salvatore Sirigu, also sold to Paris Saint-Germain. Francesco Benussi is not 
the answer.

Parma: Last season Amauri rode to the rescue, helping to guide the team away 
from the relegation zone over the closing weeks of the season. With the 
Brazilian back at Juve (for the time being, at least), who picks up the slack 
this time around?

Roma: The most fascinating experiment in Serie A for some time. Franco Baldini 
wanted someone,in his own words 
<http://msn.foxsports.com/foxsoccer/story/luis-enrique-roma-coach-former-barcelona-b-break-from-past-080811>
, "uncontaminated" by Italian football, and in Luis Enrique he certainly seems 
to have found someone willing to try something different. From Pablo Osvaldo to 
Erik Lamela, Maarten Stekelenburg, Bojan Krkic and José Angel it has certainly 
been a bold transfer campaign. Will it work? The Europa League exit certainly 
wasn't encouraging, but in the long run a reduced fixture list could yet play 
to the new manager's advantage.

Siena: Gaetano D'Agostino is quite the signing, if he can stay fit, but as 
with the other newly promoted sides, Siena's squad still looks thin on quality. 
Emanuele Calaiò led the charge up front with 18 in 39 Serie B games last 
season, but prior to that he had managed just 13 in 66 in two seasons withSiena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/siena> in Serie A.

Udinese: Falling short of the Champions League group stage will hurt, but 
against Arsenal Francesco Guidolin's side showed they have not been totally 
undermined by their summer departures. It is hard to imagine a repeat of last 
year's heroics – especially with only three Champions League spots now up for 
grabs – but equally hard to imagine a return to the flirting with relegation of 
2009-10.
 