
"You're going down with the Dingles." West Bromwich Albion's supporters 
delighted in reminding their visitors of thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> standings as three goals 
pulled the Baggies 11 points clear of danger and left Blackburn – reduced to 10 
men in the final moments after the sending off of Anthony Modeste – in need of 
a big Manchester United win over Queens Park Rangers on Sunday to keep their 
heads near the surface.

Set pieces proved to be Blackburn's undoing. Albion had three corners soon 
after the game kicked off and took the lead from the fourth, in the seventh 
minute. On each occasion, Chris Brunt lifted the ball to the far post and, this 
time, Gareth McAuley rose above Blackburn's defence to nod the ball goalwards. 
The stadium announcer awarded him the goal, but the Blackburn full-back Martin 
Olsson volleyed the ball into his own net attempting to clear from a few yards 
out.

The West Brom manager, Roy Hodgson, had described this as a meeting of two 
teams "quite desperate to get a good result", having targeted four points from 
his side's remaining seven games of the season. They comprehensively stifled 
Blackburn in the opening 20 minutes, but then play began to level out. As 
half-time approached, Junior Hoilett hit a shot just wide of the top-right 
corner and when another effort was blocked, the West Brom goalkeeper, Ben 
Foster, held David Dunn's follow-up.

In the second half, Rovers continued as they had left off, much to the chagrin 
of the home crowd. "I was disappointed we never really managed to get a 
foothold in the game early on," said the manager, Steve Kean. "We put Hoilett 
back up front with Yakubu in the second half and we dominated for 20 minutes. 
But we had to score in that period."

They went close within 10 minutes of the restart: Hoilett miscontrolled Dunn's 
pass, but in doing so teed up Yakubu, whose strike was palmed away by Foster; 
the keeper was still on the floor when he managed to do the same to Bradley 
Orr's follow-up shot.

The managers agreed that was the game's critical moment and Albion secured the 
points 15 minutes later. Yakubu picked up Graham Dorrans's corner beyond the 
far post, but was swiftly dispossessed by Brunt, whose cross skimmed over Jonas 
Olsson, keeping two defenders busy, and dropped for Marc-Antoine Fortuné to 
poke home from close range.

Their nerves settled and Blackburn's confidence pricked, the home side 
stretched the lead in the 84th minute when Liam Ridgewell headed home an 
in-swinging free-kick from Dorrans, with Paul Robinson rooted.

"The scoreline makes the game look more comfortable than it was," said 
Hodgson, who found himself fielding questions about next season, rather than 
surviving the rest of this. The result ended a run of four games without a win 
and lifted West Brom to 12th place. "I think we can relax, but hopefully we 
don't and keep rewarding our fans with wins."

Results elsewhere offered Blackburn some hope – Wigan Athletic and Bolton 
Wanderers lost – and Kean indicated they would appeal the red card shown to 
Modeste late on. The substitute had been on the pitch for 10 minutes when he 
kicked out at Billy Jones.
 