
Shed's July Genius seems to have attracted a wider than usual field of 
entries: 193 to be precise with 11 coming on Day One and two in a neck-and-neck 
finish to be the first home (both clocked in at 0917 GMT). There were a couple 
of comments to the effect that it was nice to have completed a whole Genius 
puzzle at last. Congratulations to John Williams from London who is July's 
winner.

_____

The main purpose of this month's message is to let you know about the 
arrangements to cover my absence from this country for the next four or five 
months. My hope is to sail my boat with friends from Ireland to the Falklands 
in time for Christmas. I investigated the possibilities of laptops and 
satellite telephones that might enable me to go on editing your puzzles and 
fending off your gripes from the South Atlantic, but it all seemed a bit 
complicated and risky.

So Sandy Balfour has nobly agreed to step into the breach. He is a South 
African-born television journalist and his name will be familiar to many 
Guardian crossword solvers already. First, be wrote a delightful 
autobiographical memoir which entwined his physical and professional journey 
from South Africa to London with his discovery of the joys of cryptic 
crosswords. This was published by Guardian Books as "Pretty Girl in Crimson 
Rose (8)", which was his (almost accurate) recollection of a Rufus clue for 
REBELLED [RE<belle>D].

Then, for a considerable period, he wrote a regular column based on his life 
and crosswords at the back of the Guardian's Saturday G2, entitled X-Philes. A 
selection of these pieces was published as "I Say Nothing (3): My Family and 
Other Puzzles". The three-letter clue in the title is the celebrated Enigmatist 
offering for EGO [EG/0].

Sandy will be responsible for the content of all Guardian crosswords, except 
the daily Quick crossword. These will be looked after by Liz McCabe, who 
recently retired after a long career at the Guardian and who has designed and 
produced all the books of Guardian crosswords that have been published since I 
have been editing them. If spared, I hope to be back in this country some time 
in January.

_____

You should continue to communicate as before with 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk <> and either Sandy Balfour or Liz 
McCabe will respond as appropriate. Who knows, from some Internet cafe behind 
Ipenema Beech, I might even be tempted to log on and see what you are all up 
to. But my parting plea is that you should use the other email address -
subshelp@theguardian.com <> - for all technical questions, for you will find 
neither Sandy nor Liz is any better than I at answering these for you. The most 
FAQs relate to the compatibility of the Guardian crossword software with Java. 
To these there is no simple single answer, as a number of variables are 
involved. Those on the subshelp desk should be your first port of call on such 
issues.

_____

Meanwhile may I be the first to wish you all a (slightly premature) Merry 
Christmas and a happy new year!

* Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor.
 