
Few things are worse than being on the end of a sporting thrashing. I should 
know, having once played for a junior football team that lost a match 33-0 (we 
made the local paper and earned a free trip to Burger King and the local cinema 
to watch Home Alone, so we did get something out of it).

My embarrassment was fortunately limited, a very local affair that I have 
tried my best to forget. But many of the participants in the following sporting 
thrashings were not as lucky as me. Theirs was very much a national or 
international humbling, played out in front of the watching public, read about 
by sports fans at the time and since.


1984-85 Scottish Cup: Stirling Albion 20-0 Selkirk


A lot of teams were on the receiving end of a shellacking at Anfield in the 
1980s – OPS of Finland, Fulham and Crystal Palace to name a few – but not many 
visited Stirling Albion's Annfield Stadium with the same levels of trepidation. 
The Second Division side were going through a pretty ordinary 1984-85 season – 
just three wins in 16 league matches – prior to the visit of Scottish Border 
Amateur League club Selkirk in the first round of the Scottish Cup. But the 
events of 8 December 1984 were far from ordinary.

 To put it mildly, Selkirk had an iffy first half, trailing 5-0 at the break. 
Yet this was a triumph in comparison to the next 45 minutes. Stirling scored a 
further 15 goals past Richard Taylor, the young goalkeeper soon to gain his 
five minutes of notoriety due to the events of that day. "The most goals I had 
ever conceded before in a match was five," said Taylor, who also admitted that 
he had only become a goalkeeper a year previously. The goalkeeper with 20-20 
vision, as the Daily Express called him, was honest enough to sum up his 
experience neatly: "Yesterday was like a nightmare".

 Davie Thompson had a more enjoyable day, scoring seven goals, with Willie 
Irvine netting five in the rout. "I felt sorry for the Selkirk players but they 
accepted their defeat in good humour," said Stirling manager Alex Smith. 
"Actually I lost count and thought we only won the match by 19 goals," he 
added. It wasn't quiteArbroath-Bon Accord 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbroath_36%E2%80%930_Bon_Accord>, but for Taylor 
and his Selkirk team-mates it was bad enough.


1984 Rugby Union: Lavardac 350-0 Vergt


 Now on to the most emphatic thrashing of them all. Unhappy at having four of 
their players suspended, the third tier French team Vergt opted for the very 
mature step of taking the field with only 11 players in their next few matches. 
The results were unsurprisingly disastrous. A 236-0 defeat to Gujan Mestras was 
awful, but the best (or worst) was still to come.

The laissez-faire approach adopted by Vergt's players hardly helped matters, 
the 11 reluctant men making no attempt to tackle or win the ball, but their 
350-0 defeat to Lavardac was still some achievement. In total, 66 tries were 
scored – in the days of four points for a try – at an average of one every 72 
seconds, Vergt not so much parking the bus, more giving the keys to their 
opponents and nipping off down the pub.

"We couldn't accept the federation's scandalous decision," said a Vergt 
committee man. "We had to react." Well, there can be no disputing that the 
French team certainly made their point, in a couple of defeats that will take 
some beating.


1980: West Indies beat Australia by 408 runs


 A statement of intent for the decade that followed, the West Indies' crushing 
408-run victory over Australia 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/63255.html> sealed their first 
series win Down Under and provided Australia with their biggest defeat in terms 
of runs since 1929, when England beat them by 675 runs.

Such a massive defeat didn't look too likely after the Australian's had 
dismissed the visitors for 328 shortly into day two, Clive Lloyd's fine hundred 
and Viv Richards' rapid 76 helping the West Indies to a total that looked 
competitive but not insurmountable on a good batting strip at Adelaide. 
However, with Andy Roberts, Michael Holding, Colin Croft and Joel Garner to 
contend with, Australia could only make 203, the heart of their innings ripped 
out when Roberts removed both Chappell brothers in consecutive deliveries.

With a 125-run lead, the West Indians, already 1-0 up in the series, then 
ground Australia into the dirt. At first it was Gordon Greenidge and Richards 
who did the damage, a stand of 136 in as many minutes destroying the hosts, as 
Len Pascoe chose the unwise action of bombarding Richards with bouncers and 
then sarcastically applauding him when he chose to defend one.
An unhappy Richards allegedly flicked the Vs at Pascoe and was involved in 
some heated discussions, but all it succeeded in doing was focusing the mind of 
the Master Blaster. It was never a great idea to make the great man angry. 
Peter Laker of the Daily Express was right to describe Pascoe's act as "as 
senseless as throwing a boomerang with a built-in grenade".

 Alvin Kallicharran's 12th Test century – he would become the sixth West 
Indian to reach 4000 Test runs during the innings – propelled the West Indian 
total to 448, leaving Australia 574 to win, or more pertinently nine hours to 
survive. They didn't come close. After 28 overs Australia had slumped to 58/5, 
crawling to 131/7 as the fourth day ended. Michael Holding polished things off 
the next morning as an Australian team that had its Packer stars back in the 
fold during the series had to contemplate their standing in the world.

"It's no shame to lose to a side with their ability – four great fast-bowlers 
backed up by magnificent fielding and a tremendous batting line-up," said a 
realistic Greg Chappell, his comments accurate for the years of Caribbean 
domination that were just beginning. The West Indies may have gone on to lose 
their next series, an ill-tempered clash in New Zealand (without Richards), but 
the rest of the world had been given a taste of what was to come during that 
final Test at Adelaide in January 1980.


1988 Rugby League: Wigan 92-2 Runcorn Highfield


When Second Division Runcorn Highfield drew Wigan in the first round of the 
1988-89 John Player Special Trophy, it should have been a time of anticipation 
and excitement for the town. Admittedly no one expected the underdogs to 
triumph, as Wigan were steadily building the foundations for their subsequent 
period of dominance, yet when Runcorn's directors chose to switch the tie to 
Wigan's Central Park, the romance of the cup vanished immediately.

Due to the higher gate receipts that would now be received, the Runcorn 
players reportedly demanded a higher proportion of the cash pot, but when the 
directors craftily proposed an increase only in winning bonuses, the chaos 
truly began. Two days before the match the players went on strike, leaving the 
club directors with two realistic options: bow down to the demands of the 
strikers, or somehow cobble together a makeshift side.

They chose the latter, frantically recruiting players to make up a 13 to take 
on the might of Wigan. Coach Bill Ashurst came out of retirement to help the 
cause, his assistant Harold Daley, treasurer Jeff Fletcher and a set of local 
amateurs from the Clock Face and Pilkingtons Rec clubs making up the rest of 
the team. Unsurprisingly Wigan steamrollered their way to a 92-2 win, the Iro 
brothers running rampant and scoring seven tries between them. Runcorn's cause 
was not particularly boosted when Ashurst got himself sent off for headbutting 
Andy Goodway after just 12 minutes.

The arguments continued. Runcorn skipper Chris Middlehurst immediately put in 
a transfer request, expressing his disgust over the whole affair. "The dispute 
was not originally over pay. The players wanted to retain the home tie to give 
us a better chance of giving Wigan a game," Middlehurst protested. "When the 
directors said they had agreed to go to Central Park to make more money, a 
players meeting decided to ask for increased money as our share."

The row turned out to be the catalyst for an abysmal run of results for the 
club. Runcorn would not win another league match in the 1988-89 season and then 
they extended their winless run in style during the 1989-90 campaign, a P28 L28 
record and a points against total of 935 indicating just how far the team had 
slumped. And it all started with this messy 92-2 defeat.


1982 Snooker World Championships: Tony Knowles 10-1 Steve Davis

Alan Thompson of the Daily Express was pretty certain about what would happen 
at the 1982 World Snooker Championships. In fact, he was wondering what all the 
fuss was about regarding the forthcoming tournament. "After unaccountable hours 
of well-dressed men playing with antiseptic precision to the accompaniment of 
sepulchral commentary,Steve Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-davis> will win and that will be that."

You couldn't argue with Thompson. The reigning World Champion was a 2/5 
favourite with the bookies to retain his crown, and with the Masters and UK 
Championship wins already under his belt during the season, few would have 
predicted anything but another Davis procession.

 Davis was expected to brush off his first round opponent Tony Knowles easily. 
The two-times winner of the UK Junior Championships had qualified for the event 
the month before but his pre-tournament odds of 150/1 stressed the task ahead 
of him. Yet astheir match progressed 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xsjI-xivr00> it soon became apparent that all 
was not well with the world No1.

Davis became involved in a row with photographers in the first frame, and 
whether this disturbed his concentration or not is open to debate. What was for 
certain though was the predicament Davis found himself in. Knowles raced into a 
4-0 lead, and although Davis would win the next frame, Knowles moved into a 
staggering overnight lead of 8-1.


"It is a hell of a lot to pull back, but if Tony can do it then so can I," 
said a less than convincing Davis. "Even so it was probably the worst mauling 
of my life. He never let me settle". Any hopes of a Davis comeback or of 
Knowles nerves were put to bed, as Knowles calmly finished the job off the next 
day. To beat Davis was shocking enough, but his 10-1 win was barely believable, 
as the Crucible Curse had struck again (no first-time world champion has ever 
retained his title since the move to Sheffield).

 Knowles' win thrust the Bolton lad into the spotlight, a run to the 
quarter-finals cementing his reputation as a fine player for the future, and 
his boyish good looks attracting the attentions of both the press and fans 
alike ("broke a million hearts on and off the table," as Brian Potter once 
said). For his part, Davis licked his wounds, brushed himself down, and then 
went on toreclaim his world title a year later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/apr/30/world-snooker-championship-1983-steve-david-cliff-thorburn-147>
. And he didn't too bad for the rest of the decade either.


1989 Wightman Cup: USA 7-0 Great Britain

By 1989 the Wightman Cup had long ceased to be a contest. The annual tennis 
competition between the Great Britain and USA had not been won by Britain's 
women since 1978, their last away victory being in 1975. The event desperately 
needed a boost as the 1980s ended. Instead it was issued the last rites.

There were five 7-0 American whitewashes during the decade, but 1989 was the 
nadir as far as British tennis was concerned. Although Martin Navratilova, Pam 
Shriver and Zina Garrison were absent from the home team, the British side, 
comprising of Jo Durie, Anne Hobbs, Clare Wood and Sara Gomer, failed to even 
win a set between them in any of the seven matches.

Wood has the most chastening experience, being hammered by a 13-year-old 
Jennifer Capriati, in just 42 minutes, in which time Wood won just 17 points 
and was unsurprisingly on the receiving end of a Double Bagel (6-0 6-0). "I've 
never been in a hurricane. That is probably the closest I am going to get to 
one," revealed Wood. "In the end, all I could do was stand back in admiration. 
I was given a lesson by a student".

By the time an 18-year-old Mary Joe Fernandez saw off Gomer 6-1 6-2, Britain 
had only won nine games and were 3-0 down. "They [the British players] 
approached the occasion with the enthusiasm of a dog being ordered to its 
basket," wrote Andrew Longmore in the Times, in the aftermath of the oh so 
predictable drubbing. Under the circumstances, it was hardly a shock that the 
British women were not too happy in their roles of lambs to the slaughter.

Where did the event go from here? Many suggestions were proposed to 
reinvigorate the tournament in the same way that theRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> had been saved: a USA v 
Commonwealth contest; USA v Europe; even Britain versus players from the 
original 13 colonies in America (like that would have made much difference). 
Eventually the LTA did the kind thing in 1990 and "temporarily" suspended the 
Wightman Cup. It has never returned, although judging by the outcome of the 
matches in the 1980s, and 1981 and 1989 in particular, it is probably for the 
best.


1989 Ryder Cup: Tom Kite beats Howard Clark 8&7

Howard Clark had a decent singles record in the Ryder Cup, with four wins from 
six matches between 1977 and 1995. But unfortunately this blog is centred upon 
sporting thrashings, so there is only one match that I can write about here: 
Howard Clark v Tom Kite, 1989.

Clark had not been in the greatest form in 1989, his place in the team only 
guaranteed once Tony Jacklin had chosen him as one of his three captain's 
picks. Yet Clark would win two points out of his three matches on days one and 
two, his fourball partnership with Mark James a particular success.

In one of the most gripping matches of the 1989 event, Clark and James would 
defeat Payne Stewart and Curtis Strange 1-up, giving Europe a 9-7 lead as the 
sun dipped on the Saturday evening. "Jessie James and myself beat Strange and 
Stewart on that Saturday evening but it took over six hours to play, and you 
know, it wiped me out for the next day," Clark would later admit.

With concerns over form, his tired mind and body, the last person Clark could 
have done with facing was Tom Kite. The American was as tough as they came, and 
never lost a singles match in his seven Ryder Cups, so Clark needed a solid 
start if he was to stay in contention. But three birdies in the first six holes 
from Kite spelt danger for the Yorkshireman, his day summed up neatly when he 
was struck on the head after Kite had thrown his ball back to him on the second 
green and he had not been paying attention.

"I wasn't so bad when I was playing with somebody," said Clark in Gavin 
Newsham's Two Tribes. "There was a bit of confidence there, there was a bit of 
back-up. But on my own I was very fragile". Clark's delicate confidence and 
wobbly form left him vulnerable, and when Kite started firing birdies at him he 
simply had no response. Five threes from the American on the front nine, left 
Clark six-down at the turn and staring a record defeat squarely in the face.

When the next two holes were won by Kite, the last appropriately with a birdie 
three, Clark's humiliation was complete, the 8&7 loss a record for an 18-holes 
singles match in the Ryder Cup (equalled when Fred Couples beat Ian Woosnam in 
1997). Clark could take some comfort in the superb golf played by Kite, but 
when you're on the end of such a stuffing it must be hard to find any 
consolation.

Europe would go on to retain the cup, moving into a 14-10 lead before America 
fought back to tie the matches at 14-14. A watching Kite was interviewed just 
after Jose Maria Canizares' putt had ensured that the cup would stay in Europe, 
asking to comment on Europe's latest victory. "Not yet. Let's get this 
straight," came the reply. It is a moment that has stayed with me to this day. 
Kite was spot-on with his comment, the lack of that extra half point to win the 
trophy outright still something that bugs me. Kite was accurate in more ways 
than one that day, something that Howard Clark can vouch for.

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiansport>
 