
When I turned 30, in 2011, I envisioned my sexual experience eventually 
reaching a terminus, like a monorail gliding to a stop. I would disembark, find 
myself face-to-face with another human being, and there we would remain in our 
permanent station in life: the future.

I was single and straight. I had not chosen to be single, but love is rare and 
frequently unreciprocated. Without love, I saw no reason to form a permanent 
attachment to any particular place. My friends expressed a religious belief 
that it would arrive for me one day, as if love were something the universe 
owed to each of us, which no human could escape.

I had known love but, having known it, I knew how powerless I was to instigate 
it or ensure its duration. I knew that it did not arrive for everyone, and as I 
got older I began to worry it would not arrive for me.

On a Monday in April 2012, I stood in line at JFK airport to board a plane to 
California. I had decided to visit San Francisco because my desires and my 
reality had diverged beyond the point of reconciliation. I wanted to picture a 
different future, one aligned with the freedom of my present, and in those 
years San Francisco was where the future was going to be figured out, or at 
least it was the city designated for people who still believed in free love. 
They gave their choices names and they conceived of their actions as social 
movements. They saw in new technology an opportunity to refashion society, 
including ideas about sexuality.

By 2012, the young people who came to San Francisco were neither dropouts nor 
misfits. They were children who had grown up eating sugar-free cereal, swaddled 
in polar fleece jackets made from recycled plastic bottles. They had studied 
abroad, knew their favourite kinds of sashimi and were friends with their 
parents. Unlike their parents, they commuted to the suburbs and lived in the 
cities. As they arrived, the cities reshaped to receive their disposable income.

In San Francisco, the young people went to coffee shops where the production 
of espresso was ritualised to resemble a historic re-enactment of the hardships 
of 19th-century pioneer life. Nobody smoked cigarettes. They honed their bodies 
with the aim of either perfect homeostasis or eternal life. They ate red meat 
only once a month, to time their consumption of iron with the end of their 
menstrual cycles. They started companies whose names referenced fantasy 
fiction. They were adults, but they could seem like children. Their sex lives 
were impossible to fathom, because they seemed never to have lived in darkness. 
They had grown up observing foreign wars, economic inequality and ecological 
catastrophe, crises that they earnestly discussed on their digital feeds, but 
avoided internalising as despair.

Soon Elizabeth had two non-boyfriends. Neither relationship had the 
expectation of exclusivity

I’m not saying Elizabeth was all of these things, but she described herself as 
an optimist. Elizabeth had a membership at a rock-climbing gym; she meditated 
and practised yoga. She organised hot-air balloon rides and weekend trips. She 
worked long, punishing hours, but had the energy to stay up all night at 
weekends, go on cycling excursions or attend silent retreats. A friend of mine 
had met her at a circus arts class and suggested I meet her.

Elizabeth had moved to San Francisco after college. Her boyfriend had moved to 
the south to go to medical school. No matter how much she loved him, or how 
much her mother, an infertility specialist, urged her to have children as a 
young woman, she was not yet ready to start a family. She had a job offer as a 
consultant at an economics firm. So, in 2010, when she was 22, she moved west 
and they broke up.

Elizabeth had never before lived in a city. She knew the suburbs in Virginia 
where she had grown up, and the small New England town where she had attended 
college. She arrived in San Francisco and made friends, some through internet 
dating.

She met Wes one night in late 2010, when he accompanied one of her co-workers 
to a boardgame party at her house. For their first date, they attended Nerd 
Night at a local bar. They watched a lecture about the future ofteledildonics 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teledildonics>. On the walk home, they kissed. 
Then Wes, with the transparency he thought of as mature and fair, gave a speech 
of pre-emptive relationship indemnity. He was still getting over his last 
girlfriend, he said. He did not want to be in a relationship. Elizabeth tried 
not to roll her eyes – it was the first date! They said goodnight and parted 
ways.

Wes had grown up in San Francisco, studied computer science at Harvard and 
returned west after graduation to work at Google. Somewhere along the upward 
incline of his precocious youth, he had skipped a grade and was still only 21, 
tall and handsome.

Wes’s previous serious relationship, the one before he met Elizabeth, had 
ended during his senior year of college. At the time he met Elizabeth, the 
discovery of how much he liked casual sex was still new to him.

Still, Elizabeth and Wes lived near each other. They began meeting once a week 
for drinks, dates and sleeping over, always with a show of nonchalance. Given 
the choice, Elizabeth would have wanted a more serious commitment. She was only 
23, but she had one reaction to Wes’s lack of interest in their relationship: 
he was acting like a baby. Fine, she decided. She would also see other people.

A few weeks later, she met Brian, a graduate of Stanford who also worked in 
tech. Soon Elizabeth had two non-boyfriends. Neither relationship had the 
expectation of exclusivity, or any defined path into the future. She kept the 
two separate and never saw the men together. They balanced each other, one 
providing security against the possible failure of the other.

One day in May 2011, six months after they met, Elizabeth introduced Wes to 
psilocybin mushrooms. The trip shifted their relationship. They still did not 
use the word “love”, but they now acknowledged what they referred to as 
“emotional involvement”.

Elizabeth was hired at Google. They took the bus to its Mountain View complex 
and ate in the cafeteria together. When they went for dinner with Wes’s family, 
Elizabeth was presented as a friend.

Elizabeth did not describe what she was doing – having sex with two men on a 
regular basis over an extended period of time, with the occasional 
extra-relationship dalliance besides – as polyamory. The word had cultural 
connotations for her, of swinging married people or creepy old men.

Although, like most people her age, she had friends whose partnerships allowed 
for sex with others, those friends tended to use the term “open relationship”, 
which was somehow less infused with the stigma of intentional weirdness, and 
did not amount to a proclamation of sexual identity.

Still, whatever accidental arrangement she had created, by the end of that 
year the lack of sexual boundaries was causing Elizabeth no small amount of 
anxiety. Wes’s crushes from high school were resurfacing. Women on the OkCupid 
dating site were probably sending him winky emoticons. To allay her growing 
insecurity, she turned to self-help and readThe Ethical Slut: A Practical Guide 
To Polyamory, Open Relationships & Other Adventures 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ethical-slut.html>, Sex At Dawn 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sex-at-dawn.html>, by Christopher Ryan and 
Cacilda Jethá, and Tristan Taormino’sOpening Up 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1128665.Opening_Up>.

These books convinced Elizabeth that monogamy was a choice, not a given. It 
began to take on the cast of an unreasonable expectation, best suited to people 
who disliked experimentation: people not like her.

Elizabeth compiled a shared Google doc – a syllabus of recommended reading, 
discussion groups and sex parties

For almost a year, Elizabeth and Wes avoided naming the terms of their 
relationship. They celebrated the last night of 2011 with friends, and before 
midnight, because she wanted to say it while still relatively sober, Elizabeth 
told Wes she loved him. He loved her, too, but he still wanted sexual freedom. 
She had already decided she wanted it, too.

They agreed that they would think of themselves as a couple from now on, 
instead of two single people who slept together, but they would still not be 
monogamous. Now they had to figure out how to manage the logistics. Elizabeth 
compiled a shared Google doc that was to become the foundation of their 
research – a syllabus of recommended reading, places to attend discussion 
groups and sex parties open to the public. They went to a party at a sex club 
and had sex surrounded by onlookers. They returned another night, for an 
open-relationship discussion group, but most of the attendees were in their 
late 30s and were either married and “frisky” or desperate to save their 
failing marriages.

Elizabeth and Wes felt they could draw upon certain ideas of the older 
polyamorists, but had to do a lot of the thinking on their own. After their 
research, they began to draw up rules.

The first held that, on any given night, one could call the other and say, 
“Will you please come home?” There was a shared understanding that each of them 
was the most important person in the other’s life. The second rule was about 
disclosure: if one of them suspected he or she might sleep with another person, 
the premonition should be disclosed. They agreed to discuss each other’s 
crushes. If a sexual encounter happened spontaneously, the event should be 
disclosed soon afterwards. They would use condoms with their other partners.

Despite making rules, they would aim to fail. It was a concept they borrowed 
from computer security: if an unplanned event occurs, the default is to act 
first, then worry about formulating responses for the next time.

Early in 2012, Brian left the country for three months. In the absence of her 
second partner, Elizabeth felt an imbalance. Wes was still dating other people 
and she felt vulnerable. She was also coming to terms with what had been a 
growing crush on someone else. His name was Chris. He happened to be Wes’s best 
friend.

Wes said he wouldn’t mind if Elizabeth and Chris started to sleep together. 
Elizabeth, upset, asked how he could possibly care about her and want her to 
sleep with his best friend. They worked it out.

Chris is a tall man with a sweet smile and a shy affect. His parents had met 
at a commune in Santa Barbara in the early 1980s, so the example he had was one 
of youthful adventure that would eventually settle into conformity. He met Wes 
at Google, where they both started working in 2010.

The two men were affectionate with each other, but Chris was surprisingly 
troubled by his unreturned desire for Wes

Chris and Wes became friends around the time Wes met Elizabeth. Compared with 
them, Chris had a more introspective personality. He was more careful about 
taking risks when it came to things such as drugs and relationships.

By the end of 2011, the three regularly socialised as a group outside work. 
Soon after, Chris and Elizabeth would also hang out by themselves. Chris knew 
that his new friends were in an open relationship, but at first he saw his own 
role as a mutual confidant, with a much closer relationship to his male 
counterpart.

One night, Chris accompanied Elizabeth and Wes to a queer dance party. They 
all danced together, dancing that evolved seamlessly to kissing on the dance 
floor. Chris enjoyed it, but felt a little bit like the third wheel. His 
friends were on MDMA and he was not. Elizabeth and Wes had planned a foursome 
with another couple later that night, so Chris ended up going home alone.

It became an unspoken understanding that if the three of them went out 
dancing, they would probably end up kissing together. This was true for a whole 
group of friends who began to coalesce at this time around Wes and Elizabeth, 
who began to be sought after as gurus by other couples who had considered 
opening their relationships. The shared Google doc soon had multiple 
subscribers.

Chris asked Wes whether he really did not mind if he and Elizabeth 
occasionally slept together. Wes said he didn’t. Then Chris brought up another 
idea: what about the three of them together, he asked carefully. Or just the 
two men?

Chris described himself as “mostly straight but every once in a while…” Wes 
happened to be one of the men to whom Chris was attracted. Wes, meanwhile, 
suspected that he was not at all gay, although in the spirit of the times he 
was having trouble making such a closed-minded declaration. He told Chris he 
needed to think about it.

The two men were affectionate with each other, even kissing hello or goodbye, 
but Chris was surprisingly troubled by his unreturned desire for Wes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsilicon-valley-millennials-emily-witt-future-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F241ede01d1d9ce94a03606b7e1eb89377c4566b4%2F19_1288_4850_6062%2F4850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%20in%20Silicon%20Valley%3A%20are%20millennials%20better%20at%20free%20love%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsilicon-valley-millennials-emily-witt-future-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%20in%20Silicon%20Valley%3A%20are%20millennials%20better%20at%20free%20love%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fsilicon-valley-millennials-emily-witt-future-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F241ede01d1d9ce94a03606b7e1eb89377c4566b4%2F19_1288_4850_6062%2F4850.jpg>
 Emily Witt: ‘When it came to sex, I thought we had it much better than 
previous generations.’ Photograph: Michael Danner for the Guardian 
I first met Chris, Elizabeth, and Wes in late May 2012, when their experiment 
was just a few months old. I was seven years older than Elizabeth and Chris, 
eight older than Wes. I envied the openness with which they shared their 
attractions. They did not proceed recklessly. They drew up ethical codes to 
protect their relationships. Elizabeth and Wes seemed to plunge forward through 
life without fear. I saw in Chris a little more hesitation.

They were not bothered, as I was, by the evidence that nonmonogamous 
arrangements had been rejected by the last generation of straight people who 
had tried them. I looked at the experiments of the 60s and 70s, and felt they 
had taught us that communes and other alternative arrangements that celebrated 
sexual freedom generally ended in jealousy and hurt feelings. We obedient 
children of the 80s and 90s saw the failures of the counterculture, and held 
ourselves in thrall to drug laws, health insurance, student loan payments, 
internships, condoms, skin protection factors, antidepressants, designated 
smoking areas, politically correct language, child safety locks, gym 
memberships, cancer screenings and career advancement. We had a nuanced 
understanding of risk.

When it came to sex, I thought we had it much better than previous 
generations. We knew better than to move into rural communes or force one’s 
wife to sleep with another man to overcome her cultural programming. We had 
more access to birth control, and knew more about our bodies. We had a vast 
selection of vibrators sold in woman-friendly retail environments. We had rape 
crisis centres, legal abortion and over-the-counter emergency contraception.

What my married parents imparted as the lessons from the 60s was that it was 
fine to have as much casual (“safe”) sex as we wanted as late-stage teenagers 
and young adults, and fine secretly to “experiment” with the more benign and 
least addictive drugs (although no teacher or relative ever openly recommended 
it), but eventually we would grow up and settle into the nuclear families we 
saw on television. Some of us would be gay and that would be fine. Many of 
these families would fall apart, but we did not consider divorce a structural 
failure of an institution, but a set of personal problems.

Among my mostly secular group of friends, the ceremonies of marriage and death 
were the only ritual sacraments left. I believed in the mystique of commitment. 
Could I think of myself as an adult if I never married? Would my married 
friends become distant and remote? Elizabeth, Wes and Chris believed there were 
still primary choices to make about sexuality. I wasn’t the only one who kept 
thinking about the warnings of people who had observed the 60s and felt 
hesitation. There was a phrase being thrown around the Bay Area only 
half-jokingly: “responsible hedonism”.

In the spring of 2012, Elizabeth would spend most nights with Wes and the 
occasional night with Chris or someone else. The three friends would see each 
other at work, too. When their relationships evolved, the shifts tended to 
happen not in slow increments, but with sudden tectonic upheavals, usually 
during out-of-town retreats that served as emotional crucibles.

Wes and Elizabeth’s relationship had acquired an acceleration, a momentum 
based on mutual daring. In the way that some couples might spend their energy 
systematically eating at new restaurants, Elizabeth and Wes went to sex 
parties. Elizabeth attended two porn shoots, one of them with Wes, the other 
with a woman who had become another long-term sexual partner. In June 2013, Wes 
left Google to start his own company. Between ending one job and beginning the 
other, he travelled around Europe. Elizabeth met him in Amsterdam, where they 
hired a prostitute.

In May 2013, Elizabeth took a work trip to Tokyo. Chris decided to go with her 
and play “house husband”. For the first time, they honestly discussed Chris’s 
understanding of Wes, of how, in Chris’s hopes and expectations, he had fallen 
in love – “filled in the dots with his own lines”, as Elizabeth put it. She 
left the conversation feeling they finally understood their differences, but 
also felt Chris’s romantic attraction to her break.

As untraditional as Wes and Elizabeth’s relationship was, it had started to 
look as if it was heading toward the traditional happy ending. They discussed 
moving in together, and finally did so in late 2013. The decision carried less 
weight with the knowledge that, at least a few times a month, one of them would 
be spending the night at someone else’s place. The lingering question for both 
was what would happen should one of them fall in love with someone else. They 
even discussed this likelihood with an older married couple, a couple in their 
late 30s who had been married for years. The man told them a story of how in 
the course of their open marriage, his wife had truly fallen for another 
person. He called it a “crisis episode”. They decided together that they were 
what they called “life journey partners” – a designation that sounded very 
hokey, but that was meant to indicate, Wes said, that “there’s being in love, 
and there’s being in love and wanting to spend the rest of your life with 
someone”. There would be times when a person had to compromise.

Party rules: 1. Low expectations, high possibilities. 2 Consent is required. 3 
Parties are fun!

In August 2014, Elizabeth and Wes got engaged at the Burning Man festival. In 
August 2015, I attended their wedding in Black Rock City. To the tune of 
Somewhere Over The Rainbow played on an electric piano, Wes and Elizabeth, he 
in a white, button-down shirt and black trousers, she in a white dress, both 
with colourful face paint around their eyes, processed to an altar decorated 
with pink fabric flowers and tasselled fringe. Relatives delivered loving 
statements. Wes’s godfather recited a Druid prayer. We lit sparklers and held 
them skyward as the sun set, forming a ring of light. The drone of a didgeridoo 
obscured the couple’s quiet murmuring.

“By the power invested in me by the internet, you are now married,” said the 
officiant, Wes’s uncle. “You can kiss each other and other people.”

Chris and Elizabeth threw their first sex party in the fall of 2012. In early 
2015, I went to the fourth iteration, Thunderwear IV, in a rented loft. A 
black-and-white portrait of Elizabeth lifting one of her legs up over her head 
in a full split and penetrating herself with a dildo hung over the room. She 
had installed a stripper pole.

The invitation had laid out the party’s rules in a charter, to which every 
invitee had to agree:

1 Useful mantra: low expectations, high possibilities.

2 Consent is required. And sexy. If you wanna do something, ask first. Bonus 
points for enthusiastic consent.

3 This is a party. Parties are fun! You don’t have to do anything you don’t 
wanna do. If you don’t wanna, say “no thanks”.

4 This is a party. Have fun! White ribbon means: ask to feed me (remember, you 
can say no). Red ribbon means: ask me for a kiss (on the cheek… at first, at 
least).

5 Relationship conversation with your partner recommended before you start 
partying.

There was one final rule: no glitter, at the request of the venue.

The party started calmly, with drinking and talking. I stood and talked with 
one of the two other people over 30. Elizabeth, ever organised, told me she had 
taken out liability insurance for the stripper pole.

The friends had arranged to begin the evening with an amateur burlesque show. 
We watched a slightly botched acrobatic routine to Rihanna’s songJump 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VFBUiZ5vgZ0>. The next woman performed a 
pirate-themed striptease that concluded with her taping a pair of red cups to 
her breasts, filling them with Malibu, orange juice and coconut milk, and 
letting people drink from them with straws. Then, to Rihanna’sBirthday Cake 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=leK4eoqwmfU>, came a striptease that ended 
with the performer smearing herself all over with cake.

After the show, I walked into the massive slate-gray bathroom with its Jacuzzi 
and had a conversation with a couple about the dream of one day living in a 
backyard casita in Oakland with a composting toilet. I wandered back to the 
loft, where couples and threesomes had begun to pair off on couches. Nearby was 
a wheel of fortune that could be spun for instructions. After several 
conversations that felt like job interviews, I ended up taking turns spinning 
the wheel with a man. I did so with a slightly exhausted determination to get 
the show on the road. He was a bit younger. We spun the wheel, awkwardly 
obeying instructions to feed each other strawberries and kiss.

Then we went into the second room to do whip-its. I had never done a whip-it. 
My new friend explained how it worked: screw a small canister of nitrous oxide 
on to a stainless-steel whipped-cream maker. Exhale deeply, then inhale while 
depressing the handle of the machine, filling your lungs with nitrous oxide 
instead of oxygen. This produces a one- or two-minute high. Deprived of oxygen, 
the mind dissolves; physical sensation becomes acute, a goofy giddiness sets 
in. Whip-its are good for a sex party, because they do not impair sexual 
function and can heighten physical sensation, although I was advised not to do 
too many.

On my first whip-it, the man I had met lightly touched my arm, the feeling of 
his hands producing warmth and electricity while my vision broke into geometric 
patterns. During his turn, he asked that I kiss him. We made out for a while, 
doing the occasional whip-it. I felt airy and happy. We stood up with our hands 
against the wall and took turns smacking each other with a riding crop. Around 
us, groups of people lay together on beds and couches, or stood making out in 
corners. On a couch, a man lay across the laps of his friends, who formed a 
spanking train. I sat with Elizabeth and took a whip-it, after which she 
massaged my head while a man lightly shocked me with an electrified wand.

The after-party was at the apartment of one of Elizabeth’s partners, a man 
with whom she had exchanged I-love-yous. I had overheard a conversation between 
her and Wes before she left, where she had asked Wes if he would let her go on 
her own. It was a conversation that was difficult to listen to. I believed Wes 
when he cheerfully assented, but I also knew my own feelings would have been 
hurt. Chris was there, too, with his now steady girlfriend.

Elizabeth had slyly slipped me a condom, but I didn’t have sex. My then 
boyfriend in New York had not wanted me to attend the party at all. I was still 
thinking of myself as just a visitor, or rather neither here nor there, someone 
undertaking an abstract inquiry, but not yet with true intention. I regretted 
having been shy in my making out earlier at the sex party, that I had spent the 
night with one person instead of joining the cuddle puddle coalesced on the 
satin-sheeted bed opposite.

I wished I had other chances for this degree of experimentation, and wondered 
what it would feel like to be not a visitor to this scene, but a part of it. It 
had been easier for me to relax, because most of the people in the room had 
been strangers. Now I sat in a penthouse with a group of sleepy partygoers. We 
chatted and looked at the view. In the background was the sound of whip-its, of 
orgasms, of water falling from a shower into a porcelain tub.

• This is an edited extract from Future Sex, by Emily Witt, published next 
month by Faber & Faber at £16.99. To order a copy for £13.93, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/future-sex.html>, or 
call 0330 333 6846.
 