
The first football club Bill Shankly was associated with was a team in 
Ayrshire called the Glenbuck Cherrypickers which, as Sir Alex Ferguson is fond 
of explaining to know-nothings from south of the border, had little to do with 
bucolic fruit-harvesting but was a colliery term for selecting the best bits of 
coal on a pit-head conveyor.

John Dempster was born in Kettering but his father came to England from 
Glenbuck, which is why the Mansfield Town defender not only opted to play for 
Scotland at Under-21 level but also followed his father in adoptingLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> as his favourite club. So when 
Dempster scored the opening goal in the second-round replay against Lincoln to 
help bring Sunday's dream third-round FA Cup tie a step closer, it was a cause 
for family celebration as well as another layer of romance to add lustre to 
football's most storied weekend.

"My dad always supported Liverpool so I did too," Dempster explains. "He's 
from a small Scottish village called Muirkirk which neighbours Glenbuck, the 
birthplace of Bill Shankly. We knew we would get Liverpool if we won the replay 
because the draw had already been made. Everyone was buzzing but we still had 
to get past Lincoln. We managed that – scoring a goal made it extra special for 
me, and we've been looking forward to the match ever since. My dad comes to 
everyMansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> home game 
anyway but he can't wait for this one. Everyone else feels the same way. You 
don't have to support Liverpool to be excited about the prospect but I can't 
get the idea of a replay at Anfield out of my head. Unthinkable as that might 
be, it would be the ultimate dream come true."

Strictly speaking Dempster has seen dreams come true before, though while he 
was a member of the Crawley Town squad that played at Old Trafford in the fifth 
round two years ago, he was Cup-tied and could not take part in the game. "The 
day out at Manchester United was special, something I'll never forget," he 
says. "But it was a bittersweet moment really, I've had better days playing in 
the Cup than that. When I was at Kettering we drew Fulham once and then the 
following season we drew Leeds and took them to a replay at Elland Road."

At 29 Dempster is well on his way to becoming a battle-scarred Cup veteran, so 
spare a thought for his team-mate Alan Marriott, who in a 16-year professional 
career, including nine seasons with Lincoln, has yet to feature in a 
third-round tie. "It's been such a long wait I was beginning to think it would 
never happen," the 34-year-old goalkeeper says. "I am getting towards the end 
of my career now and I thought the whole third-round excitement might pass me 
by but thankfully that hasn't happened. I'm relieved about that. It's an 
ambition realised for me. But really the Liverpool game is all about the fans. 
They were great the night we played Lincoln because everyone knew what it meant.

When you play in the Conference you don't get big games coming round very 
often. This is about as big as you can get and it's great to see the fans 
smiling again."

They say the third round always throws up stories and the Stags' manager, Paul 
Cox, has a couple of his own to add to the mix. Not only does the former Notts 
County and Kettering player celebrate his 41st birthdayon Sunday, the biggest 
game of his career comes just a couple of days after another match arranged at 
short notice. Cox promised his long-term partner Natasha they could get married 
if Mansfield beat Lincoln in the Cup and not only did Natasha take him at his 
word but she managed to fit the two big days into the same week.

All that remains now is for Liverpool to enter into the spirit of the thing by 
sending along a recognisable team so that Mansfield folk do not feel 
short-changed, although Cox feels that whatever side Brendan Rodgers selects 
will represent a formidable challenge. "Liverpool are a worldwide brand, that's 
why we are pleased to have them here," the Mansfield manager says. "Their whole 
squad is filled with quality footballers."

Mansfield's is not, at least not to the same extent, though that is what gives 
the Cup its special flavour. As the defender Exodus Geohaghon – and what an 
unimprovable name for a Cup hero that might turn out to be – points out, 
Liverpool will not be used to cramped dressing rooms and puddles on the pitch. 
"We need to get under their skin," the Stags' long-throw specialist says. "If 
they don't fancy it we'll know straight away."
 