
Shane Duffy had a night to forget in Cardiff as he scored two own‑goals before 
being sent off in a 2-1 defeat that continuedBlackburn’s wretched start under 
Owen Coyle.

The Republic of Ireland defender found the net at the wrong end at Wigan on 
Saturday and it continued in South Wales with a pair of own-goals inside the 
opening 20 minutes.

Dwight Gayle’s double gives Newcastle United lift-off against Reading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/17/newcastle-united-reading-championship-match-report>
Duffy saw the ball ricochet off him after Declan John’s shot hit the post and 
he doubled the Bluebirds’ advantage by directing Peter Whittingham’s free-kick 
beyond Jason Steele with his head. The defender has turned down a new Rovers 
deal amid reported interest from Celtic.

Asked whether Duffy was in the right frame of mind to play for Blackburn, 
Coyle said he did not have the answer and suggested that agents had turned the 
player’s head.

“I think that’s the million dollar question we always face with players,” 
Coyle said after a third straight league defeat for Blackburn.“Coming into the 
club there’s a number of situations I’ve inherited. Shane, Ben Marshall … there 
have been offers that were rejected a couple of weeks ago.

“But what you have in the modern game is third-party interest, somebody in one 
ear telling you one thing, someone else in the other ear telling you another. 
They have their heads turned and you’ve got to manage that in the modern game.

“When you step on that field you’ve got to be at your best and be at your 
maximum and, unfortunately, that’s not happened tonight.”

Blackburn’s winless start in the league would extend to three games despite 
Danny Graham reducing the arrears late on. Duffy got his second caution in 
stoppage time for kicking the ball away. The only 100% record was ended whenQPR 
lost 3-2 atBarnsley. A win would have sent Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s side to 
the top of the table, yet they trailed at the break to Marley Watkins’s 
fourth‑minute header.

QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> would turn the game on its head 
thanks to two penalties, one converted by Tjaronn Chery, the other by Sebastian 
Polter, but Conor Hourihane levelled with a free-kick and Josh Scowen claimed 
an 89th-minute winner against a visiting side thatalso finished with 10 men, 
due to Grant Hall’s dismissal.
 