
Aberdeen kept up the pressure on the leaders Celtic with a narrow but deserved 
victory over second-bottomKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock>.

With Ronny Deila’s team winning against Partick in the lunchtime kick-off to 
pull four points clear,Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> 
knew they could not afford to slip-up and they duly delivered. Shay Logan 
nodded in a 71st-minute winner after Josh Magennis had wiped out his former 
club’s lead given to them by Ash Taylor.

The hosts dominated the first half and Kenny McLean almost celebrated winning 
his first Scotland call-up with the opening goal in the seventh minute. After 
linking with Simon Church, McLean curled a 22-yard effort beyond the 
outstretched Jamie MacDonald but the ball struck the upright.

The visitors looked vulnerable at the back and MacDonald had to make a superb 
save in the 21st minute. Church flicked on Logan’s cross with his head for the 
returning Niall McGinn, who, after taking a good first touch, saw his 14-yard 
shot clawed away by the Killie keeper. The Northern Irishman will probably feel 
he should have scored.

However, Derek McInnes’s men made a deserved breakthrough in the 37th minute 
from a set-piece. Barry Robson’s delivery allowed Taylor to steal a march on 
his marker and he buried a header into the net from eight yards out.

Kilmarnock’s threat was minimal prior to the interval but they drew level two 
minutes into the second half. Greg Kiltie sent in a right-wing cross, which was 
knocked down at the far post by Rory McKenzie and Magennis headed home.

Magennis could have scored again in the 62nd minute after an error from Andrew 
Considine. The Aberdeen defender was hesitant and Magennis robbed him of 
possession only to screw his angled shot wide.

The hosts quickly upped the tempo and they restored their lead in the 71st 
minute. Jonny Hayes delivered a superb left-wing cross, which was met by the 
onrushing Logan who stooped to head home from close range.

The energetic full-back was just as effective down the other end, stopping a 
near certain goal by intercepting a Magennis cross, which was heading towards 
the unmarked Tope Obadeyi at the far post, but Aberdeen held out to keep alive 
their hopes of a first title since 1986.
 