
Carlos Carvalhal, the Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> manager, was 
delighted with his side’s convincing victory that guaranteed them a 
Championship play-off spot.

Wednesday dominated throughout and in the 21st minute Gary Hooper saw a 
drilled 25-yard effort hit the post. In the 64th minute, he scored his side’s 
opening goal after reacting quickly when the Cardiff goalkeeper, David 
Marshall, parried a stinging low-drive from Daniel Pudil.

Keiren Westwood in the Wednesday goal had to be alert to gather in a shot from 
the edge of the penalty area by Craig Noone. However, the home side doubled 
their lead in the 75th minute in bizarre circumstances after a mistake by 
Marshall allowed Hooper to steal the ball and cross towards the empty goal. The 
Cardiff defender Lee Peltier could only divert the ball into the net with the 
home side’s Lucas João lurking.

After João went close, forcing a smart save from Marshall down to his right, 
Hooper added a third in stoppage time, chipping the keeper from inside the area 
following a neat flick-on from substitute Atdhe Nuhiu.

Carvalhal said: “I said from the beginning that we were outsiders this season. 
We achieved this place because we have a fantastic group of players, they’re 
acting like a team, we are one as a team.

“We did very well in this kind of game – the sort of game to decide things. It 
was a very good performance, we attacked very well, we defended well.

“We are the team that have a new coach, a new philosophy, we’ve changed a lot 
of things in the club,” Carvalhal added. “We feel strong at the moment, like at 
the beginning of the season. We saw that today. We saw the reaction when we 
lost the ball – we were like dogs. We have a lot of goals in our team but we 
have also equalled the record for clean sheets at the club, it’s something we 
are happy with. We’ve found a balance.

“Getting to the play-offs is the work of a lot of people; the players, the 
chairman, the fans who turn out home and away.”

Cardiff were the only club who could prevent Wednesday from claiming a top-six 
spot before the start of play but they fell short in their quest.

Russell Slade, the Cardiff manager, said: “It hurts. You’re disappointed 
whenever you lose a match. For half a game we were still in it, but we’re very 
disappointed with the second half and, in particular, the goals we conceded.

“It was frustrating we never kicked on. If you stay in the game the pressure 
would have mounted on them, but we weren’t able to apply that and we weren’t a 
great enough threat in the second half.

“We tried whatever we could, bringing on bodies and we had three up front and 
three at the back by the end, but you have to say we got beat by the better 
side.

“We need to finish on a positive note, we’ve been strong at home, we’ve made 
progress from where we were. Last year we finished in the top half and if we 
can finish seventh it’s progress, just not quite enough.” 
 