
Crewe’s manager, Steve Davis, pointed to the confidence his side can take from 
their shock 2-1 victory at promotion-chasingSheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> as they took an 
unexpected step towards League One safety at Bramall Lane.

The game had reached the final minute and was heading for a 1-1 draw when the 
substitute Ryan Colclough, back after 16 months out with injuries and off-field 
problems, fired an unstoppable 25-yard shot from the left that dipped over the 
despairing leap of the Blades’ goalkeeper Mark Howard.

Crewe had entered the game fourth from bottom and on the back of three 
successive defeats and so this historic victory – their first ever at Bramall 
Lane – was crucial. It lifted them up to 18th, three places and two points 
above the drop zone with seven games remaining, while bringing the Blades’ 
momentum – which had seen them win two games in a row – to an unexpected halt, 
although they remain in fifth place.

Davis said: “It should give us massive confidence – I’ve said that in the past 
and it hasn’t – coming here and winning against the odds, and the odds were 
very high today. If you’d have had a bet you’d have won a few quid. With the 
three defeats we’ve had we weren’t expected to get anything.

“Crewe have a habit of upsetting the odds and we are capable of these results. 
We’ve got some decent players and on our day we are capable of beating any team 
in the league.”

Davis also had high praise for Colclough. “I am glad he has that confidence 
and swagger about him because I think you need that little bit of swagger to 
become a good player and I want all the players to have a swagger – 
particularly coming to these places.”

The visitors took a shock lead in the 12th minute when Uche Ikpeazu showed his 
strength on the edge of the area and slid the ball through to striker Lauri 
Dalla Valle who managed to get beyond the Blades’ defence before shooting 
firmly home.

Ten minutes into the second half and the Blades were level. Jamie Murphy 
danced down the left and put in a low ball to Jason Holt who swivelled and shot 
home from an angle for his second goal in as many games.

Chris Basham headed against the post for United before Murphy curled the ball 
across goal but the Blades’ fans held their collective breath when Howard was 
forced to go down to his left to save a low shot.

However, that was not the end of it from Crewe. There seemed to be little 
danger for the hosts when Colclough received the ball from Jamie Ness on the 
left but he turned and unleashed the winner prompting a mass exodus from 
Bramall Lane.

Nigel Clough did not attempt to hide his disappointment, especially having 
seen his side beat Port Vale and Scunthorpe in the past week. The Sheffield 
United manager said: “Having had two home wins in the week, to lose a third one 
in the manner we did is incredibly disappointing. We shouldn’t be losing those 
games.

“We are not negative but you can take your draws and have more points on the 
board if you don’t lose as we did in the 90th minute today.”

He added that they were “a little bit unlucky with the goal. Two deflections – 
one to get the corner and then the strike has deflected off the top of 
someone’s head taking it past Mark Howard when he has had so little to do in 
the second half as well.

“It is very, very disappointing. But Crewe are capable of doing that – we 
talked about it this week. They are capable of doing that to anybody in the 
league. I don’t think anybody played anywhere near as well as they did Tuesday.”
 