
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> 
continued to rule the roost over their South Yorkshire rivals Rotherham as they 
registered a 2-1 Championship win at New York Stadium.

The Owls, who stretched their unbeaten run to nine games in all competitions, 
extended their even better record against the Millers in away league matches 
thanks to a five-minute two-goal salvo at the start of the second half.

Lucas João put them ahead 34 seconds after the restart and Fernando Forestieri 
made it two in the 50th minute, ensuring the Owls remain unbeaten atRotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> in the league since 1976.

Tom Thorpe’s consolation at the end did little to mask a poor Rotherham 
performance that outlined the uphill task the new manager, Neil Redfearn, has 
in keeping them in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> as he is yet to taste 
victory in three games.

The red-hot atmosphere before kick-off gave hope that a barnstorming derby was 
on the way but it did not start off that way. Both teams were hindered by a 
lack of quality and clear-cut chances were at a premium.

Rotherham perhaps had the better of the opening 35 minutes, with Jonson 
Clarke-Harris having an effort from distance that tested Kieren Westwood’s 
handling.

But Wednesday finished the half the stronger as they had two chances to take 
the lead, with Barry Bannan heading over at the end of a counter-attack before 
Kieran Lee fired over from another quick break.

However, Wednesday needed soon took the lead after the break. Forestieri 
nicked possession off Thorpe in the penalty area and drove in a low shot which 
Lee Camp could only push out to the grateful João, who had the simplest of 
tap-ins.

If the Millers’ keeper could have done better for the first goal, he was 
solely at fault for Wednesday’s second five minutes later. The former 
Bournemouth man meekly fumbled Daniel Pudil’s header from a corner and 
Forestieri was on hand for another tap-in from close range.

Wednesday were rampant and Joao should have had another but he fired over from 
eight yards.

Rotherham eventually stemmed the tide and tried to muster some sort of 
response but they never looked like reducing the arrears as Wednesday’s 
defence, marshalled by Glenn Loovens, had as trouble-free an evening as they 
could have wished for.

Indeed it was Wednesday who had further opportunities, with the enterprising 
Bannan blazing over the best of them before placing another one wide.

Thorpe did find the back of the net as he converted Chris Maguire’s free-kick 
with the final action but there was little for the Millers’ supporters to cheer 
as they suffered more derby disappointment.
 