
Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> have 
awarded a professional contract to a former Thai refugee, Kler Heh, after the 
18-year-old impressed in his third trial for the club.

Born in the Umpiem Mai Refugee Camp, he and his family of ethnic Karens, a 
minority group who have faced oppression in Myanmar, had already failed with 
their attempts to move to Australia and seemed destined never to escape the 
depressing camp environment.

“You can’t really get out, nobody has a passport to go into Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand> and go out like a normal human 
would,” Kler explained.

Sheffield United to drop Jessica Ennis-Hill’s name from Bramall Lane stand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/16/sheffield-united-jessica-ennis-hill-stand-estate-agent>
But in 2006, a small group from the camp, including Kler and five family 
members, were resettled in Sheffield as part of the United Nations gateway 
protection programme.

Unable to speak the language, Kler took to the sanctuary of football once 
again, playing for school teams and in Sunday leagues. Friends told him of the 
Football Unites Racism Divides group, which helped Kyle Walker on his way to 
becoming an England international, and he went along and impressed.

Two nerve-filled trials at Sheffield United, where Walker also started, came 
and went before Kler was finally taken on by the club’s academy at the third 
attempt and has impressed coaches.

“I would love to play in the Premier League one day but at present my goal is 
to impress [the manager] Nigel Adkins and [Under-21 coach] Chris Morgan, and 
repay Sheffield United for the faith that they have shown to me,” he told 
Reuters.

“But I am an ambitious player and I would love to and one day be the captain 
of either Myanmar or Thailand at international level and as I grow play at the 
highest level possible the Premier League and Champions League.”

Kler is a skilful winger who will play in United’s Under-21 side this year and 
push for first-team opportunities with the Blades, who made the semi-finals of 
the League Cup last season but narrowly missed out on promotion back to the 
second tier.

“Trying to progress through the academy ranks is a tough challenge on its 
own,” said United’s academy manager Nick Cox. “Kler has done this at the same 
time as having to learn a new language and adapt to an unfamiliar culture. It 
has been an incredible achievement to be awarded with a professional contract 
at the club.”

Kler, now holding a British passport, went back to Thailand in 2012 to visit 
family and friends at the refugee camp, which is home to almost 13,000 people.

He said he is happy to carry the weight of expectation for all back home in a 
region obsessed with the Premier League and desperate to see one of their own 
play in the lucrative league for the first time.

“I know that I am representing myself, my family, friends and everyone in 
Myanmar and Thailand,” Kler said. “I want to be a positive role model and a 
symbol of hope that there is life outside the refugee camps.”
 