
This was a Friday the 13th Brighton & Hove Albion will not forget in a hurry. 
Statistics suggest a third-placed finish is anything but a curse in the 
Championship play-offs but after leaving the first leg of their semi-final 
against a rampantSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> four men and two 
goals down they might not believe it.

Six of the previous 10 sides to finish third have been promoted. But Brighton 
have it all to do to make it seven from 11 with their crocked quartet – Connor 
Goldson, Tomer Hemed, Steve Sidwell and Anthony Knockaert – unlikely to feature 
in the second leg on Monday night, according to their manager Chris Hughton. 
They will have well-taken Ross Wallace and Kieran Lee goals to claw back at the 
Amex Stadium, and must do so without the suspended midfielder Dale Stephens.

A week ago, Brighton’s season was still fizzing. They entered their 46th 
league match at Middlesbrough with the chance to secure a place in the top 
flight for the first time since 1983. After managing onlya draw on Teesside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/middlesbrough-promoted-premier-league-draw-brighton-boro>
, they had only six days to come to terms with the disappointment of missing 
out on a top-two finish. No side in the second tier has ever lost so few 
matches as their five and not been promoted automatically. Now, with 
disappointments stacking up, they are battling to stop it going completely flat.

Sheffield Wednesday v Brighton: Championship play-off semi-final - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/13/sheffield-wednesday-v-brighton-championship-play-off-semi-final-live>
The balance of power in the tie was obvious as Hillsborough’s Kop rocked more 
vigorously at the final whistle than just about any time in the 16 years since 
Wednesday’s exit from the Premier League. Not that either manager was 
anticipating a straightforward conclusion.

“I am always confident when we play at home,” said Hughton. “We are realistic 
enough to know it’s a tough task, Sheffield Wednesday are a good team, as we 
knew before this game, but it is something that can be achieved. We can draw 
something from the fact that we limited their goals with 10 men. Now let’s try 
to make it a night to remember at the Amex.”

Teams sent out by Carlos Carvalhal –whose transformation of Wednesday has 
drawn crowds in excess of 30,000 – do not sit back. “We are happy with the 
score, of course, but we have won nothing,” the Portuguese said. “The first of 
two games has finished, now we must play the second part, and we will try to 
play it as if it was 0-0.”

The side he sent out on home turf, in contrast to their opponents, had been 
energised by the events of the final day of the season. While Brighton began 
without Stephens and Lewis Dunk, their defensive rock, Wednesday were at full 
strength and able to field a completely different XI to the team that were 
defeated in the dead rubber at Wolverhampton Wanderers last Saturday.

“We headed into these games physically and emotionally fresh and this is a 
good sign,” Carvalhal added. “Our teams tend to finish seasons strongly.”

As if to emphasise his point, Wednesday tore out of the blocks. Fernando 
Forestieri had already caused penalty area panic on a couple of occasions when 
he had a goal disallowed for offside in the 20th minute. Latching onto Kieren 
Westwood’s raking clearance, he arrowed the ball beyond David Stockdale’s left 
hand and into the bottom corner. Celebrations were 30 seconds old before it 
became apparent that the referee, Andre Marriner, following advice from his 
fellow officials, had ruled it out. Wednesday’s top scorer was yards offside 
from Westwood’s initial clearance and no one subsequently touched the ball on 
to the forward. Hillsborough voiced its displeasure.

But momentum swung back Wednesday’s way when Hemed and Goldson departed to 
muscle injuries late in the first half. Brighton barely had time to reorganise 
before going behind.

Hull City’s David Meyler: ‘This team are 100% more talented than in 2013’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/david-meyler-hull-city-derby-county-championship-play-offs>
Gary Hooper swept the ball out to the right flank to launch a counterattack 
and, instead of heading for the outside, Wallace cut infield on his left foot 
and unleashed a ferocious 25-yard drive past Stockdale.

Further disruption followed for Brighton the other side of the interval as the 
on-loan Stoke City midfielder Sidwell hit the turf. Hughton opted to throw on 
the Towell. It was some occasion for Richie Towell, a 24-year-old former Irish 
youth international, to make his debut. The towel could have gone in on the 
hour when Knockaert jarred his knee.

With all three substitutes already made, Brighton played with 10 men for the 
final half-hour for the second time inside a week. Sensing an opportunity, 
Carvalhal re-shaped his own side. The reshuffle forced Forestieri into more of 
a No10 role and it was from the pocket between Brighton’s defence and midfield 
that he threaded the assist to Kieran Lee, who picked his spot and finished 
with the precision of a striker to get Wednesday dreaming of an end to their 
16-year top-flight absence.
 