
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday>, 
to the general astonishment of everyone outside South Yorkshire, have a foot in 
the Premier League. Carlos Carvalhal’s side fought a rearguard action in East 
Sussex last night and it is they and not the team that finished 15 points above 
them in the Championship who will go to Wembley next week to, almost certainly, 
face Hull City in the division’s play-off final.

Brighton 1-1 Sheff Wed (agg 1-3): Championship playoff semi-final – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/16/brighton-v-sheffield-wednesday-championship-playoff-semi-final-live>
Tony Bloom, the Brighton chairman, had urged the home crowd to make the Amex 
Stadium a “cauldron of noise”. That they did, but at the final whistle came the 
silent recognition that their season was over. No team since the first world 
war has only lost five games in the regular season and not been promoted from 
English football’s second tier and Brighton finished level on points with 
promoted Middlesbrough only nine days earlier. Life and these play-offs can be 
cruel.

Lewis Dunk gave Brighton hope with a goal that came in a period of incessant 
home pressure as the Seagulls attempted to claw back a two-goal deficit from 
the first leg when they lost four players to injury. But Ross Wallace, one of 
Wednesday’s scorers last week, scored an equaliser out of nothing.

Brighton, who have been in the play-offs for three of the last four seasons, 
certainly had their chances to become the first team ever to overturn a 
two-goal disadvantage in theseChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> play-offs. It was one-way 
traffic before the interval but in the second half, with the game becoming 
bad-tempered and the referee Roger East constantly reaching for his yellow 
card, Brighton ran out of steam.

Wednesday are a tough side to break down and Steve Bruce’s Hull, who have a 
three-goal advantage over Derby County on Tuesday, will not relish facing them 
on Saturday week. Their Portuguese manager Carvalhal, in his first season at 
the club, says his team will not be overawed at Wembley.

“This has been a fantastic season for Brighton and they deserve promotion – 
but then so do we,” he said. “We have played better and better as the season 
has gone on. We were not at our best tonight and Brighton caused us a lot of 
problems in the first half but after half-time we stopped the dynamism of their 
attackers.

“The club is a sleeping giant but it is waking up and we are making history. 
We know we will be underdogs but we also know we have a 50-50 chance of making 
it to the Premier League.”

Before last night its seemed Brighton’s manager Chris Hughton faced a 
challenge getting 11 fit players on the pitch. At Hillsborough last week they 
were forced to play the last half hour with 10 men after four key players left 
the pitch with injuries, including their leading scorer Tomer Hemed. 
Astonishingly, Anthony Knockaert, who had been carried off on a stretcher, 
started this game. And the Frenchman, a key January signing for Hughton (who 
was ironically named Championship manager of the season on Monday night), 
caused Wednesday no end of problems before the interval. Knockaert says he was 
drawing inspiration from his former team-mates at Leicester City and it showed.

He almost scored with a free-kick that cannoned off Keiren Westwood’s post and 
when he swung over a free-kick for Dunk to score at the far post after a period 
of incessant pressure it seemed that a glorious comeback was on. But Brighton 
continued to spurn good chances, two of them to James Wilson, and suddenly 
Wednesday were back in the game.

Wallace found some space on the right, swung over a hopeful cross to nobody in 
particular and the ball drifted past David Stockdale into the far corner. Even 
then there was a sense of injustice from the Brighton players who said Dunk was 
being impeded by Gary Hooper.

Hughton said: “There was a foul on Dunk and decisions like that and the red 
card for Dale Stephens at Middlesbrough have cost us dear. The changing-room is 
distraught and the disappointment massive. It was almost impossible to keep up 
the intensity of the first half for 90 minutes. It is very tough to go so 
close.”
 