
Sales of Grandma’s favourite Christmas tipple, sherry, have slumped in the 
past decade.

Sherry and port have been losing out to more fashionable drinks such as 
sparkling wine and gin, both of which have seen booming sales this year.

Sales of sherry fell to 10m bottles last year in the UK, less than half the 
22m sold in 2005, and the pace of decline has stepped up in the past year, 
according to theWine <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wine> and Spirit 
Trade Association (WSTA).

The year of gin! Spirit enjoys record sales as drinking habits change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/08/gin-record-sales-2016-drown-sorrows>
Sales of fortified wine, which also includes port, vermouth and madeira, fell 
by 5% in the year to 5 November, to 315 hectolitres, and the pace of decline 
rose to 7% in the last three months of that period.

Sales of fortified wine in restaurants and bars was also down in the three 
months to October, by 4% year on year, a turnaround from growth seen earlier in 
the year.

Fine sherries, such as the drier fino and manzanilla styles popular in Spain, 
have seen strong growth in recent years, boosted by a trend for sherry bars and 
tapas. Sainsbury’s said its sales of premium sherries were up 14% year on year. 
But sales of traditional cream sherries, which far outsell the other types – 
particularly at Christmas – have ebbed.

A spokesman for market researcher Wine Intelligence said sherry sales were 
down as “the generation raised on cream sherry is growing smaller and fortified 
wines are relegated to bottom shelves hidden from view”. Its research shows 
that just 10% of 25- to 34-year-olds drink sherry compared with 34% of over-65s.

The WSTA blames falling sales on increasing taxation. It says that since 2007, 
fortified wine duty has increased by 53%, adding £1 to a bottle of port or 
sherry. The industry is likely to come under further pressure from the fall in 
the value of the pound, which makes importing wine from Europe more expensive.


Miles Beale, chief executive of the WSTA, called on the government to cut back 
taxes on fortified wine: “Whether it’s the sherry shared as an aperitif or left 
out for Santa, a port to accompany the cheese course at the end of Christmas 
lunch or vermouth shaken or stirred in a classic martini – these drinks have 
been enjoyed by the British for centuries. It would be incredibly sad to see 
the British traditions associated with these drinks, which have been passed 
down through the generations, disappear.”
 