
The dilemma My mother-in-law is rude and offensive. My husband and I have been 
together over 10 years, and I have coped by biting my tongue and tolerating her 
attacks because he says if we call her out, she will stop calling, visiting 
etc. Recently she said something about my family that I couldn’t ignore. My 
husband asked her to apologise, which she did, but she blamed me for being too 
sensitive. Now she is, in essence, sulking. My problem is that she sees very 
little of our children as it is. They adore her, and she adores them, so I 
don’t want this relationship to suffer. What do I do? I can’t tolerate insults 
any longer, yet my children deserve a close relationship with their grandmother.

Mariella replies That’s very wise and also sensible of you. You won’t be the 
first or last daughter-in-law to suffer the sharp end of a mother-in-law’s 
tongue. That said, it’s all too easy to slip into a siege state with such 
inherited relationships and display more vulnerability than you would in other 
situations.

From our beginnings in the playground we all, with varying degrees of success, 
learn to develop a thick hide. It’s necessary with family, too – sometimes even 
more so. I’m amused by how many grandparents I see get away with murder as they 
embrace the power of their returned indispensability in a working world. 
Instead of patronising them as dusty relics, engaging with grandparents and 
keeping them sweet(ish) has become essential for the many who rely on them for 
liberation from the kids. Don’t think they don’t know it! With age comes the 
boundary-pushing mischievousness of the toddler. I’ve seen plenty of 
septuagenarians, and older, with a wicked gleam in their eye manipulate an 
adult child for attention or just for devilment, pushing them to the edge of 
their tolerance and beyond the limits of their sense of humour.

What is called for is a degree of pragmatism and compromise. There are few 
insults I wouldn’t put up with for a few guilt-free days of granny-and-child 
bonding while I absent myself. Left with professionals, my own kids moan, groan 
and threaten to call ChildLine. A week with their grandparents, on the other 
hand, and they can’t get their father and me out fast enough. Part of the 
appeal has to be this return to devil-may-care immaturity that adds spice to 
life at a time when it would otherwise be losing its zest. Whether it’s plying 
their charges with sweets, letting them stay up late or tearing up your 
carefully planned activity timetable the minute you wave them goodbye, 
grandparents thrive on thwarting your wishes, sniping at your shortcomings and 
behaving as though the world belongs only to them. I admit to some admiration 
for this exaggerated and infuriating commitment to pleasing themselves.

Increasingly our parents are filling a void not just when it comes to 
childcare but also the sort of undistracted focus and fun once delivered by 
non-working and much younger parents. Manning the childcare chasm and spending 
quality time not glued to phones and chasing deadlines but watching 
inappropriate TV shows and scoffing prohibited biscuits, grandparents are the 
perfect playmates for our children. If biting your lip when the sniping starts 
is the only cost, I’m tempted to say it’s worth it. Just as we shouldn’t care 
about insults levelled by strangers on social media, nor should we allow jibes 
closer to home to hit their mark. Simply because they can provide a saintly 
service and a rewarding relationship with grandchildren doesn’t mean they 
themselves are saints.

In fact, bad attitudes or unfettered tongues seem to be one of the liberating 
qualities of today’s late-lifers, as though the closer they get to the end the 
more they have to say about what they’re leaving behind. Much of it is less 
than complimentary. Plenty of our closest relatives are far from the human 
beings we’d wish them to be (and no doubt vice versa). That’s where a pragmatic 
and self-serving sensibility comes in. We are not delicate creatures tied to 
the kitchen sink any more but hard-pressed, active combatants in the big wide 
world. That means we have to learn to take slights less personally, thicken our 
skins and do what men have learned over millennia: make pleasing yourself your 
main priority.

You have a grandmother who can be most useful, so take advantage of all the 
positive elements she has to offer and turn a blind ear and eye to her insults 
as you would someone half her size. One day you, too, will have a headful of 
opinions formed over a long life and a smaller group of people willing, or 
alive, to listen to them. Put yourself in her shoes, and just remember that 
“sticks and stones will break my bones but words will never hurt me”. Then hand 
over some ice-cream money and send them all out so you can have a long, hot, 
luxurious bath in peace.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 