
The dilemma I’ve always had a difficult relationship with my mother. She has 
mental health problems, few friends and feuds with family members. She was 
physically abusive and mentally controlling when I was young. When I was 16 she 
pushed me out of a car because I was 10 minutes late to meet her. If things 
break she won’t get them fixed. Her washing machine broke 15 years ago and she 
has been hand washing ever since, resulting in RSI.

I went to university, got therapy and “moved on”, although I had self-esteem 
issues and an eating disorder as a teen. In my 20s I tried to have a 
relationship with her, but my tolerance for her obsessive behaviour has 
lowered. I met my husband four years ago and she took an angry dislike to him – 
since then our relationship has deteriorated. It’s been more than a year since 
we’ve been in contact.

Now I’m pregnant and others expect me to make amends. I feel little compulsion 
to do this. Maybe it’s better to live without her to protect my child and 
myself.

Mariella replies This is so tricky. I’d love to say that life is short, we 
need to forgive and forget and family is ultimately all we have. But I don’t 
think that’s true. Often family can be the spring from which our troubles spill 
forth.

Having a baby doesn’t turn you into a perfect parent, or even a 
better-functioning human being. In many respects it can exacerbate character 
flaws that already exist. All the experiences you carry from childhood will 
heavily influence how you parent. There may be no such thing as a perfect 
parent, just as there is no such thing as a perfect human being, but some take 
their dysfunction to heights from which it is impossible to return.

You’ve had a pretty rough childhood and it’s no wonder you’ve tried to escape. 
I’m in admiration for the strength of character you’ve shown in getting to 
university, tackling your emotional residue and embracing a life seemingly not 
too much mired down in past problems. Another test of your resilience would be 
your ability to maintain an emotional distance while continuing to have a 
semblance of a relationship with your mother.

Drop her a card and leave it to her to reply. If it comes with emotional 
tripwires step away

Turning your back and severing contact is sometimes the only path, but it can 
also be the easiest. It offers a form of escape, but no resolution; it just 
means you don’t need to cope with behavioural problems and emotional triggers 
that are your mother’s legacy. It also means you’ll never really know what was 
at the root of her unhappiness, or come to understand what made her the person 
she has become. The latter is a potential key to confronting your own foibles 
and fairly apportioning blame. Curiosity is one reason to try to forge a new, 
less emotionally fraught connection and, interestingly, your baby may do the 
work for you.

Grandchildren often develop an entirely independent connection with 
grandparents, enjoying a harmony with the adults we found impossible to live 
with. Without responsibility for the young life in their orbit, but enhanced by 
the pleasure of seeing themselves reflected, love can swing both directions in 
a fairly unconditional way. Vicariously it can be a healing balm for raw sores.

The most important question is how robust you feel about your own mental 
health at the moment. Pregnant with your first child is no time to take on 
additional emotional challenges and if that is all a rekindled relationship 
with your mother has to offer I’d be inclined to make yourself the priority. 
Familiarity does not come with a right to continue bad patterns of behaviour 
down the decades. It’s possible that this period of estrangement has given your 
mother time to contemplate her relationship with her daughter; it’s also 
possible that she hasn’t given it a second thought.

I’d be tempted to drop her a simple, kind card, letting her know you are all 
well, that you are having a baby and that you miss her. Then leave it to her to 
respond, and if it comes fraught with emotional tripwires step away and 
consider your duty done. If, on the other hand, your olive branch elicits a 
reply that feels it’s carried on a conciliatory wind, tentatively step further 
towards her. Ultimately it’s all down to you. Parenting gives you no rights 
over your children. At a certain point your relationship with them will be 
defined not by guilt but by the good times. If that bonding base never existed, 
ranting and raving about duty, responsibility or devotion is just specious 
noise.

As in a romance, the quality of blood relationships depends on all parties. 
They need to be invested in and nurtured in order to flourish. You can’t 
torture a child for 20 years and then expect them to support you 
unconditionally in old age. There’s no debt due, but there’s much pleasure to 
be gleaned watching your child enjoy an independent relationship with their 
grandparent. I’d give her a chance just to see if she deserves it.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 