
The Shrewsbury Town manager, Micky Mellon, paid tribute to the returning Andy 
Mangan after the striker’s winner dumpedCardiff City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> of the Championship out of 
the FA Cup.

Mangan signed for a second spell with Shrewsbury last week and his 62nd-minute 
header put the League One club into the fourth-round draw. The 29-year-old left
Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> in the summer, 
with the club unable to afford to keep him, but made the switch back from 
Tranmere Rovers to link up with Mellon once again.

Tottenham’s Harry Kane spot-on to deny Leicester and Shinji Okazaki
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/tottenham-hotspur-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
It sparked a turn in fortunes for Mellon’s side, who lost 7-1 at Chesterfield 
on 2 January, Shrewsbury’s worst result since 1962.

Mellon said: “More so than getting through to the fourth round, we owed a lot 
of people a lot of things after the performance last Saturday. We showed a huge 
amount of character to come to a club like Cardiff and get a result. I’ve 
signed Andy three times, so you can say I’m pretty keen on him. He’s a great 
talent and a great player and someone who should have played a lot more games 
at a higher level.

“It was tough to let him go in the summer. This club’s had some tough times 
and this is the fourth time I have had to rebuild the team. It’s a bit 
ridiculous and frustrating at the same time but hopefully we can get settled 
now and move forward. We have to try and build on this result and hit the 
standards we have set.”

Mangan had almost put the visitors in front inside a minute but his shot was 
blocked by Bruno Manga. Sammy Ameobi hit the post for the home side in the 
first half but they wasted several good chances.

Mangan’s winner came just after the hour mark when he rose to meet Scott 
Vernon’s ball from the left. The Cardiff defender Manga could have earned a 
replay in injury time but he sent a free header wide of the post from Peter 
Whittingham’s corner.

The Cardiff manager, Russell Slade, said: “I’m disappointed. There was enough 
ammunition out there to get the desired result. Sometimes you lose that little 
bit of continuity but statistically it’s 64% possession and 27 shots. We had 
chances to score but we didn’t take those opportunities unfortunately.

“It was an opportunity for those players to impress – the ones who haven’t had 
so much football recently. They’ll feel let down themselves – that’s the 
important thing. Have they done themselves justice when they’ve been given the 
opportunity by the manager?

“We’re all accountable. As manager, I’m accountable but players are also 
accountable for their own performance out on the pitch. Even though they’ve not 
had the benefit of playing together as a unit or as an XI for any length of 
time, you’re still looking for a better performance than that.”
 