
The head of Silverstone’s management team has welcomed the result of the EU 
referendum and urged Britain’s next prime minister to get behind motorsport in 
the wake of Brexit.

Patrick Allen, managing director of the Silverstone circuit, venue of Sunday’s 
British Grand Prix <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>, 
said: “Brexit could help us because if we are out of Europe then European state 
aid rules can now be forgotten about and the government can look at whether it 
should be funding the industry of motorsport that has tens of thousands of jobs 
at stake and contributes tens of billions to the UK economy. We ourselves 
contribute £80m to the economy. So this is a good thing to support.

Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg given ‘final warning’ by Mercedes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/07/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-not-subject-team-orders-mercedes>
“We are the only race on the Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> circuit that doesn’t receive 
either benefactor money or government money.”

With either Theresa May or Andrea Leadsom to be confirmed as Britain’s new PM 
in the next few weeks, Allen is getting his plea in early.

He added: “We should be investing in what Britain has always been, at the 
vanguard of innovation and technology, and there is no greater example than 
motorsport. The government should take a serious look at it. Formula One is 
just a tiny piece of the iceberg of British motor racing as an industry.”

Silverstone has a deal in place to host the British Grand Prix until 2026, 
though a clause in the contract means that Formula One’s chief executive, 
Bernie Ecclestone, could take the race away in 2019.

In the short term though, Allen, who has transformed Silverstone in less than 
two years at the helm, driving up attendance figures and adding extra 
entertainments, admits that Brexit could have had a negative effect on this 
year’s ticket sales, which are down on last year.

“Sales have still been good but I think Brexit has made a few think about 
money and whether they will have a job.

“The high and lower ends have not been affected but the squeezed middle, who 
would be paying £250 for a grandstand ticket, might be thinking about whether 
they need to spend that money. The uncertainty around Brexit might be 
paralysing some people’s spending. Uncertainty is not a good thing when it 
comes to people spending money”

Sunday’s race will also be up against the men’s Wimbledon final and the final 
of Euro 2016. But Allen added: “General admission is way up on last year and 
our corporate hospitality is pretty much sold out.”

Lewis Hamilton boo-boys may bring out the beast in British GP fans again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/08/lewis-hamilton-british-gp-fans-nico-rosberg-f1>
Allen has also urged spectators to get behind Lewis Hamilton this weekend. 
“Lewis will be coming to Silverstone just a few points behind Nico Rosberg, 
after Austria. So it could be Silverstone, his home grand prix, that tilts it 
for him and puts him in the lead, which could springboard his fourth world 
title, which would be fantastic. And he likes this circuit. It suits his 
aggressive style.”

But Allen feels that more drivers should follow Hamilton’s style and do more 
to promote the sport. He said: “I like Lewis’s rather irreverent attitude 
towards the establishment. He’s got a personality and he’s not afraid to show. 
He will do his music stuff and be seen with the stars and all the rest of it. 
What do people know about Kimi Raikkonen or Max Verstappen?

“In the old days we had James Hunt with a wreath round his neck and a 
cigarette in his mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/08/lewis-hamilton-british-gp-fans-nico-rosberg-f1>
 and a bottle of beer in his hand and that image was something people could 
associate with. We miss a few characters.

“Look at Nascar. Their drivers are like rock stars. Valentino Rossi is like a 
rock star. Where are the rock stars in Formula One? Lewis is the only one.

“The drivers make a lot of money from fans buying their merchandise and 
following them. They have a duty to say to their teams and to F1 that they are 
going out there and sign autographs and get on stage and show the colour of 
their personalities, instead of hiding behind their helmets.”
 