
The organisers of the British Grand Prix have encouraged all fans to turn up 
for Sunday's race, after extremely heavy rainfall over the preceding days 
during practice and qualifying had threatened the ability of the circuit at
Silverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> to cope with the 
arrival of, and specifically the car parking for, fans.

Late on Friday the Silverstone managing director, Richard Phillips, had taken 
the highly unusual decision to request that fans who had public car parking 
tickets stay away from the circuit for qualifying on Saturday in a bid to 
ensure the car parks would be fit for use on race day.

But despite having endured an exceptionally wet qualifying session, organisers 
took the decision on Saturday afternoon that the fields used for car parking 
were in a fit state and issued a new statement encouraging all fans to attend 
the race.

"We had to make a really difficult decision yesterday, which was upsetting, 
but today has been a much better day," Phillips said. "We're very grateful to 
the people who did stay at home. This has given us some breathing space now. 
We're looking forward to tomorrow."

The traffic problems that had been particularly poor on Friday – with some 
campsites being too wet to accommodate guests and others experiencing 
difficulties in moving camper vans on to their sites – appear also to have 
improved.

Fewer campers turn up as the weekend progresses and the circuit advises that 
there is no availability for camping on race day. "Pretty much all the camping 
population is in the vicinity now," Phillips said.

The circuit has received considerable criticism over the previous two days and 
Phillips himself was close to tears when announcing that fans should stay away 
but was clearly cheered by the decision that will allow the race to be enjoyed 
by potentially a full house.

He was also optimistic that the circuit and its staff would be making every 
effort, but added that fans could still do their bit. "It will be challenging," 
Phillips said. "We're hoping people come early. We'd like lift-sharing.

"If you've got a bike, come on that. 4x4s are very welcome, horses, pack 
animals. Seriously, we've made some provisions but it will be challenging. The 
fans seem to have been very supportive and we're going to give it a good go."

As a general rule fans are advised to come early and delay leaving immediately 
after the race. Organisers had offered a refund to anyone who chose not to come 
on Saturday and Phillips said the process for receiving it would begin soon.

"We don't know how many people were affected. We'll be putting out a form next 
week," he said.
 