
Formula One fans are being invited to join in the celebration of the 50th 
British Grand Prix <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> at 
Silverstone in July with new viewing areas and a display of historic cars.

Race organisers had already said that they would open up the pitlane on the 
Thursday before the race, and on the Friday it has been announced that the 
centre of the circuit will be available to spectators for the first time since 
2003. The Centre Access pass will open new viewing points, including the inside 
of Copse corner.

The centre will feature a 50th Grand Prix Heritage Paddock, with a display of 
winning cars from the previous 49 races, including Nigel Mansell's winning 
Williams from 1987 and Lewis Hamilton's McLaren from 2008.

Silverstone's managing director Richard Phillips said: "Our loyal fans are 
incredibly important to us and we are constantly looking at ways to give them 
an even better experience.

"Tickets sales were slow early on but they really picked up after Bahrain and 
when Lewis started winning. It really helps when a British driver is up there 
and hopefully in with a chance of winning the championship.

"Since Lewis winning we have got things pretty much in line with where we 
expected them to be. It's a demonstration that the new formula is starting to 
be a success."

Meanwhile, Derek Warwick, the president of the British Racing Drivers Club, 
who will be hosting theSilverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> race on 4-6 July, has come to 
the defence of the quieter sound of the new 1.6litre V6 engines. He said: "I 
want to combat the negativity. We have gone from high-revving, ear-bleeding, 
ear-piercing V8s to a turbo. When I was a steward in Bahrain I went I went down 
to one of the corners and the braking zone and I thought they were fantastic.

"For the last few years they have been Scalextric cars, the drivers were still 
fantastic and that's taking nothing away from four-times champion Sebastian 
Vettel, but now drivers are being challenged. The cars have high power and low 
downforce. It's much more exciting to watch."
 