
The funniest book I’ve ever read 

The Timewaster Letters by Robert Popper. I laughed so hard I fell off the 
toilet.

The funniest meal I’ve ever eaten 

Chicken surprise. I cook it for my wife and children sometimes; the surprise 
is… there’s no chicken. Still makes me laugh.

The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 

Nearly 30 years ago, I was at the Comedy Store and there was an American comic 
on. I’d been mildly amused, and thenJerry Sadowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/jerry-sadowitz> came on, like a raging 
gargoyle made flesh, and said: “I fucking hate fucking American comics like 
fucking” – and named the bloke – “they come over here and say things like: 
‘Have you ever noticed how blind people can’t do crosswords?’” And then he was 
off, telling jokes at such speed that waves of different audience reaction 
criss-crossed the room: people would be still laughing at one joke while others 
were being appalled by the next.

The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen 

Brass Eye: not only was it hilarious at the time, but it also made watching 
the actual news from then on a hoot.

The funniest item of clothing I’ve ever owned 

I built an electric suit; tiny lightbulbs all over, powered by batteries with 
a switch in the pocket. I wore it in Prague just after the Berlin Wall came 
down and would walk round galleries self-illuminating if I liked a painting. 
Later that evening, in a club, I lit up whenever I saw a girl I fancied. It 
didn’t work, proving once and for all women are significantly different from 
moths.

The funniest hairstyle I’ve ever had 

An inverse mohican.

The funniest sketch I’ve ever seen 

One I wrote myself for BBC2’s Attention Scum. It wasn’t much on paper: a man 
runs around shouting “What am I?” at the sky over and over again for ages, then 
a booming voice from above answers: “You are curious”; and the man says: “Yes, 
but why? Why? Why?” But the performance of it by Kevin Eldon had me crying with 
laughter to such an extent I had to throw myself in a hedge so as not to ruin 
the recording.

Simon Munnery is at Cutty Sark, SE10, Sat; Battersea Arts Centre, SW11, Wed; 
The Stand, Edinburgh, 4 to 29 Aug
 