
Kenneth Tynan famously wrote that 'I doubt if I could love anyone who did not 
wish to see Look Back in Anger '. As for me, I doubt if I could love anyone who 
didn't wish to see Singin ' in the Rain again and again and again. I first saw 
it in 1952 when at a very low ebb. They say you can't remember pain. But you 
can remember misery well enough and on the last day of my first six weeks of 
army basic training at Warrington's smog-shrouded, grime-encrusted Peninsula 
Barracks I felt terrible. The rough khaki uniform gave me a constant itch. 
Enforced daily shaving had created a painful rash for which a medical orderly 
gave me a foul ointment of a kind a vet might have prescribed for scrapie. My 
feet were blistered by square-bashing, my left shoulder bone bruised from 
supporting a rifle. I'd been sworn at and humiliated by sadistic sergeants and 
moronic corporals, and I still had 98 weeks left to serve.

After a farcical passing-out parade with a band playing the regimental march 
('God Bless the Prince of Wales') we were free for the rest of the day before 
moving on to another barracks for more of the same. My comrades-in-arms went 
off to the Naafi and I headed for the nearest cinema. As a member of 'HM Forces 
in uniform' (the H had recently switched from His to Her), I was admitted for 
ninepence (less than four pennies in today's money) and the movie wasSingin' in 
the Rain <https://www.theguardian.com/film/singin-in-the-rain> , which had been 
received with muted enthusiasm by the critics and everywhere compared 
unfavourably with On the Town, the previous film by the same production team.

So I wasn't expecting too much when I entered the continuous performance at 
the final point of the montage showing Hollywood's transition to sound - the 
song 'Beautiful Girl'. Immediately thereafter, singing star Don Lockwood (Gene 
Kelly) is reunited with ingenue Kathy Selden (Debbie Reynolds), they enter an 
empty sound stage where with the artifice of a cyclorama and a wind machine he 
creates a sunset and a light breeze to serenade her with the beautiful Arthur 
Freed-Nacio Herb Brown song 'You Were Meant for Me'. This was pure cinema, the 
most romantic thing I had ever seen. I was raised from the spiritual lower 
depths, my heavy army boots exchanged for ballet shoes as I imagined I was 
Kelly dancing with Reynolds.

I saw the movie to the end and sat through it twice more, thrilling to every 
scene. Donald O'Connor's 'Make 'em Laugh' was brilliant, but a little too close 
to Kelly's 'Be a Clown' in The Pirate (plagiarism by Arthur Freed or a homage 
to Cole Porter?) his duet with Kelly of 'Moses Supposes' is sublime. Kelly's 
pas seul of 'Singin' in the Rain' is magnificent, and I used to test my memory 
by recalling all the shops in the drenched Hollywood street. The 'Good Morning' 
routine, which revived Kelly, O'Connor and Reynolds after the disastrous 
preview the way I was rescued from my barrack-room blues, was sublime. The bit 
I had doubts about was the ambitious (pretentious?) 'Broadway Melody' sequence, 
an attempt to match the finale of An American in Paris, though I'm now inclined 
to excuse it as a postmodernist joke in the light of studio boss R.F. Simpson's 
comment that he'd have to see it before he could understand it.

I emerged from the cinema that evening elated, thinking of life outside and 
beyond the Army. The film made me want to emigrate to the States more than 
ever, to become an American. As a comic view of Hollywood, a metaphor for my 
fanciful notion of America, it perfectly complemented the tragic view of Billy 
Wilder's 1950 Sunset Boulevard. It confirmed my naive ambition to write about 
movies so I could share the joy they gave me and challenge the ignorance of 
Fleet Street reviewers and the grudging equivocations of Sight and Sound, to 
which I'd lately become a subscriber. The surprising thing is that as I saw 
Singin' in the Rain every couple of years over the next two decades, my love 
and admiration were enhanced rather than diminished.

When it at last appeared on TV my family taped the soundtrack, and we'd listen 
to the playback, recreating the images in our minds. Since the coming of the 
video cassette I've seen it more often, perhaps too easily. It is, to me, a 
perfect cocktail of wit, elegance, ebullience and grace, intoxication without a 
hangover, an innocent Eden to be visited by those well acquainted with good and 
evil. It's the movie I'd take to a desert island, the film I'd risk my life to 
save for posterity should the National Film Archive be consumed by flames.

If I were the Minister of Health, I'd see that chemists were well stocked with 
cassettes of Singin' in the Rain and encourage doctors to prescribe it for 
depressed patients. Does any work of art have a more agreeably therapeutic 
title?
 