
Having survived several crashes, including the one that forced his premature 
retirement from motor sport in 1962, Sir Stirling Moss's powers of recovery are 
undergoing another stern test following a potentially lethal accident at his 
home.

Moss, 80, suffered two broken ankles, four broken bones in his foot, skin 
abrasions and four chipped vertebrae when he fell down three floors of a lift 
shaft in his town house in Mayfair.

A statement from the Moss family said: "The door to the lift, that should have 
remained locked if the lift was not on the floor that it was called from, 
opened in error. He stepped into the narrow open shaft in the expectation that 
the lift would be present for him to walk into, as it should have been."

Moss, who won 16 grands prix but never the world championship, was taken to 
the Royal London Hospital before being moved to the Princess Grace Hospital, 
where he underwent surgery on both ankles, which were plated and pinned.

Lady Moss, Stirling's wife, stated: "This was a very unfortunate accident; it 
could have just as easily been another member of the family stepping into where 
the lift should have been. The family are very relieved that Stirling survived 
the fall, demonstrating that his body still has the same resilience to injury 
as it did in his racing days. He is comfortable and well on the road to 
recovery. It is expected that it will take up to six weeks for him to recover 
from his injuries."

Moss is extremely fortunate to have avoided head injuries within the narrow 
confines of a shaft designed to cater for a small lift capable of carrying just 
two people. The car of the lift – and nothing to do with the operation of the 
lift itself – was made of carbon fibre by the Williams F1 team at Moss's 
request.

It was typical of Moss's fascination with gadgets within a home that was ahead 
of its time 40 years ago when Moss introduced electronic controls for curtains, 
a heated toilet seat and remote filling of the bath. A dumb waiter formed the 
basis for the eventual conversion to a lift in order to avoid a spiral 
staircase which, despite Moss's spritely condition, was beginning to prove 
difficult to negotiate. Sir Stirling and Lady Moss are close friends of Lord 
and Lady Tebbit. The lift was also installed to accommodate Margaret Tebbit, 
confined to a wheelchair following the Brighton bombing in 1984.

Moss began racing in 1948 and took part in grands prix from the start of the 
world championship in 1950 until 1962, a period when accidents were 
commonplace. Moss had his fair share, largely due to the fragility of the 
equipment, but the most severe was a crash at Goodwood on Easter Monday 1962. 
Moss had to be cut from his Lotus and remained unconscious for six weeks. The 
Englishman returned to the cockpit a year later for a private test session but 
decided to quit because he was no longer driving instinctively.
 