
The mapping of the human genome is proceeding apace and producing 
extraordinary insights into previously inexplicable aspects of the human 
condition. Perhaps it will soon help us to understand on a more scientific 
basis why women and men are different, or why some people get hooked on 
crosswords while others cannot for the life of them see what they are about.

 It is still, for example, something of a mystery why the ranks of the world's 
leading mathematicians and chess players have always been so male-dominated. 
There is also an impression that the world of crosswords is also male-skewed.

 It is certainly true that, with distinguished exceptions, the overwhelming 
majority of our leading crossword compilers are men. On the Guardian, for 
example, only Audreus, Auster, Crispa and Plodge are women, out of the present 
regular team of about 25.

 We have done rather better with those who regularly compile the Quiptics here 
on the website, since Arachne, Beale, Hazard, Hectence and Moley are all women, 
and only Bonxie, Don Putnam and Troll are not. But this small advance of the 
sisters in one corner of the compiling world does not change the general 
picture. Certainly, with the exception of the Daily Telegraph, the crossword 
editors of all the London broadsheets (if we can still use that term) are men.

 My mailbag, however, does not support the view that crossword solvers are 
mostly men. I know of no proper research on this question (or for that matter, 
on the age distribution of crossword addicts), but my correspondence is pretty 
much 50/50. Perhaps the perception that solvers are mostly men comes from the 
fact that a person seen doing the crossword in a public place (in a train or in 
a pub, for example) is usually a man.

 This pattern is regularly reflected in what people say to me. A recent letter 
from Warwickshire included the following: "I like to start them in the pub, 
where I don't have access to reference sources. The same goes for the Saturday 
puzzle, which is something of a social event. These days it usually gets 
completed at home near the bookcase. I believe my fellow competitors give up at 
closing time, but they still enjoy it." By and large, women, for some reason, 
tend not to sit in pubs doing crosswords until closing time.
 _______________

The above description of a typical Warwickshire pub scene, while differing 
from what you see in the classic "bar of soap (3,6,6)"*, clearly represents how 
many (men at least) tackle the crossword. Which raises the question: how far 
should it be possible for the average punter on a good day to crack the 
crossword successfully without access to reference books?

 Compilers obviously have to use reference books in putting a puzzle together. 
And most crossword editors will allow a word to appear as a solution if it is 
in Chambers, though not necessarily in Collins. This does let in some pretty 
obscure words of a kind that would not easily (or indeed ever) come to mind in 
a pub in Warwickshire or anywhere else.

 Using Chambers as the yardstick legitimises, in particular, a fairly wide 
range of archaic (or even deader) words and of Scottish usages presumably not 
familiar in Warwickshire. But having to check up on a word or spelling in 
Chambers when you get home does not seem to be too much of a burden for such an 
intelligent body of persons such as Guardian crossword solvers.

 More of a problem lies in proper nouns. Chambers does not go in for them, but 
Collins does. My rule of thumb (ie I cannot swear that it will not be broken) 
is that a person can appear in a solution from Monday to Friday, provided that 
he or she is included in Collins. Thus, among six-lettered composers, Béla 
Bartók is obviously OK, as are Pierre Boulez and Friedrich von Flotow (even 
though to my shame I know nothing at all about them), but poor Arnold Ridley 
and Humphrey Searle are not.

 The Saturday prize crossword is rather different. Here, I think that 
searching a bit wider than Chambers and Collins can be part of the fun, 
provided that the clue is fair. There are now a number of books published to 
help the solver in this regard. Here is a small selection:

· Crossword Dictionary by Elaine Higgleton, Don Manley and Catherine Schwarz 
(Chambers)
· Crossword Lists by Anne Stibbs (Bloomsbury) 
· The Complete Crossword Companion by Jeremy Howard-Williams (Collins)
· People, Places and Things: The Ultimate Book of Lists by Michael Cader 
(Macmillan)
_______________

* The Rover's Return
 