
Slaven Bilic thinks Andy Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-carroll> is a “really brave man” 
after the West Ham striker’s gunpoint ordeal.

Carroll was targeted by armed motorcyclists who confronted him at a junction 
and attempted to rob him as he drove home from training on Wednesday.

The 27-year-old sped off and was pursued through the streets as he returned to 
West Ham’s Rush Green headquarters to seek the help of security staff.

Hammers manager Bilic revealed the rest of the squad were shocked at the news, 
but said Carroll was in good spirits despite the drama.

“He was brave because they asked for his watch with a gun, and he put the 
pedal down and he didn’t want to give him the watch,” said Bilic. So for me 
it’s not about the watch, but for me that’s very brave.

“He got chased for 15 or 20 minutes, it wasn’t like 10 seconds, so it was 
probably planned. I know that he was very brave to do what he did. He came back 
to the training ground and it stopped. But he’s good, he’s OK, he’s not in 
shock and he acted as a really brave man.

“We’re all asking him the questions about it and he’s smiling, he’s not in a 
state of shock. Of course he’s in a good environment now he knows its not going 
to happen now.

“When we heard it yesterday of course we were all shocked. Sometimes you hear 
about that happening in a foreign country, but it’s happening far away, but not 
England so we were all like ‘here inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> how is that possible’. Unfortunately it 
is a problem.”

West Ham have beefed up security at their training base but Bilic admitted 
there is little else that could be done to prevent players being targeted by 
thieves.

“What can they do? He didn’t go somewhere that it would be likely to come into 
those situations or problems - he just drove home from his work at the training 
ground to his house,” added Bilic.

“He was stopped a couple of minutes from his house so what can you do? What 
should they do? Live an isolated life or stop going to grocery stores or 
driving cars by themselves or have 10 bodyguards or whatever?

“To be fair it’s very good when the players want to be linked with normal 
people and the fans, to mix with them in pubs and all that after the games.

“The fans and the players love to feel that bond between themselves and if we 
lose that what’s the point in playing football at all?”

Carroll has been out injured since August but has had injections in a bid to 
speed up his recovery and Bilic hopes he will be back in action after the 
forthcoming international break.

“He will continue to do his rehab, he is progressing well, he’s back on the 
pitch,” said Bilic. “Not with us, but he’s running and had no negative reaction 
since he started his running. So in two weeks we are expecting him to be back 
on the pitch with us.”

The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
have confirmed officers were called to reports of an attempted robbery at 
gunpoint in nearby Chigwell, north-east London.


A Scotland Yard spokeswoman said: “Police were called at around 12.45 on 
Wednesday 2 November to reports of two males on motorcycles attempting to rob 
the driver of a car in Romford Road.

“The two men threatened the driver and intimated through gesture that they 
were in possession of a gun. The motorcyclists attempted to block the car as 
the driver sought to get away.

“The suspects rode off prior to the arrival of police. The driver of the car 
was spoken to and an allegation of attempted robbery was recorded.”

Officers from Redbridge CID are investigating and are yet to make any arrests, 
the Met said.
 