
The new Fulham manager, Slavisa Jokanovic, watched from the stands as the 
Cottagers enjoyed a 4-1 victory overRotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> at Craven Cottage.

Jokanovic agreed to return to England on Sunday night after the west London 
club negotiated the former Watford manager’s release from the Israeli side 
Maccabi Tel Aviv. He will be hoping this was a taste of things to come as his 
presence inspired Fulham to their firstChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> victory in 10 attempts.

Fulham name Slavisa Jokanovic as head coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/27/fulham-slavisa-jokanovic-head-coach>
Cauley Woodrow made the most of his first start of the season by scoring twice 
and providing another for Alexander Kacaniklic before Ross McCormack rounded 
off the scoring with his 15th goal of the campaign, with Farrend Rawson having 
drawn Rotherham level after Woodrow’s opener.

Jokanovic, due to be formally presented as manager on Wednesday, could not 
have enjoyed a much brighter start to life in charge as Woodrow took advantage 
of slack defending from the visitors to convert the first chance of the game 
after six minutes.

Scott Parker played a pass towards the edge of the area and McCormack stepped 
over the ball, leaving Woodrow through on goal as the forward kept his 
composure to round the goalkeeper, Lee Camp, and score his third goal of the 
campaign – and his first in four months since scoring in the reverse fixture.

Kacaniklic might have doubled the home side’s lead moments later with an 
angled drive that bounced just to the right of goal, before Rotherham were into 
their stride and went close four times in quick succession.

Ryan Fredericks spared the Fulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham>
 goalkeeper Andrew Lonergan’s blushes by heading Tony Andreu’s corner off the 
line, before Lonergan was called on to parry Lee Frecklington’s low drive to 
safety, with Danny Ward then having two efforts deflected just wide.

After 20 minutes the home side’s frailty against set pieces was exposed as 
their defence managed to block Kirk Broadfoot’s header from Joe Newell’s corner 
before Broadfoot’s partner in central defence rifled in a drive off the 
underside of the bar. The referee, Simon Hooper, was quick to adjudge Rawson’s 
effort had crossed the line before it bounced back into play.

A lull in proceedings followed before the visitors’ back-line switched off to 
the threat of Emerson Hyndman’s through-ball, but McCormack telegraphed his 
effort when through on goal and Camp saved to his left.

However McCormack did not rue his miss for long as he whipped in a superb low 
cross in the final minute of the half with Woodrow getting across Broadfoot to 
steer home.

Woodrow then turned provider after 59 minutes, making his way down the right 
before providing Kacaniklic with a simple finish from close range.

With a two-goal deficit to make up, the visitors threw caution to the wind but 
to no avail. Fulham had their fourth when McCormack chested down Dan Burn’s 
header and swivelled to fire in a fine strike after 69 minutes that completed 
the scoring.
 