
Before West Ham United’s latest and perhaps most impressive away win, over 
obdurate opposition who were reduced to 10 men for the entire second half, 
injury had restricted Andy Carroll to 20 minutes of Premier League football 
since February. He got 30 more under his belt here and was instrumental in the 
creation of the late goalthat finally shattered the resistance of a Crystal 
Palace team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/17/crystal-palace-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 who had come from behind and looked set fair to hold out for a hard-earned 
point.

It was a goal fashioned on the bench, where West Ham showed their strength in 
depth by naming four strikers. Mauro Zárate provided the cross, Carroll rose 
highest to get the far post knockdown and, when the pair’s fellow substitute 
Nikica Jelavic was thwarted in his attempts to scramble home, Manuel Lanzini 
fired in an unstoppable drive from close range. In his post-game comments,
Slaven Bilic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slaven-bilic> was generous 
in his praise for an England international whose often devastating 
effectiveness was in danger of being forgotten.

West Ham edge out 10-man Crystal Palace as Dimitri Payet makes a point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/17/crystal-palace-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
“He’s got something that is very hard to cope with,” the West Ham manager 
said. “I played as centre-half and know that position. In the box, when the 
ball comes in, it’s [usually] more about you than about [the centre-forward]. 
You are the one who has got more chance. But when the ball comes to him, it’s 
more about him than you the defender and that’s why we won today. He’s skilful, 
he’s got good vision, he’s got good ideas, he’s a great player. His biggest 
problem was his fitness due to injuries, but he has been training for eight 
weeks and it’s been very boring training to be fair: individual work, but he’s 
done it well. We are so happy that he is back.”

This was not your orthodox game of two halves. The first was exciting, 
incident-packed and possibly edged by Palace until the dismissal of Dwight 
Gayle just before the interval; the second comparatively dreary, with the home 
side on the back foot challenging West Ham to break down their back door. It 
eventually came off the hinges through judicious use of a Geordie battering 
ram, and the excellent Dimitri Payet made up for a bad first-minute miss with a 
deft chip over Wayne Hennessey in the closing seconds of added time. Weirdly, 
it was the third consecutive time this fixture was decided by a scoreline of 
3-1 to the visiting team.

In an enthralling half of many chances for both sides, Carl Jenkinson had 
opened the scoring with a second goal in two games. Following good work from 
Payet and the Palace old boy Victor Moses, the right-back drilled low and hard 
past Hennessey into the corner. Perhaps still celebrating his unlikely 
goal-rush, Jenkinson almost immediately gifted Palace an equaliser, colliding 
with Gayle, whose rather emphatic encroachment on the subsequent penalty meant 
Yohan Cabaye was forced to take it twice.

Gayle was a menacing presence throughout the first half but not always in a 
good way. His constant bickering with opponents and the referee suggested that 
a second yellow was inevitable, once he had been booked for a lunge through the 
back of Payet. When it duly arrived for a challenge on Cheikhou Kouyaté, the 
striker walked off with his shirt pulled over his face to hide his 
embarrassment and later apologised on social media. He might learn a thing or 
two from Carroll, whose equally obvious levels of enthusiasm and aggression 
were channelled in a more positive way.

Man of the match Dimitri Payet (West Ham United)
 