
Ally McCoist stood on Brechin <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> 
City's pitch, in torrential rain, offering a pre-extra-time pep talk to his 
players. As the Rangers fans chanted "If you hate [the Scottish FA's chief 
executive] Stewart Regan," his equivalent at Ibrox, Charles Green, joined in 
the applause. Welcome to the opening chapter of Rangers' strange new world.

The colours of the Rangers FC are the same, their supporters chant identical 
songs and McCoist could name six full internationals in his starting XI at 
Glebe Park. But this match marked the start of a new journey, one triggered by 
Rangers' fall into administration and subsequent liquidation. Four years on 
from an appearance in the Uefa Cup final,Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> needed the extra-time 
interventions of Lee McCulloch to win a Ramsdens Cup tie 2-1 against Brechin, 
of Scotland's Second Division.

The Rangers following at least appear energised by their team's new-found 
lower league status. The vociferous travelling contingent made up the vast 
majority of a 4,123 attendance, with the gridlocked scene around Brechin set to 
become commonplace when Rangers start their Division Three campaign.

Smoke bombs were thrown on to the pitch, with one punter even thinking it a 
smart idea to climb a floodlight pylon midway through the first half. The 
novelty may wear off, but it hasn't yet and, owing to what they perceive as 
unfair treatment from football's governing bodies, Rangers' fans couldn't care 
what the rest of the world thinks of them.

On the field, it was to the credit of Brechin and an indictment of Rangers' 
unprepared state that there never appeared any kind of gulf between the teams. 
Andrew Little handed the visitors an early lead, cancelled out by Andy Jackson, 
before McCulloch's winning header. "Considering we didn't know 48 hours before 
this game if we were going to play, I've got to be pleased," said McCoist.

Of annoyance to the remainder of Scottish football has been the lack of 
contrition shown from within Ibrox regarding Rangers' well-documented failings.

There seems little prospect of that changing. In a stance which can be 
described as somewhere between shameless and arrogant, Rangers' new directors 
chose Glebe Park as the venue to gloat about the relative financial strength 
the club has compared with the rest of the Scottish game.

"We're ready with a strong balance sheet and a squad that can play at almost 
any level," insisted the chairman, Malcolm Murray. Green said: "We've not got 
the debt that any of these clubs have. And, on the last day of the season, I 
would really enjoy some clever financial analyst looking at the balance sheets 
and debt-to-equity ratio of every club in Scotland."

Which may be a valid exercise, but the unpalatable truth is that Rangers, 
unlike those other businesses, used liquidation to shed tens of millions of 
pounds worth of their own debt.

In advance of a season in the bottom tier, Rangers have made moves to sign 
players who no other Scottish club apart from Celtic could afford. A year-long 
transfer embargo begins for Rangers on 1 September; their trading moves only 
accentuate the theory the club will somehow be parachuted back into the top 
flight at the earliest opportunity.

"I think we have to be careful what we say about that," said Murray on the 
prospect of league reconstruction. "I hope that's not the case. But there's got 
to be a reasonable probability, I would say. We will be back at the highest 
level and I don't think it will be as long as many cynics say."

Yet for all their preaching, Murray and Green cannot quite manage to sing from 
the same hymn sheet. Rangers' public relations stance is that their fresh 
corporate status does not break the history of the football club.

Murray stuck to that party line. "This is a continuation, in my view, not a 
new beginning because there has been no end," said the chairman. Green chose a 
different tack when the issue of liquidation to drop debt was highlighted. He 
said: "I wasn't party to the previous club. For my part, I came in after the 
club had already been sold."

Mixed messages have been commonplace in this Rangers tale. Nobody seems 
willing to focus on football quite yet.
 