
He is 21, but looks no more than 16. His complexion is as pale as his 
arctic-blue eyes. Sunday's Australian grand prix was the first time he had 
raced a formula one car, and only the 24th car race of his short life. But 
after he had finished sixth, scoring his first world championship point, Kimi 
Raikkonen seemed no more impressed than if he had spent the preceding hour and 
a half playing outside on his skateboard.

No, the race in Albert Park had held no real surprises. Even though none of 
the young Finn's previous races, in much smaller cars, had lasted more than 
half an hour, the experience of a full-length grand prix in a 750-horsepower 
machine, pulling goodness knows how much G-force in the corners, had not left 
him exhausted, either physically or mentally. In fact he felt like he could 
have got straight back into his Sauber and done it all again.

"It felt much shorter," he said, giving the barest hint of his new perspective 
on life, "than it does if you're looking from outside."

This may have been the most impressive grand prix debut since Jacques 
Villeneuve arrived from the United States and finished second on the same track 
five years ago. And yet Raikkonen is effectively on probation, his FIA 
"superlicence" - the document permitting him to compete in formula one - issued 
on the understanding that it will be reviewed after the fourth race of the 
season.

As with the case of Jenson Button a year ago, there has been no shortage of 
greybeards keen to express reservations about letting such an inexperienced 
young man loose on the grand prix grid, including Max Mosley, the president of 
the FIA and a member of the superlicence committee, who cast his vote against 
letting Raikkonen race.

The sceptics were wrong. Raikkonen qualified 13th for Sunday's race - the same 
grid position, someone recollected, as his compatriot Mika Hakkinen, the double 
world champion, in his first grand prix 10 years to the month earlier - and 
after making a bit of a mess of the start, recovered to pick up places not just 
by benefiting from retirements but through finding a way past some of his 
better known rivals. "It was nice to do some overtaking," he said. "I got past 
Fisichella, Jenson, and Alesi."

Perhaps passing the two underpowered Benettons did not count for much. "There 
wasn't a fight," Button remembered. "He was behind me, and then he was in front 
of me, and that was it." But the third scalp clearly pleased Raikkonen's team 
boss, Peter Sauber, with whom Jean Alesi spent two disappointing seasons before 
leaving to join Alain Prost's team.

Sauber was clearly elated by the performance of both his young drivers, the 
23-year-old German Nick Heidfeld finishing fourth. "I'm very, very proud of 
them," he said. "Nick has more experience than people think. But it was a risk 
to take Kimi. You know, we finished eighth in the championship last year, we 
needed to go forward, and to do that you have to get good drivers. I tried very 
hard to get Heinz-Harald Frentzen, but it was not possible. So I had to take a 
risk. And I'm really happy, because Kimi's race was beautiful."

And not just his race, either. "What's remarkable about him," his race 
engineer, Jacky Eeckelaert, said, "is that with so little experience he can act 
at a grand prix weekend just like a normal racing driver. He's quite amazing. 
In those three days he didn't put a foot wrong - not one single spin, no gravel 
trap, not even a flat spot on a tyre. Nothing. He drove a perfect three days, 
like a driver who's been doing it for 10 years."

Eeckelaert had told him to take the weekend steadily. "We pushed him to be 
very careful, because people had been critical. For instance, Michael 
Schumacher rolled his car on Friday. Not his fault. Jacques Villeneuve and Ralf 
Schumacher had a big accident in the race, and a marshal was killed. I don't 
know whose fault that was. But if Kimi had been involved, and perhaps someone 
had been killed, can you imagine what would people have said?"

But if Eeckelaert was pleased by his sensible behaviour, he was delighted by 
his speed. "He was fast and consistent. You can be slow and make no mistakes, 
but he's fast with no mistakes. So it means that his potential is even bigger 
than he's shown this weekend."

Raikkonen is from Espoo, a small town a few miles outside Helsinki. His 
background is modest. His father, Matti, drives a machine that flattens gravel 
roads. His mother, Paula, works in the state pensions office. He has an older 
brother, Rami, who is a rally driver and is currently leading the national 
under-25 championship.

When Kimi was three or four, his father gave the boys a pair of mini 
motorbikes to ride around the back yard. Sliding around in the rain and snow 
they made such a mess that it was thought prudent to move their hobby outside 
the home, and at the age of eight Kimi got his first home-built go-kart.

Ten years of successful competition in national and international kart races 
led him to England and Formula Ford in 1999. Last year he graduated to Formula 
Renault, winning all four races in the winter series, seven out of the 10 
rounds of the British championship, and two of the three races comprising the 
European series. Of his total of 23 races before Sunday, he had won 13.

He has been managed since 1999 by Steve Robertson, a former Indycar driver who 
is the son of David Robertson, one of Jenson Button's co-managers. Raikkonen 
has been living with Robertson in Chigwell, Essex, but will soon move to 
Switzerland to be close to the Sauber factory. He is also an expert snowboarder 
and ice hockey player.

Just as some have misjudged Raikkonen's maturity at the wheel, others will 
probably assume from his quiet manner that he has nothing to say. But after a 
few minutes of parrying post-race questions, trying not to give answers that 
might betray naivety, his reserve began to melt. A grin broke through when he 
was asked how he had felt about finishing on the same lap as the leader.

"That was really nice," he said. "I was looking in my mirrors towards the end, 
but nobody was coming."

Kimi Raikkonen is probably not destined to spend his life looking in his 
mirrors. Pretty soon, you would have to guess, everybody else will be looking 
out for him.
 