
• YouTube: Teaching Parkour 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yvP_HfVa2Rs#t=18m56>

It's a sunny spring day in an inner-city comprehensive and a group of students 
are vaulting waist-high metal bars and springing, cat-like, against brick walls 
in a concrete yard. From a nearby third-floor window in the school's concrete 
jungle, three boys are shouting encouragement. Someone else is videoing the 
scene.

But none of the students is going to get told off. The video is in the hands 
of Paul Crozier, a PE teacher, and three coaches and another teacher are 
nearby. This is a session of "parkour" being taught at Quintin Kynaston (QK) 
school in Swiss Cottage, London.

Parkour - which comes from the French parc and courir, meaning park running - 
involves clambering and vaulting across "urban furniture". The sport is similar 
to free running, but whereas free running emphasises acrobatics and specific 
moves, parkour emphasises speed, directness, efficiency. It briefly grabbed the 
nation's attention in 2002 when a BBC advert featured David Belle, the 
Frenchman who is regarded as the founder of parkour, leaping and somersaulting 
incredible distances across rooftops.

Now the sport itself has crossed a barrier, making the leap into education. 
Westminster Sports Unit has funded coaches at free-jumping group Parkour 
Generation to provide sessions to 14 schools across the borough, and, now that 
the sport's trial has been hailed as a crime-busting, education-enhancing 
success, other local councils are in talks with the group to roll out teaching 
later this year.

QK was one of the first schools to sign up to the scheme and has been offering 
students free parkour lessons as an after-school activity for the last three 
years. It now also incorporates it into PE lessons. And teachers say the 
decision to offer parkour to pupils is an example of the kinds of changes that 
have turned the school around.

QK is a complex school: nearly half of its 1,300 students have free school 
meals, 40% have learning difficulties or disabilities, and three-quarters speak 
English as a second language. It was a pupil from this school who stabbed 
headteacher Philip Lawrence in 1995, and it has had to tackle gang culture in 
its hallways. But it was rated "outstanding" in its most recent Ofsted report - 
and the parkour participants are hailed as examples of the school's new culture.

Parkour participants here don't leap from rooftops - the moves are, as Matt 
Sheppard, head of PE, puts it, "gymnastics rebranded". But the rebranding seems 
to be working: Sheppard says the sport attracts a wide range of students and 
has an impact beyond the playground.

"The students who get involved in parkour generally don't do the traditional 
sports," he says. "And a lot of them have behaviour problems, or are classified 
as at risk, or have special educational needs. Some have been close to being 
excluded. But, once they start parkour, we've seen them getting interested in 
school again, and less likely to get into trouble."

Evidence from parkour's teaching at schools across the borough of Westminster 
suggests the impact goes further. The most recently available figures from the 
Metropolitan police report that in 2005, when Westminster council ran sports 
courses in school holidays, youth crime fell by 39%; the following year, when 
parkour courses were added to the mix, the rate fell by 69%. Feedback from 
teachers at QK backs this up.

Such effects seem extreme for a sport that seems mainly to involve teenagers 
leaping over metal railings - but scepticism is pushed aside when I talk to the 
participants. Mohamed Aziz, 15, says: "When I'm playing sports in an 
after-school club that day, it makes a big difference to how I feel about going 
to school."

Then there's Connor Bloomfield, 13, who started parkour lessons when he joined 
the school in year 7. "Everyone thought I couldn't do anything," he says. "I 
wasn't good at maths or English or any of that school stuff, and I didn't 
really believe I would be good at anything. But parkour changed that, because 
it tested my body's ability to do things. I have much more confidence and have 
learned a lot about discipline. I can concentrate more in class now and believe 
in myself a bit."

But critics of parkour flag up health and safety concerns. In 2005, 
14-year-old Alex Leatherbarrow died while attempting to copy parkour films by 
jumping a two-metre gap between buildings. The Association for Physical 
Education has reported that "parkour-related activity challenges a number of 
fundamental safety principles" and recommends that the sport should be taught 
inside, to discourage teenagers from replicating its moves in a less safe 
environment.

At QK, coaches teach parkour outside whenever the weather allows, and students 
have to agree not to perform parkour moves on school premises without 
supervision. Sheppard says that the most serious accident so far has been a 
grazed finger. I witness one student tripping up, but the most noticeable thing 
was not a lack of health and safety precautions (there were lots), but the 
other kids - who come from the whole spectrum of school years, from 7 to 13 - 
gathering round to help the student up.

• Video by julieangel.com <http://julieangel.com/Julie_Angel_home_page.html>
 