
With tears streaming down his face, an emotional coach Kiatisuk Senamuang 
broke down during a post-match interview, apologising for Thailand’s failure to 
win for their recently departed and beloved king.

A side that traditionally underperforms against the bigger nations in Asia, 
Thailand showed courage and industry amid an atmosphere of high emotion on 
Tuesday and, but for a contentious second-half penalty, could very well have 
claimed the win their spirit and organisation deserved.

Australia only manage a draw in World Cup qualifier away to Thailand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/australia-draw-world-cup-qualifier-away-thailand-socceroos>
If Thailand’s players gave their nation every hope, the opposite could be said 
for Australia’s chargers.

With the pre-game focus being the absence both of Tim Cahill and Tomi Juric 
this was a massive opportunity for Jamie Maclaren to stake his claim. And yet, 
the Brisbane Roar speedster is a very different striker to either Cahill or 
Juric.

Operating best in tandem, Maclaren first blossomed in the A-League in a 
partnership alongside Andy Keogh. Not an out-and-out No9, the kind of player to 
receive balls to chest or to look to score with the head, Maclaren’s game is 
built around his pace and relies heavily on others around him to draw defenders 
and work small openings.

Presumably the instructions from Ange Postecoglou were for his wide men, 
Robbie Kruse and Mathew Leckie, not to lump in crosses as they might have for 
Cahill or Juric, but instead to work inside, playing back to playmaker Tom 
Rogic or Aaron Mooy, who in turn could look for the feet of Maclaren.

Postecoglou has earned praise for his focus on instilling a consistent 
philosophy and belief among his team – and stands in great contrast to the 
reactive coaching of predecessors Holger Osieck and Pim Verbeek. And yet a 
familiarity with Thailand’s structure should have raised some red flags for 
this game plan.

With three central defenders and two flowing wing-backs the Thais often 
stretched midfield – captain Theerathon Bunmathan and Tristan Do not only 
consistently bombed forward on dangerous counter-attacks but they largely 
stifled any free space for Australia’s wide forwards to operate within.

With two strong strikers leading the line, Australia’s defensive pairing 
Matthew Spiranovic and Trent Sainsbury had their hands full, allowing 
Thailand’s hugely impressive Chanatip Songkrasin pockets of space in front of 
Australia’s defence, and away from the screening midfielder Mile Jedinak.

That Songkrasin was at the heart of Thailand’s best passages and was arguably 
the most influential player on the pitch should have come as no surprise to the 
Australian coaching staff – the attacking midfielder was identified pre-game by 
Postecoglou’s former Roar captain Matt Smith, now playing in Thailand,as the 
national team’s X-factor 
<http://www.espnfc.com/world-cup-qualifying-afc/story/2996011/matt-smith-warns-socceroos-of-thai-messi-chanathip-songkrasin>
 – a point underlined by his player of the tournament status when the Thais won 
the Asean Football Federation Championship in 2014.

Whether through hubris or a dogmatic focus on Australia’s own formation, a 
failure to blunt this most obvious attacking threat constitutes a huge blot on 
Postecoglou’s copybook.

His midfield looked stretched, skipper Jedinak lacked the mobility to trail 
his more agile opponent and Australia’s wide men were neutralised by Thailand’s 
hugely impressive, and seemingly humidity-proof full-backs. Overrun in 
midfield, playmaker Rogic was drawn too deep and failed to receive the ball in 
areas in which he could threaten, as Mooy – pulled from box to box – had 
arguably his worst ever showing in the gold ofAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>.

As Socceroos fans watched on with frustration, more questions were raised than 
answers provided.

With seven goals between them in 85 appearances are Australia getting enough 
out of Leckie and Kruse in attack? If their role in the side is as providers, 
are they the best complement for a striker like Maclaren, or would he be better 
suited playing in a front two?

With passes going astray and Australia lacking any real goal menace it was as 
disjointed and incoherent an attacking performance as we’ve seen under 
Postecoglou.

On a sticky and sluggish pitch, the Socceroos’ passing lacked the crispness 
and speed to really dissect their opponents. Could a change of personnel at the 
base of Australia’s midfield alter that? Was this a game for Mark Milligan to 
start; and with Mooy having an out-of-character evening, could we have seen a 
20 or 30 minute cameo from the domestically in-form Luke Brattan?

A rare positive in the second half was the attacking intent of Nathan Burns, 
whose introduction alongside Milligan energised the Socceroos. A sometimes 
peripheral figure at international level when played out wide, restored to a 
more central position the quick-thinking striker could even have snatched a 
winner with an excellent lofted drive that clipped the crossbar late on.

Despite Thailand’s heroics, with wins overnight for rivals Japan and UAE this 
was a hugely damaging result for the Socceroos – especially coming as it has 
after dropped points against both Japan and Saudi Arabia.

And yet with five games to play, Australia’s qualification hopes still lie in 
their own hands.

With the more fancied “top-tier” Asian teams struggling, the gap between 
emerging football nations such as Thailand ever closes, and this result comes 
as a well-deserved fillip for a nation whose domestic league continues to 
strengthen and whose national team shows a technical and tactical proficiency 
not seen perhaps a decade ago.

For Australia, the aura of Asian Cup champions has never looked less imposing, 
and the narrative of steady progress and renewal under Postecoglou more 
doubtful.

 World Cup qualification is still well within the Socceroos’ grasp and 
capabilities – but fringe players need to lift their performances and 
Postecoglou needs to conjure more from the sum of his parts.
 