
Socceroos players will not be asked to mute any goal celebrations against 
Thailand over the death of the country’s king. Thailand was plunged into a 
30-day period of mourning following King Bhumibol Adulyadej’s passing last 
month, prompting initial disruptions to Tuesday night’s World Cup qualifier.

After an early request to move the game to a neutral venue, the Football 
Association of Thailand agreed to host the Group B tie on 15 November as 
scheduled, on the condition fans refrain from singing, cheering and drumming.

Socceroos face tough assignment against ambitious Thailand side in Bangkok | 
John Duerden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/socceroos-face-tough-assignment-against-ambitious-thailand-side-in-bangkok>
However the restrictions were subsequently relaxed on the basis the match 
falls one day after the official mourning period ends on 14 November. 
Supporters would be allowed to bring banners and instruments and “sing cheering 
songs and appropriately conduct joyful activities”.

What is considered appropriate remains open to interpretation but while both 
teams will wear black armbands as a sign of respect, Postecoglou signalled he 
had no intention of instructing his players to sway from their usual match 
routine or celebrations on the pitch.

“The game needs to run normally, and from our intent it will be,” Postecoglou 
said. “The information we have is that the game will run normally so I’m not 
going to try and manufacture something in the game or the context to reflect 
the circumstances of the game. It’s been sanctioned to go ahead, so it goes 
ahead.”

A couple of thousand fans have made the trip from Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>, and coupled with a large 
expat community the match is expected to get the biggest turnout of any of the 
Socceroos’ away qualifiers.

“In terms of supporters it’s been well-documented, the expectations,” 
Postecoglou said. “I’d be very surprised if the supporters aren’t respectful of 
that. We travel throughout the region and more often than not the supporters 
are well-behaved.”

Postecoglou was reluctant to call it a must-win game despite the implications 
the result could have on the second-placed Socceroos’ group standing. He was 
more focused on his team producing the right type of performance.

“We knew the first five games would be really tough because we had two trips 
to the Middle East plus this away game, and one of our home games against 
Japan,” Postecoglou said. “If we play well and claim maximum points we’ll be on 
11 points from five games.

“Regardless of what the others do we’ll be in a good position with three home 
games next year plus Iraq at a neutral venue – so we’ve only really got one 
away game in the back half. We’ll let the others fight it out.”

Follow the match in Bangkok with Jonathan Howcroft on the Guardian liveblog, 
from 10:15pm (AEST) tonight.
 