
Perhaps it is fortuitous that Tim Cahill is not in the Australian squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/tim-cahill-out-of-socceroos-squad-to-face-thailand-in-world-cup-qualifier>
 that takes on Thailand in Bangkok on Tuesday night. Should the veteran have 
scored – as he has done 48 times previously in the green and gold – his 
celebratory corner-flag boxing routine might not have gone down too well.

The 2018 World Cup qualifier at the Rajamangala Stadium is not going to be 
easy – Thailand may have lost all four games in Group B so far but the death of 
King Bhumibol last month complicates matters for Ange Postecoglou. Few in the 
so-called “Land of Smiles” remember life before the much-loved monarch took the 
throne in 1946 and his passing has prompted a nationwide period of mourning.

Thailand players offered $400,000 to beat Socceroos in World Cup qualifier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/thailand-players-offered-400000-to-beat-socceroos-in-world-cup-qualifier>
That resulted in the Thailand Premier League cutting its season short by three 
games and there was talk of this match being moved or played behind closed 
doors. The green light has been given, though fans have been asked to dress in 
sombre colours and to behave respectfully. Afternine young Australians spent 
four days in a Kuala Lumpur jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/nine-australians-detained-for-stripping-to-underwear-arrive-at-malaysian-court>
 for drinking beer in Malaysian-flag undies at the country’s Formula One grand 
prix last month, it is a chance for visiting fans to recoup some standing in 
south-east Asia.

What is best for Thailand is that those Socceroos supporters have nothing to 
shout about at all. This is a crucial game for both.Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> have dropped four points in 
their last two games – in Saudi Arabia and at home to Japan – and are keen to 
return to winning ways. Thailand just want to find a way to win.

The War Elephants topped their group in the previous round to become the first 
south-east Asian nation to get to the final stage of qualification since 2002 
(a time when South Korea and Japan were absent). To finish above 2007 Asian 
champions Iraq was a fine achievement but not all that surprising to those that 
have been watching the country’s development.

In the past three or four years, Thailand have emerged as the clear No1 in 
South-east Asia, playing an easy-on-the-eye passing game along the way. This 
has happened in the past but this time there is real hope that the Thais could 
finally break clear of the passionate, but at times claustrophobic, Asean 
football scene, and look to the continental stage first and the one closer to 
home second.

As the final phase began, nobody in Thailand expected or demanded a place in 
the top two in Group B and automatic qualification for the competition in 
Russia, or even third and a play-off route. What was hoped for were signs that 
the team could be competitive against the best in Asia.

It started well enough. Kiatisuk Senamuang’s men were, just, the better team 
against Saudi Arabia in Riyadh on 1 September. The 1-0 loss came due to a late 
and fairly soft penalty given to Bert Van Marwijk’s men. It was followed by a 
2-0 defeat at home to a Japan side that was treated with too much respect.

Therein may lie the Thais’ issue. The talent is there but perhaps it will take 
a little time for confidence to catch up. Japan have not looked impressive in 
qualification so far and had the hosts been more aggressive, it could have been 
a different story.

Then came a 3-1 loss in the United Arab Emirates before their first truly 
disappointing performance. Playing Iraq (in Iran) should have offered a fine 
chance of victory given the events of the previous round but defensively 
Thailand were at sixes and sevens and could have lost by that much too. In the 
end it was 4-0.

The danger is that further defeats will, naturally, damage confidence and the 
team’s future ambition may suffer. Losing a few is fine for a team looking for 
stronger tests, but to lose every game is understandably dispiriting.

Long term though, the signs appear healthy. The widely-disliked Thai FA 
president, Worawi Makudi, is finally out after a corruption scandal too many 
and the local league is progressing well.

With 2015 champions Buriram United struggling this year, the likes of Bangkok 
United came to the fore but it was Muangthong United who won the league. 
Well-funded and well-supported, like a growing number of Thai clubs, the Kirins 
contain a number of internationals who will line-up against the Socceroos.

Chanathip Songkrasin is one. The attacking midfielder, known as “Messi Jay”, 
is the biggest star in south-east Asian football and there is cool midfielder 
Sarach Yooyen, charismatic striker Teerasil Dangsa, highly-rated full-back 
Theerathon Bunmathan and Kawin Thamsatchanan, an athletic goalkeeper once 
linked to Manchester United.

The talent, most of it still young, is there for Thailand, as are the 
ambitions. It remains to be seen if the team has the self-belief to stop the 
Asian champions, stop a fifth straight defeat and stop the Socceroos supporters 
from having anything to cheer at all.
 