
The Southampton manager Claude Puel dismissed suggestions his rotation system 
was responsible for their “unlucky” Europa League defeat againstInternazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale>.

Antonio Candreva’s exceptional second-half goal secured an important victory 
for Inter at San Siro that prevented their visitors from building a lead at the 
top of Group K.

One of the most glamorous fixtures in Southampton’s history concluded with 
them third in the group when they could have taken a significant step towards 
reaching the knockout stages. Despite being reduced to 10 men after Marcelo 
Brozovic’s red card, Inter are back in contention after winning their first 
points.

Defeat also came after Puel made six changes from the starting XI he had 
selected in Sunday’s3-1 defeat of Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/southampton-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 – an injury suffered by Matt Targett meant one was forced upon him – which 
included the goalscorers Charlie Austin and Nathan Redmond.

It seemed a surprising decision to also rest Steven Davis, Jordy Clasie and 
José Fonte. In their absence, Jay Rodriguez, Shane Long, James Ward-Prowse, 
Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg and Maya Yoshida were selected. There was also a full 
debut at left-back for the one-time winger Sam McQueen, who replaced the 
injured Matt Targett in Puel’s sixth change.

Manchester United v Fenerbahce: Europa League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/20/manchester-united-v-fenerbahce-europa-league-live>
Asked if his changes had disrupted his team, Puel responded: “No. We have all 
the time fresh players to play good football. This is very, very important. Not 
all the players can play good football [if they play every game]. It’s 
important to consider all the players. We want to go for the qualification with 
all the squad and not just 11 players.

“We can see [we played a] good game with the quality against Inter away it is 
difficult to think and to answer the question. It’s a very, very good game and 
unlucky. We are just unlucky.”

Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> had a fine 
chance to score in the ninth minute when Jay Rodriguez conceded possession 
after hesitating from a shooting position. Perhaps a somewhat disjointed 
performance was inevitable but Rodriguez may reflect that had he shown greater 
confidence this could have been an important goal. He is still to truly recover 
from the anterior cruciate ligament injury he suffered in 2014 and at times it 
showed.

In the 28th minute McQueen’s cross was spilt by Samir Handanovic against Long. 
The ball then rolled past the goalkeeper and towards the goal before Yuto 
Nagatomo raced back to clear.

Austin was introduced as a 48th-minute substitute when Long indicated an 
injury, but if there was optimism that his directness would make a difference 
it soon vanished when Inter took the lead.

A Rodriguez header had been disallowed for a foul when, from nowhere and with 
little threat, Davide Santon – once of Newcastle United – sent a left-wing 
cross into Southampton’s area. From there, Candreva produced a powerful finish 
into the roof of the net beyond Fraser Forster. Southampton already looked 
defeated.

Brozovic’s dismissal, for a second yellow card after a foul on Hojbjerg, 
presented an opportunity but the closest Saints came to an equaliser was wasted 
in the 82nd minute by Virgil van Dijk.

Ward-Prowse’s classy cross left the defender with the simplest of chances from 
directly in front of goal but he sent his shot straight at Handanovic.

Puel also recognised the return against Inter in a fortnight has become 
“interesting”, while Van Dijk told BT Sport: “We were the only team that 
deserved to win and to concede a goal with their only chance frustrated.

“We should have had the game dead and buried in the first half but that is 
what happens if you don’t take your chances. I had a big chance with my left 
foot and a header. We had so many opportunities to win the game.”

The result also relieved some of the pressure that had been building on the 
Inter manager, Frank de Boer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/frank-de-boer-inter-era-europa-league-southampton>
, and the Dutchman said: “They created some very dangerous chances. We knew 
that they were very dangerous. At first there were small chances for both of 
us. Luckily we have a great goalkeeper, he was unbelievable. The result for the 
group? It’s very important for us.”
 