
South Korean health authorities have said they are investigating a cosmetic 
surgery clinic in Seoul after photographs emerged online apparently showing 
medical staff partying in an operating theatre.

In one selfie, posted on Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>, staff in scrubs appeared to 
stand around a candlelit birthday cake – with an apparently unconscious patient 
lying on a bed behind them.

Another picture on the photo-sharing app showed a staff member, wearing a mask 
and a surgery gown, jokingly placing a gel breast implant over her chest in an 
operating room. Another showed staff posing while eating hamburgers.

“Our officials are investigating the clinic to see if there was any violation 
of medical laws,” said a spokeswoman from the public health department in 
Seoul’s Gangnam district on Monday. “They may look into whether such behaviour 
damaged the reputation of medical practitioners.”

Under South Korea’s medical law, behaviour deemed to tarnish the reputation of 
the industry can result in suspension.

The images, posted by one staff member, drew a storm of online criticism for 
alleged disregard of sanitation rules and patient safety. They were taken down 
later.

The clinic apologised on Monday for “careless actions” by some of its staff, 
whom it confirmed were doctors or assistants. “We are left devastated for 
causing such concerns among our clients … because of the senseless behaviour,” 
Jewelry Plastic Surgery Centre said on its website.

“We offer our deep apology … and will conduct thorough safety training for all 
our staff members.”

The upmarket district in southern Seoul – made famous by South Korean singer 
Psy’s global hit Gangnam Style – is home to high-end stores as well as hundreds 
of cosmetic surgery clinics.

South Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> is famed for its 
vast cosmetic surgery industry, with one of the highest per-capita rates of 
cosmetic surgery procedures in the world.
 