
Barry Corr headed an equaliser as Southend United emerged from a bruising 
League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-off 
semi-final first leg at Stevenage with a 1-1 draw. Corr nodded in at the far 
post shortly after Dean Parrett’s brilliant shot had broken the deadlock in the 
second half of a match held up for a lengthy break in the first half due to a 
collision between the home captain, Bira Dembélé, and Southend’s Michael Timlin.

The Shrimpers, who finished 12 points ahead of Boro, will now fancy their 
chances of finishing the job at Roots Hall on Thursday and booking a trip to 
Wembley.

The visitors went close to taking an early lead when Timlin poked Corr’s 
cut-back inches wide. However, Timlin’s evening came to a premature end shortly 
afterwards when a sickening clash of heads with Dembélé left the midfielder 
soaked in blood from a gaping wound above his eye.

Dembélé appeared to have been knocked out and received treatment for seven 
minutes. But while Timlin departed the action for 15 stitches Dembélé bravely – 
and possibly foolishly – played on in a bandage until he was substituted at 
half-time.

Next to hit the deck was the Boro goalkeeper, Chris Day, following a collision 
with Stephen McLaughlin and suddenly all eyes turned to theStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> bench where, due to a spate of 
injuries, the 56-year-old goalkeeping coach, Dave Beasant, had been named among 
the subs.

The former Wimbledon and Chelsea keeper climbed out of the dug-out for some 
gentle stretches, to the delight of the crowd, but Day was eventually able to 
play on.

Day, 39, ensured the sides went in level at the break when, during nine 
minutes of stoppage time, he pulled off a fine save with his legs to keep out 
Dave Worrall’s close-range shot.

However, six minutes after the interval the deadlock was broken when Parrett, 
who cost Tottenham £1m as a 15-year-old, curled in a superb shot from 20 yards 
which arced into the top corner.

Southend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> hit back nine minutes 
later when Corr’s header from McLaughlin’s corner found its way past Day at the 
far post.

Day had to turn away a fierce John White drive and Bentley palmed Ben 
Kennedy’s shot clear to leave the tie finely balanced for the return leg.
 