
Southampton’s hopes of reaching the Europa League’s knockout stages are in the 
balance after defeat atSparta Prague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spartaprague>. A familiarly ineffective 
performance means they must at least draw at home to Hapoel Be’er Sheva next 
month if they are to qualify.

They went to Prague in the knowledge victory against a team they beat 3-0 in 
their first Group K fixture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/southampton-sparta-prague-europa-league-match-report>
 would likely mean a first-placed finish. Costa Nhamoinesu’s early goal instead 
proved enough to ensure Sparta will finish top, and Southampton have lost their 
chance of being seeded.

'What's this geezer doing? He's hopeless' – the Ali Dia story, 20 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/ali-dia-story-20-years-on-southampton-souness>
Claude Puel remained upbeat about their chances of reaching the knockout 
stages but lamented Saints’ lack of a cutting edge.

“This goal is not a good thing just at the beginning of the game,” Puel told 
BT Sport. “The first half we had some good chances but weren’t clinical enough 
and this was a problem for us in this game. In the second half it was 
difficult.”

The first of those chances came in the third minute when Shane Long and Jordie 
Clasie combined with one-touch football to put Jay Rodriguez into space in the 
penalty area. The forward should have followed their lead and shot first time, 
but he took the heaviest of touches and as in last month’s 1-0 defeat at 
Internazionale wasted a fine opportunity.

Eight minutes later Sparta took the lead. From a routine free-kick Borek 
Dockal crossed towards Nhamoinesu who, after a well-timed run, sent a side-foot 
finish beyond Fraser Forster.

Southampton’s dominance of possession led to little and they could have gone 
further behind during a shaky spell in the second half. The impressive Dockal’s 
58th-minute free-kick eluded everyone before forcing Forster into a reaction 
save, before a mix-up between the usually reliable Virgil van Dijk and Maya 
Yoshida presented Dockal with another shooting opportunity that the diving 
Forster palmed away.

Puel brought on Charlie Austin in the 72nd minute but it was too late for 
Southampton’s top scorer to have much of an impact.

“We have our future in our hands,” Puel said. “The last game is the final of 
the group. It’s in front of our fans and this is very important.”
 