
League Two Southend stunned Championship club Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> with a 4-1 win at Roots Hall.

The Shrimpers controlled the majority of an eventful FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> third round match.

And their biggest threat came from the floodlights, which went out for 15 
minutes midway through the first half.

The game got off to a controversial start when Barry Corr appeared to elbow 
the Millwall defender Jack Smith but referee James Adcock opted to wave play on.

The Shrimpers then came close to taking the lead when Anthony Straker saw a 
low shot saved by Millwall goalkeeper David Forde and both Michael Timlin and 
Corr had follow-up efforts blocked in the resulting goalbound scramble.

But Corr was not to be denied for long and, with 22 minutes on the clock, he 
putSouthend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> in front.

Corr headed home his ninth goal in his last 12 FA Cup games when he rose high 
to head home a cross from captain John White.

Five minutes later the floodlights went out and both teams left the pitch 
wondering if the match was going to resume.

But when it eventually did, Millwall – who had former Shrimpers striker Neil 
Harris in charge – suffered another blow in the 44th minute when forward 
Jermaine Easter was sent off after appearing to stamp on Southend defender Ben 
Coker.

The Shrimpers then made the most of their extra man just a minute later when 
Will Atkinson raced on to Timlin's through-ball before confidently chipping the 
ball over advancing Lions goalkeeper Forde.

Timlin made it 3-0 in the 57th minute with his first goal since February 2012 
when he fired home from the edge of the penalty area.

Millwall got back in to the game seven minutes later when substitute Martyn 
Woolford collected a right wing cross from Steve Morison and sent a neatly 
controlled volley in to the bottom right-hand corner of the net.

But the Shrimpers were immediately back on top in the appalling wet conditions 
with Ryan Leonard having an outrageous 50-yard shot tipped over the crossbar by 
Forde.

Corr then headed a left wing cross from Straker against the outside of the 
left post before Southend sealed their shock win in stoppage time, with Leonard 
on target.

The midfielder, who scored twice in Wednesday's 2-1 win against Portsmouth, 
charged through the centre of the pitch before sending a powerful 16-yard shot 
goalbound.

That completed a memorable afternoon for the Shrimpers as they reached the 
fourth round of the competition for the first time since 2008.
 