
Michael Timlin might be sporting a headache of a different kind in the morning 
after firingSouthend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> United to 
Wembley.

The Southend midfielder, whose horrific head injury almost overshadowed the 
first leg of theirLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> play-off semi-final 
against Stevenage, fittingly scored the goal which made sure of an extra-time 
victory on Thursday night.

A surprise inclusion and wearing protective headgear after needing 15 stitches 
in a gaping wound above his eye, Timlin played the full 120 minutes and rounded 
off a courageous display by wrapping up a deserved victory. “For Michael Timlin 
to get that goal … dear me,” said the Southend manager Phil Brown.

“It emphasised the commitment that was shown to try to win the game. We never 
do things easy at this place – it doesn’t seem that way anyway. I have made 
some big decisions in my life football-wise and that’s probably the biggest, 
Michael Timlin to play.

“On Sunday he went in for that horrific challenge and their captain’s laid 
out. In the 90th minute here he went into another header with a skullcap on – 
it was just the bravest performance I’ve seen from an individual in my 
managerial time.”

Southend had finished 12 points clear of their opponents but still made hard 
work of booking their trip to Wembley against a dogged Boro side.

They fell behind to Tom Pett’s close-range strike and, after Ryan Leonard had 
equalised, Barry Corr blew the chance to send Southend through when he missed a 
stoppage-time penalty.

But the substitute Stephen McLaughlin nodded them in front in the 108th minute 
and Timlin added the gloss to send manager Phil Brown back to the scene of his 
memorable promotion to the Premier League with Hull City seven years ago.

Southend dominated the opening half with the Stevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> goalkeeper Chris Day saving 
from Dave Worrall and Joe Pigott volleying narrowly wide.

Corr fashioned a glorious opportunity for himself moments before the interval 
when his dummy left Dean Wells and Day sat on the ground, but his attempted 
chip floated wide.

Those missed chances came back to haunt Southend 10 minutes into the second 
half when Pett broke the deadlock. Simon Walton’s corner found its way to Dean 
Parrett on the edge of the area and his shot took a couple of defections before 
falling at the feet of Pett to slam home.

Southend immediately piled forward and Day made fine saves from Cian Bolger 
and Pigott before Leonard equalised in the 67th minute. McLaughlin crossed from 
the left and Leonard, unmarked on the right-hand side of the area, smashed a 
first-time shot past Day and high into the net.

Deep into stoppage time referee Graham Scott appeared to hand Southend a place 
in the final when he penalised Parrett for bringing down Leonard in the area. 
But Corr, who scored Southend’s equaliser in the first leg, failed from the 
spot, seeing his penalty clip the crossbar.

In extra-time Southend found Day in inspired form as he made fine saves to 
deny McLaughlin, Leonard, Corr and Worrall. But Southend finally found a way 
past when the captain John White crossed from the right and McLaughlin threw 
himself at the ball to nod it inside Day’s far post.

As the clock ticked down Timlin took advantage of a tiring Stevenage back line 
to race through and drive in the third as Southend completed a 4-2 aggregate 
win.

For Boro, defeat means another season in the bottom division, although the 
manager Graham Westley admitted he might not be a part of it.

“They’ll take so much confidence from this and there’s a real chance in that 
dressing room that they can have a good season next year,” he said. “We will 
see where things go from here. I am the Stevenage manager up until the end of 
May. There’s been no offer to me. The club is having a serious rethink about 
what it’s going to do for the future so we’ll see how that pans out.”
 