
Here we go again – back to work after the festive season. And this is perhaps 
one benefit of the extendedChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>/New Year period: by the 
time you get to the end of it, you may well be ready, if not busting, to get 
away from your relatives, run around a deserted open space screaming, and go 
back to work. Even if you love them. After the complex stew of family life, the 
office, the building site or even the staff room and chalkface could seem 
like heaven.

But it may not be such a relief for those who no longer go to work, who’ve 
just had one giant, intense dose of family and friends, and that’s their lot 
for another year. About 40 years ago a friend told me he only saw his parents at
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. He seemed happy 
about this arrangement, and I rather admired it, because it appeared to show a 
sensible, grown-up level of detachment that my family didn’t have. Although in 
my early 30s, I still saw my parents weekly and phoned them almost daily, 
because without regular check-ins, updates and visits, there would be panic, 
anxiety and sometimes screaming reprimands from my mother’s end.

I don't have Christmas spirit this year. So I'm faking it | David Ferguson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/25/christmas-spirit-2016-faking-it>
But looking back, perhaps my friend’s method wasn’t so admirable. What if his 
retired parents bravely waved him off, then sat down in their empty house and 
sobbed, longing for next year, and the return of their beloved son. If only a 
happy medium were possible, and family visits could be spread out evenly, 
rather than come in one huge and rather difficult chunk; and family gatherings, 
along with Crisis at Christmas and special free church dinners, or being 
pleasant to elderly people and relatives you can’t usually be fagged to talk 
to. If only we could have it in smaller dollops all year round, and not just 
for Christmas.

Easier said than done. Families are scattered all over the place nowadays: up 
and down the country, grandparents retired to Spain, children and grandchildren 
moved to distant continents, divorced parents in different directions. Which 
ones do you visit, and when? Can you afford the time and the money? Or can you 
only have a Skype Christmas? It all adds to the tension.

Then, exhausted, bloated, agitated and possibly bankrupt, we must welcome in 
the new year, which I find more distressing than Christmas. Strangely, singing 
Auld Lang Syne gives me asthma. The first time it happened I thought it was the 
hostess’s cat, but by the third time I knew it wasthat song, so I hid in the 
larder eating cold pudding until it was over.

What a relief to stop being infantilised by your mummy, daddy and aunties, and 
get back to work and have structure and restraint, and fairly Spartan dinners, 
and I suspect some of the unemployed and elderly people left at home might also 
be temporarily thrilled to bits when everyone clears off. No more pandering to 
tantrumming grandchildren, crazed by additives, sugar and excess presents. No 
more exhausting cooking for visitors, and no more behaving yourself when 
visiting.

But it won’t take long before the twinkly lights will have all gone, and 
the relief and back-to-normal feeling wears off. The weather is growing bleaker 
and colder, and the world is becoming scarier. Hold on to your hats, everyone. 
Brace yourselves. We’ll be lucky if we have many more Christmases to moan about.

Never mind the third world war, nuclear holocaust and the global warming 
tipping point, theInstitute for Public Policy Research predictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/29/uk-in-2030-older-more-unequal-and-blighted-by-brexit-report-predicts>
 are not much fun either. By Christmas 2030, our over-65s will have increased 
by 30%, we’ll have double the number of over-85s, and an 80% increase in the 
number of adults over 65 with dementia. And as 15 million current human jobs 
will be automated, there won’t be much work to go back to.

But we’ll probably manage. It’s like childbirth. By this time next year, 
you’ll have forgotten the pain and you’ll probably want to do it all over 
again. I will, to celebrate that the world has survived another year, despite 
the rotten odds. Oh please, please let there be Christmas dilemmas to moan 
about for ever and ever, Amen.
 