
I have of late had a rash of letters claiming, with varying degrees of 
indignation and abuse, that a misspelling has appeared in one of our 
crosswords. To misspell is human and it is in the nature of things that - very 
occasionally - a compiler's misspelling will get past the editor and the 
spellchecker, and into the paper. But usually the problem turns out to be that 
the word in question has alternatives.

Often those in this category are foreign words that have passed into English 
dictionaries. For example, what is the correct plural form of the Italian for 
"hors d'oeuvre"? One dictionary will tell you that it is antipastos, but 
another will give you antipasti. Italian food in general tends to upset people. 
For example, is it fettucine, fettuccine, or fettucini? You will find that the 
authorities are not sure. (The "correct" plural in English for hors d'oeuvre 
is, of course, also a potential problem.)

Often the alleged offence relates to a proper noun. "There is a howler in 
today's puzzle," writes Disgusted of Islington. "The composer spelt his name 
Rachmaninov, not Rachmaninoff." The truth, of course, is that he did not spell 
his name either way, because he was a Russian and wrote in the Cyrillic 
alphabet. It is true that his name is usually transliterated as "-ov" rather 
than as "-off", but Collins gives both forms equal prominence. By contrast, 
Chekhov has never, so far as I know, been transliterated as Chekhoff. However, 
just to keep crossword editors and solvers on their toes, he does appear 
regularly also as Chekov. And should Ganymede, the beautiful young Trojan 
abducted by Zeus and made cupbearer to the gods, be so spelled, as he is in 
Collins? Or is he really Ganymedes, as he appears in most classical 
dictionaries?

The word that is in a class of its own as a cause of solver seizures, however, 
is the name for a small four-stringed guitar. For those of us of an older 
generation, who hold that we were the last to be taught to spell properly, it 
can only be a ukulele. But what then are we supposed to do when Chambers says 
that "ukelele" is "a common spelling of ukulele", to say nothing of when the 
ultimate authority, the Oxford English Dictionary, also allows of ukalele and 
even eukaleli?

My pragmatic position on all of this is that any spelling sanctioned by any of 
the main one-volume dictionaries should be allowed, with the proviso that, if 
the alternative spelling is very rarely used, the clue should then be one that 
leads the solver to the answer by the hand!

__________

 In common with all crossword editors, my main running fight with compilers is 
in the area of anagram (and other) "indicators" in the clues themselves. On 
behalf of the solver, I regard it as my duty to insist that the word used 
actually indicates, even if not obviously, that an anagram, say, is involved. 
The compilers, bored with having to ring the changes on absurd, bizarre, 
cooked, dicky, excited, false, grotesque, hash, improper, juggled, kinky, 
lunatic, minced, naughty, off, perhaps, queer, rotten, stew, tipsy, undone, 
volatile, wild or zany (I don't think I have ever seen an x- or y-word so 
used), try to see what they can get away with by way of a word that goes nicely 
with the sense of the other words in the clue, even if it does not directly 
say: "Look out! There's an anagram about!"

The issue does not only arise with anagrams. There are also the indicators to 
hidden words, reversals and split words. For example, does "cover" mean that 
the suggested word goes on top of something, or round it? Does "take" mean that 
something is about to follow, or that what follows needs to be included? Do the 
words "visitors call in from time to time" indicate that something for "call" 
needs to be included in something for "from time to time" to give a word 
meaning visitors; or that something for "call" needs to be included in 
something for "visitors" to give a word meaning "from time to time"?

I have to admit that our different compilers are not uniform in the way that 
they apply all these conventions. This must be more of a problem for crossword 
editors with other newspapers, which shall be nameless, where the compilers are 
anonymous. Those papers have to impose a uniform grammar. The advantage for the 
Guardian is that you, the solver, know who you are up against and how that 
particular compiler applies the rules.

The bottom line, in my view, is not some arbitrary set of rules, strictly 
applied, but whether the solver thinks that the compiler has been playing fair. 
That is the main advantage to signed puzzles: after a while you do get to know 
the way the cryptic mind of a particular compiler works.
 