
It is a widely held belief that The Chambers Dictionary is the bible of our 
crossword world. I get a regular trickle of indignant protests (one last week) 
that something I have let through in a clue or a solution is 'wrong' because 
the latest edition of this excellent reference work does not sanction a 
particular spelling, or contain a particular word, or does not give the 
definition used in a particular clue.

Chambers has certainly long been most crossword setters' dictionary of choice, 
no doubt partly because it includes many more Scottish and Irish words and a 
wider range of archaic and dialect words (and Shakespearean and Spenserian 
vocabulary) than the other major one-volume English dictionaries. Thus its 
'biblical' authority has often been a godsend to setters struggling to fill 
that awkward bottom right-hand corner of a grid.

Chambers was established in Edinburgh in 1819, published its Twentieth Century 
Dictionary in 1901, Chambers English Dictionary in 1988 and, since 1993, 
successive editions of The Chambers Dictionary. Its present owners, the 
Paris-based Hachette publishing group, broke its link with Scotland, closing 
its Edinburgh headquarters and moving the Chambers editorial operations to 
London in 2009.

However English usage and punctuation can change quite quickly. For example, 
in the last 15 years the trend has been towards much less hyphenation of words: 
hyphenated nouns in particular becoming either a single word or two separated 
words. Chambers has been slower than other dictionaries in reflecting this 
trend. So I have come to follow most closely the usage set out in the 
one-volume Oxford Dictionary of English (ODE) and in Collins. Thus, for 
example, the migrating duck would now appear in our puzzles as the 'goldeneye' 
(ODE and Collins) and not as the 'golden-eye' (Chambers).

Surprisingly, dictionaries do not always provide an answer to some questions 
troubling the crossword editor. Thus a person making a will is a testator and a 
group of them are testators. But, if a setter wants specifically to refer to a 
woman making a will, she is a testatrix. Question: what is the correct plural 
of testatrix? Chambers provides no guidance. Nor does Collins. However the ODE 
comes to the rescue: it asserts that it can be either testatrices or 
testatrixes. A further wrinkle is that advice on usage from the ODE (and the 
other dictionaries) is tempered by what the Guardian's house style book says. 
So, other things being equal, we go to 'jail', rather than to 'gaol'; we find 
ourselves in 'mid-Atlantic' on 'transatlantic' voyages we may find ourselves in 
mid-Atlantic; and we read 'Shakespearean' (not 'Shakespearian') sonnets. The 
latest edition of Guardian Style (by David Marsh and Amelia Hodsdon) was 
published by Guardian Books in 2010.
_____

I am indebted to 'viny11' and 'Remus' for pointing out the shortcomings of my 
attempt last month to help those having difficulty with either the online 
interactive versions of our puzzles or in getting access to our Genius (and the 
Observer's Azed) puzzles. For those who did not see their polite and helpful 
comments on my evident lack of understanding of the software involved I am here 
trying again.

The Guardian's Quick, Cryptic, Quiptic and Saturday Prize puzzles and the 
Observer's Speedy and Everyman require JavaScript to work. JavaScript is not 
installed on your computer, but is a language that runs on your browser. So, if 
any of the above puzzles are not running properly in your screen, your first 
act of troubleshooting should be to check that JavaScript is activated by your 
chosen browser.

For the Genius and Azed puzzles to work, however, you need Java (which is not 
the same thing as JavaScript). Java does need to be installed on your computer 
and to be switched on. If it is not, you are likely to get a message saying 
(untruthfully) that the page is not available, or you may get a prompt about 
the need for Java, or you may just get nothing.

If you can't find the required settings in your browser, then try Goggling 
Java for instructions on how to download the required program, or on how to 
switch on the version already on your computer. Java is published by Oracle and 
both the java.com and the oracle.com sites are genuine.
_____

The search continues for the date and place of publication of Araucaria's 
celebrated anagram ('O hark the herald angels sing the boy's descent which 
lifted up the world' producing WHILE SHEPHERDS WATCHED THEIR FLOCKS BY NIGHT 
ALL SEATED ON THE GROUND).

The latest and most promising lead comes from Liz W. in France, who has a 
clear memory of it. Her memory is that the anagram was not contained one of the 
numbered clues. The solution ran clockwise around the perimeter of the grid (in 
which case the anagram 'fodder' would have been given in the italic special 
instructions above the clues). Her guess is that it would have been an 
Araucaria Christmas special in the early 1990s. I did not take over from John 
Perkin as crossword editor until the end of 1997 and, unhappily, the digital 
crossword archive only goes back to mid-1999, but Liz's clear memory provides a 
new focus for my efforts. Watch this space.
_____

You seem to have found May's Genius puzzle (No 119 by Picaroon) slightly 
harder that other recent offerings. There were 288 entries by the deadline. The 
first in was Dave H. at 1:26 and the first foreign entrant was from MJ. S. in 
New Zealand at 08:10.

Congratulations to Dave Harding, from London, who is the May winner.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 