
The great British summer continued service as normal at Silverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> as the lowering clouds that had 
glowered ominously all morning let loose with a downpour during qualifying. But 
while Jenson Button and other drivers struggled with the day job, for the race 
organisers and many fans at home anxious to see if they would even be able to 
attend Sunday's race, watching the skies had become as important as the action 
on track.

Their concern was caused by the wettest June on record, coupled with 40mm of 
rain falling in a 12-hour period to cause the chaos that surrounded the circuit 
on Friday and led to the organisers taking the extraordinary decision to 
request that fans with public car parking tickets did not turn up on Saturday. 
The public parking areas were so sodden it was feared their use would have 
rendered them unfit for race day, but there was no guarantee, as the rain came 
down again , that leaving them empty would be enough.

The situation was both a blow and a further threat for the fans who are such 
an integral part of theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>. Bernie Ecclestone's 
plans for a London GP remain fanciful at best but the enthusiasm the concept 
generated is a reflection of how popular Formula One is in this country. It was 
underlined by the 80,000 who turned up on Friday – a figure many circuits would 
be hugely satisfied with achieving on race day itself – and who, having finally 
got into the track, sat huddling under umbrellas, schlepping through mud and 
cowering under damp canvas for two days with indomitable good cheer.

They had already been asked to show forbearance by the British Racing Drivers' 
Club president, Derek Warwick, who said problems with the weather had been 
anticipated but had to ask: "Be patient with us, be kind to us." Largely the 
fans appear to have heeded his request, with the numbers suggesting many did 
stay away, no doubt to the relief of anyone travelling on Sunday.

Organisers announced late in the afternoon that all would be welcome to attend 
the race, with the public car parks reopened. Those who come, and there is no 
doubt they will, are set to join a happy throng whose spirits have not been 
dampened in the least by the elements.

Out at Copse corner, waterproofs and wellies were the order of the day for 
fans, their predominantly dark blues and blacks matching the skies, 
accessorised by knee-length patches of mud but offset by the flashes of red 
McLaren baseball hats bobbing about and the smiles of the supporters themselves.

"In the campsites there's a good atmosphere," said a cheery Alan Walker from 
Stratford. "I hate to say it but it's British spirit, bit of camaraderie, 
everyone seemed to be getting on with it." Andrew Woods from Newcastle agreed: 
"When the weather's like this you get talking to people quite quickly," he 
said, of the bonhomie around the track.

Intriguingly, there was also little appetite for finger pointing at the 
organisers. Even Ecclestone, who has needed little excuse to bludgeon 
Silverstone in the past and referred to the event as "a country fair 
masquerading as a world-class event" after weather-related problems 12 years 
ago, was lenient. "You can't blame anybody," he said. "There would be no 
problem with the car parking if it hadn't rained."

Fan Odette Nicoll agreed with him. "It's the weather," she said. "There's 
nothing that anyone can do about it unfortunately, that's Britain." A stoical 
theme that was echoed around the track. "You can't Tarmac five or six fields," 
said Woods. "It's not like Wimbledon where you can just close the roof. It's 
just … it's Britain."

Which is why there were 80,000 fans here on Friday, why anything less than a 
full house seems improbable and why Silverstone's managing director, Richard 
Phillips, who made the car park decision, admires them.

"They're incredibly resilient," he said, adding: "It's quite humbling 
actually, they're just brilliant." Moreover, they are the ones everyone else 
wants: "You only have to look at the way Abu Dhabi is trying to promote 
themselves at Silverstone to realise that they want our fans to come over 
there," Walker said.

"We're laughing through the wet," he said, as the heavens opened once again. 
"And going back for some Pimms," Nicoll said.

Which is, just, Britain. And the British Grand Prix is all the richer for it.
 