Steven Gerrard scored 120 goals for Liverpool in the Premier League. Who is the 
only player to have scored more?  Michael Owen  Luis Suárez  Robbie Fowler 
Fowler scored 128 in 266 league games.  Fernando Torres Gerrard made 504 
appearances in the Premier League – putting him joint 10th on the all-time list 
with which other player?  Rio Ferdinand Carragher, Heskey and Lampard made more 
appearances in the league.  Emile Heskey  Frank Lampard  Jamie Carragher Nico 
Rosberg needs to finish on the podium at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix to win the F1 
drivers' title. Rosberg competes under the German flag now but which country 
did he also represent in his younger years?  Monaco  Finland Rosberg and was 
born in Germany to a Finnish father and German mother. He now lives in Monaco.  
Canada  Austria If Lewis Hamilton wins the drivers' championship, it will be 
his third title in a row. Who is the only racer to have won five in a row?  
Sebastian Vettel  Ayrton Senna  Alain Prost  Michael Schumacher Schumacher won 
a record seven titles: in 1994 and 1995 plus the five in a row from 2000 to 
2004. Why has the Scottish Conservative Party politician Douglas Ross been 
criticised by fellow members of the Scottish parliament?  He was caught wearing 
a Rangers shirt below his suit in parliament  He tweeted Joey Barton and called 
him a ‘shirker’  He missed a meeting as he was working as an assistant referee 
in a Champions League matchRoss ran the line in the match between Sporting 
Lisbon and Real Madrid in Portugal. It was a big game but his fellow MSP Ben 
Macpherson was unimpressed: 'The arrogance and blatant disrespect of "three 
jobs" Tory Douglas Ross is simply staggering. Last time the whistle was blown 
on one of his refereeing junkets the Tories claimed it was just a "one off". 
But he's at it again - and this time it should be a straight red card.'  He was 
spotted at the Celtic v Barcelona match when he had called in sick for work 
Andy Murray won the 2016 ATP World Tour Finals in London on Sunday to 
consolidate his place as world No1 in front of Novak Djokovic. Who is world No3?
 Rafa Nadal  Roger Federer  Milos Raonic Raonic is yet to win a grand slam.  
Stan Wawrinka Who admitted that he is taking career advice from the Almighty, 
saying: ‘It’s not my last tournament until God puts his foot down. He is the 
boss and I don’t want to take liberties with him’?  Zlatan Ibrahimovic  Jenson 
Button  Conor McGregor  Ronnie O’Sullivan O’Sullivan added: 'I have 
conversations with God and he said to me, ‘Jack snooker in mate, you’re better 
off as a pundit’ and I was like, "Hold on, we will have to have a proper 
conversation about that".' Wayne Rooney scored his 248th goal for Manchester 
United against Feyenoord to move closer to Bobby Charlton’s club record of 249. 
Which player is third on that list with 237 goals?  George Best  Denis Law Law 
also scored 30 goals for Manchester City.  Mark Hughes  Ryan Giggs How did two 
ticketless Manchester United fans try to sneak their way into the match against 
Arsenal on Saturday?  They turned up at the ground on Saturday morning in 
stewards outfits  They came dressed as engineers, saying they had to fix the 
floodlights  They pretended to be a visiting delegate from Mister Potato, the 
club's 'Official Savoury Snack Partner'  They took a stadium tour on Friday and 
slept out in the ground overnightA club spokesman said: 'We realise people will 
go to any lengths to watch a game at Old Trafford but these people went too 
far.' England play Argentina at Twickenham on Saturday on the back of 12 
straight victories. Who were the last team to beat them (in October 2015)?  
France  Australia Australia thumped them 33-13 in the World Cup but, if England 
can beat Argentina and Australia in the next two weeks, they will have achieved 
a 100% record in 2016.  Wales  Ireland  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers  