
Tottenham’s youngsters have earned themselves the right to face Liverpool at 
Anfield, says Mauricio Pochettino, after a team containing five debutants 
brushed aside League One opposition with the minimum of fuss.

EFL Cup draw: Manchester United face Manchester City, Liverpool host Spurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/efl-cup-fourth-round-draw-manchester-united-manchester-city>
Cameron Carter-Vickers, Anton Walkes, Marcus Edwards and Georges-Kévin Nkoudou 
all made their first appearances while midfielder Harry Winks made his full 
debut for the club in a match that was one-sided from start to finish. The draw 
for the fourth round now takes Spurs to Merseyside and their manager said he is 
ready to trust his fresh faces again.

“Why not play our young players?”, he said. “It will be a great experience for 
them. It’s true that Liverpool are not involved in Europe so maybe they will 
take the game in a different way to us. But for us we are in a different 
process. The young players have the quality to impress and are very important 
for Tottenham for our identity.”

It is easy to understand Pochettino’s confidence when the game was dictated by 
players who may not have been making their debuts but could hardly be called 
veterans. Christian Eriksen and Érik Lamela are both only 24 but had too much 
composure and ability for the side coached by Justin Edinburgh, who won the 
League Cup with Spurs himself in 1999.

Eriksen, playing in his preferred No10 position and celebrating a new contract 
extension with Spurs, was in his element and opened the scoring on the half 
hour. The visitors had been forced to change their goalkeeper after an injury 
to Jonathan Bond, but his replacement Stuart Nelson could do nothing about the 
goal. Perhaps mesmerised by Spurs’s metronomic passing, the defence stood off 
Eriksen for just the briefest of moments, but that was enough time for him to 
lash a swerving shot under the bar from 25 yards.

Spurs failed to add to their advantage before half-time but didn’t hang about 
after the restart. Eriksen doubled the lead in the 47th minute, coolly tucking 
home after another assist from Lamela, this time after a driving run right 
through the heart of the visitors’ midfield. Two minutes later and it was 
three. Kieran Trippier, who impressed at right-back, was again causing havoc on 
the right and was brought down in the box by Deji Oshilaja. Janssen hungrily 
grabbed the ball and hit the spot-kick low into the corner to score his first 
goal in a Spurs shirt.

West Ham beat Accrington Stanley after Dimitri Payet’s last-minute strike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/west-ham-united-accrington-stanley-efl-cup-match-report>
Bought from AZ Alkmaar for £17m to ease the striking burden on Harry Kane, the 
Dutchman is needed immediately now that the England forward is out with an 
ankle ligament injury. Janssen’s form up until now has been unimpressive and 
here he missed three highly presentable chances in the first half alone. 
Scoring the penalty might be a monkey off his back, however, and Pochettino 
said he was glad the Dutchman had taken the kick.

“The goal was important for him”, he said. “He is going to be our main striker 
for the next few games. I said before the game that whoever has the most 
confidence can try to shoot [the penalty]. I think it was important for him to 
feel the love from the supporters.”

Lamela claimed a hat-trick of assists when he played in 19-year-old Josh 
Onomah to score his first goal for the club, a deft finish inside the post. A 
couple of minutes later Janssen showed his confidence was already up, laying a 
deft touch off to Lamela who claimed a goal for himself, caressing the ball 
across the box and beyond Nelson.

Edinburgh found himself torn between disappointment at the result and being 
impressed at the strength of his old club. “First and foremost the manager is a 
class act,” he said. “I’ve got nothing but admiration and they’re showing signs 
of being a team I never experienced here. They certainly have a chance of being 
successful. They’ve got some really exciting young players and the future’s 
bright for a lot of people, but obviously I didn’t want it to be that way 
tonight.”
 