
Marc Stcherbina was taken to hospital last night with reportedly limited 
feeling in his limbs after the Newport centre suffered a serious neck injury 
againstToulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse>. The 
Australian, who is 32 today, was hurt while making a head-on tackle in the 50th 
minute and the game was stopped for 10 minutes until he was carried from the 
pitch on a stretcher.

Early information suggested that at one point Stcherbina had had trouble 
breathing. However, Dragons' head coach Paul Turner commented after the match 
that it was too soon to know the seriousness of the injury. 'Marc's been taken 
to hospital as a precaution and we'll know more about his condition later,' he 
said.

The incident cast a shadow over a game for which Toulouse's fans had turned up 
in festive and expectant mood. 'No tries, no presents' was the playful threat 
from one banner. But they had to wait a long time before the players themselves 
got into the party atmosphere, as for 50 minutes the pool-five leaders 
struggled to overcome game opponents.

In fact Stcherbina's injury proved to be the turning point. After the long 
stoppage Frédéric Michalak kicked through for Clément Poitrenaud to score the 
home side's second try and suddenly the floodgates opened. Two more tries in 
quick succession from winger Maxime Médard and Florian Fritz decided the 
contest and brought Toulouse their first bonus point in this year'sHeineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> campaign, leaving them set 
fair to win the pool.

Nevertheless, trainer Guy Novès will not be entirely happy. Despite strong 
displays in the second row from the inexhaustible Patricio Albacete - who 
shrugged off a knee injury to play - scrum-half Byron Kelleher and hooker 
William Servat, Toulouse looked jittery at times and squandered numerous 
chances. The worst culprit was Michalak, who missed four penalties - three of 
them very straightforward. Typically, however, he also had a hand in three of 
the tries.

As for the Dragons, they battled hard, with centre Rhodri Gomer-Davies 
outstanding in attack and defence. But their late try by replacement hooker 
Steve Jones did not disguise the fact that they were thoroughly outclassed by a 
team who were themselves rarely at their best. It was Newport's fifth defeat in 
a row in all competitions.

The French side had looked like running away with it early on. In the 12th 
minute Michalak chipped the ball delicately under the posts for centre Yannick 
Jauzion to score, a move the pair have perfected over the years. But if that 
was new Michalak - he's 5kg heavier after his time in South Africa - the old 
Michalak was soon in evidence as he missed three penalties in a row.

Dragons had even started the second half the better of the teams, but the 
unfortunate injury to Stcherbina changed that as Poitrenaud scored a try 
immediately after the restart following a scrum the Dragons felt should have 
been reset with their put-in when it wheeled.

Steve Jones' late effort after a break from Gomer-Davies at least gives the 
Dragons something to build on before next week's rematch at Rodney Parade - and 
on this evidence they will need all the help they can get.

TOULOUSE Poîtrenaud; Médard, Kunavore (Fritz 40), Jauzion, Heymans; Michalak, 
Kelleher (Du Toit 68); Human (Lecouls 49), Servat (Vernat-Basualdo 65), 
Perugini (Poux 49), Albacete, Millo-Chluski, Bouilhou (capt; Nyanga 61), 
Dusautoir, Lamboley (Sowerby 49)
Tries Jauzion, Poitrenaud, Médard, Fritz Cons Michalak 3 

NEWPORT Dollman; Wyatt, Gomer-Davies, Stcherbina (Smith 49), Fussell; Arlidge 
(Connor 61), W Evans (Lewis 69); Black (Robinson 71), Willis (capt; S Jones 
69), R Thomas, MacDonald, Charteris, Bearman, Charvis (Lydiate 69), L Evans 
(Ringer 51)
Try S Jones Con Connor
 