
Steph Houghton scored from a 25-yard free-kick in added time to give 
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> a winning 
start to their season in this Women’s Super League curtain raiser against Notts 
County.

Until then it had been an evening of frustration for Nick Cushing’s team, who 
had dominated throughout, but after Nikita Parris was fouled, Houghton, the 
City and England captain, stepped up to drill a low finish that beat Megan 
Walsh to her left. “I just tried to hit it as hard as I could and thankfully it 
went in,” Houghton said.

Women’s Super League: our team-by-team guide to the new season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/22/womens-super-league-team-guide-arsenal-sunderland>
Last year City finished second, two points behind Chelsea, and this late 
victory is a major boost to them as they look to go one better this time. 
Houghton said: “Games like this – that’s what we were probably lacking last 
season. The first game then was nil-nil against Birmingham. It’s all about 
finding a way to win.”

City began by pressing County and winning a succession of corners. In midfield 
Daphne Corboz was keen to take possession and conduct proceedings. The touch of 
her partner, Jill Scott, was initially clumsy but after 16 minutes she burst 
forward to fire in a shot that was blocked.

County were awarded a penalty when Jess Clarke was fouled but she failed to 
punish City from the spot, her disappointing effort dribbling wide. City also 
missed a penalty, Walsh making a sharp save from Toni Duggan after Parris, on 
loan from Everton, was brought down.

At half-time the question for City was how had they failed to score. As well 
as the missed penalty, County had made more than one goalline clearance and 
Kosovare Asllani had a finish ruled out for offside.

City, who ended last season with 30 points to County’s 15, continued to pepper 
Walsh’s goal in the second half.

The visitors best chances of scoring came on the counter-attack, as when 
Rachel Yankey broke late in the game, but the control of England’s record 
129-cap forward let her down.

Now came Houghton’s moment and delight for the 1,167 crowd. City’s next 
opponents are Arsenal, here on Monday, and Cushing believes that, along with 
Chelsea and Liverpool, the Gunners are City’s title rivals. “A tough game but 
we’ll hope to win,” he said.

Elsewhere, Asisat Oshoala scored on her Arsenal debut in a 3-1 victory over 
Reading. Danielle Carter and Dominique Janssen also found the net for the hosts 
while Jade Boho-Sayo replied for Reading.

And Shanice van de Sanden grabbed the winner in a 1-0 victory for Liverpool 
against Birmingham, who fluffed their lines from two penalties – Siobhan 
Chamberlain saving the first from Kirsty Linnett while Freda Ayisi dragged her 
chance to equalise wide after Mandy van den Berg was sent off for bringing down 
Melissa Lawley.
 