
Aberdeen took a big step towards securing their Scottish Premier League status 
next season with a 1-0 victory over the bottom side, Falkirk. Steven MacLean, 
the on-loan Plymouth striker, broke the deadlock after 11 minutes when he 
pounced on a Davide Grassi flick to strike the ball past Robert Olejnik.

The Bairns were unfortunate to be denied a penalty just before the break when 
Ryan Flynn fell in the penalty area under pressure from home defender Zander 
Diamond. But despite dominating possession in the second half, Steven 
Pressley's side rarely tested Jamie Langfield in theAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> goal as the Dons held on for 
their second win in 16 matches, to open up a nine-point gap over bottom side 
Falkirk.

St Johnstone substitute Paul Sheerin netted an injury‑time penalty as the 
Saints battled back to claim a point in a thrilling 2-2 encounter against 
relegation-threatenedSt Mirren at McDiarmid Park. Sheerin kept his cool to slot 
home the spot-kick, which was awarded after a Murray Davidson shot was kept out 
by aSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> hand on the 
goal-line.

Graham Carey had opened the scoring for St Mirren, while Andy Dorman made it 
2-0 early in the second half. Michael Duberry broughtSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> back into the contest late 
on before Sheerin completed the fightback.

A 15-minute second-half blitz helped Hamilton sweep aside Kilmarnock 3-0 and 
secure their SPL status for a third successive season.

After a dull first half, the game came to life less than four minutes after 
the restart when Mickaël Antoine‑Curier and Mark McLaughlin were both appealing 
for what they appeared to think was handball on the line from Garry Hay after a 
Flavio Paixão corner.

Dougie McDonald, the referee, had a big call to make just after the hour mark 
when Antoine-Curier got the wrong side of Tim Clancy and fell under pressure 
from the defender. It appeared to be a decent penalty shout but McDonald 
decided to book the Hamilton striker for diving instead.

Hostilities briefly ceased when Tomas Cerny required treatment just outside 
his own penalty area before Antoine-Curier had a golden chance to put Hamilton 
ahead in the 68th minute.

A Steven Hamill clearance careered off Marco Paixão straight to the striker, 
whose shot was turned behind superbly by Cammy Bell.

Jimmy Calderwood made substitutions for the visitors but they fell behind 
almost immediately, Bell failing to claim a Marco Paixão corner and Dougie 
Imrie sweeping home from point-blank range 18 minutes from time.

The home side soon had a second goal and it was as spectacular as their opener 
was scrappy. Imrie's 77th-minute cross was headed clear by Pascali but the ball 
was met on the volley by Flavio Paixão and flew into the bottom corner.

Killie looked beaten, while Billy Reid's side were now full of confidence, 
though they had to replace Cerny with Sean Murdoch.

Accies' afternoon was capped three minutes from time when Thomas made it 3-0, 
outmuscling Simon Ford before striking a left-foot finish into the bottom 
corner.

Motherwell play Dundee United at Fir Park tomorrow, while Rangers host Hearts 
at Ibrox in the early kick-off. A victory for the visitors will take the 
Tynecastle side to within three points of their neighbours with an Edinburgh 
derby match remaining.
 