
While Sheffield United's city rivals Wednesday were making sure of automatic 
promotion, United were left contemplating a play-off campaign after being held 
2-2 at relegatedExeter City.

The home side went ahead in the 24th minute through a fine goal from Alan Gow 
before the Blades were reduced to 10 men when James Beattie was shown a 
straight red card for a tackle on James Dunne. Lee Williamson levelled a minute 
before the break and Kevin McDonald put United ahead within two minutes of the 
restart, but Scott Bennett equalised late on.

Danny Wilson's side will now face Stevenage in the play-offs who maintained 
their chances of three consecutive promotions by securing the final play-off 
spot with a 3-0 win overBury. Craig Reid opened the scoring in the 24th minute, 
Joel Byrom gaveStevenage <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> 
breathing space with a 77th-minute penalty and Chris Beardsley added a third in 
injury time.

That result meant Notts County missed out on the play-offs on goal difference 
despite a 4-1 victory overColchester United, as did eighth-placed Carlisle 
United, who went down 2-1 to Oldham Athletic.

In League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> Crawley 
Town emulated Stevenage's example in winning promotion in their first season in 
the Football League, a 1-0 win atAccrington securing them the final automatic 
promotion place.

Scott Neilson was the match-winner, capping a spell of second-half Crawley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/crawley> pressure with the only goal on 66 
minutes. Warren Cummings played the ball over the top for Neilson, who turned 
smartly before drilling the ball into the bottom corner.

Crewe Alexandra won the point they needed to take the final play-off place in 
a 2-2 draw at home toAldershot, who had responded to an early goal from Ajay 
Leitch-Smith by taking the lead through Harry Davis and Mark Molesley before 
Luke Murphy equalised again 14 minutes from time.

At the bottom, Barnet again secured survival on the final day of the season, 
beatingBurton Albion 2-1 at the Pirelli Stadium. The visitors began brilliantly 
with Mark Byrne's sixth-minute goal but, with Hereford beating Torquay 3-2, 
their Football League status was very much in doubt when Jacques Maghoma 
equalised and then Calvin Zola drilled a penalty over the bar. But the Barnet 
captain, Mark Hughes, rescued his side with a winner on the hour mark to ensure 
another escape.
 