
Steve McClaren admitted he has a lot of work ahead of him despite marking his 
second spell as Derby County manager with a 1-0 victory overLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>.

McClaren saw Johnny Russell come off the bench to score the goal that earned 
Derby’s first home league win of the season and their first for six months. But 
Leeds hit the woodwork twice and could easily have ruined McClaren’s return to 
the club that sacked him 17 months ago.

Until Russell pounced there was little in the game, and Leeds should have been 
in front after their captain, Kyle Bartley, thumped a header against the bar 
from a corner in first-half stoppage time. It was from a corner that Derby 
scored in the 56th minute when Leeds could only get the ball away to the edge 
of the area and Russell raced in to drive a low shot past Rob Green.

Leeds pressed hard in the closing stages and almost equalised in the fifth 
minute of added time when the substitute Marcus Antonsson curled a shot from 
just inside the penalty area past Scott Carson, but the ball came back off a 
post.

“I think you could see the nervousness of the players but amongst that 
nervousness the players showed fight, the attitude was great and we got some 
great blocks in at the end,” McClaren said. “We worked our socks off and we 
needed that second goal and we have to learn that. The last 10 minutes was 
always going to be nervous but we rode our luck and got through it and it was a 
big three points.”“We said we need to put a marker down at five o’clock and we 
have done. I saw certain aspects I like and potential in the team but there is 
a lot of work, a lot of work, and a long way to go but if the players have that 
attitude and fight, I have no complaints. That’s what we said at the beginning 
not just at half-time, what do the supporters want to see, they want to see 
your fight, attitude, tackles and I think the players did that.”

The Leeds head coach, Garry Monk, was frustrated not to get anything from the 
game. “I said to the players at half-time that we need to put our game on the 
pitch a little bit better and we came out and we started to do that and then we 
conceded a poor goal,which put us on the back foot,” he said.

“We had a go in the last 25 minutes and had a couple of chances but overall I 
think we didn’t do enough of the things we have done really well in recent 
games with the ball to give ourselves the best chance of getting something.

“We probably deserved something from the game but it’s one of those where you 
probably can’t complain that you didn’t. We didn’t do enough of the good things 
that we have been doing recently to really carve them open or create really 
clear opportunities.

“We hit the woodwork a couple of times and were probably the wrong side of 
those margins but the pleasing thing for me is we are still very competitive in 
games and were fighting for the result right up to the very end.”
 