
Steve Davis, manager of Crewe Alexandra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crewealexandra>, said last week: “We have 
to learn to win when we’re in front.” The previous Saturday they led 3-1 at 
Swindon at half-time and lost 4-3. It was far from the first time they “had 
failed to see games out”. The situation did not arise again on Saturday at home 
to Wigan, who scored after 16 minutes, but now Crewe cut to the chase, caught 
up before half-time and held out for a worthy 1-1 draw. Wigan lie comfortably 
fourth in League One, Crewe last but not in the least worried.

This is familiar territory for them. The Railwaymen know their station – it is 
five minutes’ walk away – and remain happy to shunt between fourth and second 
tiers as they have through history, sticking to their line and ignoring the 
signals from other clubs of knee-jerk dismissal. Eleven of the 36 managerial 
changes this season have been inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, including all three 
clubs immediately above them. Oldham have been responsible for two. Unveiling 
John Sheridan last week their chairman, Simon Corney, said: “John has always 
been high on my list whenever we have appointed managers” – except, perhaps, 
when they had sacked him in 2009 with the club eighth in the same division.

Crewe do things differently, unmoved by fashion, proud of principle and 
presenting an almost old-fashioned matchday experience of stability and smiling 
hospitality. Last season they survived on the last day through no credit of 
their own; they lost at home to Bradford. They have won only twice at Gresty 
Road since and even lost there to Eastleigh in the FA Cup. But most of their 
fans, fewer than 4,000 on Saturday and out-shouted by more than 2,000 from 
Wigan, seem to accept there are more important things in both life and 
football, such as youth development with an emphasis on technical skills as 
espoused for more than a quarter of a century by Dario Gradi, who is still 
director of football at 74.

Davis, now 50, made his mark early at Crewe, promoted to captain at 19 after 
starting his playing career as Gradi began as manager. He played more than 100 
games there, then at Burnley and Barnsley, and gained non-league managerial 
experience before returning after Gradi’s fourth spell in November 2011 and 
taking them up from League Two six months later in the play-offs. Though 
remembered on Saturday as “an industrial defender”, he carries Gradi’s torch 
faithfully. The result was a game of fine enterprise and tactical wit.

Wigan appoint Gary Caldwell as manager to replace Malky Mackay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/07/wigan-appoint-gary-caldwell-manager-malky-mackay>
Wigan, after four managers and two relegations in three years, are looking up 
under Gary Caldwell, 33 and of the same ID, who failed to stop the club’s 
second drop in his five games last season, after ceding his playing career to 
injury. After a big summer turnover they are brimming with confidence. Yanic 
Wildschut, a speedy Dutchman wide on the left, was fed relentlessly and Crewe’s 
Oliver Turton could have done with more help from George Cooper in front.

“We tried to force them into wide areas,” Davis said afterwards, “but we 
needed to retain the opportunity to break.” If the flow of crosses put a 
blocking burden on the centre-backs, Ben Nugent and Semi Ajayi – no 
half-measures here – the willingness to break and match the high tempo of 
Wigan’s game was clear. Their goal came from it.

Reece Wabara had put Wigan ahead with a snapshot after sustained pressure but 
the equaliser rewarded Crewe’s intent to play on the front foot with three up 
against Wigan’s back three. Ben Garratt put Ryan Colclough away on the right 
from a Wigan corner and Bradden Inman took a precise pass on his chest and beat 
Jussi Jaaskelainen at the near post. Colclough, with deceptive footwork and 
acceleration in his first season at 21, still had time to measure a chip 
against the bar before half-time, leading no doubt to Dave Perkins’ horrible 
foul straight after it. Colclough was not cowed and Garratt, solid in goal 
against distant shots, deserved the luck attached to Wildschut’s that hit a 
post.

Davis was pleased they “kept shape and discipline” and said: “Every time we 
score it’s a good move but we need to get scrappy ones, too. Most managers 
scratch their heads over where we are.” They have 20 games to go, starting at 
Bury tomorrow. He may not get 20 years but, if Crewe go down, it will surely be 
playing up to their beliefs.
 