
And then there were two unbeaten clubs in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>. Stevenage, the third 
on Saturday morning, had their run ended at the Community Stadium, where 
Colchester United beat them 1-0. But they retain second place in the table, now 
seven points behind Tranmere, as neither Sheffield United nor Swindon won at 
home.

Gary Smith, Stevenage manager since late January, blamed the referee, Graham 
Salisbury, more than his players. Anthony Grant was sent off in the 53rd minute 
for bringing down Sanchez Watt in full flight. As Smith prepared to replace 
Greg Tansey with the more defensive midfielder Oliver Risser, Watt raced down 
the left again two minutes later and surprised Steve Arnold with an early shot 
rather than later cross.
Stevenage had late chances to save a league record that, with six games from 
last season, stretched to 17 unbeaten but Risser headed Luke Freeman's 
free-kick wide and Bondz N'Gala's overhead in an added-time scrimmage hit the 
bar. Against that Arnold, lately preferred to the veteran Chris Day, had 
excelled with half a dozen point-blank parries. Smith's fury had no basis in 
the cold light of reason and statistics.Stevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> had two shots on target. 
Perhaps he had forgotten how to lose.

"We would certainly have got something with 11 men on the field," he said. 
"Practically everything we contested the referee stuck a card on us. We 
definitely got a raw deal. Anthony didn't warrant a second yellow; I'm not even 
sure about the first. On the other hand it's down to professionals not to get 
sent off."

Grant was one of three Stevenage men booked for late challenges in the first 
18 minutes. Smith's predecessor, Graham Westley, favoured tall, prickly 
poppies. This lot were spiky as thistles until they settled to the football 
that has taken them to where they are.

Stevenage were sixth when Westley, who drove them non-stop through League Two 
from Blue Square comfort, left for Preston. Smith said then: "This team is on 
such a good run there isn't an awful lot I want to change about the group." 
Having kept them sixth into play-off disappointment, he oversaw 16 ins and 16 
outs in the summer. Their play has a purer stamp. Apart from Day only Jon 
Ashton, currently injured, and Mark Roberts, the centre-backs, remain from 
their double promotion winners.

Smith, at 42, slipped into his first English managerial post almost unnoticed, 
having taken Colorado Rapids to their first MLS Cup in 2010. His playing 
career, including a spell withColchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester>, was cut short by injury. 
This was his first match at the ground, opened in 2008 on the outskirts of 
Britain's oldest town and possibly lowered into place under cover of night. 
Cuckoo Farm Studios are across the road.

Joe Dunne, 39 and his opposite number, is even newer to the managerial game 
but after two longer playing spells at Layer Road enjoys legendary local 
status. He has brought in his Irish compatriot Mark Kinsella, another former 
Colchester player, as assistant and recorded a third win in his four league 
games after John Ward managed none in eight.

Neither club pulls great crowds from populations around 100,000, though 716 
away travellers raised Colchester's average to 3,602. Stevenage's 2,697 is the 
lowest in League One. But the club are not resting on recent laurels. In a few 
weeks a 42-acre training complex opens at nearby Bragbury End and Smith has 
called in Nigel Winterburn to polish the defence as Arsenal's of old. Ahead of 
them James Dunne led the strivers of middle Stevenage with vision.

"We'll just have to go on another run," said Smith eventually. They can start 
it at MK Dons on Saturday in a new-town showdown, second against seventh. 
Crawley lie between them in fourth. They, too, failed to beat Colchester. These 
upstarts bring out the Roman in Camulodunum.
 