
There may not have been dancing in the street – it is not quite the done thing 
at the Den – but there was certainly lively celebration as League One Millwall 
pulled off an upset to knockBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> out of the Cup.

Eddie Howe was punished for making 11 changes to his side as Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> chewed up the Cherries with a 
committed performance of classic 4-4-2 football. Steve Morison gave the Lions a 
first-half lead with a commanding header, before second-half goals from Shaun 
Cummings and Shane Ferguson decisively wrapped up a result that was, in truth, 
never in doubt.

Chelsea set to recall defender Nathan Aké from Bournemouth loan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/chelsea-set--to-recall-nathan-ake-bournemouth>
“Three-nil didn’t flatter us, we could have scored more” said a rosy-cheeked 
Neil Harris after the match. The Millwall manager revealed he had extended 
training to try to ensure his tactical instructions were understood for this 
match and was pleased with the results. “We got the shape right, we pressed at 
the right times and at the right times we were also clinical.

“I’m really, really pleased to come off with a victory against this really 
talented Bournemouth squad.”

Harris’s choice of words was telling because it was not the Bournemouth first 
team that Millwall came up against – far from it. Howe claimed after the match 
that he had been “excited” by the team he had put out but there was no 
disguising his annoyance at the display from a side that failed to register a 
shot on target.

“I can’t hide how I feel, I’m really disappointed”, said Howe. “I see the 
players at work every day and I think they’re much better than what they showed 
today. We’re very much a team that relies on teamwork, relies on understanding 
and building relationships and we didn’t have that cohesion.

Steven Naismith rescues last-ditch draw for Norwich City against Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/norwich-city-southampton-fa-cup-match-report>
“I’m not trying to disrespect the Cup, but the Premier League is very 
demanding and I’ve got to protect my players.”

The key to Millwall’s victory was a classic big-man, little-man combination up 
top. Morison’s height and experience paired with Lee Gregory’s pace and 
anticipation caused Bournemouth problems from the first whistle.

In the 25th minute a succession of successful combinations between the pair 
led to the opening goal. Morison’s flicked header was returned to the Welshman 
by Gregory and he hit a shot that was deflected for a corner. The set piece 
went deep, and there was Morison in space to knock the ball to Gregory, whose 
shot on the turn was deflected wide again. Second corner, near post this time, 
and Morison jumped clear again and rose to direct the ball past Adam Federici.

Bournemouth had no response to going behind and looked disjointed in all 
aspects of play. Jordon Ibe was particularly frustrating, constantly drifting 
inside from the right wing when the game was crying out for width.

He was in the middle of one such foray when the Lions’ 20-year-old prospect 
Fred Onyedinma muscled him off the ball and went on a run that took him through 
three players. Tiring as he approached the box, Onyedinma managed to slip a 
pass to Gregory, who drove the ball just wide of the far post.

Millwall admit council scheme could force club to leave Lewisham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
Things could not stand for Bournemouth and Howe duly made a change at 
half-time, bringing on Callum Wilson and switching to two up front. Inside five 
minutes of the restart Marc Pugh swung in a cross that found Lys Mousset 
unmarked on the penalty spot. The young Frenchman, making his first start for 
the club, lacked the composure to get his header on target with the goal gaping.

Within seconds of that chance Bournemouth found themselves two behind. Morison 
easily found space on the right-hand side of the Cherries’ defence to receive 
the ball and drive it back across the goal. Gregory and Federici both went for 
it but missed, only for the right-back Cummings to pop up on the left-hand side 
and poke home.

Bournemouth finally were able to rouse themselves but their only real 
opportunity came in added time when Wilson had a goal disallowed for offside. 
Once again Millwall sprang up the other end almost immediately and Ferguson’s 
cool finish allowed a small but raucous Millwall crowd to get their party 
started.
 