
For a day League One was the greatest league in England if not in Richard 
Scudamore’s world. With the international break silencing the Premier League’s 
insistent hype and the Championship teams also not playing, the third tier had 
its day in the late-summer sun andBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> took advantage with a 2-0 
win over Scunthorpe United at Ashton Gate which lifted them to second in the 
table, a point behind Peterborough United.

They found the altitude as dizzying as their three defenders did Gary 
McSheffrey, who added unfamiliar industry to familiar skills and hit a post 
early on, and Steve Cotterill had to clear their heads at the interval. The 
manager said later: “They came and sat in, ending up with a back six. The back 
four defended within the 18-yard box, plus the two wide men. It wasn’t about 
going round them. We needed to go through the middle, which we did for the 
corner that got the goal.” Even then it took Flint to crack Iron. Aden Flint, 
the 6ft 5½in defender, headed in Luke Freeman’s delivery in the 52nd minute.

Cotterill was modest about his insight. “I may not always be right,” he said. 
“It was just one man’s gut feeling.” The same man held back his substitutes 
until United had used theirs, then had another gut feeling. Greg Cunningham and 
Scott Wagstaff replaced the brave and elusive Joe Bryan and Kieran Agard after 
82 minutes. In the 83rd Korey Smith and Freeman set up Cunningham to fire in 
the second.

“There’s only one team in Bristol,” sang the Robins’ fans. For the first time 
in 94 years it is almost true. City are the only League club in Bristol, after 
Rovers’ relegation in May. Senior in membership, they have been mostly in 
position, too – except chiefly when they were declared bankrupt in 1982. In May 
2008, under Gary Johnson,they lost the Championship play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/may/24/championship.bristolcity2> 
1-0 to Hull. Now, having dropped a division two seasons ago, they are rising 
again with new purpose and patent potential.

As Rovers felt for the first time the stir of Non-League Day, an annual 
celebration for those who like to be close to their clubs, at Braintree, losing 
2-0 in front of 1,621, City enjoyed the buzz of 12,000 with a Wurzel signature. 
They are looking at a top-flight future worthy of the sixth largest city in 
England. Jon Lansdown, the owner, has written off a £35m loan. And Ashton Gate 
is to become a stadium for 27,000 shared with Bristol RFC (already an excavator 
stood alone at one end, large enough to house the 243 Iron fans).

Finally there is Cotterill, a “working his socks off” manager. In his first 
role he saw his home-town Cheltenham, also Robins, into the League. “I was left 
to do things my way,” he said, relishing the same here, where he arrived in 
December, taking them from bottom to 12th. “I’m better when I’m allowed to do 
things and get on.” He was equally honest about his liking for British and 
Irish players. All 14 that he used conformed, including the seven bought in the 
window, all starters. The captain, Wade Elliott from Birmingham, stood out with 
Smith (Oldham) and Freeman (Stevenage). “With predominantly English teams you 
know you’ll get a good honest game,” he said. Manchester City were in this 
position 16 years ago. Bristol could be set to follow, though without losing 
their identity to a brand.
 