
St George’s Day may have marked the penultimate throes of Karl Oyston’s 
Blackpool inLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>
. If they had beaten Fleetwood in the first-ever Fylde Coast league derby at 
Highbury Stadium they would have climbed above them and had their fate in their 
own hands with two games to go. As it is, after a goalless draw they stay below 
the dotted line, with Fleetwood just above it and only Shrewsbury and 
Chesterfield catchable.

Moreover Shrewsbury can get out of range on Tuesday, when they play a game in 
hand at Walsall, where Fleetwood go a week Monday.Blackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> are at home on Saturday to 
Wigan, who are as good as up and will be looking to be champions. Fylde seems 
certain to lose one of its teams to League Two and maybe both.

Whatever happens, honour lies with Fleetwood, embarrassment with Blackpool, 
who five years ago to the daywere playing Newcastle in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/apr/23/blackpool-newcastle-premier-league>
 while their neighbours were mixing it with Histon in the course of six 
promotions in 10 years. A year ago, after six changes of manager in two years, 
Blackpool came down from the Championship 20 points from safety having failed 
to fulfil their last home match because of a fans’ pitch invasion in protest at 
the Oyston ownership. For fear of triggering a points deduction the supporters’ 
trust plans a milder but no less heartfelt protest on Saturday. The cost of 
relegation is put at £750,000.

Fleetwood put on a show for St George, whose colours they share. Home fans had 
free flags to wave, with the club badge at the centre. Thornton Cleveleys Brass 
Band were pre-match entertainers where others have pom‑pom girls. The national 
anthem was sung before kick-off. After this the game was bound to be an 
anticlimax, the scoreline inevitable. Fleetwood had drawn 14 times this season, 
five in the past 10 games, which included a single win. Blackpool had the 
division’s fewest goals, 39.

There could be no blaming the pitch, which looked fit almost for tennis; the 
groundsman has All England Club experience. Steven Pressley, the home manager, 
said later: “There was a lot of anxiety and a lot of pressure.” But Fleetwood 
were poised on the ball at first and stretched the game with strong support 
from their full-backs, Conor McLaughlin, set for Euro 2016 with Northern 
Ireland, and Amari’i Bell, and driven relentlessly in midfield by Eggert 
Jonsson and Antoni Sarcevic.

Neil McDonald, Blackpool’s manager, said he had worked hard on his side’s 
shape after losing 3-0 at Rochdale the previous week and having weathered the 
first half-hour, they might have led at the interval. Jim McAlister’s 
cross‑shot from the left looked to be sneaking inside the far post but, to make 
sure, Danny Philliskirk tapped in. He was offside. Just beforehand Mark Cullen 
had forced Chris Maxwell to tip the ball away for a corner. It was Blackpool’s 
first shot on Fleetwood’s goal in over two hours despite beating them 1-0 in 
November. To Pressley’s dismay they won then with no shot on target and an 
own-goal.

Pressley is Fleetwood’s second manager of the season, following Graham 
Alexander, who took them into League One and 10th place last season but was 
sacked after 10 games this campaign, when they lay 20th. Fleetwood are still 
20th but still way above their past and looking up with a new £8m training 
ground. If Jim Ryan’s late curling shot had dipped in rather than hitting the 
goal-frame joint, they would have been laughing in 18th. Then again Maxwell 
saved them later still from another own-goal debacle.

Since Sam Allardyce left West Ham a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/west-ham-sam-allardyce-contract-not-renewed>
 McDonald is one of three of his henchmen to step out on their own. While Teddy 
Sheringham lasted 33 games at Stevenage and Kevin Nolan 14 at Leyton Orient, 
McDonald has survived with respectable aplomb, perhaps because Blackpool fear 
no one else would take the job. Good authority has it that they keep up 
attendances by counting season-ticket holders whether they turn up or not. A 
posh coach took the team the seven miles to Fleetwood. But on the way back 
20-odd home fans on the tram spotted Oyston at traffic lights on the parallel 
road and, springing off at the next stop, mobbed his car. Latest reports say 
the dragon is breathing but not fire.
 