
Steve Bruce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/steve-bruce> asked Hull City 
fans not to be too hard on the club’s owner, Assem Allam, after a large number 
protested before and during the 2-0 win over Brentford.

With Hull unable to reach the automatic promotion spots in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> fans called for the 
unpopular Allam, who is suffering from an unspecified illness, to quit the KC 
Stadium. His unsuccessful attempt to change the team’s name and the 
introduction of a membership scheme for next season have led to protests, with 
fans showing red cards before kick-off and also calling for him to sell up 
during the game.

Bruce said: “The one thing that disappoints me is all the protests and red 
cards. At the end of the day the chairman, at the moment, is not well at all 
and this will not help him.

“He’s put £70m of his own money into the club. He’s obviously upset and 
disappointed but just be careful what you wish for. I can’t see many more 
people round here who will bail out Hull. When I first met him he bought the 
club for the community. He has built cancer hospitals.

“It’s been the best five years in the history of the club and it will be 
remembered for the membership scheme and the name change.”

Bruce admitted some of the seven players he had brought into the starting 
lineup had given him food for thought for the play-offs. “Two or three of the 
performances, it’s given me a headache with what I’m thinking about,” he said.

Hull took the lead just after the half-hour when Andy Robertson raced down the 
left and squared the ball hard and low and Harlee Dean could only turn it into 
his own net. The home side should have gone further in front but Adama 
Diomande’s penalty was saved by David Button.

Hull made it 2-0 in first-half stoppage time as Mo Diamé took two attempts to 
score from Harry Maguire’s low cross on the right.

Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> rarely threatened, 
Marco Djuricin shooting wide in the first half and Sam Saunders hitting a 
free-kick narrowly off target in the closing moments.

The visitors’ head coach, Dean Smith, complained about a congested fixture 
schedule which had left his depleted squad without payers such as Lasse Vibe 
and Alan Judge through injury.

He said: “We played three games in March and eight in April. The Premier 
League and FA Cup seem to take precedence over the Championship now.Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> can rotate their squad and they 
had fresher legs tonight.

“We were organised behind the ball and made it difficult for them. We got 
caught out by a big diagonal ball and Harlee has put it in his own net.

“It was very difficult to get back in the game after then. The second goal 
just on half-time made it too much of a mountain to climb in the second half. 
I’ve got some bodies at home who are feeling a bit tired. It’s too many games 
in too short a period.”
 