
Steven Doris' dramatic late free-kick for Arbroath means Celtic will have to 
replay theirScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> 
fourth-round tie against the third-tier side.

Neil Lennon made nine changes to his team, having one eye on Wednesday's home 
Champions League Group G decider against Spartak Moscow. They went ahead when 
Stewart Malcolm hammered a clearance from the byline off the back of fellow
Arbroath <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arbroath> defender Alex Keddie 
and into the net.

The SPL champions created and missed a host of chances while also being foiled 
by goalkeeper Scott Morrison, but with four minutes remaining Doris shocked
Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> when his deflected drive 
beat Lukasz Zaluska.

It means another game in an already congested fixture list for Lennon, who 
gave starts to the likes of Zaluska, Joe Chalmers, Rabiu Ibrahim and Dylan 
McGeouch. Thomas Rogne returned from a calf injury while Emilio Izaguirre was 
on the bench after recovering from a hamstring complaint. Arbroath had a 
smattering of players with SPL experience such as Keddie, Brian Kerr, Derek 
Holmes and the player-manager Paul Sheerin.

The top tier of Celtic Park was closed and the meagre crowd lent an unreal 
atmosphere to a match that Celtic dominated from the start. The procession 
towards Arbroath's goal began from the first whistle and in the third minute 
the Celtic striker Miku headed a Chalmers corner over the bar from six yards.

McGeouch was causing problems down the right with his pace but it was Ibrahim 
who flashed a shot wide of the target from the edge of the box before Tony 
Watt's right-foot drive from 20 yards was saved by Morrison.

In the 20th minute Victor Wanyama drove wide of the far post from distance and 
moments later the Celtic captain Scott Brown looped a header over the bar from 
another McGeouch cross.

After surviving all those Celtic attempts on goal, Arbroath gifted the opener. 
The defender Mark Baxter and Malcolm combined to dispossess Miku on the far 
side of the box and the ball appeared to be running over the byline for a goal 
kick.

With the whole of Celtic Park to aim at Malcolm attempted to hammer a 
clearance up the park but succeeded only in hitting the back of Keddie, with 
the ball rebounding into the goal.

Morrison had to make a great point-blank save from Brown a minute later while 
his opposite number Zaluksa got involved in the game for the first time two 
minutes from the break when he made a decent save from Baxter's 20-yard drive.

Celtic kept piling forward with relative ease after the break, with Ibrahim 
curling the ball past the far post after being set up by Adam Matthews.

Arbroath began to tire as the second half progressed and they were let off in 
the 67th minute when Miku worked a yard of space inside the box before rifling 
a shot off the junction of bar and post. Moments later, Morrison made a great 
save from the same player after he had turned and blasted a shot from eight 
yards.

Celtic groaned when Wanyama headed a cross from Beram Kayal over the bar and, 
to add to Celtic's exhausting list of attempts on goal, Kayal fired just wide 
from the edge of the box before Morrison made a save from an Ibrahim header.

In the final 10 minutes Arbroath kicked on and after Rogne had conceded a 
free-kick 30 yards out with a foul on Derek Holmes, Doris's drive took a 
defection before nestling in the back of the net.

In the final seconds Morrison made another save from Lassad Nouioui, who had 
replaced Watt in the 79th minute, but Arbroath held on to earn an unlikely 
replay at Gayfield. 
 