
The old club of Bruce Grobbelaar, David Platt and Danny Murphy has a day in 
the sun at Wembley on Sunday whenCrewe Alexandra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crewealexandra> take on Cheltenham Town 
for a place in League One.

Dario Gradi, the alchemist who has transformed so many young players into 
top-line performers, is now upstairs again as director of football: the five 
consecutive defeats that started the season compounded by three more in 
November led to him making way for Steve Davis to become the manager.

Davis, a former Crewe and Burnley defender, guided Crewe through a semi-final 
against Southend United in order to qualify for today's play-off final, Chris 
Barker's 88th-minute strike delivering a 3-2 aggregate victory.

Crewe finished seventh, five points and one place behind Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham>. But Davis said: "It's a case 
of who copes best on the day, who controls their nerves and who plays the 
better football. There's no favourites. If anything they'd be, as they finished 
above us. But the fact that they won more games than us over the season doesn't 
count for anything now."

Davis can remind his players of the two 1-0 league wins during regular season 
– and an 8-1 home victory in April 2011 that stands as Cheltenham's worst 
result in 40 years – and he adds: "It's not a day out. It's not a holiday. 
We're still working towards our goal of promotion and we need to keep the lads' 
minds focused."

Expect Davis to line his side up in a 4-4-2 formation with the hope that Nick 
Powell can continue the form that has reportedly led to Manchester United 
having a £4m bid accepted, with Tottenham Hotspur and Arsenal also showing 
interest. The 18-year-old attacking midfielder returned an impressive 14 goals 
in 33 league starts, though Davis denies that Sir Alex Ferguson has sealed any 
deal. "At the moment it's just speculation," he said. "There has been no solid 
offer from anybody. Nothing will be happening until Sunday's out of the way. 
Maybe next week we'll know a little bit more."

Regarding how Cheltenham – who beat Torquay 4-1 in their semi-final – might 
line up, Davis added: "I think Mark [Yates, the manager] will play the team 
which beat Torquay in the second leg when he had the two pacy wingers on [James 
McGlashan and Kaid Mohamed]. Both of them are dangerous on their day, but 
they've got other good footballers in the middle of the park too, like Marlon 
Pack, although not necessarily athletic ones. They also have two experienced 
centre-halves in Steve Elliott and Alan Bennett, who while not particularly 
mobile do an excellent job for them."
 