
In America, it is known as the YSA problem. It has been a bugbear of Major 
League Soccer’s commissioner, Don Garber, for longer than he will probably wish 
to remember and a couple of years ago, with a new television deal being 
negotiated, a memo went around that he could no longer tolerate that slightly 
strange tradition of supporters shouting: “You suck asshole!” every time the 
opposition goalkeeper took a goal-kick.

Real Salt Lake went for the naughty-step approach and warned their fans that 
if the song continued the club would not allow drums and banners inside the 
stadium, as well as halting privileges such as parking permits and discounted 
tickets. On the other hand, the New York Red Bulls opted for an incentive 
programme – bribery, to put it another way – and offered their supporters’ 
groups $2,000 each if they could go four games YSA-free.

Other clubs use different methods when it comes to the songs they dislike. 
Liverpool put a Bart Simpson cartoon on their website recently appealing for 
the naughty word in the Steven Gerrard song to be removed – roundly ignored, 
naturally – and the attempts at sanitising football crowds go all the way back 
to Brian Clough’s early years at Nottingham Forest.

Arsenal’s Arsène Wenger scarred for life by his war on Med with Monaco | 
Dominic Fifield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/21/arsenal-arsene-wenger-scarred-monaco-marseille>
Clough once ordered that a sign be carried around the City Ground before one 
game with the message: “Gentlemen, no swearing please! Brian.” When Clough was 
in the running for the England job the Trent End produced its own sign: “Brian, 
no leaving please! The gentlemen.”

It’s different, though, with Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, trying to navigate a way 
through the fog of bigotry that still pollutes the club and the realisation, 
even in February 2015, that anyone who has a go will quickly find the hate mob 
unleashed on them.

Sure enough, the poison started flowing when Stan Collymore set up an online 
petition – “Sectarian chanting is illegal” – aimed at turning down the volume 
on the Famine Song and Billy Boys and challenging some of the warped views that 
still exist behind Ibrox’s red-bricked walls.

In truth, the culture is so embedded and deep-rooted it might be 50 years, or 
longer, before Rangers (and Celtic) stop embarrassing modern Scotland.

But at least he was willing to have a go, when he will have known that every 
wannabe Begbie on the internet would be on his case. Collymore was told very 
clearly his campaign wasn’t welcome. There were threats of violence and other 
messages to his Twitter account that made it clear their first reaction was to 
attack, like zombies.

One guy who turned out to be a member of the club’s IT staff invited him to 
meet him in Glasgow, signed off with a clenched-fist emoticon that suggested he 
did not want to discuss Microsoft Windows or the latest edition of Smart 
Computing magazine. The Rangers Supporters’ Trust, an organisation that 
presumably wants to be taken seriously, reminded its followers what happened to 
Ulrika Jonsson 17 years ago (a bit rich at a club where they idolise Paul 
Gascoigne) and released a statement describing Collymore as a “self-publicist” 
and an “internet troll”, making petty jibes about his playing career and saying 
his complaints were “ill-advised, inaccurate and inane”. Plus, of course, the 
default-setting option every time Rangers are put on the spot: what aboutCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>? It’s the tactic that is known in 
Glasgow as Whataboutery. Never mind what we did, what about them? OK, we’re 
singing about the IRA or 19th-century famines – but what about the other lot?

Maybe there are times when Collymore could be less strident and it would bring 
more people on board if he could soften his tone. His style will always put a 
few backs up and, in hindsight, maybe it would have been a more effective 
petition if it addressed both Old Firm clubs rather than just one.

Worcester City’s Shabir Khan sees red after body-slamming opponent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/21/worcester-city-shabir-khan-body-slamming-opponent>
Yet it is still fairly abysmal that one of the sport’s prominent broadcasters 
and racism campaigners tries to tackle a song that features the line “up to our 
knees in Fenian blood” and is dropped from his slot withBT Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bt-sport> because the station “did not agree 
with the nature of the debate”.

In Spain, they have been deliberating over the past week about whether 
Barcelona should be punished because a group of supporters known asAlmogàvers, 
latching on to some video footage of Cristiano Ronaldo on a birthday night out, 
started singing at one match: “Es un borracho, Cristiano es un borracho” — 
translated to accuse him of being a drunk. The threat of disciplinary action 
may sound faintly preposterous bearing in mind what can regularly be heard at 
football grounds elsewhere but the death of a Deportivo la Coruña supporter 
during violence with Atlético Madrid fans last November has led to a purge on 
any chants that Javier Tebas, president of Liga de Fútbol Profesional, says 
constitutes “symbolic violence”.

Barcelona, therefore, have been charged and several other clubs are also in 
trouble. Sevilla are one of them because when they played Málaga their fans 
were apparently singing: “We want a tsunami in the Costa del Sol.”

Lugo, in the Second Division, have been reported because fans sang “clown, 
clown” at Girona’s Francisco José Sandaza and it does make you wonder how long 
the backlog of disciplinary cases might be were the same rules to apply in the 
British leagues.

Yet the songs Collymore highlighted are of an entirely different level. In 
2006,Rangers were ordered by Uefa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/may/25/newsstory.sport4> to make an 
announcement before each game clarifying that Billy’s Boys was banned because 
of its sectarian content.

The Famine Song contains the line “The famine is over, why don’t you go home?” 
and was deemed racist by three judges in 2008. Yet both were sungen masse, 
along with No Pope of Rome, at theScottish League Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cis-insurance-cup> semi-final against 
Celtic earlier this month. And, go on then, what about the other lot? Celtic’s 
dunderheads went through songs referring to a “Hun” and, of course, they have 
their own share of 90-minute and full-time bigots. But it was the Rangers end 
that seemed hell‑bent on going back through the decades and, if it does seem 
slightly unusual that Collymore is the one demanding change, maybe that is 
because we rarely hear a peep out of the people who really should be driving 
this.

The Scottish Professional Football League hides behind a rule that means clubs 
cannot be disciplined if they have taken steps “so far as is reasonably 
practicable” and the Scottish FA is just as feeble.

As for BT Sport, would it not have been better to highlight Collymore’s 
legitimate complaints and have a grown-up debate rather than decide it was too 
toxic and take him off air. “We abhor all forms of racism,” read a statement. 
“It should not be tolerated in sport. When issues of racism or sectarianism 
emerge, they should be tackled and discussed in the correct manner.”

Except it’s easy to put out a press release and promise the discussion will 
take place on another day. Why not involve the man who has brought it to light? 
And do they really not understand the irony that Gazza, the guy who once played 
a mock flute during an Old Firm game, is their guest on Sunday?

The same statement argues that it is “not censorship” that Collymore was 
removed from his role. Maybe not, but what has actually happened is that 
Collymore has complained a bit too vociferously for the station’s liking and 
the relevant people have taken what looks suspiciously like a commercially 
motivated decision rather than one that is actually fuelled by what is right 
and wrong.

Collymore had promised taking his petition to the various sponsors and 
broadcasters and suggesting they boycott Rangers until the sectarian songs 
stopped. Would the relevant people have had the nerve? Well, just look at what 
has happened instead. On Friday, when Rangers played at Raith Rovers, the 
soundtrack was defiantly predictable. The television executives have run a 
mile, Collymore has been bumped and the Rangers Supporters’ Trust has told its 
followers they “can chalk that up as a minor victory”. And everyone wonders why 
we are stuck in the same old loop.

Fans can make it Jam yesterday, not tomorrow 

José Mourinho spot-on with response to Chelsea fans’ Paris incident | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/21/jose-mourinho-chelsea-fans-paris-metro-train>
Let’s hope Souleymane S does accept Chelsea’s invitation to be a guest for a 
future home game and sees for himself what the vast majority of supporters make 
of the squalid events that have engulfed the club over the past week.

Something tells me he would be overwhelmed by the reaction if he were invited 
on to the pitch and there is also no doubt the television images could be 
infinitely more useful for Chelsea than any message in the club programme or 
statement on their website.

It was 1978 when the Jam released Down in the Tube Station at Midnight – “they 
smelt of pubs and Wormwood Scrubs and too many right-wing meetings” – and no 
doubt many people watching the video footage from Richelieu-Drouot station felt 
it belonged to that era. The truth is that this small element has never left 
Chelsea’s support and José Mourinho is wrong when he says they don’t belong to 
the club. They do and they will have the stamps in their passports to prove it.

Souleymane’s presence might not drive them away but the crowd’s response might 
send out the loudest message yet about what everyone else at Stamford Bridge 
feels about it – and that, at least, would be a start.
 