
Note relating to December's Genius puzzle, number 78: Nine solutions must be 
converted into a contradictory word with the same number of letters before 
entry into the grid. One 9-letter solution (entered normally) consists of the 
initial letters of these nine entries.

My world threatened to fall apart last month on a visit to my daughter and her 
family in Devon, outside Exeter. She was born in the mid-1960s and brought up 
properly, including being taken to task in a firm but kindly way whenever she 
spoke or wrote a sentence that included the possibility of there being more 
than one alternative. Old habits die hard, so when a grandchild spoke of a 
third alternative, I pointed out to her in my gentle, non-pedantic voice the 
grammatical error of her ways.

"Ah", said my daughter, "I have been meaning to have this out with you for 
some time. Chambers says you are wrong." Nonsense, I replied; so the book was 
produced and there it was in black and white in the latest edition: 
"alternative n. either of a pair, or any of a set, of possibilities". On my 
return home I discovered that Oxford, too, had deserted the cause. The 2005 
revised second edition of the Oxford Dictionary of English (on which until now 
I have heaped only praise) has: "one of two or more available possibilities". 
Only Collins offered me even a crumb of consolation with its: "a possibility of 
choice, esp between two things". Even this 'esp' is no real comfort for I know 
in my heart of hearts that the next edition of Collins will have removed that 
qualified prop to what once seemed an eternal pillar of the temple of the 
English language. When, I have been asking myself, did it all go wrong? I have 
long since thrown away my 1993 Chambers. Was it then? Or could it even have 
been with the 1988 edition? Why was I not told until now? I shall, of course, 
myself remain in the true cause for the rest of my life. But never again to be 
able to correct a grandchild's grammar on this point will be a source of real 
grief to the end.

My file on the subject of the word 'pet' (as meaning a tantrum) is now bulging 
with messages in support of the case that this usage is not just some Home 
Counties affectation. A Burnley mother, a native of the north-east, a solver 
brought up in Scotland and another near to Newcastle, someone from Darlington 
in County Durham (who in passing complained, in vain I fear, about the 
crossword convention that Newcastle equalled north-east). Also two Canadians, a 
native-born Australian and a citizen of the US Virgin Islands were among those 
moved to tell me that the meaning objected to was commonplace in their 
households. For the Virgin Islander it even felt as if it belonged in the 
American South. ("Lawzy, Miss Scarlett, how'd you get in such a pet?") Some of 
the comments, though, sowed the question in my mind that we may be dealing here 
with a generation gap, because the internal indications were that most of these 
correspondents are over 50.

Charity News
 Older readers may remember that last year at this time I mentioned a new 3D 
crossword concept and an associated 3D Crossword Calendar. I have been told 
that they provide much satisfaction, once you get past a short spell of frying 
your brains while you find out how the puzzles work. There is another such 3D 
calendar out now for 2010 in aid of the BBC's Children in Need Appeal. It can 
be found at www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk.

The genius behind all of this is Eric Westbrook, who is now working on a 
speaking 3D puzzle for the blind and partially sighted. He says that in its 
present basic form it involves your computer having a loud speaker and a screen 
reader such as JAWS and requires an Excel spreadsheet and a Macros program, at 
which point I for one am lost. The clues for the prototype have been provided 
by Rufus. Sarah Montague of BBC Radio Four's Today Programme has then recorded 
the clues, which are embedded in the Excel sheet's boxes. Eric has a 45-minute 
free demonstration that would run on your computer and would be happy to hear 
from anyone interested, particularly anyone with the programming skills needed 
to take the prototype and turn it into something more professional. He is to be 
found at ericwestbrook@btinternet.com.

Arachne has asked me to thank all those who sponsored her Marine Corps 10K run 
in Washington DC on 25 October. She raised more than £1,500 for the Barra/Essau 
Upper Basic School in Gambia.

Pasquale's November Genius puzzle attracted a large field of entries, 372 in 
all. It was also remarkable for the high tally of first-day submissions, at 39 
the highest that I can remember. First in for a change on that Monday morning 
was not an Australian, but Ian of London N14 at 01:30. Second was Bob from 
Forest Range, South Australia at 02:53.

Advance notice
 Araucaria's Christmas special is due to be published on Saturday 19 December, 
a few days earlier than usual because of the way the holiday dates fall this 
year. I wish you all fun with it, a happy Christmas and good solving in 2010.

· This article was corrected on Wednesday 9 December 2009. In the article 
above we said that Eric Westbrook's surname was Westwood. This has been changed.
 