
In the end it was the quality of the finishing that meant Stoke progressed 
beyond this round for the seventh year in a row without the need for a replay. 
While that of Mark Hughes’s team bore the hallmarks of international class, the 
late chances fluffed by Doncaster would have made anFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> bloopers tape.

Jonathan Walters thrashed in what turned out to be a stunning winner as Stoke 
put themidweek disappointment of conceding a deficit to Liverpool in the 
Capital One Cup semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/stoke-city-liverpool-capital-one-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 behind them. Without their twinkle-toed trio of Bojan Krkic, Xherdan Shaqiri 
and Marko Arnautovic, the honours fell to the Republic of Ireland international 
and Peter Crouch to navigate the way to victory at the Keepmoat Stadium.

Having fielded the same XI in the four previous matches since Christmas, 
including the single-goal loss to Liverpool, Hughes made nine changes. For 
continuity’s sake, he retained the central defensive duo Ryan Shawcross and 
Philipp Wollscheid. They were both kept under the cosh as Doncaster made a 
mockery of the 45 places in the English pyramid separating the teams at 
kick-off.

It would have been far from an injustice had either Nathan Tyson or Andy 
Butler converted chances from inside the six-yard box after the clock struck 90 
minutes. But, having hauled themselves back to cancel out Crouch’s opener on 
the quarter-hour, neither could keep the ball down under pressure.

“It was a proper cup tie and I don’t think many people left before the end. It 
went to the wire and we had two great chances at the end,” said Darren 
Ferguson, Hughes’s former Manchester United team-mate.

In contrast to Hughes’s sweeping changes, the single alteration Ferguson made 
was enforced after their captain, James Coppinger, turned his ankle in 
training. The other 10 from the 3-0 win at Southend last week, the Yorkshire 
club’s eighth in a dozen matches, were retained.

Doncaster’s equaliser, after Crouch crowned only his fourth start of a 
frustrating season with a deft finish to Joselu’s centre, had the Yorkshire 
club’s 13,299 crowd – comfortably the biggest here this season – dreaming of 
another Ferguson cup tale. The defender Luke McCullough burst half the length 
of the field before squaring and although Stoke’s debutant goalkeeper Jakob 
Haugaard parried his initial effort, Tyson was quickest to the rebound.

At that point it appeared to be turning into an uncomfortable afternoon for 
Hughes, who scored in the 1990 Cup final to provide Ferguson’s famous father 
with his first English trophy. Ten minutes after the restart Conor Grant zipped 
a drive through a crowded penalty area and narrowly wide and Craig Alcock went 
down under a challenge from Mame Biram Diouf, only for the referee, Keith 
Stroud, to wave away home penalty appeals.

Doncaster sensed blood only to be bloodied by Stoke’s spectacular 
counterpunch. A matter of seconds after Crouch got in an almighty tangle to 
poke over an unguarded net, after Mame Biram Diouf’s header was pushed out by 
Thorsten Stuckmann, Walters saved his blushes by unleashing his 30-yard 
howitzer. “It was a good Cup tie, they played well and caused us problems. It’s 
taken two good quality goals to take the tie away from them,” said Hughes.

Even then, Andy Williams, the much-travelled lower-league striker, hit the 
crossbar with the deftest of headers before the two fluffed efforts in injury 
time saw Stoke into round four.
 