
Parties don’t get to choose the byelections that they contest, but if Ukip had 
to choose a seat to fight,Stoke-on-Trent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stoke-on-trent> Central wouldn’t be a bad 
choice.

Related: Tristram Hunt to quit as MP to become V&A director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>

In last year’s referendum, 69% of voters in Stoke-on-Trent voted Leave. 
Compared to the other constituencies in the council area, Stoke-on-Trent 
Central is slightly younger and has more students. That means the Leave share 
of the vote in Tristram Hunt’s seat is probably slightly smaller. Despite that, 
the seat is still comfortably in the top 100 most Leave-leaning seats in the 
country. Some parts of the country voted strongly to leave without having 
displayed much previous interest in Ukip – but the party also did well in the 
2015 general election. There were about 30 seats where it did better in terms 
of vote share – but a number of those seats feature sizeable Conservative 
majorities, and so are less winnable.

The fact that the seat is held by Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> also makes this an appealing 
byelection for Ukip. In the longer-term, Ukip will have to find a new raison 
d’être – but in the short-term, its best hope of winning byelections is to turn 
them into referendums on Brexit. (This is also the best short-term strategy for 
the Liberal Democrats, for the opposite reason.)

In seats held by the Conservatives, it would be difficult for Ukip to win a 
fight between two parties committed to leaving. But in seats held by Labour, 
Ukip can try to poach votes from the Conservatives, votes which would not 
ordinarily have gone to the party were it not for the heightened importance of 
Brexit. Since Ukip just pipped the Conservatives to second place last time 
round, it can make a credible claim to be the best choice for voters who want 
to step up the pressure for a short, sharp Brexit.

These are all sound reasons why Ukip will do well in Stoke-on-Trent. So will 
it win? In my view, and in the view of most bookies, Labour has to be the 
favourite. Because of poor turnout (under 50%), Hunt’s majority in the last 
election was small in absolute terms – a shade over 5,000 votes – but large in 
percentage terms (16.7%). Byelections can result in huge swings: the swing 
towards the Liberal Democrats in Richmond Park last December was more than 30%. 
Usually, however, these swings come at the expense of governing parties, not 
parties of opposition. In byelections this parliament, Labour has increased its 
vote share more often than not.

If Ukip doesn’t win, or doesn’t run Labour close, that calls into question its 
ability to win parliamentary seats. Since Ukip has so far been able to shape 
the future of the UK without much in the way of parliamentary representation, 
that might not matter – but it would suggest that the referendum, far from 
being a staging post on the road to supplanting Labour, might signal Ukip’s 
peak.

Chris Hanretty is reader in politics at the University of East Anglia
 