
The closing tie of the fourth round offered no fairy tale bookend to the FA 
Cup weekend. Instead Rochdale, lying fifth in League One, were beaten soundly by
Stoke City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> who, at least, knew 
they had been in a game. They now play Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park in the 
fifth round while Rochdale can concentrate on winning promotion.

After a pre-match soundtrack of James, Happy Mondays and the Stone Roses had 
this tight ground rocking, – and the mascot, Desmond the Dragon, jigging –
Rochdale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> were stunned within 
four minutes of the kick-off.

Keith Hill’s team had initially pinned Stoke City back, winning an early 
corner. Now, though, came a beautiful strike from Bojan Krkic. Jack Butland, 
one of two Stoke changes alongside Ryan Shawcross, hoofed a clearance downfield 
and when the ball was headed out it came to the Spaniard, who fired a sweet 
20-yard shot past Rochdale’s goalkeeper Josh Lillis for his fifth goal of the 
season.

Krkic has been one of Stoke’s go-to performers in his first season since being 
bought for £3m from Barcelona. Operating in the No10 berth he continued to show 
why, tormenting the Rochdale defence with his quick feet and teasing deliveries 
from corners.

Rochdale v Stoke City: FA Cup fourth round – live! | John Ashdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/jan/26/rochdale-v-stoke-city-fa-cup-fourth-round-live>
The contest was open, though, and the Dale posed a threat whenever they moved 
forward. Joseph Bennett illustrated how when the right-back made a buccaneering 
run and sent over a cross that flashed in and out of the danger area before 
Butland could blink.


Krkic’s evening was to prove eventful and truncated. The 24-year-old decided 
to get involved when Peter Vincenti left Victor Moses in a heap following a 
challenge. As Stoke’s manager, Mark Hughes, went ballistic on the touchline and 
Rochdale refused to put the ball out it eventually came to Vincenti. Now, Krkic 
went in hard on the Rochdale No7 to enrage the midfielder and after handbags 
were exchanged the referee Martin Atkinson restored order before showing 
Stoke’s scorer a yellow card.

Bad was about to follow the good and the ugly for Krkic. Racing on to a ball 
in Rochdale’s area he went down unchallenged and was replaced in the 32nd 
minute by Stephen Ireland after appearing to suffer a knee injury. This had the 
home fans gleefully shouting “cheat” at Krkic as he departed.

Rochdale went close soon afterwards when Matthew Done raced clear but he 
steered his shot wide. As the break neared Done nearly beat Butland, while 
earlier Stephen Dawson had a close-range attempt smothered by the goalkeeper. 
Stoke, despite their lead, had been warned.

After the interval Hughes continued to berate the officials, turning to the 
fourth, Michael Jones, in disgust after Stoke were denied a corner claim 
following a speculative 25-yard Marc Wilson shot. Moments later Hughes was much 
happier when a pass by Moses was turned home expertly by Ireland to stretch his 
team’s lead.

FA Cup fifth-round draw: Middlesbrough to visit holders Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/26/fa-cup-fifth-round-draw-middlesbrough-arsenal-bradford>
Yet despite Stoke’s 2-0 cushion Rochdale continued to take the contest to 
their Premier League opponents and to aid this effort Hill made two quick 
substitutions, bringing on Reuben Noble-Lazarus and Calvin Andrew for Vincenti 
and Done.


But if Hill hoped they would add an extra spark to his side, Moses made any 
chance of a comeback all but impossible by making it 3-0. The forward turned 
Rafferty inside and out before bending a peach of a finish beyond Lillis.

This had the Stoke faithful singing “Hughesy, Hughesy give us a wave?” The 
Welshman obliged, knowing that his side were all but through. Rhys Bennett 
grabbed a late consolation for Rochdale before Jonathan Walters added a fourth 
for Stoke in stoppage time.
 