
We’ve all heard the importance of looking within, finding yourself, and being 
authentic to what you see. What could possibly be wrong with that?

Actually, Chinese philosophers 2,000 years ago would say our emphasis on 
self-discovery has led us dangerously astray and constrains us.

Consider the self the way that they did: there is no true self and no self you 
can discover in the abstract by looking within. Such a self would be little 
more than a snapshot of you at that particular moment in time. We are messy, 
multifaceted selves who go through life bumping up against other messy, 
multifaceted selves. Who we are at any given moment develops through our 
constantly shifting interactions with other people.

Being untrue to ourselves helps us break bad patterns. Confucius taught that 
we must ‘overcome the self’

Philosophers, such as Confucius, advocated living “as if”. They said that by 
engaging in as-if rituals – which are the very opposite of the sincere, 
authentic approach to ourselves – we will develop into better human beings.

How does this work? Consider a game of hide-and-seek with a child. When you 
play at being a befuddled adult who can’t hide very well, both you and the 
child know you are just pretending. But by taking on these roles you have both 
broken from your usual patterns. The triumphant child experiences competence 
over an adult; the adult is the fallible, vulnerable person bested by a child.

We break from who we are when we note the not-so-good patterns we’ve fallen 
into and then actively work to shift them – “as if” we were different people in 
that moment. Such opportunities exist all around us. When we greet someone 
cheerfully even though we’re feeling down at the moment; when we calmly respond 
to an infuriating person even though our “real” feeling is anger. In all such 
instances, we enter an alternate reality in which we draw on different sides of 
ourselves and each time we do so we come back slightly changed.

Being untrue to ourselves helps us break bad patterns. Confucius (who 
presumably saw the dangers of too much self-absorption and would have almost 
assuredly been horrified by theMyers-Briggs test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/myers-briggs-employee-personality-test-accurate>
) taught that we must “overcome the self”. His rituals liberated people from 
the notion of any sort of essential self.

But if there’s no essential self and you are always changing, you might wonder 
how you could ever decide what’s best for you. Here again, the notion of living 
life by breaking from who you think you are can help. Consider the example of a 
student we know: throughout secondary school he’d excelled in maths and 
science, so when he went to university he expected to continue along that path, 
and planned on studying economics. He had an interest in Chinese, but quit 
after a term because learning a foreign language didn’t seem to be a strength 
of his.

After encountering Chinese philosophy, he realised that he didn’t need to 
limit himself to his strengths and proclivities, nor did he have to stick to a 
plan he’d previously made, so he returned to Chinese, did a postgraduate degree 
in Asian studies, and now works as a diplomat. By breaking from his vision of 
himself he found an expansive and unexpected life.

It is liberating to understand the self and the world to be unstable, 
imperfect and fragmented. This gives us all the more opportunity to shift 
things on micro levels constantly. We alter things at a small, daily level, and 
if we’re successful we eventually build tremendous communities around us in 
which we, and other people, can flourish.

The Path: a New Way to Think About Everything  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385669/>is by Michael 
Puett and Christine Gross-Loh (£14.99, Viking). To order a copy for £11.99 go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385669/>
 