
As a manager who has never before been on the verge of winning a league 
championship, Gordon Strachan's anxiety to see Celtic's procession to the 
Scottish title confirmed as early as possible is understandable. His team will 
finally be crowned if they defeat Hearts atCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> Park on Wednesday week, after 
this latest workmanlike if uninspiring performance of their campaign.

"It wasn't brilliant, but we had to dig deep," conceded Strachan after his 
team maintained their 17-point lead over the Tynecastle side. "I am very 
surprised to be so far in front at this stage, and I don't think we were 
favourites to win the title before the season started. But now that we're so 
close we just want things over and done with."

Celtic had their goalkeeper Artur Boruc to thank for not being behind within 
10 minutes, as the Pole saved brilliantly at close range from Richard Brittain.
Livingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston>, who remain nine 
points adrift at the foot of the SPL, demonstrated every ounce of the fighting 
qualities that should be expected from a team trying to preserve top-flight 
status, and matched the possession of the champions-elect during the opening 45 
minutes. But clearly roused by a half-time pep talk from Strachan, Celtic began 
the second half with vigour and the prolific Maciej Zurawski buried the 
substitute Ross Wallace's cross from six yards only 120 seconds after the 
restart.

Five minutes later Dion Dublin, for much of the match a lumbering figure after 
being handed a rare start in green and white since his January move from 
Leicester City, won a hotly contested penalty after a tug from Manu Dorado. 
Shaun Maloney emphasised why he is a strong contender for the Scottish 
player-of-the-year award with a typically clinical finish from the spot for his 
sixth goal in as many games.

Celtic played out the game under little duress, with post-match debate 
centring on a two-footed and reckless tackle by the visitors' Stephen McManus 
on Allan Walker in the first half. McManus was booked for the lunge but the 
Livingston manager John Robertson was adamant the referee Kenny Clark had 
treated the young Celtic defender lightly.

"Our whole camp felt it should have been a straight red card," said Robertson. 
"It was two-footed and over the top of the ball. Everybody in the ground knew 
it was a red card apart from the referee. I think Mr Clark may be disappointed 
when he sees the tackle again." Yet it seems virtually inevitable that it will 
be Robertson who suffers abject disappointment within weeks, unless his team 
can miraculously turn around a season which has now yielded only two league 
wins from 31 games.
 