
Gordon Strachan said yesterday that he had no fears that Celtic's Champions 
League tie in Milan next month was in jeopardy after the cancellation of all 
Italy's domestic games at the weekend following the hooliganism in Sicily that 
led to the death of a police officer.

"The games will be played," said Strachan. "It has always been shown that 
money outweighs anything else in football, especially just now. There is so 
much to look into but football will always turn towards the money."

On domestic matters, Strachan will have been cheered by the role played by 
Derek Riordan in this Scottish Cup victory. Riordan'sCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> career has stuttered since his 
summer move from Hibernian, but the young midfielder served notice yesterday 
that he retains an ability to light up matches.

Celtic were at their ruthless best against their First Division opponents, 
having fallen behind to an early Dave MacKay header, with Riordan at the centre 
of all that was positive about this keenly fought tie. The talented 24-year-old 
scored twice, was inches away from a hat-trick with a spectacular volley, and 
was pivotal in securing Celtic's passage to the last eight where they will 
travel to Inverness.

"There are still areas of Derek's game he has to work on, but he is looking 
more and more assured," said Celtic's captain, Neil Lennon. "He has been in 
good form in the last few weeks and his first goal was different class."

Not only was Riordan's opening strike a moment of genius, it proved crucial in 
shaping this encounter. Celtic had fallen behind after MacKay latched onto a 
curling Lee Makel free-kick but Darren O'Dea restored parity by smashing in Jan 
Vennegoor of Hesselink's knockdown on the half hour mark.

Livingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> would 
unquestionably have gained fresh initiative if they had reached the interval 
with the scores level, but Riordan denied them by firing an angled, dipping 
volley into Colin Stewart's top corner in first-half stoppage time.

Riordan added his fifth goal in six games after 59 minutes, burying the ball 
beyond Stewart after Shunsuke Nakamura had played him through, the Livingston 
captain Lee Makel having earlier gifted possession to Paul Hartley. Makel 
showed similar profligacy just 120 seconds later, before Nakamura this time fed 
Vennegoor of Hesselink; the Dutchman rounding off the scoring with a powerful 
finish from the angle of the penalty area.

Man of the match Derek Riordan (Celtic)

Quarter-final draw

Inverness Caledonian Thistle v Celtic

Queen of the South v Hibernian

Motherwell v St Johnstone

Dunfermline v Partick

Matches to be played February 24-25
 