
An obsession with anything entails negativity. To that extent Zoe Williams (An 
obsession with nostalgia offers us only political poison, 21 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/20/nostalgia-political-poison-strictly-bake-off>
) is right to caution us about being obsessively nostalgic in the political 
context, for to give oneself up to longing for something from the past runs the 
risk of compromising one’s capacity to act effectively in the present. But this 
surely does not make political nostalgia by definition “poisonous”. Nor does it 
inevitably leave us with a “burning, indignant desire for a thing [we] can’t 
have”.

On the contrary, some forms of nostalgia can remind us of positive aspects of 
the past which presently are either lost or in danger of being obscured, and 
which are maybe worth recovering or retaining. Thus conceived, nostalgias 
about, for example, community, fraternity, solidarity and good neighbourliness 
challenge us to ask what exactly it is we want to imagine, making them 
therefore a possible source of hopefulness.
David Halpin
Kirk Deighton, North Yorkshire

• Strictly and Bake Off are celebrations of living craft and skill, not 
nostalgia. These are people of modern Britain, on a journey, learning hard 
practical skills (the hours of dance training, the hours of baking practice), 
quite different from the empty narcissism of other reality TV, with which they 
are sometimes linked. These are programmes that beneath, yes, a froth of fun 
(and what’s wrong with that) celebrate achievement through hard work. In an age 
of the virtual and an age when automation threatens us all as much as it 
liberates, these demonstrations of the virtues of personal, hands-on, hard-won 
craft are welcome.

And crucial to their success is that in both programmes the craft skills at 
their core are never talked down to or taken anything other than seriously. The 
judges are proper experts and the shared passion on display is for getting it 
right, not sending it up. They are democratic, inclusive and participative. And 
they demonstrate that the “authentic” doesn’t have to be extremist or a rogue’s 
charter, but can be, well, inspiring and fun.
Dr Rupert Evenett
London 

• Strictly could not have been made in the 1960s. Apart from the feel good 
factor (and golly how we need some at this present time), I admire the 
creativity of the costumes, the sets and the choreography. I admire the skill 
of the professionals and the ability of the celebrities to master very complex 
routines. I will certainly continue to watch it although, I have not yet voted 
for anyone.
Rev Cecil Heatley
Bromley, Kent

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 