
Dundee United have confirmed the departure of their manager, Jackie McNamara. 
His exit had been widely expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/26/dundee-united-kilmarnock-scottish-premiership-championship>
 following a poor start to the Ladbrokes Premiership campaign where they have 
taken only five points from their opening nine matches and the former Scotland 
international held showdown talks with the board over the weekend.

A club statement late on Monday night read: “Dundee United Football Club and 
Jackie McNamara have mutually agreed the departure of McNamara as first-team 
manager with immediate effect.

“Following widely reported talks between the chairman and McNamara, the club 
and McNamara agreed that a change was required to improve the results of the 
club’s first team, with immediate change being required following the club’s 
start to the season.”

The statement continued: “Simon Donnelly, Darren Jackson and Craig Hinchliffe 
have also left the club. The club thanks Messrs McNamara, Donnelly, Jackson and 
Hinchliffe for their service. The club will commence recruitment for a new 
first-team manager and associated staff.”

The chairman, Stephen Thompson, said that United’s early-season results were 
simply not good enough and is confident McNamara’s replacement is inheriting a 
strong squad.

“I’d like to personally thank Jackie McNamara for his efforts during his 
tenure which saw him become the longest serving manager in the league,” he said 
on the club’s official website.

“Everyone at the club – from the board to the coaching staff, from the players 
to the fans – knows our recent run of results and current position in the 
league isn’t good enough and we all want the club back to where it should be, 
challenging for silverware and European qualification.

“We have one of the most exciting young squads in British football and a lot 
to be upbeat about. The next manager will be taking on a talented bunch of 
players at an exciting time for the football club.”

McNamara, a former Partick Thistlemanager, has led United to three top-six 
places and two cup finals since taking over in January 2013, although a place 
in Europe and silverware has eluded them. But they have struggled this year 
amid the sale of key players, Gary Mackay-Steven, Stuart Armstrong and Nadir 
Ciftci, to Celtic.

Since the sale of the first two at the end of the winter transfer window, 
United have won only four of 24 league games.

The club expected better results after giving McNamara money to rebuild his 
squad in the summer, which saw him bring in Billy McKay, Darko Bodul, Coll 
Donaldson and Mark Durnan.

Dundee United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> are believed 
to have the fourth-highest playing budget in the top flight and have given the 
manager more money to spend than his predecessors. Yet there was no sign of 
imminent improvement following their worst start to a season for 12 years and 
McNamara paid the price after the defeat by St Johnstone at the weekend.
 