
It seems typical of Stuart Gray's peculiar path through football management 
that even before Milan Mandaric had finally confirmed his permanent appointment 
as Dave Jones's successor atSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> – in the distinctly 
unswanky surroundings of the away dressing room at Spotland on Saturday teatime 
– the Owls owner had given an interview to the club's YouTube channel 
confirming his desire to make Gray answerable to a new director of football.

Gray has been in and out of the caretaker's office on a regular basis since he 
first worked under Jones at Southampton more than a decade ago, succeeding 
Glenn Hoddle at both St Mary's and Wolverhampton Wanderers in addition to 
spells in charge of Aston Villa, Burnley and Portsmouth. So he knew the drill 
when Jones was sacked by Mandaric in early December with Wednesday six points 
adrift at the bottom of the Championship table, got his head down and set about 
making his point.

He could not have started better, with a home win against Leicester City, and 
after Wednesday came through a second potentially tricky away tie to reach the 
last 16 of the Cup for the second time this century – this time not even 
requiring a replay, as they had to dispose of non-league Macclesfield Town – 
his record now stands at six wins and four draws from 12 matches.

"I am extremely happy that things have turned out exactly the way I wanted 
from day one," said Mandaric. "Of course results are the most important to get 
us out of a horrible situation, but also the way they have played shows Stuart 
is the right man.".

However, the contract Gray signed at Spotland, which runs until the summer of 
2016, is as head coach, not manager. "We are looking at a modern type of 
management and structure … to allow the room for bringing in a director of 
football," Mandaric explained.

"It's a big club and it needs to go places. This modern structure, Premiership 
clubs have gone in that direction, and I don't think we should be different. 
It's not focusing on that now, but I'm looking at what could happen in the 
future."

Wednesday's Championship position is still precarious, only two points clear 
of the relegation zone with games against two of the teams in it, Millwall and 
Barnsley, this week. Dale have also enjoyed the Cup but play the first of "19 
cup finals", according to their pleasingly unorthodox manager, Keith Hill, in a 
bid to secure promotion from League Two at Northampton Town, the only club 
where Gray has been appointed manager without a caretaker stint, on Tuesday 
night.

Man of the match: Oguchi Onyewu (Sheffield Wednesday)
 