
Porridge oats and bircher muesli, chia sludge and acai bowls, expensive juice 
and bright-green smoothies – these are the breakfasts that wellness is made of, 
apparently, but they’re not what make me hungry. What makes me hungry is a 
soft, cinnamon-scented muffin, a stack of pancakes so syrupy-sweet I buzz, 
slices of hot, toasted fruit bread and even – giddily premature – the first 
pannetone of the season, cut into a thick, towering wedge. These are the 
breakfasts that make me feel well, or even better than well: they make me happy.

Everyday marmalade-glazed fruit loaf

This loaf has been knitted into my Sunday routine: nestled between a long 
weekend brunch and my TV catch-up, I find a moment to mix the sticky dough full 
of fruit and zest, bring it to life and tuck it in to its loaf tin to rise. We 
sit together through Keeping Up With the Kardashians, the dough slowly rising 
as I sink lazily into the sofa. By the time it’s ready to bake, the evening is 
creeping in. When it finally emerges from the oven, I brush the loaf with 
marmalade that glosses its browned, raisin-speckled crust, and leave it to cool 
overnight. It doesn’t last me the whole week – perhaps, in a greedy spell, no 
longer than till Tuesday morning – but it’s as good a way to start the week as 
any, pulling a bit of the slow weekend forward into Monday’s groggy breakfast.

Crumble is the comfort recipe of the season | Ruby bakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/17/crumble-recipes-aple-pudding-squash-spinach-casserole-feta-bakes>
I don’t think there’s any special virtue to patience in the kitchen, so I’m 
not here to lecture on the ostensible merits of slow cooking over fast food. If 
ever I were to make a case for the benefits of taking your time, though, it 
would be breads like this at the heart of it. Rush dough to rise, especially if 
it’s enriched with sugar and/or fat, and you’ll be left with a close-textured, 
gummy-feeling bread that rises poorly and bakes to a pallid beige. But if you 
take your time, patiently waiting for the dough to roughly double in size on 
both its first and second rises, you’ll make a loaf that’s springy, flavourful 
and robust, and just holey enough to hold as much soft, salted butter as you 
dare to spread on.

Cook’s tip: Exposed fruit on the top of the loaf will burn in the oven, so 
just pluck them off the dough before baking

 Serves 6
300g strong white flour
2 tbsp soft light brown sugar
7g sachet instant dried yeast
½ tsp salt
Zest of 1 orange
175ml strong black tea, cooled
200g mixed dried fruit
50-75g marmalade

1 Stir together the flour, brown sugar, yeast, salt and orange zest in a large 
bowl. Add the cooled tea and stir everything to roughly combine, then use your 
hands to bring all the ingredients together to a smooth dough. Leave to rest 
for 10 minutes; during this time the flour will begin to absorb the liquid and 
its gluten will start strengthening, making the dough easier to knead.

2 Once it has rested, tip the dough on to a clean work surface and knead for 
10 minutes until it is smoother and more elastic. Add the dried fruit and 
gently massage it into the dough until it’s well mixed in.

The recipe for a Sri Lankan breakfast | Feasting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/16/sri-lankan-breakfast-feast-recipe-egg-hoppers-henry-dimbleby-jane-baxter-feasting>
3 Transfer the dough back to its mixing bowl, cover with clingfilm and leave 
to rise until it has doubled in size. This could take up to 2 hours depending 
on the temperature of the ingredients and of your kitchen, and it certainly 
won’t be ready in any less than an hour. If you want the finished bread to have 
a springy, airy texture, you’ll need to be patient with it and give it as long 
as it needs to rise.

4 Lightly grease a 900g/2lb loaf tin. Once the dough has risen, tip it out and 
shape it into a rough rugby ball shape, pinching the dough underneath to leave 
the top taut and smooth. Put the dough shape in the loaf tin and again cover 
loosely with clingfilm. Leave to rise for around an hour, or until the loaf has 
almost doubled in size. Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4.

5 When the loaf has risen, transfer it to the oven and bake it for 35 minutes. 
When it’s ready, the loaf should be well browned on top, risen and springy to 
the touch. Heat the marmalade in a small pan until it’s loosened, then spread 
liberally over the top of the hot bread with a pastry brush. Leave it to cool 
completely before slicing and serving.

Overnight banana pecan muffins

Because you can mix the batter for these muffins the night before, there’s no 
fiddly measuring and mixing through sleep-crusted eyes in the morning. You can 
also make them to bake straight away if you want, but they won’t need as long 
in the oven if you do: just check them after about 25 minutes.

 Makes 12
125g salted butter
125g soft light brown sugar
2 ripe bananas
125g full-fat natural yoghurt
175g plain flour
2½ tsp baking powder
½ tsp cinnamon
50g dried banana chips, roughly chopped
100g pecans, roughly chopped
Dried banana chips, to top

1 Melt the butter in the microwave or in a pan over a low heat. Let the butter 
cool a little before stirring in the brown sugar. Mash the bananas until 
completely smooth, then stir these into the butter and sugar mixture along with 
the yoghurt. Once smoothly combined, add the flour, baking powder, cinnamon, 
dried banana and pecans. Mix to a smooth batter, cover with clingfilm and put 
in the fridge overnight.

2 In the morning, preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Divide the muffin 
batter between 12 paper muffin cases and top each with a dried banana chip. 
Bake for 30-40 minutes, or until well risen and cooked through; they take a 
little longer than usual because the batter is cold from the fridge. If you 
haven’t chilled the batter and you’re just baking the muffins straight away, 
you’ll only need to cook them for around 25 minutes.

 * Ruby Tandoh is Cook’s baking columnist and the author of Crumb (Chatto & 
Windus)
 