
Ever since VfB Stuttgart won the championship in 2007, they've been the No1 
go-to club for intra-season wobbles, managerial perma-crisis and board upheaval 
in theBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>. 
Those seven years have seen six coaches – the term is used loosely here – in 
Armin Veh, Markus Babbel, Christian Gross, Jens Keller, Bruno Labbadia and the 
present incumbent Thomas Schneider, three different presidents and two sporting 
directors.

For reasons unknown, Stuttgart refuse to adhere to the Swabian stereotype of 
playing it safe and dull. On the contrary, the club seem to do everything in an 
extreme manner. The last few seasons have seen incredibly strong 
post-winter-break runs and disastrous autumns. In this campaign, it's the other 
way round. On Saturday, the Swabians lost their seventh league game in a row, 
2-1 at home toHertha Berlin <https://www.theguardian.com/football/herthaberlin>
. It's their worst set of results since 1987, when Egon Coordes was in charge.

His name is still remembered with a shudder in the city, especially by those 
who trained under him. Coordes, a former assistant to Udo Lattek, was known as 
"der Schleifer" (the grinder), and for good reason: compared to his fitness 
regime, Felix Magath's looks enlightened.

It was one of those fairly nondescript, nothing-in-it games that you win when 
you're doing well, draw when you're not and lose when everything conspires 
against you. After going 1-0 down early on to a Levan Kobiaschvili goal, the 
home side battled bravely, equalised thanks to Arthur Boka's fine shot on the 
stroke of half-time but were then undone three minutes before the end by a 
Sandro Wagner header. The former Germany under-21 international still found 
time to get booked twice in the space of a few seconds, but the away team held 
out.

Stuttgart's sporting director, Fredi Bobic, blamed "catastrophic refereeing 
mistakes" for the result. "It was a lucky win," admitted the Hertha coach, Jos 
Luhukay.

Schneider could claim with some justification that his team were "led onto the 
path of defeat" by the referee, Robert Hartmann, who didn't whistle for a foul 
on Timo Werner shortly before Wagner's goal at the other end. But his side have 
only got themselves to blame for tempting such bad fortune over the course of 
the last few weeks. When you can't perform consistently over 90 minutes and 
open the door for the opposition in regular intervals, they tend to get lucky.

Looking at the team on Saturday, it's easy to imagine them fighting for a 
Europa League spot. They're not a great side but there's enough quality in 
midfield and attack for mid-table, at least. The confidence has been shattered, 
however. "The relegation fight is brutal, especially for the head," said the 
goalkeeper, Sven Ulreich.

Schneider's inexperience is also showing. The 41-year-old took over from 
Labbadia in August after coaching the under-17s, it's his first job at this 
level. While no one is doubting his technical expertise or effort, he seems 
unsure about which squad members he can and can't trust in the current 
situation. Players like Georg Niedermeier and Martin Harnik have come back into 
this fairly young side after being sidelined not long ago, and the formation 
has changed from a courageous but risky 4-4-2 to a 4-2-3-1.

There's nothing wrong with these decisions per se, but taken together, they 
seem to have only bred more insecurity in the ranks. Losing some of the more 
reliable performers in Christian Genter (injured), Moritz Leitner (suspended) 
and Vedad Ibisevic (suspended) at this crucial time hasn't helped. The former 
two are back next week, at least.

Hamburg's unexpected 3-0 win against Dortmund has left Stuttgart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart> (15th) perilously close to the 
drop zone. The club president, Bernd Wahler, spoke of "14 finals" a couple of 
weeks ago. Two have since been lost. How many more chances will Schneider get? 
"I feel total backing," said the manager, "[the quality of my] work is being 
seen, despite the results".

That is essentially right. Wahler is keen to continue with Schneider (and 
Bobic), because he fits the grand plan for the development of a new team with 
mostly young players. But on Monday, Stuttgarter Zeitung reported that the club 
were thinking about Thomas Tuchel (Mainz) and the former manager Ralf Rangnick, 
who is now the sporting director of both Red Bull Salzburg and RB Leipzig. 
Neither of them would be willing to start in the second division though, if at 
all.

A second relegation in their history – they spent two seasons in second 
division in the mid 1970s – would plunge the whole club into chaos. Unusually 
for Stuttgart, the current crisis has not yet resulted in popular revolts and 
blockades outside the Mercedes-Benz Arena but patience is bound to run thin 
soon. Sunday's trip to Eintracht Frankfurt looks like it will determine 
Schneider's fate.

There's no point in making a prediction. Stuttgart, the grand champions of 
randomness and erratic mobility, could just as easily go down as get into the 
Champions League places next season.

Talking Points 

• "Champions League is like nice food in good restaurant, Bundesliga is like 
everyday pizza or hamburger," Pep Guardiola had said before the 4-0 win at 
Hannover. The DFL might not appreciate the notion but it's hard to argue with 
the Catalan's taste buds. Tayfun Korkut's side proved little more than a quick, 
comforting bite for the league leaders on Sunday night.

While the rest of the Bundesliga appear ever more despondent due to their spot 
in the food chain, Bayern thoroughly enjoyed themselves. Manuel Neuer was 
rested for Tom Starke in goal, and Bastian Schweinsteiger continued his 
rehabilitation programme with an almost vintage performance in midfield. The 
29-year-old jokingly pretended to be angry after his substitution and nearly 
threw away his gloves in mock indignation – like Toni Kroos had done, in 
earnest, a few weeks ago. Matthias Sammer was seen laughing on the bench. (No, 
this is not a typo.)

The Bavarians are 19 points clear of the opposition, it's the 
XXL-super-mega-meal-crust-stuffed-with-triple-whoppers of league leads. At the 
current rate, they'll be lifting the trophy in mid-March but it might need a 
new nickname in the circumstances. "The salad bowl" doesn't quite reflect how 
unhealthy this whole thing is (for the league as a whole).

• Incongruously, Leverkusen are still Bayern's closest rivals after yet 
another defeat, their fourth in row. They weren't quite as bad in the 3-1 at 
Wolfsburg as in the 4-0 Champions League capitulation against PSG on Tuesday 
but "the mood is more like 16th or 17th," wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung.

Nobody is playing at 2013 levels, silly mistakes have become a weekly 
occurrence and the biggest fear of all is that whole squad cannot be shaken out 
of its stupor by Sami Hyypia. Coming across cool and non-plussed is great when 
you're winning but less attractive when you're not.

• Nürnberg celebrated a fantastic 10-man triumph against Braunschweig in a 
game that made Bundesliga history. Kiyotake (Nürnberg), Bicakcic and Kumbela 
(both Eintracht) missed three penalties between them; that's never happened 
before, not even when Mesut Özil was still playing in the Bundesliga.

• But the weekend's biggest surprise – and surprise goal – came courtesy of 
Hamburg. In his first game in charge, Mirko Slomka led the troubled "Dino" to a 
sensational 3-0 win over Dortmund. Hakan Calhanoglu, 20, scored with a free 
kick from 40 metres. "I could hardly sleep for joy and watched it 50 times," 
said the midfielder, who'd apparently practised this somewhat optimistic strike 
in training.

Results: Schalke 0 Mainz 0, Stuttgart 1 Hertha 2, Hamburg 3 Dortmund 0, 
Nürnberg 2 Braunschweig 1, Wolfsburg 3 Leverkusen 1, Freiburg 2 Augsburg 4, 
Borussia Monchengladbach 2 Hoffenheim 2, Frankfurt 0 Werder Bremen 0, Hannover 
0 Bayern Munich 4.
 