
Of the teams in the top half of the table only the league leaders, Bayern 
Munich, (2-1 at Hamburger SV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/hamburg-bayern-munich-bundesliga-report-robert-lewandowski>
) and Thomas Tuchel’s relentlessly awesome Borussia Dortmund (3-1 at Borussia 
Mönchengladbach) won their opening games in 2016. The fight-back from the 
nether regions mostly came at the expense of Champions League contenders, real 
and imagined, but will also have been greeted with some relief at the league’s 
headquarters in Frankfurt.

Far too many prominent, storied clubs have coalesced around the relegation 
plug hole for the DFL’s liking, the fear being that they could be flushed down 
just in time for the new TV rights negotiations to start in earnest. Much as 
anyone enjoys the continued resilience of better-coached, smarter underdogs, 
minnows and newcomers, people would rather tune in to rage at their own side’s 
sluggish incompetence than marvel at the tactical sophistication of Ingolstadt 
and Mainz 05.

Real Madrid on right path under Zidane but still lose ground to La Liga rivals 
| Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/25/real-madrid-on-right-path-under-zidane-but-still-lose-ground-to-la-liga-rivals>
Early signs are that the ancien régime might just be able to raise their game 
to stave off a process that has been called theVerzwergung of the league, the 
proliferation of sporting dwarves in the top flight. This was a good weekend 
for fallen giants.

VfB Stuttgart <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart>, surprise 
champions nine years ago and serial flirters with the drop for nearly as long 
too, prolonged a nice little run of four league games unbeaten with an 
impressive 3-1 away win at FC Köln. The Billy-Goats wore their special edition 
carnival-inspired shirts – best described as 19th-century army uniform meets 
crisp packaging – for the first time but that was surely not why Peter Stöger’s 
usually very tidy side were rendered a total mess by the Swabians over the 
course of the 90 minutes.

The away team recovered from going behind early on – Anthony Modeste converted 
from the spot – to reply with some wonderfully fluid counterattacking football 
from Daniel Didavi, Filip Kostic and Timo Werner. Form an orderly queue, 
Premier League clubs. Three fine goals later Köln were roundly beaten and the 
Stuttgart coach, Jürgen Kramny, was full of praise for a “mature performance”.

Stuttgart were by no means perfect but they worked hard to deny the opposition 
space in their own half and then broke with real conviction. It was revealing 
to hear Kramny speak of an “end to wild west football” after the final whistle, 
with the captain and goalscorer, Christian Gentner, stressing that his team’s 
game had “totally changed” under the new management since November. “We don’t 
defend as high up the pitch, we don’t press as manically and everything doesn’t 
go up in flames the moment somebody gets beaten.”

The sense of relief was palpable among the squad. Gone are the days of the 
crazed and highly volatile system of the former coach, Alex Zorniger, a 
pressing andgegenpressing radical even by Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> standards, in favour 
of a more reactive, sustainable approach. Stuttgart have always had enough 
quality in the final third to be a mid-table side, Kramny has now given them 
enough quantity – by way of playing much deeper – to add an element of much 
needed control.

Stuttgart, however, were not the only traditional outfit to come up trumps. As 
Eintracht Frankfurt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> 
edged three points against VfL Wolfsburg thanks to the reappearance of the 
latterly somewhat absent “football god” Alex Meier and his rather divine 
hat-trick in the 3-2 win, fellow blue-chip strugglers Werder Bremen also 
bounced back in remarkable fashion. They beat the yet again strangely 
dishevelled Schalke 04 3-1 at the Veltins-Arena. The veteran captain, Clemens 
Fritz, 35, was the man of the match with one goal and two assists against the 
Royal Blues; 37-year-old Claudio Pizarro and Anthony Ujah, 25, made sure of 
Werder’s second league win since late October. Fritz picked a good day to end a 
goal drought going back 115 matches. Sunday’s win marked his 300th Bundesliga 
game. “Everyone was going on about it, including the coach. But I said to him, 
‘Viktor, I will score one.’” And score he did, to make Viktor Skripnik breathe 
a little easier in 16th spot, level with Stuttgart.

Juventus bringing the best out of Paulo Dybala to help fill boots of Tevez | 
Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/25/paulo-dybala-juventus-fill-boots-carlos-tevez>
Fritz will retire at the end of the season, hopefully not as the first Bremen 
captain to get relegated since Dieter Burdenski in 1980. Born in Erfurt in the 
GDR, the right-back was once rated one of Germany’s most promising players but 
he was unlucky with his timing. He joined Leverkusen just as the so-nearly 
glorious 2002 side of Michael Ballack et al was disintegrating and then moved 
on to Bremen at a time when Thomas Schaaf’s “wild north” style – no defence 
please, we are Nordisch – was beginning to falter under the sheer weight of its 
chronic imbalance.

Other defenders such as Per Mertesacker, Naldo or Valérien Ismaël, have fled 
the impossible workload at the Weserstadion for bigger and better things over 
the years but loyal, old, demure Fritz kept on taking the punishment for the 
team. With the possible exception of Hamburg fans, few will now begrudge him a 
last hurrah if it results in Werder staying up. God knows they have wasted 
enough money over the last few years to deserve to get relegated and they still 
might go down. But without Werder or any of the other usual, underachieving 
suspects, the Bundesliga would find it much harder to generate storylines that 
truly resonate. There are only so many plucky no-names a league can accommodate.

Results 

Hamburger SV 1-2 Bayern München, Gladbach 1-3 Dortmund, Ingolstadt 1-0 Mainz, 
Köln 1-3 Stuttgart, Hannover 1-2 Darmstadt, Hoffenheim 1-1 Leverkusen, Hertha 
0-0 Augsburg, Eintracht Frankfurt 3-2 Wolfsburg, Schalke 1-3Werder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen>.
 