
ESPN has defended its decision to apologise and hold talks with the 
commentator Jon Champion after he labelled Liverpool's strikerLuis Suárez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luis-suarez> a "cheat" in the wake of the 
striker's controversial goal against Mansfield Town. The fall-out from Sunday's 
FA Cup tie continued with the Mansfield owner, John Radford, claiming Suárez 
embarrassed Liverpool directors and the manager, Brendan Rodgers, at Field Mill.

The broadcaster made the unusual move of issuing a statement implying that 
Champion had erred in criticising Suárez after the 25-year-old controlled the 
ball with his right hand during its live coverage of theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> third-round tie.

After Suárez put the ball in the net for Liverpool's second goal Champion said 
the Uruguayan had scored by "illegal, nefarious means" and, after viewing the 
replay, declared: "That, I'm afraid, is the work of a cheat."

It is understood that ESPN, which is in the third year of a four-year deal to 
show 25 live FA Cup matches per season, had not been contacted by Suárez or 
Liverpool but decided to act after a string of inquiries from viewers,Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> bloggers and the media.

The club were aggrieved by Champion's comments but had no plans to take it any 
further. Following the match Mansfield's chief executive, Carolyn Radford, said 
the tie had been "stolen" from the club but Rodgers defended his player.

The broadcaster has apologised for any offence caused and is believed to have 
discussed the subject at length in a post-match debrief.

"We take our responsibility to deliver the highest standards of coverage to 
our viewers," said anESPN <https://www.theguardian.com/media/espn> spokesman. 
"ESPN's editorial policy is for commentators to be unbiased and honest, to call 
things as they see them. Inevitably this can involve treading a fine line on 
occasion, especially in the heat of the moment.

"Comments during the Mansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield>
 v Liverpool match caused offence where none was intended and we have spoken to 
our commentator about this incident."

Mansfield were also aggrieved that three penalty claims against Liverpool 
players for handball were not given by the referee, Andre Marriner, and at 
Suárez's celebrations following his 19th goal of the season. Radford, the owner 
and chairman, said: "I'm going to be biased but I'm watching a Premiership 
referee, a game between a Conference side and a Premiership side, and some of 
the decisions were hurtful.

"When you get a professional player like Suárez celebrating a deliberate foul 
then it hurts. Of course it does."

Radford accused the Uruguay international of gloating by kissing the offending 
right hand after his goal, although that is a routine that Suárez performs 
whenever he scores in tribute to his wife and daughter.

"Of course he was [gloating]," said Radford. "It was: 'Hang on, I can get away 
with this.' You know, if one of my players had done that I'd be embarrassed. I 
was looking for a fair and true competition and that was one incident in the 
game that made me feel … Well, for me as Mansfield Town chairman – local club, 
local boy, born and bred – it's not business, I'm here for the passion against 
Liverpool, where it's all about business, and that was a killer. It was a 
killer that a professional would do that sort of thing to a non-league team."

Rodgers claimed that Suárez's handball was not deliberate and that the fourth 
official had admitted the referee spotted the incident but deemed it 
accidental. The Mansfield owner, however, continued: "To be honest, the 
Liverpool directors felt embarrassed. I would have been absolutely embarrassed 
and the manager should be embarrassed.

"The referees have a hard time but for him to do it deliberately and then 
celebrate is the hardest thing to take. To cheat, OK, but to cheat and them 
celebrate cheating, that is the worst thing you can do. If you're going to 
cheat, then fair enough. If you're going to cheat, then cheat. But if you cheat 
then celebrate cheating, then there you go. What I will say is that, one day, 
cheats will never prosper."

Howard Webb, meanwhile, has been appointed to referee Liverpool's visit to 
Manchester United in the Premier League on Sunday.
 