
Readers of our publications may wish to submit content for publication in any 
of Guardian News & Media's print publications. These are our terms and 
conditions by which you agree to be bound should you submit any content to us 
for publication, including any letters, comments or other correspondence, 
graphics, data and images you may wish to send to us.

When you submit content to us, you agree and represent that you have created 
this content, or you have received permission from, or are authorised by, the 
owner of any part of the content to submit it to us.

You or the owner of the content still own the copyright in the content sent to 
us, but by submitting content to us, you are granting us an unconditional, 
irrevocable, non-exclusive, royalty-free, fully transferable, perpetual 
worldwide licence to use, publish or transmit, or to authorise third-parties to 
use, publish or transmit your content in any format and on any platform, either 
now known or hereinafter invented.

You acknowledge and agree that when you provide us with content, or view 
content provided by others, you are doing so at your own discretion and risk, 
including any reliance on the accuracy, completeness, of this content. You 
further acknowledge and agree that the views expressed by you and other users 
in this content do not necessarily reflect the views of Guardian News & Media, 
and we do not support or endorse any user content. You acknowledge that we have 
no obligation to pre-screen, monitor, review, or edit any content provided by 
you and other users to us.

We, or authorised third parties, reserve the right to refuse to publish, cut, 
crop or edit your content at our or their sole discretion. We may remove your 
content from use at any time.

We accept no liability in respect of any content submitted by users and 
published by us or by authorised third-parties.

You warrant that the content you submit to us is not obscene, threatening, 
harassing, libellous, deceptive, fraudulent, invasive of another's privacy, 
offensive, defamatory of any person or otherwise illegal. You warrant that the 
content you submit to us does not infringe any patent, trademark, trade secret, 
copyright, or other intellectual or proprietary or privacy right of any party 
or individual.

Any queries regarding copyright and your content should be directed in the 
first instance torights@theguardian.com <mailto:rights@theguardian.com>. 

Users of our digital network submitting content to Guardian News & Media 
should read ourTerms of service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/terms-of-service>.
 