
With reference to your recent coverage of the Bradford City fire and Martin 
Fletcher’s book about it (‘No accident’: stadium fire that killed 56 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/bradford-fire-stafford-heginbotham-martin-fletcher>
, 16 April, and several subsequent reports), 11 May will see the 30th 
anniversary of this tragic event, which relatives and survivors will no doubt 
wish to acknowledge by private grief and sad recollection. They will now have 
to cope with the suggestion implicit in Mr Fletcher’s book that, far from being 
an accident as the tribunal found, the fire was started by Stafford 
Heginbotham, Bradford’s then chairman, for the insurance. This suggestion, 
widely publicised, will no doubt have caused distress to the people of 
Bradford. I am writing this to reassure them that in my view the suggestion is 
nonsense for the following reasons:

1. The public aspect of the inquiry into the facts took place soon after the 
fire while the events were fresh in everyone’s mind. We needed to learn lessons 
and were required to make recommendations as soon as possible to prevent a 
similar tragedy in the future. Hundreds of statements and numerous other 
documents including the video of the fire had been provided to us, which I and 
my assessors, a retired chief constable and a retired chief fire officer, were 
able to read before the hearing. After hearing the evidence over five days, we 
adjourned to the Home Office, where we heard more evidence before submitting 
our interim report in July and our final report in about December. The 
suggestion in some papers that we did not think the inquiry was important or 
that we were too focused on the riot at Birmingham (which we considered later) 
is just plain wrong.

Bradford fire: Sir Oliver Popplewell says new inquiry would find nothing 
sinister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/27/bradford-fire-inquiry-oliver-popplewell>
2. We did not know about the previous fires. Neither the fire authorities, nor 
the police, nor indeed Mr Heginbotham’s own fire insurers, or any of the 
members of the public who submitted statements or letters, alerted us to that 
information or indeed suggested that there was in fact anything sinister. If we 
had known about the previous fires at his premises, we would have asked the 
authorities for their views in order to satisfy speculation. But in the light 
of the uncontradicted forensic evidence ruling out arson, in the absence of any 
evidence to suggest it and in the light of the TV film which we saw, we reached 
the unsurprising conclusion that the fire was an accident. Anyone familiar with 
investigation into fires will know that the fire authorities and insurance fire 
adjusters take a very sceptical view about claims made by owners of buildings 
under fire insurance policies. Fires caused by arsonists tend to leave clues.

3. Additionally, neither the chief fire officer of Liverpool, one of my 
assessors, nor the fire department at the Home Office cast any doubt on the 
conclusion. I have had some experience both at the bar and on the bench dealing 
with fire claims and added my own views.

4. Calls for another inquiry, particularly from politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/bradford-fire-andy-burnham-calls-for-fresh-investigation>
 in the month before an election, need to be treated cautiously. By all means 
let the authorities look at the previous fires in order to satisfy further 
speculation, but nothing can change the evidence given at our inquiry.

5. Nor has anyone suggested how, when or where Mr Heginbotham organised the 
fire nor why he chose a day when there was one of the largest crowds ever at a 
match at Villa Parade and chose a time (just after half time) when the stand 
was still full with 4,000 spectators.

Accordingly, while Mr Fletcher’s book is rightly a tribute to his industry and 
is an emotional record of the terrible tragedy suffered by his family, I have 
to say that his conclusion that the fire was caused by arson is, in my view, 
nonsense.
Sir Oliver Popplewell
Chair of the Popplewell inquiry into crowd safety at sports grounds
 