
Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> have had a £7m 
offer for the Sevilla midfielder Vicente Iborra accepted and remain keen on 
also signing Yann M’Vila from Rubin Kazan.

Although Iborra is believed to be enthusiastic about relocating to the Stadium 
of Light, there is interest from other clubs and any deal seems unlikely to be 
finalised until after the weekend.

David Moyes will get it right at Sunderland, says Steven Pienaar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/david-moyes-sunderland-steven-pienaar-premier-league>
A Europa League winner for the past three seasons, the versatile 28-year-old 
regarded in some quarters as a “superior Marouane Fellaini” not only caught 
David Moyes’s eye during the Sunderland manager’s time in charge of Real 
Sociedad but was wanted by Sam Allardyce before heswapped Wearside for the 
England job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/23/sam-allardyce-new-england-manager-football>
.

M’Vila impressed on loan at Sunderland last season and there are only four 
months remaining on the former France midfielder’s contract in Russia but much 
depends on whether Rubin Kazan reduce a seemingly steep asking price.

“It’s a complicated situation but we keep trying,” said Moyes, whose already 
slender squad has been ravaged by a rash of injuries. “We’ve got one or two 
offers in for players right now and we’re actively trying to improve the squad.”

With an elbow ligament injury sidelining Vito Mannone – who may yet need 
surgery – for a minimum of three months, Moyes requires an extra goalkeeper. 
While it is unclear whether he will be bought to understudy the highly rated 
22-year-old England Under-21 keeper Jordan Pickford or go straight into the 
first team, Sunderland’s manager has not ruled out a potential loan move for 
for Manchester City’s newly ousted former no1, Joe Hart.

A compromise would almost certainly need to be reached with City over the 
England goalkeeper’s £125,000 weekly wage but Moyes – who admits Pickford could 
easily have started the season ahead of Mannone – appears open to the 
possibility.

“I’ll need to wait and see what’s available in the next few days,” said a 
manager keen to add the widely coveted young Barnsley defender Alfie Mawson to 
his squad while also actively seeking an attacking partner for Jermain Defoe. 
“I’ve given Jordan the jersey for now and we’ll see how things go from here.”

Pickford will be in goal at Southampton on Saturday when Moyes hopes to 
collect his first point – or points –since succeeding Allardyce. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/david-moyes-sam-allardyce-sunderland>
 “It was very tight between Jordan and Vito at the start of the season,” he 
said. “Vito, with his experience, got the jersey but Jordan’s well liked here 
and we’re looking forward to having him in the team. And I do believe if you 
get young English players in your side, it draws a lot of attention to your 
football club as it’s something the media and the public want to see.”

There is, though, a caveat which could yet open the door for Hart. “We’ll see 
how Jordan does in the games,” said Moyes. “It’s a big step up from where he’s 
been and it’s not easy for young goalkeepers. I’m confident that he’ll be fine 
and he’ll get a chance – but the Premier League is a different animal.”

Lamine Koné,, meanwhile, still anxious to join Everton, could return to 
central defence for Moyes’s team following his return to light training after a 
back complaint. “I’ll have to assess Lamine but, if he’s fit, he’ll play,” said 
Sunderland’s manager who remains adamant he will not accept the Merseysiders’ 
£18m bid. “I need him.”
 