
Didier Ndong has been described as “the new Michael Essien” and this potential 
persuadedSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> to break 
their transfer record by paying Lorient £13.5m for the defensive midfielder.

Despite Ndong’s evident promise, the move – made after rebuffs from Sevilla’s 
Vicente Iborra and then Tottenham’s Ryan Mason, who opted to join Hull City 
instead – represents something of a gamble on David Moyes’s part.

Burnley make Jeff Hendrick £10.5m record signing but Grosicki deal collapses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/burnley-transfer-record-jeff-hendrick-derby>
On Wednesday night Moyes was still hoping to conclude a deal for Yann M’Vila 
with Rubin Kazan but the move failed to materialise. Although M’Vila had 
already agreed a pre-contract with Sunderland that would see him move to 
Wearside in January, the clubs spent Wednesday haggling over an agreement that 
would see the switch become immediate.

The former France midfielder, who shone on loan at the Stadium of Light last 
season, has four months remaining on his contract with the Russian club and 
does not feature in their first-team squad but Rubin Kazan still want £7m.

M’Vila flew into Heathrow on Wednesday morning and was scheduled to travel on 
to Sunderland via Newcastle airport later in the day but later expressed his 
frustration that the move had broken down. “I called Sunderland but they are 
not picking up the phone why? My heart has broken,” he wrote on Instagram.

Happily for Moyes things proceeded much more smoothly with Ndong. At 22 years 
old and capped 18 times by Gabon, he is far from the finished product. So much 
so it is understoodLorient <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lorient> 
officials were shocked by Sunderland’s large offer for one of Ligue 1’s 
toughest tacklers. When Moyes’s scouts travelled to France last week to watch 
him, Ndong was sent off after 30 minutes and will, accordingly, be suspended 
for Everton’s visit to the Stadium of Light on Monday week.

He has agreed a five-year deal that could cost Sunderland a further £3m in 
add-ons. The basic fee already exceeds the £13m they paid for Asamoah Gyan six 
years ago.

Ndong, who made 46 appearances for Lorient after joining them from the 
Tunisian side Sfaxien in January 2015, could hardly have been more 
enthusiastic. “I am very proud and happy to sign for Sunderland,” he said. 
“This is a new adventure for me and to play in the Premier League is a dream 
come true. Maybe the Sunderland fans don’t know me yet but I promise they will 
quickly discover I will give everything for them and the club. It will be an 
honour to wear the Sunderland shirt and I will wear it with a true 
understanding of what it means. I am excited to meet everyone at the club, to 
see the stadium and of course the fans, who I have heard so many good things 
about. Today is the most beautiful day of my life.”

As the deadline approached Moyes concluded a loan deal with Manchester City 
for their 21-year-old Belgian centre-half Jason Denayer but was thwarted in his 
long-running, and ever more urgent, search for a striker to ease the burden on 
Jermain Defoe.

A proposed deal with Norwich that would have seen Steven Naismith move north 
collapsed when the Scotland forward failed to agree personal terms, while Moyes 
also encountered frustration in his hunt for a goalkeeper. With Vito Mannone 
having severely damaged elbow ligaments competition is needed for the highly 
rated understudy Jordan Pickford.

They eventually settled on Mika from Portuguese side Boavista, with the 
25-year-old set to move for an undisclosed fee after negotiations with Norwich 
over the transfer of John Ruddy proved slow while Crystal Palace turned down an 
approach for Wales international Wayne Hennessey.

One bit of good news for Moyes was that Everton failed to pursue their 
interest in his key centre-half, Lamine Koné.
 