
Sunderland travelled to League One’s Doncaster Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster> for their penultimate friendly 
last night and they lost it 2-0 to continue what has been a poor build-up to 
the new Premier League season.

Dick Advocaat’s side open up against Leicester in 10 days’ time and last night 
the head coach handed first games to the new signings Jermain Lens and Younès 
Kaboul. Sebastián Coates also made a first appearance since signing after his 
loan spell from Liverpool last season.

The friendly was Sunderland’s first in the UK since their three-game north 
America tour which saw them lose to Sacramento and Pachuca before winning 
against the MLS side Toronto, and it produced a third defeat out of five. 
Inevitably it also sparked more calls from fans for further investment in the 
squad.

Lens, had a good game, the £8m man taking the limelight from Kaboul who came 
on at the interval after recovering from injury thoughSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> – who had seen Patrick van 
Aanholt hit his own post early-on – were already trailing after falling behind 
on the quarter-hour mark.

Harry Forrester’s looped cross from the right found Cedric Evina unmarked and 
he had time to cushion a half-volley beyond Costel Pantilimon.

Sunderland went close just before half-time when Lens picked out the run of 
Steven Fletcher who despite a heavy first touch laid the ball back to Jermain 
Defoe just inside the area, but his low shot was deflected inches over by a 
defender.

Kaboul was one of four substitutes introduced at the interval but it was 
another of those replacements, Danny Graham, who had the best chance when his 
first-time shot was well gathered low to his left by the Doncaster goalkeeper.

And it was the home side who doubled their advantage just after the hour mark 
when Jack Rodwell was sloppy in clearing a low pull-back from the left .He 
thrashed the ball into the back of Harry Middleton and it rebounded into the 
path of Forrester, who sent a half-volley beyond Pantilimon into the far corner.

Doncaster Stuckmann (Marosi, 82), McCullough, Taylor-Sinclair, Butler, Jones, 
Evina (McKay, 86), Wellens (Carberry, 86), Coppinger (Mandeville, 83), 
Middleton (Lindley, 86), Keegan (Whitehouse, 67), Forrester (Pugh, 83).

Sunderland Pantilimon, Jones (Matthews, 63), O’Shea (Kaboul, h-t), Coates 
(Beadling, 63), Can Aanholt, Cattermole (Larsson, h-t), Rodwell (Bridcutt, 71), 
Johnson (Buckley, 82), Lens (Watmore, 82), Defoe (Giaccherini, h-t), Fletcher 
(Graham, h-t).Subs not used: Pickford, Mannone. Attendance 5,776.
 