
Supermarkets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> are braced 
for their busiest day of the year on Friday, with shoppers expected to spend 
nearly £900m on groceries for the Christmas break.

Tesco, the UK’s biggest supermarket, is expecting 10 million shoppers and to 
sell one-third of itsChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> turkeys, as 200,000 
customers buy their birds and turkey crowns in one day. Sainsbury’s said its 
busiest shopping period would start at about 12pm.

Although many people make last-minute purchases on Christmas Eve, 
traditionally the number of shoppers out and about the day before Christmas is 
one-fifth lower than on 23 December.

But with Christmas Day falling on a Sunday, potentially leaving time for a 
full day of shopping on Christmas Eve, retailers are expecting to be busy.

The number of shoppers visiting the UK’s high streets and shopping centres was 
down 7.7% last week, according to shopper tracking company Springboard, and 
retailers are holding their breath for a final dash to stores.

Waitrose, which announced a 1.7% drop in sales last week on the same period 
last year, said many shoppers were holding off to make their big purchases 
later. It expects takings to be three-and-a-half times higher than on a normal 
Friday.

Grocers that focus on premium quality foods usually grab a bigger share of the 
market at Christmas. Marks & Spencer, which typically accounts for 3% of UK 
grocery spend, sells one-quarter of all festive turkeys.

In the past few years, discounters Aldi and Lidl have taken a bigger slice of 
the Christmas pie by tempting shoppers with luxury foods such as lobster and 
champagne at bargain prices.

This year, the major supermarkets have fought back, with Asda offering 
seasonal packs of vegetables such as carrots and potatoes for 20p, and Lidl 
slashing its price to 19p to undercut Tesco’s 39p packs, which were a hit last 
year.

Meanwhile, Iceland, which has struggled in recent years, has been seeing 
strong growth. Malcolm Walker, the chief executive of the supermarket, said: 
“We are on a roll, with everything going well.” He said Friday is expected to 
be the chain’s best Christmas sales day since its launch more than 40 years ago.

Meanwhile, the rise of next day delivery and click and collect is also 
encouraging shoppers to leave things later than in previous years.

Online retailers are offering some of their latest order dates in history. 
Fashion website Asos says shoppers who order before 8pm on Friday will get 
their gifts ahead of Christmas Day and Debenhams is promising click and collect 
next day delivery to stores for orders made before 9pm on Friday.

M&S and Next shoppers must order by Thursday night in order to get their gifts 
on time, although the latter is promising shoppers a refund and gift card if it 
does not meet its delivery promise.

 