
If you pass stall 66 on Testaccio market at 10am, you may find the shutter 
half down, but the side door open. The stall used to be run by a Sicilian 
couple. When you looked through the door, they were either preparing Sicilian 
sweets: tubes ofcannoli <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cannoli> and breast-like 
minni di sant’agata 
<http://www.lovesicily.com/blog/minne-di-sant-agata-saint-agathas-breasts-recipe>
: or Sicilan street food: deep-pinched pizza and chickpea fritters to be served 
in a cone with lemon or stuffed into soft bread rolls. For my homesick Sicilian 
partner, this stall had an almost magnetic pull. It was a sad day when they 
closed. The shutters stayed shut for too long, until, finally, they were rolled 
back up to reveal an outpost of a Roman street-food joint called Supplizio. 
Look through the side door these days and you may well see Marco or Alessio 
shaping balls of rice intosupplì.

Marco Morello has worked for many years with Rome’s undisputed supplì master, 
chef and owner of Supplizio – the splendidly named Arcangelo Dandini. Marco can 
also tell a good story. Last week, while Alessio chopped mountains of carrots, 
onions and celery in the small back kitchen of stall 66, he explained that it 
was Napoleon III’s troops occupying Rome in the late 1800s, who, having eaten
arancini (the large rice balls filled with ragù in Sicily), demanded a similar 
dish nearby. Roman cooks obliged, using local produce such as chicken livers 
and pecorino and named their inventionla surprise, which evolved into supplì. 
Over time, the surprise became a piece of mozzarella that melts and then 
stretches like a telephone cord when the supplì is broken open. This is the 
reason for the nicknamesupplì al telefono, an anathema for a generation who 
have never known what it is to manage a curling cord, or the skill needed to 
drag a rotary telephone into the privacy of the downstairs bathroom.

Rachel Roddy’s pumpkin frittata recipe from Rome | A Kitchen in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/pumpkin-frittata-recipe-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>
Traditionally, supplì were found in friggitoria – Roman frying shops, places 
of boiling oil and crisp batter – or with street vendors, neither of which 
exist in the same way any more. Nowadays, the best place to find supplì is in a 
pizzeria where, along with battered salt cod and stuffed courgette flowers, 
supplì are freshly fried and brought to you on a square of brown paper. At a 
time when industrialisation is ploughing like a juggernaut through Italian 
kitchens, many supplì are standard factory fare, with bright orange coats and 
fried in palm oil – which is not food snobbery, just an observation. There are 
exceptions though, like Dandini and Marco, who have returned to more 
traditional ways, and are dedicated to really good ingredients. Their classic 
supplì are quite something, the rice enriched with chicken liver, pork, egg and 
pecorino and coated in coarse crumbs – which, when fried, almost shatter to 
reveal the surprise.

The process is rather like making a risotto. First the soffritto – remember 
you are laying foundations – then meat, rice and wine, which should whoosh in 
the pan, before adding alternating ladles of broth and tomato sauce. 
Traditionally, this mixture was spread out on a work surface and the enriching 
egg and cheese mixed in. You must wait before shaping. By the third supplì, you 
will have the knack of hiding the mozzarella and then moulding the rice until 
it looks like an elongated egg. Be firm.

I have no fear of frying, door open, beer open and hair in a shower cap. You 
want a few inches of oil at 175C/350F or, for those of us who can’t find the 
thermometer, when a cube of bread dances around and takes 30 seconds to turn 
golden. Marco suggests frying in two stages: 3 minutes, out for 45 seconds to 
rest, and then a final 45 seconds back in the oil. Blot and eat while the 
supplì are still as hot as you can bear, possibly standing around the stove, 
making sure you stretch the mozzarella as far as you can.

Supplì alla romana– Roman rice croquettes

It really is worth making this amount, as they freeze brilliantly.

Makes 20
1 onion
1 stick of celery, with leaves
1 carrot
Extra virgin olive oil
1 tsp rosemary or thyme, finely chopped
Salt
300g minced pork or sausage meat
100g chicken livers
500ml simple tomato sauce, or passata
500ml water/vegetable or meat broth
500g risotto (carnaroli) rice 
125ml white wine
2 eggs
100g parmesan or pecorino, grated
100g mozzarella, cut into 20 small batons
Coarse breadcrumbs
Oil for frying (peanut or sunflower)

1 Finely chop the onion, celery and carrot. In a large, deep frying pan or 
casserole, warm the olive oil and fry the vegetables with the herbs and a pinch 
of salt until soft. Add the pork and chicken livers and cook until the meat is 
browned.

2 Put the tomato sauce and broth/water in two pans, on a low heat at the back 
of the stove.

3 Add the rice to the frying pan and stir until it is slightly toasted, then 
add the wine and stir until it evaporates. Now, as with risotto, add alternate 
ladlefuls of broth and tomato sauce to the rice, stirring continuously and 
giving time between additions until the rice is al dente and all the liquid 
absorbed – about 16 minutes. Take the pan off the heat, wait 5 minutes then add 
one egg and all the parmesan to the mixture. Mix to combine. Leave to cool for 
at least an hour.

4 Shape the supplì by taking a small handful (about 90g), then make an 
elongated ball in your palm. Now press a piece of mozzarella into the centre 
and squeeze your palm slightly to mould the rice around the cheese until it is 
enclosed. Let the supplì rest on a baking tray lined with parchment.

5 Prepare a bowl of beaten egg, and another of seasoned breadcrumbs. Dip each 
supplì in the egg, then the crumbs, letting any excess fall away. In a suitable 
pan, heat 12cm of oil to 175C/350F. Fry the suppli in batches of 4 for 2 
minutes, then lift out to rest for 45 secs, before returning to the oil for 
another 45 seconds. Blot on kitchen towel, sprinkle with salt and serve hot.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food writer based in Rome, the author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-quarters.html> (Saltyard) and winner of 
the André Simon food book award




 * This article was amended on 29 November, as we incorrectly named Napoleon I 
as occupying Rome in the late 1700s, but it was in fact Napoleon III. In the 
late 1800s.
 