
Paul Lambert, sitting on the Livingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> bench, must have been 
overcome as he watched the team he left as a player at the end of last season 
ruthlessly dismantle the one he took over as player-manager.

And it would be no consolation to the former Scotland midfielder that he would 
have prior knowledge of the bullying ruthlessness that would bringCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> a handful of goals from five 
scorers. Steven McManus, Shaun Maloney, Maciej Zurawski, Chris Sutton and Craig 
Beattie were the executioners of a crushing victory that takes them to within 
two points of league leaders Hearts, who play Falkirk this afternoon.

Livingston's recent improvement - they drew with Aberdeen at Pittodrie and 
eliminated Hearts from the CIS Insurance Cup - at least for a while gave them 
the heart for an assignment that once again, as it has invariably since their 
arrival in the Premierleague, proved a painful experience.

Their industriousness seemed initially to take Celtic by surprise, too, the 
Parkhead side often harassed out of their attempts to establish a tempo and a 
rhythm that was suited to their technically superior players.

But by the time Maloney had produced the second of their goals a few seconds 
before half-time, the visiting teams had imposed themselves more forcefully in 
forward areas, their rewards almost overdue after a series of threats that 
could have given them an advantage earlier.

This authority derived from a powerful midfield, where Shunsuke Nakamura, 
Stilian Petrov and Sutton had too much strength and guile for their immediate 
opponents and, on the Celtic left, Maloney was a lively, elusive nuisance.

It was Maloney who delivered the corner kick from which Celtic took the lead. 
The ball was headed into the goalmouth by the towering Sutton and McManus 
managed the final touch with his head that pushed it over the line.

If Gordon Strachan's team have often shown themselves to be masters of the set 
piece - a regular source of goals for them - they demonstrated with the second 
that they are also, at their best, capable of constructing the fluent and 
incisive moves that bring strikes of exceptional quality.

Nakamura played the ball to Sutton and took the return, as Petrov bolted 
through the inside-left channel. The Japan midfielder's pass found his captain, 
who then hit the ball forward to Maloney. With his back to goal, the little 
midfielder turned quickly and, from about 15 yards, hit a right-foot shot low 
to the right of Roddy McKenzie.

The Livingston players must have been convinced in that moment that they were 
about to have a bad day.The impression was, after all, that Celtic were just 
getting warmed up.

The dread did not take long to be vindicated, with Zurawski delivering the 
visiting team's third soon after the interval. It was from a powerful and 
perfectly placed cross on the left from Mo Camara that the Poland striker leapt 
unchallenged to send the header high past McKenzie from six yards.

Sutton scored the goal that his all-embracing performance deserved as the 
result of a Maloney free-kick that was deflected by the defensive wall to the 
big Englishman on the right side of the area. The right-foot volley, 
deliberately placed and beautifully controlled, hurtled high to the right of 
McKenzie.

With the home team in disarray, even the Celtic play ers seemed embarrassed at 
the ease with which they dominated. This was typified by Beattie's almost 
apologetic gesture when he scored the fifth.

From another powerful cross from Camara on the left, this time waist-high, 
McKenzie managed simply to take the pace off the ball, which ran straight to 
Beattie at the far post. The striker had only to tap the ball over the line.

 Man of the match  Chris Sutton - Endlessly versatile and at the heart of 
everything Celtic did.

 Referee  M McCurry - Must have seemed like a day off.
 