
Michael Laudrup dismissed the idea that the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> would act as a distraction from 
Swansea City's Premier League survival hopes after his side came from behind to 
win 2-1 atBirmingham City.

Swansea recovered from a dismal first half in Saturday's fourth-round tie to 
secure a spot in the fifth round, where they visit Everton. Lee Novak gave the 
Championship side a deserved lead, but the substitute Wilfried Bony's two quick 
goals turned the game around to give the visitors victory.

Laudrup, the Swansea manager, acknowledged that some will view his team's FA 
Cup and Europa League commitments as a distraction, but he is happy for his 
squad to challenge on as many fronts as possible.

"This result gives us confidence, even if this is another competition, which 
might be seen as a downside by some," he said. "In our case we are still in 
three competitions; is that good or bad? I think it is a good thing as it gives 
your players games and experience.

"I'm very happy. It would have been very bad in our situation to have had to 
face a replay.

"That would have meant five consecutive midweek games for us with Premier 
League games and our Europa League games against Napoli coming up. But we 
recovered well to get the win."

The win came at the end of a week when Swansea's unity has been questioned 
following a training ground row between Chico Flores and Garry Monk. Laudrup 
does not doubt his squad's togetherness, but has identified leadership as a key 
element during the final months of the season. "It is about leadership, you 
always need that in a team in every moment, you need it most when you are 
behind or not doing well," he said

The Birmingham manager Lee Clark was disappointed to see his side miss out on 
claiming Swansea's scalp for the second time this season, having knocked them 
out of the Capital One Cup. But he was delighted by the performances of 
youngsters Reece Brown, fresh from signing his first professional contract, and 
Albert Rusnak, making his debut after joining on loan from Manchester City.

He said: "Reece is an outstanding young player and we are delighted to have 
signed him. He is the best footballer at the club technically. Rusnak is in on 
loan, he is very talented and he is right alongside Reece, they are on the same 
wavelength in terms of passing and movement."

The Hull City manager, Steve Bruce, sees no reason why an FA Cup run should 
not "galvanise" his squad's attempt to stay in the Premier League. Hull came 
through 2-0 in a tricky tie at League TwoSouthend United with two second-half 
goals from Matty Fryatt, one of nine changes to the starting line-up.

"There is no harm in a cup run because sometimes it can galvanise you and I am 
delighted we have got through," said Bruce.

On another afternoon, Southend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> 
– who are chasing promotion to League One – could have caused a shock, as a 
fierce header from Barry Corr was saved at point-blank range and Michael Timlin 
struck the crossbar with a 30-yard shot.

Eventually, though, Hull's superiority came through as just after the hour 
Fryatt struck a low effort into the bottom right corner, adding a second on the 
break in stoppage time.

Former Hull manager Phil Brown is determined to keep Southend focused for 
their League Two campaign. "You could not write the script for me when the draw 
was made, and I did enjoy the encounter," said Brown, who left Hull in 2010. 
"Good luck toHull City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> in the 
next round and in their Premier League campaign, but I have got my own 
challenges ahead."

Part of those include the club's plans to move to a new stadium at Fossetts 
Farm.

Brown is relishing a return to grassroots. "It is not a different skills set, 
it is very similar," said Brown, appointed at Roots Hall in March 2013 
following a year at Preston, who were relegated to League One.

Brighton & Hove Albion's assistant manager, Nathan Jones, praised his side's 
attitude after they came through a challenging tie atPort Vale.

Their manager, Oscar García, was another who made team changes – seven in all 
– but his players responded impressively to win 3-1 in the Vale Park mud.

Vale reacted positively to Rohan Ince's 27th-minute opener when the defender 
Chris Robertson headed a 36th-minute equaliser. But Solomon March put Brighton 
back in front just before the interval and the gulf in class between the 
respective League One and Championship promotion challengers was more apparent 
in the second period.

The away side went close on several occasions before Jon Obika, on loan from 
Tottenham, added a decisive third goal 12 minutes from time.

Jones said: "We are very pleased with what the players have given us. The 
attitude of all of them was spot-on in difficult conditions.

"I don't really want to single out anyone, but Matt Upson was magnificent and 
led by example. He's 34, he's played for England, but his hunger and desire are 
still there for all to see. I thought Jon Obika should have scored before he 
finally did. He's usually a clinical finisher but he failed with one chance 
before putting that one away in style.

"

Vale manager Micky Adams, who has had two spells in charge of Brighton, had 
the unusual compliment of both sets of fans chanting his name in admiration.

He said: "That was nice, but I'm disappointed because we've lost and are out 
of the competition.

"I'm particularly proud of my players because they gave everything they had 
didn't give up at any stage."

The Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> Town 
manager, Mark Robins, feltCharlton Athletic's Dale Stephens should have been 
sent off for a high tackle that put Adam Hammill out of their tie at the John 
Smith's Stadium, which Charlton won with Simon Church's second-half goal.

Stephens was only booked after the 28th-minute challenge which sparked an 
angry response from players on both sides. Robins said: "I think it was a red 
card but the referee has a decision to make. I have seen the photograph and 
both his feet were off the ground and it doesn't make good watching.

"At the end of the day we are out of the Cup and you can't control what the 
referee does."

Robins said there were some other "tough challenges" in the game and added: "I 
could moan all day long but it sounds like sour grapes so I will desist."
 