
The proposed scheme to build the world’s first tidal lagoon at Swansea Bay 
<http://www.tidallagoonswanseabay.com> in south Wales has been put back at 
least a year following delays over the government agreeing the size of any 
subsidy.

The £1bn project is also subject to an ongoing investigation into whether a 
major contract to a Chinese state company to build a breakwater was properly 
awarded.

The delay will put more pressure on Britain’s stretched electricity generating 
capacity after 2020 at a time when a timetable to build the Hinkley Point C 
nuclear plant in Somerset has also been put back.

Mark Shorrock, the chief executive of Tidal Lagoon, told the Guardian last 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/02/swansea-bay-tidal-energy-scheme-strives-generate-waves-of-optimism>
 he expected to receive the subsidy go-ahead from the government later this 
year and be ready to bring on power by 2019-2020.

But a spokesman admitted this already looked optimistic. “We’re targeting 
financial close and a start of activity on site next year, enabling marine 
works to commence in the favourable weather of spring 2017 and generation of 
first power in 2021,” he said.

Despite the setback, Tidal Lagoon said it was working flat out on putting the 
project together with its suppliers. In a statement, it said: “Next month marks 
the conclusion of the Advanced Works Phase with our preferred construction 
partners. All detailed design and pricing work is drawing to a close and our 
integrated construction programme is fully mapped out. Which means we’ll be 
ready to build as soon as the remaining permissions have been secured and 
financial close with investors is achieved.”

The company said it had been told not to comment on the discussions with the 
Department ofEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and 
Climate Change (DECC) over subsidies, a highly sensitive subject given the high 
price being demanded.

Tidal Lagoon has previously said it wanted an agreed price of £168 per 
megawatt hour for its electricity, but believes it would be able to reduce this 
figure below £100 if it is allowed to proceed with a number of follow-up 
lagoons.

Hinkley Point has attracted a lot of criticism for being given a “strike 
price” of £92.50 for 35 years at a time when the current price of wholesale 
power is down at half this level and expected to stay there for some time.

A DECC spokesperson said: “Tidal Lagoon Power are seeking a significant amount 
of financial support from consumers for their proposed project inSwansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swansea> Bay and we need to carefully consider 
whether it is in the best interest of bill payers.

 “At present there is no timeframe for how long the negotiation process for 
Swansea Bay tidal lagoon may take. It depends on a number of factors, many of 
which are outside the control of the government.”

The department also confirmed that the investigation into the breakwater 
construction contract was continuing.

 The Swansea Bay scheme was included in the Conservative party election 
manifesto and wasgiven planning permission this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/09/swansea-bay-tidal-energy-scheme-on-brink-of-winning-planning-permission>
. But the government has been cutting subsidies to solar and wind power, 
leading to speculation it might eventually dump tidal lagoon power, which is 
even more expensive.

The project is, however, seen as a major creator of jobs in an area of high 
unemployment while also offering a low-carbon prototype that could eventually 
be rolled out across the globe.

The waters around the scheme have further been muddled by complaints from 
contractors that they were not given a fair chance to bid properly for the deal 
won by China.

A spokesman for Tidal Lagoon played down this spat, saying: “As said 
previously, we ran a series of robust and intensely competitive tenders for the 
Swansea Bay project. In accordance with procurement best practice, we have now 
also offered and given feedback to the unsuccessful bidders and addressed any 
issues raised.”

 