
Swansea City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> were spared an 
embarrassing evening against League One side Crawley Town after Garry Monk 
produced a late winner at Broadfield Stadium.

With the score level at 2-2 and extra-time beckoning, Monk nodded home a 
corner from Wayne Routledge in the 90th minute as Swansea avoided a third 
successive defeat.

The Premier League club looked on course for an easy night as their early 
dominance was rewarded when Michu pounced. But Josh Simpson and Hope Akpan 
struck to give Crawley, who lost to Manchester United in the fifth round of the 
FA Cup two seasons ago, hope of humbling their top-flight opponents.

Had the finishing skills of Jonathan Forte matched his surging runs from 
midfield, a prized scalp would have been assured. However, the substitute Danny 
Graham equalised in the 74th minute, sparking a lively spell from Swansea who 
finally regained the lead through Monk.

It took 12 minutes for the first goal to come under meaningful attack with a 
defensive error by the Crawley right-back Nathan Byrne giving the ball to Luke 
Moore. Moore dashed to the edge of the area where he pulled the trigger only 
for his shot to whistle past the right post.

An almost identical error of judgment saw Byrne cause panic among the home 
defence again but this time Moore was hustled off the ball. Michu nodded a 
free-kick straight at keeper Paul Jones before Routledge stabbed a glorious 
chance into the side netting.

But Routledge made amends in the 27th minute by unlocking the Crawley defence 
with a mazy run that set up the opener for Michu. Stationed on the edge of the 
area, Michu steered the ball over the head of Jones with a superb finish to 
grab his fifth goal since his summer arrival from Rayo Vallecano.

The Spanish attacking midfielder was then booked for fouling Dannie Bulman and 
later sent a header over the crossbar, but only after Moore had squandered 
another great opportunity.

The closing moments of the first half saw Swansea come under pressure and they 
were forced to deal with a dangerous overhead kick from Billy Clarke. Worse was 
to come, however, as Crawley made their breakthrough when Simpson gathered a 
failed clearance from 20 yards out and drilled home a shot that took a heavy 
deflection.

Moore saw a promising attempt bundled out for a corner by Jones but it was 
Swansea who were cracking in the early stages of the second half. Forte surged 
through midfield and tested the keeper, Gerhard Tremmel, from 20 yards before 
Nicky Adams failed to capitalise on the follow-up a heartbeat later.

Forte was also involved as Swansea's worst fears were realised, Akpan taking 
his incisive pass, turning and slotting home from close range. Having run half 
the pitch, Forte should have put Crawley 3-1 up but his shot was easily saved 
by Tremmel.

The home side were left to rue the missed chance as in the 74th minute Swansea 
equalised when Graham nodded in Dwight Tiendalli's cross. And the decisive blow 
was struck as the match entered injury-time, Monk jumping to head home 
Routledge's corner.
 