
Alan Curtis has been a dependable redoubt throughout Swansea City’s time in 
the Premier League. Before stepping aside for the new manager, Paul Clement, he 
did his club proud once again as he steered them to victory againstCrystal 
Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>.

Curtis’s last match as the caretaker-manager brought a performance that belied 
Swansea’s position and their recent wretched form. Joined by Clement in the 
dugout for the second half, he also made two decisive substitutions to win the 
game when Àngel Rangel converted Leroy Fer’s long ball with two minutes left. 
It was a vital three points and confirmed Sam Allardyce has another big job on 
his hands at Palace.

Swansea job excites Paul Clement: ‘It’s a big task but I think it can be done’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/paul-clement-appointed-swansea-city-manager>
“You’ll have to excuse the voice, a bit of excitement at the end there,” said 
Curtis before confirming it was he who had called the shots in the game’s final 
knockings. “I made the substitutes. There were injuries and players who had 
been suffering so the changes all sort of fell into place to be fair. Paul came 
down, he made a real positive contribution. There’s nothing better for any 
player than having a new manager watching them.”

The home side were being watched by a febrile crowd, with the mood in Selhurst 
Park worse than in the last days of Alan Pardew’s regime. Whether the 
atmosphere fed into Palace’s play or not, nerves were already manifest and the 
home side started terribly.

Swansea had a focus about their approach and confidence on the ball. Palace 
were either overplaying or short of ideas. Allardyce put this down to fatigue 
after he chose to select a largely similar side to the one wholost to Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/arsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 two days previously. He also accepted his players had not performed well 
enough but saved his strongest words for the referee, Paul Tierney, after he 
failed to give Palace a penalty in the 32nd minute.

A Wayne Hennessey goal-kick had somehow managed to clear the entire Swansea 
defence and fell to Christian Benteke who got a touch beyond the onrushing 
Lukasz Fabianski. The Belgian then went over the keeper and went to ground. 
Tierney saw no foul and video replays were not conclusive but Allardyce was 
incensed with the decision.

“The goalie’s cleaned him out,” Allardyce said. “I can’t understand why the 
ref didn’t give the penalty but maybe I can because he has had very few games 
in thePremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> and 
might find it hard to make the big judgments. He got it wrong and he got it 
massively wrong. If we’d have scored that penalty I don’t think we would have 
lost that game.”

Swansea took the lead just before half-time with a set piece Big Sam would 
have been proud of. It came from a typically expert delivery from Gylfi 
Sigurdsson, which was matched by the run from Alfie Mawson. The 22-year-old 
centre-half, signed from Barnsley in the summer, ran across the Palace line to 
flick the ball back from where he had come and inside the near post. It was his 
first goal for the club.

The crowd booed Palace off vociferously at half-time and then cheered them 
vigorously back on. Allardyce withdrew Benteke, who had hurt his shoulder 
falling over, and replaced him with Fraizer Campbell. He also added Bakary Sako 
for Andros Townsend and suddenly Palace had more zip, even if they struggled to 
create good chances.

In the 78th minute Sako provoked another penalty shout, bustling his way into 
the box and flicking the ball past Rangel only for the Spaniard to stop it with 
his hand. This one was a definite penalty but Tierney could not have seen it 
because his whistle stayed silent.

Olivier Giroud caps Arsenal’s fightback to earn point in Bournemouth thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
For a moment it looked as if Palace had burned themselves out. Swansea were 
recovering their composure. But then in the 84th minute a moment of quality 
from Wilfried Zaha brought the scores level. Campbell chased down a long ball 
and played it wide to Martin Kelly. His first-time cross span across the edge 
of the box, where Zaha met it with a flying scissor kick. Fabianski could do 
nothing as it flew past him into the net.

There was bedlam in the ground but still there was time for another twist as 
Rangel chose the end of the match to turn auxiliary striker. Running on to 
Fer’s long ball, he took one touch to control and another to finish coolly 
under Hennessey. Suddenly it was a figurative six-pointer after all.

Clement will now take full charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/paul-clement-appointed-swansea-city-manager>
 and Curtis says the former assistant to Carlo Ancelotti believes he can keep 
Swansea up. “I think that’s why he took the job,” Curtis said. “He had the 
security of a top job at Bayern Munich but he wanted the challenge. I told him 
if I was him I would have stayed in Germany.”
 