
A £300m contract with a Chinese company to build a sea wall for a flagship 
renewable energy project atSwansea <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swansea> Bay 
has been called into question amid allegations that it may have been awarded 
improperly. Lawyers for the tidal lagoon scheme’s promoter are reviewing a 
challenge understood to have come from Belgian contractors who were shortlisted 
but lost out to China Harbour Engineering Company, an arm of China 
Communications Construction Company (CCCC). The Department of Energy and 
Climate Change (DECC) confirmed on Sunday that it was aware of claims about the 
agreement.

The energy secretary, Amber Rudd, gave permission last week for the £1bn 
project to provide power for 150,000 homes, in what the government hopes will 
be the first of a string of such projects around the coastline.

The nature of the complaint is not known, but it is believed to allege 
anti-competitive behaviour around the letting of the contract. To make the 
issue more complicated, critics have pointed out that CCCC is on a list of 
companies banned from obtaining certain kinds of contract from the World Bank.

World's first tidal-lagoon clean energy scheme prompts environmental row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/31/worlds-first-tidal-lagoon-clean-energy-scheme-environmental-concerns>
The agreement to build a sea wall in South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> was signed last week just days before 
Rudd gave planning permission for the scheme, which is led by renewable energy 
entrepreneur, Mark Shorrock.Shorrock’s company, Tidal Lagoon Swansea Bay, said 
it could not comment, but sources said lawyers at the firm were now handling 
the issue.

A spokeswoman from the DECC said:”We are aware of these allegations. However, 
this is a completely separate matter to the planning decision. As such, this 
does not impinge on the government’s decision to grant planning consent for the 
Swansea Bay Tidal Lagoon project.”

Industry experts in Brussels said they understood that Belgium’s foreign and 
deputy prime minister, Didier Reynders, had been in contact with the British 
Foreign Office, which had passed on his concerns to the DECC. The Belgian 
foreign ministry declined to comment.

There is a dedicated procedure for allegations of this kind to the European 
commission and then for Brussels to raise any objections with the UK. The £300m 
contract will ultimately be paid for through customer bills.


The Swansea Bay project will only go ahead if the government provides the 
developers with subsidies through the “contract for difference” scheme. This 
should be decided later this year.

China Engineering Harbour Company has made clear in earlier public statements 
that it is not covered by the sanctions imposed by the World Bank in July 2011 
and which run until 2017. CCCC became barred from bidding for road or bridge 
contracts funded by the World Bank due to a problem dating back to 2002 
relating toChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Road and Bridge 
Corporation (CRBC) in the Philippines. CCCC did not take over CRBC until 2005.

“CHEC is not involved in and has never been involved in any activity that has 
attracted any sanctions by the World Bank. CHEC has never been under any 
inverstigation by the World Bank,” it said in a statement in 2012.

The £1bn Swansea Bay project will see green power delivered to more than 
150,000 homes. The next step for the project is the obtainment of a marine 
licence from the Welsh government.

 * This article was amended on 17 June 2015. An earlier version referred to 
“the government’s flagship renewable energy project at Swansea Bay”. To 
clarify, while the government has publicly expressed support for this project 
and will decide what level of subsidy should be offered, it was initiated by 
and will be built by the private sector, with the costs ultimately borne by the 
consumer.  