
Some people see Neil Simon’s 1966 musical comedy (with lyrics by Dorothy 
Fields and music by Cy Coleman) as anti-feminist. I’m not so sure. The 
tweaks given by director Derek Bond and designer James Perkins to fitSweet 
Charity <https://www.royalexchange.co.uk/whats-on-and-tickets/sweet-charity> 
into this theatre-in-the-round sharpen its focus. In their production, Charity 
is an Everywoman figure who, in the face of trials and tribulations, manages to 
maintain faith in her creed: “Without love, life has no purpose.” The addition 
of a chorus, commenting on the action, points up Charity’s struggle: to make a 
decent life in a cynically indifferent city.

In the opening scene, Charity flounders (offstage) in the lake in the park, 
pushed in by her boyfriend as he snatches her bag. Passers-by gather to watch, 
as if at a spectacle: “I’ll get my brother. He’s never seen a drowning.” It’s 
slick, it’s funny, but it is also, as the actors’ gaze takes in the auditorium 
(with us watching them watching her), nudging us towards a question: how to be 
good, in a world such as this?
Sweet Charity trailer. <https://vimeo.com/194173639> 
Charity is good. Everybody who meets her feels better for the encounter – even 
as they make her feel worse. She wears her broken heart tattooed on her biceps, 
and ekes out a living in “the rent-a-body business” as taxi girl in a dance 
hall. Her world-weary co-worker friends sneer or sigh at tales of her 
experiences with men.

If the balance of their rapport goes awry, Charity will come across as a ditzy 
woman with a man fixation. Here, equilibrium is perfectly calibrated: each 
performance, every note from the live band (under Mark Aspinall), each 
irony-laced dance step (Aletta Collins’s choreography), every 
atmosphere-creating light-change (Sally Ferguson). All pivots around Kaisa 
Hammarlund’s Charity. In her dazzling characterisation, we see not naivety, 
which is unconscious, but hope – the card she and her friends hold against the 
stacked deck of economic injustice.

• Sweet Charity is at the Royal Exchange, Manchester until 28 January 
<https://www.royalexchange.co.uk/whats-on-and-tickets/sweet-charity>
 