
France finished top of Group A, not quite at a gallop but convincingly enough 
after an initially boisterous, ultimately slow-burn draw withSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> in Lille. The Swiss are also 
through and showed some real muscle and craft after Paul Pogba had looked like 
making this game all his own in an early burst of all-round midfield power-play.

Didier Deschamps will welcome another clean sheet for his new-build defence. 
By the end, though, with the real business of this two-part Euros now booked 
in, the suspicion remains there is still some clicking into place needed for 
that talented chop-and-change midfield.

Paul Pogba does his best to liven up France side who are yet to cut loose | 
Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/19/paul-pogba-france-didier-deschamps-euro-2016>
Even before kick off this felt like a low-pressure occasion, with no more than 
a mild celebratory purr around the stadium as the hosts emerged. Lille is 
lodged up in the northeastern shoulder of France, a waffle’s width from the 
Belgian border, with a nice neat stadium that is a notch down from the heat of 
Marseille and the Stade deFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france>.

“Lâcher les freins” was the match-day headline in L’Équipe, urging Deschamps 
to take off the brakes and allow this team of multi-talents to rev up through 
the gears. Here he made five changes, all in the front six, with Antoine 
Griezmann, André-Pierre Gignac,Paul Pogba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-pogba>, Moussa Sissoko and Johan 
Cabaye coming in to a 4-3-2-1 formation.

Early on France zipped the ball about well enough although it was Switzerland 
who had the first chance with Pogba almost flailing the ball into his own net 
from a corner only for Johann Djourou to deflect the ball away. At which point 
Pogba pulled himself up to his full height and took the opening quarter of this 
game by the scruff.

First Pogba started and finished a fine move, winning the ball deep in his 
half, taking it back from Gignac’s fine twist and then curling in a shot that 
Yann Sommer palmed over. Moments later he danced and jiggled his way across the 
box and spanked a drive with the outside of his foot, only for Sommer to save 
again, a high-class moment of skill.

Switzerland 0-0 France: Euro 2016 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/19/switzerland-v-france-euro-2016-live>
Pogba was bullying Switzerland. Roving infield from the left he drove forward 
and shot with thrilling power, wobbling the cross bar. Next came a whipped 
cross that narrowly evaded the eager Gignac. “Pogba!” the crowd chanted, 
buzzing every time he got the ball.

For Switzerland this was a chance to seal qualification and also to shake off 
a little gathered rust, to still some hints of tension in the camp. Breel 
Embolo came in at centre-forward but spent most of the opening half-hour 
defending as France surged on both flanks, winning a series of corners. 
Steadily though Switzerland began to creep back into things, with Granit Xhaka 
and Valon Behrami snapping closer and Shaqiri tracking back furiously.Kingsley 
Coman, nippy and incisive on both flanks, was repeatedly fouled.

Pogba began to slip a little, a combination perhaps of the poor, multi-use 
pitch (Rihanna is the next headliner here a month from now) and some recent 
problems with not having – seriously – the right boots. By half-time France had 
decelerated after that thrilling early burst.

Xhaka had been the man to lead the Swiss, knuckling down, passing carefully 
and showing real strength in the clinches. If France lacked something between 
their thrusts it was perhaps a little easy dominance in the centre, with Cabaye 
unable to assert his passing rhythms.

Armando Sadiku winner makes Albania history in win over Romania
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/romania-albania-euro-2016-match-report>
Switzerland continued to squeeze. Embolo and Blerim Dzemaili ganged up on 
Pogba, robbing the ball as he thrashed like a lassoed tyrannosaur. On the 
flanks France’s three-man midfield offered space as Switzerland drove 
purposefully wide. Still there was plenty of thrust as Sissoko powered across 
halfway and played in Gignac for a low shot. It was high-intensity stuff at 
times: one collision between Griezmann and Behrami was so intense the ball 
exploded.

Griezmann finally moved to the centre from the left and sprung past Xhaka, 
shooting powerfully but close to Sommer. With just over an hour gone there was 
a huge cheer around the Pierre-Mauroy as Dmitri Payet appeared on the touchline 
to replace Coman.

Payet slotted into the same left-sided channel, drifting inside as ever and 
with 75 minutes gone producing the moment of the half, and so nearly the group 
stage, as he met Sissoko’s cross on the run and spanked a wonderful leaping 
volley on to the underside of the bar. Sissoko had made a wonderful barrelling 
run to the corner. It would have been a sensational goal.

Deschamps will have a little to ponder after a performance that ran out of 
urgency by the end. The configuration of the midfield still looks a little off, 
with plenty of nice moments but no obvious pattern of how to tesselate best all 
the talent at his disposal. Gignac started well but was an absence in the 
second half. What France do have, though, is strength in reserve and time now 
to settle again.
 