
Sydney FC’s championship aspirations have copped a massive blow with 
confirmation defender Matt Jurman has played his final game for the club and 
will move overseas.

The A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> outfit on Tuesday 
announced they had accepted a transfer fee from an Asian club, believed to be 
in Korea, for their vice-captain during the current transfer window.

Busy transfer window in store as Jets look for A-League finals push
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/busy-transfer-jets-a-league-finals-push>
Jurman’s exit cruels the heart of a Sky Blues’ defence that has conceded just 
five goals on their way to building a seven-point gap on their rivals atop the 
competition table.

He had appeared in 11 of their 13 games this season, and was also a member of 
the club’s 2010 premiership and title win in the first of two stints at Moore 
Park.

However the move ensures Sydney are financially rewarded for helping develop 
the 27-year-old before his current contract was due to expire at the end of the 
A-League season.

The club described it as a life-changing move for its centre-back.

“Matt has been a great servant to Sydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> during two spells and has grown 
as a defender over the last couple of years,” coach Graham Arnold said.

“It’s disappointing to lose a player of his quality but this is also a 
fantastic opportunity for Matt at this stage of his life and career.

“I’m sure the Sydney FC fans will wish him well and he will always be 
remembered for his toughness and tenacity on the field, and mild mannered good 
nature off it.”

Jurman was thankful for his time in the Sky Blue.

“I have had some fantastic memories at Sydney FC and made some friends for 
life both in the dressing room and among the supporters,” he said.

“My game has developed enormously in the last few years and I will always be 
thankful to the club for that, and also for supporting me with this wonderful 
opportunity that lies ahead.”

Jurman’s departure has been linked with the club’s interest in out-of-favour 
Perth defender Rhys Williams, who hasn’t played since early December.

Sebastian Ryall is now likely to partner Alex Wilkinson in defence moving 
forward, beginning with Sunday’s clash against Central Coast.



 