
I would love to be able to tell you that these biscuits evoke nostalgic 
memories of erstwhile days. However, I would be lying; I eat far too many of 
these family favourites for them to be anything but a vivid memory. They’ve 
been around for as long as I can remember, nestled within a big red box next to 
those impossible-to-make and even more impossible-to-resist pink wafers.

Granted, some things are best left to the magicians at biscuit kingdom HQ. 
However, a few of the old-school classics can be improved with a little kitchen 
tinkering to bring them up to date. I am hopeful that the few simple efforts 
that go into making these biscuits will prevent you from scoffing the lot 
before offering them to others – which so often happens with a packet of their 
shop-bought counterparts!

Jammie dodgers

Cornflour and ground almonds create a rich, crumbly texture, while lemon zest 
balances out the sweetness of the jam – choose your favourite flavour for a 
tailor-made dodger. Perfectly partnered with a hot cuppa.


Makes about 15 
150g butter, softened 
85g caster sugar, plus extra for dusting 
Zest of 1 lemon 
150g plain flour, plus extra for dusting 
50g ground almonds
25g cornflour 
125g jam (such as seedless raspberry)

1 Beat the butter and sugar in a large mixing bowl until really pale and 
fluffy. Stir in the lemon zest.

2 Add the flour, ground almonds and cornflour, then beat until the mixture is 
combined – there should be no visible signs of flour. Bring the biscuit dough 
together with your hands into a ball, knead briefly, then wrap in clingfilm and 
chill for 15 minutes.

3 Remove the dough from the fridge and roll out on a lightly floured work 
surface to a thickness of about 5mm. Use a 6cm round cutter to make around 30 
circles of dough. Use a 2cm cutter (a bottle top works perfectly here) to stamp 
out a hole in the centre of half of the biscuits – these will become the tops 
of your dodgers. Re-roll any offcuts and repeat the stamping out process to 
make more biscuits.

4 Transfer to a couple of lined baking sheets – I find it helpful to keep the 
tops and bottoms separate – and place in the fridge for a further 15 minutes.

5 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Transfer your biscuits to the oven 
and bake for 10-12 minutes, or until pale golden and sandy. Remove from the 
oven and allow to cool completely on the tray.

6 Once cool, put a scant teaspoon of jam on to the full biscuit bases. Spread 
the jam out with the back of the spoon in an even layer – don’t go right to the 
edge or you with end up losing jam when you sandwich with the top half. Pop the 
biscuits with the holes on top and sprinkle a little more sugar over the 
exposed jam. Serve immediately.

Dan Lepard's baking: 10 best biscuit recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2013/jun/10/best-biscuit-recipes-dan-lepard>



Bourbon creams

I have added ground and stem ginger to these biscuit sandwiches for a more 
grown-up flavour, but feel free to leave it out if you are a traditionalist. 
The joy of a bourbon is prising the two halves apart, quickly gobbling the 
un-iced half then savouring the creamy remainder – I have been intentionally 
heavy-handed with the buttercream filling as it’s the best bit.


Makes about 12 
125g butter, softened 
75g soft light brown sugar 
75g caster sugar 
1½ tsp ground ginger 
1 tsp vanilla extract 
1 medium egg
175g plain flour, plus extra for dusting 
50g cocoa powder

 For the filling
75g plain chocolate, roughly chopped 
75g butter 
25g soft brown sugar 
75g icing sugar
2 balls stem ginger in syrup, drained and finely chopped 
1 tbsp ginger syrup from the jar

1 Put the butter, sugars, ground ginger, vanilla and egg into a mixing bowl. 
Use a wooden spoon to beat the ingredients together until fully combined.

2 Sift the flour and cocoa powder into a separate bowl, then gradually add to 
the wet ingredients, beating as you go until no lumps of butter and sugar 
mixture remain. You will end up with a slightly sticky yet firm dough. Bring it 
together with your hands, wrap in clingfilm and chill for 30 minutes.

The 10 best jam recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/07/10-best-jam-recipes> 
3 Line a couple of baking sheets with baking paper and preheat the oven to 
180C/350F/gas mark 4. Remove the biscuit dough from the fridge, then roll out 
on a well-floured work surface to a thickness of 5mm. Use a ruler to measure 
out a 30cm x 20cm rectangle. Trim to size and set aside the offcuts to be 
re-rolled later.

4 Divide the dough into 5 rectangles horizontally and 4 vertically. Use a 
palette knife to transfer half of the biscuits to the lined trays, leaving 
around 2cm between each to allow for spreading. Roll up any offcuts and shape 
roughly to the same size and shape. Use a cocktail stick to make a pattern 
around the edge of half of the biscuits. These will become the tops of your 
biscuits. Return to the fridge for 15 minutes.

5 Transfer the biscuits to the oven and bake for 8-10 minutes, or until sandy 
in texture – the biscuits will look remarkably like shop-bought bourbons. Allow 
them to cool completely on the tray.

6 Meanwhile, make the filling. Melt the chocolate in a bowl set over a pan of 
barely simmering water. Remove from the heat and allow to cool to room 
temperature. Beat the butter, brown sugar and icing sugar together until 
smooth, then fold in the melted chocolate, chopped ginger and ginger syrup. 
Stir to combine, then leave at room temperature.

7 To build your bourbon creams, spread the filling over the bottom half of the 
biscuits and sandwich with the patterned tops. Chill in the fridge for 15 
minutes before eating.

 * Rosie Reynolds <http://www.rosiereynolds.co.uk/> is a food stylist, recipe 
writer and regular Cook contributor. Ruby Tandoh returns next week  