
There is a pale man in a suit lying on the floor of the reception I run. He 
wasn’t pale when he came in. Quite the opposite: he was overly tanned, with an 
arrogance offset by the right amount of charm. He sat on the couch to have 
anaesthetic cream applied to his face ready for aDermaroller treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/nov/28/facials-deep-cleanse-pores-skincare>
, in which a small wheel covered in hundreds of tiny needles is rolled across 
wrinkles or scars to stimulate collagen and leave the skin smoother.

When the nurse told the man it would be painful, and he might get blood on his 
suit, but she would be very careful, he fainted. I do feel for him. A lot of 
people come through my reception harbouring insecurities and hiding behind 
false confidence. I can spot it a mile off.

I’ve seen enough genitals to know we are all truly unique | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/18/genitals-sexual-health-nurse-sex-toy>
The clinic I work for specialises in laser hair removal and anti-ageing 
treatments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jul/20/anti-ageing-treatments-sali-hughes>
, along with the occasional boob and nose job. Our most popular treatment is
Botox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/23/botox-starting-to-show-age-eva-wiseman>
, and 90% of our customers are female. They expect the staff to have little 
education, wear too much makeup, watch reality TV and dream of rich men in fast 
cars. Actually, I have a degree in history and like to hike at the weekends. I 
was attracted to the low level of responsibility that comes with being a 
receptionist, following years of trying to make myself heard as a self-assured 
career woman in public sector management. But nothing could prepare me for the 
reality of working in a beauty clinic.

My first day was a huge learning curve. I was thrust into a world of 
Botox-frozen faces, faddy diets and Tinder. I get a unique insight into 
strangers’ private lives. The 60-year-old who complains the £150-worth of Botox 
hasn’t made her look 21 again. The girl crying because a single hair on her 
neck is ruining her life, sitting next to a 30-year-old with sore weeping acne, 
who gives her hand a sympathetic squeeze.

I’ve also learned a lot about my own attitude towards beauty. It turns out I 
do enjoy applying makeup, my hair doesn’t have to be out of control, and I can 
only last for 17 hours on a juice cleanse.

What I struggle with most are the sales targets. Mine aren’t that high – 
around £100 each week – but as I can’t sell treatments, I have to try to sell 
products. We stock a moisturiser that is £92 a bottle, so if I sell one of 
those it’s fine. But selling eight or nine lip glosses at £12 each, in one 
week, is near to impossible for me.

I had a good few months of selling the high-end stuff when I first started 
working here, and my target went up to £500 a week. That was until a part-time 
aesthetician cornered me in the kitchen and screamed in my face that I’d stolen 
all of her commission so she couldn’t pay her rent. I felt awful. Thankfully, 
she’s no longer working with us.

Conversation may start about the weather but quickly descends into an analysis 
of patients' deepest insecurities

Other than sales, it’s the interaction with the patients that I find 
particularly difficult. I sign them in and they nervously flick through Good 
Housekeeping or Heat. If they feel like a conversation, it may start about the 
traffic or the weather but quickly descends into an analysis of their deepest 
insecurities. One minute I’m the receptionist, the next I’m their counsellor.

Often, when there are two or three people waiting in reception, I play the 
referee in an imperfection competition. “No, my mole is uglier than your hairy 
chin!” “Oh, but my wonky nose is far worse than both those things!” I don’t 
encourage this, and I try to avoid it escalating by interjecting with positive 
comments.

Many of our patients think their lives will improve after a treatment, that it 
will mean they’ll find the perfect partner or the perfect job. The biggest 
problem they have is a lack of self-esteem.

The doctors have a verbal agreement not to carry out surgery if a patient’s 
boyfriend is offering to pay. They need to be sure it is solely the patient’s 
decision, and have sadly seen situations where it is not. Husbands are 
different, because they rarely come in for consultations, and this is a good 
sign that the patient is not being pressured. It’s quite common for women to 
keep it a secret from their husbands, too.

During the weeks that I sat wearing a splint on my face, I hope the patients 
understood that they had inspired me to have the rhinoplasty I’ve wanted for 
the past 10 years. Actually, it was a mixture of their bravery and, on the odd 
occasion, total disregard for the safety of their own bodies: throw caution to 
the wind – you only live once. Plus I got a 10% discount, which was very 
welcome, of course.

I am happier now it’s healed. I thought I’d be the only person who noticed the 
change, but I get frequent comments about how different I look. Friends who 
haven’t seen me for a while know there is something different but can’t put 
their finger on it – maybe it’s the newfound confidence they can see. Either 
way, I can definitely recommend going for it.

In this job I am the person I always wanted to be. I’m not bogged down trying 
to fit into the corporate machine. I have lots of free time and can go on nice 
holidays, as long as I watch the pennies in between. I can see that taking care 
of my appearance is not shallow, destructive, or unattainable for someone like 
me, but that it can be good for the soul. And for the record, most staff here 
have their own fancy cars. Because beauty is not in the eye of the beholder – 
it’s business.

• Are you a police officer, developer or brain surgeon? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 