
Envy is becoming an increasingly prominent topic in the field of psychology, 
particularly in an ever-growing world of social media. We are constantly 
bombarded with images of other people’s supposedly perfect lives. Even though 
logic dictates that these images are hugely selective, their impact is 
powerful. We instinctively react, envious of what we don’t have and jealous of 
people who seem to enjoy more money, more exciting experiences and greater 
happiness than us.

But is this a bad thing? It depends on what sort of envy you experience. There 
have been suggestions that there are not one but two forms – vicious and 
emulative – and they are very different. Vicious envy – as its name suggests – 
is invariably hostile and corrosive. It is the simple resentment of another 
person’s success that manifests in the desire to haul them down into the mud.

By contrast, emulative envy is akin to admiration, comprising a more uplifting 
mix of desire, longing and respect. If used wisely, this kind of positive envy 
can help us to clarify our goals and values, illuminate our path towards them 
and drive us forward to achieve them. In this sense, it is appropriate to speak 
of moral and even spiritual envy. For example, we look up to the Nelson 
Mandelas of this world and envy their moral strength and courage. This entails 
not only wishing that we could possess similar conviction and fortitude, but 
also attempting to follow in their esteemed footsteps.

Emulative envy is akin to admiration, comprising a more uplifting mix of 
desire, longing and respect

Emulative envy is positive in two key respects. First, there is no resentment 
of the admired person. Second, it is inspirational. It spurs us on to emulate 
our heroes. Indeed, for our envy to be positive, it must be emulative rather 
than vicious. Vicious envy can be an insidious poison, gradually draining the 
world of all its joy. Which is why envy should never be allowed to fester into 
resentment at others’ success. Instead it should be harnessed skilfully and 
thoughtfully.

When envy first stirs within us, it is poised on a knife edge and can go 
either way: it might corrode into vicious envy, or rise up to emulative envy. 
The bad news is that it is all too easy to take the wrong path; the good news 
is that it is largely within our power to opt for the alternative. We can – and 
must – make a determined, conscious decision to choose the emulative 
alternative. There are two main ways in which we can do this. The first is to 
focus on ourselves, rather than on the target of our envy. Instead of obsessing 
over their good fortune, we work out how to attain what they have.

But what if some of these goals are simply unattainable? For instance, I may 
envy a child with their whole life ahead of them, but I’ll never be in that 
position again. Similarly, despite my best efforts, I’m certain I will never 
attain Bill Gates’s wealth or David Beckham’s footballing ability. It is 
precisely in this sort of situation that envy is most liable to turn bitter.

But there’s a solution: in such circumstances we can work on the envy itself 
and turn it towards attaining more achievable outcomes. This is the second way 
of preventing envy from degenerating. These achievable goals, also, tend to be 
more fulfilling. Everything from better relationships to creative fulfilment is 
within reach if we use envy wisely, and they are likely to be far more 
rewarding than the vast – and unattainable – riches so many of us crave. We 
should strive to cultivate higher forms of envy by aiming for outcomes that are 
worthier and more deserving of our attention.

The Positive Power of Negative Emotions by Dr Tim Lomas is published by 
Piatkus Books at £13.99. To order a copy for £11.47, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/positive-power-of-negative-emotions.html>
 