
It's not often that Spaniards see Vinny Samways cry. Back in England he may 
have been derided as Skinny Sideways, but Vinny has undergone a dramatic image 
change during six seasons at Las Palmas. In Spain he's considered a hard man, 
not the kind of wuss who'd bawl his eyes out. Especially not in public. The 
proud owner of 19 yellow cards this season, "Beenee" is far more likely to 
inflict pain than suffer it. This weekend, however, the unthinkable happened: 
Unión Deportiva deLas Palmas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> 
were relegated from the First Division and Vinny - a hero at the club - 
couldn't hold back the tears.

Hardly surprising really: Las Palmas looked pretty safe at Christmas, only to 
embark upon the kind of run that might even embarrass Dario Gradi. Then, 
suddenly, on the final day they were back in a position of safety after Jorge 
scored a twentieth-minute penalty to put Las Palmas 1-0 up against Real 
Sociedad. Just after 9.30pm on Saturday night, Vinny and his boys were First 
Division footballers while Mallorca, trailing 1-0 against Valladolid, had 
joined Zaragoza and Tenerife (like David Icke, waiting in vain for a miracle) 
in the relegation zone.

It was, however, a temporary reprieve, cruelly snatched away. Las Palmas were 
safe for almost an hour before Ibagaza put Mallorca level and Albert Luque 
added a winner from Samuel Eto'o's pass with a quarter of an hour to go. Then, 
to add insult to injury (even if it made no practical difference) Las Palmas 
conceded a Darko Kovacevic penalty. Mallorca were safe; Las Palmas were down.

Vinny and Luque could hardly have cut different figures. While Vinny trudged 
off the pitch with tears in his eyes, a delighted Luque whipped his shorts 
down, threw his kit into the crowd and raced round the Son Moix in a delightful 
pair of pristine white pants. The Spanish press, inevitably, loved it - Vinny 
and Albert were all the rage on Sunday morning. So keen were the papers to 
glory in Vinny's pain that AS even included one photo of "The Crying 
Englishman", which wasn't Samways at all. Everywhere you looked you were 
confronted by images of Vinny hiding his head in his hands, and Luque hiding, 
well, not really hiding anything.

Relegation is a disaster for Las Palmas who have massive financial problems - 
Samways is just one of many who has occasionally gone without pay over this 
season. The club's future hopes - most notably Jorge - will almost certainly 
get sold, there will be few, if any, additions to the squad and a quick return 
is extremely unlikely. Vinny probably wishes he'd gone to Atlético Madrid when 
they came knocking last summer.

Tears in the Canaries, then, but it was all smiles in the Basque Country, 
where Alavés secured a Uefa Cup place alongside Betis and Celta (who, like a 
kid with a breakfast cereal freebie, choked yet again, leaving Barça the final 
Champions league spot).

Few doubted that Alavés would win, what with their opponents being their 
already-safe fellow Basques, Osasuna (even though Osasuna are Navarrese, but no 
matter) - like last season, when Real Sociedad, the bastards, obligingly laid 
down and died, allowing Osasuna to survive instead of the mighty Real Oviedo, a 
Basque "favour" was on the cards. Alavés won 1-0.

The summer transfer season starts in earnest

With the messy on-field business finally over, Spain's top clubs can now 
dedicate themselves whole-heartedly to what they do best: going mental in the 
transfer market. Atlético Madrid have set the ball rolling by buying half the 
Lazio reserve team (Claudio López, Gaizka Mendieta, and Diego Simeone are all 
said to have agreed deals), while across the city Real continue to chase 
Patrick Vieira round like a salivating Benny Hill, and Valencia scour the world 
for a centre-forward, any centre-forward.

Barcelona, though, have taken top billing. For now, at least. Reports this 
morning suggest that they'll make a 36m euros bid for top scorer Dirty Diego 
Tristán, but the real news concerns the man who will take up residence 
alongside millions of euros worth of wasted talent on Barcelona's bench.

Barça have been looking for new manager pretty much all season, right under 
the nose of current incumbent Charly Rexach (they've been looking far and wide, 
obviously). The trouble is, the club appears to have developed the Midas touch 
in reverse - everyone they touch turns to shite. They went for Irureta after 
Depor beat Madrid in the Cup and Depor collapsed; they went for Hector Cúper 
and Internazionale blew the title; they went for Víctor Fernández and Celta 
promptly threw away next year's Champions League.

And so it was that Barça turned to the man everybody loves to hate, the only 
man in the world with a bigger head than Joe Royle - Louis Van Gaal.

The news was broken earlier this week by Cadena Cope radio when impressionist 
Fernando Echeverria phoned Van Gaal pretending to be rival radio host and Van 
Gaal supporter, José María García.

The Dutchman obligingly revealed that he would be signing a deal in the next 
few days. What he didn't explain was how got back to Barcelona - after all, Van 
Gaal didn't so much burn his bridges as blow them to smithereens. With the news 
of Van Gaal's return confirmed by Barça president Joan Gaspart on Monday 
afternoon, there'll now be a mass exodus, with Kluivert and Rivaldo likely to 
be the first through the door.

It's not just the players, though: The Spanish press also hates Van Gaal. This 
is the man whose final press conference consisted of a withering glare and a 
carefully prepared three-word statement: "I'm going. Congratulations". Even 
TVE's limelight hogging, football-manager hugging interviewer Quique Guash 
hates him. "I would", said Guash, a Barça fan, "rather the devil came to manage 
Barcelona". The devil, eh? Now there's an idea. Roll on next season.

Champions: Valencia
 Copa del Rey: Deportivo de La Coruña
 Champions League: Depor, Real Madrid, Barça.
 Uefa Cup: Celta, Betis, Alavés.
 Relegated: Zaragoza, Tenerife, Las Palmas.
 Promoted from Division 2: Atlético Madrid (champions), and two from Racing de 
Santander, Xérez, Recreativo de Huelva and Elche.
 Pichichi (top scorer): Diego Tristán (Depor), 21.
 Zamora (best goalkeeper): Santiago Cañizares (Valencia).


Email Sid sidlowe@telefonica.net <mailto:sidlowe@telefonica.net>
 