
Ten-man Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> fought 
back to draw 2-2 at Osasuna, who also finished with 10 players, in La Liga on 
Saturday but still left their title rivals the chance to widen the gap at the 
top of the table.

Osasuna's Oriol Riera headed in goals in the 16th and 39th minute before 
Madrid's woes deepened when Sergio Ramos received his second yellow card in the 
44th.

With Cristiano Ronaldo unable to extend his eight-game scoring run for club 
and country, the midfielder Isco pulled one back before half-time and passed 
for Pepe to head home an 80th-minute equaliser seconds after Osasuna's 
Francisco Silva also earned his second booking.

"The team demonstrated it has a good attitude, but a draw is like a loss for 
us," the Real defender Marcelo said. "We knew that the result wasn't good 
enough but we reacted too late."

Madrid's five-game winning run in the league ended at a ground where they 
traditionally have trouble getting wins. Real have now won only one in six at 
the Reyno de Navarra stadium.Osasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna>, who sit just two points above 
the relegation zone, have held both Barcelona and Madrid to draws there this 
season.

Madrid started strongly and Ronaldo had two chances to put his team in front. 
But Osasuna struck first when right back Marc Bertran dribbled past his marker 
before swinging a cross to the far post where Riera was left unmarked to direct 
the ball into the net.

Madrid momentarily lost both their verve in attack and composure in defence, 
and both centre-halves, Pepe and Sergio Ramos, received yellow cards.

Riera was left free to double the hosts' lead by nodding in the follow-up to 
Damià Abella's header from a corner-kick that goalkeeper Diego López sprung to 
palm off his line.

And Ramos soon received his second yellow card in questionable circumstances 
when Osasuna's Roberto Torres fell after colliding with his arm.

But just when Madrid were at their lowest, Ronaldo dribbled into the Osasuna 
defence and laid off for Isco to place a right-footed strike just inside the 
post and pull one back before the break.

Osasuna still appeared set to claim the victory after a placid second half 
until Silva earned himself two yellow cards in a four-minute spell. Isco found 
the hole left in the defence which Pepe exploited to score Madrid's second.
 