
Josh Onomah, 18, Tottenham Hotspur, midfielder

Mauricio Pochettino is not always given to effusiveness, so it caught the 
attention when he spoke almost evangelically about one of Tottenham’s young 
prospects in December. “He is a special boy, a special player,” said Pochettino 
of Onomah, who had just made his first start ina Europa League win over Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/tottenham-monaco-europa-league-match-report>
. The locally-born Onomah can play in a number of midfield positions and his 
blend of speed, power and vision certainly bodes well. Pochettino gives 
youngsters more chances than most and has already entrusted him with substitute 
appearances in tight, tense games such as November’s north London derby against 
Arsenal. A repeat of Dele Alli’s recent breakthrough is not an outlandish idea.

Mason Holgate , 19, Everton, right-back

Holgate’s £2m move from League One side Barnsley drew inevitable comparisons 
to John Stones, who trod the same path in 2013. The fact that Holgate, like 
Stones, has begun his career as a right-back adds to the likeness but the 
19-year-old is very much his own man. In 22 appearances for Barnsley, Holgate 
showed himself to be an outstanding athlete with composure well beyond his 
years.Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> moved quickly to 
sign him on a five-year contract ahead of Bournemouth and, while early moves to 
the Premier League do not always benefit young players, Stones’ meteoric rise 
has set the blueprint for his fellow Oakwell alumnus to make an impact sooner 
rather than later.

Zach Clough, 20, Bolton Wanderers, forward

The winning bidder for Clough – who seems likely to leave Bolton sooner rather 
than later – will almost certainly have landed a bargain. Clough, a product of 
the Trotters’ academy, burst onto the scene last season with six goals in 10 
appearances and is now fully fit after shoulder surgery sidelined him for three 
months of this campaign. A natural finisher with strength that belies his 
diminutive frame, Clough signed a new three-year contract in October but could 
move on this winter. Manchester United were linked with him last summer but his 
more immediate use may be as a must-have accessory for a Championship promotion 
contender looking to push over the line.

Adam Armstrong, 18, Coventry City (on loan from Newcastle United), forward

Newcastle supporters barely know what to make of Armstrong’s half-season at 
Coventry. On the one hand, it augurs splendidly that he can take League One by 
storm, scoring 13 times by Christmas; on the other, don’t Steve McClaren’s 
strugglers need someone with exactly that happy knack right now? For the 
moment, Armstrong is probably in the best place – Tony Mowbray’s 
upwardly-mobile Sky Blues are playing some vibrant football and Armstrong, a 
lethal finisher, is improving rapidly at the Ricoh Arena. The fear is that 
Newcastle may not be able to offer him Premier League football upon his return.

Martin Samuelsen, 18, Peterborough (on loan from West Ham), forward

The fanfare surrounding Real Madrid’s Martin Odegaard may have deflected 
attention from a Norwegian with an equally big future. Samuelsen joined West 
Ham after being released by Manchester City last year and, even if their 
co-chairman David Gold’s tweet that “It’s possible he could be as good as Sir 
Trevor Brooking” was not entirely helpful, the signs are exciting. His early 
form during a loan spell in League One with Peterborough has been outstanding, 
and his first senior goal – a thrilling mixture of close control, footwork and 
composure at Sheffield United this month – has already made him a minor YouTube 
hit. Whether or not he quite lives up to Gold’s billing, there will surely be 
more to come.

Ben Kennedy, 19, Stevenage, forward

Teddy Sheringham knows a thing or two about second strikers, so you are 
inclined to listen when theStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> manager says Kennedy could 
enter the reckoning for a place in Northern Ireland’s Euro 2016 squad this 
summer. The deep-lying forward has already captained his country’s under-19s 
side and, after scoring four times for the League Two club in their run to the 
play-offs last season, has returned from hip surgery to figure prominently 
again. “He’s an intelligent player, a very clever player,” says Sheringham of 
Kennedy, and you suspect that, at least until bigger clubs begin circling, 
player and coach are perfectly suited to one another.

Sergej Milinkovic-Savic, 20, Lazio, midfielder

Serbia’s senior team may be strife-ridden but the depth of talent coming 
through is extraordinary. Their Under-20s won last year’s World Cup and the 
driving force in midfield was Milinkovic-Savic, a dominant figure at nearly 6ft 
4in whose size merely augments his ability to shine as a multifaceted, 
technically superb playmaker.Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> 
recognised his promise, signing him from Genk in July for an estimated €9m, and 
his performances have been a rare beacon in a sluggish first half of the season 
from the Serie A club. An expensive move to a Champions League team would be a 
natural progression for Milinkovic-Savic, whose younger brother Vanja, a 
goalkeeper, had a short spell with Manchester United.

Kingsley Coman, 19, Bayern Munich, forward

Coman has certainly done the rounds in his short career. The 19-year-old 
winger was Paris Saint-Germain’s youngest ever outfield player when he made his 
debut in February 2013; he moved to Juventus the following year and now, a 
quarter of the way through a two-year loan at Bayern Munich, is progressing 
quickly in Bavaria. Injuries to Arjen Robben and Franck Ribéry have given him 
chances to impress and he has taken them, scoring four times by December and 
making six assists. A place in the France squad has resulted and Coman, who 
Bayern are likely to sign for €21m next year, could emulate Thierry Henry in 
shooting to global prominence on home soil this summer.

Kenedy, 19, Chelsea, forward

More than a few journalists had to double-check their teamsheets two months 
ago when Kenedy, a 19-year-old winger signed from Fluminense in the summer, was 
named at left-back for what – at the time – seemed a pivotal match in José 
Mourinho’s managerial career. Chelsea kept a clean sheet against Norwich and 
Kenedy handled the pressure on his first start with laudable cool. His future 
probably still lies further forward, and he has impressed with some lively 
appearances from the bench; it says plenty that, whileChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> road-test most of their better 
youngsters at partner club Vitesse Arnhem, the rangy Brazil Under-20s player 
appears to be staying firmly put.

Jonathan Tah, 19, Bayer Leverkusen, defender

Bayern Munich are not the only Bundesliga club capable of signing their 
rivals’ prize assets. Tah had been linked with several Premier League clubs 
after coming through with Hamburg but the Germany Under-19 captain eventually 
joinedBayer Leverkusen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> 
in the summer for around £7m. Leverkusen have a remarkable player on their 
hands: the 6ft 4in Tah has established himself in their defence and performed 
maturely throughout their Champions League campaign. Few opponents win a 
physical tussle with Tah and there are not many better at playing from the back 
either. Nobody in Germany played more minutes than Tah (2,520) in the first 
half of this season; he would cost his English suitors a pretty penny now.
 