
Definitions <> | Rights and Licence to Use <> | Logos and Credits <> | Display 
and Removal of Content <> | Confidentiality <> | Warranties and Exclusions <> | 
Exclusion of Liability <> | Termination <> | General <> |

These terms and conditions for content network sharing agreements set out the 
terms under which you, as a Partner of GNM's Content Networks, agree to share 
content with GNM. They should be read in conjunction with the Term Sheet issued 
to you by GNM and together these form your Agreement with GNM.

Please read these terms carefully. You shall be legally bound by these terms 
when GNM sends You a countersigned Term Sheet. You are advised to print off and 
keep a paper copy of these terms.

1. Definitions

1.1 The words and phrases defined in bold on the Term Sheet shall bear those 
meanings when they are used in this Agreement.

2. Rights and Licence to Use

2.1 The Licensor shall retain all copyright and all other right, title and 
interest in and to its Content. Subject to the terms of this Agreement, the 
Licensor hereby grants to the Licensee a non-exclusive, worldwide licence for 
the Contract Period to load the Licensor Content on to its server and use, 
reproduce, transmit and publicly display the Content on the Licensee Platform 
in accordance with this Agreement and the Publication Limits.

2.2 Licensor grants an irrevocable and permanent worldwide licence subject to 
Clause 4 to:

2.2.1 store the Content in internal archives; and

2.2.2 publish and transmit the Content on the Licensee Platform

after the Contract Period only in the same form and context, and to the 
extent, that such Content has been reproduced on the Licensee Platform during 
the Contract Period in accordance with this Agreement.

2.3 Partner grants to GNM the perpetual right to authorise the Newspaper 
Licensing Agency and similar reprographic rights organisations in other 
jurisdictions ("RROs") to distribute or license the distribution of the Partner 
Content for the RROs' licensed acts and purposes as amended from time to time.

2.4 The Partner shall email rights@theguardian.com with the title, author and 
date of all items of GNM Content it wishes to publish on the Partner Website. 
The parties shall discuss in good faith the procedure for the supply of the 
Partner Content from Partner to GNM. The Licensee agrees not to publish any 
Content until it has confirmation that the Licensor has sufficient rights in 
the Content.

2.5 End users of the Licensed Platforms may view, print and download the 
Content for their own personal use only (and not in a systematic or regular 
manner so as to create a database of the contents) and may not reproduce the 
Content or transmit it to or store it in any other website or disseminate it in 
any other form. Each party shall ensure that the terms of use of material on 
the Licensed Platforms include restrictions of equivalent or greater affect to 
those set out in this clause.

2.6 The Licensee shall not edit, modify, use, copy, transmit, display or 
redistribute the Licensor Content in any way except as set out in Clauses 
2.1-2.3. The Licensee may not copy any other material which appears on the 
Licensor Platform without its prior written approval.

2.7 GNM may change the headline, standfirst and add pictures and captions to 
the Partner Content but shall not make any changes to the body of the Partner 
Content. If the Partner objects to the changes made, GNM shall remove them with 
immediate effect. The Partner may not make any changes to the GNM Content 
unless GNM agrees to the specific change required.

3. Logos and Credits

3.1 GNM may display the Partner Logo on the GNM Platforms. The Partner shall 
display the logo of the GNM Content Network as defined in the Term Sheet on the 
front page or other prominent position on the Partner Website.

3.2 The Partner shall publish a credit alongside each item of GNM Content with 
the name of the author and the name of the GNM Content Network as defined in 
the Term Sheet hyperlinked back to the relevant home page on GNM's network of 
websites.

3.3 GNM shall publish a credit alongside each item of the Partner Content as 
follows:

[Author] for [Partner], part of the [GNM Content Network] 

3.4 The Licensor shall retain all right, title and interest in and to its 
name, logo and trade marks worldwide.

4. Display and Removal of Content

4.1 The Licensee acknowledges that on occasion the Licensor may need to remove 
certain parts of the Content for legal reasons and accordingly the Licensee 
shall, on receipt of a notice from the Licensor, immediately remove from the 
Licensee Platform any part of the Content identified in such notice.

4.2 In the event that such Content is not removed from the Licensee Platform 
within 24 hours, the Licensee agrees to indemnify the Licensor from and against 
all costs, claims and expenses attributable to and/or resulting from such 
non-removal. The Licensee shall have the right to control any proceedings in 
relation to which this indemnity applies.

5. Confidentiality

5.1 Each party undertakes to use all documents and all technical, commercial, 
financial and other information which is obtained from the other party in 
connection with this Agreement, or with the negotiations leading up to it, for 
the purpose of performing this Agreement, to treat them confidentially and to 
make them available or disclose them to third parties only so far as it is 
necessary (i) for the performance of this Agreement; or (ii) as permitted under 
the Licence to Use in Clause 2; or (iii) to their professional advisers; or 
(iv) as required by law. Further, each party undertakes not to disclose to any 
person, without the previous written consent of the other party, the existence 
of any term of this Agreement, or the existence of any information about any 
dispute or disagreement between the parties.

5.2 The obligations of confidentiality set out above shall not apply to any 
documents or information which a party can show:

5.2.1 at the time of its acquisition was in, or at a later date has come into, 
the public domain, other than following a breach of this Clause 5; or

5.2.2 it knew prior to first disclosure to it by the other party; or

5.2.3 it received independently from a third party with the full right to 
disclose.

6. Warranties and Exclusions

6.1 The Licensor warrants that it has full right, title and authority to 
license the Content to the extent set out in this Agreement and that the 
Content shall not be an infringement of any third party intellectual property 
rights.

6.2 Save the warranty as set out in clause 6.1, the Licensor excludes any and 
all warranties, conditions or other terms implied by statute, common law or 
otherwise to the fullest extent permitted by law.

6.3 The Licensor shall not be liable (and hereby excludes liability) for the 
consequences of any inaccuracy, interruptions or errors in the Content.

6.4 Each party shall be solely responsible for virus detection and the 
development, operation and maintenance of their respective websites and for 
imposing disclaimers on end users of the Website equivalent to those set out in 
this Clause 6.

6.5 The Licensor does not provide the Content for any specific purpose or 
persons. Accordingly, it is not intended to be relied upon in making any 
particular decisions and appropriate independent advice should be obtained 
before doing so.

6.6 Some of the Content may contain links to websites provided by independent 
third parties. The Licensor is not responsible for the availability or content 
of such sites and shall not be responsible for any transaction concerning goods 
or services available from those sites.

6.7 The Licensee shall promptly inform the Licensor in the event of any claim 
by a third party in relation to the Content and the Licensee shall comply with 
the reasonable requests of the Licensor in relation to such claim.

7. Exclusion of Liability

7.1 Neither party shall be liable to the other for indirect, special or 
consequential damages (or any loss of revenue, profits or data) arising in 
connection with this Agreement or the Content, even if one party has advised 
the other of the possibility of such damages.

8. Termination

8.1 Either party may terminate this Agreement by giving written notice to the 
other in any of the following events:

8.1.1 if the other party commits any breach of any of the terms of this 
Agreement and fails to remedy that breach (if capable of remedy) within 7 days 
after notice from the other party giving full particulars of breach and 
requiring it to be remedied; or

8.1.2 if any step, action, application or proceeding is taken in relation to 
the whole or any material part of the other party for a voluntary arrangement 
or composition or reconstruction of its debts, or winding up, dissolution, 
administration or receivership (administrative or otherwise) or a threat of the 
same.

8.2 The Agreement may be terminated by either party, on giving the other 30 
days written notice.

8.3 On termination of this Agreement the rights and obligations of the parties 
shall terminate except that the provisions of Clauses 2.2, 2.3, 2.5 and Clauses 
3-7 shall survive any termination or expiration of this Agreement.

9. General

9.1 Any notice given under this Agreement shall be in writing to the Contact 
specified on the Term Sheet or such other Contact as the parties may notify 
from time to time and may be delivered to the other party or sent by pre-paid 
post or email to the address of that party specified in this Agreement or such 
other address as may be notified under this Agreement by that party from time 
to time for this purpose.

9.2 The parties do not intend for any third party to have any rights under 
this Agreement by virtue of the Contracts (Rights or Third Parties) Act 1999 or 
otherwise.

9.3 A party shall not be liable for any failure or delay in performing its 
obligations under this Agreement to the extent that this failure or delay is 
the result of any cause or circumstance beyond the reasonable control of that 
party and that failure could not have been prevented or overcome by that party 
acting reasonably and prudently. If by reason of force majeure a party is 
unable to perform all or any part of its obligations under this Agreement for a 
continuous period of 20 working days, the other party may terminate this 
Agreement immediately by written notice.

9.4 Neither party shall assign or transfer its rights or obligations under 
this Agreement without the other party's prior written consent.

9.5 This Agreement represents the entire terms agreed between the parties in 
relation to its subject matter. Any variation to this Agreement must be agreed 
in writing by the parties.

9.6 Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to create a partnership or joint 
venture between the parties. No party shall have the authority to bind the 
other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the 
other party in any way for any purpose.

9.7 No failure or delay by any party in exercising its rights under this 
Agreement shall operate as a waiver of that right nor shall any single or 
partial exercise by either party of any right preclude any further exercise of 
any other right.

9.8 Each party shall comply with all applicable law including, without 
limitation, the provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998.

9.9 If any provision of this Agreement (or part of any provision) is found by 
any court or other authority of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, 
unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain unaffected and in 
force.

9.10 This Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance with 
the laws of England and Wales. Each party irrevocably submits to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts of England and Wales over any claim or matter 
arising under or in connection with this Agreement.
 