
1. The following terms have the following meanings:
1.1. "Agreement" means these Terms and Conditions and the Term Sheet;
1.2. "GNM IPR" means trademarks and service marks, registered designs and 
design rights, copyright and all similar rights anywhere in the world, and any 
and all goodwill and know-how associated with the afore-going;
1.3. "Theatrical and Motion Picture Usage" means usage of GNM Media as a) 
props, being movable or portable items on a stage or a set, distinct from the 
actors, scenery, costumes and electrical equipment); b) as background material 
on theatrical or TV or film sets in any format or media; and c) as mock-ups 
("Mock-up") meaning a prop that is a mocked-up version of GNM Media and 
including all revised and amended versions;
1.4. "GNM Media" means the Guardian and Observer newspapers in their various 
formats including printed and tablet editions, and the theguardian.com network 
of websites in its various formats including desktop and mobile formats.

2. Capitalised words used in these Terms and Conditions not set out in Clause 
1 are defined in the Term Sheet.

3. In consideration of the Fees and subject to Clause 10, GNM hereby grants 
the Client the right to photograph, record, reproduce or otherwise use the GNM 
Media as defined in the Services on the Term Sheet in the Client Services and 
same in connection with the exhibition, exploitation, distribution and 
promotion (including as excerpts or stills of the Services) of the Client 
Services in all now known or hereafter invented media without limitation as to 
time or territory.

4. The Client shall pay to GNM the Fees in the Currency. GNM shall issue an 
invoice and such invoice shall be payable within 30 days of the end of the 
month following the month in which the invoice is issued. The Client shall pay 
any VAT properly applied to the Fees due at the applicable rate.

5. The Client shall pay, on demand, interest on all amounts which are overdue 
for more than 30 days, such interest to be calculated from the day after the 
date when payment fell due to the date of actual payment at the rate of 4 per 
cent above the base rate of the Bank of England from time to time. GNM may 
suspend and/or terminate provision of all or part of the Services if the Client 
is in arrears with the payment of Fees at any time and the Client's Contact 
Person has been given 7 days written notice prior to suspension and/or 
termination.

6. GNM reserves the right to charge a cancellation fee of 50% of the quoted 
Fees should the Client cancel their purchase following acceptance of GNM's 
quotation

7. In the event that the Services contain Mock-Ups:
7.1. At GNM's option, it may create the Mock-up itself or require the Client 
to create the Mock-up. Where GNM creates the Mock-up, the Client shall supply 
any copy and images it requires to be included in the Mock-up which shall be 
subject to GNM's approval. Where the Client creates the Mock-up, GNM shall 
supply fonts, logos and other relevant GNM IPR for use in the Mock-up.
7.2. GNM shall have the right, in its absolute discretion, to approve or 
reject the final version of the Mock-up. If GNM rejects the Mock-up, the Client 
may supply a revised version of the Mock-up. Should the Client not supply a 
revised Mock-up or should the revised Mock-up (and any subsequent revised 
versions) be rejected by GNM, this Agreement shall immediately terminate and 
the Client shall have no further rights in relation to the Mock-up or GNM's IPR.

8. GNM acknowledges that:
8.1. nothing in this Agreement requires the Client to use GNM Media in or in 
connection with the Client Services; and
8.2. it shall not acquire any interests or rights in the Client Services.

9. The Client acknowledges that:
9.1. all GNM IPR are and shall remain the sole and exclusive property of GNM 
and its third party licensors and it shall not, by virtue of this Agreement or 
otherwise, acquire or claim any goodwill, or rights, title or interest in the 
GNM IPR; and
9.2. it shall not be entitled to exploit the GNM IPR except as expressly 
provided for in the Agreement and shall not use the Services in such a manner 
so as to damage GNM's reputation, brands, logos, products or trademarks.

10. The Client acknowledges that GNM does not represent or warrant that it 
owns the rights in the material contained in the Services (including, without 
limitation, any photographs, images, copy and advertisements) and it is the 
responsibility of the Client to obtain any necessary clearances.

11. GNM excludes all liability arising from this Agreement and/or the Client's 
use of the Services (regardless, in the case of Mock-ups, of whichever party 
produced the Mock-up) save for any liability that cannot be excluded under law.

12. The Client agrees that it shall indemnify and hold GNM harmless against 
all and any losses or damages (including legal costs and VAT thereon) incurred 
as a result of use of the Services.

13. This Agreement shall be subject to the laws of England and any dispute 
concerning it or its interpretation shall be decided in that jurisdiction.
 