
These Terms and Conditions for Video Revenue Share Arrangements and any other 
documents expressly referred to herein including any revisions thereto, set out 
the terms under which You agree to make available Your Content to GNM. They 
should be read in conjunction with the Term Sheet issued to You by GNM and 
together these form Your Agreement with GNM.


Please read these terms carefully. You shall be legally bound by these terms 
when GNM sends You a countersigned Term Sheet. You are advised to print off and 
keep a paper copy of these terms.

1. Definitions


1.1. The words and phrases defined in bold on the Term Sheet shall bear those 
meanings when they are used in this Agreement.

2. Content

2.1. You hereby agree that GNM may publish and distribute Your Content on the 
Guardian Digital Network as defined below on the terms of this Agreement.

2.2. You shall provide Your Content at the Content Frequency to the Agreement 
Owners from which GNM shall select items that it wishes publish and distribute.

2.3. You shall deliver Your Content to GNM in accordance with the technical 
requirements set out in theTechnical Information for Submitting Video to GMN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/dec/08/technical-requirements-for-submitting-video-contributions-to-gmn>
.

2.4. GNM shall credit Your Content by appending a link to Your Website 
adjacent to Your Content.

2.5. GNM may promote Your Content through marketing, editorial (subject to 
GNM’s editorial discretion) and advertising activity in any GNM product.

3. Rights and Licence to Use

3.1. Subject to the terms of this Agreement, You hereby grant to GNM a 
non-exclusive, worldwide licence during the Term to:

3.1.1. load (and if necessary, encode) Your Content on to its server and use, 
reproduce, transmit and publicly display Your Content on the Guardian Digital 
Network on a VOD basis in accordance with this Agreement where a)“Guardian 
Digital Network” means GNM’s digital network accessed via browsers and/or apps 
or any other means on any device or equipment including but not limited to 
desktop computers, PDAs, mobile phones and tablet devices and any other 
connected devices, and incorporatingwww.theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> or any affiliate or successor 
websites (“GNM Website”), digital/IPTV television, RSS feeds, GNM social media 
presences, and any other website, app, digital product, network or channel 
bearing GNM’s trademarks or brands; and b)“VOD” means the exhibition of 
material via streaming whereby the viewer is able to receive its exhibition 
where the scheduling is at the viewer’s discretion as to precise time for 
viewing; and

3.1.2. add “stings” fore and aft of Your Content for the purposes of content 
and source identification, and include advertisements before and after 
distribution of Your Content; and

3.1.3. edit Your Content for the purposes of creating and transmitting trailer 
material, best of the week previews and reviews, etc; and

3.1.4. allow users of the Guardian Digital Network to make Your Content 
available on third party platforms (via embedding, etc).

3.2. You grant an irrevocable and permanent licence to GNM subject to Clause 4 
to:

3.2.1. store Your Content in internal archives; and

3.2.2. publish and transmit Your Content on the Guardian Digital Network

after the Term only in the same form and context, and to the extent, that Your 
Content has been reproduced during the Term in accordance with this Agreement.

3.3. All rights in Your Content not specifically granted to GNM hereby are 
expressly reserved by You.

3.4. End users of the Guardian Digital Network may view and download Your 
Content for their own personal use only (and not in a systematic or regular 
manner so as to create a database of the contents) and may not reproduce Your 
Content or transmit it to or store it in any other website or disseminate it in 
any other form. GNM shall ensure that the terms of use of material on the 
Guardian Digital Network include restrictions of equivalent or greater affect 
to those set out in this Clause.

3.5. GNM shall not edit, modify, use, copy, transmit, display or redistribute 
Your Content in any way except as set out in Clauses 3.1 and 3.2. GNM may not 
copy any other material which appears on Your Website without Your prior 
written approval, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed.

4. Display & Removal of Content

4.1. GNM shall have absolute discretion to determine the manner by which Your 
Content shall be made available from the Guardian Digital Network. During the 
Term, GNM may, in its sole discretion and at any time for any or no reason, 
suspend display of, choose not to display, or cease displaying any or all of 
Your Content.

4.2. Each party acknowledges that on occasion You may need to remove certain 
parts of Your Content for legal reasons and accordingly GNM shall, within 24 
hours of receipt of a notice from You or any third party sent to both of
multimedia@theguardian.com <mailto:multimedia@theguardian.com> and 
rights@theguardian.com <mailto:rights@theguardian.com>, remove from the 
Guardian Digital Network any part of Your Content identified in such notice.

5. Revenues and Payments

5.1. In consideration of the rights You grant to GNM under Clause 3, GNM shall 
pay to the SONAR Recipient in the SONAR Currency the SONAR as defined in the 
Term Sheet. The SONAR shall be based on:

5.1.1. the page impressions that Your Content receives on the GNM Website;

5.1.2. the Net Revenues received by GNM at the prevailing CPM rate for the 
respective month of the Term where a)“CPM” means the cost to advertisers of GNM 
serving 1,000 ad impressions; and b)“Net Revenues” means revenues from 
advertisers throughout the world in relation to advertisements that are 
received by GNM, less advertiser/agency discounts, ad serving costs and any 
applicable duties or taxes.

5.2. At the SONAR Frequency over the Term GNM shall:

 5.2.1. provide to You reports on page impressions on the GNM Website, unique 
users on the GNM Website and Net Revenues for Your Content; and

5.2.2. pay You Your SONAR within 30 days of the end of each calendar month of 
the Term unless the SONAR owing is less than GBP 20.00 in which event the SONAR 
shall be carried over to the following month(s) until such time as the SONAR 
reaches GBP 20.00 in aggregate.

5.3. In addition to Your SONAR, in the event that GNM block sells Your 
Content, for example by means of advertising roadblocks or page sponsorship, 
GNM shall pay You 50.00% of Net Revenues within 30 days of the first 
anniversary and any subsequent anniversary of the relevant commercial 
arrangement.

5.4. GNM shall be responsible for selling advertising on Your Content. No 
SONAR shall be payable in respect of:

5.4.1. house advertisements which may be published on occasion; and

5.4.2. cancelled or rejected advertisements, regardless of the time and method 
of rejection or cancellation.

5.5. GNM reserves the right to grant any discounts to advertisers for network 
advertisements and for setting the rates for any other advertisements.

5.6. GNM’s policies on payment as set out here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/info/2012/oct/01/payments-content-suppliers> are 
incorporated into this Agreement and shall apply to all payments pertaining to 
this Agreement.

6. Confidentiality

6.1. Each party undertakes:

6.1.1. to treat confidentially all documents and all technical, commercial, 
financial and other information which is obtained from the other party in 
connection with this Agreement or with the negotiations leading up to it; and

6.1.2. not to disclose to any person, without the previous written consent of 
the other party, the existence of any term of this Agreement, or the existence 
of any information about any dispute or disagreement between the parties

and to disclose such documents and information to third parties only so far as 
it is necessary:

6.1.3. for the performance of this Agreement as permitted under the Rights and 
Licence to Use in Clause 3; and/or

6.1.4. to their professional advisers; and/or

6.1.5. as required by law.

6.2. The obligations of confidentiality set out above shall not apply to any 
documents or information which a party can show:

6.2.1. at the time of its acquisition was in, or at a later date has come 
into, the public domain, other than following a breach of this Clause 6; or

6.2.2. it knew prior to first disclosure to it by the other party; or

6.2.3. it received independently from a third party with the full right to 
disclose.

7. Warranties and Indemnities

7.1. You warrant that:

7.1.1. You shall use the skill and care of a competent provider of video 
content;

7.1.2. except as otherwise expressly indicated, all necessary releases 
(including but not limited to model releases) have been obtained from the 
subject of Your Content for GNM’s purposes;

7.1.3. You shall use Your best endeavours to ensure that any resource made 
available for the supply or downloading of Your Content by GNM (for example, a 
website or FTP service) shall be uninterrupted and error free and that such 
resource be regularly swept for viruses and other programs with contaminating 
or destructive properties;

7.1.4. Your Content shall be of publishable quality and free from defects in 
software material;

7.1.5. You have full right, title and authority to enter into this Agreement 
and to license Your Content to GNM to the extent set out in this Agreement and 
that Your Content is not an infringement of any third party intellectual 
property rights;

7.1.6. none of Your Content or materials provided to GNM by or on behalf of 
You nor any part thereof or material therein nor any use thereof by GNM as 
expressly permitted by this Agreement shall:

7.1.6.1. breach any laws, rules, regulations, regulatory codes or any industry 
codes of practice (including those of ATVOD), orders or directions; or

7.1.6.2. be defamatory, abusive or offensive.

7.2. You shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless GNM against all claims, 
liability, damages, costs and expenses (including reasonable legal fees and 
disbursements) arising out of or in connection with any claim by a third party 
resulting from a breach of Clause 7.1.

7.3. GNM shall notify You in writing promptly upon becoming aware of any 
claim, damages, costs or expenses to which the indemnity in Clause 7.2 relates.

8. Exclusion of Liability

8.1. Neither party shall be liable to the other for indirect, special or 
consequential damages (or any loss of revenue, profits or data) arising in 
connection with this Agreement or Your Content, even if one party has advised 
the other of the possibility of such damages.

9. Termination

9.1. Either party may terminate this Agreement by giving written notice to the 
other in any of the following events:

9.1.1. if the other party commits any breach of any of the terms of this 
Agreement and fails to remedy that breach (if capable of remedy) within 7 days 
after notice from the other party giving full particulars of breach and 
requiring it to be remedied; or

9.1.2. if any step, action, application or proceeding is taken in relation to 
the whole or any material part of the other party for a voluntary arrangement 
or composition or reconstruction of its debts, or winding up, dissolution, 
administration or receivership (administrative or otherwise) or a threat of the 
same; or

9.1.3. if the other party undergoes a material change of ownership or 
effective change of control.

9.2. The provisions of Clauses 3-8 shall survive any termination or expiration 
of this Agreement.

10. Status of Contributors and Suppliers as Independent Contractors

10.1. You undertake to provide Your Content as an independent contractor and 
on this basis a) Your Agreement to provide Your Content to GNM shall not be 
interpreted or construed to create an association, agency, joint venture, 
partnership or employer-employee relationship between You and GNM or to impose 
any liability attributable to such a relationship upon either party, including 
but not limited to GNM’s Sickness Policy and paid leave; and b) You agree that 
subject to the provision by GNM of the Tools You shall work from Your own 
premises in providing Your Content to GNM and shall provide all the necessary 
equipment and materials to enable You to fulfil the terms of Your Agreement.

10.2. For the avoidance of doubt, You are not a “worker” as defined under the 
Working Time Regulations 1998 (as amended from time to time), and therefore You 
acknowledge that the provisions in those regulations relating to hours of work, 
rest breaks and annual leave do not apply to You.

10.3. You confirm for the purposes of the Taxes Acts, or such other 
appropriate legislation, that You are a self-employed person in business in 
Your own right and You shall be responsible for all tax liabilities arising in 
respect of Your Content, and shall Yourself account to the appropriate 
authorities for all tax, National Insurance or similar contributions payable in 
respect of the provision of Your Content to GNM under this Agreement. You 
undertake to advise GNM immediately in writing in the event that Your 
self-employed status is challenged by HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing 
authority during the Term.

10.4. In the event that GNM or any of its holding, subsidiary, associated or 
group companies (“Group”) becomes liable to account to HM Revenue & Customs or 
any other taxing authority anywhere in the world for any income tax, employee 
national insurance or any other deduction or withholding required to be made by 
law (including any interest and/or penalties thereon) arising in respect of 
payments made or to be made to You, You undertake and agree to indemnify and 
hold harmless GNM and/or the Group against such tax and national insurance and 
shall, at the written request of GNM, immediately pay GNM an amount equal to 
any tax and national insurance paid or payable by GNM or any other company in 
the Group to HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority. GNM shall be 
entitled to set off an amount equal to any tax and national insurance or any 
other deduction or withholding paid by GNM or another Group company to HM 
Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority against any monies otherwise 
payable to You.

10.5. For the purpose of this Clause 10, “independent contractor” shall be 
interpreted (as appropriate) to include all engagements made with GNM via a 
company or limited company. In such event, the rights of indemnity and 
disclosure equally shall apply.

11. General

11.1. Any notice given under this Agreement shall be in writing to such 
contact as the parties may notify from time to time and may be hand delivered 
to the other party or sent by pre-paid post or email (with a hard copy sent by 
post) to the address of that party specified in this Agreement or such other 
address as may be notified under this Agreement by that party from time to time 
for this purpose.

11.2. The parties do not intend for any third party to have any rights under 
this Agreement by virtue of the Contracts (Rights or Third Parties) Act 1999 or 
otherwise.

11.3. You shall not assign or transfer Your rights or obligations under this 
Agreement.

11.4. This Agreement, together with any documents referred to in it, 
constitutes the entire agreement and understanding between You and GNM, and 
supersedes any previous agreement whether written or oral between the parties 
in respect of Your Content.

11.5. Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to create a partnership or 
joint venture between the parties. No party shall have the authority to bind 
the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the 
other party in any way for any purpose. No failure or delay by any party in 
exercising its rights under this Agreement shall operate as a waiver of that 
right nor shall any single or partial exercise by either party of any right 
preclude any further exercise of any other right.

11.6. Each party shall comply with all applicable law including, without 
limitation, the provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998.

11.7. If any provision of this Agreement (or part of any provision) is found 
by any court or other authority of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, 
unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain unaffected and in 
force.

11.8. This Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance with 
the laws of England. Each party irrevocably submits to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts of England over any claim or matter arising under or 
in connection with this Agreement.
 