
Definitions <> | Rights and Licence to Use <> | Logos and Credits <> | Display 
and Removal of Content <> | Revenues & Payments <> | Status of Contributors and 
Suppliers as Independent Contractors <> | Confidentiality <> | Warranties and 
Exclusion of Liability <> | Termination <> | General <> |

These terms and conditions for content network supply agreements set out the 
terms under which you, as a Partner of GNM's Content Networks, agree to supply 
content to GNM. They should be read in conjunction with the Term Sheet issued 
to you by GNM and together these form your Agreement with GNM.

Please read these terms carefully. You shall be legally bound by these terms 
when GNM sends You a countersigned Term Sheet. You are advised to print off and 
keep a paper copy of these terms.

1. Definitions

1.1 The words and phrases defined in bold on the Term Sheet shall bear those 
meanings when they are used in this Agreement.

2. Rights and Licence to Use

2.1 Partner shall retain all copyright and all other right, title and interest 
in and to the Content. In consideration for displaying the Content and the 
Partner Logo on the GNM Platforms, Partner hereby grants GNM:

2.1.1 a non-exclusive, worldwide licence for the Contract Period to load the 
Content on to its server and use, reproduce, transmit and publicly display it 
on the GNM Platforms in accordance with this Agreement and the Publication 
Limits; and

2.1.2 the perpetual right to authorise the Newspaper Licensing Agency and 
similar reprographic rights organisations in other jurisdictions ("RROs") to 
distribute or license the distribution of the Content for the RROs' licensed 
acts and purposes as amended from time to time; and

2.1.3 an irrevocable and permanent worldwide licence subject to Clause 4 to 
(i) store the Content in internal archives; and (ii) publish and transmit the 
Content on the GNM Platforms after the Contract Period only in the same form 
and context, and to the extent, that such Content has been reproduced on the 
GNM Platforms during the Contract Period in accordance with this Agreement.

2.2 The parties shall discuss in good faith the procedure for the supply of 
the Content from Partner to GNM. GNM agrees not to publish any Content until it 
has confirmation that the Partner has sufficient rights in the Content.

2.3 GNM may change the headline and standfirst and add pictures and captions 
to the Content. In addition, GNM may make changes to the Content for legal and 
style reasons.

2.4 GNM shall publish a credit alongside each item of the Content as follows: 

[Author] for [Partner], part of the [GNM Content Network]

3. Logos and Credits

3.1 GNM shall display the Partner Logo on the GNM Platforms in form supplied 
by the Partner. The Partner shall retain all right, title and interest in and 
to its name, logo and trade marks worldwide.

3.2 The Partner shall display the GNM Logo in the form supplied by GNM on the 
front page of the Partner Website. GNM shall retain all right, title and 
interest in and to its name, logo and trade marks worldwide

4. Display and Removal of Content

4.1 GNM shall not be under any obligation to display the Content. 

4.2 Partner shall inform GNM if there is a legal issue or complaint concerning 
any of the Content published on the GNM Platforms pursuant to this Agreement as 
soon as possible.

5. Revenues & Payments

5.1 Where a share of net advertising revenues ("SONAR") is agreed, the SONAR 
shall be based on:

5.1.1 the page impressions that the Content receives on the Guardian network 
of websites ("Website");

5.1.2 the net revenues received by GNM at the prevailing CPM rate for the 
respective month of the Term where

5.1.2.1 "CPM" means the cost to advertisers of GNM serving 1,000 ad 
impressions; and

5.1.2.2 "Net Revenues" means revenues from advertisers throughout the world in 
relation to advertisements that are received by GNM, less advertiser/agency 
discounts, ad serving costs and any applicable duties or taxes.

5.2 On a monthly basis in arrears over the Term GNM shall provide to Partner 
reports on page impressions on the Website, unique users on the Website and Net 
Revenues for the Content. GNM shall pay the Partner the SONAR within 30 days of 
the end of each calendar month of the Term unless the SONAR owing is less than 
GBP 20.00 in which event the SONAR shall be carried over to the following 
month(s) until such time as the SONAR reaches GBP 20.00 in aggregate.

5.3 GNM shall be responsible for selling advertising on the Content. No SONAR 
shall be payable in respect of:

5.3.1 house advertisements which may be published on occasion; and

5.3.2 cancelled or rejected advertisements, regardless of the time and method 
of rejection or cancellation.

5.4 GNM reserves the right to grant any discounts to advertisers for network 
advertisements and for setting the rates for any other advertisements.

5.5 GNM's policies on payment as set out here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2012/oct/01/payments-content-suppliers> are 
incorporated into this Agreement and shall apply to all payments pertaining to 
this Agreement.

6. Status of Contributors and Suppliers as Independent Contractors

6.1 Partner undertakes any and all engagements under this Agreement as an 
independent contractor and on the basis that a) its agreement to provide 
Content to GNM shall not be interpreted or construed to create an association, 
agency, joint venture, partnership or employer-employee relationship between 
Partner and GNM or to impose any liability attributable to such a relationship 
upon either party, including but not limited to GNM's Sickness Policy and paid 
leave; and b) Partner agrees that it shall work from its own premises in 
providing services to GNM and shall provide all the necessary equipment and 
materials to enable it to fulfil the terms of its engagement.

6.2 For the avoidance of doubt, Partner is not a "worker" as defined under the 
Working Time Regulations 1998 (as amended from time to time), and therefore you 
acknowledge that the provisions in those regulations relating to hours of work, 
rest breaks and annual leave do not apply to Partner.

6.3 Partner confirms for the purposes of the Taxes Acts, or such other 
appropriate legislation, that it is a self-employed person in business in its 
own right and it shall be responsible for all tax liabilities arising in 
respect of its engagement under this Agreement, and shall itself account to the 
appropriate authorities for all tax, National Insurance or similar 
contributions payable in respect of the provision of its services to GNM under 
this Agreement. Partner undertakes to advise GNM immediately in writing in the 
event that its self-employed status is challenged by HM Revenue & Customs or 
any other taxing authority.

6.4 In the event that GNM or any of its holding, subsidiary, associated or 
group companies ("Group") becomes liable to account to HM Revenue & Customs or 
any other taxing authority anywhere in the world for any income tax, employee 
national insurance or any other deduction or withholding required to be made by 
law (including any interest and/or penalties thereon) arising in respect of 
payments made or to be made to Partner, Partner undertakes and agrees to 
indemnify and hold harmless GNM and/or the Group against such tax and national 
insurance and shall, at the written request of GNM, immediately pay GNM an 
amount equal to any tax and national insurance paid or payable by GNM or any 
other company in the Group to HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing 
authority. GNM shall be entitled to set off an amount equal to any tax and 
national insurance or any other deduction or withholding paid by GNM or another 
Group company to HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority against any 
monies otherwise payable to Partner.

6.5 For the purpose of these clauses, "independent contractor" shall be 
interpreted (as appropriate) to include all engagements made with GNM via a 
company or limited company. In such event, the rights of indemnity and 
disclosure equally shall apply.

7. Confidentiality

7.1 Each party undertakes to use all documents and all technical, commercial, 
financial and other information which is obtained from the other party in 
connection with this Agreement, or with the negotiations leading up to it, for 
the purpose of performing this Agreement, to treat them confidentially and to 
make them available or disclose them to third parties only so far as it is 
necessary (i) for the performance of this Agreement; or (ii) as permitted under 
the Licence to Use in Clause 2; or (iii) to their professional advisers; or 
(iv) as required by law. Further, each party undertakes not to disclose to any 
person, without the previous written consent of the other party, the existence 
of any term of this Agreement, or the existence of any information about any 
dispute or disagreement between the parties.

7.2 The obligations of confidentiality set out above shall not apply to any 
documents or information which a party can show:

7.2.1 at the time of its acquisition was in, or at a later date has come into, 
the public domain, other than following a breach of this Clause 5; or

7.2.2 it knew prior to first disclosure to it by the other party; or

7.2.3 it received independently from a third party with the full right to 
disclose.

8. Warranties and Exclusion of Liability

8.1 Neither party shall be liable to the other for indirect, special or 
consequential damages (or any loss of revenue, profits or data) arising in 
connection with this Agreement or the Content, even if one party has advised 
the other of the possibility of such damages.

8.2 The Partner warrants and represents that it has all necessary rights in 
the Content and the Partner Logo to enable GNM to carry out its rights and 
obligations under this Agreement.

8.3 GNM warrants and represents that it has all necessary rights in the GNM 
Logo to enable the Partner to carry out its rights and obligations under this 
Agreement.

9. Termination

9.1 Either party may terminate this Agreement by giving written notice to the 
other in any of the following events:

9.1.1 if the other party commits any breach of any of the terms of this 
Agreement and fails to remedy that breach (if capable of remedy) within 7 days 
after notice from the other party giving full particulars of breach and 
requiring it to be remedied; or

9.1.2 if any step, action, application or proceeding is taken in relation to 
the whole or any material part of the other party for a voluntary arrangement 
or composition or reconstruction of its debts, or winding up, dissolution, 
administration or receivership (administrative or otherwise) or a threat of the 
same.

9.2 The Agreement may be terminated by either party, on giving the other 30 
days written notice.

9.3 On termination of this Agreement the rights and obligations of the parties 
shall terminate except that the provisions of Clauses 2.1.2 and 2.1.3 and 
Clauses 3-4 and 6-7 shall survive any termination or expiration of this 
Agreement.

10. General

10.1 Any notice given under this Agreement shall be in writing to the Contact 
specified on the Term Sheet or such other Contact as the parties may notify 
from time to time and may be delivered to the other party or sent by pre-paid 
post or by email with receipt acknowledged to the address of that party 
specified in this Agreement or such other address as may be notified under this 
Agreement by that party from time to time for this purpose.

10.2 The parties do not intend for any third party to have any rights under 
this Agreement by virtue of the Contracts (Rights or Third Parties) Act 1999 or 
otherwise.

10.3 Neither party shall assign or transfer its rights or obligations under 
this Agreement without the other party's prior written consent.

10.4 This Agreement represents the entire terms agreed between the parties in 
relation to its subject matter. Any variation to this Agreement must be agreed 
in writing by the parties.

10.5 Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to create a partnership or 
joint venture between the parties. No party shall have the authority to bind 
the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the 
other party in any way for any purpose.

10.6 No failure or delay by any party in exercising its rights under this 
Agreement shall operate as a waiver of that right nor shall any single or 
partial exercise by either party of any right preclude any further exercise of 
any other right.

10.7 Each party shall comply with all applicable law including, without 
limitation, the provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998.

10.8 If any provision of this Agreement (or part of any provision) is found by 
any court or other authority of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, 
unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain unaffected and in 
force.

10.9 This Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance with 
the laws of England and Wales. Each party irrevocably submits to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts of England and Wales over any claim or matter 
arising under or in connection with this Agreement.
 