
(A) GENERAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO ALL FIXED FREELANCE PERSONNEL <>

(B) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO ARTS CRITICS <>

(C) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO CONTRIBUTORS PROVIDING BLOGS <>

(D) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO CONTRIBUTORS PROVIDING ILLUSTRATIONS, 
CARTOONS AND ARTWORK <>

(E) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO STRINGERS AND SUPERSTRINGERS <>

(A) GENERAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO ALL FIXED FREELANCE PERSONNEL

These Terms and Conditions for Fixed Freelance Personnel, incorporating where 
stipulated theFreelance Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter> (“
Freelance Charter”) and any revisions thereto, set out the terms under which 
you (“You”) agree to provide freelance services (“Your Services”) to Guardian 
News & Media Limited (“GNM”, “We”, “Us”). 

Please read these terms carefully. You shall be legally bound by these terms 
when GNM sends You a countersigned Term Sheet. You are advised to print off and 
keep a paper copy of these terms.

Term and Termination <> | Engagement <> | Fees and Expenses <> | Services 
Exclusivity <> | Rights and Licence to Use <> | Confidentiality <> | Status of 
Contributors and Suppliers as Independent Contractors <> | Warranties & 
Indemnities <> | General <> | Revision history <> |

1. Term and Termination

1.1 The Agreement shall remain in full force for the Term unless terminated 
earlier pursuant to Clauses 1.3 or 1.4.

1.2 There shall be no automatic renewal of the Agreement upon expiry of the 
Term. In the event that GNM wishes to continue to engage Your Services after 
expiry of the Term, the parties hereto shall negotiate in good faith acceptable 
commercial terms.

1.3 Without prejudice to any of its other rights or remedies, either party 
shall have the right to terminate this Agreement with immediate effect at any 
time by giving notice in writing to the other party if:

1.3.1 the other party commits a material breach of any of its obligations 
under this Agreement which is not capable of remedy; or

1.3.2 the other party has committed a material breach of any of its 
obligations under this Agreement which is capable of remedy but which has not 
been remedied within a period of thirty (30) days following receipt of written 
notice to do so.

1.4 The Agreement may be terminated by either party, on giving the other party 
written notice to terminate to expire on expiry of the Notice Period.

1.5 The termination of this Agreement, for whatever reason, shall not affect 
the provisions of Clauses 5, 6, 7 and 8, which shall continue beyond such 
termination in perpetuity unless otherwise stated.

2. Engagement

2.1 During the Term You shall provide Your Contributions to GNM and these 
shall be delivered to Us according to the instructions that can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter#Delivery 
of contributions>. You shall liaise with the relevant editor as to content and 
delivery schedules.

2.2(a) Should You not deliver Your Contributions by the end of the Term, 
either this Agreement shall be extended without further payment to You until 
such time as you have fulfilled its terms which may involve contributing to 
other sections of GNM; or You shall reimburse to GNM a pro-rata sum equivalent 
to the value of Your Contributions undelivered as at the end of the Term.

2.2(b) Contributions that exceed Your total contributions under this Agreement 
as defined in Your Contributions must be agreed in advance in writing by the 
Managing Editor. In this regard GNM shall expect You to monitor Your 
Contributions and advise commissioning editors of any contributions that are in 
excess of Your Contributions.

2.3 You shall not have, and shall not hold Yourself out as having, any 
authority to incur any expenditure in GNM’s name or otherwise enter into 
arrangements that would be binding on GNM.

2.4 You may use another person, firm or company to perform any administrative 
or other functions which are reasonably incidental to performance of Your 
obligations under the Agreement, provided that GNM will not be liable to bear 
the cost of such unless agreed in advance in writing.

3. Fees and Expenses

3.1 GNM’s policies on payment and expenses as set out in the Freelance Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter> are 
incorporated into this Agreement and shall apply to all payments and expenses 
pertaining to the performance of Your Services under this Agreement and other 
contributions made by You during the Term that do not form part of this 
Agreement.

3.2 Contributors subject to these terms and conditions should note that unless 
otherwise set forth in the Term Sheet all fees due hereunder (save exceptional 
payments and expenses) shall be paid in equal monthly instalments in arrears 
and shall be processed by GNM Accounts Payableon the last Tuesday of each month 
of the Term. You should then allow a period for clearance of funds into Your 
bank account.

3.3 Subject to Clause 2.2, if the Agreement is extended beyond the Term by 
mutual agreement in writing under which You continue to supply Your Services to 
GNM, GNM shall be liable to pay fees to You until such time as the Agreement is 
terminated, such liability being either a pro rata amount of Your Fees based on 
the extended period of the Term or other amount as agreed in writing between 
the parties.

4. Services Exclusivity

4.1 The provision of Your Services to GNM shall be subject to the Services 
Exclusivity as set forth in the Term Sheet.

5. Rights and Licence to Use

5.1 You grant to GNM the following rights to use, publish, transmit or license 
Your Contributions:

5.1.1 the Copyright terms of GNM’s Freelance Charter as applicable to Your 
Contributions for a)text 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/standard-terms-for-written-contributions>; b) 
picture and artwork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/standard-terms-pictures-illustrations-artwork>
; and c)audiovisual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/standard-terms-audio-video-audiovisual-contributions>
 Commissioned Contributions; and

5.1.2 the exclusive and worldwide right for the period of copyright (and all 
extensions, revivals, reversions and renewals thereof):

5.1.2.1 to commission from You and publish a book (in any language and in any 
format including but not limited to printed, electronic and audio books) and/or 
dedicated app (and/or similar and/or related technology) on the subject matter 
of Your Contributions for publication by Guardian, Observer or Guardian/Faber 
imprints or any affiliate or successor or licensed imprints; and

5.1.2.2 to publish a collection of Your Contributions where You are the sole 
author in book form (in any language and in any format including but not 
limited to printed, electronic and audio books) and/or as a dedicated app 
(and/or similar and/or related technology) for publication by Guardian, 
Observer or Guardian/Faber imprints or any affiliate or successor or licensed 
imprints

PROVIDED THAT:

5.1.2.3 such publication(s) shall be subject to a publishing agreement between 
the parties hereto and as issued by GNM; and

5.1.2.4 in the event that suitable commercial terms cannot be agreed between 
the parties hereto You, or Your representatives, may, with the prior written 
consent of GNM, seek terms with another publisher in relation to the same on 
the condition that any resulting agreement with a third party a) shall be based 
on no lesser terms than those offered by GNM; and b) shall require You and GNM 
to agree commercial terms whose purpose shall be the sale to You of the 
exclusive rights granted to Us under this Agreement; and

5.1.2.5 save for acknowledgement to GNM such as “First published in the 
Guardian/Observer” no such licence from GNM as contemplated under Clause 
5.1.2.4 shall be required in the event GNM declines to respond to an invitation 
from You or Your nominees to offer terms as the case may be in respect of 
either a) a book or app (or similar or related technology) on the subject 
matter of Your Contributions; or b) any book or app (or similar or related 
technology) collection of Your Contributions where you are the sole author.

5.2 The following terms are incorporated into this Agreement and shall apply 
to all of Your Contributions delivered by You in the performance of Your 
Services under this Agreement:

5.2.1 Definitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter#Definitions>
; and

5.2.2 Moral rights and author credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter#Moral 
rights and author credits>.

5.3 You grant GNM first option during the Term to publish or serialise in the 
UK subject to the parties hereto negotiating in good faith mutually acceptable 
commercial terms extracts from any books that You produce or that are planned 
for publication during the Term. Nothing in this Agreement shall bind GNM to 
publish any extracts or serialisation.

5.4 You hereby grant GNM the right to publish a photograph of You of its 
choosing in association with publication of Your Contributions and/or in 
relation to any other promotion or publicity of the same throughout the world.

6. Confidentiality

6.1 Each party undertakes:

6.1.1 to treat confidentially all documents and all technical, commercial, 
financial and other information which is obtained from the other party in 
connection with this Agreement or with the negotiations leading up to it; and

6.1.2 not to disclose to any person, without the previous written consent of 
the other party, the existence of any term of this Agreement, or the existence 
of any information about any dispute or disagreement between the parties

and to disclose such documents and information to third parties only so far as 
it is necessary:

6.1.3 for the performance of this Agreement; and/or

6.1.4 to their professional advisers; and/or

6.1.5 as required by law.

6.2 The obligations of confidentiality set out above shall not apply to any 
documents or information which a party can show:

6.2.1 at the time of its acquisition was in, or at a later date has come into, 
the public domain, other than following a breach of this Clause 6; or

6.2.2 it knew prior to first disclosure to it by the other party; or

6.2.3 it received independently from a third party with the full right to 
disclose.

7. Status of Contributors and Suppliers as Independent Contractors

7.1 You undertake to provide Your Services under this Agreement as an 
independent contractor and on this basis a) Your Agreement to provide Your 
Services to GNM shall not be interpreted or construed to create an association, 
agency, joint venture, partnership or employer-employee relationship between 
You and GNM or to impose any liability attributable to such a relationship upon 
either party, including but not limited to GNM’s Sickness Policy and paid 
leave; and b) You agree that You shall work from Your own premises in providing 
Your Services to GNM and shall provide all the necessary equipment and 
materials to enable You to fulfil the terms of Your Agreement.

7.2 For the avoidance of doubt, You are not a “worker” as defined under the 
Working Time Regulations 1998 (as amended from time to time), and therefore You 
acknowledge that the provisions in those regulations relating to hours of work, 
rest breaks and annual leave do not apply to You.

7.3 You confirm for the purposes of the Taxes Acts, or such other appropriate 
legislation, that You are a self-employed person in business in Your own right 
and You shall be responsible for all tax liabilities arising in respect of Your 
Services, and shall Yourself account to the appropriate authorities for all 
tax, National Insurance or similar contributions payable in respect of the 
provision of Your Services to GNM under this Agreement. You undertake to advise 
GNM immediately in writing in the event that Your self-employed status is 
challenged by HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority during the 
Term.

7.4 In the event that GNM or any of its holding, subsidiary, associated or 
group companies (“Group”) becomes liable to account to HM Revenue & Customs or 
any other taxing authority anywhere in the world for any income tax, employee 
national insurance or any other deduction or withholding required to be made by 
law (including any interest and/or penalties thereon) arising in respect of 
payments made or to be made to You, You undertake and agree to indemnify and 
hold harmless GNM and/or the Group against such tax and national insurance and 
shall, at the written request of GNM, immediately pay GNM an amount equal to 
any tax and national insurance paid or payable by GNM or any other company in 
the Group to HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority. GNM shall be 
entitled to set off an amount equal to any tax and national insurance or any 
other deduction or withholding paid by GNM or another Group company to HM 
Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority against any monies otherwise 
payable to You.

7.5 For the purpose of this Clause 7, “independent contractor” shall be 
interpreted (as appropriate) to include all engagements made with GNM via a 
company or limited company. In such event, the rights of indemnity and 
disclosure equally shall apply.

8. Warranties & Indemnities

8.1 You hereby represent, warrant and undertake that:

8.1.1 You shall not at any time do anything to bring GNM’s brands, trademarks 
or reputation into disrepute; and

8.1.2 You are entitled to enter into this Agreement and You are not bound by 
any third party restriction not to do so, including, but not limited to, the 
right and authority to license the intellectual property rights in and the use 
of Your Contributions on the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement; 
and

8.1.3 Your Contributions shall be original and not copied wholly or 
substantially from any other source, nor contain defamatory statements nor 
otherwise breach the privacy, confidentiality or other statutory or common law 
rights of any third-party; and

8.1.4 You shall observe the highest ethical standards in providing Your 
Services under this Agreement as part of which You shall be expected:

8.1.4.1 to abide by the Press Complaints Commission’s Editor’s Code of Practice
 <http://www.pcc.org.uk/>; and

8.1.4.2 have full regard for GNM’s own Editorial Code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code>; and

8.1.4.3 to co-operate fully in the event of a complaint about Your 
Contributions or Services to the Press Complaints Commission or GNM’s internal 
ombudsman; and

8.1.4.4 to inform GNM immediately of any actual or potential conflict of 
interest arising from any engagement or contribution or service You undertake 
for GNM.

8.2 You hereby acknowledge that the above representations, warranties and 
undertakings are express conditions of the retention of Your Services under the 
Agreement and that in the event that You are in breach of any of them, GNM 
shall have the right to terminate the Agreement forthwith without any liability 
to You whatsoever. You agree to notify GNM of any facts or circumstances that 
may affect the accuracy of the statements set out in this Clause 8 as soon as 
such facts or circumstances arise.

8.3 GNM agrees to indemnify You against any claims of or liability to any 
third party in respect of defamation on the same basis as staff journalists 
PROVIDED THAT:

8.3.1 no gross misconduct or negligence can be attributed to You relating to 
the relevant material; and
8.3.2 You co-operate fully with GNM in its response to the claim; and
8.3.3 You do not engage in discussions with a complainant without GNM’s prior 
agreement.

9. General

9.1 This Agreement, together with any documents referred to in it, constitutes 
the entire agreement and understanding between You and GNM, and supersedes any 
previous agreement whether written or oral between the parties in respect of 
Your Contributions to GNM, provided that any previous contributions delivered 
by You to GNM under the terms of theFreelance Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter> shall 
continue to be governed by theFreelance Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter>.

9.2 No variation of or amendment to this Agreement shall be binding unless it 
is in writing and signed by the parties.

9.3 There shall be no waiver of any term, provision or condition of this 
Agreement unless such waiver is evidenced in writing and signed by the waiving 
party and then only in the instance and for the purpose for which it is given.

9.4 No omission, failure or delay on the part of any party hereto in 
exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder shall operate as a waiver 
thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise of any such right, power or 
privilege preclude any other or further exercise thereof or of any other right, 
power or privilege. The rights and remedies herein provided are cumulative with 
and not exclusive of any rights or remedies provided by law.

9.5 This Agreement shall be subject to and interpreted in accordance with 
English law.

10. Revision history

Any revisions to these Terms and Conditions for Fixed Freelance Personnel 
shall be posted here.

16 January 2014: Additions to clause 5 relating to book publication clarifying 
a) that grant of rights covers all languages; and b) mechanisms to license back 
publishing rights to contributors.

(B) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO ARTS CRITICS

You should liaise with the relevant editor as to content and delivery 
schedules, which shall include the requirements of the Guardian Digital Network 
and GNM’s digital engagement tools. Further, You shall be expected to include 
web links in all copy, monitor comments from readers, post comments in 
response, alert moderators to potential problems, and generally inform and lead 
the debate stimulated by Your Contributions.

(C) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO CONTRIBUTORS PROVIDING BLOGS

It is GNM’s intention that the blogging process should be interactive between 
bloggers and readers, and You are expected therefore to (i) include web links 
in Your Contributions; (ii) monitor comments from readers; (iii) post comments 
in response; (iv) alert moderators to potential problems; and (v) generally 
inform and lead the debate stimulated by Your Contributions.

(D) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO CONTRIBUTORS PROVIDING ILLUSTRATIONS, 
CARTOONS AND ARTWORK

You should liaise with the relevant editor as to content and delivery 
schedules. If submitting Your Contributions electronically, You should include 
the Agreement Reference Number above in the filename of each of Your 
Contributions and send to design@theguardian.com

(E) ADDITIONAL TERMS APPLICABLE TO STRINGERS AND SUPERSTRINGERS

1. You shall, unless prevented by ill health or accident, devote at least five 
(5) days per week over forty-six (46) weeks of each 12 month period of the Term 
(pro-rated for shorter Terms) to the carrying out of Your Services under the 
Agreement together with such additional time if any as may be necessary for 
their proper performance.

2. Any contributions that Stringers wish to file during the Term must at all 
times be discussed and commissioned, before filing, with the appropriate desk.

3. Superstringers are expected to deliver contributions at regular intervals 
during the Term.

4. You are encouraged to develop contacts with other, non-news commissioning 
editors at GNM with a view to filing for their sections.

5. In addition to Your Fees and subject to the section entitled Rejection of 
Commissioned Contributions within the Freelance Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter#Rejection%20of%20Commissioned%20Contributions>
, Stringers shall be paid per contribution atGNM’s standard rates as set out in 
the Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter#Fees> 
within 30 days of publication.

6. You agree not to incur any expenses in excess of USD 500.00 without the 
prior written consent of the Managing Editor.
 