
At 12.30pm on Saturday 21 September, Frank Musungu, a sergeant major in the 
Kenyan navy, was sitting out on the balcony of the Artcaffe in Nairobi's 
Westgate mall, next to its main pedestrian entrance. Military personnel had 
been advised against visiting the Kenyan capital's high-profile shopping malls, 
in case they were targeted by terrorists. He went anyway but took his handgun 
as a precaution. Like many in the country's poorly paid armed services he had 
hopes of a job at the nearby UN headquarters and was meeting a friend in the 
diplomatic police to look over his CV. Their discussion was abruptly 
interrupted by rapid bursts of automatic fire only a few metres away.

Musungu looked down and saw four men striding towards the entrance to the 
mall, firing at the cars around them as they went. Before he could stand up the 
first grenade detonated. About 150 metres away at the vehicle entrance a second 
group of attackers had driven their car through one of the barriers, scattering 
the unarmed security guards. They jumped out of the vehicle and began firing 
and throwing grenades at passers-by.

As Musungu and the policeman took cover, a bullet ripped through a woman 
dressed in black jeans and a T-shirt standing next to them. She had tried to 
run away and been shot through the back.

The woman in black was one of the first victims of a co-ordinated slaughter 
that had been planned for months; a small band of jihadi fighters, perhaps as 
few as eight, killed at least 67 people in what became an 80-hour siege. 
Building on detailed interviews with survivors, their relatives and members of 
the security forces, as well as insights from officials involved in the 
operation, it is now possible to give the most complete account so far of what 
happened at Westgate.

The picture that emerges is of a woefully disorganised response from 
authorities, where infighting and a clash of egos left a handful of Kenyan 
officers, an off-duty British soldier and an Israeli security agent, backed by 
Kenyan-Indian vigilantes, to fight heavily armed militants in a bid to rescue 
hundreds of shoppers. A friendly-fire killing in the early hours of the siege 
led to the withdrawal of security services, allowing the attackers to regroup, 
rearm from a weapons cache inside the mall, and hunt down desperate people 
hiding inside.

Five minutes after the assault began in the rooftop car park at the rear of 
Westgate, radio DJ Sadia Ahmed was getting ready to judge a children's cooking 
competition.

When she heard the first blast she thought it was a gas cylinder. Two more 
blasts followed and people started to run from the food court through the 
second floor entrance/exit.

They ran straight into the firing line of two militants who came up the 
vehicle ramp into the parking area. As Ahmed ran for cover, her fellow judge 
and radio presenter Ruhila Adatia-Sood, left, was shot dead. She was six months 
pregnant.

Karani Nyamu, a software engineer who was shopping with his two daughters, 
emerged into the gunmen's line of fire, but miraculously survived. As he ran 
towards his car he saw two men throwing grenades "like maize to chickens" and 
shooting indiscriminately. After 20 minutes, with bodies everywhere, they went 
inside the mall.

12.40pm Meanwhile, in a section of the basement car park underneath the mall, 
the attackers set up what an intelligence source described as a "command and 
control centre" in an unidentified vehicle. The vehicle is thought to have been 
driven to the car park some time in advance of the attack.

One or more of the militants is believed to have been in mobile phone contact 
with the others from here, while intelligence intercepts suggest that some of 
the Twitter statements that al-Shabaab started to release later in the day 
originated from here. The death of Ghanaian poet Kofi Awoonor, who was shot in 
his car as he was preparing to leave, confirms the presence of armed gunmen in 
the basement from the beginning of the assault.

12.50pm Joshua Hakim, an accounts clerk, had stopped at the mall on his way to 
a rugby match. He left his three American friends at the second-floor Java 
coffee shop and headed to the giant Nakumatt supermarket that took up a third 
of Westgate's floor space to buy some beer. He was on the interior balcony of 
the first floor when he heard shots from below. As he took cover on the floor 
under a table, repeating the mantra "Jesus is lord", he heard shots from above 
as well. Then two armed men appeared on his level. After firing several rounds 
they called out in English: "Muslims, get out of here!"

Summoning his courage, Hakim approached one of the men, who was wielding an 
assault rifle in each hand. Hakim believes they were M-16s. Hakim showed the 
man his voter card, holding a thumb over his Christian name. The gunman, who 
was wearing a black bandana embellished with Arabic script, shouted at him to 
leave. An older man, of Indian origin, approached and was asked to name the 
mother of the prophet. When he hesitated, he was shot. Hakim dived to the floor 
again and lay there watching a woman remove her niqab. She tore it into strips 
and, in one of many small instances of bravery during the siege, handed it to 
the women around her to wear as Islamic-style headscarves.

1pm Musungu had run out through the vehicle exit from the basement on the far 
side of Westgate from the attackers. He found armed guards from a bank's 
private security firm, who had abandoned an armoured car used for money 
collections, cowering in a corner. He shouted at them: "Why don't you return 
fire?"

1.10pm Officers from Nairobi police's flying squad arrived at the scene but 
initially refused to enter, according to news reports. Meanwhile, armed 
volunteers from a neighbourhood watch scheme run by Kenyan-Indians in the 
nearby district of Parklands arrived.

Together with at least two uniformed police, Musungu and his colleague, they 
numbered roughly 30 and split into two groups. One team was detailed to take 
the ground floor, the other, led byKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> Red Cross secretary-general Abbas 
Gullet, climbed the ramp to the roof-top parking. Other armed "samaritans" 
including Somali-Kenyan Abdul Hajji, the son of a former defence minister, 
Mohamed Yusuf Hajji, who had been texting his brother who was trapped inside, 
reached the scene soon afterwards.
 A child runs towards Abdul Yusuf Hajji. Photograph: Goran Tomasevic/Reuters 
1.15pm The ground floor team said they saw at least two gunmen who were 
"walking not running", picking their targets. Terrified shoppers ran into the 
cavernous supermarket pursued by the attackers who exchanged fire with 
Musungu's irregular band. His friend from the diplomatic police was hit in the 
thigh and Musungu helped him outside. Several people were injured and Reuters 
photographer Goran Tomasevic, who had entered the mall after the attacks began, 
helped to get them outside.

In some places the gunmen stopped to separate Muslims from non-Muslims. In one 
case, shocked by the audacity of four-year-old British boy Elliot Prior, who 
scolded a gunman for shooting and injuring his mother, the militant showed 
mercy and spared his life. In others cases, such as at the Urban Gourmet Burger 
restaurant – where Australian-Briton Ross Langdon and his Dutch partner Elif 
Yavuz died – people were slaughtered en masse.

On the roof, a British man with close-cropped hair and a background in the SAS 
ushered the survivors through a side entrance to the third floor Java Coffee 
shop, from where a fire escape led to the ground floor and safety.

At the same time, a shaven-headed man who two witnesses said was Israeli had 
reached Hakim and others on the second floor. The man asked Hakim if he knew 
how to use a weapon and offered him a handgun. "I'd never fired a gun, so I had 
to say no," he said. Along with at least a dozen others, the clerk was led up 
one floor and out through the fire escape.

1.25pm Almost an hour after the assault had begun, authorities were still 
trying to work out what was going on. A spokesman for the Kenyan military, 
Major E K Chirchir,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/MajorEChirchir/statuses/381363590458277888>: "Anyone on 
twitter who is at Westgate and in position to update?"

2.30pm Witnesses on the car park roof saw at least two men, who they believe 
to have been attackers, changing into casual clothes near the tent where the 
cooking competition was judged. At this point there was no police cordon and no 
screening process for survivors coming out of the mall. Intelligence officials 
believe that at least two attackers were able to escape in the confusion.

4pm Three-and-a-half hours after the first shots were fired, Kenya's 
equivalent of a Swat team, the police reconnaissance unit known as the "recce 
group", arrived at the mall. Wearing black body armour and helmets, armed with 
machine guns and trained for hostage and siege situations, they were the 
best-equipped to deal with the attackers, and were able to pin them down inside 
Nakumatt.
 A police officer tries to secure an area while civilians flee in search of 
safety. Photograph: Siegfried Modola/Reuters 
The first army units also arrived, including infantry from the Embakasi base 
outside Nairobi and US-trained Kenyan rangers from their base in the Rift 
Valley. Behind the scenes a power struggle was emerging between the police 
chief David Kimaiyo and the army head, Julius Karangi, over whose forces would 
take the lead. First to move in was the recce group, followed shortly 
afterwards by Kenyan army (KDF) soldiers.

5.30pm Now with substantial numbers of military or paramilitary personnel on 
site, the authorities had not yet established a clear command and control 
structure. With no radio communications between army and police units, KDF 
soldiers opened fire on what they thought was an armed suspect – but who was in 
fact one of the commanders of the recce group. After this all units were pulled 
out of the mall and for the next two hours the operation came to a standstill 
as heated arguments raged that went all the way to the State House and the 
office of Uhuru Kenyatta, Kenya's president.

"There was a lot of politics going on," said one soldier close to the 
makeshift command centre. As night fell and no nightvision equipment was 
available, it was decided that the police chief, Kimaiyo, would be in overall 
charge of the operation.

Sunday 22 September

7am Under the command of the police chief, a joint unit comprised of police 
and army made a first attempt to enter and take control of the ground floor of 
Nakumatt, where they believed the bulk of the militants were. They came under 
fire from a sniper on one of the upper floors and were forced to withdraw after 
at least two of their men were shot, one of them fatally. "They have an arsenal 
in there,"said one of the soldiers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/kenya-shopping-mall-attack-latest-military-takes-control-of-shopping-centre-and-says-all-hostages-freed-8831413.htm>
 involved in the operation.

9am It was a Sunday morning in Nairobi, and by now hundreds of onlookers had 
gathered on the high ground overlooking the Westgate mall. The police also had 
to deal with a growing media presence as news crews set up live points in the 
roadside furniture market looking down Peponi Road towards the shopping centre. 
Regular bursts of gunfire punctuated the morning, with one official saying that 
the operations were aimed at depleting the militants' ammunition store.

2pm The Kenyan police and interior ministry announced 59 people had died and 
175 more were injured. Officials estimated the number of attackers to be as 
many as 15, but no fewer than 10.

3pm Relatives of the missing people gathered at the Oshwal Centre – a 
community centre and Hindu temple about 200 metres from Westgate. Volunteers 
brought food and medical supplies, and people camped overnight in the basement 
car park. Johnson Mungai, a young pilot whose two sisters and grandfather were 
still inside, said he had given his phone to police so that they could contact 
his relatives.

They received a text message in the morning from his grandfather who was 
hiding in the Planet Yogurt shop, that read: "How far have you got?" He doesn't 
know if there was any further communication because the police ran down his 
battery and no one had a charger. The 23-year-old became increasingly angry 
with the authorities' handling of the crisis. "The government is letting the 
people down. The Kenyan police is saying they don't need help and should be 
allowed to do their work. What work have they done?"

4.50pm "White" military men, working in teams of three, were seen to enter the 
building carrying specialist rifles. They were later identified as Israeli 
commandos. Kenya's recce group re-entered the mall, with some officers carrying 
rocket propelled grenade launchers. Over the next two hours two loud explosions 
were heard from within the mall.

11.28pm The KDF Twitter account announced that the siege was nearly over 
<https://twitter.com/kdfinfo/statuses/381877655227731968>. The last of Joshua 
Hakim's three American friends inside the mall – who asked not to be named – 
emerged. He had been hiding in the cold storage room of one of the restaurants 
on the second floor food court.

Monday 23 September

6.45am The KDF's assurances that the siege was reaching a conclusion were 
shattered by a huge blast that shook the entire Westlands district, followed by 
bursts of gunfire. Overnight, Kimaiyo had been forced to cede control of the 
operation to Julius Karangi, who had argued for a more aggressive approach 
throughout the crisis. By now a command centre had been set up in the Ukay 
shopping centre opposite the vehicle entrance to Westgate. A British team was 
present in the room, including officers from the Metropolitan police's 
anti-terror unit along with Israeli officials.
 Smoke rises from the Westgate mall in Nairobi Photograph: Carl De 
Souza/AFP/Getty Images 
1.25pm Four more large blasts – the loudest during the siege – were heard from 
inside Westgate and a column of black smoke climbed into the sky. The fire was 
still smouldering a week later. Helicopters that had been hovering just over 
the roof the previous day began to circle higher overhead.

7.40pm Inside the situation room at the State House, about two miles from the 
scene at Westgate, there was despair as a series of triumphalist and bizarre 
messages poured onto Twitter from senior officials – including one from 
Kimaiyo, which has since been deleted, and read: "Taken control of all the 
floors. We're not here to feed the attackers with pastries but to finish and 
punish them. IG"

A generation gap between the president's mainly US-educated, younger staffers 
and the senior staff in the army and police emerged. "We had our heads in our 
hands when we saw the Kimaiyo tweet," said a Kenyatta staffer. "What was he 
thinking?"

Tuesday 24 September
 The ruins of the Westgate mall. Photograph: AP 
12.30pm The first shaky amateur footage of the rear of the shopping centre 
emerged, showing a vast crater in the rear third of the building. The rooftop 
car park area where much of the worst of the carnage took place had collapsed 
into the floors below. Officials first claimed that the militants had set off 
explosives and set fire to mattresses inside Nakumatt supermarket.

That explanation was changed to say that a wire-guided anti-tank shell, an 
RPG-7, had been fired at one of the support pillars in an attempt to distract a 
sniper during an operation to rescue survivors from the mall. After the attack 
several Kenyan army soldiers corroborated this version of events. But a 
munitions expert cast doubt on it, saying that a weapon of this kind, capable 
of dislodging the central pillar of the building, would have seriously injured 
anyone standing up to 20 metres behind it, as well as wounding the person 
discharging it in a confined space.

Moreover, a private security contractor familiar with the operation said that 
directional explosives used in demolition jobs had likely been deployed to 
blast a square hole in the roof: "They decided that they were taking too many 
casualties and would drop the roof on them. There is no way that was an 
anti-tank munition," he said.

8pm Explosions and gunfire continued inside Westgate all day and was said to 
be coming from troops providing cover while bomb disposal teams removed booby 
traps. A soldier inside the mall described the difficulty of the operation 
inside. "Every panel of glass is broken, there is debris everywhere. We found 
people alive and we found people dead. We don't know what's under the debris. 
We don't know what's behind closed doors."

10pm President Kenyatta declared "the operation is now over" in a live 
televised address. "The agents of terror, themselves craven wretches and lowly 
cowards, had the agenda of perpetrating grievous mayhem in our country, 
senselessly killing, maiming and traumatising harmless, innocent people," he 
said.

"The criminals found us unafraid, as we ever shall be. We cannot be conquered. 
Our confrontation with the terrorists at Westgate mall left 240 casualties." He 
concluded that 61 civilians died in the attack and that six security officers 
had died. A fuller account of what had happened and what had become of the 
reported hostages – said by Kenyan officials the previous day to number 30 – 
was expected to follow.

Wednesday 25 September

Shopkeepers and store owners returned to find their properties looted. A 
clothes-shop owner said even his mannequins had been stripped: "They've broken 
everything. All my money is lost over there. All the cash is lost. Everything 
is shattered over there, laptops gone, everything."

A day later, footage emerged of the inside of Artcaffe 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QAF0En4Z0VI> showing scores of empty beer and 
spirit bottles littering the tables and lining the bar, where only Kenyan 
security forces had any access during the siege.

The owners of the second floor Millionaire's Casino – who had emptied the safe 
while the siege was still officially underway – returned four days later to 
discover that while the premises were under government control someone had
attempted to shoot their way into the safe 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EY4M7Yw7Bh0>.

Kenya's celebrated satirical cartoonist Gado <http://gadocartoons.com> 
captured the mood when he portrayed Kenyan soldiers – who had been feted for 
their bravery days before – running away from the ruined shopping centre 
carrying looted goods and drinking beers. After days of conflicting reports 
there was no longer any confidence in the authorities when they announced that 
the figure of 60 people missing had fallen suddenly to 39.

Two weeks later it remains unclear whether the militants ever held hostages in 
the conventional sense. Survivors who emerged from Westgate had been hiding 
from the attackers, not being held. There have been unconfirmed reports that 
some were tortured or mutilated during the siege, but doctors said it remains 
possible that the physical injuries could have been sustained by grenade 
fragments.

Despite the number of people missing, only three bodies have officially been 
recovered from the rubble of the mall. Two of those belonged to Kenyan soldiers 
whose remains were so badly mutilated that families had to give DNA samples to 
identify them.

The Kenyan government continues to insist that five attackers were killed by 
its security forces, but has admitted that none of their bodies has been 
conclusively identified so far. Forensics teams, including agents from the FBI, 
have found remains they believe may have belonged to at least one of the 
attackers, but the person has not been named.

On 1 October, facing mounting criticism of his administration's handling of 
the Westgate attack, Kenyatta promised an official inquiry.
 