
Tessa Ross has resigned as chief executive of the National Theatre 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk> after deciding only one person should be in 
charge.

Ross, who joined from Channel 4 where she was the highly respected director of 
film and drama, had only been in the job for six months. She and Rufus Norris, 
the new artistic director, were seen as a dream team in taking over from 
Nicholas Hytner and his executive director Nick Starr.

But on Thursday, Ross said the structure was not working. She will step down 
at the end of the month and remain working as a consultant.

She said: “I joined the NT last year and have got to know the organisation in 
great detail. However, it has become clear to me that the new leadership 
structure, with a separate role of chief executive, is not right for the NT at 
this time, and so I have decided to step down.

“I will, with great pleasure, continue to work with Rufus and Lisa as a 
consultant, ensuring the smooth delivery of their first season and planning for 
the next one. It is an institution that I love and for which it has been a 
great privilege to work.”

Ross’s departure is an amicable one. There would appear to be no blood on any 
carpet. A NT spokeswoman said: “There is no difference of opinion, it is purely 
down to structure. The relationship [between Ross and Norris] is very strong.”

The National will now be run along similar lines to the previous regime: 
Norris as director while Lisa Burger will be executive director.

Norris said: “Tessa’s role in the planning of my first year and beyond at the 
NT has been invaluable and immense. I’m sad that our partnership is ending 
prematurely but am grateful for everything she has done here, and happy that 
we’ll work together on a consultancy basis.

“As I continue to steer this extraordinary powerhouse, I look forward to 
working in close partnership with Lisa Burger as together we build on our plans 
for the National’s future.”

John Makinson, the NT’s chairman said: “It is with great regret that we are 
saying goodbye to Tessa in this role. She is an outstanding producer and 
executive and has already made a significant contribution to the National. 
However, we recognise and salute the integrity of her decision.

“The NT has a strong team in place under the capable and skilful leadership of 
Rufus and Lisa. The National is in very good hands.”

What Ross does next is unclear, although there would be no surprise if she 
returned in some way to her spiritual home. As controller of Film4 she was a 
driving force behind bringing films to the screen which included 12 Years a 
Slave and Slumdog Millionaire. In 2013, she received a Bafta for outstanding 
contribution to cinema.
 