
Thailand’s football association is offering a 10 million baht ($400,000) bonus 
to the national team to defeat the Socceroos in Tuesday’s 2018 World Cup 
qualifier in Bangkok.

The hefty incentive has been announced by association president, Police 
General Somyot Poompunmuang, ahead of final preparations for the game at the 
Thai national stadium.

Tomi Juric ruled out of Socceroos' World Cup qualifier in Thailand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/tomi-juric-ruled-out-of-socceroos-world-cup-qualifier-in-thailand>
“I know that anything can happen in the match but I want [the Thai team] to 
play with their heart,” Somyot said.

Earlier restrictions facing fans in light of the official mourning period 
following the passing of revered King Bhumipol Adulyadej on 13 October had been 
eased, Thai football association officials said.

The official month-long observation ends on 14 November although cancellations 
out to 100 days have been reported for other major events but Thai Football 
Association deputy general secretary, Patit Suphaphong, said the easing of 
restrictions would allow fans to use cheering equipment and show symbols.

Association President Somyot called on the team to play to honour the late 
king. “I don’t want them to play for money. I want them to play for his majesty 
the king,” he said.

A Thai squad of 23 players based at Khao Yai, 260 kilometres northwest of 
Bangkok, is due to return to the capital on Sunday. Coach Kiatisak Senamuang 
told Thai media he was anticipating “a tough game against the Australians”.

“These World Cup qualifiers are always keenly fought affairs, so there is a 
big chance of one or more players sustaining injuries,” he said in naming the 
large contingent.

But former national team manager Thavatchai Sajakul said the Thais often faced 
a “crisis of confidence” against the Socceroos. “Every time we play against
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>, Japan, Korea ... 
they lose their confidence – this is what I call inferiority complex,” 
Thavatchai told AAP.

While Thailand has a “good chance” against teams such as United Arab Emirates 
[UAE], Saudi Arabia and Iraq, “except against Australia and Japan. All the rest 
are 50-50,” he said.
 