
When I was DJ on the pirate ship Radio Caroline, I was made president of the 
Elvis Presley <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley> fan club. In 
1972, the club took 200 fans to Vegas to see the King.Colonel Tom Parker 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colonel_Tom_Parker> invited 11 of us down to the 
dressing room and suddenly there Elvis was, leaning against the wall. He had a 
black suit on, and the first thing that hit you was how handsome the guy was. 
He came over and was very polite, and I started to interview him for my show, 
asking him some dumb questions, like: “Are you going to do any more 
rock’n’roll?”

The following year I went back, taking my programme director Ken Evans with 
me. Elvis was one of the few stars Ken had never met. To return the favour, 
when we arrived in LA, he took my wife Christine and I to spend an afternoon 
with Mae West.

Her apartment was in a block that, by all accounts, she owned. We were met at 
the door by her butler with a tray carrying his card and I’ll never forget his 
name, because it was Larry Grayson. Larry took us into the lounge and said: 
“Miss West will join you shortly.” The room was all gold and white – white 
carpet, white sofas, white piano, gold ornaments, gold chandeliers – and in she 
walked in a pink chiffon nightdress. Lots of layers of chiffon. She would have 
been 80 then.

'Come up and see me some time'. You know what? I never said that

Mae was to sit between my wife and I. Ken and a newspaper reporter who’d 
tagged along were sitting opposite, with their backs to an oil painting of Mae 
completely naked and lying on a chaise longue. So I’m looking at this all 
afternoon.

She gave us some carrot cake and tea. Ken was a big movie buff, and was asking 
all about her famous lines. She was very funny. Ken mentioned “Come up and see 
me some time,” and she said: “You know what? I never said that. I did say, when 
I was checking into a hotel and the receptionist said, ‘Goodness, what 
beautiful diamonds,’ I did say, ‘Goodness had nothing to do with it’ and I did 
say, ‘It’s not the men in my life, it’s the life in my men.’ But I did not say, 
‘Come up and see me some time.’ Ken could have sworn she did, in some movie or 
other, but she insisted she hadn’t.

When, finally, we stood up, the reporter turned and looked at the painting and 
said: “Miss West, what a beautiful painting.”

“Yeah,” she drawled looking at her naked younger self, “He caught me when I 
wasn’t looking.”

Elvis yesterday, Mae West today. We were buzzing!

The Royal Ruler and the Railway DJ by Tony Prince and Jan Šesták is published 
by DMC, £20
 