
For the past 20 years I’ve put two ideas about power to the scientific test. 
The first is Machiavelli’s: “It is better to be feared than loved.” This thesis 
has not fared well in studies looking at who rises to power in organisations, 
schools, communities and military units. It isn’t the coercive, manipulative 
Machiavellian who rises to power. Instead it is the empathetic, generous person 
who reaches out to others who gains esteem and rises up the ranks.

Lord Acton’s observation that “power tends to corrupt, and absolute power 
corrupts absolutely,” however, is confirmed time and time again. As we enjoy 
elevated power, we are more likely to eat impulsively, have sexual affairs, 
violate the rules of the road, lie, cheat, shoplift, take sweets from children 
and communicate in disrespectful ways.

Putting these two literatures together leads us to the power paradox. The 
socially intelligent practices that enable us to rise to power in the first 
place – empathy, sharing, open-mindedness, a focus on others – vanish when we 
get power. It isn’t just politicians, kings of high finance or drug-addled rock 
stars who are vulnerable to falls from power. The power paradox can undermine 
the social life of any of us.

Romantic partners who express gratitude were more than three times less likely 
to break up

How can we avoid losing power and enjoy enduring respect, esteem and 
influence? One clue comes from studies of those in power. When we gain power 
our attention shifts from a focus on others to what is gratifying for us, 
leading quickly to the abuse of power. Transcending the power paradox is 
therefore quite simple: just focus on the interests, humanity and dignity of 
the people around you.

This gives rise to the expression of gratitude, perhaps the most important 
basis of enduring power. For economistAdam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/adam-smith-international-partner-zone>
, gratitude – the feeling of reverence for what others give to us – is the glue 
to healthy communities: “The duties of gratitude are perhaps the most sacred of 
those which the beneficent virtues prescribe to us.” Empirical science agrees: 
gratitude, even a simple “thank you”, is a basis of power.

We can choose to express gratitude in so many ways – public recognition, 
expressing appreciation by email, by knowing eye contact, a deferential bow, 
and acknowledging what another person believes. My research has shown that even 
brief touches to a person’s arm can communicate gratitude – they trigger 
activation in the reward circuits of the recipient’s brain and soothe 
stress-related physiology.

Expressions of gratitude create strong, collaborative ties and pave the way 
for greater influence. Studies find that individuals who express gratitude to 
others as groups are forming have stronger ties within the group months later. 
Romantic partners who express gratitude to their partners in casual 
conversations were more than three times less likely to break up six months 
later. When experimenters touch participants on the arm in a friendly fashion, 
those individuals are more likely to sign petitions and co-operate with a 
stranger. When teachers encourage students with a pat on the shoulder, those 
students are three to five times more likely to try solving hard problems. 
Simply being thanked for completed work led participants to be twice as likely 
to volunteer for more.

Succumbing to the power paradox is the source of so many ills in our social 
life: anxiety, unethical behaviour and arrogance. But solutions can be found in 
quotidian practices focused on others, such as the simple “thank you” that 
punctuates our daily lives.

The Power Paradox by Dacher Keltner is out now (Allen Lane, £16.99, or £13.59 
atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/393435/>)
 