
A lively correspondence has continued on the theme of what words, people's 
names and cultural references it is fair to include in a Guardian crossword in 
the year 2009. One open-minded process engineer saw no objection to references 
to Paris, Hector and Lysander, though the classics had been no part of his 
education. In return, he felt that non-scientists ought to be expected to live 
with some quantum effects, black holes and dark matter.

One of the problems here, as in other areas of modern life, is that the body 
of what used to be labelled (and examined) as "general knowledge" has 
fragmented. Against that, I am regularly astonished by the evidence that so 
many non-native English speakers are grappling with and enjoying our 
crosswords, which I would have assumed were highly culture specific. One 
Frenchman recently sent in an almost correct entry to a Paul Genius puzzle that 
I had initially had difficulty deciphering even with the aide of the crib sheet 
that he had supplied to me.

One persistent myth that I would like to try to kill, however, is that TREE 
(in the guise of Sir Max Beerbohm Tree) still features regularly in Guardian 
crosswords. You can see why, with the two E's together and a short name that is 
also a plant, he was so useful to crossword setters for so long, but I think 
that the great actor-manager can now decently be allowed his rest. However, be 
warned: this is not yet the case with Miss Mae West, not only because the 
actor's combination of seven letters is beloved by setters, but also because 
her reputation as a wit and her record of willingness to fight (including 
serving a spell in prison) against censorship and prejudice deservedly live on.

On the general question as to whether our puzzles are too hard or too easy, I 
took much comfort from this in one email: "My daughter and I, when in the same 
house, can almost invariably complete the Guardian puzzle within fifteen 
minutes (including the time to make tea). When working alone, each of us takes 
rather longer and, indeed, might be quite stumped at times. This state of 
affairs, extant for more than ten years now (the younger woman at present being 
nearly 29), would seem to suggest that the clues are pitched to both my 
daughter's generation and my own."

_____

A number of you have found that the PDF version of each day's puzzles has been 
printing out at your end smaller than heretofore. I am told that the reason 
must be in your printer's relationship to what your computer is receiving from 
our end. There is no single piece of advice that I can give you as to how to 
cope with this problem, since what needs to be done will be different with Macs 
and non-Macs, with Java and non-Java and with all the possible variations in 
operating systems and software and from browser to browser. A general line of 
approach would be that, when you have clicked on 'File' and then on 'Print', 
you should be offered an option to scale the page on the printer setting 
screen. 115% seems to be about right on mine; but, if that does not work with 
you, could you ask subshelp@theguardian.com for further and better advice, 
indicating what systems you are using? They should be able to give you more 
specific advice.

_____

I was inhibited in responding to the flood of demands to know what was missing 
from Paul's prize crossword No 24,641 for 7 March, because for once nothing. 
However, to explain this in detail would have been to give the whole game away. 
The * at the end of several clues was not a cross-reference to something that 
we had forgotten to give you but a definition common to all the clues involved: 
namely that all the answers to these clues involved stars of one sort of 
another. I hope that, as time goes on, your first reaction to something unusual 
in a puzzle will not, with some justification, be that it must just be another 
mistake.

_____

Lavatch's March Genius was published late and, as a result, there was only one 
correct entry on the first day, from Ian of London N14 at 15.57. By the 
deadline, 160 of you had unlocked the Kafka code.
 