
1. Barcelona 1-4 Metz <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PBY59ghoTgU> (agg: 5-6), 
10 October 1984, Cup Winners' Cup, first round

No one saw this coming – almost literally, because after Metz had lost the 
home leg 4-2 no French TV or radio station bothered to cover the seemingly 
pointless return match and the Camp Nou was only a quarter full. The pessimism 
surrounding Metz was understandable: their previous two away matches in the 
league had been a 6-0 defeat at Bordeaux and a 7-0 mauling at Monaco, and, 
after the Catalans had benefited from a series of mistakes to win the first leg 
4-2, theBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> playmaker 
Bernd Schuster said he would "give the Metz players some ham when they come to 
our place to thank them for the presents that they give us tonight".

"They really looked down on us – and that made us so angry," Michel Ettore, 
the Metz goalkeeper, recalled recently. "We wanted to wipe away their insults." 
After half an hour at Camp Nou, however, Barça's belief grew even stronger as 
Lobo Carrasco fired past Ettore to make it 5-2 on aggregate. With less than an 
hour to go, Metz needed four goals. In the 38th minute Tony Kurbos hurtled down 
the right and, with the goalkeeper anticipating a cross, sent the ball, perhaps 
flukily, straight into the net from an acute angle. Sixty seconds later Metz 
carved open the Barça defence and Sánchez diverted a Kurbos cross into his own 
goal to leaveMetz <https://www.theguardian.com/football/metz> requiring "only" 
two more goals. Ten minutes into the second half the irrepressible Kurbos 
latched on to a sweet through ball and clipped it over the keeper to make it 
5-5 on aggregate, but with Barça still in front on away goals. The home side 
attempted to rally but Ettore and his defenders produced improbable block after 
improbable block.

"Every time it seemed they were about to score we'd get a head, a foot or an 
arse in the way – we felt invincible," Ettore said. In the 85th minute Metz 
tore forward again, the Senegal striker Jules Bocandé feinted his way to the 
byline and pulled back towards the penalty spot, where Kurbos, of course, 
arrived to lift it into the net and ignite ecstatic French celebrations. "I ran 
straight up to Schuster and bawled: 'Where's your ham now?'" Ettore said. "I 
don't think he speaks French but he understood me that night."Paul Doyle

2. Porto 4-3 Wrexham (agg: 4-4), 1984-85 Cup Winners' Cup, first round

Wrexham were lucky to be in the Cup Winners' Cup, having failed to fulfil the 
competition's fairly obvious criterion. Shrewsbury had in fact won the Welsh 
Cup in 1984, but the Shrews could not represent Wales in European competition, 
the snag being that pesky border which placed Shrewsbury nine miles inside 
England. The beaten finalists, then, took their place.

But by 1984 Wrexham were a club in disarray. Back-to-back relegations in 1982 
and 1983 had sent them spiralling from the Second Division to the Fourth, 
bringing financial hardship. They were left with only 14 professionals on their 
books and in their squad were three teenagers – Paul Nicholl, Gary Pugh and 
Kevin Jones – whose careers in football had begun in the summer courtesy of the 
government's Youth Training Scheme because the club could not afford to pay 
them. They warmed up for the first leg with a 3-1 home defeat against 
Peterborough in front of 1,704 die-hard fans, a result that left them 82nd of 
the 92 League clubs.

Porto, then, should have been an impossible task. The visiting side that lined 
up for the first leg contained seven of the players who had been in the team 
beaten 2-1 by Juventus in the previous year's final, plus a young Paulo Futre. 
A host of them had helped Portugal to a World Cup qualifying victory over 
Sweden the week before. Predictably they dominated much of the first half, but 
the Welsh side grew into the game and Jim Steel's bullet header gave them a 
remarkable victory. Just 4,935 had been at the Racecourse ground for the first 
leg; nearly 40,000 packed into Estádio das Antas in Porto for the return game. 
In what Steel would later describe as "a bloody hurricane" the hosts raced into 
a 3-0 lead within 38 minutes, but the Robins' captain, Jake King, pulled two 
goals back just before half-time. Futre put the Portuguese back in command with 
a goal in the second half before Barry Horne, signed from Rhyl in the summer, 
made it 4-3 in the dying minutes, giving the Welshmen an astonishing victory on 
away goals. Their reward was a trip to Italy to take on the beaten European Cup 
finalists of 1983-84, Roma. A 3-0 aggregate defeat meant an honourable exit, 
but the players had already written themselves into Wrexham, and indeed 
European, folklore.John Ashdown

3. CSKA Sofia 2-0 Ajax <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qBSlMzOAqSU> (agg: 
2-1), 24/10/1973, European Cup second round

Ajax had been shocked before – not least in 1960 when they were beaten 4-3 by 
the Norwegian amateurs Fredrikstad – but those defeats came before they had 
evolved into the European powerhouse of the early 1970s. This came when they 
were close to the height of their powers. In 1971, '72 and '73 they had won a 
hat-trick of European Cups under Rinus Michels and then Istvan Kovacs. Johan 
Cruyff had departed for Barcelona in the summer of 1973, but this was still the 
team of Johan Neeskens, Arie Haan, Johnny Rep and Piet Keizer. They had not 
been beaten in Europe since the defeat to Arsenal in the semi-final of the 
Fairs Cup in 1969-70. They had won six of the previous eight Eredivise titles.

CSKA by comparison, despite their domestic success (four back-to-back titles 
from 1969), had never made an impact on the European scene. They'd reached the 
European Cup semis in 1967 but in the previous year's European Cup they had 
been destroyed 6-1 over two legs by the same Ajax side. They'd reached the 
second round in bizarre circumstances aftertheir second leg with Panathinaikos 
was replayed after the game had gone to penalties 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2009/may/27/football-the-knowledge-retired-shirts>
. A Jan Mulder goal gave Ajax a 1-0 victory in the first leg, but that was 
nullified in Sofia when Dimitar Marashliev scored in the 68th minute. 
Extra-time was needed. In the 116th minute, Stefan Mikhailov struck to give the 
Bulgarians a famous victory and effectively end Ajax's golden era. It was to be 
14 years before the once-dominant club won another European title.JA

4. Chelsea 1-1 Atvidaberg (Atvidaberg win on away goals), Cup Winners' Cup, 
2nd round, 1971

Six months previously Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> 
had lifted the trophy by beating Real Madrid in the final, and they began their 
defence of the Cup Winners' Cup with a narrow 21-0 aggregate victory over 
Jeunesse Hautcharage of Luxembourg. So nobody expected them to slip up in the 
next round against the Swedish part-timers. Even after being held 0-0 in the 
away leg, Peter Osgood and Co were anticipating a slaughter at Stamford Bridge, 
as indeed were the Swedes, who, in the words of David Lacey in the Guardian, 
"threw nine men back in their defence with a fatalism worthy of Bergman".

Atvidaberg survived the first half but within 10 seconds of the resumption 
they finally fell behind, Alan Hudson finding the net from 20 yards. John 
Hollins' penalty miss a few minutes later was not expected to matter but, 
amazingly, it did, as in the 68th minute the visitors mounted their attack of 
the game and the striker Roland Sandberg dashed on to a pass from Lars-Goran 
Andersson and slid the ball past Peter Bonnetti for an equaliser. Chelsea 
failed to respond and, indeed, failed to accept their defeat with good grace. 
"One of the Chelsea players spat at me," said the forward Ralf Edstrom 
recently, adding: "They were real pigs. Absolutely! Pigs! A lot of people say 
that the Englishmen were always fair. And maybe they were – when they were 
playing each other. Against foreign teams they were dirty all the time."PD

5. Dinamo Tbilisi 3-0 Liverpool (agg: 4-2), 3/10/1979, European Cup first round

Teams from behind the Iron Curtain were always shrouded in mystery – in 
previews they were habitually referred to as "the crack Soviet outfit" or "the 
ruthless Red Army" but no one knew for sure how good they would turn out to be. 
Would Tbilisi be as nifty as Ferencvaros and Red Star Belgrade had proved when 
upsettingLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> earlier in 
the decade, albeit before Bob Paisley had elevated the club to a higher level 
with two European Cup triumphs? No. They would turn out to be better than 
anything the English champions had ever encountered. Already in the first leg 
at Anfield, where the home side had prevailed 2-1, Dinamo had shown flashes of 
a technical and tactical sophistication that perplexed the hosts. In Tibilisi 
came the full onslaught.

Liverpool barely slept the night before the match – some 200 Dinamo fans 
having staged a torchlight parade around their hotel at 4am – but mostly it was 
Dinamo's rapid passing and jagged running that made them so sluggish. Dinamo 
made it 1-0 on the night after a moment that should feature permanently in the 
Match of the Day intro footage:David Kipiani dazzled past Alan Hansen with a 
piece of trickery that left the acclaimed denouncer of diabolical defending 
floundering like a drunk in the dark 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O4W_pszBQ9A>. Ray Clemence diverted the ensuing 
cross, but only as far as Vladimir Gutsaev, who slammed it into the net. The 
Georgians' second arrived in the 75th minute when Georgiy Chilaya collected the 
ball in his own half, slalomed past three opponents and slipped in Ramaz 
Shengelia, who casually lifted the ball over Clemence to make it 2-0. Three 
minutes later came the third after Phil Thompson conceded a penalty and 
Alexandre Chivadze converted with ease. Hansen has since said this was the best 
Liverpool team he ever played in. Kevin Keegan's Hamburg would avenge them in 
the next round, knocking out Dinamo.PD

6. Aberdeen 3-2 Bayern Munich <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DdCdA6UhEJw> 
(agg: 3-2), Cup Winners' Cup quarter-final, 1983

An up-and-coming manager named Alex Ferguson had already made Aberdeen a force 
in Scotland but not until this dramatic night did Europe realise that here was 
a side to be reckoned with. Applauded just for reaching this stage of the 
tournament,Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> were 
expected to be dispatched by Bayern, who counted Karl-Heinz Rummenigge and Paul 
Breitner in their team. After a valiant 0-0 draw in Munich, the Dons fans were 
dreading the concession of an early goal at Pittodrie and their worst fears 
were realised when Klaus Augenthaler stepped regally forward to drive the ball 
into the net in the 10th minute. Neil Simpson equalised before half-time, but 
soon the Scots were put back in their supposed place, when Hans Pflügler 
smashed a crisp left-footed volley past Jim Leighton.

Needing two goals to progress, Ferguson introduced two substitutes – John 
McMaster and John Hewitt. In the 76th minute the former combined with Gordon 
Strachan to outwit the German defence with a free-kick routine that has since 
become commonplace at Manchester United, leaving Strachan to cross for Alex 
McLeish to head an equaliser. One minute later, the Bayern keeper Manfred 
Müller parried an Eric Black header and Hewitt, with his first touch after five 
months out with injury, stabbed in a sensational winner. Now all of Europe was 
aware of something special brewing in Scotland, but neither Waterschei in the 
semi-final, nor Real Madrid in the final, could concoct a remedy, and Aberdeen 
completed one of the most astonishing campaigns in European history.PD
 