
Last month, Marmite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
 managed to leave a nasty taste in the mouth for even those of us who like it. 
Unilever’s attempt to increase the price, allegedly in response to rising costs 
as a result of aBrexit-inspired falling pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/brexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch>
, was fought off by plucky old Tesco. Critics pointed out that Unilever had 
also benefited from the falling pound because it exported so many of its 
products. The company backed down and Tesco won the day. Hurrah. The diehard 
Brexiteers were able to claim that the portents of doom around our leaving the 
EU were misplaced. It was buttered toast all round.

Except the Unilever story has managed to obscure the reality, which is this: 
when it comes to food,Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> has utterly screwed us 
all. I ran into a friend recently who runs a food import and restaurant 
business. They spend more than £10m a year on produce, purchased in euros. 
Because of the falling pound their costs have gone up by 20%. They have to find 
an extra £2m just to stand still. I spoke to a man in the steakhouse business, 
who imports beef from the US. It was chaos, he said. The falling pound against 
the dollar had decimated the business.

You can dismiss these as merely challenges for those wealthy enough to visit 
restaurants. And anyway, surely importing beef from the US is a bad idea? You 
have a point. Shouldn’t they be sourcing everything from within the UK?

In a perfect world they would. But this is where it gets tricky, because there 
isn’t enough high-quality beef in the UK. And it’s that issue – a lack of 
British produce writ large across the entire domestic food chain – which is the 
real problem. Even before the vote we were producing considerably less than we 
consumed. Factor in exports and only 50% of the food we consume in the UK is 
actually produced here.

And now a number of other things kick in. First, as a result of the falling 
pound exporting produce becomes only more attractive for farmers, and there’s a 
plentiful supply of takers. Second, the uncertainty created by Brexit means 
that farmers have no incentive to invest in increased production until they can 
see what the future holds. We are utterly at the mercy of those increasingly 
expensive imports. The price of domestic milk may still be disastrous for 
farmers, but its by-products – cream and butter – are decided by the European 
cream market and are now priced 108% and 144% higher than they were in April. 
Tea has gone up by 50%.

The long-term prospects are no better. Over the years I’ve got to meet a lot 
of farmers; generally, I like their no-nonsense stoicism. But God knows what 
came over them when they voted en masse for Brexit. There are major faults with 
European farming subsidies, but if they think a post-Brexit world will replace 
all of them they are fooling themselves. And an end to free movement of labour 
will remove the armies of eastern Europeans who come here to do the 
agricultural work others will not. Without them we will simply not be able to 
get the harvest in. Dismiss all this as merely the rantings of a disappointed 
diehard Remainer if you like, but the truth is I can afford the increases. It’s 
the others I worry about; the ones who may have to make do with toast and 
Marmite.
 