
The power of the nap cannot be ignored. A study by the University of 
Düsseldorf has shown that even very short naps enhance memory processing, while 
a Nasa study, looking at their effects on pilots on long flights, reported: 
“Naps can maintain or improve subsequent performance, physiological and 
subjective alertness, and mood.” One of the authors of that report, Mark 
Rosekind, head of theNational Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
<http://www.nhtsa.gov/> in the US, has said that “a 26-minute nap improves 
performance in pilots by 34% and alertness by 54%”.

Naps are of critical importance to pilots flying long-haul – they fit one in 
while the co-pilot takes over, later reaping the benefits of improved 
alertness. They are a significant performance enhancer for athletes, too, and 
they can have the same benefits for anyone. A 30-minute nap is the most 
practical.

If you want to try it yourself, have a coffee beforehand – espresso is a good, 
quick fix – so that it takes effect towards the end of your nap, or controlled 
recovery period (CRP). Don’t sip your coffee too slowly, as you might find it’s 
already taking effect as you begin your CRP, and be aware of the amount of 
caffeine you have already consumed. If you are hovering around the 400mg daily 
maximum, go without.

Those who claim they can’t nap won’t fall asleep. But this is one of the 
revelations: it doesn’t matter

When I was working with Manchester United in the late 90s, the club introduced 
double training sessions pre-season for the first time, and I suggested 
creating an environment for the players in which they could relax and have a 
CRP between sessions to improve their recovery. Both Alex Ferguson and head 
physiotherapist Rob Swire supported the idea so we allocated a suitable room 
for up to 12 players at a time, put in some single-sleeper loungers and coached 
the players on how to use the room.

It was all very basic – no whale noises or essential oils – but it did the 
job. It was a key step towards where we are today with sleep recovery, and the 
players took full advantage with an open mind to day-time sleeping.

The truth is that we can nap anywhere. The best way is to find a spot where 
you can make yourself comfortable at some point during the afternoon period – 
an unused office or meeting room, a quiet corner in the communal kitchen, the 
sofa in the staff room or even in the park or on a bench, when the weather 
permits. Then close your eyes and just let go. Easier said than done, you might 
think. Some people will be able to do this and fall asleep promptly. Others, 
those who steadfastly claim they simply “can’t nap”, won’t be able to fall 
asleep. But this is one of the revelatory aspects: it doesn’t matter.

What’s important is that you use this period to close your eyes and disconnect 
from the world for a short while. Falling asleep is great, but so is catching 
that place on the verge of sleep, when you’re not quite awake but not quite 
asleep either. It’s tapping into that point of the day when you’re not really 
thinking about anything at all, when your mind is a blank.

After a nap, take five minutes to become aware of your surroundings and 
hydrate. Daylight lamps on your desk or getting out into natural daylight will 
reduce any inertia quickly, so that you will enjoy all the benefits of a CRP, 
just like those pilots who took the 26-minute Nasa naps.

Sleep – The Myth of 8 Hours 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sleep-434356.html> by Nick Littlehales, is 
published on 27 October by Penguin, at £9.99. To order a copy for £8.19, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sleep-434356.html>
 