
This month, the custard apple has dominated my postbag. The quick crossword 
for March 16 had it as a clue, leading to the solution papaw. All hell broke 
loose.

The more polite correspondents confined themselves to telling me that, if I 
thought a custard apple was anything like a papaw (or a pawpaw, or a papaya), I 
should try eating one sometime. Many, assuming that I was botanically as well 
as gastronomically challenged, took time out to tell me that the custard apple 
is the fruit of a West Indian tree, Anona (or Annona) reticulata, and is 
closely related to the sweet sop (or sweetsop), which comes from a West Indian 
evergreen (Anona squamosa), and to the soursop, which is from another West 
Indian bush (Anona muricata).

Incidentally, there was some difference of opinion amongst my correspondents 
as to whether all these were native only to the Caribbean or could also be 
found naturally in South America, the tropics in general, or even in India. All 
were clear, however, that only the Guardian could make the mistake of confusing 
any of them with the papaw (Asimina triloba) or the papaya (Carica papaya).

Embattled and confused by this unexpected but clearly informed barrage, I 
sought refuge in the dictionaries. My 1995 Chambers was no help, since it was 
100% for the prosecution. A custard apple for Chambers in 1995 was the fruit of 
the Anona reticulata with edible pulp of the appearance and consistency of 
custard.

Collins (2000), though, offered me some shelter. Its first and second 
definitions are clearly in the Anona reticulata camp. But its third is: any of 
several related trees or fruits, especially the papaw and sweetsop. Then, I 
reached for the new Chambers 21st Century dictionary. The entry for custard 
apple is shorter than in 1995. In fact, it consists of just two words: see 
papaw. Under papaw, it confuses matters by giving as a first definition a North 
American tree with purple flowers. But its second and third definitions are the 
tropical evergreen and its oblong yellow or orange fruit. It ends simply: also 
called custard apple. Sometimes called papaya.

After this I felt happier, at least from the point of view of being able to 
tell the readers' editor that I did not think he needed to put an apology in 
his corrections and clarifications column. But it has left the intriguing 
question of what has been going on in the last 20 years or so to the papaw and 
the papaya.

One possibility is that Caribbean English has been developing in a way that 
makes papaw a general term for a wider variety of tropical fruit and that this 
usage has spread to English English. Another is that the marketing people have 
decided that papaya sounds more attractive than custard apple in the 
supermarket. Whatever the explanation, it seems that the once-clear distinction 
between Anona reticulata and Asimina triloba has become blurred. Does anyone 
have a convincing explanation of how this came about?
___________

Not in the same league, but still intriguing to one who knows almost as little 
about fabrics as he does about botany, is the question of whether chintz can 
accurately be described as being glazed. A quick clue last month for chintz was 
"Glazed patterned fabric". A solver in Edinburgh found this misleading, since 
her dictionary defines it as "Cotton printed generally in several colours on a 
white or light ground", with no suggestion of glass being involved in its 
production or it having to have a shiny surface. The dictionaries I use vary 
between defining it as "a glazed cotton fabric" and "cotton cloth, usually 
glazed, used for furnishings". However, I am reliably told that most chintz now 
bought is unglazed and that the dictionaries are simply wrong. This, as you may 
imagine, is an unsettling idea to a crossword editor.
___________

Returning to matters vegetable, the custard apple quick crossword also 
contained mangelwurzel as a variety of beet plant. A reader objected that this 
was far too obscure a word for such a puzzle. It never occurred to me that this 
poor old root crop would be unknown to Guardian readers. It is there, firmly in 
most shorter dictionaries as a common cattle feed. Perhaps it is a sign of the 
decline of agriculture's contribution to national income. Maybe it is a 
generational question. In those dire days of postwar rationing, I can remember 
eating mangelwurzel with my whale meat sausage. But perhaps my memory is 
playing me tricks again.
 