
In August 1966, my friend Paul Fitchie and I decided to go and see The Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/who> together at Dreamland Ballroom in 
Margate. We were 14 and didn’t have the cash for tickets, so we worked out a 
way to get into the ballroom for free. We went to the cinema that was part of 
the same complex, watched a movie and when it had finished hid in the ballroom 
itself all day. Our plan was to wait until the crowd started to arrive and then 
slip in with them, hopefully unnoticed.

We stayed in the dark – apart from when Paul went out a fire exit to get ice 
creams and when we snuck into the dressing rooms and scrawled messages on the 
wall like: “Smash your kit up, Keith!” At one point we had to slip into the 
ladies’ toilets because we thought someone was going to catch us. We stayed in 
there until the fans arrived – the girls were rather shocked to see us emerge 
from the cubicles.

Keith Moon was swinging from a light fitting. Roger Daltrey was not amused

In those days security was virtually nonexistent and the hall manager assumed 
we were roadies and asked us to make sure the speakers were secure. The gig 
was, of course, amazing. We were right down at the front being blasted by some 
of the most powerful rock’n’roll imaginable.

We then managed to get into The Who’s dressing room after the show, where they 
willingly gave us their autographs. Paul remembers Keith Moon swinging from a 
light fitting. Roger Daltrey was not amused. We spent so long in there that we 
missed the last train home and decided to hitchhike back along the coast. Then 
a big American 1963 Lincoln Continental pulled up, down went the electric 
window and inside wasPete Townshend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/petetownshend> and his wife Karen.

“Do you need a lift, lads? We’re heading back to London. Jump in!” said Pete. 
Unable to believe our luck, we got in and off we went. On the way Pete bought 
us some lemonade and chips and then dropped me at my house in Herne Bay and 
Paul at his home in Chestfield before driving off into the night, back up to 
London. It made me realise that superstars were human, too.

When we went to school on the Monday morning and told our classmates what had 
happened, they didn’t believe a word of it. But we didn’t need to prove 
ourselves. We knew it was true.

In the Nick of Time by John Altman (£16.99, John Blake Books) is out now. To 
order a copy for £13.93, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/in-the-nick-of-time.html>
 