
It may be midsummer madness and what I am about to announce may bring the 
heavens down on my head. But there are turning points in life at which one must 
take risks. So, from now on, in Guardian crossword clues and solutions it will 
be email (5) and no longer e-mail (1-4).

Two factors have contributed to this bold decision. The first is that email 
(5) has been Guardian house style for some while, a fact that I had 
embarrassingly missed. The second is that the letter count (1-4) telegraphs the 
punch in a boringly obvious way, giving setters little scope for their 
customary ingenuity on your behalf. The downside of the change is that "email" 
may start cropping up as a solution more frequently than it has in the past, 
because its 60% vowel content is so convenient in awkward corners of a grid. 
But I shall try to impose rationing. It would, of course, be equally helpful to 
setters if U-boat could be clued as (5) and T-shirt as (6), because (1-4) and 
(1-5) in these cases are equally obvious giveaways, but there is no sign of 
that happening in the foreseeable future.

_____

A number of subscribers have asked how many correct Genius solutions are 
submitted each month. A quick count for this year so far shows a range from 140 
to 305. This means that your chances of success are considerably better than 
those for the national lottery. Incidentally, in answer to another FAQ, how 
soon in the month you send in your solution makes no difference to the chances 
of your name being pulled out of the electronic hat.

It is not easy to know whether we are getting the level of the Genius puzzle 
right, or what survey question to ask in helping us to decide. Those who like 
it hard have been asking for harder and "Genius" is not a label that should be 
cheapened. Some of the old Listener puzzles were so hard that only two or three 
managed to complete them; one week (legend has it) there was not a single 
correct entry. This did not prevent them becoming a cult and was just as well 
for the Listener, because in those early days each correct entry won a prize. 
Curiously, in the case of Genius, there seems to be no clear correlation 
between the number of entries and what I would regard as the difficulty of the 
puzzle. Any comments on all of this will be gratefully received.

One final comment has come from Christopher Copping in Australia. It has 
occurred to him that the best way of approaching James Joyce's Finnegans Wake 
is to treat it like a collection of Genius crosswords. "For amongst all that 
would seem like impenetrable fog there are some great witticisms". I offer this 
as consolation to all those who travel the Genius route hopefully but never 
arrive.

_____

This, I promise, will be the last reference here for some time to schnapps or 
any Dutch spirits. It is striking, though, that phrases in one language that 
include reference to a given nationality are not mirrored in the language of 
the country in question: French leave/filer à l'anglaise, French letter/capote 
anglaise, French beans/chalk/dressing/fries/horn/polish/toll/window, English 
muffins and Chinese fire drill all spring to mind. But Dutch courage seems to 
be a rare exception. In Dutch this is "jenever-moed": moed meaning courage and 
jenever being unquestionably Dutch gin.

_____

Finally, apologies for this month's unforced errors. First, I am indebted to 
David Binnie for pointing out that a guillemot is a diver, not a wading bird 
(cryptic No 23,495 - July 1, 25 ac: "Nearly overact after bird set about one - 
a wading bird"). As he points out, the guillemot is the most common of the auk 
family and spends most of its time at sea, even in the winter. On land it can 
only shuffle awkwardly and it breeds in close-packed communities on cliff 
ledges. So little auks have nowhere to practise wading. Even if they wished it 
were otherwise, diving is their only way of leaving home.

Second, I am indebted to more people than I have space to list for pointing 
out that Ontario is, of course, a Canadian province (capital Toronto), not a 
city (quick No 10,969 - July 2, 14 dn). Apologies for letting that howler slip 
through the system.

· Hugh Stephenson is the crossword editor.
 