
A couple of you wrote in about my 'senior moment' last month (and more will 
have spotted it but spared my blushes by refraining from comment). As I have 
'The Torquemada Puzzle Book' (1934) and Ximenes 'On the Art of the Crossword' 
on the shelf in front of me, (and as I wrote about them both in my book 'The 
Secrets of the Setters') I do know that Derrick Macnutt was Ximenes and not 
Torquemada. Graham Wiremu, who was taught by him at Christ's Hospital, wrote 
from New Zealand to tell me something that I certainly did not know: namely 
that he was universally called 'Boom' at the school because his voice was so 
loud that he could be heard for miles. None of the boys showed the slightest 
interest in his crosswords, but were vaguely proud that this rotund, affable 
and noisy figure - almost as loud as his ginger Harris Tweed plus-fours - 
seemed to enjoy some kind of national notoriety.

Looking back on the puzzles of the Ximenes era it is striking how much the 
conventions of cluing have changed in the last 30 or 40 years, as the new 
generations of setters have moved on. It is not just a question of new setting 
devices being used and accepted by solvers, of which Ximenes, Afrit and Custos 
would not have approved. Many Ximenes clues would not get through these days 
being much too wordy for purpose. And, of course, language changes, with 
dictionary publishers giving their stamp of approval ever more rapidly to new 
words as they are under commercial pressure to justify the production of new 
editions.

But I sense that the crossword world is teetering on the brink of a 
significant new departure caused in this case by the mobile phone. So far as I 
am aware, none of these has yet made it into a standard dictionary (eg Collins, 
Chambers or the OED), but the truth is that abbreviations used in text 
messaging have become pretty universal currency. Hardly a day now passes 
without my getting sent LOL or IMHO (for 'laugh out loud' or 'lots of love' and 
'in my humble opinion'). My inclination to date has been to try to hold the 
line, but it feels like an increasingly hopeless/pointless struggle. To my 
astonishment my straw poll earlier this month of fellow crossword editors, who 
I had regarded as people of principle, showed that they were all ready to 
accept LOL as a building block in a clue, though they would still draw the line 
at having it as a solution. Not since we at the Guardian changed from e-mail 
(1-4) to email (5) has the prospect of having to make a major decision caused 
me so much anxiety.

Newer users of our online crosswords may like to know about some of the 
features of the system:

1. All the cryptic and quick puzzles are published in three basic formats: the 
interactive one, which you can do online (with its 'cheat' and other gadgets); 
the 'print' version that you can print off; and the PDF version, which shows 
you the puzzle as it appears that day in the paper itself, together with the 
solution grid for the previous puzzle in the series. If, as will still 
sometimes happen, any part of the first two versions contains a clue where the 
text has garbled or which seems in any other way to be defective, it is always 
possible to cross-check with the PDF version.

2. For each Saturday cryptic and each monthly Genius puzzle, after the 
deadline for submission has passed, we publish not only its solution but also 
notes indicating how the clues are intended to work. (To get these, click where 
indicated above the grid.) In addition, there is an extremely useful site run 
by crossword fanatics, where more Guardian puzzles are analysed and commented 
on (as well as those from other publications). It can be found at
fifteensquared.net <http://fifteensquared.net>

3. For Azed addicts a similar function is performed at andlit.org.uk 
<http://www.andlit.org.uk> which includes the whole archive of Azed slips.

4. There are at present limitations on the 'Save' option if you want to leave 
a puzzle in mid-solving and to return to it later. First, you cannot save the 
puzzle on one computer and re-open it on another. Second, to re-open a saved 
version you have to follow the same route to the puzzle from the home page as 
the one you used in the first instance. So, for example, if you clicked on 
'Cryptic' at the top of the home page to get today's puzzle but used the 
archive search facility at the bottom right to try to retrieve the saved work 
(or vice versa), you will get a new blank grid.

One more note for the 'more information than you may want' folder. It has been 
pointed out to me that Weatherbys, the company which controls the Thoroughbred 
breed register, limits the length of a racehorse's name to no more than 18 
characters and spaces. Therefore, 'Heartless Metropolis', which featured on 17 
July at 15 across in cryptic puzzle No 24,754 in Bonxie's day at the races, 
would have perforce been a non-runner. This, though, raises the question of how 
'The Flying Dutchman' (19 letters and spaces) could have won the Derby in 1849. 
Perhaps the restriction was introduced at a later date. But what is the reason 
for it now? There may have been a limit in what you could get into the standard 
manually operated telegraph frame at racecourses, but will the restriction now 
be relaxed as we pass into the digital display era?

There were a record 472 entries for the July Genius competition, with 33 
correct entries on the first day. Alan in York was timed in first at 07.43. (A 
slightly earlier entry was unhappily out by just one letter.)
 