
I was 21 years old, and had been in London for almost a year. I wanted to be a 
playwright. By night I worked as a barman in the notorious Cellar Bar, a gay 
leather bar which was part of the nightclubHeaven 
<http://heavennightclub-london.com/>. It was 1983.

The dress code at the Cellar Bar was really strict, no exceptions. We would 
dress up in the whole look each night: leather, rubber or denim and boots, to 
really look the part. It was heady, sweaty. It was a show. The money was great 
– meaning the tips, which was unusual in London.

The bar was a small main room, with a chill-out area upstairs. To the right of 
the main room was a dark area of passageways and corners, where people had sex 
in the half light. One of the guys I worked with was called Robert and he knew 
everyone. One night he introduced me toFreddie Mercury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/freddie-mercury>. It was early on in the 
evening when Freddie sat on a stool and began chatting to me. I remember how 
friendly he was, there was a sweetness about him. The clone look of the 
moustache, the leather Muir cap and jacket, added to him looking nondescript.

Robert encouraged me to chat with him, abandoning me with this world-famous 
rock star. I asked him if he was recognised a lot. It struck me how odd it was 
that he had spent his entire life wanting to be famous and well known and now, 
having such enormous success, wanting to be unrecognised. He took off his cap 
and placed it on the bar.

He was polite and seemed to take a generous interest in me. I brought him a 
bottle of vodka over, poured it, and he took the bottle and kept it on the bar. 
Being young and naive, I checked it was OK for me to leave the vodka bottle 
with him.

“Darling, don’t worry, they know me here,” he said. He laughed a wide-toothed 
self-conscious laugh. “Don’t be shy, I will bite.”

Darling, don’t worry, they know me here. Don’t be shy, I will bite

I remember he asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up, flirting 
mischievously. “You know what I wanted, to be Burt Reynolds. And then later I 
just wanted him.” His laughter was infectious and camp.

As the bar gradually filled up he became less relaxed, the presence of other 
people, strangers, putting him on edge. I served customers in between small 
talk and Robert, who was much closer to him, chatted quietly with him. There 
was a crowd. Occasionally he would slip away from the bar, unnoticed, into the 
darker area of the club, or would chat to friends. I often saw him with Paul 
[Prenter, one of his entourage], or in Heaven withPeter [Straker 
<http://www.peterstraker.com/>, his best friend] as they were inseparable.

He seemed to come into the bar quite regularly after our first meeting, or 
maybe I just noticed him more. Aids was somewhere on the other side of the 
Atlantic then and there was concern, but no real indication of the horror to 
come. Who was to know then?

Somebody to Love by Mark Langthorne and Matt Richards, is published by Blink 
at £20. Order it for £16.40 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/somebody-to-love.html>
 