
I first met Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> when 
I secured the right to export Cuban cigars to Asia. It was around 1992. We were 
driven to meet him in one of his homes, as he was very supportive of the Cuban 
cigar industry. It was a sort of bunker on the outskirts of Havana. We went 
downstairs into a basement that looked out on to a lowered garden, which was 
very beautiful.

I arrived for dinner at around 7pm, and he was there with two interpreters, 
standing beside him, one at each shoulder. They would translate as we spoke – 
there had to be two; he talked so much that one on his own would get very 
tired. We stayed standing up and talking for more than two hours, by which time 
the two interpreters were absolutely exhausted, so two new ones were brought 
in. I was amazed that anybody could talk so much.

There had to be two translators, he talked so much

He was utterly charming, but quite intimidating, with his enormous stature, 
military uniform and impressive beard. His speech was a bit rambling and he 
would gesticulate a lot with his hands, but he was never boring – in fact, he 
had me spellbound. We ate a simple meal of chicken and rice, and talked about 
everything: Cuba, America, Britain. He would speak softly, and then bellow: 
“Remember Bolívar! The great American war. The father of the Latin people.” He 
was an expert on that subject and passionate. He was very self-assured; it was 
as if he’d just come from theBay of Pigs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bay_of_Pigs_Invasion>.

At one point I thought I would throw in a random question: “Castro, President, 
what do you think about ink? Do you use an ink pen?” He went on to tell me 
everything he knew about ink, which was a lot – the dye, the history, the 
marketing – for about 15 minutes. It served me right for being so cheeky.

Another encounter I will never forget took place while I was in Cuba with a 
couple of friends from England. I’d asked to see him, but he hadn’t told me 
when we could meet. Then the phone rang at the hotel where we were staying at 
2am, and we were told: “The president will see you now.” We got up, changed and 
were driven to this steel shipping container in the middle of nowhere. The air 
conditioning was on and it was absolutely freezing inside – maybe they used it 
for interrogation, I thought. Castro was a bit late, but was extremely 
apologetic and shook our hands warmly.

We sat down and talked until about 5.30am when my friend got up and said: “Our 
plane is at 7am and we’ve got to go back to the hotel to pack.” We were worried 
we didn’t have enough time, but Castro said: “Don’t worry, the plane won’t 
leave without you.” He gave us each a box with a cigar in it. When we arrived 
at the airport, he had kept his word and the plane was held for us.•

Rules for Modern Life: A Connoisseur’s Guide  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rules-for-modern-life.html> by David Tang is 
published by Portfolio Penguin on 10 November at £12.99. To order a copy for 
£10.65, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rules-for-modern-life.html>
 