
Lucian Freud was once asked why so many gay men sat for his portraits. “I’ve 
always been friends with queers,” he said. “They’re just so brave.” Freud was 
sharing a truth as well as echoing Nietzsche’s most famous aphorism: “That 
which doesn’t kill us makes us stronger.” Being openly gay in a sometimes 
hostile world takes courage and resilience – qualities we all need in order to 
live well.

Gregory M Herek <http://facultysites.dss.ucdavis.edu/~gmherek/Herek/>, a 
professor of psychology at the University of California and an authority on 
prejudice against lesbians and gay men, says all gay people experience 
prejudice growing up. “But what I think is amazing,” he adds, “is how many of 
them are doing fine and are mentally healthy today and leading whole and 
productive lives. How do they do that? Given all they’re up against, how do 
they come out of it so well?” And could there be lessons for everyone in how 
they cope?

There is much evidence revealing the destructive impact of homophobia on gay 
people. High rates of suicide and use of recreational drugs and alcohol are the 
potent indicators of their psychological trauma. Yet according to research byDr 
Ron Stall <http://www.publichealth.pitt.edu/home/directory/ronald-d-stall> of 
the University of Pittsburgh, having survived the prejudice of their younger 
years, gay people are more likely to thrive as they grow older.

Asked why he had so many gay friends, Lucian Freud replied, ‘They’re just so 
brave’

“There’s this kind of naturally occurring resiliency that happens among gay 
men across a life course,” Stall says. “You want people to lose their 
internalised homophobia, and gay men are doing that on their own quite well, 
thank you very much.” His research shows that while there is still much work to 
be done in helping young children and adolescents, eventually there can be an 
upside to their formative struggles.

The start of the transformation is “coming out” itself. Can there be a more 
powerful phrase to encapsulate the potency of a self-determined identity? And 
coming out is something we all need to do at key moments in our lives. It 
should be no surprise that “coming out” is used by many of us to describe our 
most important moments of self-revealing honesty.

We “come out” about how we really think or feel; our profoundest loves and 
hates; our odd and surprising secrets. Coming out captures the essence of who 
we really are when doing so flies in the face of convention as it does 
profoundly for gay people sharing their sexual identity with others. Such truth 
telling is referred to as self-actualisation. This helps us to grow and develop 
as it means we have removed the mask of trying to fit in. Coming out is the 
courage to go against the grain.

According to Michael King 
<https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/browse/profile?upi=MBKIN92>, professor of primary 
care at UCL, gay resilience is the result of finding useful survival strategies 
while facing prejudice. Gay men often keep strong friendship groups into later 
life. As we age, keeping friendships going is key to our mental health and 
ability to thrive. And it’s something older straight men need to become better 
at. Men are more vulnerable to loneliness and depression after the loss of a 
partner than women. Feeling connected makes us stronger and increases our 
wellbeing.

A chant heard at recent gay pride marches would have been applauded by Lucian 
Freud for its strident courage: “We’re here. We’re queer. We’re fabulous. Don’t 
fuck with us!” It’s hard to imagine more punchy words to assert a collective 
identity. It is this energy of unalloyed self-assertion which has helped drive 
the rapid roll-out of gay rights around the world. What is the community you 
are willing to shout about with such stridency? Find it, and you could make the 
same impact, too.

David Waters is a couples counsellor and teaches at The School of Life
 