
The following is an extract from Robin Bairner's article from the forthcoming 
Issue Twelve of the Blizzard. The Blizzard is a quarterly football journal 
available fromwww.theblizzard.co.uk <http://www.theblizzard.co.uk/> on a 
pay-what-you-like basis in print and digital formats.

On 17 March 1982, the former France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> international footballer 
Jean-Pierre Adams, at the age of 34, was admitted to a Lyon hospital to undergo 
a routine knee operation. He was given anaesthetic that should have knocked him 
out for a few hours but, more than 30 years later, he has yet to awake.

Adams is a figure who drifts in and out of the consciousness of the French 
public but who is largely forgotten outside his homeland, despite being a 
highly-regarded figure as a pioneer for French-African footballers. With 22 
caps to his credit, he turned out more regularly forLes Bleus than David 
Ginola, Ludovic Giuly and even Just Fontaine, carrying himself with a humble 
spirit and a ceaseless smile.

His story begins in Dakar, Senegal, where he was born on 10 March 1948, the 
oldest child of a large family. Although football was in young Jean-Pierre's 
blood – his uncle Alexandre Diadhiou played for the celebrated Jeanne d'Arc 
club – education was made the priority in his life by his devoutly Catholic 
family and he was not allowed to play the sport he loved unless his grades in 
school were of a sufficient standard.

With this in mind, Adams was sent alone to continue his schooling in France, 
where he was ultimately fostered by the Jourdain family in Loiret, a department 
a little south of Paris.

Football proved to be a vital release for the adolescent Adams. It also 
provided him with an environment in which to socialise in what was still a 
white-dominated society as he swiftly gained respect for his physical prowess 
and his endearing personality. He would very quickly become popular at Collège 
Saint-Louis, where he was affectionately known as the "White Wolf".

Away from the pitch, Adams completed his initial schooling but elected to drop 
out of a course studying shorthand as it did not interest him. Instead, he 
worked in a factory as his game progressed to Montagris.

However, there was a hint of problems to come as he suffered a serious knee 
injury that could have ended his dreams of becoming a professional footballer.

Even after moving to l'Entente Bagneaux-Fontainebleau-Nemours (EBFN) 
misfortune continued to follow him. Adams was involved in a serious car crash, 
and though he escaped with only cuts, his close friend Guy Beaudot was killed.

To have been touched by such troubles at the age of 19, it was little surprise 
that Adams' appetite for the game was briefly diminished. Military service, 
however, proved to be a turning point. Adams had always been a physically 
imposing specimen but his time in the army meant his talents started to become 
recognised in a broader sphere. He was selected to play for the military squad, 
from which he would be recommended to Nîmes.

Adams's desire to become a professional had been further fired by his marriage 
to Bernadette. Even this had been no straightforward pathway, though, as his 
blonde bride's mother had initially refused to give her daughter's hand to the 
young African.

At this point, Adams took a path similar to that of Lilian Thuram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/mar/04/football.newsstory>, who rose 
through the amateur ranks to become one of the game's most celebrated players. 
Thuram also turned out for the latter-day version of EBFN, yet it was during 
the era of Adams that the club became prominent in the nation's amateur game.
 Jean-Pierre Adams, left, and Marius Tresor while representing France. 
Photograph: Universal/ Universal/TempSport/Corbis 
In three successive years, with Adams their driving force, they would lose the 
Championnat de France Amateurs final, before earning the right to play in an 
expanded Division 2 in 1970. Although EBFN were coming up short as a team on 
the big occasion, Adams's career was taking off. The strides he made during his 
military service persuaded the Nîmes trainer Kader Firoud to offer Adams a 
trial match in Rouen. Bernadette drove Jean-Pierre north for the friendly in 
which her 22-year-old husband impressed sufficiently to earn his first 
professional contract.

Firoud would be one of the key influences on Adams' career. He was a terrific 
motivator, although his training methods were unorthodox. However 
unconventional the coach, his methods were highly effective. Only the Auxerre 
legend Guy Roux has overseen more top division matches than Firoud's 782, and 
in 1971 he was named France Football's Coach of the Year. Crucially for Adams, 
he was particularly effective at bringing through unknown quantities from the 
youth ranks.

After making his debut in a new No4 role against Reims in September 1970, 
Adams would become a permanent fixture in the team.

It was no mean achievement to become established so readily. Nîmes's side at 
the time was one of the best in the club's history and Adams was a fulcrum as
Les Crocodiles qualified for Europe for the first time. He was decisive in the 
club's first Uefa Cup win, though Nîmes lost the tie on away goals to Vitória 
Setúbal of Portugal.

Such a narrow defeat was the prelude to a frustrating second season in which 
the club finished as runners-up to Olympique Marseille. Nîmes paid for a poor 
spring run that saw them win one of seven league matches and rendered futile 
their eight wins from nine at the campaign's conclusion.

On a collective level, Adams's third and final season at the club was 
disappointing asLes Crocos finished only seventh, yet the midfielder remained 
"in international form". "In the rugged defence of Nîmes, there is a pillar, a 
kind of force of nature, a colossus of uncommon athletic power: Jean-Pierre 
Adams," said the former Argentina captain Ángel Marcos, who played for Nantes. 
"I always dreaded the two annual confrontations [with Adams]."

When Adams moved to Nice in the summer of 1973, Marcos didn't have life any 
easier. By then a France international, Adams was at the peak of his powers. 
Nice at the time were ready to spend. An ambitious bid to sign Jairzinho failed 
narrowly as they attempted to re-establish themselves as a major force after 
dropping out of the elite in 1969.

Despite their spending, their return was marked with a disappointing 
14th-place finish but, by the time Adams arrived, Nice were rueing a failure to 
win the title the previous season, having thrown away a five-point lead to 
allow Nantes to overhaul them.

Life for Adams on the Côte d'Azur started with some promise as two goals from 
Marc Molitor and another from Dick van Dijk helped Nice secure a 3-2 win over 
Barcelona in the Uefa Cup. By the time their European run was emphatically 
ended with a 4-1 aggregate defeat to Köln – a tie played without Adams, who had 
been suspended after a red card against Fenerbahce in the previous round – the 
head coach Jean Snella found his position becoming increasingly uneasy. League 
results were not good and after a fifth-place finish he was dismissed.

His replacement was Vlatko Markovic, an ill-fated appointment. Markovic was 
never popular among the Nice fans. "If spectators want a spectacle, they should 
go to Marineland," he said following criticism of his dour playing style.

Despite the coaching sideshow, Adams remained a consistently strong performer 
and was named in France Football's team of the season. "Adams remains without a 
rival in his role, where his extraordinary athletic qualities can match the 
best," the magazine gushed.

In the subsequent campaign, Nice finished second behind Saint-Etienne, a 
series of injuries to their best players probably robbing them of the title. 
Adams was one of the men who suffered most and those issues would mark the end 
of his personal peak after dropping out of the national team.

Adams' introduction to Les Bleus had come five years earlier during the Taça 
Independência, a competition played in Brazil to celebrate the 150th 
anniversary of the nation's independence from Portugal. Fittingly, his debut 
came against an Africa select team, as he arrived off the bench to replace 
Marius Trésor, the man with whom he would form the fabledGarde Noire in years 
to come.

Five days later he was handed his first start against Colombia. It began 
inauspiciously as Adams conceded a penalty from which the South Americans took 
the lead but he showed his resilience thereafter.

The coach Georges Boulogne was sufficiently impressed to pair Adams with 
Trésor in defence for a decisive encounter with Argentina that would decide 
which country progressed to the second round. A scoreless draw meant 
disappointment for France, who were eliminated on goal difference. They were 
compensated with the birth ofLa Garde Noire.

Like all good double acts, Trésor and Adams complemented each other. The 
former was regarded as the technical defender while Adams was noted for his 
athleticism.

While Trésor was born in Guadeloupe, Adams's sub-Saharan roots were something 
of a novelty in the France team of the time. Of course, France had seen other 
such "foreigners" turn out for its national team previously; the great ball 
juggler Larbi Ben Barek hailed from Morocco but won 17 caps, while Xercès Louis 
(12 caps in the mid-50s) and Daniel Charles-Alfred (four caps in the mid-60s) 
were both born in Martinique. And of course there were Just Fontaine, Rachid 
Mekhloufi and Mustapha Zitouni, who came from North Africa.

Adams was laying a pathway from west Africa to France for the likes of Marcel 
Desailly and Patrick Vieira to follow.

France may have been welcomed back from Brazil warmly but it was not until 
they met the USSR in a World Cup qualifying match that their new central 
defensive pairing really came of age. The Parisian venue had been something of a
bête noire for Adams in the past. He had lost two previous CFA finals at the 
ground, leading the press to dub it hisStade du Désespoir – Stadium of Despair.

A free-kick from Georges Bereta proved decisive for France but it was the 
performance from the centre-backs that was truly match winning. Franz 
Beckenbauer held the duo in particularly high regard, remarking to Onze: "Adams 
and Trésor have formed one of the best centre-back pairings in all of Europe."

Once again, however, injuries had a telling impact on Adams. His persistent 
troubles saw his partnership with Trésor broken up in 1975 and Adams never 
again turned out in France's blue.

Adams soon moved back north to the familiar surrounds of the Paris region. The 
ambitious PSG president Daniel Hechter had been seduced by him amid the club's 
first period of big spending. Hechter was a very astute businessman and played 
a key role in the early development of the club, lifting them from the amateur 
ranks to overtake Paris FC as the capital's primary power.

As the 29-year-old's experience at Nice had shown, big spending did not 
necessarily equate to big rewards and Adams' time in Paris was subdued, with 
two mid-table finishes before he was released from his contract, ending his 
time at the top level.

A brief and unsuccessful stay at Mulhouse followed before Adams took the 
decision to step into coaching.

Adams had elected to take the first stage of his coaching degree in Dijon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dijon>, which meant going on a week-long 
course in the Bourguignon town during the spring. On the third day, however, he 
suffered a knee problem and the following morning quit the course for a 
hospital in Lyon. An initial scan showed damage to a tendon at the back of the 
knee but a chance meeting with a surgeon en route to the exit proved critical. 
After a discussion, it was decided that the best course of action would be to 
operate. Adams agreed to an operation a matter of days later on 17 March.

"It's all fine, I'm in great shape," were his parting words to Bernadette as 
he left on the morning of the operation.

His wife was worried and only more so when it took three calls to the hospital 
before she was passed on to a doctor. "Come here now," she was told gravely.

Adams had slipped into a coma. Bernadette remained by his bedside for five 
days and five nights hoping for a change in his condition while the couple's 
two young boys, Laurent and Frédéric, were at home with their grandparents.

There had been a problem with Adams' supply of anaesthetic, which was 
exacerbated by the fact the anaesthetist was overseeing eight operations at 
once, including one particularly delicate procedure involving a child that got 
much of his attention. To complicate matters further, Adams was not on the 
correct type of bed, the drug used was known to be problematic and the 
operation was overseen by a trainee.

Adams has never woken.

It would be November before he was moved north to Chalon, where Bernadette was 
by his side on a daily basis. That did not prevent Adams from being neglected 
by the staff at his new institution. After finding an infected bed sore, 
Bernadette exploded with rage and, after her husband had undergone another 
operation as the infection had reached his bones, she sat with him 
continuously, still holding out hope he one day might wake.

When the hospital said they could no longer look after Adams, he was moved 
home. For Bernadette this was a great undertaking. She would sleep in the same 
room as her husband and get up in the middle of the night to turn him.
 Bernadette Adams, the wife of Jean-Pierre Adams, in 2005, left, and 
Jean-Pierre, Bernadette and their son Laurent in January 1972. Photos: 
Offside/L'Equipe. 
Bernadette had a house custom-built, which she named Mas du bel athléte dormant
 — the House of the Beautiful Sleeping Athlete. It had been a struggle to get a 
loan in place, however, as she had fallen into difficult financial 
circumstances.

Various bodies came forward to help, with Nîmes and PSG both offering 15,000 
francs, while the French football federation gave her F6,000 per week after an 
initial contribution of F25,000 in December 1982.

In addition, Adams's former clubs played charity matches. The Variétés Club de 
France, a charitable organisation still running today and backed by Platini, 
Zinedine Zidane and Jean-Pierre Papin, played a fixture in the comatose 
player's honour against a group of his footballing friends.

The media, meanwhile, kept his memory alive with glowing testimonies. "[Adams] 
was the prototype of a modern-day midfielder," wrote the journalist Victor 
Sinet. "He was always available, omnipresent and just as effective going 
forward as he was defending."

Meanwhile, the courts deliberated upon the case in a sluggish manner.

Pierre Huth, Adams's former doctor at PSG, led the case, which went on for 
seven years before the Seventh Chamber of Correctional Tribunal in Lyon found 
the doctors guilty of involuntary injury. It was only at that point that the 
family's dues could be calculated, yet four years later a definitive decision 
had still to be made.

Life, such as it is, continues for Bernadette and Jean-Pierre. Hospitals 
cannot commit staff to looking after Adams for long periods of time, which 
prevents his wife from taking holidays. Each day Jean-Pierre is washed and 
dressed by Bernadette, who maintains that her husband still has some cognitive 
function.

"Jean-Pierre feels, smells, hears, jumps when a dog barks. But he cannot see," 
his wife said in 2007.

Even after all these years she remains relentless in her support and love for 
her husband. "I have the feeling that time stopped on 17 March 1982," 
Bernadette explained in a discussion with Midi Libre in 2012. "There are no 
changes, either good or bad. While he does not need respiratory assistance, he 
remains in a vegetative state.

"Last year, we met a neurologist specialising in brain injury from Carémeau 
[the hospital in Nîmes] through an acquaintance. He ran his tests and 
examinations at the hospital, which confirmed very significant damage. There 
was a lot of damage in the brain. But he does not age, but for a few white 
hairs."

Despite confirming that her daily routine is "killing her", euthanasia is not 
an option she would consider. "It's unthinkable!" she said. "He cannot speak. 
And it's not for me to decide for him."

Jean-Pierre, whose son Laurent briefly followed in his footsteps by signing 
for Nîmes in 1996, is now a grandfather and has been introduced to all of his 
grandchildren. The rest of the world has moved on, but Adams lives on as a 
pioneer, whose unlikely journey to prosperity has been replicated by so many 
since he was sent from Senegal to France as a young boy.
 The Blizzard. Photograph: Guardian 
The Blizzard is a 190-page quarterly publication that allows the best football 
writers in the world the opportunity to write about the football stories that 
matter to them, with no limits and no editorial bias. All back issues are 
available on a pay-what-you-like basis in both print and digital formats from
www.theblizzard.co.uk <http://www.theblizzard.co.uk/>, with digital issues 
available from just 1p.
 