
The first time I met Louise Bourgeois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bourgeois> in Manhattan in the early 
1990s, I was really apprehensive. I was a youngish curator and she was the 
grande dame of the New York avant-garde art world. Her weekly salons were 
legendary. Artists, critics and curators would pay court, waiting to be cut 
down to size by her unhesitating and devilishly sharp criticism.

I arrived at the impossibly slender brownstone in Chelsea – all corridor and 
creaking stairs – and was led to her studio in the back of the house, where she 
sat. Her assistant switched on a tape recorder. I was unnerved from the start 
by this tiny sharp-eyed old lady behind her desk. The view into the yard was 
obscured by a tangle of creepers, making the room dusky. The studio was full of 
the memorabilia of a life in art: floor-to-ceiling bookshelves, a wall-to-wall 
pinboard opposite with posters fraying at the edges, a huge drawing of breasts 
or mountains, plenty of notes to self, scribbled phone numbers, photographs of 
loved ones.

Louise described herself proudly as being a ‘guerrilla fighter’, and that’s 
what she had to be

Louise sat with her back to the kitchen – I caught a glimpse of two gas 
burners tucked into an alcove with enamelware hanging above. We were surrounded 
by a miniature junkyard of artist’s materials and tools and by rows and rows of 
cassettes – evidence of past interviews. Louise’s hands were relentlessly 
occupied throughout, as she tooled away at some small object.

It wasn’t a comfortable conversation. Louise refused to answer questions about 
the influence of other artists on her work. I should have known better; many 
artists hate to be associated with others. Most of my questions were met with a 
“no”, some a “no, no” and one or two with “No, no, no, no, no, no, no!” Panic. 
Midway through the interview she got up and walked out, without explanation. I 
was left alone, not knowing what to do. Pack up and leave? A moment of time 
stilled. I don’t know where she went, nor why. After a while she reappeared. No 
explanation. We ploughed on.

We opened Tate Modern in 2000 with her massive installation in the Turbine 
Hall,I Do, I Undo, I Redo 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/unilever-series-louise-bourgeois-i-do-i-undo-i-redo>
, and in 2007 I curated a big show of her work. When Louise died in 2010, aged 
98, I found it hard to believe that there would be no more visits, no more 
moments of disabling panic and awe at her wisdom and intelligence.

I was asked to speak at her memorial in New York. It was daunting, but I felt 
privileged to do it. I dug out that old interview – I’m happy I hadn’t run away 
back then. It was quite brilliant: she’d given of her best. She described 
herself proudly as being “a guerrilla fighter” – her multiple “no’s” like 
blasts of gunfire – and that’s what Louise was, what she had to be: a lone 
female innovator hacking through the undergrowth of New York’s macho urban 
jungle.

The work of Louise Bourgeois can be seen at the Artist Rooms gallery of the 
new Tate Modern from 17 June (tate.org.uk <http://www.tate.org.uk/>)
 