
I had been a massive Nick Cave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave> 
fan since I was a student in Australia. Seeing him live in 2004, when I was 
about 18, changed the course of my life. It blew my mind how powerful and 
visceral he was on stage with the whole band, and especially withWarren Ellis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warren_Ellis_%28musician%29>. I’d never seen 
such commitment to performance that wasn’t contrived. It felt so natural, like 
they were really expressing the aggression and emotion in the music. I’d been 
playing in bands since I was 14, but that concert inspired me.

Later I moved to the US and joined Warpaint <http://warpaintwarpaint.com/> as 
their drummer, we were asked to support Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds for a 
number of dates on their 2014 tour. Although I was nervous and thrilled, I 
promised myself that if I met him, I wouldn’t go and talk to him. It was a pact 
I’d made with myself when we’d played a festival on the same stage as another 
of my idols, a rock icon from the same era. I’d said to him: “Great show, I 
love your stuff,” but he was an absolute c-word to me. I was disappointed 
because it felt like he had gone out of his way to be grumpy. I didn’t want to 
find out that Nick Cave was like that, too.

Before each show, the band would make fresh juice with a juicer Nick had in 
his room

The first gig of the tour was in Denver, and I arrived a little earlier than 
my bandmates to set up and see Nick and his band do their sound check. By the 
time they’d finished, I was hiding downstairs in our dressing room, with our 
tour manager, determined not to look like a fan-girl. But then I heard Nick in 
his loafers walking down the stairs to check if anyone was down there. He came 
in and introduced himself. “Oh, you’re the drummer, the Australian one. I’ve 
heard about you,” he said, which completely broke the ice. There was no 
mystique. I realised he was just an Australian guy, like people I knew at home, 
in a band, who really cares about what he does.

Nick might be known as the Prince of Darkness, but I was surprised and 
relieved at how sweet and talkative he was, and Warren, too. It made me realise 
that if a musical legend is at ease with their own talent, they can be warm and 
friendly, whereas those who struggle with their level of fame and feel 
pressured to live up to people’s expectations can be spikier.

We played six or seven shows together, but there wasn’t a party atmosphere on 
the tour. Quite the opposite, in fact. Those guys have been through every 
single imaginable experience with every single substance, so before and after 
each show, they’d just make fresh juice with a juicer Nick had in his room. I 
made him one once. I can’t remember what was in it, but we both agreed it 
wasn’t very nice – it tasted like sweet dirt.

One night, on stage, I spotted Nick’s unmistakable silhouette watching us in 
the crowd. And after the last show in LA, even though he probably knew a lot of 
people there, he took the time to thank us for playing with him. He turned to 
me and said: “You’re a wonderful drummer,” and I replied: “You’re a wonderful 
human being.” And I meant it – he really is. He has so much integrity, even 
though he’s been around so long. It made me think it’s possible not to be jaded 
and to commit to something for life.

Warpaint’s new album Heads Up is out on 23 September via Rough Trade Records 

 