
‘SOME PEOPLE ARE GAY. GET OVER IT.’ That slogan was posted on London buses in 
2012. It was aimed at some Christian groups who understood human sexuality not 
as a spectrum of many shades but as a stark choice between right and wrong, the 
permitted and the forbidden.

Many of us are prone to this kind of binary reductionism, but it is amplified 
and exaggerated by religion, because its favourite discourse is the 
adversarial. You are either for it or against it. There’s nothing in between.

Apart from anything else, this is a very boring way to look at the world. 
Louis MacNeice 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/louis-macneice> 
got it when he wrote: “World is crazier and more of it than we think / 
Incorrigibly plural.”

The tragedy here is not just the absurdity of trying to purge the world of its 
crazy variety, but in the pain and hurt it causes those who can’t or won’t 
force themselves on to our reductionist templates..

The latest collision between the glorious variety of humanity and the dreary 
compulsion to split it into opposing pairs is in our attitude to gender. Now we 
recognise that gender, like sexuality, is fluid and plural. And in some people 
it may never be permanently determined. It might even shift during a single 
lifetime. Humans are incorrigibly plural. If you’ve got a problem with that, 
it’s time you got over it.

Humans are incorrigibly plural. If you’ve got a problem with that, it’s time 
you got over it

It’s also time the leaders of faith communities, and their equally passionate 
opponents, realised that human approaches to religion are varied. There are 
those who are firmly in and those who are firmly out of religious institutions. 
There are those whose belief is strong and those whose unbelief is equally 
unyielding. And like the majority of the population whose gender and sexuality 
are clearly printed, they are the ones who claim to define the territory for 
the rest of us. But there are as many hues on the religious spectrum as there 
are on gender and sexuality. We should acknowledge that and come to a more 
generous and comprehensive understanding of this aspect of human experience.

There are those for whom religious observance is a way of guaranteeing 
comfortable accommodation in the life to come after death. Their gaze is mainly 
on the other world and how to get there. But for an increasing number of us 
life after death has no attractions and we doubt that it exists. It is life 
before death we want to concentrate our attention on.

Our religious energy has shifted from belief to action and from creed to 
compassion. And we find that listening to the wisdom of its wisest teachers 
helps us to do that. We think of ourselves as belongers rather than believers. 
But we don’t want to persuade believers out of belief any more than we want 
them to persuade us into it. What we want is to join them in making life better 
for everyone and let what happens after death take care of itself.

The gulf between us is not so wide. Those who believe in life after death warn 
that its quality depends on how we have lived in this life. Doing good while we 
are on our earth may secure us everlasting habitations in the world to come, 
but it will also leave this world a better place than when we entered it. And 
that is exactly what those of us with no interest in eternal life want, too. 
Our motives may vary but the result will be the same.

But in my experience if you take this approach to religion you get caught in a 
withering crossfire. Both the champions and despisers of religion attack you 
with equal fury. It’s that old binary game. You have to be one thing or the 
other, they yell. You cannot be both or anything in between. Well, tough. Some 
of us are. Get used to it.

A Little History of Religion, by Richard Holloway, is published by Yale at 
£14.99. Order a copy for £12.29 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/little-history-of-religion.html>
 