
I finally know what it must have felt like to be Nelson Mandela. Only without 
the decades of incarceration. Or the human rights abuses. OK, I have no idea 
what it felt like to be Nelson Mandela. But I am certainly getting a sense of 
what it feels like to be a fighter in a rag-tag rebel force whose cause has 
finally been recognised as virtuous. I am a one-time pariah who has been 
accepted back into the mainstream as a speaker of truth. I am the Luke 
Skywalker of food. Here's what's happened: after decades of conflict, of 
name-calling and bitterness and Gillian-bloody-McKeith and "lean" bacon – I 
mean, really! – the war on dietary fat is over. Fat, on whose behalf I fought 
so valiantly, is no longer the enemy. It is our friend. At last I may step out 
of the rhetorical forest and lay down my less than rhetorical steak knife.

We know the war on fat is over because recently Time magazine made it their 
cover story <http://time.com/2863227/ending-the-war-on-fat/>. 
Johnny-come-bloody-latelys. Oh yeah. You're smearing yourself in the stuff now. 
But where were you when those of us in the vanguard were up to our nipples in 
lard, wrestling with the nutritional naysayers? Where were you when I was 
scarfing six bags of pork scratchings in one sittingjust to make a point? In 
the low-fat aisle, smugly clutching tubs of low-fat "butter". That's where.

Exactly four years ago I wrote a column in this space extolling the virtues of 
fat. <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/18/jay-rayner-fat-foods>
 It's where the flavour is. I declared that, were my family forced to eat me 
due to the economic downturn I would at least make for a good dinner on account 
of the way my luscious arse is marbled. I dreamed about self-consumption. 
Sample below-the-line comments: "irresponsible article" and "I hope that Rayner 
enjoys his bypass operation" and "fat also lines your arteries so thanks, but 
no thanks".

Who's outraged now, eh? It turns out that much of what we had been told was 
wrong: that there are good and bad cholesterols, that they can cancel each 
other out, that the fats in dairy and red meat are almost as good for you as 
those in fish. And anyway, it's sugar that kills.

As fats came out of food, so the sugars went in. Between 1980 and 2011 
diabetes levels in the US rose 157% as the population followed government 
advice and went face down in the carbs. Which not only gave us more calories, 
but also slowed down our metabolism and made us feel hungry. Last autumn Sweden 
became the first developed nation to issue health advice rejecting low-fat 
high-carb dogma. And as the Swedes are basically cooler than everyone at 
everything ever and always right, arguing is pointless.

In the end, of course, it all comes back to the same thing: the pathologising 
of our dinner time. You can only fight wars over what you eat if people are 
willing to take sides. I recognise that I am as guilty of this as anyone. But 
then I've had little choice. So much pseudo-medicine is spouted about 
nutrition, usually as a cover for picky eating, that not rolling up your 
sleeves and wading in requires a self-restraint I simply do not have. Then 
again, you probably know that self-restraint and I have never been the best of 
friends. Now leave me in peace. There's a fat-ballasted rib eye which needs my 
attention. I regard it as the spoils of war, valiantly won. It shall be mine.

jay.rayner@observer.co.uk
 