
I was an art history student in the late 70s and my tutor, seemingly immune to 
feminist discussions going on elsewhere, said if I insisted on writing on a 
20th-century female artist I had to choose betweenGeorgia O’Keeffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/01/georgia-okeeffe-tate-modern-exhibition-wild-beauty>
 and Barbara Hepworth.

Hepworth had recently died, and I was convinced I had to meet the artist if my 
dissertation was to have any significance. So I wrote to O’Keeffe twice. She 
didn’t reply. After exhausting the references available in England I travelled 
to America.

People were generous with their time, though no one could introduce me to Miss 
O’Keeffe, as they called her. So I flew into Albuquerque and hired a car. In 
Britain the horizon is usually softly misted, but in New Mexico the line 
between the red desert hills and the sky was crystalline, just like in an 
O’Keeffe painting.

I chatted to locals in bars, and finally a man told me where to find her, in a 
small village called Abiquiú.

In New Mexico the line between the red desert hills and the sky was 
crystalline, just like in an O’Keeffe painting

I had been told it would be hard to meet O’Keeffe because she was closely 
protected by her assistant and companion, Juan Hamilton. I approached her 
house, which rose on an incline from the road and had a view, and was 
confronted by Juan, a tall, good-looking young man.

“I’m a student of Miss O’Keeffe’s work. I’ve written to her in the hope of an 
interview,” I said. Hamilton rebuffed me. “I’ve come all the way from England,” 
I pleaded with no luck. Looking back, this was perhaps not the best tactic. 
Americans loved her because she was “all American”, untainted by European art.

The next day I attempted to find Ghost Ranch, O’Keeffe’s summer house, 
instead. It was isolated and locked, but through the holes in the wooden doors 
I saw the pink patio pavings and the dark rectangles of her 50s organic 
minimalist paintings.

Boosted by the experience, I returned to her house, and Juan answered my knock 
with: “She’s ill today.” I sat on a post outside, brushing my boots through the 
dust, and eventually saw her walking home with her two dogs along a ridge.

I waited another hour and knocked again. I had brought her a black iris bulb 
from Harrods, a reference to her famous painting. Juan did not even register 
this joking gesture, but he let me in through an arch cut into an old wooden 
door.

Scrambling to find my paper with its list of questions, I was led into a room 
with a huge window looking out on to the landscape. In front of it sat 
O’Keeffe. I could hardly see her against the bright light, which only caught 
the edge of her white collar, a silver brooch and her grey hair slightly 
ruffled from her walk.

I introduced myself and my purpose, and mentioned the iris bulb. Did I see a 
glimmer of amusement in her eyes? I spoke of enjoying her work, asked a few 
questions and paused.

She said nothing; just turned over some pebbles in her hand. Juan eventually 
showed me out, repeating that Miss O’Keeffe was not well today. In a daze, I 
drove through the blur of my tears.

However, in the end the trip had one good outcome. My dissertation was 
accepted and passed.

Georgia O’Keeffe is at Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/01/georgia-okeeffe-show-at-tate-modern-to-challenge-outdated-views-of-artist>
 to 30 October
 