
I was working as a typist in Churchill’s underground bunker 
<http://www.iwm.org.uk/visits/churchill-war-rooms> when the war ended. 
Churchill was always jolly and affable. One night he’d invited me and the other 
staff to watch a film with him, and we were waiting in the bunker, tired after 
our shift. All of a sudden, the door burst open and there he was in his pyjamas 
and dressing gown, whisky in one hand and a cigar in the other, shouting: 
“Winnie’s here! Let it roll!”

In July 1945, I was one of only six secretarial staff to accompany Churchill 
and his team to thePotsdam Conference in Berlin 
<http://www.history.com/topics/world-war-ii/potsdam-conference>. I was only 
around 18 and there had been a shutdown of communication during the war so, to 
me,Joseph Stalin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/joseph-stalin> was simply 
the leader of Russia, like Truman was the leader of the United States. When we 
talked about Stalin, we’d use the Allies’ nickname for him, “Uncle Joe”.

We were flown out from Northolt in small military planes, wearing Mae West 
life jackets and sitting on uncomfortable chairs that I’m not sure were even 
connected to the floor. We landed in the Russian zone of Berlin, where we had 
to keep around five different passes on us.

You couldn’t mistake Stalin. He always wore uniform and had this enormous 
moustache

Berlin was decimated. I don’t know why it made such an impression on me, as 
we’d had dreadful bombing in London, but I was amazed to find the city 
absolutely flat, with rubble everywhere. The British, American and Russian 
delegations were staying in these beautiful houses – apparently the occupants 
had been given just 30 minutes to get out, so there was knitting on the floor 
and children’s toys everywhere.

Of the three leaders, Stalin stood out to me the most. Truman was quite a 
short man and didn’t take the limelight, but Stalin you couldn’t mistake. He 
always wore uniform and had an enormous moustache. He used to go past in his 
car, heavily armed.

We didn’t see a great deal of the leaders, as we were working so hard all day 
preparing documents for their secret meetings atCecilienhof Palace 
<http://www.potsdam-tourism.com/detail/id/10219/theme/a-z.html>. Apparently, 
Stalin insisted that each of the heads of state entered the room by a different 
entrance, and Churchill was made to go downstairs, outside and round the house. 
I can’t imagine him taking kindly to that, but Stalin had the upper hand, I’m 
afraid.

During the conference, there were echelons of people and we, the secretarial 
staff, were at the very bottom. But every now and again we were invited to some 
of the more formal events. I remember at one, the three leaders were standing 
in a line, heavily flanked. Truman didn’t wear uniform, so was in a suit, and 
Churchill was in his sort-of uniform, a lightweight thing soldiers might wear 
in the desert. But Stalin was a formidable presence. He stood out in his 
military jacket as I lined up to shake his hand.

I can’t remember much about that moment, but I know I kept quiet about it for 
a long time, as I thought it wasn’t a very good thing to say I’d shaken hands 
with Stalin. It was really just because he was there.

In the end, Russia were very demanding allies. Churchill was livid, because 
Stalin asked for so much – food, military equipment, other supplies – and he 
wanted it all straightaway.

‘Undercover: Life in Churchill’s Bunker’ has just reopened at the Churchill 
War Rooms (iwm.org.uk <http://www.iwm.org.uk/visits/churchill-war-rooms>)
 