
It’s early in the morning and still dark outside. Your heart rate has dropped 
to a single beat per second and your blood pressure is the lowest it will be 
for the next 16 hours. Your respiration has fallen to 12 breaths a minute, 
while your blood glucose is at rock bottom. Despite the ingenious physiology 
remorselessly at work in all your organs, you sleep on, oblivious. In this 
state, your brain and body are preventing entry to a private inner universe 
that poses one of the biggest challenges in science – but any minute now, when 
the alarm buzzes, this special place will be all yours, exclusively.

However close you are to someone, however articulate, poetic, musical or 
compassionate you are, you will never, ever, be able to share your direct 
subjective experience with anyone else. But right now, for just a little 
longer, you are unconscious – “dead to the world”.

Without consciousness, life would indeed be pretty much the same as death. The 
conscious condition makes life worth living. But what is it, this 
insubstantial, intangible inner…what, exactly? Across the centuries, our 
predecessors have struggled to define and understand how to grapple with what 
is so intellectually elusive yet so familiar that we take it for granted day 
after day. Over the past 40 or 50 years, the issue has been thrown into ever 
sharper focus with the ascendance of neuroscience and the massive increase in 
our knowledge of the brain. But with this wealth of insight the problem becomes 
ever more glaring. How can your individual, subjective experience, within your 
physical brain, be translated into squirts of chemicals and electrical blips, 
and vice versa? What would prove definitive insight into consciousness?

However close you are to someone, you will never ever share your direct 
subjective experience

Perhaps the answer can be discovered in a brain scan. Or will the experience 
be pinned down in a mathematical formula? These “solutions” would never account 
for how objectively observable events turn into the first-hand feeling of a 
private experience. Somehow, a subjective perspective is generated – we could 
almost say “conjured up” – but no one has been able to explain how this 
apparent miracle takes place.

This tension between the objective and the subjective has seemed insoluble 
ever since the great philosopherRené Descartes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/13/my-hero-rene-descartes-kelman> 
first raised it in the 17th century, when he chose to segregate a conscious 
mind from the biological brain. This conceptual chasm is tough to cross. When 
we describe a human being, or any animal, as having “perceptual experiences” or 
“conscious states”, we are talking about some of the most basic features which 
distinguish living from non-living things. A stone is not “about” anything and 
neither does it have subjective properties, but a perception is “about” what is 
seen (or experienced), such as what it is like to see the colour red.

These features are obvious to us from our first-person view, but when we shift 
perspective to the third-person stance of objective science we find ourselves 
in difficulty. We can speak of brain states, which may be reduced to neurons 
sparking and pulsing out chemicals, but it is hard to see how this 
neurobiological maelstrom relates to the features of consciousness that are so 
apparent in everyday experience – the taste of chocolate melting slowly in your 
mouth, the sunshine on your face, the sound of crashing waves. Small wonder 
that the black night outside your bedroom window is as nothing compared to the 
intellectual darkness that gives rise to this conceptual impasse.

A Day in the Life of the Brain by Susan Greenfield is published by Allen Lane 
at £20. To order a copy for £16.40, go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/day-in-the-life-of-the-brain.html>
 