
This is an article from Issue Fifteen of the Blizzard. The Blizzard is a 
quarterly football journal available fromwww.theblizzard.co.uk 
<https://www.theblizzard.co.uk/> on a pay-what-you-like basis in print and 
digital formats.

During the 2004-05 season, Adam Boyd mesmerised League One defences so 
thoroughly you’d think he had only to click his fingers to make them strip 
naked and quack like ducks. As the striker’s goal tally mounted, hisHartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> United team-mates started to 
call him Dennis Bergkamp.

Up in the seats of the Mill House Paddock, my mate Ed cackled with delight as 
Boyd sashayed past defenders, hips wiggling like some old-school gigolo. 
“Boydy,” he laughed madly, as the forward smacked a volley into the stanchion 
of goal, “Boydy is what Van Basten would be like, if he’d been a Poolie.”

Like many English people, Ed sees the Dutch as cultured, sophisticated and 
restrained. These are not traits always associated with the north-east of 
England. And even within the north-east, Hartlepool is viewed as a place apart. 
You know your town is rough when people from Middlesbrough look down their 
noses at it, and we do.

Adam Boyd was born and raised in Hartlepool. He watched Pools from the 
terraces. When – or so we imagined – Marco van Basten was visiting art 
galleries, eating steamed greens and discussing the boundaries of freedom, 
Boydy was downing pints and going to grab-a-granny nights in clubs with 
two-for-one offers on blue Bacardi Breezers and fights in the car park.

Boyd made his Hartlepool debut as a teenager, coming off the bench to score 
against Shrewsbury. He was hailed as a prodigy, then struggled to make an 
impact – 15 goals in four seasons, a loan spell at Boston United that added 
little to his value and several inches to his waistband.

The Pools boss Neale Cooper told the local press that Boyd was overly fond of 
pies. The Poolies laughed and said that, oh aye, sometimes on Saturday nights 
Boydy had so many pies he could barely stand up from the weight of all the 
gravy. It was not the sort of thing the Milanese said of Marco.

Adam Boyd was six foot two, with long, black hair, a sunbed tan and a twinkle 
in his eye. I didn’t think he was a League One Bergkamp or an East Durham Van 
Basten, I knew he was the Frank Worthington of the 21st century – a view that 
was re-enforced when the tabloids reported the Pools forward fled semi-naked 
across a “posh estate” after the ex-boyfriend of the woman he was in bed with 
turned up drunk from a stag night and attacked him.

I’d seen Worthington play for Huddersfield Town when I was eight – a night 
match at Ayresome Park, the Terriers on their way to claiming the Division Two 
title. In the Bob End behind the goal, my grandfather and his coevals, incensed 
by all modernity, railed against the visitors’ No9: “Get your bloody hair cut, 
you big pansy, you look like a ruddy girl.” I did not hear them, nor did I care 
when Worthington tucked away the penalty that won the match and, smiling 
broadly, waved in our direction. I was wide-eyed, smitten. It was a rare 
encounter with charisma.

In the summer of 2004 Boyd shed nine pounds, linked up with Joel Porter, and 
started to find the net with regularity. Pools ascended. Word spread. 
Middlesbrough and Sunderland sent scouts to the Victoria Ground, Newcastle and 
Liverpool too. There was talk of a £1m price tag. Boyd was 23. He had 
Worthington’s small-town lothario swagger, his flicks and tricks and his 
bravado. They shared something else too. Or rather they shared a lack of it: 
pace. In the 1970s that didn’t matter quite so much as it did in this 
millennium. There was little doubt in my mind that had Boyd been able to cover 
10 yards even a split-second faster than a fully-laden brewery dray, he’d 
become very famous indeed. In possession Boyd was elegant, devastating, but he 
ran as if his knees were welded, leaning backwards like a nervous child on a 
skateboard. The big clubs looked. They shook their heads.

Boyd was unlucky. He hit 29 goals in 2004-05. Pools made the play-offs but 
lost in the final in front of nearly 60,000. Boyd had offers but, “sucked in by 
the excitement” of Pools’ promotion push, determined to stay. Early the next 
season he injured a knee in a collision with the Yeovil keeper. The knee joint 
became infected, the blood poisoning so bad he nearly died. He missed five 
months. He lost confidence. A spark went out of him.

A £500,000 move to Luton Town, then in the Championship, ended with a single 
goal, relegation and release. He joined Leyton Orient, scored on his debut, and 
stayed for two listless seasons. He drifted back to Victoria Park where the 
occasional flash of brilliance served only to remind watchers of what had gone, 
and the impatient old men who fill the terraces of lower league grounds 
bellowing “show some passion, you lazy get” at any player who does not 
literally bleed for the team, were driven to frothing fury by his languid grace.

Hartlepool released him without ceremony at the end of the 2011-12 season. I 
thought then of a Friday night seven years before. Ed and I drove through 
pouring rain from Tynedale to Victoria Park in his vintage camper van. Buffeted 
by the wind, we aquaplaned on the A19 and nearly died by Easington services. 
The game was against Sheffield Wednesday, a key moment in Pools’ promotion 
battle. We arrived 10 minutes before the start, hysterical from cold, terror 
and anticipation; dizzy from the sugar rush of all the Haribo Tangfastics we’d 
chewed.

The pitch was waterlogged. Great puddles lay across it, shimmering beneath the 
floodlights. The rain kept on falling, remorseless as if Hemingway himself had 
written it. Twenty-one footballers struggled to stay upright. The other one was 
Adam Boyd. He not only kept his footing, he waltzed across the sodden surface. 
He struck a hat-trick, each goal better than the last. For the third, Boyd 
collected a pass on the edge of the Owls’ penalty area, drifted to the right, 
stopped dead to send the pursuing Wednesday full-back splashing. He faked to 
shoot and watched another opponent slide past engulfed in spray. He looked up 
then, and seeing David Lucas marginally off his line,toe-ended a chip so 
delicate it ran down the back netting of the goal soundlessly 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yBT17GItIrU>, soft as a playboy’s fingers 
along a showgirl’s spine.

There was collective release of breath. The man beside us in the Mill House 
Paddock tilted back his head and bayed in incoherent joy, his Burberry baseball 
cap blown off by the force of it. The Poolies yelled and sang and smashed their 
fists against the corrugated iron at the back of the stand until it rocked your 
fillings loose.

I have watched the goal twice since on YouTube and never will again. To replay 
the video highlights of our lives over and over, each time another drop of the 
joy and surprise drained from them, is a besetting vice of our age. To see a 
thing like that unfold before your eyes is a thrill you never can recapture.

Adam Boyd is now 32 years old. He turns out sporadically in the Northern 
League and, though he appears unnaturally pale and just a little jowly, can 
still bring smiles with a volley, a back-heel, a drop-shouldered shimmy – a 
little bit of wonder in the fading winter light.
 The Blizzard Photograph: The Blizzard 
The Blizzard is a 190-page quarterly publication that allows the best football 
writers in the world the opportunity to write about the football stories that 
matter to them, with no limits and no editorial bias. All back issues are 
available on a pay-what-you-like basis in both print and digital formats from
www.theblizzard.co.uk <https://www.theblizzard.co.uk/>, with digital issues 
available from just 1p.
 