
Being a journalist married to a diplomat has meant I’ve had more than my fair 
share of encounters with interesting people. I have danced with a president, 
shaken hands with prime ministers, princes and a pope, and chatted to Gregory 
Peck and Mother Teresa – but none of them would remember me. With the 
photographerDavid Bailey <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/david-bailey>
, though, I had more than a brush. We had a friendship back in the 60s when I 
became young fashion editor of theSunday Times. I was 21, Bailey (as we always 
called him) was 23.

In fact I’d first met him before that, when he was an assistant to the 
legendary photographer John French. I came from a middle-class family, was 
educated at convents, only knew young men in cavalry twill and tweed, and had 
never met anyone like this leather-jacketed, confident, cocky Londoner. I was 
petrified of him. But when I found myself having to produce a weekly Young 
Fashion column, familiarity bred friendship and I worked with him andJean 
Shrimpton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/apr/30/saturday-interview-jean-shrimpton>
, who was his girlfriend then, all the time.

It was so simple in those days. I chose the clothes – two or three garments to 
illustrate my “story” – and took them to the studio. Jean did her own hair and 
make-up and usually wore her own shoes. Bailey took the photographs – it was 
all very laid-back and undramatic. We’d never heard of celebs and for us, of 
course, “the 60s” were just the 60s.

Our biggest job together was Bailey’s first coverage of the Paris collections 
for theSunday Times colour supplement (it was not called a magazine for fear of 
upsetting “real” magazine unions). Jean, Bailey and I found ourselves in the 
gardens of Versailles early one freezing January morning photographing my boss 
Ernestine Carter’s choice of clothes from the collections. Jean had to change 
into the various elaborate couture outfits behind a bush and was blue with 
cold. The day before, Bailey’s camera had broken and he’d had to borrow one 
from another photographer. It was stressful, but when the pictures appeared in 
the magazine you wouldn’t have known there’d been a moment’s difficulty.

Later I asked Bailey to take my own portrait for a book I had written on 
Christian Dior. I hate having my photograph taken and felt – and obviously 
looked – nervous, so at one point Bailey threatened to unzip his flies. This 
didn’t make me relax exactly – it made me scream. Now, 50 years later, I have 
been looking at my face in those pictures to see if I can tell at which point 
this happened.

One day I saw Diana Vreeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/diana-vreeland>, the great editor of US 
Vogue, kiss Bailey’s hand and I knew he would fly so high that our cosy weekly 
meetings could not last. And so it was, but I have only happy memories of that 
long ago time in my life when Bailey and Jean and I worked together.


Full Marks for Trying by Brigid Keenan is published by Bloomsbury at £16.99, 
or £13.40 frombookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406847/>
 