
It was the late 70s, and I was dancing with a revue in Surfers Paradise, 
Australia <http://www.surfersparadise.com/>. The show was modelled on those at 
the Lido and Moulin Rouge in Paris. Topless girls, feather plumes and jazzy 
choreography. I’d been in Australia for a couple of years, initially with a 
ballet company, and this was a change of pace. I was having a good time.

One day, a bunch of surfers hit town. There was a big contest up the coast and 
some of them came to see the show. Afterwards, they came to a party at the 
apartment block at the place where we lived. One of them, word went round, was 
taken with Amanda, a lead dancer.

Abellira had a distinctive stance, very low over the board, carving his turns 
with streamlined precision

When the surfers arrived, I stared. The guy who fancied Amanda was not some 
local hotshot, it wasReno Abellira <http://renoabellira.com/>, one of the most 
stylish wave riders in the world. I’d seen him on film, inscribing long, 
flowing lines on the Hawaiian North Shore. He had a distinctive stance, very 
low over his board, carving his turns with streamlined precision. And he was 
brave. Four years earlier, in what some still consider the greatest big-wave 
contest ever, he had won theSmirnoff Pro on a thunderous day at Waimea Bay 
<http://www.surfline.com/surf-news/great-moments-in-surfing-history-reno-abellira-wins-the-1974-smirnoff-pro-1_112610/>
,charging down the near-vertical face of a 30-footer 
<https://vimeo.com/63131845> to snatch the victory from fellow Hawaiian Jeff 
Hakman.

And here he was, on a sweltering night in Queensland, surrounded by thirsty, 
excitable dancers. Amanda was slim as a willow wand, with red hair cascading 
down her back. A few years later, she would be principal dancer at the Lido in 
Paris. Reno was all muscle, with a down-turned 70s moustache and skin tanned 
the colour of Pacific mahogany. He was a handsome guy and a surf god, but this 
cut no ice with Amanda. She was lovely, with a wicked sense of humour, but when 
the occasion demanded she could summon a cool ballerina hauteur. She was polite 
to Reno, but that’s as far as it went.

Seeing Reno standing alone, I joined him. I asked him what it felt like to 
drop into a giant wave like those at Sunset and Waimea, and he told me you felt 
the fear, but did it anyway. As we talked his eyes followed Amanda, who was 
prowling around the apartment like a restless jaguar. “I don’t think she’s 
interested,” he said, with the ghost of a smile. “Hang in there,” I told him, 
but it wasn’t long before he left.

The next day Amanda and I were warming up before the show. “I think I’ve made 
a mistake,” she told me. “I really, really liked Reno.” But the surf tour had 
moved on.
 