
Kolkata is a cultural and intellectual hub, buzzing with Ambassador taxis, the 
hum of street food vendors offering piping hot food and the sound of customers 
crunching onpani puri, hollow fried crisp balls filled with a spicy liquor (pani
), tamarind chutney, chilli, potato, onion and chickpeas. There is an abundance 
of street food available in Kolkata, especially at hubs such as Dacres Lane. 
Here my wife and I have tried every snack you can think of, from traditional 
Bengalighugni (dried white peas mixed with tamarind, chillies and jaggery) to 
Bengal’s take on Chinese chow mien.

10 of the best restaurants and street food snacks in Goa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/03/10-best-restaurants-street-food-snacks-goa-india>
Mutton, or mangsher, chop is one of the more popular legacies of the colonial 
era – a moreish, moist mutton filling encased in a crispy, deep-fried shell 
served steaming hot with spicy chutney. Originating from the dining tables of 
the imperial clubs, it made its way to the street and is now one of the little 
pleasures of everyday life in Kolkata. We used to save up our pocket money as 
kids to buy them, fought over the last few in the school canteen, and queued up 
for them on lunch break at work.

Indian Coffee House, on Bankim Chatterjee Street in the College Street area, 
was a favourite university hangout: we’d pile in after lectures to eat steaming 
chops and share our latest tales. Round the corner on Surya Sen Street, Kalika 
Mukhorochok Telebhaja was another favourite. It’s almost 50 years old and 
serves some of the best chops in Kolkata, with queues often stretching down the 
road. But mutton chop is so loved in Kolkata that it can be found at vendors 
across the city. Other popular street food hubs are: Netaji Subhas Road in the 
administrative quarter; New Market, the sprawl of stalls and street food 
vendors east of Chowringhee Road; and Vivekananda Park in the south of the city.
• Gunpowder (gunpowderlondon.com <http://gunpowderlondon.com/>), 11 White’s 
Row, Spitalfields, London, 020 7426 0542
 