
My wife Teddy and I had a luxury leather-tanning business – we were one of the 
first to tan crocodiles, lizards and snakes. One day in 1957 I was calling on 
one of our most important customers,I Miller 
<http://www.jta.org/1929/08/15/archive/i-miller-shoe-manufacturer-dies> shoes. 
They had offices in the Empire State Building.

I was waiting in a darkened hallway when a very peculiar-looking man walked in 
and joined me. He had a white face, hair that was the brightest white – it just 
didn’t belong on a human being. His suit looked like it had been pressed under 
his bed overnight, his shoes were paint-splattered with all the colours of the 
rainbow. And he was holding a portfolio. Now, I’m a big man – 6ft 6in – and I 
was scared. But I also remember thinking that this man was very uncomfortable 
in his own skin, and painfully shy.

In the meeting Andy opened his portfolio to reveal the most extraordinary 
snakeskin shoe designs. As soon as I could, I said, “Andy, my wife Teddy and I 
are looking for someone to come work for us. Someone who’s got zoom.” He told 
me he’d been looking for a full-time job in New York, so he came back to our 
offices a few blocks over and shocked our receptionist with his appearance. He 
and Teddy immediately took a huge liking to one another. Teddy was very 
motherly to him, which I think he liked.

He worked quickly – anything we asked for, he’d turn around overnight. He had 
an innate understanding of everything. He was just incredibly gifted – a genius 
– and I can say that as someone who worked with him years before he was famous.

I also remember thinking that this man was very uncomfortable in his own skin, 
and painfully shy

One evening the three of us were working late. Andy looked up and said, “I 
would like to do your portrait,” so we headed to a photobooth and had our 
pictures taken. He kept pumping the machine full of quarters and telling us 
what to do. Later, I made the one major mistake of my association with Andy: I 
asked him how much a portrait would cost. Without missing a beat he said, “This 
is my art. I would have to get $2,500.” Back then $2,500 was a little 
unattainable for Teddy and me, so we never had the portrait done, but we still 
have the pictures from the photobooth.

Andy worked with us until 1965, but then left as he was getting into film. 
We’d see him around at restaurants and he’d greet us with such warmth. He came 
to our house in Greenwich Village when we threw a party for the designerRoger 
Vivier <http://www.rogervivier.com/en-gb/>, who was over from Paris. Andy took 
a lot of pictures of our guests that night. He even asked if Roger would appear 
in one of his films, naked. He was always extraordinary, and he was always 
going to be Andy Warhol.

The Autobiography of a Snake: Drawings by Andy Warhol is published by Thames & 
Hudson on 22 September at £14.95. To buy a copy for £12.26 go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/autobiography-of-a-snake.html> 
 