
Paul Drayson says he doesn't miss the noise. After years of being deafened by 
the scream of racing engines, he's found a new addiction. It's the near-silent 
combination of the whirr of a high-performance electric motor, the whoosh of 
the air flowing over bodywork, and the hiss of slick tyres on tarmac. "The 
sound of the future," he calls it.

Best of all, he says, is the thrust of seamless acceleration that could be 
observed this week as the little green car, powered by its 
lithium-nanophosphate batteries, hurtled past 200mph along the two-mile tarmac 
runway of an old second world war bomber base in North Yorkshire. That's as 
fast as theFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> cars of 
Sebastian Vettel, Lewis Hamilton and the rest will be travelling this weekend, 
making a great deal more noise as they lap Silverstone while using, of course, 
rather more of the earth's finite resources in the process.

By contrast with the tens of thousands who will turn up to watch 
Sunday'spetrol-fuelled British Grand Prix, only a few dozen people were on hand 
to witness history being made at the former RAF Elvington as the silver-haired 
53-year-old driver – better known as Lord Drayson, the businessman who served 
as a science and defence procurement minister under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown 
– emerged from his car having set a world land speed record for an electrically 
powered vehicle. After two runs of a measured mile, one in each direction 
within the space of an hour, the timekeepers announced that he had achieved an 
average speed of just over 204mph, beating the old record, set all the way back 
in 1974, by almost 30mph.

But this was not a record set for its own sake, in the style of British heroes 
such as George Eyston, Malcolm Campbell and John Cobb. It was a demonstration 
of a technology that is slowly keeping its promise to revolutionise the way we 
travel. And for the first time in half a century, motor sport seems to be 
showing itself capable of making a significant contribution towards 
accelerating the development of that technology.

"I really think that the changes that are taking place in the car industry 
need to be reflected in motor sport," Drayson said shortly before setting off 
on his record-breaking run.

"We're seeing this huge shift to the electric drivetrain in the mainstream 
industry, so motor sport has got to pioneer this technology, too. It's got to 
lead on the innovations and help reset people's expectations about what an 
electric car can do."

At Le Mans last weekend, Audi held off the challenge of Toyota in a battle 
between two teams of cars using hybrid technology incorporating additional 
electric power sources charged by energy-recovery systems. Next year will see 
Nissan entering their all-electric ZEOD car in the 24-hour race; its dramatic 
dart-shaped bodywork will carry the number 56, dedicated at Le Mans to 
experimental vehicles by race organisers who recognise that their historic 
event was originally devised not just as a contest of speed but as a means of 
showcasing and developing automobile technology.

Electric power is catching on in all sorts of motor-sport arenas. On Sunday at 
Pikes Peak in Colorado, the world's most celebrated hill climb, a specially 
built Toyota in the hands of Rod Millen will attempt to defend the title the 
company captured last year, its performance unaffected by the loss of power 
that slows air-breathing internal combustion engines in the thinning atmosphere 
as they approach the 14,000ft summit. Last month Mercedes-Benz sent their SLS, 
an all-electric version of their top-of-the-range sports car, to lap the 
Nürburgring's legendary 14-mile Nordschleife circuit in a record 7min 56sec.

Single-seater racing is the next target, and in just over a year's time the 
streets of London are scheduled to host the first race in a new international 
championship called Formula E, to be contested on city-centre circuits by 
140mph electric racers built with technical assistance from Renault, McLaren 
and Drayson. For once in motor sport, the E stands not for Ecclestone but for 
Environment.

The car with which Drayson broke the land speed record this week mates the 
Lola sports-prototype chassis he raced at Le Mans in 2010 – when it was powered 
by a conventional V8 engine – with a brand new electric powertrain built by his 
own company in Oxford. It has no gearbox and no mechanical differential, with 
computer software controlling the relative speeds of the rear wheels.

But if electric power is no longer restricted to those little urban runabouts, 
there are many problems to be overcome before the general public accepts its 
viability. Nissan is struggling to get its Leaf hatchback to achieve a basic 
range of 100 miles, and customers are issued with a list of warnings on how to 
preserve battery life. Problems with range, recharge times and the cost of 
battery packs are said to be behind Audi's decision last month not to put an 
electric version of the R8 sports car on sale. Jaguar also informed Sir Frank 
Williams that his company's help would no longer be needed in the development 
of their C-X75, a hybrid supercar, having abandoned a plan to sell 250 examples 
at £1m each.

These are issues that racing can help to solve, as motor sport once 
accelerated the development of concepts and components now taken for granted. 
Drayson's record-breaker is also a test-bed for Qualcomm's wireless recharging 
system, through which batteries could be replenished while a racing car is 
lapping a track; eventually it could eliminate the need for drivers of electric 
road cars to plug their vehicles into recharging points.

Inevitably, the Silverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> 
paddock is full of sceptics willing to bet that Formula E will never leave the 
starting grid. Electric power, they believe, belongs to urban transportation 
and has no place in top-line motor racing. But when McLaren were launching 
their 2013 grand prix machine back in January, the presentation at their Woking 
headquarters included the unveiling of their new road car, the P1, which 
growled up to the audience of VIPs and journalists under the power of its 
twin-turbo V8 internal combustion engine before switching to its electric motor 
as the factory test driver backed it into a parking space. For a bunch of 
petrolheads, the spectacle of a 220mph supercar moving in absolute silence 
provided a stunning moment of cognitive dissonance. The P1 can actually run at 
99mph under electric power alone – but for a distance of no more than 12 miles 
at even half that speed.

According to Drayson, Britain's pre-eminence in grand prix engineering is 
matched by its expertise in electric car technology. It might be hard to argue 
that 200mph record runs and 220mph supercars deserve a place in a more 
environmentally secure world, but how powerful a public relations move it would 
be if all those Formula One super-brains – top designer-engineers such as Red 
Bull's Adrian Newey and Ross Brawn of Mercedes – could be made to devote, say, 
just half their time to their existing jobs and the other half to doing 
something socially beneficial, like devising solutions to the issues facing a 
technology that, as well as making batteries last longer, could help prolong 
the useful life of the planet.
 