
As a girl I wasn’t mad about boys or ponies. I was mad about the Mitfords 
<http://www.nancymitford.com/>. I read everything I could lay my hands on – 
from Nancy’s novels to Decca’s letters and even a whole biography of the Nazi 
sister, Unity. My favourite was Debo, the most charming of the litter, who had 
the advantage of being the last, and therefore alive, when I was made ninth 
editor ofThe Lady <http://www.lady.co.uk/> magazine.

Being addicted to the Mitfords, this was like a dose of crack to a junkie: the 
Mitford sisters’ grandfather founded the title. Debo was in her 90s, but I saw 
the signing of the century in prospect. I lost no time in proposing a column 
for Debo by telephone and travelled north to Chesterfield to persuade her on 
board the Ladyship in person.

I felt sick with nerves on the train as – along with Jilly Cooper and the 
Queen – to me Debo was the greatest living Englishwoman. I had stupidly bought 
a bouquet – coals to Newcastle – and to her credit Her Grace’s face didn’t fall 
as she welcomed me into the flower-filled hall, painted billiard-table bright 
green, dotted about with Elvis memorabilia.

After nose-powdering and pleasantries, we repaired to a dining room where a 
small table had been laid for two and to my great surprise the Dowager Duchess 
put away three courses – the pudding was a tangy blackcurrant crumble – and 
then Henry, her devoted butler, brought in cheese. When I declined the cheese 
board Debo looked as if I’d failed a vital test.

When I declined the cheese board Debo looked as if I’d failed a vital test

Conversation ranged over family, books, Chatsworth, The Lady, her other family 
“title”. Though ancient and almost blind (she told me: “Your face to me is a 
sponge”), she ran rings round me. She was dry, beautiful, elegant, unsnobbish, 
unwearied – the living and breathing opposite of dull.

We moved to sit by a crackling fire in the drawing room and there I popped the 
question. Would she beThe Lady’s agony aunt? Her eyes flickered. “The Mitfords 
have had so much agony in the world,” she replied.

As a diversion, she asked me if I would like to see the hens. She put on a 
hi-vis jacket and cheap wellies and we wandered out on to the sunlit grass 
holding buckets of grain and I had one of those moments: here I was, feeding 
the hens with Deborah, Dowager Duchess of Devonshire. I felt I could die happy.

But it turned out that she saved the best until last. Before I left, she asked 
me if I wanted to use her own bathroom upstairs, a light-filled room where the 
toiletries were covered with monogrammed napkins.

What can I say? The last of the Mitford sisters is now dead. It was a 
privilege beyond words to have met her – and to have used her own private 
boudoir. She never did submit to becoming my agony aunt – but I admire her for 
that, too.

Rachel Johnson is a panellist on The Pledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/06/sky-news-to-launch-question-time-rival-the-pledge>
,Sky News’s weekly discussion show
 