
Not even donkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/may/09/eeyore-literature-archetypal-outsider>
 get a worse deal in popular culture than the reindeer. Rabbits, mice, cats and 
even bears all have their distorted images in cartoons, but all of them show 
some sympathetic qualities of intelligence or kindness. Only the reindeer is 
forced in songs and cartoons to live down to the mangy and dispirited creatures 
chained up and sweating in rainy British theme parks. Even rats make cartoon 
heroes. Only reindeer are always caricatured as drunken, stupid and quarrelsome 
beasts of burden.

In real life the partnership of the reindeer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04d4sls> with the Sami peoples of northern 
Scandinavia is one of the great triumphs of domestication, enabling humans to 
build a culture in a landscape so cold, bare and hostile that without the 
reindeer it would have been impossible to live there at all. The Sami and their 
reindeer live far to the north of the Inuit of North America, and have for 
hundreds of years been pushed further into the wilderness by settled farmers 
encroaching from the south. Until recent times the reindeer supplied almost all 
the technology their herders needed: bone needles, and thread made of sinew to 
sew together warm clothes from skin.

Together the herds and their herders travel hundreds of miles every year, in 
search of food, minimal warmth, and escape from mosquitoes. But it is important 
that the warmth not be too great. One of the greatest catastrophes that can 
befall a herd of reindeer is a warm spell in spring, where warmth is defined as 
anything above freezing. If in the daytime rain falls instead of snow, it will 
freeze into ice when the weather returns to normal and, while reindeer can dig 
through deep dry snow to reach the lichen on which they live, they cannot break 
through a crust of ice. The food remains as inaccessible as if it were behind 
glass. This is a natural disaster that can wipe out an entire population –about 
60,000 reindeer died 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2016/11/16/starvation-killed-80000-reindeer-after-unusual-arctic-rains-cut-off-the-animals-food-supply/>
 in one Siberian incident in 2013 – and even those animals that survive will be 
greatly weakened.

Now there is evidence that this effect is attacking the wild reindeer 
population of the Svalbard archipelago 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/gcb.13435/full> as a result of 
climate change. That has progressed at an astonishing rate. The mean 
temperature in January has risen by nearly 10C in the last 26 years. In July, 
over the same period, it has only risen by a 1.5C, but both changes have had 
profound effects. The slightly warmer summers have crossed an important 
threshold for plant life, so that there is now a great deal more nourishment 
available in the fat times. But this seems to be outweighed by the loss of food 
caused by wintertime warming.

It might seem that a warmer world would be unambiguous good news for the plant 
and animal life of the arctic. Indeed, there are now more reindeer in the 
population studied than there were 20 years ago. But the problem of rain 
refreezing over plants turns out to be more important than all the gains from 
plants growing larger in a longer summer. The average weight of reindeer on the 
island has shrunk by 12% over the last 16 years as the island has grown 
steadily less cold.

Warm summers mean more adults, but the warm, or less cold, winters mean 
malnourished mothers that have fewer successful pregnancies and weaker babies 
if they are carried to term. The disruptions caused by climate change will be 
greater than we can easily imagine, and much less predictable.
 