
Bryan Robson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bryan-robson> pulled up his 
chair behind a trestle table on the Old Trafford pitch in 1981. He took a gold 
pen off Ron Atkinson and signed the contract in front of him. With that 
signature, he became the most expensive footballer in British football history. 
Fifty thousand Manchester United fans cheered and I was among them. My dad had 
taken me to my first ever game for my eighth birthday.

Over the next decade Robson was the heartbeat of the team. He could defend, he 
could attack. He could pass, he could score; a hard man and a cultured player 
rolled into one. He suffered injuries, but he would fight on through them. He 
was superhuman to me. His nickname was Captain Marvel and he was, or rather 
still is, my hero.

Robson was a hard man and a cultured player rolled into one

I wasn’t one for hanging around for autographs after a game and selfies hadn’t 
been invented so the thought of waiting to ask for a photograph never entered 
my mind. All those years he captained United, I never met him or even came 
close to meeting him. And then, several years after he had retired, I found 
myself at a urinal at a charity dinner. Urinal etiquette is a complicated 
thing. Do not look down is the main rule and if possible, always look straight 
ahead. You may occasionally look to the side to see if you know anybody, but 
keep your eyes up. I looked to my left. Standing next to me was my hero.

As a BBC presenter, I’ve been lucky enough to meet a lot of famous people over 
the years, from Beyoncé to Beckham, and I have never been thrown. They were 
normal, nice people to chat to, and I am sure Captain Marvel would have been, 
too, if we weren’t both having a wee. Or rather, he was – I couldn’t go. I was 
partly in shock, partly trying to work out how on earth to deal with my hero 
while we were both “tackle out”. I wanted to shake his hand, but circumstances 
didn’t really allow for that. I wanted to tell him how much I loved him, what a 
big part of my childhood he had been but nothing would come out. He nodded in 
my direction. I nodded back.

After what seemed like an age he finished, washed his hands and left, leaving 
me feeling like that eight-year-old boy all over again, still in admiration, 
still in awe and still needing to go to the toilet.•

The Love of the Game by Mark Chapman is published on 3 November at £16.99. 
Order a copy for £13.93 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-of-the-game-435605.html>
 