
“Would you like to meet Lauren Bacall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lauren-bacall>?”

We were at a glamorous dinner thrown by Headline Books, which was then – in 
2005 – publishing my nonfiction bookJane Austen’s Guide to Romance and Ms 
Bacall’s autobiography,By Myself and Then Some. The publicity director was 
offering to introduce me to her. She’d just sent me on a whistle-stop tour of 
live television –Richard and Judy, Loose Women and Sky News with the terrifying 
Kay Burley – so she naturally assumed that I could make conversation with a 
film legend.

However, once seated beside Lauren Bacall, that famous, extraordinary face so 
close to me, her bone structure, close up, as imposing as an Easter Island 
statue, every shred of savoir-faire deserted me. She had been quite the grande 
dame on the book tour, even bringing over her little dog and requiring people 
to look after it, but to me she smiled and said graciously: “I like your 
tights.”

They were a very smart Italian brand: a fashion maven, she had noticed them 
immediately. How easy for me to say: “Thank you, I bought them in Florence last 
month,” and segue into a conversation about Italy, travel, or whatever subject 
Ms Bacall wanted to discuss. Instead, I muttered: “Uhhhhhhhh,” and started to 
rock lightly back and forth.

Ms Bacall waited politely for me to pull myself out of my funk. Unfortunately, 
I couldn’t. And no one came to rescue her. I don’t know how long this lasted, 
but it seemed interminable. Nothing else would come out of my mouth, and I 
couldn’t stop rocking. Eventually, the poor woman levered herself off the sofa 
and made her escape.

I headed to the toilets to lick my wounds. Unfortunately, Bacall had the same 
idea

I headed to the toilets to lick my wounds. Even more unfortunately, Ms Bacall 
had had exactly the same idea. She was by the sinks checking her make-up, and 
when she saw me enter she actually staggered against them, presumably assuming 
that I had followed her inside to make more “uhhhhhhh” noises at her. I shot 
her a swift, horrified glance of apology, dashed inside one of the stalls and 
hid there for 10 minutes to give her plenty of time to flee.

It was a very large and lavish dinner, so it was easy for us to avoid each 
other for the rest of the evening, though she did look panicked once when I 
accidentally drew near her. My nerves shot, I drank till 4am with a group of 
booksellers. We bonded over my story, and one of them became a close friend and 
great supporter of the novels I would go on to write, bless him. But the price 
is to endure his killer imitation of me meeting Lauren Bacall, complete with 
droning “Uhhhhh”, mad eyes and nervous rocking...

Killer Diamonds by Rebecca Chance is out now, published by Pan Macmillan, 
£7.99. To order a copy for £6.55, go to bookshop. theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/killer-diamonds.html>
 