
I was struggling to make a living as a young composer, and working as a music 
editor, when I received an invitation fromBenjamin Britten  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/benjamin-britten>to come and work with him at
the Red House <http://www.brittenpears.org/visit-the-red-house> in Aldeburgh, 
on the Suffolk coast.

It was 1973 and although I was very aware of Britten at the time, he was of a 
different generation and wasn’t a composer at the centre of my own thinking. 
When I arrived at the house, I was taken through to the piano in the library 
extension. It was obvious that Britten was under a lot of stress. He was 
working against time to finish his operaDeath in Venice, and seemed to be 
worrying that he was out of fashion. He would talk in a way that implied no one 
was particularly interested in what he was doing. I said I’d heard work of his 
at the Proms, and he was embarrassed. He said: “Oh, I went rather over the top 
there.”

We began to work together at the house, on and off. He’d been a compulsive 
worker and performer, but he’d just had a serious operation and his health was 
in decline. One day he asked me to play through some sketches he’d written at 
the piano with him, as he couldn’t manage on his own. He’d lost the use of his 
right hand, so we played together three-handed. It was extraordinary to feel 
the music coming to life. I’m not a very good pianist, and there I was sitting 
next to a great composer, trying to make my way through the piece.

I said I’d heard work of his at the Proms, and he was embarrassed. He said: 
'Oh, I went rather over the top there'

Britten would ask me questions about the music, such as: “Does this sound 
better?” or “Should I make a cut here?” He had probably answered them in his 
own mind but wanted reassurance. He lacked confidence in some way.

There was an American airbase nearby, and planes would fly just above the 
roof, making a terrifying sound. These were bombers armed with atomic weapons, 
and the fact that Britten was a lifelong pacifist made it intolerable for him.

I played the piano with him and wrote out scores for the cantata for Phaedra 
and his third string quartet right up until a month before his death. The works 
that he wrote in those last few years are every bit as good as anything else 
he’d written. There was an intensity about them, and an awareness of death – 
some of them are quite dark.

He was known for being quite prickly and difficult to work with. But perhaps 
in his later years, his personality had softened and he was grateful for the 
help. With Britten, I learned what it was to be a professional composer. It was 
extraordinary to see him making sure everything would be ready for a run. That 
professionalism inspired me.


Five Concertinos by Colin Matthews will be performed by the Berkeley Ensemble 
next Sunday at theCheltenham Music Festival 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/music/whats-on/2016/lennox-berkeleys-stabat-mater/>
 