
Every Sunday in the centre of Brixton, a group of Afro-Caribbean women of a 
certain age, gather on Atlantic Road to sing lustily about Jesus while wearing 
big hats. As a diehard atheist I am meant to have no time for organised 
religion. But the fact is they’re not harming anyone and they look very happy 
indeed.

If only all religions were so benign. If only all religions were so cheerful. 
But they are not. Recently a new kind of religion has arisen; one engineered 
for a godless age and specifically designed to make its devotees feel worse 
about themselves more often than they feel better. Like all religions it is 
based on hocus-pocus, misdirection and delusion. This new religion is called 
The Diet.

Yes of course diets have been around for centuries, promoted just as they are 
now through books. And for the most part they have always been stupid: the 
grapefruit diet, the red wine and steak diet, the kitten and stilton diet. I 
may have invented one of those. But generally they were functional. Do thing A 
and thing B and you will get result C. They didn’t work because like, pyramid 
investment schemes, they never do.

What the modern diet books have that the previous lot didn’t is a moral 
dimension. They are not merely instruction manuals. They are secular 
catechisms. There is an implication in these titles, written by young people 
with glossy hair and clear eyes who look like they think their farts smell only 
of peaches and peppermint, that if you don’t follow their plans you will not 
merely be fat. You will be bad. You will be a flawed person who through, lack 
of insight and moral fibre, has failed to reach their full potential in the way 
the authors have.

Well I wonder if I might be permitted to make a learned intervention into this 
noble discussion of the human soul, by saying this: sod off! Really, go away. 
Find something else to do. Take up boxing; it may involve hurting people but at 
least there are rules. In saying this I am only adding my voice to a growing 
choir. The brilliant Ruby Tandoh recently examined the speciousness of some of 
the faux-scientific thinking underpinning various of these works. A new blogger 
called the Angry Chef has been laying waste in superbly forensic style to the 
flaws in dietary advice and a general failure to understand the science of food 
and cooking. And Nigella has had a stab at the use of the phrase “Clean 
Eating”. Food does not have a moral aspect. Only the people eating it do.

But we need to go further and argue against one other element of all this: the 
use of guilt as if it were a weapon being wielded by a 14th-century pope. I am 
often asked what my guilty food secret is. I reply that I don’t have one. 
Because if I started feeling guilty, where would I stop? There are some foods 
that I like but which I know I shouldn’t eat too much of and that’s what I try 
to do. Guilt corrodes. Instead I go to the gym and watch what I eat, like any 
responsible adult. But I also make a point of enjoying what life has to offer. 
Food is just too much of a pleasure to be sullied by the stupidities of a bunch 
of swivel-eyed hucksters whose only real credential is the size of their 
Instagram following. Put that in your nutribullet and drink it.
 