
Imagine you’re sitting in your local café watching two people you don’t know. 
It’s likely that you could guess quite a lot about their relationship based on 
how, and how often, they touch. It might also tell you quite a lot about what 
culture you live in. In one study from the 1960s, couples in cafés in Puerto 
Rico were seen to touch each other an average of three times per minute, while 
those in London averaged zero times an hour.

A lot of what we know about the importance of human touch comes from looking 
at the behaviour of other species. Many animals and birds groom themselves to 
remove dirt and parasites from their coat, but primates, our closest relatives, 
spend up to 20% of the day grooming each other. This is usually a rhythmic 
combination of vigorous finger-thumb pinches that pluck out pieces of debris, 
mixed with gentler sweeps that provide a stroking sensation.

Couples in cafés touched each other three times per minute in Puerto Rico, and 
zero times an hour in London

The main aim is not cleanliness but social bonding. Grooming partnerships 
between two females can last for years, and they spill over into other displays 
of loyalty. For example, the likelihood that a female gelada baboon will go to 
the rescue of another female who is attacked is related to the amount of time 
they have spent grooming one another.

In humans the effect of touch is so strong that even a barely noticed touch 
can have a big effect on how we view another person. Well-controlled studies 
have shown that, for example, waitresses receive bigger tips after 
“accidentally” touching a customer while returning their change, and students 
are more likely to volunteer answers if a teacher briefly touches their arm. In 
children, too, touching is a powerful driver of behaviour – just like in the 
young of other species.

One famous series of experiments looked at how important food was compared 
with physical contact in young monkeys who had been deprived of their mother. 
In these experiments, the baby monkeys had the choice of clinging to a warm, 
furry “surrogate mother” or a cold wire one. They reliably chose the warm, 
furry one even when it provided no food, and when something frightening entered 
their cage they ran to the furry surrogate for protection – even if food came 
from the cold wire one.

We know that a lack of physical contact is bad for the young and that, 
conversely, touch can have many positive effects on children’s development and 
wellbeing. Touch therapies, such as reiki, have been much less rigorously 
studied than conventional medicine, so it can be hard to know how effective 
they really are. But the best evidence suggests that touch therapies cause a 
small but significant reduction in pain.

Touch releases a range of neurochemicals, including endorphins (which are 
similar in effect to opiates, such as morphine) and neurohormones, such as 
oxytocin. One effect of oxytocin is an increase in general feelings of 
wellbeing and, interestingly, it is released both when we receive a loving or 
comforting touch and when we give one. For some kids, encouraging them to touch 
another being may be a good way to encourage their wellbeing. It doesn’t even 
need to be another human: oxytocin is also released when we stroke a cat and 
even when our pet dog gazes adoringly at us.

This is one reason why massage therapies are often encouraged in very ill 
children – as well as soothing the child, it reduces stress and anxiety in the 
parent or other caregiver. Touch can lift the mood of two people at once: twice 
as much bang for your happiness buck.

Growing Up Happy by Alexia Barrable and Dr Jenny Barnett is published on 11 
August by Little, Brown at £13.99, or £11.47 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/growing-up-happy.html>
 