
We’ve all been there: up at the crack of dawn, crushed on to a packed bus, 
sweat trickling down the arms of your suit jacket as you ... actually, let me 
stop there. Because when it comes to wearing a suit into work, I haven’t really 
been there. Come on, have you ever been to the Guardian? You don’t wear a suit 
to the Guardian. Some do, of course, but, in my experience, just wearing a pair 
of sensible brogues will cause people to coo: “Ooh, look who’s gone all 
trendy!” at you. So, wear a suit – an actual suit with tie and ironed shirt – 
and you would think you had turned up to work with your pants hanging out for 
all the frenzied reaction it inspires.

On the surface, Topman’s Travel Series suit 
<http://www.topman.com/en/tmuk/category/style-stuff-4186837/the-travel-series-6010891?geoip=noredirect>
 looks like an ordinary suit. It’s blue and a bit shiny – but it’s apparently 
designed with the aforementioned sweaty office worker in mind. The breathable 
fabric – which the makers claim will “adjust to your body’s temperature” – is 
crease-resistant (to test, I scrunched my jacket sleeves into a tiny ball for 
20 seconds and, fair play, it looked fine afterwards) – and one of the two 
suits available has a reflective hem that you can turn up if you’re cycling to 
work, or just fancy doing the Hotline Bling dance in the pub after work. You 
could wear it for your commute, to work, to the pub, on your commute back and 
then, presumably, to bed. A 24-hour suit, if you will.

Still, commute or cycle, the point is the same: it removes the need to change 
for work that, I’m told by people who cycle to work, is the done thing.

Paul Smith has made one 
<http://www.paulsmith.co.uk/uk-en/shop/mens/a-suit-to-travel-in>. Tommy 
Hilfiger did something similar 
<http://tommy.digitaldialogues.nl/swipebooks/Nadal_Press_Kit_FW16/> a while 
back. Neither were cheap but, it seems, there was a demand. Topman’s suit costs 
about £200, which, cost per wear, isn’t bad for something you can also sleep in.

Compared with my favourite suit – a mid-blue mohair tonic from Brighton’s Jump 
the Gun, since you ask – you could say this one was a bit stretchier and more 
comfortable. But then it also looks a little bit square. Personally, I would 
sooner my suit fit nicely and makes me look as if I am about to have a scrap 
with some rockers down on the beachfront than has a reflective hem for cycling, 
but needs must, I suppose.

Of course, the real question is whether or not the Travel Series suit does 
adjust to your temperature better than any other suit. It’s hard to say: I 
don’t commute in my other suit; I wore this one on one of the coldest days of 
the year and underneath a gigantic parka; I was coming down with a cold so my 
temperature was all over the shop. But in post-truth, expert-deriding 2016, I 
feel perfectly qualified to tell you: the commute suit worked just fine. I 
didn’t overheat in it, neither was I that cold while traipsing outside for an 
awkward photoshoot. Just never wear one into the Guardian, unless you want a 
standing ovation from half the people in the building before you have even sat 
down.
 