
The first meal I delivered was a single lobster bisque to a penthouse 
overlooking St Katherine Docks. A cufflinked wrist thrust out from behind a 
door to retrieve it. My bike was lit by moonlight, the boats swayed in the 
harbour, and despite not seeing his face, I had the fleeting thought that this 
could be the most romantic job of my life.

I’ve been a Deliveroo rider for a few months – I started in the summer when 
the riders had just been onstrike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/deliveroo-workers-strike-again-over-new-pay-structure>
. Management were trialling pay per delivery rather than the hourly pay, and 
without guaranteed income it would leave workers earning under the minimum 
wage. The company abandoned the plans a few days later. I was surprised so few 
riders were talking about it, though they did tell me to make sure I got the 
hourly contract, to be on my guard and make a note of my hours.

Everyone’s always got time for a little chat at the lights

The relative flexibility works for me as I’m studying, and working as an 
artist and illustrator. Nearly everybody is doing something else. Fellow riders 
are students, actors, architects, coders, cleaners.

A friend of mine got me into it. He nodded at my bike and said: “Not put it to 
work yet?” I realised he had a point. Now I make around eight deliveries a 
night, cycling about 15 miles. There’s camaraderie on the roads and everyone’s 
always got time for a little chat at the lights. Unlike all the other cyclists 
who are always in a rush, we take it a little easier.
 ‘Any food delivered to the door brings real joy’: Kate Horwich en route with 
another order. Photograph: Pål Hansen for the Observer 
The lunchtime shift is mostly to city workers. Lite bites, Itsu salad boxes in 
the early part of the week, burgers on Fridays. One guy wanted a boxful of 
fizzy water, which was easier to transport than soup: that sometimes feels like 
walking with books on your head – a workout and a balancing act. Once, in the 
early days, I forgot the food on the bike, caught the lift up to the 24th floor 
and emerged like a confused but highly reflective kissogram.

Sometimes you’re visiting the same restaurant all night. Each delivery is a 
new take, a Steadicam pan round waiters bearing buttery, bubbling naan bread, a 
limbo under a dish of sizzling kebab skewers and a final close-up to the 
gangster heart of the take-away counter, a kaleidoscope of chutney. The doorman 
of the Japanese restaurant is also a boxer and does security for the strip bar 
over the road. He has a stash of clips of his fights on his phone to share 
while we’re waiting for the tempura to sputter out of the kitchen.

Inside all the world’s richest companies, I’ve found, there’s a special area 
in the atrium for deliveries. There, on a table full of little brown bags, we 
deposit lunches with the recipient’s name on the side. “I worry about the food 
going cold,” I tell the security guard. “Sometimes they never even turn up,” he 
replies.

On my way home I dream about which dish I’m going to scoff

There’s a network of underground kitchens to pick up from, hidden from diners’ 
sensitivities. Often you’re kept out of sight of the deliverees, too. Modern 
millionaires’ apartments have goods lifts and exclusive doorbells for delivery 
people, the upstairs/downstairs culture still built into the fabric of 
state-of-the-art dwellings. The gig economy’s own poor door.

Sunday nights are the best time to work, when hearts are open, mouths are 
watering, people are vulnerable, grateful, generous. And hungover. Curries and 
Thais are delivered to laughing houses, food for sharing with loved ones, but 
no one ever orders a romantic box of sausage and mash for two… Those dishes are 
delivered in the dark. I pass over the bag and scurry down the back steps. Posh 
school dinner food, not much chewing needed – it’s a private pleasure. But any 
food delivered to the door brings such a joy that I was shocked to learn how 
satisfying the job is. Sometimes after a good shift, you have an adrenaline 
high.

On my way home, I dream about which dish I’m going to scoff. A Greek place a 
few miles back did halloumi wraps and chips so enticing that a customer offered 
me some of his. Or maybe I’d have an aromatic Vietnamese pho teeming with 
treats so you can’t see the bottom of the container… Sometimes I feel like it’s 
a “can’t beat ’em, join ’em” kind of night. A Breton stew of sea bass, mussels, 
clams, prawns and squid with tomato, white wine and chilli served with, who 
knows, a freshly baked sourdough baguette. And frites, why not? I mentally 
click “add to basket” as I pedal.

Except these meals remain dreams. Everywhere’s closed by the time I’m 
finished. So I come home and demolish a cauldron of pasta, contented we’ve all 
been fed.
 