
'They are scum', was Mr Maugham's famous verdict on the class of State-aided 
university students to which Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim belongs; and since Mr 
Maugham seldom says anything controversial or uncertain of wise acceptance, his 
opinion must clearly be that of many. Those who share it had better stay well 
away from John Osborne's Look Back in Anger (Royal Court) which is all scum and 
a mile wide.

Its hero, a provincial graduate who runs a sweet-stall, has already been 
summed-up in print as 'a young pup' and it is not hard to see why. What with 
his flair for introspection, his gift for ribald parody, his excoriating 
candour, his contempt for 'phoneyness', his weakness for soliloquy and his 
desperate conviction that the time is out of joint, Jimmy Porter is the 
completest young pup in our literature since Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. His 
wife, whose Anglo-Indian parents resent him, is persuaded by an actress friend 
to leave him; Jimmy's prompt response is to go to bed with the actress. Mr 
Osborne's picture of a certain kind of modern marriage is hilariously accurate; 
he shows us two attractive young animals engaged in competitive martyrdom, each 
with its teeth sunk deep in the other's neck, and each reluctant to break the 
clinch for fear of bleeding to death.

The fact that he writes with charity has led many critics into the trap of 
supposing that Mr Osborne's sympathies are wholly with Jimmy. Nothing could be 
more false. Jimmy is simply and abundantly alive; that rarest of dramatic 
phenomena, the act of original creation, has taken place; and those who carp 
were better silent. Is Jimmy's anger justified? Why doesn't he do something? 
These questions might be relevant if the character had failed to come to life 
in the presence of such evident and blazing vitality. I marvel at the pedantry 
that could ask them. There will be time enough to debate Mr Osborne's moral 
position when he has written a few more plays. In the present one he certainly 
goes off the deep end, but I cannot regard this as a vice in a theatre that 
seldom ventures more than a toe into the water.

 Look Back in Anger presents post-war youth as it really is, with special 
emphasis on the non-U intelligentisia who live in bed-sitters and divide the 
Sunday papers into two groups, 'posh' and 'wet'. To have done this at all would 
be a signal achievement; to have done it in a first play is a minor miracle. 
All the qualities are there, qualities one had despaired of ever seeing on the 
stage - the drift towards anarchy, the instinctive leftishness, the automatic 
rejection of 'official' attitudes, the surrealist sense of humour (Jimmy 
describes a pansy friend as 'a female Emily Bronte'), the casual promiscuity, 
the sense of lacking a crusade worth fighting for and, underlying all these, 
the determination that no one who does shall go unmourned.

One cannot imagine Jimmy Porter listening with a straight face to speeches 
about our inalienable right to flog Cypriot schoolboys. You could never 
mobilise him and his kind into a lynching mob, since the art he lives for, 
jazz, was invented by Negroes; and if you gave him a razor, he would no nothing 
with it but shave. The Porters of our time deplore the tyranny of 'good taste' 
and refuse to accept 'emotional' as a term of abuse; they are classless, and 
they are also leaderless. Mr Osborne is their first spokesman in the London 
theatre. He has been lucky in his sponsors (the EnglishStage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stage> Company), his director (Tony 
Richardson), and his interpreters: Mary Ure, Helena Hughes and Alan Bates give 
fresh and unforced performances, and in the taxing central role Kenneth Haigh 
never puts a foot wrong.

That the play needs changes I do not deny; it is 20 minutes too long, and not 
even Mr Haigh's bravura could blind me to the painful whimsey of the final 
reconciliation scene. I agree that Look Back in Anger is likely to remain a 
minority taste. What matters, however, is the size of the minority. I estimate 
it as roughly 6,733,000, which is the number of people in this country between 
the ages of 20 and 30. And this figure will doubtless be swelled by refugees 
from other age-groups who are curious to know precisely what the contemporary 
young pup is thinking and feeling. I doubt if I could love anyone who did not 
wish to see Look Back in Anger. It is the best young play of its decade.
 