
Welcome to the crossword email update from theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>.

The new Genius is now available at theguardian.com/crossword/genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/genius>.

The solutions to last month's puzzle can be viewed at 
theguardian.com/crossword/solutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/solutions>. Congratulations to Jonathan 
Walters from Swansea who is September's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with the 
service, please emailsubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>.

--------------

For some reason several people this month have asked for my views on 
dictionaries. Perhaps it is just Christmas casting its shadow before it, 
causing worry about what present to buy for that difficult member of the 
family. There have also been a couple of emails on the theme of why can't the 
Guardian crosswords make life simpler by nominating one "official" dictionary 
and making a rule that only words from it would be allowed as solutions.

We have never followed that path because, in my view, the result would be much 
too restrictive. You would be surprised how many words with perfectly obvious 
meanings appear in one of the leading dictionaries but not in another. In 
reality it is not surprising because even one of the large single volume 
dictionaries contains only about 170,000 words and phrases. This compares with 
the 290,000 or so entries in the second edition (1989) of the 20-volume Oxford 
English Dictionary.

And the OED (along with all the other dictionary publishers) has embraced the 
power of the computer, so that new words and phrases are given the Oxford seal 
of approval much more quickly than was the case in the past. The OED went 
online in 2000 and the content is updated every three months. Something like 
4,000 new words are "approved" each year as having become an established part 
of English as it is spoken and written. The total of its main entries is about 
300,000. The mammoth task of producing a completely revised third edition of 
the OED is scheduled to take until 2037 and it is likely that it will never be 
published in book form at all, only online. You can see just from these few 
facts and figures that any printed one-volume dictionary can only be a limited 
selection of what is available and different editing teams make different 
selections.

However, in practice, a crossword editor has to draw a line somewhere. 
Traditionally the dictionary of choice for most crossword setters has been 
Chambers and, as a result, I would guess that it is also the one to which most 
dedicated crossword solvers also turn. First published in 1901 as Chambers's 
Twentieth Century Dictionary, it changed its name with the 1988 edition to 
Chambers English Dictionary and with the 1993 edition to its present one, The 
Chambers Dictionary. As it happens, Chambers has just published a very handsome 
11th edition of the dictionary, which would make a good Christmas present for 
the right person in your target area. (You can also, of course, subscribe to it 
online.)

The other two dictionaries that I find excellent are: Collins English 
Dictionary (sixth edition, 2003) and the Oxford Dictionary of English (second 
edition revised, 2005). Both have, to my mind, a more user-friendly arrangement 
of headwords than Chambers, which still tends to group words under a single 
headword, making them more difficult to locate individually. Earlier editions 
of Collins were very good for crosswording as they had a wide selection of 
famous people's names. Annoyingly these were dropped for some reason from the 
sixth edition so you now get, for example, Churchill as one of two rivers in 
Canada but not as a former prime minister. The Oxford Dictionary of English, 
though, does have a reasonable selection of proper names, though not as many as 
Collins once had.

This 11th edition of Chambers, though, raises another point. Dictionary 
publishers live in a commercial world and one way to increase income is to 
bring out new editions. Computers and databases make doing so much easier and 
quicker. (Like the others, Chambers has a program permanently tracking the 
latest words and meanings and it has access to an international Chambers Harrup 
database of over 3m words currently written and/or spoken in English.) The 10th 
edition of Chambers came out only two years ago. As a selling point, we are 
told that the new edition contains over 1,000 new words and meanings that were 
not in the 2006 edition. I can't help feeling that, as a result of a desire to 
have something new in a new edition, words are getting the seal of approval 
implicit in appearing in a dictionary of high repute faster than used to be the 
case. In the past I have almost always given in to a setter who justifies a 
word as a solution by pointing out to me that it is in Chambers. It is possible 
that I may find myself replying that it may be OK for Chambers but it is still 
not yet going in the Guardian crossword! Also, if asked, I would say that, if 
you already have the 10th edition, you can get by without the 11th. The 10th 
had a foreword by Melvyn Bragg and the new one a foreword by Jeremy Paxman, 
which may or may not tell you something.

_____

I have only received one message of complaint about the crosswords going free. 
Margaret C. wanted to know what on earth her son could now give her for 
Christmas.

_____

A footnote to my report last month on the Manchester Guardian competition in 
1929 which invited short stories making as much use as possible of words that 
only appear in crossword puzzles. I am indebted to Theo Clarke from Ipswich for 
the information that the winner was Mr Robert Holt Edmondson JP, who was aged 
90 at the time and was a retired managing director of Garswood Hall Collieries. 
He lived on his estate at Bryerswood in Far Sawrey on the western shore of Lake 
Windermere. History does not relate what he did with his two guinea prize.

____

Rather to my surprise, going free does not see yet to have increased the 
number of Genius entries. Brummie's puzzle only attracted 135 entries, with the 
first coming from GM in Bristol at 1332 on the first day. There were only three 
others sent in that Monday.
 