
The general privacy policy <https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy> 
published by Guardian News & Media Limited (GNM) applies to content provided by 
and your use of the Guardian Facebook app (the "App"). For full details see
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>. 

This is the additional GNM privacy policy for the App. 

As a registered Facebook user, you are also subject to Facebook's privacy 
policy. Please check your Facebook account privacy settings for further 
information.

Collecting information about you

We collect different types of information about App users for four main 
reasons:

1. To personalise the content of the App for individual users.

2. To help us to monitor and improve the App.

3. To advertise on the App.

4. With user consent, to market services to individual users.

Our principles

1. We do our utmost to protect user privacy through the appropriate use of 
security technology. This means:
- we ensure that we have appropriate physical and technological security 
measures to protect your information
- we ensure that when we outsource any processes, the service provider has 
appropriate security measures

2. We will respect your privacy. You should receive marketing emails only from 
GNM and, if you choose, from carefully chosen third parties. It will be made 
clear to you where you have these choices, for example, tick boxes will let you 
decide whether you wish to receive marketing.
We may, however, email you occasionally with information or queries about the 
App, for example, to offer rewards to users.

3. We will collect and use individual user details only where we have 
legitimate business reasons and are legally entitled to do so.

4. We will be transparent in our dealings with you as to what information 
about you we will collect and how we will use your information.

5. We will use personal data only for the purpose(s) for which they were 
originally collected and we will ensure personal data are securely disposed of.

6. Where we or our service providers transfer data out of the European 
Economic Area (EEA) this is only ever done with the relevant protections 
required by UK law being in place.

Sharing your information with us and others

When you first access the App, for example by clicking on a link to a Guardian 
article from your Facebook newsfeed, you will be presented with a Facebook 
permissions page, which will advise you about the Facebook information you will 
be sharing with the App and other Facebook users. You can then decide whether 
or not to share your Facebook information by using the App. If you decide not 
to grant permission you will not be able to use the App.

By granting permission you will be agreeing to share your Facebook user 
details (including your name, profile picture, gender, networks, user ID and 
any other information you choose to share according to your Facebook account 
settings) as well as the user details of your Facebook friends, and information 
about your use of the App, for example, the articles you are reading.

If you choose to post content or other data on the App, for example, by 
commenting on an article, this can be accessed by all of your Facebook friends.

If you decide not to share information with your Facebook friends about a 
particular article you have accessed you can make your reading private using 
the "remove from timeline" facility at the top of the article page.

Unsubscribing 

To unsubscribe go to "Why am I seeing this version of the page?" at the top of 
the article page and select "Remove this application". Alternatively, remove 
the App by accessing the application settings in your Facebook account settings.

Once you remove the App we no longer have permission to access your Facebook 
information and your data will be removed from the App. If you select a 
Guardian article on Facebook after you unsubscribe you will be taken directly to
www.theguardian.com <https://www.theguardian.com/international>.

Legal information and how to contact us

For the purposes of the Data Protection Act 1998, the data controller for The 
App is Guardian News & Media Limited, King's Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

If you would like to obtain a copy of the personal data we hold on you, or 
have any queries regarding GNM's use of personal data please contact the data 
protection manager at the above address, or by email to
dataprotection@theguardian.com <mailto: dataprotection@theguardian.com>.
 