
It was a grey day in October 1998 when I had my first brush with Sir Alex 
Ferguson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sir-alex-ferguson>. In those 
days he was just Alex Ferguson, but to me he was already a man whose presence 
could illuminate any room.

It was still the relatively early years of the Premier League and names such 
as Beckham, Giggs and Cole were showing the world how football should be 
played. I was working for Sky Movies at the time and, somehow, I managed to get 
invited to sit in the director’s box at Derby County FC for their game against 
the Red Devils.

Pride Park was a shiny new ground and the boardroom, in which lunch was served 
after the early kick-off had ended in a scrappy 1-1 draw, was equally 
impressive. I had already been wowed by the heated seat I was given for the 
game, but my levels of awe rocketed when “the Boss” came in about an hour after 
the final whistle.

He mingled with the various footie types, making a particularly respectful 
fuss of an old gentleman who had been a famed player for Derby in the 40s. But 
then the moment arrived. He joined the small knot of people I was with.

By this stage in my TV career I had been in the presence of countless “stars”, 
I had worked on primetime shows and even been to the Oscars not once but twice. 
Surely I couldn’t be starstruck? But I was a jibbering wreck, laughing too 
eagerly, staring a little too intently, scrabbling for that pearl of chatty 
wisdom that would impress this brilliant man.

I was a jibbering wreck, laughing too eagerly, staring a little too intently, 
scrabbling for a pearl of chatty wisdom

Suddenly I became aware of the match programme bulging in my jacket pocket. 
Autograph!

Could I possibly, somehow, against all decorum, ask the great Scot to sign my 
programme? I began to agonise… I hadn’t asked for an autograph since I had met
Brian Jacks <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian_Jacks> at an agricultural show 
in the 1970s.

Then a middle-aged executive type appeared beside us. “Mr Ferguson would you 
do me the honour?”

God bless him! He’d broken the ice for me. The Boss obliged, signing his 
programme and, as he did so, I began to reach inside my jacket, poised to 
repeat the request. Fergie turned back towards us, leaned in close to me and 
half-whispered: “I don’t understand that… What the fuck does a grown man want 
with an autograph anyway?” If I had been a lorry I would have beeped I backed 
up so much.

In 2009 I met the Boss again, but this time I was not so tongue-tied. I told 
him about that day at Pride Park. “Was I that rude to you?” he asked. “Yes 
Boss, you were.”

“We’d better have a photo then…” So we did.

Standstill by JA Marley is out now, published by Avocado Books, at £7.99 or on 
Kindle for £1.99
 