
I believe that everything you need to know you can find in a book. People have 
always received life-guiding wisdom from certain types of non-fiction, often 
from “self-help” books. But I have found that all sorts of books can carry this 
kind of wisdom. A random sentence in a thriller will give me unexpected 
insight. If I hadn’t readKilling Floor, the masterful 1997 novel that 
introduced the world toJack Reacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/22/crime.culture>, a former 
military cop turned vagrant, I never would have learned this valuable piece of 
wisdom: “Waiting is a skill like anything else.”

I also believe that there is no book so bad that you can’t find something of 
interest in it. That, actually, is a paraphrase from the Roman lawyerPliny the 
Younger <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pliny_the_Younger>, a sentiment later 
adopted by Miguel de Cervantes inDon Quixote. Admittedly, neither Pliny nor 
Cervantes were subject to some of the weakest “sex and shopping” books from the 
1980s, but I still think it mostly holds true. You can learn something from the 
very worst books – even if it is just how crass and base, or boring and petty, 
or cruel and intolerant the human race can be.

You can learn from the very worst books – even if it is just how crass the 
human race can be

There is a proud tradition of extracting lines from poetry and songs and using 
them in this way. But not everyone is a fan of cherry-picking odd passages from 
random books and using them to direct your life. Some people argue that lines 
from novels and plays are dependent on the context that surrounds them—that 
it’s unseemly and self-serving to grab the odd line here and there.

I don’t buy this. It ignores the way that your brain collects, refracts, sorts 
and combines information. We can find meaning in everything – and everything is 
fair game. So I spend my life collecting books and sentences from them.

At home, I’m a librarian, forever curating my collection. Outside my 
apartment, I’m a bookseller –hand-selling my favourite books to everyone I 
encounter.

There’s a name for someone who behaves the way I do: reader.

What you are now reading is a manifesto of sorts – my manifesto for readers. 
Because I think we need to read and to be readers now more than ever.

We overschedule our days and complain constantly about being too busy; we keep 
up with hundreds of acquaintances but rarely see our best friends; we bombard 
ourselves with video clips and emails and instant messages; we even interrupt 
our interruptions.

Books are uniquely suited to helping us change our relationship to the rhythms 
and habits of daily life in this world of endless connectivity. We can’t 
interrupt them; we can only interrupt ourselves while reading them. They speak 
to us, thoughtfully, one at a time. They demand our attention. And they demand 
that we briefly put aside our own beliefs and prejudices and listen to someone 
else’s. You can rant against a book, scribble in the margin, or even chuck it 
out the window. Still, you won’t change the words on the page.

We all ask each other a lot of questions: “How did you sleep?” “Where did you 
go on your holidays?” But there’s one question I think we should ask of one 
another a lot more often, and that is: “What are you reading?”

When we ask one another that, we sometimes discover the ways we are similar; 
sometimes the ways that we are different. “What are you reading?” isn’t a 
simple question when asked with genuine curiosity; it’s really a way of finding 
out, “Who are you now and who are you becoming?”

Books For Living – A Reader’s Guide to Life by Will Schwalbe is published by 
Two Roads on 12 January, at £14.99. To order a copy for £12.29, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/books-for-living.html>
 