
During TV conferences and festivals, at least one delegate always argues that 
Shakespeare, if he were around today, would be writing EastEnders or Holby 
City. This claim is based on the fact that theatre, at the time Shakespeare's 
plays were written, was a mass audience form rather than the relatively elitist 
entertainment it has become; and also, more subtly, on the contention that the 
playwright's fondness for parallel plots and cross-cutting to some extent 
anticipates screen narrative.

And yet, despite these affinities, Will has always tested the will of TV 
producers. The BBC TV Shakespeare – a late 1970s attempt to film all 37 plays 
as an educational tool – became a headline calamity, helping to establish Clive 
James's reputation as a critic through his pitiless Observer reviews of shaking 
scenery and stagey acting. The original production of Much Ado About Nothing 
(starring Penelope Keith and Michael York) was never transmitted because, 
according to the minutes ofBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
management meetings I have seen, it was considered such a failure.

The original producer, the late Cedric Messina, left the project and Jonathan 
Miller came in as an emergency replacement. Miller steadied the shipwreck – 
with productions including John Cleese as a brilliant Petruchio in The Taming 
of the Shrew – and it's good to have a permanent record of, for example, Derek 
Jacobi's Hamlet. But, in general, the experience cemented the view that 
Shakespeare is a weapon to be deployed on television only when particular 
performances called to be immortalised – Laurence Olivier's King Lear and Ian 
McKellen's and Judi Dench's Macbeths on ITV, Patrick Stewart's Macbeth by the 
BBC – or when there is a special occasion, such as BBC licence fee 
renegotiation or, this summer, as part of the Cultural Olympiad alongside the 
London Games.

Bringing together four of the Shakesperean English history plays under a group 
of high-class stage directors, The Hollow Crown begins this weekend onBBC2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> and marks a significant advance in the 
medium's fight with this writer.

The troubled BBC Complete Shakespeare taught several lessons – that not all of 
the works merit the attention of the audience; that studio recordings create an 
uneasy limbo between theatre and TV; that the pace and fluidity of made-for-TV 
dramas can make stage plays seem slow and staid; and that it is vital to have 
an overall producer who understands both Shakespeare and film.

The Hollow Crown brings a full set of ticks to this checklist. Present from 
the start, rather than parachuted in as Jonathan Miller was, Sam Mendes has 
executive produced the series, while also presiding over another English 
cultural icon: the new James Bond movies.

And this BBC TV Shakespeare is sensibly restricted to a discrete and 
particular 9% or so of the collected works. The linked sequence of Richard II 
(directed by Rupert Goold), Henry IV Parts 1 and 2 (filmed by Sir Richard Eyre) 
and Henry V (under Thea Sharrock's direction) tell a sequential story, with 
recurring characters and so have a structural similarity with the four-part 
family drama, a staple of TV fiction. In this sense, The Hollow Crown can be 
seen as a relative of The Tudors, though with significantly better dialogue.

Mendes and his directors have also assimilated the wisdom of TV property 
shows: what matters in filming Shakspeare is location, location, location. 
Instead of a studio mediaeval England formed from hardboard, we get actual 
castles, taverns and forests.

The two productions that I have so far seen – Richard II and the first part of 
Henry IV – also convincingly show that, rather than being a triumph over 
limitations, filmed Shakespeare has some advantages over theatrical versions. 
In the often-bewildering opening scene of Richard II, which begins with a list 
of characters and their achievements, Goold's camera can simply close in on the 
noble being mentioned, easily establishing characters in a way that, in the 
theatre, would require much fumbling with a programme in the dark.

And, in Henry IV, Eyre employs every trick of cinematic fluidity to match the 
quick flow of modern screen drama: cross-cutting and dissolving between the 
three main locations (the court, the rebels, Falstaff's dens) and turning 
soliloquies into their natural screen equivalent of voice-overs.

Another benefit of television is the available cast: because it isn't asking 
for a three-month run or global tour to make the budget back, The Hollow Crown 
simultaneously retains a group of actors that even the most famous theatres 
could only accumulate over several seasons. Theatre-goers have long anticipated 
Simon Russell Beale's eventual Falstaff but he gives it here first: 
cloud-bearded and earthy, a portrait of ambition and intelligence chiselled 
away by appetite. And, if SRB does play Falstaff in the theatre, it is highly 
unlikely, for budgetary and logistical reasons, to be in a company that also 
includes Julie Walters, Lindsay Duncan, David Suchet and David Morrissey.

There remains a basic flaw in the theory that because Shakepeare was a 
populist writer in his time, he should naturally suit TV now: the mainstream 
television audience, often made suspicious of classic theatre by education and 
school theatre outings, would take much persuasion to tune in to these dramas. 
But, despite that caveat, The Hollow Crown feels as good as TV Shakespeare is 
going to get.
 