
Wednesday was a historic day for the climate. No, not another record-breaking 
hottest month. Not another devastating hurricane. For once, it was a good day.

Wednesday was the day enough countries – representing more than 55% of global 
carbon emissions – ratified theParis agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/obama-paris-climate-deal-ratification>
 on climate change for the treaty to enter force.

A weary world, weighed down by Syria, Brexit and American presidential 
elections must wonder if fancy words like “ratification” actually mean 
anything. The answer is unequivocally “yes”. This treaty sets us on an 
irreversible trajectory on which all investment, all regulation and all 
industrial strategy must start to align with a global economy powered by 100% 
clean energy.

So dramatic is this change of direction that, as of last December, more than 
500 global institutions with assets in excess of $3.4 trillion 
<https://insideclimatenews.org/news/02122015/divestment-campaign-grows-more-34-trillion-assets-vow-exit-fossil-fuels>
 had committed to divest themselves from the fossil-fuelled extractive 
industries of the past. Government policies globally are now aligned with 
real-world market forces pushing forward the next great industrial revolution: 
the clean low-carbon revolution that will transform how we power our lives.

The governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, and the former New York 
mayor Michael Bloomberg have set about transforming the global company 
reporting system so that it takes account of climate change risks.

Financial decision-makers at every level are recognising that fossil fuel 
investments risk their returns being undermined by stranded assets. They 
recognise that supply chains face disruption from the effects of climate 
change. Carney warned just last month that to minimise the risk to financial 
stability the transition away from high- carbon industries should begin early 
and follow a predictable path to help markets anticipate the central element of 
the Paris agreement: a net zero-carbon economy by the second half of this 
century. A disorderly transition would result in financial shocks that would 
make 2008 seem no more than a blip

Planet at its hottest in 115,000 years thanks to climate change, experts say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/global-temperature-climate-change-highest-115000-years>
To achieve the central goal at the heart of the Paris agreement, of creating a 
net zero-carbon economy by the second half of this century, we need an orderly, 
managed transition that minimises risks and allows us to seize the 
opportunities created by the new jobs and investment in clean industries that 
will increasingly drive our economies.

Binding international law provides a solid bulwark against even the most 
unexpected political events – just think of Brexit or a Trump presidency. The 
involvement of city governments, investors and the private capital markets is 
making the progress to a clean future impossible to roll back.

Latest figures from Office for National Statistics show that Britain’s 
low-carbon businesses generate atotal annual turnover of £46.2bn  
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/2458701/uk-green-economy-worth-gbp462bn-in-2014-official-stats-reveal>
for the economy and employ nearly a quarter of a million people. The growth in 
the low-carbon sector of the UK economy is now outpacing the growth rate of the 
economy as a whole, and has grown by almost 30% in the past three years.

Of course, maintaining this level of growth requires clear signals from 
politicians – not the Tory stop-start decisions that have thrown renewable 
industries into chaos and energy investors into despair. A shale gas 
infrastructure would require a return on capital over 30 to 35 years. Quite 
simply this means that shale gas is an expensive detour the UK can ill-afford 
to take. That is why last week I announced that the next Labour government will 
ban fracking, and why community secretary Sajid Javid’s decision this week to 
overturn 18,000 local objections and clear the way for fracking in Lancashire 
is a colossal mistake.

Gas will play an important transitional role in the UK’s energy supply over 
the next 15 years. But energy efficiency in domestic heating and the 
decarbonisation of our power supply by 2030 will see demand for it fall by 26%.

We need to be investing in the low-carbon technologies that are creating the 
apprenticeships and skilled jobs of the future. Wednesday’s ratification of the 
Paris agreement makes business as usual impossible. We are in a different world 
now.
 