
With the dank, fetid winds of manmade climate change blowing our way and 
worries over Russian military ambitions there has been much talk of Armageddon. 
And I have to say, it doesn't look like much fun. Obviously there's the grisly 
business of mass death, the general collapse of civilisation and the loss of 
broadband services around Nuneaton. But there's another rarely discussed but 
much more serious issue: once we doughty survivors have dragged ourselves from 
the smouldering rubble and brushed ourselves down, what exactly are we going to 
do for lunch? Post the apocalypse, what will be on the menu?

I was given cause to think about this by the news that 20,000 crop samples 
from more than 100 nations have recently been deposited in a "doomsday vault" 
in the Norwegian Arctic Circle. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/26/svalbard-global-seed-vault-plants-shipped>
 The facility, dug deep into a mountain, is designed to withstand all natural 
and human disasters for centuries. That's terrific; I recognise that at some 
point we will have to start ploughing the fields again. But for those of us 
left alive, the ones who have managed to trudge our way north, it will be a 
hideous disappointment. We'll force open the blast doors of the global food 
repository only to find what amounts to a warehouse full of muesli.

That will never do. It will merely make us feel gloomier. We will need 
something properly sustaining. We will need comfort food. I've thought long and 
hard about what the UK section of the repository might look like, and I've come 
to the conclusion that it needs to be things that remind us exactly who we, as 
a nation, are. We must abandon any notion of ourselves as sophisticated 
cosmopolitan types with a taste for pot au feu and Iberico ham. We will need to 
go back to basics.

For a start we will need crateloads of bacon. By which I mean the cheap stuff 
that leaks white phlegm when you fry it. We will need house bricks of cheap 
sugary white bread, and barrels of brown sauce. Post the apocalypse we are 
going to be gagging for bacon sandwiches, of the sort drunk students make when 
they get home after a night on the Strongbow. The cheap bacon sandwich is the 
"in case of emergencies break glass" of comfort food.

After that we can get a little bit more exotic and nuanced. Obviously that 
means Findus crispy pancakes, and in particular the chicken curry flavour: a 
crisp breaded shell the colour of Sunny Delight; sweet-salty gunk inside. 
What's not to like? There's a temptation to supplement that with Pot Noodles. I 
can see that there's a convenience point here. They do only require a kettle. 
But we need to be a little more ambitious, which means only one thing: Vesta 
instant chow mein. As a child, one of those made most things better.

Finally we will need dessert. There's only one contender: Angel Delight. 
Butterscotch flavour. You may have other candidates for the post-Armageddon 
comfort food repository and I'd love to know what they are, but I think I'm on 
the right track. For here is the truth. Only by knowing exactly who we are can 
we hope to rebuild. Only by going back to basics can we start again. And 
anyway, as everybody knows, a cheap bacon sandwich is the solution to 
everything, including the end of the world.
 