
I have recently been on a psychotherapy binge. Not having psychotherapy, you 
understand – like most people, I cannot afford it – but reading about other 
people having psychotherapy. Whether it's voyeurism that drives me, 
intellectual curiosity, or an attempt in the age of austerity to get some free 
therapy by proxy, I really can't say. But whatever it is, it's compulsive. If I 
were a fly, I'd head straight up to Hampstead, in north London, and park myself 
on the neutral white wall of a psychotherapist's office.

It all began a few weeks ago when The Examined Life 
<http://www.randomhouse.co.uk/editions/the-examined-life/9780701185350>, by the 
psychoanalystStephen Grosz <http://www.stephengrosz.com/>, was on BBC Radio 4's 
Book of the Week <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qftk>. I listened, rapt, 
walked straight down to Waterstone's and ordered myself a copy. When it 
arrived, I gulped it down in a single, 200-page sitting. In fact, I read it so 
fast I could barely taste it, so then I had to read it again. But the truth was 
that even after two readings I still wasn't satisfied. I wanted more, in 
quantity but also in depth – or perhaps complexity is a better way of putting 
it. Now don't get me wrong, I'm not knocking Grosz; if he'd written another 
book I would have read it and no doubt he will and I shall. But the cases he 
presents in The Examined Life just feel a little too tidy to me. They read 
almost like parables, and the titles are suggestive of parables, too: "How 
anger can keep us from sadness", or "Why parents envy their children". But 
people are not parables – they're much more complicated than that – and they 
aren't riddles either, waiting for an analyst to solve them.

Then, someone suggested Irvin D Yalom <http://www.yalom.com/index.html>, the 
American existential psychotherapist, and specificallyLove's Executioner 
<http://www.yalom.com/pagemaker.php?nav=le&subframe=summary>, an account of 10 
cases he treated. This had a radically different feel from The Examined Life, a 
much messier feel, and I absolutely loved it. In fact, it is one of the most 
fascinating books I have ever read.

What Yalom does so brilliantly is to demonstrate how therapy is a meeting of 
two fallible human beings. It's so easy, so tempting, as a patient to see the 
professional (therapist, psychiatrist, social worker) as some sort of a god, 
or, if not quite a god, a person with supernatural powers at least; an 
unconditionally accepting mind-reader, who knows for certain what to do in 
every situation.

But Yalom's psychotherapist is very far from this. He makes mistakes, 
repeatedly, says the wrong thing and, most shocking of all, reveals himself as 
a bigot. When an obese woman comes to him for treatment, he finds her body so 
repulsive he can barely bring himself to look at her. What's striking is 
Yalom's honesty. In acknowledging his feelings, even when he doesn't approve of 
them, he allows his own humanity to enter the equation. If the irritation he 
feels is real, the boredom, the active dislike, so too is the caring, the 
genuine love, that develops as the therapy progresses.

It's ironic that people sometimes think of therapy as self-indulgent. 
What therapy is ultimately striving to do is to help someone find a way to 
take responsibility for their own wellbeing. You don't achieve this by removing 
all support, as the coalition government appears to believe; that's a recipe 
for disaster. But effective treatment must always be about empowering and 
enabling individuals to take responsibility; if you aren't responsible, you 
cannot effect any changes, after all. And, as alarming as it may be to 
recognise that nobody else has the absolute power to heal and transform us, the 
process of change can only begin when we finally acknowledge that there aren't 
any gods – not in the field of mental health anyway.
 