
Short of being photographed as one of those curving toilet doors on a Virgin 
Train slides gently open, revealing a mess of bare knees and shirt tails, there 
is one photograph that the modern politician fears more than any other: the 
eating shot. Look at what that image ofEd Miliband eating a bacon sandwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/25/ed-miliband-david-axelrod-bacon-butty>
 did to him: the way the lips folded back and curled, how the eyes began to 
roll back in his head like he had reached some private moment of truth. That 
one image raised a brutal question: could you imagine this man, the one with 
the expression like the ketamine has just kicked in, running the country?

Now consider all the politicians run ragged by the election campaign so far, 
and have pity on their souls. For all day every day what they are thinking is 
this: please God, let nobody take a picture of me eating. It so terrified David 
Cameron that, apparently haunted by Miliband bacon sandwich gate, he responded 
to a hot dog encountered on the campaign trail by eating it with a knife and 
fork <http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/david-cameron-eats-hot-dog-5470169>. 
And he still managed to look a bit of a knob.

It’s terribly unfair. In the old days politicians were allowed to be dignified 
and remote figures, other-worldly emissaries from Planet Leadership. Now, in 
the age of the selfie and the close-up, we insist they be just like us. We 
insist they be human. And what could be more human than the act of eating? 
Eating is genuinely a shared experience. The problem is it’s an ugly, ungainly 
shared experience. It’s just too human.

Try watching the people you love eating. It’s a mess. As you open your mouth, 
there’s a flash of wobble and pink of the sort the pathologist will see when 
they come to conduct the inevitable postmortem on your chilling cadaver. There 
is the sticky shine of saliva, there’s the way your eyelids flutter, your lips 
roll outwards. Ever seen a German Shepherd running excitedly towards its owner, 
its tongue flapping in the wind? That’s you, photographed eating, only without 
the excitement.

This shouldn’t be regarded as a negative. Eating is messy because it’s meant 
to be. Show me someone who daintily forks away morsels between tidy, pursed 
lips and I will show you someone who could never be my friend. Recently I was 
invited to participate in a wretched “art” project, which involvedeating with 
other people in silence <http://www.zagreus.net/en/menu/>. No surprise that it 
would be in Berlin. I would rather lick the inside of my composting box than 
take part in something like that which sucks the life from the dining table. 
Eating should be noisy and generous, a mess of flailing body parts.

Curiously, moving images of people eating are fine, which is good because 
television is full of them. Some of them are of me. It’s the freeze frame that 
doesn’t work. Even Barack Obama, the coolest politician on the planet, looks 
unelectable when photographed eating. If you really want to put yourself off 
your lunch Google the image ofBarack Obama and David Cameron eating together at 
a ball game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/barack-obama-david-cameron-hot-dog-summit>
. They look like unloved cats expelling fur balls. Me, I refuse to be 
photographed eating. It’s a red line. I won’t do it. And do you know who else 
was never photographed eating? Winston Churchill, a chap who knew a thing or 
two about maintaining his dignity. That’s who. I rest my case.
 