
Boning a pig’s head isn’t easy. My friend, the food historian Dr Annie Gray, 
tried it once. It took her and a friend five hours. She was following the 1846 
instructions of Charles Elmé Francatelli, once chef to Queen Victoria, who was 
an old hand at the whole pig boning business. The key is to get a head severed 
at the second vertebrae, so that when you have tunnel-boned the skull, working 
the blade carefully about the jaw and skull, and then refilled it with the 
forcemeat, you have a flap of skin to be re-stitched at the back.

Before you can do that, you have to take the pig’s head, the eyes stitched 
closed, and smear it with six pounds of salt, handfuls of saltpetre, sugar, 
cloves, mace, garlic, thyme, marjoram and basil. It then needs to be submerged 
in a quart of port for two weeks and turned every day.

Next you stuff it with sausagemeat, and a mixture of tongue, fatty bacon, 
truffles and pistachio kernels. It now needs to be wrapped in butter-rubbed 
muslin and simmered in a stock full of cow’s feet and grouse carcasses for five 
hours, before being allowed to cool. Finally, decorate it with piped lard and 
separately baked pastry pieces. Queen Victoria had a head like this on her 
table at Christmas every year. Apparently the upper classes have long 
appreciated the ceremony that attends the boning of pig heads.

Preparing a pig’s head this way is tricky, of course, because you’re trying to 
keep it in one piece. If that’s not an issue you can cut off the pieces you 
want: the cheeks ears and snout. Pig cheeks braise beautifully. The ears have 
many uses. Fuchsia Dunlop has a great recipe in herRevolutionary Chinese 
Cookbook <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/revolutionary-chinese-cookbook.html> 
for an aromatic salad, which is all about chilli oil and sesame oil, and the 
thin slices of gelatinous skin sandwiching a crunch of cartilage.

Alternatively, April Bloomfield does a crispy pig’s ear salad, in which they 
become the biggest curve of pork scratching imaginable. The Pitt Cue boys 
recommend boiling them for a couple of hours and refrigerating overnight, 
before cutting into strips, deep frying them and serving with a habanero sauce. 
At Duck & Waffle, they dust crispy strips of ear with a sweet salty mix. They 
taste like Frazzles.

If this doesn’t appeal, you can always boil a head until the flesh falls away. 
Next, remove all the meat. There are now two ways to go. Spice it up the old 
English way with lots of mace and white pepper, and press it to make a classic 
brawn. Or (again,pace Pitt Cue) form it into a sausage bound in clingfilm. Once 
refrigerated and set, cut it into discs, bread crumb and deep fry to make pig’s 
head croquettes.

Alternatively, take the whole thing and, as they do at St John, slow roast it 
for hours until the meat falls from the bones, and the skin shatters beneath 
your teeth like savoury glass. Think of this as a self-boning pig’s head, which 
is a neat trick if you can pull it off. Of course, there may be other ways to 
go about boning a pig’s head.
 