
I much appreciated your responses to my thoughts last month about the "cheat" 
button. And I sympathise with a plea from M.R. of Norwich that this button 
should have been marked as something much less obviously judgmental than 
"cheat", such as "prompt" or "confirm", which would avoid any implication of 
wrongdoing. It was also suggested that we might add a "cheat-lite" button that 
would give you just the single letter in the square under the cursor and not 
the whole word. I fear, though, that in the current budgetary climate these 
suggestions may not reach the top of the programming action list for some time. 
Incidentally, the way to get all the E's into a grid by cheating is to fill all 
the spaces for any given word with E's and then click on "check". The system 
should leave you just with the E's that are in the right place and get rid of 
all those that are not, but perhaps I shouldn't have let this cat out of the 
bag.
_____

Two problems raised themselves last month in the same Quick crossword (No 
12,509 for 14 June). The first contested clue was "Map book - world supporter 
(5)" for ATLAS. The point made was that, as anyone with any knowledge of Greek 
gods should know, Atlas was made to carry the sky (not the world) on his 
shoulders as a punishment for standing up against Zeus. That point has to be 
accepted but any image I have ever seen of Atlas working out his sentence has 
him carrying a globe representing planet Earth. Of course, this may just be 
because painters and sculptors, finding it difficult to make the sky look heavy 
enough to be fit for purpose, have chosen a globe instead. But I would 
diffidently suggest that, as they have all done so, "world supporter" as a 
second and slightly jokey definition for ATLAS is acceptable in a Guardian 
Quick.

The second problem was the CATHODE/ANODE issue, which has raised its head 
before. The clue was: "Positive terminal of a primary cell (7)" for CATHODE. 
Signing himself "Electrically yours", Colin said that the correct answer, which 
did not fit, was ANODE.

I try never to get into an argument about electricity with anyone who sounds 
as if they know about it. But it has to be said that the dictionaries are 
precious little help here to the lay person because all of them give two 
definitions (one positive and one negative) for each of these two terminals. 
Take, for the sake of argument, Collins. For "cathode" (and vice-versa for 
"anode") it has: 1. the negative electrode in an electrolytic cell; and 2. the 
positive terminal of a primary cell (which, in passing, was the exact wording 
of the clue in question). Is there any way in which one can avoid accusations 
of being electrically challenged except by crossing out entirely all clues 
involving positive and negative terminals?
_____

June's Genius (No 84 by Brummie) produced a small storm (or large flurry) of 
protests that the clue for 10 across had two possible correct answers. It read: 
"Time" Dicky (4). The protesters who had managed to work out that the word 
missing from the clue must be "said" (an anagram of "dais" in the clue for 22 
down) argued that, if it was placed in the clue as '"Time" said Dicky', the 
solution could be either WEEK (time) or WEAK (dicky). As this was what my 
lawyer friends would call an arguable point (or, at least, an arguably arguable 
point) we have accepted either solution as correct. Brummie and I, though, 
tentatively offer a defence that there is in fact only one correct solution, 
namely WEEK. Our position is based on the assertion that there should only be 
one unambiguously correct solution to a properly constructed crossword clue and 
that, therefore, the missing word ("said") must be placed at the end of the 
clue to give: "Time", Dicky said: because the alternative ("Time" said Dicky) 
holds out two possible answers, which cannot have been intended.

But I am more that willing to accept that arguments of this sort are exactly 
what give my learned friends a bad name with the public, so I shan't use it 
again.
_____

Ian of London N14 was back to form last month. His entry was the first in at 
02:25. (He was in the WEAK camp.) Ian was closely followed at 02:31 by Peter 
from Montville in Queensland, who was a WEEK man. There was then a long gap 
until the next entry at 06:55 from B.B. at Gloucester, which was also the first 
WEEK submission from this country. WEEK or WEAK, it seems to have been a 
reasonably accessible puzzle, with 26 correct entries by the end of the first 
Monday and a total of 316 by the deadline.

Congratulations to John O'Neill from Merseyside, who is June's Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with it, 
please email subshelp@theguardian.com
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk
For Observer crosswords please email crossword.editor@observer.co.uk
 