
Last month I asked for your views as to whether the style and general level of 
difficulty of the Guardian crosswords were pitched about right and, in 
particular, whether there were now too many 'themed' puzzles being published. 
Your responses by way of comments online under my April column and as emails 
directly tocrossword.editor@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardian.co.uk> were very helpful, so thank you for 
them. The process produced some delightful vignettes of the part that 
crosswords can play in people's lives. For an example of networking, one solver 
in Vancouver, Canada regularly does a weekly Guardian puzzle jointly with her 
friend in Sydney, Australia and is particularly pleased when it is an Araucaria 
offering. Another reported that 'if it wasn't for the blessed Rufus crossword 
on a Monday' he would never have got to solve a single Guardian crossword clue 
in the first place and 'I am far less likely to buy a printed copy of the paper 
on a Thursday or Friday, whereas Monday's shopping trips often find me with a 
Guardian in the basket.'

To summarise the views you expressed it would seem that:

1. With the Quicks: you are fairly happy with their consistency and appreciate 
the fact that some of the definitions are a degree or two more quirky than 
those found in quick puzzles in other papers. Cited with approval, for example, 
were two adjacent clues in the Quick for 27 March (No 13,379), both of which 
read simply: 'XX (6)'. At the time several people thought that they were being 
kind in pointing out to me that there had been another Grauniad cock-up and 
asking whether I could give them the missing clues ASAP. In fact the solutions 
to these two clues were, respectively, TWENTY and KISSES.

2. With the Cryptics: a) the fact that there is a deliberate range of 
'difficulty' in the course of a given week is seen as very much a 'good thing' 
and there were heart-felt pleas that the average level of difficulty should not 
be raised; good clues and the element of fun in solving them are clearly, if 
unsurprisingly, what makes a puzzle enjoyable for most people; b) the 'themed' 
puzzles got a definitely positive vote, provided that the theme is not so 
obscure that it can only be cracked for those unfamiliar with it by searching 
through lists of names, titles, places etc on Google; in passing it is 
gratifying and, perhaps, a bit surprising to discover how many foreign online 
solvers, for many of whom English is not their first language, seem to enjoy 
the challenge of these usually Brit-centred themed puzzles; c) but there was a 
clear preference for 'light' rather than 'heavy' themed puzzles, ie ones where 
there is not too much cross-referencing of clues and where the clues make 
possible at least some progress with the puzzle even without knowledge of an 
esoteric theme; most popular of all were puzzles with a 'ghost' theme, ie one 
that is not explicitly announced either in an italic standfirst or by way of 
cross-referencing in the clues, but where it gradually emerges from the mist as 
more and more of the clues are solved, making the solver specially pleased for 
having spotted what is going on.
____

I regularly get complaints, claiming that the current month's Genius puzzle is 
(still) not available and asking when, if ever, it is going to appear. There 
are also demands to know why the interactive version of the Cryptics or Quicks 
is suddenly no longer working. It would be foolish of me (and counter-factual) 
to claim that the site has not had its technical stumbles, but the problem in 
these particular cases is much more likely to be at your end than at ours.

To make the interactive versions of our puzzles work on your machine you need 
to have installed an up-to-date version of JavaScript. In addition, to get 
either the Guardian Genius or the Observer Azed puzzles on to you screens, you 
also need to have Java uploaded. Quite often, when you install some new piece 
of software on your hard drive (or when you update of an existing program with 
the latest version), JavaScript or Java become temporarily disabled, or even 
sometimes deleted.

So your first act of trouble shooting in these cases should be to check that 
JavaScript and/or Java are still installed and in their 'enabled' mode; or, if 
for some reason they have disappeared, to install them again. Your second 
course of action, if this has not done the trick, is to ask for advice from
userhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>, where there are 
people to help you who, unlike me, know how the system works.
_____

I know if sounds incompetent, but my search for the date and place of the 
original publication of what is, perhaps, Araucaria's most celebrated anagram 
has still not come up with the answer. It must have appeared around Christmas; 
it was some time ago and it may not have been in the Guardian. It is the one 
where the anagram of 'O hark the herald angels sing the boy's descent which 
lifted up the world' produced the solution WHILE SHEPHERDS WATCHED THEIR FLOCKS 
BY NIGHT ALL SEATED ON THE GROUND. Araucaria remembers the clue well enough, 
but not where and when it appeared. I should be most grateful if anyone could 
give me a clue.
_____

April's Genius puzzle (No 118 by Araucaria) produced 341 entries by the 
deadline. The first in was Barry J and the first from abroad was Pau... from 
Switzerland.

Congratulations to Kathryn Knight, who is the April winner.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 