
A moment of real class from Tom Rogic earned Celtic the victory and further 
strengthened the champions’ grip on theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> title race.

The Celtic midfielder’s controlled half-volley in the 23rd minute was enough 
to send Celtic 10 points clear of Aberdeen with a game on hand on the team who 
have finished runners-up in the past two seasons. Celtic passed up a stream of 
chances either side of the interval and defended well whenAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> pushed for an equaliser in the 
final quarter.

All but two of the eight players who came in for Celtic’s 4-0 victory over 
Ross County dropped out of the team. Stuart Armstrong and Emilio Izaguirre were 
the exceptions. Celtic playBorussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/19/celtic-v-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-live>
 away from home in the Champions League on Tuesday night.Aberdeen gave their 
captain, Ryan Jack, his first start in 10 weeks following knee surgery while 
top goalscorer Adam Rooney and James Maddison started on the bench, Wes Burns 
being preferred up front.

Erik Sviatchenko was booked in the first minute for chopping down Jonny Hayes 
as Aberdeen started on the front foot, but the closest they got to an early 
goal was when the winger had a penalty-area effort blocked by Jozo Simunovic.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> grew in possession but 
they had not seriously threatened before opening the scoring. Mikael Lustig 
found room to cross and the ball was only half-cleared to Rogic on the edge of 
the box. The Australia international took one touch with his right foot and 
quickly sliced across the ball with the outside of his left foot to send it 
into the corner of the net.

Aberdeen took time to respond but Niall McGinn twice found Andrew Considine in 
good positions with crosses. The left-back headed the first over and his volley 
son after was blocked.

Celtic had a great opportunity to double their lead just before the break but 
Armstrong shot wide from 12 yards.

Celtic maintained their pressure after the interval and Joe Lewis produced a 
brilliant fingertip save to stop Scott Sinclair’s effort curling in the top 
corner after the wide player cut inside.

After making small inroads at the start of the second period, Aberdeen brought 
on Rooney and Maddison in the 53rd minute but they were soon caught out by 
Lustig’s diagonal ball, Lewis again coming to the rescue to deny Rogic.

Lewis again kept the game alive when he saved from Moussa Dembélé and Rogic, 
before Rogic and Forrest both shot wide from 18 yards. Maddison was starting to 
pose questions to Celtic and his free-kick found Rooney but the striker’s 
backwards header was cleared in the goalmouth.

Joey Barton remains suspended after meeting with Rangers officials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/28/joey-barton-remains-suspended-rangers-meeting>
A melee broke out when Scott Brown kicked the ball against the grounded Graeme 
Shinnie, who had been decked by Lustig. The Celtic pair were booked along with 
Hayes, who pushed the visiting captain over.

Aberdeen made a late surge for an equaliser but Sviatchenko produced a 
last-ditch sliding tackle to deny Shinnie and Maddison volleyed over from 16 
yards.

Armstrong shot just over at the other end but the game finished in the Celtic 
area with Lewis among those attacking several testing set-pieces from Maddison, 
and Craig Gordon saved brilliantly from Sviatchenko’s misplaced header five 
minutes into injury-time.

Brendan Rodgers added his view to Scott Brown’s return to the international 
fold: “You saw how dominant he was, how good he was, and that can only be good 
for Scotland. He is an outstanding player and it’s a great tonic for Scotland.”
 