
A late goal by Toni Kroos sealed victory as Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> defeated an impressive Celta 
Vigo to win their first home La Liga game of the season.

Álvaro Morata scored his first goal for the hosts since returning from 
Juventus to break the deadlock on the hour before Fabián Orellana equalised for 
Celta in the 67th minute.

Kroos then finished off James Rodríguez’s cutback with a low drive from the 
edge of the area in the 81st minute, giving Real six points from their two 
league games.

“We were made to suffer against a team that were a lot better than I expected 
especially in attack,” Zinedine Zidane, the Real manager, said. “They caused 
problems for us on a few occasions but that’s normal … it’s never easy to win.”

With Cristiano Ronaldo, Karim Benzema and Keylor Navas sidelined, Zidane 
fielded an almost identical XI to the sidewho won 3-0 at Real Sociedad, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/21/gareth-bale-real-madrid-sociedad-la-liga-match-report>
 dropping only Mateo Kovacic to accommodate Luka Modric’s return from 
suspension. The playmaker rattled the bar and tested Sergio Álverez with two 
other efforts from distance but it was Celta who squandered the first clear 
opening.

Real Madrid 2-1 Celta Vigo: La Liga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/27/real-madrid-v-celta-vigo-la-liga-live>
Theo Bogonda robbed Dani Carvajal and raced down the wing before opting to 
shoot when John Guidetti was unmarked in the area, the Belgian firing wide to 
his team-mate’s frustration.

Celta were lively after the break too although they did not cause Kiko Casilla 
too many problems in goal.

Gareth Bale clipped the bar at the other end with a free-kick and the 
breakthrough arrived soon after. Modric slipped a pass to Marco Asensio and the 
winger was thwarted by Álverez, only for Morata to ram the loose ball into the 
net.

The former Juve forward almost grabbed a second a few minutes later when he 
latched on to a ball from Kroos and his effort bounced off the outside of the 
far post.

Celta then levelled following a crisp move between Daniel Wass, Guidetti and 
Orellana, the Chilean sending a rasping drive high beyond Casilla.

Zidane brought on Rodríguez and Mariano and it was the out of favour 
Colombian, who started on the bench for the third game running, who made the 
difference. After having a penalty appeal waved away and watching Bale squander 
a close-range header, Rodríguez chased down a loose ball on the right and slid 
it back for Kroos to score.

Atlético Madrid had to be content with a goalless draw away to Leganés, who 
are in their first season in the top division. Atlético have drawn both of 
their games this season while their neighbours Leganés, from the outskirts of 
the Spanish capital, are joint second, with four points.
 