
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 

Sean Lock at the Edinburgh fringe in 2002. Pure funny bones – instinctual. 
Every bit he did was a surprise. The best bit was him killing a budgie with a 
spoon. He was perfect that day; a solid hour laughing, mostly not knowing why.

The funniest sketch I’ve ever seen 

Bill Murray as Hercules who kept throwing his back out and would lie flat and 
it would fix itself. Those old sketches had no jokes and certainly no endings. 
They would squeeze the idea for ages. All through school, my friends and I 
thought Bill Murray was Canadian and were so proud. Turns out he ain’t.

The funniest hairstyle I’ve ever had 

Probably the mullet/perm I had when I went to the Soviet Union on a school 
trip. I’m pretty sure that got the ball rolling.

The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen 

The Day Today. Chris Morris changed some neurones in my mush.

The funniest person I know 

My wife’s totally inappropriate sense of humour. Especially in a crisis. 
Scientifically exact in her bad timing.

The funniest film I’ve ever seen 

When I was 15 at a huge party with drunk, awful teenagers everywhere, I found 
the TV den in the basement of the house, empty but playing Monty Python And The 
Holy Grail. I watched it three times. The first time I just stared at it. The 
second time I laughed like I’d never laughed in my life. The third time I wept. 
I felt such joy knowing that out there somewhere in the world were lots of 
people the same as me.

The funniest number 

I have to say they are all funny in their own way, as long as they’re not 
cruel or pick on the weak. Six.

The funniest book I’ve ever read 

Hands down The Brothers Karamazov. Beginning to end I laughed like a spoon.

The funniest joke I’ve ever heard 

“It’s a small world, but I wouldn’t want to paint it” – Steven Wright.

Tony Law is at Soho Theatre, W1, Thu 
<http://sohotheatre.com/whats-on/tony-law-enter-the-tonezone/> & Rainy Hall, 
Edinburgh, 4 to 28 Aug <https://www.assemblyfestival.com/event/240/>
 