
Manchester City could have been forearmed. Shortly before they kicked off 
against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/manchester-city-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 the League One leaders, Gillingham, lost 4-1 at the Ricoh. Table-toppers are 
sitting ducks (see League Two’s Plymouth, too) and Coventry City knocked off 
the Gills with glee and a goal rush of four in 11 minutes just before 
half-time. A hat-trick by Jacob Murphy bracketed a header by Ben Turner. Both 
are on loan.

They are not the only ones. Coventry live precariously still after the 
shambles that followed their grandiose move from Highfield Road in 2005. Tony 
Mowbray is their eighth manager in that time, discounting five interims. None 
has had two full seasons. The owners who led them through two 10-point 
deductions, relegation from the Championship and off to Northampton for a 
season may be better at hedge funds than football clubs but City, in new hands 
and recovering from the topiary, are back at the Ricoh, albeit as Wasps’ 
tenants, and daring to feel good about themselves.

Disaffected fans are returning and Saturday’s 14,747 in a total of 15,604 is 
way above anything since their first game back from Northampton (27,306) in 
September last year whenGillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> were also the visitors. Wins 
help and Coventry have not lost at home in the league this season. The manner 
of this demolition was compelling, the style scintillating and the word is 
spreading.

Not all visitors will be so compliant. It could be argued that Coventry’s 
muddle over the past decade reflects the city centre, where all is diggers, 
diversions and cones, and Gillingham, though they probably never saw it, might 
have taken their cue from the cones. They were constantly caught short to the 
ball as Coventry swept through them like flood water. Strictly City’s formation 
was probably 4-2-3-1 but there was such intensity, both going forward and 
covering, that it was hard to see how Gillingham, who enteredLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> from below under 
Martin Allen in 2013, had reached their elevated position.

Justin Edinburgh, steadily raising his profile via Newport County, was 
appointed in February, a month before Mowbray, and imposed stability but he was 
let down here, barring Bradley Dack’s reply in a tame second half.

Mowbray has done two full seasons, at both West Brom and Middlesbrough, and 
could be here for longer. He is well trusted with loanees. Besides Turner, a 
centre-back returning from Cardiff as injury cover, and the speedy Murphy, aged 
20 from Norwich, he has Adam Armstrong, 18 from Newcastle, and Ryan Kent, 19 
from Liverpool. Armstrong, England’s Under-19 captain, has 12 goals from 15 
games born of deceptive speed from a long body and short legs. Kent’s first 
feinting touch regularly threw off his marker if there was one. Prompted by 
John Fleck, Jim O’Brien and Romain Vincelot, a summer buy from Leyton Orient, 
they were made to look irresistible at the end of a bright week for young 
English talent. Joe Cole is getting match-fit in the wings. Sam Ricketts is the 
old hand on the field.

Mowbray struggled not to be excited. “It’s always difficult when you’re four 
up at half-time,” he said. “I had to calm them down as everyone was bouncing 
and we still had 45 minutes to play. All in all it was a top performance and we 
have to use that as our benchmark. Jacob’s a smashing lad. He and the other 
young lads are away from their mums and families. We have to look after them. 
I’ll go home to my family and we’ll all enjoy my birthday tomorrow. It’s always 
easier on the back of a win. Otherwise I might have been grumpy. But let’s not 
get carried away. I was top of the table twice at Boro on New Year’s Day and we 
missed out on the play-offs.”

On Tuesday Coventry, top of the table, are away at Bradford, unbeaten since 
September. Mowbray knows the danger.
 