
It is a stereotype that has long dogged the nation – crooked British teeth.


But figures published Monday suggest the joke may now be outdated, as dentists 
rake in record earnings from customers splashing out on cosmetic treatments in 
the hope of getting a Hollywood smile.


Britain’s top 100 dentists recorded a turnover of almost £1bn last year, a 22% 
rise since 2010.


Laser whitening, computerised smile analysis and straightening are among the 
cosmetic techniques that are drawing in the growing list of customers.


The trend suggests Britain may be moving towards the US fixation on dental 
cosmetics.


The contrast between the two countries is so stark that Americans have even 
wrongly believed that the comedianRicky Gervais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/17/ricky-gervais> wears 
intentionally funny false teeth.


Gervais said a US journalist praised him for being so dedicated to comedy that 
he was prepared to wear unflattering false teeth for his role as an English 
dentist in his film,Ghost Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/24/ghost-town>. And when he found 
out they were his real set, Gervais said the journalist was horrified.


“It’s like the biggest difference between the Brits and the Americans,” he 
said. “They are obsessed with perfect teeth.”





Peter Alderson, managing director of independent finance provider LDF, which 
compiled the figures, said the rise in British dentists’ income reflected 
changing attitudes.


“Increasing numbers of dental patients are starting to explore cosmetic 
treatments like laser whitening and are willing to pay significant amounts of 
money for cutting-edge services, especially if they are delivered in a more 
exclusive, private clinic-style environment.”


He said the business was also being aided by mergers and takeovers in the 
sector, with some large private-equity-backed dental groups growing 
significantly and operating more than 400 practices. “The biggest dental groups 
are able to invest very heavily in their practices’ equipment, furnishings and 
IT systems, and that has raised the stakes in the profession markedly.


“If dentists want to make the most of the demand for cosmetic dentistry, they 
need the type of apparatus and environment that brings in clients, but that 
type of equipment routinely costs tens of thousands of pounds.”


Most British dentists are self-employed contractors and can have the potential 
to earn huge salaries. For NHS dentists, who do not offer cosmetic treatments, 
salaries start at £38,000, while specialist dental consultants can earn more 
than £100,000.

 