
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
will consider whether to move their European home ties from Wembley back to 
White Hart Lane if they end up in the Europa League and Moussa Sissoko has said 
it would be better for them to play at their home stadium.

Tottenham’s 2-1 defeat at Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-tottenham-hotspur-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 on Tuesday signalled the end of their hopes of reaching the knockout stage of 
the Champions League and they will qualify for the Europa League if they avoid 
defeat against CSKA Moscow in their final group game on 7 December at Wembley.

“I think it would be good for us to play at home in the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>, and by home, I mean 
White Hart Lane,” Sissoko said. “Going home would make it easier for us. We 
know the stadium and it would be better for us.”

Summer signings and lack of savvy: why Tottenham failed in the Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/why-tottenham-failed-champions-league>
Tottenham’s Champions League demise owed much to their defeats against Monaco 
and Bayer Leverkusen at Wembley, which they have used while their new stadium 
is being built adjacent to White Hart Lane. Uefa has deemed the club’s 
traditional home to be unfit to stage Champions League ties “owing to the 
impact on access, capacity and rights delivery of the construction work”.

Uefa would consider the staging of Europa League ties at White Hart Lane, 
where the capacity is capped at below 32,000. “Upon a specific request by a 
club, Uefa would look into it,” a spokesman said.

It is understood there is no binding agreement between Tottenham and the 
Football Association that states the club must play Europa League ties at 
Wembley this season. Spurs have the option to do so but could choose not to. 
The FA will take its lead from Tottenham and, if it turns out they will play in 
the Europa League, there will be discussions between the two parties.

Spurs have yet to decide whether to play any Europa League ties at Wembley or 
White Hart Lane. They are weighing up their options and a move back to White 
Hart Lane would please not only Sissoko. There are other players in the squad 
who have expressed reservations in private about playing at Wembley.

For all of its appeal the national stadium has felt unfamiliar to the players 
and, in short, simply not like home. A case could also be made for Wembley 
having diluted Tottenham’s advantage. Unlike White Hart Lane, it has never felt 
particularly hostile to opposing Champions League teams.

The discussion has raised an interesting question that relates to next season, 
when Spurs have the option to play all of their fixtures – domestic and 
European –at Wembley, while the work on their stadium is completed.

The club said in May their agreement with Wembley “additionally provides an 
option to play all our Premier League and cup home games at Wembley for the 
2017-18 season. The timetable is also dependent on infrastructure, transport 
and associated commitments being delivered by Transport for London and Haringey 
council.”

As yet nothing has been signed between Tottenham and the FA for next season at 
Wembley. Sissoko’s comments, though, raise the prospect of the players being 
less than comfortable at the national stadium for a whole season. Tottenham 
have always said they plan to take up the option of Wembley.

The Champions League exit has provided a far from ideal buildup to Saturday’s 
visit to Chelsea, where Tottenham’s title hopes ended last season in 
acrimonious fashion.Spurs had a record nine players booked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/spurs-referee-report-chelsea-premier-league>
 in the 2-2 draw in May.

“I watched the game on TV and it was very tough,” Sissoko, the £30m summer 
signing from Newcastle United, said. “I saw the tackles flying in and it is 
going to be another massive game on Saturday. I am sure we will be ready for 
it. Every derby is tense and this will be no different. All the players will be 
up for it, do not worry. It will be another big battle.”
 