
For Mauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino>, the devil is always 
in the detail. Tottenham Hotspur will begin a new chapter in their history when 
they step out to face Monaco in the Champions League at Wembley on Wednesday 
night and, for the club’s manager, it has meant a fresh set of markings at the 
training ground.

Pochettino has highlighted in the past how White Hart Lane is one of the 
smallest playing surfaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/28/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-pitch-small>
 in the Premier League and there have been theories about how it can stifle 
Tottenham against opponents who sit deep and mass players behind the ball. The 
Wembley pitch is five metres longer and two metres wider, which may not sound 
like much but, when it is put another way, the difference is 545sq m – which 
does sound significant.

Tottenham Hotspur will play next season’s Champions League matches at Wembley 
Stadium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/tottenham-champions-league-fixtures-wembley-stadium>
The bottom line is Pochettino inhabits a world in which the finest of margins 
can make the difference. And so, in the countdown to Tottenham’s big night, he 
has trained on two pitches that replicate the 105m x 69m dimensions of the 
national stadium. They have alternated between them, Pochettino said, in order 
to look after the grass.

“Wembley is a little bit bigger and this can help the teams that play along 
the grass and keep possession,” Pochettino said. “Teams that build from the 
back, like us, have more space, more possibility to play and it’s more 
difficult for the opponent to press you. We believe in the way we play and this 
is a good chance to play on a big pitch. We need to adapt our game.”

Pochettino said his squad’s routine would not change; they will arrive at the 
stadium three-and-a-half hours before the kick-off and there will be a “very 
nice room” for the team meeting. The traffic problems around the ground may not 
be as severe as those at White Hart Lane, he added with a smile.

The excitement is mounting. “We trained today with the Champions League balls 
and the bibs with theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> on, and it’s difficult 
to describe the feeling,” Pochettino said.

The club is making every effort to smooth the transition; to create a home 
from home while White Hart Lane is deemed to fall foul of Uefa’s regulations 
because of building work.

The supporters have been urged to dress in all-white, while the Wembley arch 
will be lit in lily white and Tottenham Ladies players will hand out flags to 
youngsters in the upper tier. Happily for lovers of overblown pre-match 
montages, the montage from White Hart Lane will play on the giant screens. On a 
practical note, fans have been advised to get there early.

Nothing will truly prepare Pochettino and his players for the moment when they 
depart the dressing room to be assaulted by the colour and noise of what could 
be the largest home attendance in English club history. Tottenham anticipate 
around 85,000; the record is the 84,467 who watched Manchester City’s FA Cup 
sixth-round tie against Stoke City at Maine Road in 1934.

“I can’t really imagine what will happen in the moment when we walk from the 
tunnel to the pitch,” Pochettino said. “It will be an emotional moment.”

Wembley will be down on its 90,000 capacity because of Uefa requirements but 
it is a sellout and, withMonaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> 
having been given a tiny proportion of the tickets, it stands to be quite the 
occasion for those who love Tottenham. The atmosphere inside White Hart Lane 
when the club played their only previous season in the Champions League in 
2010-11 was exhilarating and there have been those who have wondered whether 
Wembley will retain the sound in quite the same way. Will it feel like home?

When Arsenal staged their Champions League ties at Wembley, between 1998 and 
2000, Arsène Wenger described it as being a “nightmare”. The Arsenal manager 
has said the grandest stage in English football served to give opponents a 
lift. Tottenham will have to contend with that, too, but, right now optimism 
holds sway.

“It’s going to be fantastic,” Eric Dier said. “For it to be at Wembley is very 
special. Hopefully, we can create some very good memories for Tottenham fans.” 
Those supporters recall Ricky Villa’s mazy dribble against City and Paul 
Gascoigne’s free-kick against Arsenal but both of those moments are decades old.

The new Wembley has generally been unkind to Spurs, with four defeats in five 
visits – the win came in the 2008 League Cup final against Chelsea, when 
Jonathan Woodgate’s extra-time goal was decisive.

Pochettino spoke about how Champions League qualification had given the sales 
pitch to new signings a boost but he was also keen to inject a note of 
perspective. “The Premier League is the toughest competition in the world,” he 
said. “When you compete against Man United, Man City, Liverpool, Chelsea and 
Arsenal, we’re talking about the top clubs in the world. Now, we play Monaco, 
CSKA Moscow and Bayer Leverkusen in the Champions League but it’s just as tough 
to play Monaco as it is to play against Stoke, in Stoke. There is nothing to 
prove.”
 