
Tottenham’s attempt to sign Georges-Kévin Nkoudou is on the brink of collapse 
after a breakdown in negotiations withMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> over the £11m winger.

Nkoudou had looked set to complete his protracted transfer to White Hart Lane 
this week after the Cameroon forward Clinton Njie received his work permit to 
move the other way on a season-long loan. However, despite reassurances the 
deal would go ahead from sources close to the player, it is understood 
Marseille are unhappy with the structure of the payments being proposed by the 
Tottenham chairman, Daniel Levy, having previously agreed to pay the majority 
of the fee up front.

Leicester make £23m offer for Brazil forward Gabriel Barbosa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/leicester-bid-gabriel-gabigol-barbosa-brazil-santos>
Reports in France on Tuesday claimed that following the departure of the 
Marseille president, Vincent Labrune, after the club was sold, Levy attempted 
to renegotiate the offer for Nkoudou, who completed his medical almost three 
weeks ago and has been in London ever since. A new offer comprising an initial 
£4.2m that could eventually reach £11m is said to have fallen way short of 
Marseille’s valuation. Spurs are now understood to be ready to walk away from 
the deal.

It is also understood the breakdown is connected to Paul Mitchell’s imminent 
departure as Tottenham’s head of recruitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/tottenham-head-of-recruitment-paul-mitchell-quits-nightmare>
, although the club have insisted that is not the case. The 34-year-old was 
prised from Southampton in November 2014 and followed the manager, Mauricio 
Pochettino, from St Mary’s to White Hart Lane. He was keen to add Nkoudou – a 
21-year-old who scored 10 goals in all competitions last season – to the 
purchase of the Holland striker Vincent Janssen, with Pochettino having 
convinced the former Nantes player to move to Spurs after speaking to him on 
the phone.

Tottenham could turn their attentions elsewhere, with Lille’s Sofiane Boufal 
having been linked in the past. However, with Mitchell having played a 
significant role in identifying targets, it remains to be seen whether they 
have an alternative in mind, meaning Njie and the Belgium forward Nacer Chadli 
could be forced to stay put.
 