
A bellow of rage came last month from Linda A., provoked by the Quick 
crossword for 22 October <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12621>: 
"Could you PLEASE remind today's setter that this is England, NOT the USA!" Her 
gripe related to there being no less than four solutions in that puzzle that 
were by nature transatlantic: NAVAJO and SIOUX, (President Jimmy) CARTER and 
SOCCER (which, I assume, she thought all true Englishwomen should call 
'football'. Finessing the assertion that 'this is England' (rather than the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and ignoring the rights 
of rugby players to call Association Football 'soccer' rather than 'football', 
does Linda have any kind of valid point? On the substance of her plaint I have 
to say that I think not. The names of major Native American peoples and of the 
better known US presidents (though perhaps not John Tyler or Chester Arthur, 
for example) must be within the acceptable range for Guardian Quick crossword 
solvers.

But this raises another point. Are actual Americanisms acceptable in Guardian 
crosswords? We do not allow American spellings of words, or at least not 
without making it clear in the clue that something funny is going on or where, 
as with Pearl Harbor, we are dealing with a proper noun. But what about 'fall' 
for 'autumn' or 'auto/automobile' for 'car'? Faced with difficult questions of 
this kind, I tend to adopt the standard position of all fence-sitters and say 
that each case must be treated on its merits!

Sometimes, though, things are the other way round. I got an equally sharp 
complaint about a Quick puzzle in August where the clue was "A railway track 
worker" with the solution LINEMAN. All my (English English) dictionaries say 
that a lineman is someone employed in laying and maintaining railway track. But 
my complainant said that this was yet another Guardian crossword error and 
asked how it was that neither the setter nor I had heard of the well-known 
Jimmy Webb song, Wichita Lineman, famously recorded by Glen Campbell, which 
begins with the words: 'I am a lineman for the county', because we would then 
know that a lineman is one who works on overhead power lines or telephone 
wires. As it happens I both know and like the song, but that does not alter the 
fact that my (English English) dictionaries tell me that 'lineman' (in Glen 
Campbell's sense) is an Americanism for what in England (and other parts of the 
UK) we call a linesman, which I can see is confusing for Guardian solvers who 
are also C&W lovers.

_____

I am regularly asked why it is not possible to search the archive of Cryptic 
puzzles by setter. People seem to want to take batches by a particular setter 
with them on holiday, for example, or to work through the puzzles of one setter 
to compare them with another's for style or difficulty. The present facility on 
the crossword home page only allows you to search by setter for a particular 
month.

In principle the archive could, of course, be programmed to allow this to be 
possible, but the amount of work involved is such that at present the resources 
are not going to be allocated. However, there is an indirect way that can get 
you there. It is true that you have to find one crossword by your targeted 
setter by searching by month and year. But having found that one puzzle and 
brought it up on your screen, if you click on the setter's name above the grid, 
the whole body of his or her puzzles in the archive is listed for you. For 
example, with the late Bunthorne, if look for him for any year before he died 
and bring up one of his puzzles, you will find yourself offered a total of 146 
of them with their serial numbers and you can take it from there.
_____

October's Genius (No 88 by Pasquale) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-26271,00.html> attracted a 
healthy 285 entries. Tony of Ealing, London W5 was again first in at 01:49, 
with Ian of London N14 arriving 11 minutes later. The first correct entry from 
abroad was once more from Australia: Peter of Montville, Queensland, but not 
until 08:10. There were 24 correct entries by the end of the first day.

Congratulations to Andy Knott from Twickenham, Middlesex, who is October's 
Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with it, 
please emailsubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com> . If you 
have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> .
 