
Stoke have confirmed the signing of Wilson Palacios from Tottenham less than 
an hour before the close of the transfer window. The 27-year-old has penned a 
four-year contract at the Britannia Stadium after being deemed surplus to 
requirements by Tottenham.

"This is a fantastic deal for the football club because Wilson has proved 
himself to be a top class performer at the highest level," said the Stoke 
manager, Pulis. "He has a considerable amount of international experience and 
played a prominent part in getting Tottenham into the Champions League only two 
years ago."

QPR have completed the signing of the Manchester City winger Shaun 
Wright-Phillips. The 29-year-old becomes the fourth major signing of the Tony 
Fernandes era, following Joey Barton, Luke Young and Armand Traore to west 
London. The transfer brings an end to Wright-Phillips's second spell at City 
and he admitted Rangers's ambition helped sway him.

"I am very delighted at the moment, I am just really looking forward to it all 
kicking off," he told Sky Sports News. "After speaking to the manager and 
hearing the direction this club are going in, I wanted to help that happen."

QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> also agreed a fee with 
Sunderland for their 26-year-old defender Anton Ferdinand. Ferdinand, the 
younger brother of the Manchester United centre-back Rio, moved to the 
north-east for a reported fee of £8m three years ago from West Ham. He is now 
set to discuss personal terms with the Premier League newcomers in London.

David Ngog has completed his transfer to Bolton Wanderers from Liverpool. The 
French striker joined the Reds from Paris St Germain in July 2008 and went on 
to make 94 appearances, scoring 19 goals.Chelsea's Gael Kakuta has joined Bolton
 on loan until 1 January. 

Wigan Athletic have signed the 28-year-old Scotland forward Shaun Maloney from 
Celtic on an initial two-year deal for a fee believed to be about £1m. 
Maloney's deal includes the option for an additional third year. "We're 
delighted to welcome Shaun, who has great experience and is at the perfect age 
to come and bring something different to our squad," said the Wigan manager 
Roberto Martínez.

Martinez had added further depth to his squad with the signing of Chelsea's 
Holland Under-21 defender Patrick van Aanholt on a season-long loan. The 
21-year-old left-sided player becomes the third new arrival at the DW Stadium 
in just over 24 hours with Almeria's Albert Crusat having signed a permanent 
deal. "Patrick is a player with enormous potential," said Martinez. 
"Technically he is very gifted, very comfortable in possession and physically, 
he uses his intensity to defend very effectively. He can play left-back or left 
wing-back and without a doubt he's got a phenomenal career ahead of him.

"We rate Patrick really highly and his professionalism and his personal 
attributes will be a huge asset to us this season. Like Tom Cleverley (on loan 
from Manchester United) last year he is a young player who is hungry to learn 
his trade and I feel both parties can benefit hugely from the move."

David Bentley has joined West Ham from Tottenham on a season-long loan, while 
theArsenal midfielder Henri Lansbury has also moved to east London on an 
initial season-long loan after Scott Parkercompleted his protracted transfer to 
Spurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/31/tottenham-west-ham-scott-parker>
. Lansbury featured in Arsenal's 8-2 defeat at Manchester United, but has 
struggled to secure regular football at the Emirates.

Fulham have completed the signing of the Juventus defender Zdenek Grygera on a 
one-year deal. The 31-year-old Czech, who spent the past four seasons at Juve, 
joins on a free transfer after his contract in Italy was terminated by mutual 
consent on Tuesday.

Grygera faced Fulham in March 2010 when he came off the bench during Fulham's 
4-1 Europa League win againstJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> at Craven Cottage. Grygera told 
the club's website: "It has always been an ambition for me to play in the 
Premier League and I am looking forward to an exciting new chapter in my career 
with Fulham."

Birmingham's Scott Dann has joined Blackburn Rovers for a fee thought to be in 
the region of £6m. The Blackburn manager, Steve Kean, worked with the former 
Coventry defender during his time as assistant manager to Chris Coleman at the 
Ricoh Arena.

The Liverpool midfielder Christian Poulsen has joined French club Evian on a 
one-year deal. The Denmark international struggled to make an impression at 
Anfield after signing for £4.5m from Juventus last summer. ALiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> statement said: "Everyone 
would like to wish Christian the best of luck with his future career."

Manchester City have allowed striker John Guidetti to join Feyenoord on loan 
for the rest of the season. Guidetti has previously had loan spells with IF 
Brommapojkarna and Burnley, and scored 17 goals for City's reserves last season.

St Etienne have completed the signing of the Ivory Coast international Max 
Gradel fromLeeds United on a four-year deal. Gradel, 23, had handed in a 
transfer request in the hope of pushing through a return to French football 
where he started his career as a youngster at Championnet Sport.

The former Manchester United forward Diego Forlán has completed his move from 
Atlético Madridto Internazionale on a two-year deal, for an undisclosed fee.
 