
Tranmere’s unbroken 94-year spell in the Football League is over after a 3-2 
defeat at Plymouth left them adrift at the bottom ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>. The result was their 
fifth consecutive defeat, and followed the departure of their manager, Micky 
Adams, last weekend.

The former FA chief executive and ex-Rovers player Mark Palios, who took over 
with his wife last year, described it as a “devastating” blow for a club that 
reached the League Cup final in 2000 under the player-manager John Aldridge, 
and missed out three times in successive playoffs for promotion to the Premier 
League.

“For all of the fans and for myself it feels devastating today,” Palios told 
Sky. “But tomorrow the sun will come up. It’s not a disaster tomorrow. The fans 
today gave me a humbling experience and something that makes me even more 
determined to make sure we get back as quick as we can.”

Cheltenham were also relegated to the Conference for the first time since 
1999, asHartlepool secured their safety. Gary Johnson’s Robins were beaten 1-0 
by second-placedShrewsbury, who celebrated promotion to League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> thanks to Jean-Louis 
Akpa Akpro’s strike.

Hartlepool’s Jordan Hugill, a former Tranmere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tranmere> loanee, scored Pools’ winner 
againstExeter after the Grecians striker Graham Cummins had cancelled out Scott 
Fenwick’s opener.

Shrewsbury’s win meant already-promoted Burton were unable to seal the title 
despite a 3-1 victory overNorthampton, with Lucas Akins scoring twice and Phil 
Edwards also on target for the Brewers and Lawson D’Ath grabbing the Cobblers’ 
consolation.

In the race for the final automatic promotion spot, Southend head into the 
final day two points ahead ofBury and three ahead of Wycombe as Phil Brown’s 
side moved into third. The Shrimpers kept an eighth clean sheet and recorded a 
seventh straight win, despite losing Ben Coker to a red card, as Michael Timlin 
earned them a 1-0 victory overLuton. Gareth Ainsworth’s Wycombe dropped two 
places as a Paul Mullin strike gaveMorecambe an away success, while goals from 
Tom Soares and Ryan Lowe moved Bury up to fourth following a 2-0 success over
AFC Wimbledonat the JD Stadium.

Morecambe are Southend’s opponents next Saturday while Bury visit 
already-relegated Tranmere and Wycombe travel to Northampton.

Stevenage booked their play-off berth as Dean Parrett scored the only goal in 
a home success overCarlisle, and seventh-placed Plymouth will almost certainly 
join them in the end-of-season knockout competition after extending their 
advantage over Luton to three points. Ross Reid, Lewis Alessandra and Tareiq 
Holmes-Dennis all found the net for the Pilgrims as efforts from Max Power and 
Kayode Odejayi for Tranmere proved to be in vain.

Jamie Cureton, Matt Partridge, Frankie Raymond and Jodi Jones were all on 
target asDagenham thrashed Accrington 4-0, while Kemar Roofe and Danny Hylton 
netted asOxford beat Cambridge 2-0.

Portsmouth picked up their first three points of the post-Andy Awford era by 
beatingMansfield 2-1. The Stags were down to 10 men as Ritchie Sutton was sent 
off after 78 seconds and Matt Tubbs and Jed Wallace scored in either half for 
Pompey, with Jack Thomas pulling one back.

York’s last home game of the campaign ended in a 2-0 loss to Newport as David 
Tutonda and Lee Minshull added to their accounts in the second half.

In League One, a Joe Garner hat-trick helped Preston take a huge step towards 
promotion with a 3-0 win at home toSwindon. But victory for MK Dons, 3-2 at 
Rochdale, means Preston’s potential promotion party will have to wait until 
next weekend. North End made easy work of much-changed opponents, with Garner 
celebrating his League One player of the year award in style. MK Dons remain a 
point behind after Karl Robinson watched Samir Carruthers and then Dean 
Bowditch earn them a comfortable lead at Spotland. The substitute Daniel Powell 
sealed the points either side of consolations from Peter Vincenti and Ian 
Henderson.

Another top-class display by Bristol City gave the champions a 2-0 win at 
Chesterfield, who nonetheless secured a play-off place thanks to Dale’s defeat.

City were always in control after Kieran Agard gave them a first-half lead and 
a header from Aden Flint early in the second wrapped up the points.

At the other end of the table, a late Michael Brown goal for Port Vale secured 
a 2-1 win overYeovil to ensure survival.

Tom Pope’s 10th of the campaign was cancelled out by Gozie Ugwu before the 
former Sheffield United midfielder bundled in the winner.

Colchester also left it late to keep their survival hopes alive as they saw off
Fleetwood 3-2. Crawley, meanwhile, are just three points clear after a dramatic 
4-3 loss atPeterborough.

Notts County’s fight for survival will also go down to the final day after 
they secured a 2-1 win overDoncaster. Goals in each half from Garry Thompson 
and Liam Noble were enough to seal the points despite Nathan Tyson’s late 
penalty.

Crewe gave themselves a chance with a 3-1 away win at relegation rivals 
Coventry.

Meanwhile, Leyton Orient still have a chance of playing in the third tier next 
season but they could only draw 1-1 at home toSheffield United.

Elsewhere Walsall’s top scorer Tom Bradshaw scored both goals in victory over 
Oldham while Jon Stead ended his goal drought as Bradford overcame Yorkshire 
rivalsBarnsley 1-0 on a emotional day at Valley Parade, where the 30th 
anniversary of the ground’s tragic fire was honoured.

Scunthorpe eventually beat Gillingham 2-1 after play was halted for 27 minutes 
due to a torrential downpour. Hakeeb Adelakun wiped out Luke Norris’ opener 
before Gary McSheffrey finished smartly.Agencies
 