
Caterham and Marussia, who both went into administration towards the end of 
last month, have made an almost ghost-like return toFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>.

Both teams missed last Sunday’s United States Grand Prix in Austin and will be 
absent once more in Brazil this weekend after being given special dispensation.

But they have both lodged entries to compete in next year’s world 
championship. And they haven’t given up hope of running in the final race of 
the season in Abu Dhabi on 23 November.

FIA regulations state that all teams must be entered for next year by 1 
November. And the entry fee must be paid by the end of the month. 
Administrators have registered the teams to make them more attractive to future 
buyers.

Finbarr O’Connell, one of Caterham’s co-administrators representing Smith & 
Williamson, said on Wednesday: “This is restructuring, and we’re clearly trying 
to restructure so a new owner can race this season and into next season. “With 
a team having an entry in the championship it makes them a far more viable 
proposition for us to do a deal. It’s absolutely essential. We’ve explained to 
the FIA and FOM we are looking for a new owner, but the paperwork for the entry 
has been done. We’re hoping the new owner will then pick up things like the 
fees and finalising the 2015 design.”

As for the double-pointer in the last race of the season, O’Connell said: “We 
are now extremely hopeful that we will be going to Abu Dhabi. I think I’ve got 
enough confidence now to say I’d be very surprised if we were not racing in Abu 
Dhabi. I’m now really hopeful for the future of the team.

“There are a number of parties involved, but because the financial commitments 
are so huge it is difficult for people to commit. But I’m hoping that by the 
time the sport is in Abu Dhabi we will have finalised a deal before then, or at 
that point. I’m very, very hopeful the team will be in Abu Dhabi. We are making 
arrangements to go to there as we speak.”

Marussia – or Manor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor> Grand Prix as 
they have been rebranded - stand to gain ninth-place prize money with their 
best ever finish.

Meanwhile, Gerard Lopez, representing his Lotus team as well as Sauber and 
Force India, continues to negotiate with Formula One’s majority shareholders 
CVC as a solution is sought for the sport’s financial malaise, which threatens 
the future of the smaller teams.

He said: “Talks are progressing well but I don’t expect any news before 
Friday.”

CVC are believed to ready to help the smaller teams with an extra payment of 
£100m.
 