
"People feel this is like the return of colonialism," says Athumani Mkambala, 
chairman of Mhaga village in ruralTanzania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tanzania>. "Colonialism in the form of 
investment."

A quarter of the village's land in Kisarawe district was acquired by a British 
biofuels company in 2008, with the promise of financial compensation, 700 jobs, 
water wells, improved schools, health clinics and roads. But the company has 
gone bust, leaving villagers not just jobless but landless as well. The same 
story is playing out acrossAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
as foreign investors buy up land but leave some of the poorest people on Earth 
worse off when their plans fail.

The tale of London-based Sun Biofuels's misadventure in Kisarawe links the 
broken hopes of the villagers to offshore tax havens and mysterious new owners, 
tracked down by theObserver, and ultimately to petrol pumps in the UK and 
across Europe. The final link results from the mandatory blending of biofuels 
into European petrol and diesel. The aim is to reduce carbon emissions, but 
many say biofuels actually increase pollution. The G20 meeting next week will 
discuss the issue, following a stark report it received in June from theWorld 
Bank, World Trade Organisation, UN and others calling for biofuels subsidies to 
be abandoned 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/04bf4788-92b6-11e0-bd88-00144feab49a,dwp_uuid=a955630e-3603-11dc-ad42-0000779fd2ac.html#axzz1bnoEi3dV>
.

"The situation in Kisarawe is heartbreaking, but the real tragedy is that it 
is far from unique. Communities across Africa and beyond are losing their land 
as a result of the massive biofuel targets set by our government," said Josie 
Cohen atdevelopment group ActionAid <http://www.actionaid.org.uk/biofuels>, 
which works in Kisarawe. "Like it or not, everyone who drives a car or catches 
a bus is involved in this problem, as all UK petrol and diesel is mixed with 
biofuels."

It was the promise of this lucrative export market that led Sun Biofuels to 
Africa to plantjatropha, the seeds of which can be processed into biodiesel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2009/may/05/jatropha-biofuels-food-crops>
. Mkambala's first contact with the company was in 2006 through the former 
Kisarawe MP, Athumani Janguo. "People trusted him. We thought all our problems 
would be solved," Mkambala told theObserver. He says no compensation has been 
paid for the land, on which villagers used to hunt animals, gather firewood, 
wild mushrooms and honey.

Mhaga has no electricity, and water has to be carried each day from a well 
several kilometres away, back to the small mud or concrete-block houses in 
which 1,000 people live. "Water is everything," says local activist Halima Ali, 
sitting with three of her children on the earth floor of their home. "Because 
they promised there would be water available, everyone was happy." There would 
be more time for farming and more time for her children to go to school, she 
says. But the company drilled only a 6in-wide hole in the village, despite 
having sunk a 100m well on the plantation. "We thought something very good had 
come to the village, to lift our standard of life, but now we are only crying," 
she says.

Sun Biofuels <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/biofuels> was the first 
company to come to the area and about 50 people in Mhaga rushed to take jobs at 
its plantation, some queueing for days for the £42-a-month salary. Saidi Abasi 
was one, but he was soon unhappy. He asked his employer why a promised pay rise 
failed to materialise. "The reply was 'if you want to work, work. If you don't, 
get out'," he says.

Abasi's job was spraying pesticides, but he claims he was initially given no 
protective equipment. "During spraying, we became like drunk people," he says. 
When his contract was terminated after Sun Biofuels went into administration, 
he says he was not paid the full severance pay due for his 18 months of service.

Mhaga's crowded school teaches 257 children and was promised new classrooms, 
books and materials, says teacher Rhamadani Lwinde, but all that appeared were 
a few portable blackboards. In addition to the village land, the company also 
took 670 hectares of Lwinde's family land, he says. He was offered 13m 
Tanzanian shillings (£4,835), which he says was not a good price, "but we were 
advised to accept it by the district authorities. If we had problems we would 
sort it out later, they said." In the end he says he was paid for just 85 
hectares.

In the nearby village of Mtamba, villagers tell the same stories of broken 
promises and unpaid compensation. Tabu Koba says he was one of 11 people to 
lose land and one of nine who received no money at all. "We are very angry," he 
says. "My children have now left school but have nowhere to farm."

Sun Biofuels and two related companies went into administration in August, but 
their shares in a Tanzanian subsidiary – Sun Biofuels Tanzania, which did not 
go bust – were sold. The insolvency company directed theObserver to Christopher 
Egerton-Warburton <http://www.lhgp.com/warburton.htm> and a company called 
Thirty Degrees East, based in the tax haven of Mauritius. Egerton-Warburton is 
a former Goldman Sachs banker and now a partner at the London-based merchant 
bank Lion's Head Global Partners. "We are part of a consortium that purchased 
the shares of Sun Biofuels Tanzania," he said. "Given that we are currently in 
the process of raising additional funds, I am not at liberty to discuss 
publicly or off the record about our long-term plans."

Egerton-Warburton said a site visit was not possible, but when the Observer 
went to the plantation it was able to interview farm managerAmbilikile 
Mwenisongole <http://www.linkedin.com/pub/ambilikile-mwenisongole/23/a0/bb1>, 
who has worked there for four years and lives on site. He confirmed that fewer 
than 50 of the 700 workers remained and that the plantation was not operating 
due to the change of ownership. Mwenisongole said the progress on the water 
wells and other social services were "not on target because of the transition", 
but he denied that workers lacked tools or protective equipment and rejected 
claims that access to an ancestral graveyard had been blocked. He blamed the 
complaints on rumours spread by "lazy" villagers.

It was not possible for the villagers to get their land back, Mwenisongole 
said. "It is now owned by the government. The government was meant to 
compensate the land owners." In Tanzania, large land deals are done through the 
district government, which acquires the land and then leases it to companies. 
District officials have told villagers that Sun Biofuels did not pay all the 
money due, but refused to see theObserver.

Mwenisongole named Kenyan Alan Mayers as the new chief executive of Sun 
Biofuels Tanzania. Mayers said he could not comment on the previous owners' 
failure to provide wells and classrooms, but added: "We are looking into the 
matter and our community relations officer is in constant contact with the 
villages." Villagers say that there has been just one recent meeting.

Mayers said all compensation for land and all due severance pay had been paid, 
and that he was unaware of claims by ex-workers that national insurance 
payments were missing. He added: "We are focused on a positive, collaborative 
relationship with local people."

Yet Kisarawe MP Selemani Saidi Jafo said: "I am the MP and I am not yet 
informed there is a new owner. What is the secret behind it? I need investors 
to come to my district, especially to help bring employment for many people. I 
prefer a win-win project, but this is not a win-win." Why Sun Biofuels went 
bust is unknown, as attempts to contact the previous owners were unsuccessful. 
Whatever the reason, the company is far from alone. A large jatropha plantation 
created by a Dutch firm calledBioshape in the southern Tanzanian district of 
Kilwa has also gone bankrupt 
<http://ipsnews.net/newsTVE.asp?idnews=54783%E2%80%9Dhttp://ipsnews.net/newsTVE.asp?idnews=54783>
, leaving locals complaining of missing land payments. Also in Tanzania, a 
large ethanol biofuel project set up bySwedish company Sekab went bust 
<http://www.biofuelsdigest.com/blog2/2009/03/17/skab-pulls-plug-on-250-million-tanzanian-ethanol-project-citing-economic-conditions/>
. In both cases, the land has not been returned to its owners.

Further afield, in Ghana, a Norwegian-backed jatropha project has collapsed, 
while in Mozambique a UK-linked company called Procana, behind a huge ethanol 
project, has folded in acrimony. TheObserver's investigations and those of 
journalistStefano Valentino <http://www.freereporter.info/wordpress> have 
identified at least 30 abandoned biofuels projects in 15 African countries.

The thirst for biofuels to meet the UK and EU's rising targets has led British 
companies to lead the charge into Africa 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/may/31/biofuel-plantations-africa-british-firms>
. Half the 3.2m hectares of biofuel land identified is linked to 11 British 
companies, the biggest proportion of any country. ActionAid's estimate suggests 
that up to 6m hectares has been acquired. But with landowners frequently 
illiterate and unaware of their rights, the potential for exploitation is high.

In Kisarawe, the villagers do not know if the promises will ever be kept. They 
feel deeply betrayed and are increasingly angry as time passes without answers. 
"If we have not got our rights by December, we will slash the jatropha plants," 
says Mkambala. "That will be the clearest sign that we do not need this company 
here."
 