
The former England coach Glenn Hoddle, we all remember, made the fatal mistake 
of taking the mumbo jumbo mantra from Russell Crowe's Gladiator ("What we do in 
life, echoes in eternity")a bit too seriously 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sport/football/265903.stm>. Or was it the other way 
round? In any case, the idea that karma does indeed have a role to play in 
football does appear a little less ridiculous with every passing minute this 
spring. In fact it's nigh on impossible to look at the terrible fate that has 
befallen Hertha Berlin as anything else but divine retribution for sins 
committed in a former life. Or last season, to be more accurate.

Supporters of the Spreesiders will probably violently shake their heads in 
disagreement at this point, but this column has still barely recovered from 
witnessing one or two Hertha matches in 2008-09, when they played (if that is 
indeed the right word) a brand of football so dull, negative and downright 
misanthropic that one opponent after another lost the will to live. By the end 
of the campaign the whole Bundesliga was ready to commit hara-kiri, just to 
make the pain go away. ForgetJorge Valdano's notorious quip 
<http://www.redcafe.net/f7/shit-hanging-stick-154877/> about Rafa Benítez's 
less than aesthetically pleasing Reds: you couldn't see the pitch for all the 
excrement in the Olympic stadium.

This year, it's more or less the same. Tedious but very competent catenaccio 
with excellent results has turned into slightly less tedious general 
incompetence without results. They looked doomed going into the winter break 
with a grand total of six points after 17 games and they're all but out now, 
after picking up only nine more. On Saturday, Hertha failed to beat fellow 
strugglers Nürnberg in another must-win match. In front of a hopeful crowd of 
57,000, the home side started well and created plenty of chances. Theofanis 
Gekas's lone goal to make it 1-0 represented scant reward for their dominance 
after 45 minutes. Then Dieter Hecking's men regrouped while Hertha slowly 
buckled under the weight of the occasion. When Albert Bunjaku equalised in the 
61st minute, the game turned into the last 30 minutes of the Lord of the Rings 
trilogy: it went from end to end to end to end.

Fortune favoured the Franconians at the death. The visitors' Greek striker, 
Angelos Charisteas, popped up to take advantage one final counter-attack in 
injury time. Hertha, for all their effort, were left with nothing. Nürnberg 
keeper Raphael Schäfer, who had been outstanding in the first half, felt moved 
to do this German keeper thing: he celebrated the win with some moderately 
incendiary gestures towards the Berlin fans. Schäfer didn't have much time to 
gloat, however: 150 mostly hooded yobs stormed the pitch with plastic flag 
poles and chased the players into the changing rooms. As the stewards stepped 
out of the way, the invaders started demolishing the dugouts. A few minutes 
later, the police moved in and arrested 26 troublemakers.

The spontaneous riot has shocked German football. "Violent offenders have no 
place in football," said the league president Reinhard Rauball. "We will push 
for hard sanctions." Hertha will certainly pay a heavy fine and might be forced 
to play aGeisterspiel (ghost game) without supporters, too. Holger Hieronymus, 
the deputy CEO of the league, hinted that terracing could come under review as 
well. "But I hope that we won't end up with American or English stadiums," he 
added.

Not all of the rioters were part of Berlin's Ultras but Peter Gabriel, the 
head of the supporters' relations office in Frankfurt, has warned that the 
incident should be seen as emblematic of "a wider process". Many had lost the 
respect for the players and the game, he told Berlin-based Der Tagesspiegel. 
"Some Ultras believe they can motivate their teams by creating a threatening 
scenario."

No one's trying to excuse what happened on Saturday. But Tagesspiegel's chief 
football correspondent Sven Goldmann can certainly understand the supporters' 
frustration. He blames the bureaucratic, ostentatiously unemotional crisis 
management of sporting director Michael Preetz, who took over from the 
egocentric but experienced Dieter Hoeness. The 42-year-old former Hertha 
striker fired last year's surprise success Lucien Favre with undue haste and 
replaced him with sour-faced Friedhelm Funkel, another man versed in an 
unemotional – and unsuccessful – style of management. The fans raged against 
what they perceived as a lack of passion, he argues: "Hertha tried to solve 
their sporting problems like a modern corporation and forgot to take the 
grassroots supporters with them".

The postmortem has already begun. There's predictable talk of rifts within the 
dressing room and not much love for the manager's tactics – as far as there 
were any. Apart from Funkel, Berliners can point to president Werner 
Gegenbauer's austere transfer policy in the summer and specifically the lack of 
suitable replacements for the departed strikeforce of Marko Pantelic and Andriy 
Voronin, who were vital for Favre's counter-attacking gameplan. The self-styled 
"poor but sexy" capital only got the first bit right.

Hertha are nine points adrift from safety. They have already played all of the 
bottom sides apart from Köln. They will go down. And they know it. TheBundesliga
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> will miss the 
capital but not as much as the capital will miss first-flight football. "The 
whole city will feel second-rate", lamented Tagesspiegel, "even more 
unfinished, even dirtier, even poorer."

Talking Points

• It's still a most unlikely threesome at the top. Schalke (53 points) and 
Leverkusen (54) stubbornly refuse to bottle it; both sides won tough matches at 
home against Stuttgart (2-1) and Hamburg (4-2), respectively. Bayern (56 
points) did revert to type, however: a nearly disastrously unfocused first-half 
perfomance saw them heading for an embarrassing home defeat against Freiburg 
before Arjen Robben, this year's outstanding player in the league, rescued them 
with a sharp free-kick (76 min) and penalty (83) double.

• Strikers who don't score? Check. Problems in defence and attacking midfield? 
Check. Questions about the manager's future? Check. A still unresolved, 
smouldering conflict between captain and team manager? Check. Yes, tradition 
does demand that Germany should be heading to the World Cup engulfed in some 
sort of crisis. One could have readily done with another goalkeeping debate 
this time, however. But sadly, it's not to be: four grave errors by No1 René 
Adler (Leverkusen) in quick succession have brought the inevitable Franz 
Beckenbauer intervention ("schoolboy error") and opened the door for Tim Wiese 
(Bremen) and Manuel Neuer (Schalke). "Hurrah! Germany can immerse itself in its 
favourite topic again," wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung wryly. The veteran Jens 
Lehmann, 40, however, is convinced that Jogi Löw's choice is straightforward. 
"Somebody like me would be perfect for the World Cup," the Stuttgart keeper 
told WAZ.

Results: Schalke 2-1 Stuttgart, Bochum 1-4 Dortmund, Gladbach 0-4 Wolfsburg, 
Bayern 2-1 Freiburg, Hannover 2-1 Frankfurt, Mainz 1-0 Köln, Hertha 1-2 
Nürnberg, Hoffenheim 0-1 Bremen, Leverkusen 4-2 Hamburg.
 