
So, Formula One is likely to be sold within the year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/06/bernie-ecclestone-parties-interested-buying-formula-one>
 according to the latest pronouncement from Bernie Ecclestone. But Ecclestone 
is ever the master of smoke and mirrors and it is hard to take anything he says 
without a shovelful of salt. But more pertinently outside the F1 bubble, it is 
difficult not to imagine that for many British fans buyouts at the top are not 
of great interest, especially given the recently revealed financial 
difficulties Silverstone faces in continuing to host a grand prix. But the two 
issues might yet still be linked, at least if one has an optimistic take on the 
future.

Ecclestone, at a conference on Tuesday, said: “There has been a lot of 
interest and I would say there are three parties at the moment, where I would 
be surprised if one of them did not buy them [the shares] shortly.” He added 
that he expected it to happen in 2015.

The private-equity firm CVC, which owns F1, has held its shares longer than it 
would usually and made its return – an estimated £5bn profit so far from the 
sport’s £1.5bn annual turnover – so it is perfectly feasible it could sell and 
a potential deal was on the cards this year with a consortium led by Stephen 
Ross, the owner of the Miami Dolphins, alongside Qatar Sports Investments.

Bernie Ecclestone says three parties interested in buying Formula One
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/06/bernie-ecclestone-parties-interested-buying-formula-one>
But as yet it has come to nothing. “Bernie is always very good for headlines, 
and headlines and controversy are part of F1,” said Mercedes’ head of 
motorsport, Toto Wolff, in reaction to the news. Possibly with one eyebrow 
arched.

Indeed, as recently as July the co-chairman of CVC, Donald Mackenzie, who is 
understood to have come to enjoy F1 and his role in it,was explicit in his 
denial that the company wanted to offload 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/04/formula-one-cvc-qatar-donald-mackenzie>
. “We like owning it, we don’t want to sell it,” he said. Ecclestone also said 
in July: “Donald Mackenzie doesn’t want to sell, simple as that. He loves 
Formula One, loves the business.”

It has been mooted that he loves it so much he would buy into F1 himself, 
perhaps in partnership with Ecclestone. But until a sale is more than just 
another quote from Bernie, that is all the substance it possesses. Of more 
gravitas to fans were the words that Wolff went on to say in relation to a 
potential new owner. “For us, we are participating as a team, it’s important 
that we have a sustainable shareholder with a long-term perspective and 
vision,” he added.

Last week Ecclestone revealed that Silverstone’s payment for the 2015 British 
Grand Prix had been deferred and would be paid in instalments because of 
financial difficulties the track is experiencing, despite an absolute bumper 
weekend sell-out at the race and ticket sales for 2016 that are up 53% from 
this point last year.

The managing director, Patrick Allen, admitted that the circuit needs a £15m 
investment to secure the future of the British Grand Prix. The track, owned by 
the BRDC, has suffered from a loss of rental revenue after selling land around 
the circuit and by an escalator clause in the hosting contract that sees the 
fee, estimated to be around £15m, rise by 5% a year.

Ecclestone suggested public money should be used to back the circuit. “They 
are looking for a little bit of support from government sources,” he said. 
“It’s something they should get becauseSilverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> does a lot for England and 
quite a bit for the area. They should get support, as lots of countries do.” A 
call which Allen backed but that is unlikely to be answered.

In the current economic climate, state funding for a sport that generates huge 
revenues and markets its glamorous nature appears impossible to justify. Nor 
would it win any friends. A taxpayer subsidy to a company that is paying fees 
to a private-equity company with a £1.5bn turnover (which already receives 
broadcasting fees from the state-owned BBC) would not go down well with any of 
the electorate, nor would backing a sport already pilloried (largely unfairly) 
by the green lobby, or one that actually takes place in the UK only once a year.

It would be right were the economy healthy enough to back a national 
institution that is of huge benefit to the area and to the country, but as 
political hot potatoes go this is likely to be too hot for the prime minister, 
David Cameron. Which brings us to new investors with “long-term vision”.

Should Bernie’s latest pronouncement turn into more than hot air, might that 
vision include a long-term look at the circuits hosting grands prix?Might new 
owners look at the future and see investment in the classic tracks to ensure 
they remain on the calendar as part and parcel of what attracts people to the 
sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/formula-one-british-grand-prix-bernie-ecclestone-vijay-mallya>
? How many young fans of the future will experience a tingle of anticipation at 
the mention of Baku over Silverstone, Spa or Monza?

Ecclestone has been at pains to point out the deal he has done with 
Silverstone is very favourable in comparison with other circuits. But perhaps 
stopping altogether the inflated race fees and escalator clauses that make all 
but state-backed tracks unable to offer to host a grand prix would create lower 
short-term profits but a guaranteed long-term stability in the European 
heartland. It’s not even that visionary a suggestion, requiring only owners 
that might put the sport before the bottom line.
 