
Six years ago I was an unemployable, shambling train wreck who got laughed out 
of recruitment agencies. If I hadn't got into stand-up, I probably would have 
ended up like Andy, the thirtysomething slacker I play inUncle 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03q46jm>.

Andy is a manchild: he has no responsibilities and spends most of his time 
stoned, playing computer games in his pants. He lives for the day when he will 
land his dream job as the lead singer in a band. One day, though, his sister 
needs him to look after his nephew, Errol. Andy only ever sees the world from 
his own point of view. He thinks, "I've got to look after this kid and that 
gets in the way of my plans", even though his plans are ultimately to kill 
himself. The fact that this character remains likable, by the way, is a massive 
accomplishment on my behalf.

When I was young, I couldn't wait to grow up. But now that I'm here, I'm in a 
society that indulges irresponsible, binge-drinking sex-pests. And I fit right 
in. When you're a 35-year-old with the apartment and outlook ofTom Hanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomhanks> in Big, without having made the 
wish in order to get there, you're a manchild. The cult endures because people 
think they can delay growing up for as long as possible. In fact, the manchild 
has become even more childlike in recent years.Men Behaving Badly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/18/how-we-made-men-behaving-badly>
 didn't behave that badly, really; they still held down jobs, they just had a 
slightly dirty flat. It was Simon Pegg and Nick Frost who took it to the next 
level. From Spaced toThe World's End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154514/world-s-end>, between them they 
have portrayed every aspect of manchildhood. If it weren't for zombies, serial 
killers and alien invasions demanding their attention, they'd still be sitting 
on the sofa playing on their PlayStations.

Chandler from Friends had the same job in his 30s that he had in his 20s, 
while Joey pursued his dreams at the expense of his self-respect. They spent 
all their time playing foosball, sitting on their matching armchairs watching 
Yasmine Bleeth in Baywatch and failing to get their adult life in gear. But who 
wouldn't want a foosball table next to their fridge in their massive flat, and 
identical La-Z-Boys with kick-out footrests? They were living the fucking 
dream, until Monica came along and ruined everything.

Like the manchildren before him, Andy is his own worst enemy. He has the blind 
faith that one day, someday soon, he's going to get his break and he'll pursue 
that dream until it kills him. Or he has to get a proper job. Which deep down 
he denies that he'll ever have to. Andy doesn't realise that he's getting 
redemption through his nephew. It's a heart-warming saga of the importance of 
friendship. Hopefully he won't learn too much, though, otherwise there'll be no 
second series and I'll have to get a proper job.

Uncle is on Monday, 10pm, BBC3
 