
As you will know, we continued to have the old technical problems last month. 
The special instructions were initially left off another Araucaria prize puzzle 
(April 5) and the clue to 1 down in the May Genius puzzle disappeared into thin 
air. There was the usual deluge of emails asking how such things can possibly 
continue to happen.

The general tone of these communications is well captured by this extract:

"And how may times [Note: I think he meant 'many'] has this happened already? 
And how many times have you made pathetic excuses and tried to shuffle the 
blame onto someone else?

"You, sir, are unfit to run a whelk stall let alone a PAID FOR SERVICE. [Note: 
How many whelks can one get for 8p a day?]

"Stand down, please, and let someone with more clout, more guts, more pride 
and more self-respect take over."

Earlier this year I spoke to my opposite number at the Times about the 
underlying problem (which is that the clunking, out-of-date software still used 
by theguardian.com to upload the puzzles to the website is not up to the job 
and requires a great deal of manual intervention to surmount its inadequacies, 
which is where the errors slip in). Since the Times has had even more problems 
with its subscription crossword service than the Guardian, I thought that he 
would be a good man to talk to.

My colleague's advice was unequivocal. Make it plain to all concerned, he 
said, that your task is over once you have delivered correctly edited puzzles 
to the paper in the required format and then refuse point blank to enter into 
any correspondence about what has subsequently been done with them.

I saw at once the attraction of his approach and may shortly adopt it myself. 
But, meanwhile, if you would like to send abusive notes directly to the editor 
and/or to the readers' editor as well as to me, that might have some marginal 
effect on the powers that be.

 _______________________

Apart from that, you seem collectively to have been in pedantic mood this 
month. It was claimed that Enigmatist had misquoted Lear's The Dong with the 
Luminous Nose in his April Genius. One line to fit the puzzle had to read: "A 
light on the Bong-tree stem it throws". This should be "stems", said RR. Still 
not having unpacked and sorted all my books, I cannot find my Lear, but the 
Oxford Dictionary of Quotations (1953) firmly has "stem" (singular), so I hope 
that it is right. On this puzzle in general, a couple of you took the trouble 
to say that you thought it very clever and a couple that it was too easy once 
you had Googled and found the quotation. I suspect that to Google or not to 
Google will become more and more the question. The fact is that a computer, 
especially if you have one of the crossword puzzle setting packages on it, 
makes finding answers very much easier.

Then Michael in France took grave exception to a homophonic clue from 
Araucaria (No 24,367 April 19). The answer was Jupiter and the clue got you 
there via "Jew pitta" (as in pitta bread). I have to say that, in the context 
of a bit of fun, this seems to me an entirely fair homophone. Indeed, M in F 
concedes that dictionary pronunciation guides may well support me. But, he 
says, to a phoneticist, the difference is wide. His claim is that the sound of 
the last part of the god's name in, for example, the sentence "Jupiter is here" 
is not the same sound that comes when you say "pitta". In my case, I don't 
pronounce "pitta" as if it was Peter, but as 'pit' followed by a short 'a'. I 
have no idea which of us is right.

And then came an objection from Wolverhampton that ACCELERATION (Quick No 
11,841, April 21) is not a "rate of increase of speed" but of "velocity", 
because both velocity and acceleration are vector quantities, while speed is a 
scalar quantity. I fear that this is one of those cases where words have a 
precise scientific meaning, but also have a less precise one in general usage. 
Collins, for example, is on my side. It gives: the rate of increase of speed or 
the rate of change of velocity. For once I felt on firm ground.
 