
The issue of alternative spellings raised its ugly head again this month. 
(Older subscribers may recall the previous strife as to whether Rachmaninov 
could have spelt, or spelled, his name with two f's at the end and as to 
whether ukulele is the one and only true combination of letters for the small 
guitar.) The trigger this time was a clue in the Quick puzzle No 11,482 for 
February 24: "(Chinese) fruit (tree) (5)". To fit the grid, the answer had to 
be LICHI.

Mike from Lancs was first into the lists. "There is no such word. The fruit 
and the tree is the litchi, also known as the lichee and lychee. 'Lichi' may 
well be the way your setter's local grocer spells it, but it isn't in the OED." 
The gauntlet had been thrown down and I felt bound to pick it up on behalf of 
grocers everywhere.

First question, when can a word be said to exist? The answer must be when it 
is sufficiently recognised in a particular circle. Achieving this status is how 
new words (or alternative spellings) get into dictionaries and crossword 
editors, ever anxious to cover their backs, tend to rely on dictionaries for 
authority. This is not always hard and fast. I would allow iPod and rendition 
(in the sense of illegal treatment of foreign prisoners) into Guardian 
crosswords, though I have seen neither yet in any dictionary. But dictionaries, 
in my case particularly Chambers, Collins and Oxford, are professional 
comforters.

There are always likely to be grey areas where a word is transliterated, in 
this case from Chinese. Chambers (2006) has lychee as its preferred spelling 
but litchi, lichee, lichi and leechee as alternatives. Collins (2003) supports 
Mike from Lancs in having litchi as its main spelling, with lichee, lichi and 
lychee as alternatives.

By this stage I was beginning to feel confident enough to say that Mike from 
Lancs was completely out of order in his generalised slur on greengrocers. So I 
went for broke and looked up the online OED, since Mike had asserted that it 
did not have lichi. Under the genus "litchi chenensis" it has no fewer than 13 
variants for the spelling of the fruit/tree, including (I am happy to say) 
lichi. But some of them are, I think, too exciting for a Guardian Quick puzzle. 
So I rest for the moment on what appears in Chambers and Collins.

_____

Genius addicts will have noticed that Araucaria's March offering is, for the 
first time, on a barred grid. And those who printed off a "print" version early 
will have been confused by the fact that the bars did not show up. They were 
there in the interactive version of the puzzle, reached by clicking on the link 
at the top of the home page. Sorry about that. The deadline for entries is 2359 
GMT on March 31.

Paul's bald-headed Genius puzzle for February attracted a larger number of 
correct entries than recent offerings (157 in all) and only one active 
objection (from a solver who did not think that "having nothing on top" was for 
him a "problem"). There were eight correct entries on the first day, led by Don 
from Leeds at 11.39am and David from Elancourt in France at 11.49am.

_____

From time to time subscribers say that, even having seen the solution to a 
puzzle, they still can't understand how a clue was supposed to work. So this is 
just a reminder that, for the Saturday prize and the Genius puzzles at least, 
we have for some time been providing notes on the clues. To get to them, you 
bring the solutions onto your screen and click above, where it says "Click here 
for an annotated guide to the solution to this puzzle". You should not, of 
course, be able to do this until the deadline has passed.

_____

One final bit of admin for those who opt to enter for the Saturday prize 
puzzle by printing off a hard copy and then mailing or faxing that in to 
Birmingham. If your entry gets pulled out of the hat, it will significantly 
improve your chances of actually getting the prize on offer if you add your 
name and address (including the postcode), so that it can be sent to you; and 
your telephone number, so that the Guardian's post room can ring you to tell 
you that you have won and that the prize is on its way. We are, I promise, 
working on ways of allowing you to submit your Saturday prize entries 
electronically, as with the Genius, but we are not there yet.

* Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor.
 