
Hundreds of undocumented men work in Hawaii on fishing boats, making as little 
as 70 cents an hour and unable to step on to US soil because they do not have 
visas, a six-month longAssociated Press investigation has found 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/39ae05f117c64a929f0f8fab091c4ee1/hawaiian-seafood-caught-foreign-crews-confined-boats>
.

The report was part of an ongoing investigation of “labor abuses in the 
fishing industry” done by the AP.


Migrant workers in US seafood industry exposed to forced labor conditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/us-seafood-workers-abuse-immgration-temporary-labor>
“The entire system, which contradicts other state and federal laws, operates 
with the blessing of high-ranking US lawmakers and officials,” authors Martha 
Mendoza and Margie Mason wrote.

Americans who eat Hawaiian seafood are “almost certainly” consuming fish 
caught by the men on these boats, as their highly valued catches are sold in 
premium restaurants and stores like Whole Foods.

“This is a unique situation,” coast guard vessel examiner Charles Medlicott 
told the AP. “But it is legal.”

Due to a loophole pushed for by “influential lawmakers”, Hawaii’s commercial 
fishing boats are exempted from “from federal rules enforced almost everywhere 
else”. The workers “have little legal recourse” in areas of labor rights, and 
“are detained on boats where US Customs and Border Protection requires captains 
to hold the men’s passports”.

“That potentially goes against federal human trafficking laws saying bosses 
who possess workers’ identification documents can face up to five years in 
prison,” the AP wrote.

Brokers are paid to bring the workers, who come from places like Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>, the Philippines, Vietnam or 
Kiribati, to the approximately 140 boats in the fleet. The men are not allowed 
to land at the airport in Honolulu, though they are allowed to exit the country 
from there.

The conditions on each boat vary by captain – with some tidy, and others piled 
with garbage or requiring crew members to use the bathroom in buckets or over 
the side of the ship, the AP reported. The men rely on the captains for food 
and medical attention.

 The fishermen work 20-hour days, and can get paid “as little as $350 a month… 
but still more than they can make back home in countries where people live on 
less than a dollar a day,” the AP wrote.

One man from the Philippines told the Associated Press that he was working to 
support his teenage daughter and son in college until they finish school. A 
23-year-old man from Indonesia said he decided to get a job on the boat because 
he was jealous of neighbors who returned fromHawaii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii> with money to buy a house.

“It turns out that the salary I got is not much better than my job in my 
homeland. How can I have a house when I’m back home?” he said. “It’s just my 
silly dream.”
 