
The fatal accident which befell a trackside marshal in the Australian grand 
prix, caused by Jacques Villeneuve running his BAR into the back of Ralf 
Schumacher's Williams-BMW, highlights the precarious role of those unpaid 
enthusiasts without whom a multi-million pound sport would long ago have 
stalled in the pits.

The death of the Queensland official, whose name is not being released before 
relatives are informed, came six months after Paolo Ghislimberti, a 
professional fireman from Trento, was killed by a flying wheel after a six-car 
pile-up at the Italian grand prix in Monza. The 50-year-old died in hospital 
and his daughter was said by race officials to have been among the 128,500 
crowd.

Unconfirmed eyewitness reports said the marshal was killed in what appeared to 
be a freak incident. He was struck in the chest by a wheel which came off 
Villeneuve's car and flew through the 12ft x 2ft hole in the perimeter fence 
which he would use to wave warning flags. The incident is now the subject of a 
coroner's investigation.

While formula one racing has expanded dramatically over the past two decades 
and is now one of the world's best-funded international televised sports, the 
fact remains that the circuit is traditionally lined by voluntary officials.

A generation ago, marshals were on a par with the drivers and mechanics, 
people for whom motor racing was a hobby. It was their route to the inside of 
the sport they loved but in which they lacked the finance or connections to 
compete.

Today, the volunteer marshal still underpins the sport, waving warning flags, 
sweeping the track of debris and, if worse comes to the worst, rushing to the 
aid of drivers who may be trapped and injured inside their cars.

Yet while many drivers and engineers enjoy millionaire lifestyles, these fans 
remain unpaid as the sport's foot soldiers, happy to offer their services for 
nothing. Indeed, none of them would give a second thought about being paid for 
what amounts to a hobby.

At various times over the past three decades it has been suggested that the 
international motor racing community should provide funds for a corps of paid, 
professional marshals who would travel the world to work at the races.

The idea never got off the ground, largely because it would have required a 
major culture change on the part of the marshals themselves; few people would 
want to make a career out of full-time marshalling.

Patrick Head, the technical director at Williams, yesterday led calls for 
improved safety measures "You've got to ask if the marshal had proper 
protection where he was standing, because if you have open-wheel racing cars, 
it does not matter what you do about tying bits to the car," Head said.

"These cars are immensely fast and if they hit each other there are going to 
be bits flying around and you have to be realistic and decide how you are going 
to deal with it.

"There is no need to have a man with a flag out there - you can have a button 
to push with an arm that can come out with a flag on it."

Despite Head's comments, the problems of controlling flying debris within the 
confines of a race track continues to be a pressing issue.

Referring to the FIA's introduction of a tethering system to help prevent 
wheels flying off, the former world champion Jackie Stewart, one of the sport's 
original safety campaigners, said: "We've got to do even more about tying the 
wheels together - we need to do it even for wings and so forth. At 200 or 300 
kph, you don't know where that type of debris is going to go.

"You have to ring-fence the race tracks with higher and stronger debris 
fences. You then have to police where the marshals stand."

However, the difficulties in guaranteeing the safety of marshals were 
highlighted earlier by the Australian grand prix chairman Ron Walker. "The 
track is inspected every day. We have a certificate to run the race and we do 
comply with all the rules and regulations. If you want to build a concrete wall 
right around the track, you won't have any spectators," he said.

The accident cast a huge cloud over the event and there was no spraying of 
champagne on the podium. "It seems a very insignificant race when there is a 
loss of life involved," said David Coulthard, visibly shaken. Villeneuve, whose 
father Gilles was killed at the Belgian grand prix in 1982, said his back was 
feeling a "little tight" and was later taken to hospital as a precaution.
 