
Today we're unveiling the new url and front page for our US readers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/gnm-press-office/guardian-unveils-us-url>. It's the 
first tiny step in our bid to improve the Guardian website for US users, and 
marks the beginning of our new digital operation based in New York.

It's just one page today, but we hope that by presenting a targeted homepage, 
we'll be able to better display the stories that are most relevant to our US 
readers. You'll still be able to read, watch and contribute to all of the 
Guardian's journalism – everything produced here, in the UK, and around the 
world is available to all of our users. If you want to look at the UK homepage 
– or indeed the US homepage if you're anywhere else in the world – you can do 
so by using the button in the very top left-hand corner of the page.

As well as launching the new homepage, we're hiring a new US team of writers, 
technologists and editors to work with journalists from the UK, to combine the 
Guardian's internationalist, digital journalism with American voices and 
expertise. We'll build on the successes we've already had in live, real-time 
news, such as our live blogging from theMiddle East uprisings  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middleeast/roundup> as well as our 
investigative strength in breaking stories such as thephone-hacking scandal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/phone-hacking>. We'll also be drawing on 
reporting from the hundreds of Guardian journalists based around the world.

This is the beginning of our efforts, not the reveal of a finished product, so 
it's very, very beta. Please tell us what you think – we'll be reading and 
responding as well as revising as we go along – and do bear with us over the 
next few weeks and months as we try to get it right.

Update
Just to clarify: there will be a redirect on the guardian.co.uk page, so US 
visitors will get the new front page on arrival. As the page has just launched, 
it will take a while to work, so it will be with you soon.

As you've all noted – you will continue to be able to switch between the two 
using the edition button on the top left of the page.

Janine Gibson
Editor in chief, Guardian US
 