
Bernie Ecclestone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> has 
been told he must make a better job of selling Formula One by leading figures 
hosting this Sunday’s US Grand Prix in Texas.

This week the sport travels to Austin in crisis, with the futures of Caterham 
and Marussia in the balance, and other teams close to the wall. Pressure is 
mounting on Ecclestone, the sport’s chief executive and commercial rights 
holder, to take note, with the message from Mario Andretti, the official 
ambassador for the race in Austin, and Bobby Epstein, the co-founder of the 
Circuit of the Americas (Cota), that F1 needs to “loosen up a bit” and “make 
the sport about personalities”.

Caterham went into administration on Friday and have been given special 
dispensation not to take part in the next two races as they seek a buyer. 
Marussia went into administration on Monday and will also miss the next two 
grands prix, though they are still planning to take part in the final race of 
the season, in Abu Dhabi on 23 November.

The next two most desperate teams are Sauber and Lotus, who in 2012 and 2013 
posted respective losses of more than £22m and £64.9m. Williams, one of the 
most famous names in F1, who are running third in the constructors’ 
championship, have already reported a six months’ loss of £20m for 2014. Even 
the biggest teams have struggled to replace dwindling sponsorship in recent 
years.

F1 has had no coherent leadership in the past year while Ecclestone, who will 
be 84 on Tuesday, fought bribery allegations in London and Munich courts. Now, 
against a background of spiralling costs, unequal payments to teams, falling 
crowds and TV audiences, as well as declining sponsorship and no agreement 
about capping costs, the sport has reached the point of no return.

How apt, then, that Ecclestone – who continues to spin gold for shareholders, 
the private equity company CVC Capital, if not the teams – has been given a 
blueprint for the sport’s future by the best salesmen in the world, the 
Americans, who want a closer relationship between drivers and fans as well as 
greater use of social media.

Andretti, the Italian-American who won the world title in 1978, told the 
Guardian: “Formula One should loosen up a bit. I think they’ve gone slightly 
overboard with the technical side of the engine. And we saw in Sochi [the 
previous race in Russia], teams backing off for fuel reasons, just to make it 
to the end.

“I would love to see a team invite a third car for a special event. For the US 
Grand Prix, say, Mercedes could invite a third car, having groomed some 
well-known American driver in testing, to take part as a guest competitor. Can 
you imagine what that would do for the promotion of the event? Every newspaper 
in the country would write about it.”

He added: “There are ways of using a little bit of creativity to enhance and 
increase the interest. It’s all there for the taking. It’s just a question of 
looking at some of the stranger rules they have in F1. Some people might laugh 
at that, but what I’m saying is very valid. And as time goes by they may have 
to look at things like this. F1 should explore every angle.”

Epstein added: “F1 has got to make the sport about personalities. That’s what 
Nascar does very well.Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>
 can learn a lot from Nascar, from Hollywood. People connect with people. They 
don’t connect with metal. I would encourage the teams to make a priority the 
accessibility that the fans have to the drivers.

“Look at Lewis Hamilton. F1 should get him out there as much as they can, 
because he’s a great driver and a very good ambassador. The more Mercedes let 
him step out and be himself, the better. He’s an incredibly marketable guy. FI 
could look at the model of [US] PGA golfers, who have got really close to their 
fans.”

Jason Dial, the president of Cota, also feels Formula One should make a 
greater effort to involve its fan base. “I’d like to see F1 taken off the track 
and be more about engagement. There is real upside in the brand really growing, 
in terms of accessibility and digital social engagement. I think these type of 
things could really move the needle. From a business standpoint I want to 
engage our fans, and I want to build the fan base. I want to make it younger. I 
want to grow the pie. That’s what I’m focusing on.

“From a product-offering standpoint, accessibility is something that really 
plays well in the US market. Fans love to be close to the drivers and the 
machines. This is incredible technology. It’s one of the sport’s core equities.

“People love watching from afar but if they can get up close, so much the 
better. We’ve experienced that here in other events.”

The message from Austin has already been delivered to Formula One by people 
and countries with greater experience in staging grands prix and it is felt by 
many observers that the sport’s failure to listen – Ecclestone has dismissed 
social media as little more than a fad – is the main reason why it is in such 
difficulty.

In Monaco last year Martin Whitmarsh, then McLaren’s team principal and 
chairman of the Formula One Teams’ Association, warned: “I fear that we will 
have a crisis and then we will have to get real and sort it out. I cannot see, 
in their shoes [the seven smaller teams], how you can construct a sustainable 
business model.”

At the same time Bob Fernley, Force India’s deputy team principal, told the 
Guardian that CVC had been “a disaster” for the sport. He said: “I think they 
have done an absolutely awful job. In my view they are the worst thing that has 
ever happened to Formula One. They have done nothing whatsoever for the sport.”

CVC has made an estimated $8.2bn from its investment in Formula One since 2006 
but its profits have not been reinvested in the sport. Formula One itself is 
also culpable. The teams have gone their own selfish ways and their failure to 
manage the cost of the development and supply of this year’s engines has been a 
major factor in the crisis.

As Graeme Lowdon, the president of Marussia put it just days before his team 
joined Caterham in administration: “The current recipe, in terms of sporting 
and technical regulations, has produced a sport that nobody can afford.”
 