
The atmosphere and aura surrounding Mexico’s quadrennial trip to Columbus for 
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifying 
are storied among American soccer fans.

USA 1-2 Mexico: five things we learned from World Cup qualifying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/usa-mexico-marquez-five-things-we-learned>
Columbus has been considered a fortress by US goalkeeper Tim Howard, who on 
Fridaydevoted a Players’ Tribune piece 
<http://www.theplayerstribune.com/tim-howard-usmnt-mexico-columbus/> to 
describe just how much mystique surrounds the place when it comes to soccer.

The qualifiers in Columbus come with a mystique of their own, as each of the 
games – before Friday’s 2-1 win by Mexico, that is – had an identical 2-0 
scoreline in favor of the US, prompting American fans to adopt the phraseDos a 
Cero whenever they played Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico>.

That Dos a Cero chant was audible on the way to the stadium as the American 
Outlaws marched through the narrow Columbus streets on the way to the stadium, 
banged on cars and got people to come out of their houses. That excitement 
carried on in the parking lot, where dozens of tailgates started up. Everyone 
seemed to be getting along.

Despite the obvious disagreements over the election of Donald Trump, the mood 
inside and out of the stadium was carefree. American fans welcomed Mexican fans 
and took pictures with them. One Mexican family began randomly passing a ball 
with Americans fans they had just met.

Vicente Tlahuextl, who said he traveled five hours from Indiana to watch the 
game, said the game was about soccer, not politics. “This is my first time in 
Columbus, first time here – I hope it’s a warm welcome by everyone,” he said. 
“Everyone loves each other, they call it the beautiful game for a reason.”

Inside Mapfre Stadium there was good-natured joking among both sets of fans, 
but nothing of the kind that has popped up on previous occasions between these 
two teams. When Rafa Marquez buried the game-winning header, the groupings of 
Mexican fans quickly let the Americans know it.

But instead of hate or fighting breaking out, the stadium mostly just fell 
silente. No arrests, no incidents, just a meeting of two devout fan bases 
supporting their teams.

Most Americans waded out of the stadium crestfallen after the loss but a few 
stuck around in the parking lot trying to wait out the traffic or just trying 
to take a little more in. Joe Crawford and his friend Chris, Columbus Crew 
season-ticket holders, have been to every incarnation ofDos a Cero in Columbus, 
but neither was impressed with Friday’s atmosphere.

“This is the worst atmosphere I’ve ever been here for. It was terrible. It was 
bad,” Chris said. “This is the biggest sporting event in America in four years 
and you’re just going to sit here and golf clap? It’s unbelievable, and I don’t 
understand it.”

Crawford criticized the lottery system, and how Crew season-ticket holders 
were promised tickets to the USA-Mexico game at the beginning of the season – 
but it only entered them in lottery for tickets, which he believes made tickets 
easier to get for non-hardcore fans. He also said that hardcore fans should 
have an advantage for games like this in order to provide a proper atmosphere 
for the team to be played in.

“Clearly we are USA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> 
fans, we’re soccer fans. We’re Columbus Crew fans. We don’t have priority over 
these tickets?” Crawford said. “We get out in some sort of lottery? OK, we 
understand that, whatever.”

Most fans in attendance seemed to enjoy themselves despite the result and no 
violence has been reported. Perhaps the most telling moment came before the 
game, when the announcer gave the crowd the usual message of tolerance and 
acceptance, and no one person stood up to object. At least in the realm of this 
rivalry, acceptance and unity are truly being understood.
 