
Valencia began the Cesare Prandelli era with a 2-1 win at Sporting Gijon to 
climb out of theLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> 
relegation zone.

Prandelli, the former Italy coach, replaced the sacked Pako Ayestaran after 
Valencia’s dreadful start to the season left them in the bottom three.

Prandelli has plenty of talent at his disposal and that was underlined by 
Mario Suárez’s seventh-minute goal after good work from Rodrigo and Dani Parejo.

Carlos Castro levelled after 65 minutes but Suárez soon struck the winner when 
a misdirected header from the Sporting midfielder Sergio Álvarez fell into his 
path and the former Atletico Madrid and Watford man made no mistake.

Villarreal moved into fifth spot by thrashing Celta Vigo 5-0. Roberto Soriano 
scored twice in the opening 12 minutes, his first goals since joining from 
Sampdoria in August.

Cédric Bakambu added a third before the break from Nicola Sansone’s pass and 
Daniel Wass put through his own goal from a corner just after half-time.

Celta’s misery was completed when Sergi Gómez was sent off for a second 
bookable offence three minutes from time and Manuel Trigueros added a fifth in 
stoppage time after Alexandre Pato’s header had hit a post.

Athletic Bilbao claimed the Basque bragging rights with a 3-2 victory over 
Real Sociedad at San Mames. Sociedad had not lost this fixture since March 2012 
and they seemed well placed again when David Zurutuza fired them into a 
16th-minute lead.

Iker Muniain levelled six minutes after the break and goals from Aritz Aduriz 
(60) –his fifth in six games and 21st of the calendar year – and Inaki Williams 
(72) put Athletic in command.

Iñigo Martínez’s goal seven minutes from time set up a tense finish but the 
hosts held on to move within three points of the summit shared by the Madrid 
neighbours Atlético and Real.

Málaga’s Roberto Rosales struck late to secure a 1-1 draw at Alaves. The 
Brazilian striker Deyverson’s fourth goal in seven matches had givenAlaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alaves> a ninth-minute lead which they 
should have built on in a dominant first-half performance.

Marcos Llorente, Édgar Méndez and Deyverson had chances to extend Alaves’ lead 
but their failure to take them ended with Rosales equalising five minutes from 
time.

Both sides finished with 10 men after Alaves’ Theo Hernández and the Málaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> midfielder Juanpi were sent off 
in the final seconds.
 