
Stuttering Valencia reached the Copa del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa-del-rey> semi-finals after a Rodrigo 
Moreno goal earned a morale-boosting 1-0 second-leg victory atLas Palmas and a 
2-1 aggregate win.

Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> are yet to win in 
seven La Liga matches under their coach, Gary Neville, and lie 11th in the 
table but this victory will ease some of the tension surrounding the club.

The game was always in the balance but Valencia worked hard defensively and 
had the better chances to score with Moreno slotting home after 20 minutes.

“Our fans deserved to enjoy a moment like this,” Neville said. “They have been 
patient with me and with the team in these past six weeks.”

“It has not been easy for us,” Rodrigo said. “It was important to advance to 
the next round, it gives us more confidence. We played well in the first leg 
but didn’t get a good result. Today we didn’t play brilliantly but we advanced, 
and that’s what was important.”

Sevilla eased into the last four after a Vicente Iborra penalty helped them to 
a 3-0 second-leg win over second-tierMirandes and a 5-0 aggregate success.

Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> were firmly in charge 
from the start and went ahead after Sebastián Cristóforo was upended by Ion 
Vélez and Iborra sent the goalkeeper Raúl Fernández the wrong way with his spot 
kick after nine minutes.

Mirandes caused little danger and Sevilla could have added to their lead but 
Yevhen Konoplyanka fired over and Vitolo had a shot beaten away by Fernández in 
the first half.

They sealed the win after the break when the 20-year-old Juan Muñoz finished 
clinically after 70 minutes from a Vitolo pass and Coke headed home the third 
goal in stoppage time.

Sevilla have clicked into gear after a slow start to the season and have 
suffered only one defeat in 16 games in all competitions, moving them up to 
seventh in La Liga.

Barcelona reached the semi-finals on Wednesday after knocking out Athletic 
Bilbao. Real Madrid were disqualified for fielding an ineligible player in an 
earlier round.

Celta Vigo completed the semi-final lineup with a 3-2 aggregate success against
Atlético Madrid on Wednesday.
 