
Going into the 2014 Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
season there was only one Finnish driver on the radar. Kimi Raikkonen’s return 
to Ferrari to drive alongside Fernando Alonso had dominated headlines and 
prompted great anticipation for a grand showdown between the two. It was not to 
be – both have struggled in an uncompetitive car – but another Finn has stood 
out and shown enough talent to have the potential to join the two world 
champions at the pinnacle of F1.

In his rookie season last year, Valtteri Bottas was largely dismissed as 
another over-hyped young driver promoted to a race seat before he was ready. 
The dismal carWilliams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> gave him 
provided little scope to prove otherwise. This year, with machinery that has 
put Bottas at the sharp end of the grid and helped him qualify alongside 
Mercedes’ Nico Rosberg on the front row for Sundays German Grand Prix, the 
scepticism has shifted sharply to acclaim.

He took his first podium in Austria and drove an extraordinary race at 
Silverstone two weeks ago to move from 14th on the grid to second when the 
chequered flag fell. He had passed Daniel Ricciardo, Daniil Kvyat, Nico 
Hülkenberg, Kevin Magnussen and Jenson Button to take fourth by lap 15. The car 
is quick, of course, but moving through the field without incident so quickly 
was a consummate display of race craft.

There was fire behind the calculation as well. The moves on Magnussen and 
Button were both performed around the outside at Stowe, not a common overtaking 
spot. Each pass was a ballsy manoeuvre that required a perfect set up in the 
corners preceding the straight. Bottas made it look easy.

The 24-year-old began in karting and moved through Formula Renault into 
Formula Three and then GP3, where he won the title in 2012 and impressed by 
helping develop an initially poor ART car into a championship-winning ride. It 
is a skill shared by most of the greats.

Bottas is not the finished article yet; an error in Australia caused contact 
with the wall and cost him what may have been a second place. However, he does 
possess the awareness to learn from such incidents. “In Formula One it’s never 
easy, the level is really high and there are so many great drivers and there 
are many world champions on the grid,” he said in Germany. “So trying to be the 
best is not easy, but that’s the goal. What you need to do is keep learning, 
keep developing.”

A continuing process, then, but even in only his second season Bottas has not 
been afraid to make his presence felt. Toto Wolff is often touted in the 
paddock as sounding like The Terminator, but in Malaysia – when quicker than 
team-mate Felipe Massa – Bottas’s claim that “I have more pace than him” had 
all the cold, steely confidence of Schwarzenegger. Massa may be thankful he did 
not require his clothes, boots and motorcycle after the race, but that he was 
so considered and calm in that pressure-cooker situation speaks volumes.

Rob Smedley, Williams’s head of vehicle performance, recognised these skills 
after Silverstone. “Valtteri did an exceptional job,” he toldAutosport. “The 
communication between him and the pitwall was exceptional: you need that level 
of synergy between driver and pit, and here it came off as well as it could do 
really.”

Equally, the team’s deputy principal, Claire Williams, believes they have a 
future world champion on their books. “There was a lot of hype around Valtteri 
when he first came into the sport and that can put a lot of pressure on, but he 
has dealt with that so well,” she said. “He was able to develop personally last 
year, in the shadows almost, and fortunately this year we have given him a car 
in which he can show his ability – and he looks at the moment like he is a 
future world champion.”

The team’s turnaround this season has been exceptional. Jenson Button noted 
here in Hockenheim that he believed Williams had the second-fastest car on the 
grid, behind the Mercedes – although Williams’ chief technical officer, Pat 
Symonds, thinks Red Bull still have the edge. “It looks quite a clean and 
simple car,” Button said. “I’m happy for Frank Williams and Claire that they 
are quick. They don’t have the budget of some of the bigger teams, but they are 
putting a lot of effort into performing this year. It’s going to be a hell of a 
challenge to beat Williams from here to the end of the year.”

A quick car needs a mean pedaller, however, and it was at the British Grand 
Prix that Bottas really proved he could put it to work. “You have complete 
confidence that he is going to deliver that overtake that you need him to,” 
said Williams. “Silverstone was a difficult weekend, but Valtteri blitzed his 
way through the field – the overtaking manoeuvre on Jenson was phenomenal.”

Raikkonen recently suggested that he would retire when his contract with 
Ferrari is up at the end of 2015 and it would not take a huge stretch of the 
imagination to see this new, young, flying Finn taking his seat there. But for 
now understandably, he is happy at Williams. “It’s my aim to be world champion, 
and it always has been – nothing else is enough,” said Bottas before practice. 
“As a team, we are on the right road – that’s the goal of us together, to be 
world champion one day, and it would be really great to achieve it at Williams.”
 