
Before I became a writer I was an editor, and it's possible that I did this 
job for too long because, even now, strange headlines arrive in my head 
unbidden, floating above new experiences like speech bubbles in a cartoon 
strip. This happened most recently when I visitedBlue Hill 
<http://www.bluehillfarm.com/food/blue-hill-new-york>, in New York. Blue Hill 
is a super-hip restaurant that opened in Greenwich Village, in a former 
speakeasy off Washington Square, in 2000. Pretty much ever since, its chef, Dan 
Barber – "high priest of locavourism" and pioneer of the farm-to-table movement 
– has been garlanded with awards: in May he was named one ofTime magazine's 
most influential people and picked up a James Beard Foundation award for 
outstanding chef, the equivalent of an Oscar for best actor in US foodie 
circles. So getting a table at Blue Hill is always tricky. A few days after 
these most recent awards, however, bagging a berth got even more difficult when 
it was reported that the Obamas had eaten there on a "date". Suddenly, getting 
into Blue Hill was impossible.

But back to that headline. Last month, through various abuses of friendship 
and power in combination with a small miracle courtesy of the restaurant god in 
the sky, I did manage to get a table (I was working in New York). I was so 
excited! Here's how excited: even when G, the friend I took as my guest, told 
me nonchalantly that she'd already been to Blue Hill, and for a swankyNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> wedding reception to boot, my 
enthusiasm was undimmed. It was an unusually dank evening for the time of year, 
but anyone standing near me would have felt no chill at all; they could have 
warmed their hands on me, so feverish was my desire to get my paws on Blue 
Hill's improbably delectable and yet oh-so-puritanical menu.

Waiter! Bring me everything!
 Virile asparagus. Photograph: Romas Foord 
Actually, this is almost what happened. Our waiter – precise; rather priestly 
– told us that we were welcome to choose from the menu but that, if we 
preferred, "Dan", who was in the kitchen that night, could put together a 
tasting menu for us. We agreed that we would indeed prefer this. It would be 
preferable in every possible way. Off he went. The next time he came back, 
well… it was at this point that the headline ran through my brain like ticker 
tape. On the table he placed a large block of wood, the length and breadth of a 
gentleman's brogue. Along the top of it were half a dozen metal spikes, and on 
these spikes, in the manner of martyrs' heads, were a series of slender, and 
wholly raw, young vegetables: a long, slim carrot, its filigree top foaming 
like a green perm; a pale yellow parsnip which looked like a carrot that had 
smoked too many cigarettes; a piece of serene, papal-looking purple beetroot. 
On closer inspection, all of them were shining lightly, as if they'd just done 
a gym workout: they had, I later discovered, been spritzed with salt solution. 
Mesmerised, I removed a carrot from its spike, and took a bite. "Vegetables," I 
thought. "They're the new sex."

This sounds daft, but still: you know what I mean. That's the glory of 
headlines. Of course, thanks both to the turning wheel of fashion and to 
necessity, fiscal and environmental, vegetables have been enjoying a "moment" 
for a while now, a trend you can see reflected in the latest cookbooks. Last 
April, to wide acclaim, Maria Elia, head chef at the restaurant of the newly 
refurbished Whitechapel Art Gallery, publishedThe Modern Vegetarian: Food 
Adventures for the Contemporary Palate. Try her carrot pancakes with hummus, or 
her sumac-spiced aubergine "schnitzel" with tabbouleh, and weep. This month, 
meanwhile, Nigel Slater's long-awaitedTender: A Cook and His Vegetable Patch 
arrives, and next, the great Simon Hopkinson will publishThe Vegetarian Option. 
Nevertheless it took Blue Hill's daring – the sheer chutzpah of offering up raw 
veg by way of an appetiser – to make me see it. Naturally I know that, in a 
way, Barber's bravado is ridiculous: this is the emperor's new vegetables. 
We've always eaten veg, and so long as global warming allows, we always will. 
The Yorkshire Protestant in me – the one who used to spend Saturdays sitting in 
a tree with my Enid Blytons while my father laboured fanatically on his 
allotment – considers Blue Hill's poncy spikes and thinks: you want me topay… 
forthis? I've got carrots at home. But another part of me thinks this 
veneration of simplicity is just the ticket. Blue Hill's menu seems to me to be 
one possible path to happiness. It celebrates the regular – or what was once 
regular, before plastic tunnels and food miles – and makes it special. It 
counts its blessings. And because much of the produce its kitchen uses comes 
from Barber's family farm in upstate New York, it challenges the concept of 
choice. The seasons rule. I think that choice – or too much choice – makes 
people unhappy.

My veg-sex headline started off in a small point size, and a moderately 
self-effacing typeface. As the night went on, however, it got bigger, and 
darker. Soon it was front page news. After the vegetables came a series of 
amuses, the first of which were asparagus burgers: tiny brioches, split in two 
and filled with an asparagus mousse. Delicious. Then there was good white bread 
and butter and little dishes of dehydrated carrot and rocket. The idea was to 
dip the bread and butter into the powder. Well, that's what I did. An intense 
burst of carrot, and of rocket, exploded – forgive me as I lapse into 
restaurant speak – in the mouth. Tiny cups of asparagus soup. A perfectly 
poached egg in a pool of soft fresh peas. It was one thing after another! Our 
main course was chicken: the breast poached in buttermilk, the thigh roasted, 
served with kohlrabi and pickled rhubarb. Barber is a fan of sous vide cooking, 
in which meat is cooked for a long period of time at low temperature in an 
airtight plastic bag, so his chicken breast is soft, a bit pink, and far too 
reminiscent of turkey roll for my liking. But everything else was good. Next, a 
palate cleanser of three sorbets – carrot, celery and beetroot – followed by 
rhubarb soup with fromage blanc sorbet. Finally, a soup-cum-mousse of peanut 
butter and chocolate and, with our coffee, chocolate almonds and coconut 
marshmallows. Were we full? Certainly, but in such a zingy kind of a way. 

You will have noted the repetitions on this menu: the reappearance of carrot 
and asparagus. But boredom fails to set in when you are eating food that is so 
good and fresh, and which has been cooked by someone with wit and imagination. 
Granted, Blue Hill's credo can seem a little cultish, and when I visited its 
website to see what goes on "upstate", the lyrical accounts of barns and cows 
did get on my nerves a little (Ann Strauss, Dan Barber's grandmother, bought 
the farm from two warring brothers; the family now has a restaurant upstate, 
too – at the non-profitmaking Stone Barns Centre for Food and Agriculture in 
Pocantico Hills, on David Rockefeller's estate). But still, there is something 
powerful about Barber's personal commitment to the politics of food. A former 
English major, he is regarded as a "thinker chef", and has written editorials 
for theNew York Times. His "carrots and almonds" conference speech, which you 
can watch on YouTube, is legendary in US foodie circles. I've lost count of the 
number of times I've heard chefs bang on about their reverence for farmers, but 
he means it. In an interview he was once asked which one value he tries to 
instil in his staff. "Farm chores," he said enigmatically. These days he is 
increasingly famous – the Obamas chose him, not Thomas Keller – and yet still 
he remains at his stove, unseduced by all the offers he must get to step into a 
different kind of limelight. For this you can forgive him his poncy spikes.

Though not oblivious to fashion, I am fairly resistant to it. But I keep 
thinking about Blue Hill, in spite of the fact that, in some ways, the saintly 
Dan Barber is playing daffy haute-couture designer to the diffusion lines 
provided by veg boxes, farmers' markets and allotments. Just lately, when I 
shop, I find myself looking at squash and fennel with the same lustful eyes 
that I used to reserve for expensive cheese. I have moved my supply of veg out 
of the cellar and into a bowl in the kitchen, the better to admire their 
colours. I get cravings, not for chocolate but for asparagus, broad beans and 
peas. Frankly I used to scoff at the now-defunct Radio 4 programmeVeg Talk, but 
these days, I think they should revive it, late night.Veg Talk: it sounds so 
much more…intimate to me these days (obviously they'd have to replace its 
ex-presenter, Greg Wallace, who, though a former greengrocer, has all the sex 
appeal of a bag of Iceland crinkle-cut chips). Look, I don't really think 
vegetables are the new sex. But they are quitesexy: abundant and wonderful and 
wholesome, whether they arrive on spikes or not. OFM
 