
If there was ever a week to persuade neutrals that rugby union is a more 
satisfying sport than football this is it. TheHeineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> quarter-finals will spread the 
gospel to previously uncharted territory from Barcelona to Milton Keynes, 
offering as vibrant and enthralling a spectacle as European rugby can deliver. 
Even the Six Nations, in all its traditional glory, cannot provide quite the 
same kaleidescopic range of backdrops.

Will Leinster v Leicester be as good an occasion as Ireland v England in the 
same stadium last month? You would be unwise to bet against it.Perpignan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/perpignan> v Toulon in the Catalan capital 
of Barcelona? Atmosphere-wise, it will make the Stade de France feel like a wet 
Sunday evening in Lowestoft. Even the Amlin Challenge Cup, once a decidedly 
second-tier competition, will serve up four games with a genuine edge.

A better matchday experience than football? It is, naturally, a subjective 
debate with strong arguments for and against. To disciples of either sport it 
is like comparing the relative merits of cats and dogs. Minds tend to be made 
up early and habits duly formed. But how interesting to hear on the radio on 
Saturday morning that the former Arsenal and England striker Ian Wright had 
recently attended his first ever rugby game. His verdict? He could not believe 
how polite the supporters were towards each other and was positively staggered 
to discover that a) you could enjoy a drink while watching a Twickenham 
international and b) that fans are not segregated.

The X-Factor host Dermot O'Leary also told of his enjoyable visit to the Aviva 
Stadium for the England game last month, specifically the spontaneous applause 
from Irish supporters when an Englishman in their midst belted out a rousing 
solo version of Jerusalem. The next time Wright fancies a day out at the rugby 
perhaps he should invite that smooth-talking Wayne Rooney along.

But which of this week's four Heineken games would best help Wayne to escape 
his current angst-filled world? If he has never been to San Sebastián, home of 
Real Sociedad, he would be swiftly disabused of the notion that the north-west 
of England has the most passionate fans in Europe. The intense desire in the 
Basque country to seeBiarritz <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/biarritz> beat 
the strolling players of Toulouse will ensure a contest with as much percussive 
forward power as any, particularly with Jean-Michel Gonzalez's team still 
hurting from their 41-13 defeat to Clermont at the weekend.

Or maybe he should head to the other side of Spain. Having been lucky enough 
to cover the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, I've always felt Heineken Cup rugby would 
be on fertile ground if Perpignan ever took a major home game to the Olympic 
Stadium. Now the blood-and-gold flag-waving fans have their wish. Jonny 
Wilkinson has played all around the world but this will be something else 
again, particularly with theToulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> 
president, Mourad Boudjellal, foaming at the mouth. Having criticised his 
players for losing at Castres, he is keen to goad them to the Top 14 title and, 
conceivably, the Heineken Cup as well. "I told myself: 'If I don't vex this 
bunch, if I don't humiliate them, they'll fall asleep,'" he said this week. "If 
they become champions of France by hating me, I'll be doing well."

Hmm, he sounds Wayne's type of guy in terms of using anger as a driving force. 
In that respect, Northampton's England contingent will also strike a chord. Ben 
Foden's late-night taxi altercation has demonstrated that rugby remains far 
from immune to off-field incidents and Saints' decline over the Six Nations 
period has merely upped the club's desire to finish the season as they started 
it. It matters not whether they are playing at Franklin's Gardens or their new 
temporary "home" venue, stadium:mk.

If I was Rooney, though, I'd board a plane and head for Dublin this Saturday. 
Leinster v Leicester offers an enticing sequel to Ireland's striking victory 
over a grand-slam chasing England. Will Ben Youngs and Toby Flood get their 
comeuppance again? Has Brian O'Driscoll got another European title in him? Will 
the Tigers scrum have the last laugh? Mix all the plotlines together and the 
stage is set, even on a packed sporting weekend, for a humdinger. A semi-final 
line-up ofNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> v 
Toulon and Leinster v Toulouse is my tentative prediction but one thing is 
certain: rugby's sense of self-worth will be higher by Monday morning.

Heineken Cup quarter-finals
Saturday, 9 April


3.30 Perpignan v Toulon, Olympic Stadium, Barcelona – Alain Rolland (Irl)

6.00 Leinster v Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, 
Aviva Stadium, Dublin – Nigel Owens (Wal)

Sunday, 10 April 2011 


2.00 Northampton v Ulster, stadium:mk, Milton Keynes – Romain Poite (Fr)

4.30 Biarritz v Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse>, 
Estadio Anoeta, San Sebastián – Wayne Barnes (Eng)

Semi-final draw:


Leinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> or Leicester v Biarritz 
or Toulouse

Northampton or Ulster v Perpignan or Toulon

(To be played weekend of 30 April/1 May)

PROFIT WARNING


Strong words from the Sale Sharks owner, Brian Kennedy, in the current issue 
of Rugby Times. Kennedy says he questions his sanity "every day" having spent 
£15m on establishing Sale as a professional entity. "If the Premiership owners 
pulled out you'd have just four clubs left in England and that would put the 
RFU in a very funny position, wouldn't it? The whole financial dynamic of 
professional rugby union has to change and the RFU has to give us more 
financial support, otherwise the game will go bankrupt. Frankly if it wasn't 
for our fans and their support I'd have dropped this project years ago. The 
game is bust and the RFU has to do something about it." Not much room for 
misinterpretation there. Everyone with a stake in the English club game should 
heed his stark warning.

WORTH WATCHING THIS WEEK


Cian Healy (Leinster): The loosehead had a fine game for Ireland against 
England and now faces the ultimate challenge. Martin Castrogiovanni enjoyed a 
productive afternoon at Healy's expense in Rome back in February and both 
players will remember that particular fixture well. If Healy holds firm, 
Leinster will feel confident of reaching the last four.
 