
Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> is to introduce 
a permanent ban on all onshore unconventional gas exploration, including 
fracking and coal seam gas, becoming the first Australian state to do so.

The premier, Daniel Andrews <https://www.theguardian.com/world/daniel-andrews>
, made the announcement on Tuesday morning and said legislation for the ban 
would be introduced later this year, making the current moratorium on 
unconventional gas exploration permanent.

 A parliamentary inquiry last year into onshore unconventional gas in Victoria 
received more than 1,600 submissions, most of them opposed to fracking and coal 
seam gas exploration.

A statement from the Department of Premier and Cabinet said: “It is clear that 
the Victorian community has spoken. They simply don’t support fracking.

“The government’s decision is based on the best available evidence and 
acknowledges that the risks involved outweigh any potential benefits to 
Victoria.”

Court rules in Santos's favour over coal seam gas water treatment plant in 
Pilliga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/01/court-rules-in-santos-favour-over-coal-seam-gas-water-treatment-plant-in-pilliga>
The government said the move would protect the reputation of Victoria’s 
agriculture sector, which employs more than 190,000 people; provide certainty 
to regional communities; and end anxiety felt by farmers about the 
environmental and health risks associated with fracking.

Exemptions to the ban will remain for activities not covered by the current 
moratorium, such as gas storage, carbon storage research and accessing offshore 
resources. Exploration and development for offshore gas will also continue.

The Greens energy spokeswoman, Ellen Sandell, welcomed the news, describing it 
as “a relief to communities that have fought the threat of fracking for years”.


“This decision proves the power of grassroots advocacy,” she said. 
“Individuals have won over powerful and influential mining companies, and the 
Greens are proud to have led the political campaign which forced the government 
to support a permanent ban.

“But it’s disappointing the government is leaving the door open to 
conventional gas drilling after the next state election. We won’t stop fighting 
until all onshore gas drilling is banned.”


A dairy farmer in the Victorian coastal town of Seaspray, Julie Boulton, said 
the threat of unconventional gas mining had been hanging over farmers’ heads 
for years. “It has been so heart-wrenching at times, when we thought the drill 
rigs were coming and there was nothing we could do,” she said.

Fossil fuel register shows more than a third of Australia earmarked for coal 
or gas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/11/fossil-fuel-register-shows-more-than-a-third-of-australia-earmarked-for-coal-or-gas>
“But we pulled together as a community and decided to fight this threat to our 
farmland, water and health and today’s decision is just fantastic – we are 
ecstatic.”

Over the past five years the Lock the Gate coalition of rural communities, 
environmental groups and farmers has fought unconventional gas exploration.

Chloe Aldenhoven, coordinator for Lock the Gate, said about 1.4m hectares of 
Victoria was threatened by some form of onshore gas mining, which included coal 
seam gas, tight gas, shale gas and underground coal gasification. “Labor has 
shown real leadership by listening to community concerns,” she said.

“This is good news for every Victorian, but for the farming communities that 
have been fighting to stop this industry for over five years now, this is a 
wonderful day. This decision gives them certainty to move forward, and this 
decision protects Victoria’s vital clean and green image.”

 Principal Adviser at The Australia Institute, Mark Ogge, praised the ban as 
“sound economic and energy policy”.

He said that Queensland’s experiment in unconventional gas had demonstrated 
that the economic benefits promised by the gas industry had largely failed to 
materialise, while negatively impacting other industries. Research had found 
that for every 10 new gas jobs, 18 agricultural jobs were lost, he said.

“The manufacturing industry has been one of the biggest losers with LNG 
exports allowing gas suppliers to drive up prices to Australian users, and 
suppliers exercising their market power keep Australian prices high even as 
global prices collapsed,” Ogge said.

“We now have the ridiculous situation that Australian gas is now cheaper in 
Korea than it is in Australia. That’s a double-disaster for local manufacturing 
jobs.

“What benefits there are, have gone almost entirely to the overseas owners of 
global oil and gas companies licensed to export Australian gas, largely at the 
expense of Australian businesses and local jobs.”
 