
Valencia beat Getafe 4-1 to leapfrog Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> into fifth in the Primera 
Liga table and strengthen their bid for a Champions League place. They were set 
on their way by Juan Manuel Mata after 19 minutes match and went two up shortly 
afterwards, when David Villa converted from the penalty spot.

Francisco Javier Casquero pulled one back with a penalty shortly after the 
interval, but Raúl Albiol restored Valencia's two-goal lead after 56 minutes 
and Villa rounded off a comprehensive victory with a fourth from the spot on 
the hour mark.

Getafe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/getafe> played the last half an 
hour with 10 men after their goalkeeper Jacobo Sanz was sent off following a 
second yellow card for bringing down Villa for the penalty which led to the 
home side's fourth goal.

Osasuna climbed out of the relegation zone and severely dented Atlético Madrid
's hopes of getting back in the Champions League after claiming a 4-2 win at 
the Vicente Calderón. Walter Pandiani scored in the eighth minute before Diego 
Forlan levelled seven minutes later, but Krisztian Vadocz re-established the 
lead a minute before half-time.

Pandiani and Masoud Shojaei made it 4-1, before Pablo Ibanez grabbed a 
consolation five minutes later. Iranian Masoud was involved in virtually every 
good passage of play for the Pamplona-based side and his brilliant display 
earned him an impressive ovation from home fans when he was substituted late on.

Espanyol defeated Deportivo La Coruna 3-1 at Montjuic to boost their slim 
chances of survival. They got the perfect start when January signing Iván 
Alonso fired the opening goal after 12 minutes, following a bad mistake by the 
Deportivo goalkeeper Daniel Aranzubia.

Ivan De La Peña fired the home side into a two-goal lead six minutes before 
the break and, even though Deportivo quickly hit back through Lassad Nouioui, 
the home side looked comfortable in the second period and sealed a precious win 
in added time, when Alberto Lopo turned into his own net.

In the day's other game, Nikola Zigic (54) and substitute Gonzalo Colsa (89) 
scored second-half goals to giveRacing Santander a 2-0 win at Sporting Gijon.
 