
Manchester City were handed a fresh injury worry over their club captain, 
Vincent Kompany <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/vincent-kompany>, following 
his withdrawal from Belgium’s 1-1 draw with Holland in Amsterdam on Wednesday 
night.

Kompany was named in Roberto Martínez’s starting line-up for the friendly on 
his return to the national squad but following the pre-match warm-up the 
central defender was replaced by Watford’s Christian Kabasele.

Adam Lallana wants Gareth Southgate to be named full-time England manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/adam-lallana-gareth-southgate-full-time-england-manager-scotland>
Local media reports said the 30-year-old felt some discomfort and was 
withdrawn as a precaution but it is yet another concern for the player himself 
and City’s manager, Pep Guardiola. A series of injuries have limited Kompany to 
only four appearances this season and he played only 14 Premier League matches 
last season.

In the game itself Kompany’s team-mates came from a goal down to draw, with 
Yannick Carrasco equalising late on to cancel out Davy Klaassen’s first-half 
penalty.

Both managers fielded strong sides with Chelsea’s Eden Hazard the captain for 
Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> while Tottenham’s Jan 
Vertonghen and Kompany’s City colleague Kevin De Bruyne were also picked. For 
Holland Vincent Janssen, Maarten Stekelenburg, Virgil Van Dijk, Daley Blind and 
Gini Wijnaldum were among the Premier League stars on show.

Belgium started the brighter but the first real chance came Holland’s way 
after a defensive mistake from Laurent Ciman. His header back towards Simon 
Mignolet was weak, allowing Janssen to steal in and knock the ball past the 
Liverpool goalkeeper but Ciman recovered sufficiently to make amends.

The visitors were getting plenty of balls into the penalty area but more often 
than not Van Dijk was there to head them away or avert the danger.

Janssen gave Tottenham some injury concern when he went off after 25 minutes 
following a clash with Mignolet.

Dries Mertens should have put Belgium in front with the very next attack but 
he headed De Bruyne’s cross into the side netting.

Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> had been on the back 
foot throughout but took the lead seven minutes before half-time. It was poor 
defending from Vertonghen, who let Jeremain Lens get the wrong side of him at 
the byline before pulling him back by the shirt.

It was a definite penalty and the Ajax striker Klaassen dispatched it with 
aplomb, straight down the middle, for his third goal for the Oranje and on his 
home ground.

Belgium felt they, too, should have had a penalty after an hour when Joel 
Veltman dragged back Carrasco from behind but the referee awarded only a 
free-kick. De Bruyne took the set piece and his shot had to be helped over the 
crossbar by Stekelenburg.

Martínez’s men had struggled to get going and he made a double change four 
minutes later, bringing on Thorgan Hazard and Romelu Lukaku for De Bruyne and 
Mertens.

Gareth Bale still ‘one of the boys’ for Wales after £150m deal, says Joe Ledley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/gareth-bale-wales-150m-deal-joe-ledley-serbia>
Belgium survived a scare when Joshua Brenet’s shot curled narrowly wide but 
they improved immediately with Lukaku sending an effort just wide before the 
Everton striker was guilty of a glaring miss after 79 minutes.

Thorgan Hazard sent a shot across the face of goal and Lukaku, unmarked with 
an open goal inside the six-yard box, could not sort his feet out in time and 
scooped the ball over the crossbar.

Belgium finally made the breakthrough with eight minutes left when Carrasco’s 
shot deflected off the back of Veltman and over the head of Stekelenburg. Eden 
Hazard could have made sure of it for the visitors in the 86th minute when 
Lukaku’s flick put him through one-on-one with Stekelenburg but the Everton 
goalkeeper made a good save.

Both countries move on to World Cup qualifying matches this weekend with 
Holland travelling to Luxembourg while Belgium host Estonia in Brussels.
 