
In February, I used Virgin Experience Days to buy a Ferrari ride voucher at 
Silverstone as a birthday present for my husband. The voucher was valid for 
nine months. After a month I got the message that the voucher couldn’t be used 
at Silverstone following changes. I had chosenSilverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> as my husband is a big Formula 
One fan.

I called Virgin and was offered another location. When I said that was no 
good, I was offered another voucher: for cooking, jumping, etc. Again, I 
declined. The company has refused to give me a refund. I have sent a further 
letter of complaint that has been ignored. Can you please advise what can I do 
to get the money back?AM, London

This was a straightforward matter to resolve. You paid for one thing but 
didn’t get it, and you should have been offered a refund. We contacted Virgin 
Experience Days, a company that appears too often in this column, and it agreed 
that you should have, and will be offered, a refund.


It said: “Unfortunately, this location for the head-to-head challenge was 
withdrawn from sale at short notice by the supplier earlier this year. We 
realise this is disappointing for customers looking forward to their track day. 
We immediately wrote to all affected customers, offering available dates until 
the end of May. If this wasn’t feasible, we offered alternative locations or an 
exchange. The majority of customers chose one of these alternatives. However, 
we appreciate this doesn’t suit everybody and any customers who chose not to 
take up these options received a full refund.

“Unfortunately, AM was quoted our standard terms and conditions, which do not 
apply in this exceptional case. This is a staff training issue which has now 
been addressed.”

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number

 