
Did an exceptional visual memory give Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso> an edge in his 
capacity for artistic excellence? Studies show that the drawing ability of 
children correlates with their visual memory; those who are good at one are 
likely to be good at the other.

Picasso knew that the strength of his memory was of fundamental importance. It 
was, he said: “A painter’s most useful adjunct.” While his biographers may vary 
in their assessments of some of Picasso’s behaviour, they are united in 
describing his visual memory as being extraordinarily good.

Descriptions of the intense way Picasso looked at things suggest another facet 
of his behaviour relevant to memory. His many biographers comment on his deep 
gaze. Picasso had incredible eyes – women, apparently, were captivated by them 
– and he used them to great effect in looking at the world. In her book about 
Picasso,Gertrude Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gertrude-stein>, his 
friend and collector, commented that he was “dark, alive with big pools of 
eyes…”

Other artists also used an intense and concentrated gaze. Lucian Freud 
characterised his own early work as the result of “maximum observation by 
staring at my subject matter”.

While Picasso may have had an uncanny ability to remember things after just 
one gaze, his memory was often developed by multiple exposures to a single 
image.Françoise Gilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/10/francoise-gilot-artist-love-picasso>
 – Picasso’s friend, lover and partner from 1944 to 1953 – describes how, when 
he was preparing to reinterpret a favourite painting, he would repeatedly go to 
the Louvre and stare at it for ages. Only later would he start work on his own 
interpretation.

Picasso had incredible eyes – women, apparently, were captivated by them

He produced 58 interpretations of Velázquez’s 1656 masterpiece Las Meninas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/26/velazquez-las-meninas-everything-is-happening-extract-michael-jacobs>
, a number of which focus particularly on the child at the front of the 
painting, thought to be the eldest daughter of the Queen, Margaret Theresa.

Françoise also remembers Picasso adopting a similar approach before painting 
her. He would stare at her for extended periods, but produce his paintings when 
she was not there.

Picasso overlearned the picture. When you overlearn something, you don’t just 
look at it, think about it and try to learn from or remember it. You look at it 
(or listen to it) again and again until it becomes completely familiar. 
Overlearning enables memory to work much better and in much greater detail.

Picasso adopted a similar approach for his influential portrait of Stein. She 
sat for him many times – about 90 sittings from the autumn of 1905 through to 
the summer of 1906 – during which Picasso had ample opportunity to overlearn 
her appearance. This enabled him to paint the final version of her portrait 
from memory, after returning from a trip in the summer of 1906.

Picasso also used back-ups to remind him of details. These included postcards, 
prints and photographs. In his homes in the south of France he used projectors 
to display the pictures that he was studying on to the walls of his studio.

He did not use his visual and tactile memory to produce exact copies of what 
he had seen. He changed them into something new, combining the originals with 
other ideas and influences. Look at his adaptations of old master paintings, 
for instance, and you can clearly see how he retained the characteristics of 
the originals while altering their focus, size or structure. It was this 
dynamic aspect to his memories, combining different images in the creation of 
something original, which marked Picasso’s genius.

Picasso’s Brain by Christine Temple is published by Little, Brown at £14.99. 
To order a copy for £12.29, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/picasso-s-brain.html>
 