
It was one of those nights when the woodwork made all the difference. With 
five minutes remaining the width of the post denied Gareth Bale a second goal 
that would have put this crucial game to bed and less than 60 seconds later the
Serbia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serbia> bench exploded with joy 
after Aleksandar Mitrovic, the Newcastle United striker, scored via the upright 
at the other end.

Wales were crestfallen, disappointment written all over their faces at the 
final whistle after two precious points slipped through their fingers for the 
third consecutive match in aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualification 
campaign that has stalled. “The players are absolutely devastated,” Chris 
Coleman, the Wales manager, said.

A win over a strong Serbia team would have made up for the frustration of 
being pegged back at home against Georgia last month and allowed Wales to apply 
some pressure on the Republic of Ireland at the top of the group. InsteadWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> will travel to Dublin in March 
with no margin for error. Coleman’s team sit third in Group D, four points 
adrift of Ireland and two behind Serbia, whom they face in June in another 
tricky away game.

From Coleman’s point of view, coming up against Martin O’Neill’s side next is 
just what Wales need. “It’s probably the best game – we couldn’t have chosen a 
better one,” he said. “We know it’s going to be one of the hardest games and 
that’s what we need. We’re going to go into a fantastic atmosphere at the Aviva 
Stadium and Ireland are playing on the front foot, playing with confidence – 
they deserve to be top. It’s going to be a fantastic test and challenge for us, 
and we look forward to that.”

Wales will have a long time between now and then to mull over the opening four 
qualification matches and in particular the dramatic chain of events that saw 
this match swing one way and then the other in the closing stages. Bale, who 
registered his 26th international goal to move within two of Ian Rush’s 
all-time scoring record, will curse the moment when his low, angled 
right-footed shot rebounded off the post after Aaron Ramsey had set him free.

Wales 1-1 Serbia: World Cup 2018 qualifier – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/12/wales-v-serbia-world-cup-2018-qualifier-live>
Questions will also be asked about whether Wales could have done more to 
prevent the goal that Serbia pilfered moments later, when Antonio Rukavina was 
given the room on the right to deliver a cross that Mitrovic, getting in front 
of James Chester, brilliantly headed home. The ball hit the upright and ended 
up in the net via Wayne Hennessey’s gloves, almost crossing the line in slow 
motion to add to the sense of despair among the home supporters.

“That’s football,” Coleman said. “We’re an inch away from going 2-0 up and 
then the game is finished – we’ve got the three points. Seconds later the 
ball’s in the back of our net. We hit the post and it pops out, they hit the 
post and it goes in, it’s like that sometimes unfortunately. It would have been 
a great point if we’d beaten Georgia, and we should have taken care of business 
there. But I thought we were more or less back at it tonight with our 
performance, we had that edge back in our game – and you need that against a 
team like Serbia. No complaints from our players, I thought they gave 
everything they had, deserved more, deserved better. I think apart from the 
goal in the second half I can’t remember Wayne Hennessey having anything to do 
really, just a couple of crosses. So to give up two points late on was a bitter 
pill to swallow.”

Set up in an unfamiliar 4-2-2-2 formation, Wales took the lead on the 
half-hour mark with a goal that owed much to the persistence of Hal 
Robson-Kanu, who dispossessed Matija Nastasic, the former Manchester City 
defender, and then had the presence of mind to look up and pick out Bale. About 
20 yards from goal, he thumped a low shot that flashed past Vladimir Stojkovic, 
the Serbia goalkeeper, who was partially unsighted as Branislav Ivanovic tried 
to block. Shortly afterwards Robson-Kanu headed a Bale cross narrowly wide.

Serbia, however, also had their moments in the first half. Neil Taylor cleared 
Ivanovic’s header off the line and Nemanja Matic drew a decent save from 
Hennessey on the stroke of half-time.

It was a frantic game, spiky at times and threatened to boil over on a couple 
of occasions. Dusan Tadic was left bloodied after Taylor accidentally caught 
him on the nose with a high kick and a total of seven yellow cards were 
brandished. The most telling blow, though, was landed by Mitrovic four minutes 
from time and left Wales with plenty to do to get back on the road to Russia.
 