
Murray Walker cut his teeth as a sports commentator back in 1949, covering the 
British Grand Prix at Silverstone for BBC Radio.

From this point, the ever-growing crescendo of his high-pitched voice has been 
as central to the sport as the screeching of tyres on tarmac.

Mr Walker was born into a family of motor-racing fanatics - his father was 
also a motor-racing correspondent and they worked together until Walker 
senior's death in 1962.

However, after returning from a distinguished spell driving tanks during the 
second world war, he worked in advertising, where he was partly responsible for 
the Mars "Work, Rest and Play" campaign, and helped defend the market-leading 
bird-seed brand Trill against falling foul of the Monopolies Commission.

Mr Walker left advertising to follow in his father's footsteps, leading to a 
career spanning almost 51 years commentating on motor-racing and particularly
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>.

In 1978 he entered the premier league of sports commentators when the BBC 
began televising every Grand Prix race, and Mr Walker's name and voice became 
synonymous with the BBC's coverage.

Formula One rights owner Bernie Ecclestone once gave Mr Walker a gold tie-pin, 
proclaiming that he "was the BBC".

His coverage of racing has been characterised by three things; his knowledge; 
his high-pitched voice, which becomes more excited as the tension on the track 
mounts; and his propensity for verbal gaffes.

Dubbed Muddly Talker, his more nonsensical remarks knock George W Bush and 
Danforth Quayle into a cocked hat. These included "I imagine that the 
conditions in those cars today are totally unimaginable," and "The atmosphere 
is so tense you could cut it with a cricket stump".

It was a shock, both to Mr Walker and to motor-racing fans, when ITV scooped 
the rights to the sport three years ago.

He has defended himself robustly against recent claims in the Daily Mail that 
his verbal gaffes were getting worse, but at the age of 77, the time was right 
to hand over to a younger man.

Saying his official goodbye at today's press conference, Mr Walker said his 
most glorious moments in motor-racing were watching British drivers such as 
James Hunt take the Grand Prix.

His replacement at ITV, James Allen, faces an uphill struggle. Maybe the next 
generation of motor racing commentators can carve out a niche for coherent 
reportage free from malapropisms. But the Muddly Talker will be sadly missed.
 