
Walsall replaced Burton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion> at the top of the Sky Bet 
League One table thanks to a hard-fought 2-0 victory over their rivals at the 
Banks’s Stadium.

An opener from 19-year-old Liam Kinsella and a last-minute penalty from Tom 
Bradshaw handed the Brewers their first defeat in six games in front of the 
biggest league gate of the season atWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall>.

The 6,812 in attendance saw the Saddlers go ahead of their opponents at the 
top on goal difference but the home fans endured several nervy moments in the 
second half.

“I thought we were excellent in the first half, we played really well, moved 
the ball around and created some chances and scored a good goal,” said the 
Walsall manager, Dean Smith. “Young Kinsella, what a game. He’s taken the reins 
from Jason Demetriou, who’s been excellent all season and got a goal.

“As well as we played in the first half, they had an awful lot of the ball in 
the second half and put a lot of balls into their front men. Adam Chambers in 
front of our three centre halves was outstanding.”

The home side dominated the early exchanges but had to wait until nine minutes 
before the interval to take the lead. Rico Henry and Romaine Sawyers combined 
to create space for Kinsella and the teenager hammered home his first goal for 
the club.

Burton improved after the break and missed several chances to equalise, the 
most glaring of which fell to Timmy Thiele five minutes from time.

Instead John Mousinho was adjudged to have handled inside the area in injury 
time and Bradshaw confidently converted from the penalty spot for his sixth 
league goal of the season.

“They were the better team in the first half and they deserved to be 1-0 up,” 
said the Albion manager Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink. “We didn’t play as well as we 
can; we weren’t on the front foot and we were losing our second balls.

“We were going out of our shape to chase the ball and that’s what they like 
because they can pick you off in pockets.

“In the second half, we addressed that and I thought we were the 
better team and it looked like there was only one team to score. We had a 
really good chance to score, but it was not meant to be.”

The result means Smith’s side extend their unbeaten league run to six matches, 
with the clean sheet maintaining their record as the league’s tightest defence.
 