
Walsall were always going to celebrate this month, starting with 25 years at 
the Bescot Stadium, but they are doing it in style. Lying third and unbeaten on 
Saturday morning, the blazing Saddlers ended the only 100% record in League One 
with a 2-1 home win overCoventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> that takes them to second 
behind Gillingham.

They deserved it, too, in a pulsating Midlands derby of high quality and 
tactical interest. Coventry came with Newcastle’s 18-year-old striker Adam 
Armstrong, on loan and on fire, with five goals from three games. But Dean 
Smith, Walsall’s manager, identified John Fleck as “one of the best players in 
this league; he can pick a pass all day” – and put Romaine Sawyers on him.

With the seasoned Adam Chambers, 34, whose twin, James, was released in the 
summer, sweeping in front of two cool centre-backs, Paul Downing and James 
O’Connor,Walsall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> maintained 
Smith’s promise of attacking enterprise while Armstrong hardly had a look-in.

The full-backs Andy Taylor (how many left-back Taylors are there?) and Jason 
Demetriou, overlapped to good effect, often finding each other with raking 
crossfield passes, and Walsall enjoyed consistent forward momentum through the 
Slovak Milan Lalkovic and Sam Mantom.

Lalkovic was not born when Sir Stanley Matthews opened the ground but, playing 
on the left, he repeatedly had Jordan Willis in knots with tricky footwork. 
Before half-time Anthony Forde had put Walsall ahead and just after it Lalkovic 
made space for a shot at Willis’s expense. As Lee Burge beat it out, Tom 
Bradshaw shaped his body to hook the ball in for his fifth goal of the season 
including a League Cup hat-trick against Nottingham Forest. Willis was 
substituted. Matthews’ opponents did not have that relief. It was relief for 
Bradshaw, too, a striker in the tireless Dean Saunders mould who had the 
tentacles of Réda Johnson all over him in the first half.

Coventry replied four minutes later with a thumping 30-yard shot to the far 
top corner from Jacob Murphy. The game could have been so different if he had 
not dithered on a far-post chance early on, allowing Neil Etheridge, a 6ft 3in 
Filipino, to make a fine tip-away save low to his left. Coventry could have 
done with a boost then. They had been hobbled in the seventh minute by injury 
to James Maddison, Murphy being his substitute.

Tony Mowbray, their manager, while hinting that the loss had affected their 
fluency, gave Walsall “a lot of credit” – not the sort of thing heard much in 
the Premier League – and said: “Sides are not going to let you walk through 
them” (a point not to be lost on Northampton’s Chris Wilder, who last week 
greeted a compelling 3-0 win with a rant at his team for minor deficiencies; 
they have lost both their games since).

After guiding Coventry to safety on the last day of last season, Mowbray has 
stabilised the defence with Sam Ricketts from Wolves and added the creative 
forces of Romain Vincelot from Leyton Orient and Rúben Lameiras from Tottenham.

Smith was especially pleased with the reaction to Murphy’s goal and “how we 
got back to our passing game”, adding: “Lankovic showed how good he can be. 
There’s an awful lot of potential here and we’ve got to go out and fulfil it.”

Smith is a long-term Walsall man, starting as a teenager at Fellows Park in 
1989 and now the third longest-serving manager in the Football League’s 72, 
after Exeter’s Paul Tisdale and MK Dons’ Karl Robinson.

This conforms with the stability at the club, whose some-time saviour and 
long-time chairman, Jeff Bonser, has not always been appreciated by fans – to 
the extent that he stayed away from home matches to avoid abuse. If, as seems 
to be the case now, they want him back, perhaps they should fill the home seats 
instead of falling more than half short. (Coventry’s 2,281 were more 
responsible than Walsall’s 4,895 for a terrific atmosphere.) The football is 
rather good. Walsall go again on Tuesday at home to Brighton in the Capital One 
Cup.

Bonser’s business was in toilet-flush handles and, when the Bescot was built 
on a sewerage plant, they thought of calling it WC Fields. Now it is coming up 
smelling of roses.
 