
Walter Zenga watched Wolverhampton Wanderers endure a 4-0 defeat against 
Swansea Cityjust hours after taking over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/30/wolves-appoint-walter-zenga-new-head-coach-kenny-jackett>
 as head coach at Molineux from the sacked Kenny Jackett. The former Italy 
goalkeeper, who starred for his country at the 1990 World Cup, will formally 
start work on Monday.

Zenga, 56, was present nonetheless on Saturday and saw the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> side lose the friendly 
against their Premier League opposition.

Wolves appoint Walter Zenga as head coach after ditching Kenny Jackett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/30/wolves-appoint-walter-zenga-new-head-coach-kenny-jackett>
Jackett was ousted on Friday night, four days after receiving assurances about 
his future by the club’s new owners. His successor, announced on Saturday 
morning, has spent time in charge of clubs such as Steaua Bucharest, Red Star 
Belgrade, Catania, Palermo and Sampdoria. He has already begun to improve his 
squad with the signing of Silvio, a 28-year-old Portugal international, from 
Atlético Madrid.

The Wolves first-team coach Rob Edwards, who said the past 24 hours had been 
“a bit of a whirlwind”, took charge of the team against Swansea and said he 
hoped to be retained. Edwards is also optimistic the new man in charge can go 
on to be a big success.

“I was at the training ground nice and early and met Walter who had a look 
around the facilities and we had chance to sit down and go through a few 
things,” Edwards said. “He knows the players already as I think he has been 
watching DVDs and doing research and familiarising himself over the last couple 
of days.

“He seems like an amiable guy but he has a presence about him and as soon as 
he walks in the dressing room, he is the manager and everyone sits up and 
listens. He knows what players we have got at the moment and what we need as 
well because we need some reinforcements. I am sure he is going to go on and do 
very well and we will support him in every way we can.”

Wolves’ main director, Jeff Shi, said on the club’s website: “We’re delighted 
to appoint Walter as the new head coach of Wolves. He has an excellent track 
record both as a player and as a coach, and a wealth of experience he can bring 
to his new role at Wolves.

“ Walter is a hugely passionate personality who lives for football and is 
fiercely determined to succeed in everything that he does. We are looking 
forward to working with him, and supporting him in the shared aim of trying to 
help Wolves achieve promotion back to the Premier League.”PA
 