
At law school, lecturers love to remind their students that they will be 
entering a boys’ club. In parliament, it’s the same story: watch five minutes 
of question time and you’ll see it. So maybe we shouldn’t have been so shocked 
last year whenCaroline Tan brought the “boys’ club” of the medical profession 
to everyone’s attention 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/surgeon-caroline-tan-breaks-silence-over-sexual-harassment-in-hospitals-20150312-141hfi.html>
. Or this year, when Erin Riley experiencedbacklash after calling out sexism in 
sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/this-is-what-happens-when-you-call-out-sexism-in-australia>
. Yet another conglomerate of educated, middle-class white men were forming a 
boys’ club, to the detriment of women.

Where else are women being repeatedly pushed around and pushed away in their 
workplace? The answer is close to home for anyone who’s bought a coffee or 
beer, or eaten at a restaurant. Hospitality is one of the worst boys’ clubs of 
all.

Raise the topic of chefs with almost any 20-something female who’s worked with 
one and she will shudder, haunted by memories of overly entitled, aggressive 
men. The predominant category of chefs who thrash around in hot kitchens are 
sleep deprived and/or hungover, and looking around for someone to take it out 
on. Enter the casual staff.

Why are there so few female chefs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2016/may/05/why-are-there-so-few-women-chefs>
Sure, chefs throw their weight around regardless of who they’re working with. 
The occasional man who finds himself taking orders from, or working with, 
kitchens might be on the receiving end of swearing and name calling. The 
difference is that women are more likely to experience a special kind of 
bullying from chefs:unwanted conduct of a sexual nature 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/publications/chapter-3-what-sexual-harassment-effectively-preventing-and-responding-sexual%233_4>
, including jokes, comments and the sharing of images.

In Australia, courts recognise sexual harassment as a form of sexual 
discrimination, because it’s generally experienced by women on account of their 
gender.

When I told people I was working on this article, many of them came forward 
with anecdotes of their own. A fellow student said she had definitely been 
sexually harassed at her first hospitality job but she didn’t realise it was 
harassment at the time. My friend told me how, on her first shift working the 
door at a nightclub, the bouncer threw her over his shoulder so that all the 
other security guards could smack her ass, while queuing patrons watched.

I remained on the “right side” of the chefs for the first few months after 
starting one of my waitressing jobs. Sometimes being on the “right side” meant 
nervously laughing when the head chef asked me how I was at “handling balls, 
meaty ones” because he wanted my help in the kitchen and “liked the way you 
roll them”.

Waitresses get stuck between demoralising behaviour and a bad place: forced to 
choose between accepting chefs’ pent-up frustrations in the form of either 
sexual attention or verbal aggression. Although both are versions of the same 
thing – harassment – waitresses often choose the former because it makes their 
jobs easier, and laughing it off enables them to stay employed.

The chef and apprentice began pretending to have sex with the pig, thrusting 
their hips, erupting in cackles of laughter

I put up with it for a few months, able to distract myself by chatting with 
the nicer staff members and eating free cake. Meanwhile I took orders from 
customers who asked me on dates; I carried dirty plates into the kitchen where 
dishies called me “beautiful”; I kept a straight face while taking payment from 
drinkers who sniggered when told they had to “reinsert” their card; I sold wine 
to men who said “thanks, sexy”. Small things, yes, but irritating, recurring, 
degrading. Waitresses get hit from both sides – customers and chefs – all the 
while needing to maintain a professional and polite demeanour.

Sometimes it gets worse. One waitress I know well told me of a chef who we 
will call Tomcat, who seemed to dislike her from the get go; he approached her 
in the kitchen one day and asked if she would do him a favour.

Tomcat and an apprentice chef were holding a pig spit roast. Two dishies and 
one kitchen hand stood around. Tomcat handed the waitress his phone and asked 
her to press the red button, then he gave the command: “OK. Go!”

He and the apprentice began pretending to have sex with the pig, thrusting 
their hips, erupting in cackles of laughter. Tomcat grinned nastily as he took 
his phone back, looking deep into her horrified eyes.

College boys and sexual consent: there's still a long way to go | Catharine 
Lumby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/college-boys-and-sexual-consent-theres-still-a-long-way-to-go>
She complained to management and Tomcat apologised: “I didn’t do it to make 
you uncomfortable.” Given his satisfied grin at the time, she found that 
unlikely but ultimately irrelevant: when it comes to sexual harassment, what 
counts are the effects, not the intentions.

She asked him why he didn’t get one of the guys in the kitchen to make the 
video. “I didn’t want to ask the junkie kitchen hands because I thought they’d 
try to steal my phone,” he replied.

A week later the restaurant owner, who we’ll call Fox, approached her. She 
told Fox that she didn’t feel safe around Tomcat.

She realised she’d been slammed outside the doors of a B-grade boys’ club

“He just needs a holiday. He said he apologised,” consoled Fox. “He didn’t do 
it to upset you. The reason he told me was that he didn’t trust the junkies in 
the kitchen with his phone.”

Asking her to believe that excuse was insulting enough the first time. She 
realised she’d been slammed outside the doors of a B-grade boys’ club.

If you’re experiencing sexual harassment at work, the Australian Human Rights 
Commission <https://www.humanrights.gov.au/complaints/make-complaint> can 
arrange (voluntary) mediation between you and your employer. If you feel like 
you’ve been made to quit because of harassment, you can hire a private law firm 
to help you seek compensation for the time you are between jobs.

Or you can cut straight to quitting. This is the option most women take. It’s 
easier to find another job and avoid further humiliation than to attempt to 
retrain the “sense of humour” of a gang of guys in a kitchen.

Mention the word “chef” to anyone who has worked in hospitality and the horror 
stories will flow. But the boys in the kitchens keep their jobs while the women 
are made to move on.

Too often, bosses take the sides of chefs, brushing off inappropriate 
behaviour and allowing it to continue; waitresses are easier to replace and sit 
lower down the hospo hierarchy. But that hierarchy is gendered and it’s women 
who lose out – and no matter how overworked chefs are, no matter how rough 
their personal circumstances might be, this kind of behaviour should never be 
excused.
 