
Napoli warmed up for the away leg of their Champions League last-16 tie with 
Chelsea by routingCagliari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> 6-3 
in their sixth consecutive win in all competitions.

Marek Hamsik, Paolo Cannavaro, Ezequiel Lavezzi, Walter Gargano and Christian 
Maggio each found the target forNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, who also benefitted from an own 
goal by Davide Astori. The Argentinian striker Joaquin Larrivey scored a 
consolation hat-trick for Cagliari.

Napoli moved level with Udinese in fourth place, eight points behind the Serie 
A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> leaders Milan, who host 
Lecce on Sunday. The hosts took control at Stadio San Paolo after 10 minutes 
when Hamsik scored with an angled shot from beyond the area. Cannavaro doubled 
the lead in the 19th minute by redirecting a free-kick from Lavezzi with a 
bouncing header.

Astori redirected in a cross from Lavezzi in the 30th and Larrivey pulled one 
back for Cagliari in the 37th with a header following a corner. Lavezzi, who 
had another in a string of outstanding performances, then earned a penalty when 
he was tripped in the 56th and he converted the spot-kick for his eighth league 
goal of the season.

Edinson Cavani, Napoli's top striker, was rested at the start, then replaced 
Lavezzi in the 59th and set up Gargano's goal in the 70th. A Uruguay team-mate 
of Cavani's, Gargano collected a pass just outside the area, dribbled by Astori 
and slotted a shot past Cagliari's distraught goalkeeper Michael Agazzi.

Larrivey scored with another header for Cagliari in the 77th and the Italy 
midfielder Maggio made it 6-2 in the 85th before Larrivey completed his 
hat-trick in added time.

Internazionale moved into sixth by beating Chievo 2-0 with late goals from 
Walter Samuel and Diego Milito to end an eight-match winless streak. Inter had 
not won since beating Lazio 2-1 on 22 January and the manager Claudio Ranieri 
had tears in his eyes after the goal from Milito, who had a penalty-kick won by 
Lucio saved by theChievo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> 
goalkeeper Stefano Sorrentino in the first half.

The playmaker Wesley Sneijder banged a long shot off the crossbar and the 
midfielder Dejan Stankovic also missed in the first half. After a dangerous 
free-kick from Sneijder in the 85th minute, Inter finally broke through with a 
header from Samuel following a Sneijder corner. Milito then headed in a cross 
from the 38-year-old captain Javier Zanetti. Chievo's best chance came with a 
free-kick from the USA midfielder Michael Bradley that sailed just over the bar.
 