
Southampton’s European adventure came to an abrupt end on Thursday night at 
the hands of Hapoel Be’er Sheva, the Israeli champions, who dumped Claude 
Puel’s side out of theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> group stages to reach 
the round of 32 at their expense.

Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> were tepid 
throughout, edging towards a goalless draw that would have seen them through 
until, with the visitors’ first shot of the evening on target, Maor Buzaglo 
drilled an effort low beyond the goalkeeper, Fraser Forster, after 78 minutes.

Only then did the hosts truly rally, with Virgil van Dijk poking home an 
equaliser in injury time, but it was inadequate on a disappointing night for 
Puel, who witnessed his side limp out of the competition on head-to-head record.

“Tonight it’s difficult to find a good word. It’s a big disappointment for the 
club, the fans and the players also,” the Southampton manager said. “It’s 
difficult to accept this result with just one chance and one goal for this 
team, but it’s football and now it’s important to look forward.

“We need to come back with a good spirit and it’s a strong challenge now to 
give a good answer. Many teams are eliminated and come back with a strong 
spirit. It’s disappointing for the staff and players, we were ambitious for 
this competition and now our mission is in the Premier League.”

Southampton have now managed only four goals in six matches and against Hapoel 
they paid for their profligacy.

Puel made three changes from the 3-0 defeat at Crystal Palace on Saturday, one 
of which was to replace the captain José Fonte with Maya Yoshida. As a result 
the Portuguese, who helped his country win Euro 2016 in the summer, has not 
featured for Southampton in the Europa League this season.

Fonte, who turns 33 this month, has 18 months to run on his current contract 
and the club do not have plans to offer him a new one.

The defender is held in high regard by Southampton supporters, though, and the 
Northam Stand took all of 155 seconds to sing the name of their leader. Hapoel, 
too, were without their captain, Elyaniv Barda. Another fans favourite, Maor 
Melikson, in his second spell with the Israeli champions, was also missing.

Hapoel are a team predominantly made up of free transfers and cut-price 
signings, including Ben Sahar, the former Chelsea and Portsmouth striker. 
Nicknamed the Camels, they are 10 points clear of Maccabi Tel Aviv at the top 
of their domestic league after clinching their first Israeli title for 40 years 
last season.

Unsurprisingly, then, the Hapoel manager, Barak Bakhar, at 37, is regarded as 
something of a prodigy by the club’s supporters, even more so after guiding the 
club past the group stages in a European competition for the first time in 
their history.

Southampton started brightly and dominated large spells of the first half. 
Inside two minutes Nathan Redmond’s corner was met by Charlie Austin, whose 
header was comfortably gathered by David Goresh, the Hapoel goalkeeper. Redmond 
then shot from distance before his pace left the visitors defenders flummoxed, 
running with the ball from his own half, but his cross from the byline was a 
little too high for the leaping Austin, who was later withdrawn with a shoulder 
injury.

Southampton were forced to settle for glimpses at goal and it was Buzaglo who 
squandered the best opportunity in a fairly tame half. A deep cross by Mihaly 
Korhut evaded both Van Dijk and Yoshida, allowing the unmarked Hapoel striker 
to get in a shot at the back post. It was much the same after the break, with 
the substitute Shane Long, who replaced Austin, next to puff out his cheeks, 
after failing to guide a fine low cross by Ryan Bertrand goalwards.

Van Dijk headed wide once more and as the game crept towards full-time, Oriol 
Romeu was urged to shoot at goal in an attempt to put the home supporters out 
of their misery. But it was about to get much worse when Yuval Shabtay picked 
out Buzaglo, who found the net with a low drive.

Only after going behind did Southampton display the urgency required, with Van 
Dijk eventually poking home an equaliser. The giant Dutchman charged forward 
again during injury-time in search of a winner, as did Yoshida, who climbed 
highest to head millimetres wide with seconds remaining.

In the end Southampton were left to ponder what might have been. As for 
Hapoel, they once again are breaking new ground. The club’s very presence on 
the European circuit was proudly represented by more than 1000 travelling fans, 
who will doubtless enjoy the 3,700km trip back to the dusty city of Beersheba.

“We did a big thing – there’s no question about that. We played our game and 
we knew eventually we would get a chance to score,” Bakhar said. “We believed 
from the off that we could do it.”
 