
The presence of Wayne Rooney and Robin van Persie revived memories of when 
Manchester United were last a force. Those halcyon days occurred three long 
years ago when a record 20th championship was claimed at Old Trafford on an 
April night.Van Persie’s hat-trick sank Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/22/manchester-united-aston-villa-report>
 and Sir Alex Ferguson lauded the Dutchman’s second strike as the “goal of the 
century”.

It was a sweet over-the-shoulder volley that Van Persie hit on 13 minutes to 
give Brad Guzan no chance. The provider? Rooney, whose placing in midfield 
during that season began the quandary over his best position that is a key 
factor in the loss of his automatic starting status.

Paul Pogba gets two in Manchester United demolition of Fenerbahce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/manchester-united-fenerbahce-europa-league-group-a-match-report>
So here the captain was, reinstated to the starting lineup and the No9 berth, 
hoping to rekindle form and also favour with José Mourinho, the manager who has 
lost faith in him.

A prime way to do this is to score regularly. After 35 minutes United were 2-0 
up against Fenerbahce and Rooney had passed up two opportunities. Each were 
penalties. Each was slotted home by a different player: Paul Pogba, then 
Anthony Martial. To switch spot-kick takers is odd but not as strange as Rooney 
not wishing to treble his season’s tally by taking the ball and attempting to 
score them. A return of one goal in 10 United appearances is paltry for a 
player of his quality.

It is becoming a prevailing observation of late-career Rooney: he can seem 
becalmed, a footballer who no longer plays on the edge of a fiery temperament 
and who struggles to affect the contest. As the break neared he offered a flash 
of his pomp by making the interception and cross that led to Pogba’s second but 
all it did was highlight how peripheral he had been.

A drifting to the fringes was Van Persie’s experience, too, after the 26 goals 
that propelled United to that Premier League title. The slow fade ended when 
Louis van Gaal bombed him out in the summer of 2015 despite Van Persie 
beginning the season as a favourite to wear the armband. Van Gaal chose Rooney.

By half-time Van Persie’s side were 3-0 down and his contribution close to 
zero. He may not have been aided by muted team-mates yet as he walked off at 
the break his highlights had up to then been a hug and photocall with Fred the 
Red, United’s mascot, and the home crowd offering him a rendition of OhRobin 
van Persie <https://www.theguardian.com/football/robin-van-persie>.

Before the match the 33-year-old had downplayed his Old Trafford exit. He 
stated it should not be made any “bigger” and offered the same view of Rooney’s 
predicament.

“He’s been used to living in the spotlight from a very young age. He will deal 
with things,” Van Persie said. “During a career, you have ups and downs but 
Wayne always finds a way to come out of it. At any stage of your career, you 
will sit on the bench a few times. It’s quite normal in a long season, 
especially in England, where you have so many games. I don’t see what the fuss 
is about. I think people are actually making it bigger than it is. I think 
people are looking for sensation and something that is not there in most cases. 
Wayne will know how to handle this and he will come out on top.”

This is the tale Rooney is desperate to write. His comments following Monday’s 
0-0 draw at Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 pointed to it: a reminder he turns 31 in four days was given, plus a claim 
there is still much football left in him.

With Juan Mata’s creative abilities behind him at No10 and the pace of Martial 
and Jesse Lingard out wide, Rooney seemed surrounded by the kind of forces that 
could fashion chances for him. It did not happen. Instead, Lingard started the 
second half with a Rooney-esque 20-yard shot that rifled past Volkan Demirel. 
Rooney could claim an assist with a simple layoff and Van Persie’s late strike 
made it honours about even between them.

Rooney’s previous run-out at centre-forward came when United beat Northampton 
3-1 in the EFL Cup but only when Zlatan Ibrahimovic entered at 1-1 and Rooney 
was shunted wide to accommodate him were the two clinching goals scored. He may 
again be left out for the Swede for the serious matter of Sunday’s trip to 
Chelsea.

Twelve years have passed since Rooney’s hat-trick on debut against Fenerbahce 
announced his arrival. Then he was the future of United. Now, he is in a battle 
against becoming what Van Persie already is: part of United’s past.
 