
Wayne Rooney will start for Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> in Saturday’s FA Cup 
third round meeting with Reading at Old Trafford as the holders attempt to win 
the trophy for a record 13th time.

The captain has missed the last three matches with a muscle problem, his last 
action coming in the 2-0 win at West Bromwich Albion on 17 December. He has 
scored 248 goals for the club, one fewer than Bobby Charlton’s United record.

Faces behind the FA Cup third round: ‘At this level these are the days you 
live for’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/fa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers>
While José Mourinho confirmed Rooney and Sergio Romero will be in the XI to 
face Jaap Stam’s team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/reading-jaap-stam-manchester-united-treble-old-trafford-fa-cup-third-round>
, United’s manager made clear Morgan Schneiderlin and Memphis Depay are not 
under consideration to play as long as their respective futures remain 
unresolved.

Everton are interested in both Schneiderlin and Depay – with the latter player 
also interesting Fenerbahce. Mourinho said: “Their situation is exactly the 
same, both of them I will allow to leave – if the right offer comes. Until this 
moment, no. Is this a good situation? No. Why not? Because I don’t think about 
them as options in this moment. In normal conditions they would probably be 
selected for the match tomorrow and they aren’t because we are waiting for 
something that a couple of weeks ago looked like 100% and at the moment looks 
like 0% because we don’t have any offer that is close to the quality for the 
players we have.”

Bastian Schweinsteiger trained away from the squad at the start of the term 
but is now back in the first-team group and his situation differs from that of 
the Frenchman and Dutchman. “He’s selected again so he can start, he can be on 
the bench [versus Reading],” the Portuguese said. “He’s an option for us, 
that’s the best way to describe it. For many months he wasn’t an option, when 
we brought him back in the first couple of weeks he was not an option, not 
ready to compete. But since then working very well, never an injury, he was ill 
last week. His body is fine, is training very well, he’s ready to play.

“Again in my approach, because I think it’s the right one from the human point 
of view, if a player is not playing I cannot stop a player to leave if the 
offer is right. He wants to stay, he is staying, he is an option because he’s 
an option he’s selected for tomorrow.”

Mourinho also hopes David de Gea is not the club’s player of the season for a 
fourth successive year as it would mean something is seriously wrong with his 
side. The manager said: “When a goalkeeper is a player of the season, it’s 
because something is wrong. Of course I would love goalkeepers to be 
recognised, to win the golden ball, to be player of the season in the Premier 
League because goalkeepers are lonely guys with a different shirt to everybody 
else. When they play phenomenal, people forget; when they make a mistake, 
everyone remembers.

“That’s why I hugged David at the end of the West Ham game because no save, 
Antonio goal, no three points. But season after season the goalkeeper is player 
of the season, it means that something is wrong. Hopefully he’s not player of 
the season this season but hopefully he keeps making important saves for us 
like he did in last week.”
 