
Recently on the Radio 4 food show The Kitchen Cabinet 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01klvhq>, the panel were asked to name dishes 
they had inherited from their parents. There was sweet talk of dense stews and 
shepherd’s pies. As the chair of the show I wasn’t required to answer and I was 
grateful for the fact. It may sound disloyal but I didn’t have much to say. 
There’s a salad – lots of thinly sliced peppers, red onions and torn basil – 
which I picked up from my mother, but I think she got it out of Craig 
Claiborne’sNew York Times cookbook. Other than that, while my mother was a good 
cook, she was very much of her time. I have no desire to make the utter faff 
that is coulibiac (salmon, wild rice and boiled eggs in a puff pastry shell; 
her go-to dinner party dish) and I will not torture my kids with spaghetti 
marrow as she once tortured me.

I suspect that I am not alone. We may now inherit an interest in the table 
from our parents but not the dishes themselves. In this there are many who 
think wistfully that we have lost something, which is to misunderstand what the 
passing on of recipes was all about. The key inherited dishes of Britain, the 
sort documented by the social historian Dorothy Hartley in her 1954 bookFood in 
England, were inherited by necessity rather than a sentimental attachment to 
“the old ways”.

You grew up in the village where you would die. You learned how to manage the 
whole pig when it came to slaughter so it would last through the year. You 
learned how to make one kind of bread from the newly ground flour and a 
different kind from the same flour six months later when it had aged. You might 
look to the distant hills and wonder what was over the other side, but you were 
unlikely to go there.

Now we are mobile in so many ways. We cross those hills and keep on going, and 
are spared the worry of the flour’s ageing. While the sentimental will mourn 
the passing of a certain community cohesion, the reality is that social and 
geographical immobility was a function of poverty. You didn’t go anywhere else 
because you couldn’t afford to. You stayed home and cured pork belly for bacon 
like your mother and her mother before her.

Now, generally, if we cook our parents’ food it is to take us to an emotional 
place rather than a gastronomic one. Otherwise we cook as our curiosities take 
us, and that has to be a good thing. Of course, it makes the idea of passing on 
recipes more than ludicrous: “My son, I bequeath unto you this recipe for 
chargrilled chicken wings with a miso glaze and kimchi slaw which has been in 
our family for, oooh, 18 months now, since Uncle Derek gave me that modern 
Korean cookbook the Christmas before last.” No, perhaps not.

What does that leave us parents with? In terms of actual recipes not a whole 
lot. Instead we bequeath to our sons and daughters an enthusiasm for food and a 
sense of adventure.

We pass on self-reliance and knife skills, and a smear of good taste. And 
maybe we slip a copy of Simon Hopkinson and Lindsey Bareham’sRoast Chicken and 
Other Stories  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/roast-chicken-and-other-stories.html>into 
their suitcase as they go. After all, the years may pass, and times may change. 
But everybody needs to know how to roast a chicken.
 