
The dilemma I’ve been seeing a guy this last couple of months and we’ve had a 
lot of fun. He travels so we’ve only had four or five dates but we stay in 
touch on social media and with texts, and it’s starting to feel like a proper 
relationship. We planned an indulgent weekend to mark the moment we finally 
make out – a sexy hotel suite and a lot of room service – but he’s suddenly 
disappeared off the radar. One minute we were all smiling faces and hearts, the 
next total silence. The last message I sent was to invite him to a show that I 
was lucky enough to win tickets for in a raffle. He never responded and I’ve 
been really worried although I can see he’s OK because he’s been commenting on 
mutual friends’ Instagrams. I really don’t know what to do.

Mariella replies Oh my – you can run but you can’t hide! Or can you? It may 
seem a challenge to disappear in this uber-connected (and I don’t mean the 
taxis) world but I’m getting more and more reports of such virtual vanishing 
acts. The propensity to evaporate into thin air, or more accurately cyberspace, 
when confronted by situations you don’t want to deal with, people you’d rather 
not see, or feelings more complex than you care for, seems to be a growing 
trend.

“Ghosting”, as it has been christened, describes the mysterious moment when a 
lover, friend, colleague or in rare cases family member becomes wilfully 
incommunicado. A small minority of people have been disappearing without a 
trace for centuries, Lord Lucan being just one of many success stories. But the 
phenomenon of ghosting, and its prevalence today, confirms my long-held 
suspicion that friends and lovers in arm’s reach are far superior to quantities 
of them online. In real- world relationships handling the rough and tumble of 
discord, discourse and disagreement is a skill we pick up from nursery as we 
negotiate relationships with those we disagree with or see things differently 
from. Expressing your opinion and learning how to mediate misunderstandings are 
essential life skills.

Yet if you look online what you get are anonymous trolls venting spleen and 
the sanitised, shiny, reconstructed lives of the Instagram generation. Neither 
polarity represents a realistic lifestyle choice and both are crude and empty 
forms of communication. It’s frightening to see how reduced our myriad forms of 
self expression have become. Online life gives little clue to what we’re 
feeling the moment we’re captured on photo and film – instead it’s a form of 
disguise. Our addiction to keeping up with the global Joneses is making us less 
capable of dealing with the cut and thrust of daily life. When real feelings 
get in the way of our desired “presence” – when a disagreement, a difference in 
ambitions, or an imbalance in a relationship appear – we simply sign out.

Teenagers, online more than the rest of us, are suffering epidemic levels of 
loneliness, depression and self-harm, in the parts of the world where affluence 
allows them the “gift” of 24-hour access to their own smart phones and tablets. 
It’s not too great a leap to presume that what they’re suffering is related to 
the pressure of living up to omnipresent, unattainable standards fed into their 
lives on ever-present gadgets. In our drive to keep up we may be losing the 
ability to rise to a challenge or identify an individual path, and the internet 
is a perfect place to disappear to duck any form of confrontation. If your life 
is a fantasy construct you can’t possibly drag it down to the uneven ground and 
hard toil of daily life.

I admit that’s more of a broad brush. In your case it could be that this guy 
is simply bad boyfriend material. They’ve existed since time immemorial and you 
don’t have to be surfing the web to bump into one. It’s not just a man thing 
but it’s certainly more prevalent in men, perhaps down to the ludicrously 
outmoded way we nurture different genders. There’s a propensity among men to 
feel that they need to do the catching, hence it’s only unrequited love stories 
that feature women being proactive in romance. It may well be that you’ve 
bumped into one of those guys who can’t commit beyond his latest burst of 
animal instinct and runs in fear when anyone tries to encourage a more fertile 
form of relationship. If that’s the case the advice remains the same as it has 
for centuries – back away, busy yourself with your friends and unless he comes 
careering back tick him off your list for anything but playtime.

Having the word to describe your experience naturally doesn’t help you to 
solve or explain it, but at least knowing you’ve been ghosted gives tangible 
form to an otherwise puzzling, preoccupying and extremely frustrating form of 
human behaviour. You’re definitely not alone in your experience.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 