
The Wigan manager, Uwe Rösler, and Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> caretaker, Stuart 
Gray, agreed Keith Stroud made the right call when abandoning their sides' 
Championship match at Hillsborough due to a waterlogged pitch.

Rösler, in charge of his first league game on the road since replacing Owen 
Coyle, had more to be disappointed about than Gray as his side looked a good 
bet to secure a rare away win this season before Stroud called a halt to 
proceedings in torrential rain in the 59th minute.

The midfielder James McClean, a £2m summer signing from Sunderland, scored his 
first goal for Wigan in the 24th minute, coolly sliding the ball under the 
Wednesday goalkeeper, Damian Martinez, after a fortunate ricochet off defender 
Roger Johnson had sent him clear into the penalty area.

"I've no complaints. The referee did the right thing," said Rösler, who made 
five changes to the side that halted a six-game losing run with victory over 
Bolton on Sunday and saw them miss a host of other golden first-half chances.

"Safety first for the players for both teams. I felt that when you have so 
much water on the pitch that Nick Powell can't convert a one-on-one with the 
keeper because the ball's stuck in the water, I think the referee didn't have a 
choice but to call it off.

"I think the referee was very good. In the first half when more rain came and 
settled on the pitch, I thought he was excellent and it was the right decision.

"Obviously for us, as good as we played in the first half and in the second, 
as tough as our game programme is in the next few weeks, this was a blow.

"I enjoyed myself so much the way we played in the first half against a team 
who has been on a high and beating top teams in our division, how we played on 
their pitch, how we quietened the crowd, how we dominated the game, I enjoyed 
myself so much.

"My only criticism is that we didn't score more goals. The game should have 
been safe at half-time."

Gray, in his fourth game in charge as caretaker after Dave Jones's sacking 
this month and given an extended run by the chairman, Milan Mandaric, to stake 
his claim for the permanent role, also praised the referee, but admitted his 
side had clearly been second best.

"I'm totally disappointed with the first-half performance. We got outplayed, 
bullied, individual errors, decision-making.

"I was happy to get in at half-time only 1-0 down, but for 15 minutes in the 
second I thought we bossed it. But in the end it had to be the right decision. 
The players' safety is the most important thing.

"Players can't run with the ball, the ball's sticking. Sometimes it's quite 
amusing for the supporters, but you've got to think of the players' health."

Crawley's FA Cup second-round replay against Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> was abandoned after 75 
minutes due to a waterlogged pitch. The referee, Stuart Attwell, took the 
decision after initially taking the players off to assess the worsening 
conditions. The game was goalless.

Meanwhile, Stoke's Capital One Cup tie against Manchester United was suspended 
in the first half. Mark Clattenburg took the players off the pitch because of a 
hailstorm. However, the action resumed 10 minutes later andUnited ended up 
winning 2-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/18/stoke-city-manchester-united-capital-one-cup>
 to reach the semi-finals.
 