
They were chanting his name and holding placards proclaiming the legend’s 
return. But this was still very much hero worship, northern-style: the 100 or so
Werder Bremen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen> fans stood in 
orderly rows in the Bremen airport arrivals hall in early September, strictly 
behind the barrier, of course, and many of them carried smiles that were equal 
parts genuine, childlike excitement and self-deprecating mocking of their own 
genuine, childlike excitement, a way to cope with the sense of wonderment: are 
we really here?

They don’t really do public adulation in those parts of Germany, you see; the 
cool, wet climate tends to smother emotions. But when it comes to Werder, 
exceptions are acceptable. 11 Freunde magazine noted that such crowds hadn’t 
turned up to cheer the football team touching down since 2004, when a 3-1 win 
in Munich secured the championship for Thomas Schaaf’s men. This time, though, 
there was no team to celebrate, let alone a trophy. Instead, the supporters had 
thronged into the building at 11 o’clock at night to greet an unemployed, 
36-year-old man in a purple jumper.

Bayern Munich suffer shock home defeat by Mainz’s Jhon Córdoba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/02/mainz-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
The next day, Claudio Pizarro was unveiled as Werder’s new striker – for the 
fourth time. The Peruvian had started hisBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> career at the 
Weserstadion back in 1999, then returned on loan from Chelsea in 2008 before 
signing a second contract in 2009. “The supporters have made my heart shudder,” 
he said at his latest unveiling. “The welcome has been fantastic.”

Despite leaving them to sign for hated southern moneybags Bayern twice before, 
the love for Pizarro has never ceased. He’s the Bundesliga’s most successful 
foreign goal-scorer (176 goals before the start of the season), he looks like a 
swashbuckling 1950s film star and his signing promised nothing less than a 
return to the good old times, when Werder weren’t serial relegation contenders 
but taking on Europe’s heavyweights in the Champions League.

Peruvian IV: Resurrection took some time to get going, however. Pizarro didn’t 
score before November, and Werder were back in the Bundesliga basement fighting 
for survival. Social media was awash with supporters bemoaning the sentimental, 
ill-advised signing of yesterday’s star performer.

A first strike won his club three important points against Augsburg, but the 
elegant forward was only able to add one more to his tally before the winter 
break. Nostalgia, it seemed, didn’t you get very far in a league that has 
become no country for old men. It looked as if the much-hailed comeback of the 
most seasoned outfield player – Pizarro is now 37 – would end on a sad note.

Local newspapers reported that Werder coach Viktor Skripnik was only one 
defeat away from the sack last week, with successors allegedly already being 
sounded out. “The situation has never been this grave,” said the club’s 
sporting director, Thomas Eichin. Werder, in 16th place, were 2-1 down at home 
to Darmstadt with one minute to go when Pizarro nodded in a cross. He saved a 
point, Skripnik’s job and possibly the club’s entire season. Werder took their 
new-found confidence to smash Leverkusen 4-1 at the BayArena on Wednesday 
night. It was their second high-profile win against Roger Schmidt’s 
increasingly demob happy army in as many months. At the beginning of February, 
the northerners had won 3-1 to knock out Leverkusen in the DFB Pokal and 
advance to the semis, where Munich await. Pizarro had scored a penalty.

On Wednesday, the South American was at it again. He became the oldest 
Bundesliga player to score three goals in a Bundesliga game. (Germans, for 
reasons that remain forever obscure, refuse to call such feat a hat-trick 
unless the goals were scored without interruption, in one half.) With 99 goals 
for Werder, he’s now only two behind all-time record scorer Marco Bode. “I’m 
sorry Marco, but I’ll try to break your record,” the man they call Pizza 
tweeted after the final whistle.

Pizarro’s goals have taken Werder to 15th place in the table. At the weekend, 
they can put more daylight between themselves and one of the relegation places 
when bottom club Hannover, coached by the Werder icon Thomas Schaaf, come to 
town. The manager vowed that he would celebrate a goal against his former side 
– “It’s my duty to show joy” – but that might well be an empty threat. Hannover 
have lost six out of seven games since the 53-year-old took over during the 
winter break. And Schaaf, as any Werder fan can attest, doesn’t do joy anyway.

“We can’t do him any favours, we need the points,” warned Pizarro. The Green 
and White evergreen also announced that he was looking to prolong his 
incredible career: “I feel very good and would like to continue.” Eichin hinted 
at an option to renew the contract at the end of the season. Would it be really 
feasible to have a 38-year-old chasing goals in 2016-17 though? Pizarro has no 
doubt. “I don’t feel old”, he said a couple of weeks ago. “I feel like Claudio 
Pizarro”.

Talking points

• “We know it, and Bayern know it as well,” said Erik Durm. “If we win on 
Saturday, it’ll get really tight.” Ja, sehr verehrte Damen und Herren, we might 
have a title race after all. AsBayern lost 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/02/mainz-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
 at home to Martin Schmidt’s marvellous Mainz (“I am pleased that we have made 
the fight for the title that little bit more interesting,” Schmidt quipped), 
Dortmund powered through in difficult circumstances at Darmstadt to set up a 
Klassiker contest that has a little more riding on it than people thought a few 
weeks ago. Thomas Tuchel’s men might not be playing at their breathtakingly 
best at the moment but Bayern’s defensive sloppiness will have give the Black 
and Yellows plenty of encouragement. “We must not lose there,” warned 
Karl-Heinz Rummenigge.

• In other “manager under pressure” news, André Breitenreiter was spared 
further trouble as his Schalke side won 3-2 against Hamburger SV. The incoming 
sporting director Christian Heidel was eyeing up Lucien Favre for next season, 
Sport-Bild had reported before the game. Favre, the highly-strung Swiss 
football professor in the football gold fish bowl that is Gelsenkirchen makes 
for an interesting image. Breitenreiter, though, will surely given a bit more 
time, as long as Schalke remain in the hunt for fourth spot.

Results: Hannover 0-4 Wolfsburg, Ingolstadt 1-1 Köln, Schalke 3-2 Hamburg, 
Bayern Munich 1-2 Mainz, Darmstadt 0-2 Borussia Dortmund, Bayer Leverkusen 1-4 
Werder Bremen, Borussia Mönchengladbach 4-0 Stuttgart, Hertha Berlin 2-0 
Eintracht Frankfurt, Hoffenheim 2-1 Augsburg.
 