
West Yorkshire police has voluntarily referred itself to the Independent 
Police Complaints Commission <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ipcc> (IPCC) 
in relation to the Bradford City fire of 1985, in which 56 football fans died.

The force said the referral comes after a senior officer met with Martin 
Fletcher, whose father, brother, uncle and grandfather died in the Valley 
Parade blaze and who recently wrote a book about the tragedy.

It claimed that the fire was one of nine that occurred at businesses owned by 
or linked to the club’s then chairman Stafford Heginbotham.

In a statement, the force said “serious issues” had been raised by the book 
relating to a number of agencies and organisations.

It said: “Since publication of Mr Fletcher’s book, West Yorkshire police has 
been working to identify what material was still available from the original 
enquiry and has found that, despite the passage of time, a lot of material had 
been retained.

“West Yorkshire police fully understands that this will bring back painful 
memories for people who were there or who lost loved ones 30 years ago, but it 
is important that the concerns raised by Mr Fletcher are addressed.

“We are awaiting a decision from the IPCC on the referral.”

Fletcher’s book overshadowed the 30th anniversary of the disaster earlier this 
year. The official inquiry into the tragedy on 11 May 1985, headed by Sir 
Oliver Popplewell, concluded that it was an accident and was probably started 
by a spectator dropping a cigarette into rubbish that had accumulated under an 
old timber stand.

The blaze ripped through the wooden structure in just a few minutes as Bradford
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> City played Lincoln City in an 
end-of-season match, leaving many fans unable to get out.

Fifty-four Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> City 
supporters lost their lives in the fire, along with two Lincoln City fans. More 
than 200 people were taken to hospital following the blaze, many with terrible 
injuries.

Bradford West MP Naz Shah said she welcomed the announcement. 

“It is only right that unanswered questions about the original investigation 
and process, which was conducted in great haste, are properly addressed - the 
victims deserve nothing less.

“The decision taken by West Yorkshire police is a credit to modern policing 
that they are willing to be open and transparent.

“We should also be mindful of the fact that this will not be an easy process 
for many of the victims’ families and friends to have to deal with so many 
years later - their privacy must be respected.”



 