
West Ham will hold talks with officials from Fenerbahce on Tuesday as they 
attempt to seal the loan signing of the Nigeria striker Emmanuel Emenike.

The 28-year-old is currently on a one-year loan at Al Ain in Qatar from the 
Turkish club and has more than two years of his contract remaining. West Ham 
are understood to have made Emenike their priority as Slaven Bilic searches for 
a replacement for the injured Andy Carroll and have already agreed personal 
terms with him.

West Ham deny possibility of groundsharing at the Olympic Stadium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/25/west-ham-face-possibility-of-groundsharing-at-olympic-stadium>
However, Fenerbahce have so far proved reluctant to sanction the move, while 
Al Ain would also like to retain Emenike’s services given he has scored seven 
goals in just 11 league matches so far this season. It is understood West Ham 
will ask for confirmation that the deal can go ahead at the meeting on Tuesday 
evening, with the club willing to switch their attentions to Galatasaray’s 
Burak Yilmaz instead.

“There is no clear agreement about Emenike,” said Bilic on Monday.

“He is an important player but Fenerbahce may need another striker first, so 
it’s by no means certain that they will release him.”

Yilmaz, 30, who has nine goals in 15 appearances for the Turkish champions 
this season, would also arrive on loan until the end of the season with an 
option for a permanent transfer at the end of the season.

“Yilmaz is a very good footballer,” said Bilic. “He’s an excellent striker and 
among the fittest of players. I know him very well and I admit that he is one 
of the names on our list.

“But he is not the only player on our list. If we decide to take one striker, 
then we can take action.”

West Ham scouts were in Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/24/premier-league-clubs-georges-kevin-nkoudou-scout>
 on Sunday to watch Marseille’s Michy Batshuayi but the Belgium international 
will not be allowed to leave until the summer. Bournemouth’s Callum Wilson is 
also on their radar after his hat-trick in their 4-3 win at Upton Park last 
August, with Tottenham also believed to be interested.

Wilson is currently sidelined until at least the end of March as he recovers 
from a knee injury.
 