
Slaven Bilic has urged Andy Carroll to “show it from the start” following the 
striker’s recent impressive substitute appearances forWest Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited>.

With Diafra Sakho, Dimitri Payet and Enner Valencia injured, Carroll is likely 
to start on Saturday at Manchester United. Bilic said: “He is getting back 
towards his best, he is trying hard in training and he has played really well 
in the last few games for us. He showed us in the Norwich game when he came on 
for the last 20 or 30 minutes and the same against Chelsea. Not just because he 
scored but the way he played. Against Crystal Palace away he also showed his 
class. So far he has shown himself as more of an impact player to come on in 
the last 20 or 30 minutes and he has lifted our game, but he also has to show 
it when he plays from the start.”

Andy Carroll scores West Ham’s winner to heap pressure on Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/24/west-ham-united-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
The manager stressed the importance of Carroll and his other fit strikers 
given West Ham’s injury situation. Sakho is due to have surgery on Saturday on 
a thigh, which will rule him out for three months. Bilic said of Carroll: “He 
has got quality, of course. Sometimes players need a bit longer to gel back in 
and get back to how they were before the injury – let’s hope he is going to be 
like that for us now. He has always been important to our game no matter 
whether we have a full squad or not. Now with our three injuries we need people 
like him, Jelavic, Zárate, Moses and Antonio to step in and do the job.”

Manchester United v West Ham United: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/manchester-united-west-ham-united-match-preview>
Bilic said there was still hope for Carroll to make the England squad for Euro 
2016. “Like every player he has to play, he has the shop window of the Premier 
League. The national team manager is watching games. If Carroll does it in the 
Premier League then of course there is a better chance for him to be involved 
in the national team.”

Bilic confirmed he would like to sign Manuel Lanzini from the United Arab 
Emirates side al-Jazira when the Argentinian’s loan at West Ham finishes at the 
end of the season. West Ham have an option to buy him for €10m (£7m).

“He has proved himself to be a key player for us,” Bilic said. “The way he has 
played most of the games has been really good but he is also missing Payet. Of 
course I would like him to stay with us. As the chairman has said he is our 
player and he is happy here and we are happy with him. I think it there going 
to be a long relationship between him and West Ham.”
 