
West Ham’s Andy Carroll <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-carroll> 
faces yet another injury lay-off after manager Sam Allardyce said the striker 
could miss up to six weeks with a knee problem.

The 26-year-old was forced off in Wednesday’s 0-0 draw at Southampton as the 
visitors finished the game with only nine men following a red card for 
goalkeeper Adrian - a decision against which the club have since appealed.

It is the latest in a long line of injury problems for the England 
international, who has only started 24 Premier League games since making his 
move to Upton Park permanent in the summer of 2013.

And Allardyce now expects to be without the Hammers’ club-record signing for 
the coming weeks - despite not yet knowing the full extent of the damage to 
Carroll’s knee.

“I think a full diagnosis is yet to come, it will probably be by the end of 
Friday,” Allardyce said when asked about the severity of Carroll’s newest 
setback.

“It is likely to be a few weeks, the medial ligament on the side of his knee 
has a tear in it from a fairly innocuous collision. He is wearing a brace.

“I would have thought four to six weeks out if we are lucky, depending on 
Andy’s recovery. Some players heal quicker than others. It is a big blow for 
him and us. It is another blow we have to cope with.”

The club had initially thought the problem was the flaring up of a previous 
knee injury - but Allardyce confirmed that this is a new issue and has said 
Carroll must remain strong to overcome another spell on the sidelines.

“It is a completely new injury,” explained Allardyce.

“We thought it might be a recurrence but we have analysed it, unfortunately it 
is a new one and looks more serious than the original one.

“It is traumatic when someone is going through a period where you overcome one 
injury and another occurs. We thought we were there and then (he was injured 
against) Liverpool and now this one in a short period of time.

“It is very depressing for Andy but he knows the process and he has to be 
strong to overcome this injury as quickly as possible.”

Whilst Carroll will be missing for the FA Cup fifth-round clash at West Brom 
on Saturday, Allardyce will welcome Mark Noble and captain Kevin Nolan back 
into his squad for the fixture at the Hawthorns.

During his press conference to preview the West Brom game, Allardyce was 
handed a copy of the dossier distributed by Manchester United manager Louis van 
Gaal on Tuesday.

The Dutchman reacted to Allardyce labelling the Red Devils as ‘long-ball 
United’ after van Gaal’s side scored a last-gasp equaliser at Upton Park last 
Sunday.

The four-page pamphlet highlighted statistics which van Gaal used to refute 
suggestions United have reverted into a direct, long-ball team but Allardyce 
responded nonchalantly when handed the paperwork - refusing to allow the spat 
to linger.

“I shall have a look when I get the opportunity,” he said.

“I don’t think there is any point in me going into again. It is what it is, he 
has made of it what he has made of it, I said what I saw on the day and it has 
moved on. We have played another game in the Premier League since then and our 
focus is now on the FA Cup and progressing to the next round.”
 