
West Ham United's Uefa Cup qualification has been tarnished by the club being 
charged with misconduct following Tuesday night's InterToto Cup victory inMetz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/metz>.

The Metz player Frederic Meyrieu was allegedly struck by a coin thrown from 
the section of terracing housing 1,500 Hammers fans at the Stade 
Saint-Symphorien in north-eastern France.

Police sprayed tear gas at the fans in a bid to restore order at one point, 
although there have been suggestions that a lighted firecracker was initially 
thrown into the section containing away supporters.

"The club have been charged by Uefa and we have to respond by Monday," said 
Graham Mackrell, West Ham's secretary. It is likely the club will be fined and 
warned as to their future conduct.

"It is disappointing," Mackrell added. "However provoked people are, that is 
unacceptable and something that we won't tolerate if we can identify the person 
involved."

Meanwhile West Ham will sign Derby County's Croatian international central 
defender Igor Stimac in the next few days. The former Derby captain, 32 next 
month, is available for around £600,000.

"I need to get something done now that we are in the Uefa Cup first round," 
said Harry Redknapp, the West Ham manager.

The former England full-back Gary Charles, who has been on trial at Upton Park 
for the past fortnight, is also likely to join from Benfica for £1m. The 
deadline for Uefa Cup eligibility is next Tuesday.

Bryan Robson, the Middlesbrough manager, confirmed yesterday that negotiations 
have re-opened with Juninho and Atletico Madrid with a view to taking the 
24-year-old Brazilian back to Teesside two years after Boro sold him for £12m.

However Robson wants a loan deal that would last until the end of the season 
and, given Atletico's perilous financial state, that is unlikely to be 
sanctioned by the Atletico owner Jesus Gil.

The Tottenham captain Sol Campbell has followed the example of his Manchester 
United counterpart Roy Keane and shelved talks on a new contract until next 
spring.

"I feel that contract negotiations should be left until the end of the season 
so that I can concentrate on playing for Tottenham and, hopefully, for 
England," said Campbell.

Mick Wadsworth has resigned as manager of Second Division Colchester United 
after less than a season in charge at Layer Road.
 