
West Ham United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> have 
undergone a significant stylistic shift since last season. Whereas 2013-14 was 
about long balls and crosses, this season West Ham have retained the ball for 
longer periods in midfield and placated supporters who had complained about Sam 
Allardyce’s rudimentary tactics.

Their approach for the 3-1 victory over Swansea was a hybrid of the two 
strategies. The general structure was in keeping with this season, yet the 
presence ofAndy Carroll <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-carroll> and 
Kevin Nolan, the partnership who have combined frequently for Newcastle and 
West Ham, meant there was an element of a back to basics too. Both were 
starting only their fourth Premier League game of the season.

Allardyce continued with his diamond formation, an interesting shape to use in 
the circumstances. Despite West Ham’s change of style they are still dependent 
on crossing from wide and the diamond is generally considered a narrow system 
which floods the centre.

Nevertheless West Ham get around this problem intelligently by pushing the 
full-backs forward: Carl Jenkinson’s delivery has improved immeasurably and he 
assisted Carroll’s equaliser with an impressive deep cross. On the opposite 
flank Aaron Cresswell scampered forward repeatedly to cross from advanced 
positions. He also attempted to reach dangerous passes.

The best example of the latter contribution came midway through the first half 
when Cresswell darted forward to reach a low, flat Stewart Downing ball played 
from a central position.

Downing’s role epitomises this team. In a crossing side playing surprisingly 
narrow Downing is a natural winger deployed in the No10 role. He often drifts 
laterally into pockets of space before firing intelligent balls into the box 
and the change in position has prompted his best form for years.

The undoubted star, though, was Carroll. He unquestionably alters West Ham’s 
approach and makes the side more direct but that was a logical approach against 
a team like Swansea, who are excellent technically but lack aerial power – only 
Spurs have won fewer aerial challenges this season.

Allardyce happily admits he’s a reactive manager and effectively criticised 
coaches like Arsène Wenger and Brendan Rodgers earlier in the campaign for 
playing the same way every game. “Coaches like me weigh up the opposition, and 
ask the team to adjust,” he said. “Their [Wenger and Rodgers’] philosophy is 
different to ours. Ours is more about who are we playing against.” Versus 
Swansea an aerial bombardment made sense irrespective of West Ham’s progressive 
tendencies in recent weeks.

Carroll’s performance could not have been any more stereotypical, or any more 
effective, and his aerial power featured in all three goals.

First, there was a trademark header from a Jenkinson right-wing cross, another 
towering header from a left-wing Downing corner for the second, then his 
flick-on from Adrián’s long goal-kick teed up the substitute Diafra Sakho for 
West Ham’s third, the archetypal route-one goal. Tellingly Adrián was the West 
Ham player who located Carroll most frequently – 11 times – while Carroll won 
13 of his 17 aerial battles overall.

We should not ignore the fact West Ham, now in third place, have become more 
possession-based with both average possession and their pass completion rate up 
3%.

However, this has added another dimension to their approach rather than 
changing their style completely and given Allardyce more tactical possibilities.

West Ham’s victory over Swansea was comparable to Stoke’s 3-2 win against 
Arsenal the previous day. The home side have become more technical but against 
teams who play passing football it was logical to play direct and deliver a 
stream of crosses.

Arsenal could not cope with Peter Crouch and Swansea could not deal with 
Carroll. This was the weekend of the old-fashioned big man upfront.
 