
West Ham have confirmed the signing of the Spain Under-21 midfielder Pedro 
Obiang fromSampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> for an 
undisclosed fee.

The 23-year-old is the first player to join the club since the appointment of 
Slaven Bilic as the new manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/09/west-ham-slaven-bilic-spending-spree>
. Obiang made 35 appearances for Sampdoria last season, scoring three goals as 
theBlucerchiati finished seventh in Serie A to qualify for the Europa League.

“I’m very happy to have signed,” said Obiang, who has agreed a four-year 
contract. “We have been talking about this for a long time and now I’ve finally 
got the chance to come here. I went on holiday after the season had finished 
and I was looking forward to receiving that call to tell me where and when to 
sign for this club.

“I’m very excited to play in the Premier League. It’s a style of football that 
will help me to progress as a player and as a person.

“I think Bilic is a manager that can do very well here. I know that he was a 
West Ham player and he did very well with the Croatian national team. He is a 
manager that likes to play good football and I really like that so I am sure 
that we will get along very well.”

West Ham’s co-chairman David Gold was caught in a case of mistaken identity 
when welcoming Obiang on his personal Twitter account.

Gold posted the message: “I am delighted to announce the signing of 23 year 
old midfield Pedro Obiang from Sampdoria. Pedro, welcome. dg” which was 
accompanied by a photo... of Juventus centre-back Angelo Ogbonna.

Upon realising his error, the tweet was soon removed, but not before some 
light-hearted banter by Irons fans.

Gold later uploaded another message, this time with a photograph of Obiang on 
the pitch at Upton Park holding a claret-and-blue scarf.

The West Ham co-chairman then added: “I’ve just spoke to Pedro and he sounded 
v excited to be here. He promised me that he’d learn to sing Bubbles in less 
than a month! dg”
 