
Western Sydney Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers> have announced 
the departure with immediate effect of troubled striker Kerem Bulut in a press 
release of few words.

On the books with Sydney FC’s youth team the talented forward was recommended 
to Czech club Mlada Boleslav by then head coach Vitezslav Lavicka following a 
star turn with the Australian U20 team in which he won the AFC U19 Championship 
golden boot award.

David Squires on ... Kerem Bulut and the goal that never was
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/nov/23/david-squires-on-kerem-bulut-and-the-goal-that-never-was>
Spells in Czech Republic and Turkey followed before Bulut teamed up with 
Wanderers coach Tony Popovic, winning over a large percentage of the club’s 
fans with five goals in nine games during a short stint with the club in 2015.

After a brief spell in Greece, Bulut reunited with Popovic this season 
competing with experienced striker Brendon Santalab and young talent Lachlan 
Scott to lead the line for the Wanderers.

Goalless in six appearances Bulut appeared to have fallen out of favour with 
the Western Sydney head coach taking no part in the match day squad for the 
last fourA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> games.

The club announced on Wednesday he’s been released from his two-year deal to 
pursue other “professional opportunities”.

It believed Bulut is looking to link up with a team in Thailand, potentially 
Thai Premier League side Chiangrai United, the club of former Wanderers 
foundation striker Mark Bridge.

Bulut’s exit leaves the seventh-placed Wanderers even shorter up front, with 
preferred striker Santalab now banned for three games including next month’s 
Sydney derby, and 19-year-old Scott still finding his feet.


Popovic has been hustling behind the scenes to bring in extra bodies, with the 
club having recently been linked to Robbie Keane, Dimitar Berbatov, Didier 
Drogba, Eduardo and Jamie Maclaren.


His hunt for a reliable source of goals will continue throughout the January 
transfer window – potentially the club’s most important yet given their 
imminent Asian Champions League campaign starting in February.


The Wanderers have already signed former Sydney FC goalkeeper Vedran 
Janjetovic, who will be available when the window opens on January 4.
 