
Recently I went out for dinner. And that’s all I can tell you. Except that the 
restaurant was in Hoxton. Or Peckham. Though it may have been in Carlisle. 
Anyway, there was short rib. Definitely short rib. Or perhaps hanger steak. Or 
chicken. Nah, I’ve got nothing for you. The whole meal is a black hole. My time 
went in and absolutely nothing came out.

Some eating experiences are like that. When I started as a restaurant critic I 
used to take notes. The fish was soft. The chips were crisp. The raspberries 
were sweet. I would write these words down studiously, page after page, with a 
plan to come up with better ones when I wrote the review. Until one day I 
forgot my notebook and realised I hadn’t ever needed one. Either a dish was 
memorable and therefore I could write about it, or my mind was a complete 
blank, and I could write about that instead.

It’s common these days to point and laugh at restaurants which do stupid 
things to their food to make it memorable: the ones who serve their dishes in 
mini-wheelbarrows or hollowed-out sheep skullsor on slate 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/wewantplates?lang=en>, and I am very happy to join 
in with this. I love a roaring mob, me. But what’s most curious about all that 
stuff is that it’s wasted effort. Those stupid food service items are bound to 
fail. Sure, we’ll all remember the mini-wheelbarrow or the sheep’s skull, but 
we’re never going to remember the food that was actually in it. The things that 
make food memorable are never about the accessories. They are so much more 
subtle, so much more emotional than that.

When, as a small child, I was ill, my mother would make me boiled eggs mushed 
up with warm pieces of buttered toast. It was basically boiled eggs and 
soldiers without all the admin. I can still remember the texture; the way the 
soft, slippery yolks rubbed up against the crisped toast. Even today, buttery 
eggs make me think of the hotness of the bed sheets and the tone of my mother’s 
voice, though not the words.

In adulthood I have other memories. I recall an open shellfish lasagne eaten 
at the wonderfulLe Champignon Sauvage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/oct/20/champignon-sauvage-ofm-award-2013>
 in Cheltenham in the early 90s, before few had heard of either it or chef 
David Everitt-Matthias. It was the first meal of ambition I had paid for with 
my own money and that pride at a kind of adulthood obtained only emphasised the 
intensity of the boisterous flavours. Eating oysters at the ramshackle Company 
Shed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/23/foodanddrink.restaurants> 
on West Mersea in Essex, where the water and land negotiate endlessly with each 
other, I tasted the brine and slap of the sea and felt like I was somewhere far 
off the edge of my known world. A breakfast of pancakes and maple syrup eaten 
in a diner on West 44th St, on my first ever morning in New York, will never be 
forgotten. The pancakes weren’t particularly special, but the breakfast 
seriously was.

Do I need tell you that the shellfish lasagne would not have been more 
memorable if it had been served to me in a mini-wheelbarrow? That those oysters 
were going to stay with me for life without being presented on a ship’s anchor? 
No, I thought not. And that’s the point. While chefs are busy trying to 
manufacture the “wow” factor, we are there supplying our own. Chefs can try as 
hard as they like. They can raid roofs for their slates. But I’m afraid it just 
won’t make it happen.
 