
One of the many delights of editing the Guardian crosswords is the way in 
which it produces the most obscure bits of information. Last month produced one 
such gem and, in case it may interest someone else, I pass it on.

An Araucaria puzzle was published in the paper on April 25 1998 (the website 
did not then exist) and was included as puzzle No 86 in the book of Guardian 
Cryptic Crosswords Volume 1, published in 2003. One solution in the puzzle, in 
order to fit the grid, had to be BERTOLD BRECHT. I cannot remember any fuss 
about this at the time, but Mike Hankin was working his way through the book 
this spring and wrote to point out that the man's first name ended with a T not 
a D and so did not fit. Investigation revealed that the great playwright (the 
centenary of whose birth in 1898 Araucaria was celebrating) was registered by 
his parents as Eugen Friedrich Berthold Brecht. But, in that case, why is he 
indeed universally recorded as being Bertholt?

Not being a man to let an unanswered question lie, Mike took himself off to 
Manchester Central Library where he found a book, "Brecht: a Choice of Evils" 
by Martin Esslin. In it was this sentence: "As to the three names he had been 
given, he later rejected them all, avoiding Eugen and Friedrich with their 
patriotic overtones, and amending Berthold as the mood took him by shortening 
it to Bert or hardening the rather sentimental syllable 'HOLD' (which can mean 
'lovely') into Bertholt." Not a lot of people know this.

_____

My notes last month on how to enlarge the type size for the clues produced 
questions as to why the font used was so small in the first place. The answer 
is that it was chosen because most days it allows the print version of the 
puzzle to be run off directly as a single sheet of A4. But other helpful 
suggestions came in as to how to print off the clues in a larger font. In 
Internet Explorer, for example, using the "View" menu, you can go to "Text 
Size" and "Larger". With Firefox, you just need to press (Control +) to 
increase the type size or (Control -) to reduce it again.

_____

From time to time the setter of the Quick crosswords runs for a week at a time 
with a theme: birds, poets, football teams or whatever. I have no way of 
telling whether consumers like or dislike this practice. I get one or two 
complaints from individuals when they do not like a particular theme and 
nothing to say that it is appreciated, but I cannot decide whether these odd 
complaints are indicative of general disquiet or whether the general silence 
means that Quick solvers are broadly content. Feedback on this question would 
be very helpful.

_____

This month we have our first Genius puzzle from Monk. Pasquale's May Genius 
puzzle produced 144 correct entries. The first, from Uxbridge, was at 0808 GMT 
on the first day. There were only seven other entries on that Monday. A couple 
of you wrote to protest that there was more than one possible answer to 10 
across ("Food mostly made with egg? (4)"), where the crosschecking letters 
produced *A*O. MAYO, SAGO and other possible 4-letter foodstuffs were 
suggested. But I think only TACO fits the clue, with "food mostly" being TAC(k) 
and the clue being "& Lit".

There was also a "food" complaint from the University of Manitoba arising out 
of a clue in Paul's puzzle for Saturday May 26 (No 24,087). The clue was: "One 
animal eats another with a Neapolitan ice cream (7)" for CASSATA. The objection 
was that cassata came originally from Palermo not Naples. My dictionaries are 
not very helpful on this one. Chambers and Collins simply say that it is ice 
cream from Italy. The Oxford Dictionary of English calls it Neapolitan. My only 
Sicilian friend says that he is not sure, but agrees, rather surprisingly, that 
"Sicilian ice cream" sounds less palatable than Neapolitan. Is it possible that 
the answer lies in the old "Kingdom of the Two Sicilies", with Naples and 
Palermo as its twin hubs?

* Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor.
 