
The three week Australian tennis ‘season’ (like the Australian golf season 
except hotter) climaxes with the Australian Open finals on the weekend of 
January 28-29.

Australian hopes rest on the much-maligned man-child Nick Kyrgios whom good 
judges (Rafael Nadal, Andy Murray) suggest has the game to become a world No1 
and major championship winner.

“[Kyrgios] is a player who has an unbelievable potential,” said Nadal. “He has 
focus on himself, and can become world No1 and win a Grand Slam.”

Related: Australia's sporting year in review – fairytales, flops and fiascos 
of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/australias-sporting-year-in-review-fairytales-flops-and-fiascos-of-2016>

Few doubt Kyrgios’s ability to belt premium Wilsons across a 3 1/2 foot net 
with a Yonex EZONE DR 98 at extremely high speeds and odd angles. Kyrgios has 
huge game. What’s in doubt – perhaps massive doubt – is his ability to behave 
with more maturity than a spoiled and sulky 14-year-old heir to a European 
principality.

In cricket, Australia will play the third Test match against Pakistan (Jan 
3-7) followed by a five-match one-day series against the same opponent (Jan 
13-26). The Big Bash League will run concurrently and conclude January 28 
before it’s across the ditch where Australia play three ODIs against New 
Zealand (Jan 30-Feb 5).

Then Australia will field two (2) international teams when Australia plays a 
three-match series against Sri Lanka (Feb 17-22) before Australia (another one) 
plays India in the first Test of the Border-Gavaskar Trophy at Pune (Feb 
23-27). Because that’s how things in the international bartering and mutual 
back-scratching of international cricket scheduling work.

In the Tests, Indian spinner Ravi Ashwin should be the pivotal man of the 
series given he’s the second quickest ever to take 200 wickets – behind Clarrie 
Grimmett, but in front of Dennis Lillee, Waqar Younis Dale Steyn.

Meanwhile Australia was horribly found out at against the spin of Sri Lanka’s 
podgy 38-year-old left-arm orthodox man Rangana Herath. Granted the man has 351 
Test wickets. But Anil Kumble he isn’t. Matt Renshaw, Peter Handscomb, Usman 
Khawaja and Nic Maddinson (if he makes it back into the fold) have never played 
Test cricket against India – much less in India.

In four Tests in India in 2013 David Warner scored 195 runs at 24. Steve Smith 
is the outlier, Australia’s AB De Villiers. Mitchell Starc will get some 
reverse swing and Josh Hazlewood will toil on in – quick enough and good 
enough. But Nathan Lyon seems to bowl the same seed time after time while 
Stephen O’Keefe just seems next in line. Things do not bode well.

Matters appear brighter for women’s sport, particularly Australian rules 
football <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-rules-football> which 
kicks off its inaugural, televised eight-team women’s AFL competition on 
February 3rd with, you beauty, Carlton versus Collingwood. Matches run over 
four 15-minute quarters, with 16 players a side and a six-woman bench. There’ll 
be seven rounds and a grand final on March 25th. And you should really catch a 
game if you can, it’s open footy, and entertaining.

Australia’s gold medal-winning women’s sevens team will run about in the 
super-hot Sydney Sevens (Feb 3-5) with Charlotte Caslick, Ellia Green and 
Alicia Quirk looking to capitalise on the momentum that made them Olympic 
champions and stars. Andy Friend’s men’s team disappointing in the Olympics but 
only narrowly lost to New Zealand in the final in 2016.

The final round of the National Basketball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/basketball> League takes place Feb 9-12 
before a four team finals series. A new netball season (from Feb 23) will pit 
Collingwood- and GWS Giants-backed teams against the likes of Sydney Swifts and 
Melbourne Vixens.

The Super rugby season kicks off (Feb 23) with Melbourne Rebels hosting 
Auckland Blues at AAMI Stadium. Elsewhere Reds host Sharks, Waratahs host Force 
while ACT Brumbies travel to Canterbury for a night with the Crusaders.

All pretty fair and entertaining contests. Yet the tournament remains in 
something of a flux. Ratings, crowds, mentions in the media, are all trending 
downwards, and there’s no indication things will change. Star players are drawn 
to Europe, the Western Force is under ARU administration, club land is at war 
with the governing body, and David Pocock is being well paid to save rhino 
tusks in Africa.

Meanwhile the Brumbies are still mired in the fog of two years of fear and 
loathing, court cases and suppression orders over a KPMG report that’s still 
causing high angst in the capital. (And if its contents are ever aired and 
illegality alleged, watch this space, for some heavy hitters will have a day in 
court.)

The season will again be interrupted by the June international Test ‘window’ 
most notably a tour of New Zealand by British and Irish Lions. And that should 
be very good. The Wallabies, meanwhile, will host Fiji (in Melbourne), Scotland 
(at Sydney’s Allianz Stadium) and Italy (at Suncorp Stadium in Brisbane) on the 
first three Saturdays in June.

While these inbound tourists would appear a drawcard on par with Uruguay, 
Zimbabwe and Spain, the ARU has done one smart thing: each Test match kick-off 
is 3pm. The tradition of rugby long lunches returns. Then, after the Tests it’s 
All Blacks vs Lions on the box.

And then we’re into the Bledisloe Cup and tyro locks Adam Coleman and Rory 
Arnold can enhance their growing reputation with bullish performances against 
whichever husky light-towers the All Blacks trot out, the country has a 
production line of these uber-people. And with Pocock in rhino country the ABs 
are again better than odds-on to retain the trophy for the 74,000th time.

Rugby league! First round of the ever-entertaining and kooky National Rugby 
League pits premiers Cronulla Sharks against Brisbane Broncos at Suncorp on a 
Thursday night (Mar 2).

Related: The 2016 Rusties: Guardian Australia's alternative sporting awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/the-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards>

And that should pack them in, and no argument. Twenty-four hours later Robbie 
Farah’s Rabbitohs take on Jason Taylor’s Wests Tigers, and say what you will 
about the NRL’s crack scheduling squadron, these people have a sense of humour.

Saturday night Cowboys versus Raiders in Townsville should be a ripper, while 
here we go again, Manly and Parramatta, locking horns at the dear old 
dilapidated suburban soul town of Brookvale Oval on a no-doubt sweltering 
Sunday afternoon.

Come May 31 it’s State of Origin 1 in Brisbane, with selection discussion 
dominating the wires roughly one second after full-time sounds between Manly 
and Parra. Or even sooner: The Blues showed plenty to win game three of 2016 
with Jack Bird and Tyson Frizell emerging as a new breed of Bluesmen.

And they go in knowing that surely, one day, Maroons’ master warriors Cam 
Smith, Cooper Cronk, Greg Inglis and Johnathan Thurston must slow down. Mustn’t 
they?

They won’t before the rugby league World Cup (Oct 27-Dec 2) which 
administrators are wisely taking to Port Moresby, Perth, Christchurch and 
Darwin, and away from cynical, sophisticated Sydney town which won’t host a 
finals match, but rather England versus Lebanon (Nov 4) and Australia versus 
Lebanon (Nov 11). The 14-team tournament will have two groups of four and two 
groups of three (because rugby league) with Australia expected to dominate 
England, France, Lebanon, New Zealand, Samoa, Scotland, Tonga, Papua New 
Guinea, Fiji, USA, Wales, Ireland and Italy.

The AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> season kicks off with a 
Thursday night blockbuster at Etihad Stadium, Carlton and Richmond (Mar 23). A 
night later at the Melbourne Cricket Ground it’s premiers Western Bulldogs 
against the most loved-and-loathed club in Australian sport, Collingwood 
Magpies, and they’ll just about fill the old girl for that. One player to watch 
is North Melbourne’s Mason Wood, 23, who showed plenty of potential before a 
knee injury struck him down in July of last year. Wood has hyper-athleticism 
and a mighty kick.

The Australian Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
Grand Prix kicks off the weekend of March 25-26 and will see Australia’s 
toothsome tearaway Daniel Ricciardo scream around Melbourne’s Albert Park in 
his Red Bull Renault (pending no late interest from Mercedes).

Ricciardo was third overall in 2016 though managed just one top-of-podium 
finish. He placed fourth in this race (in 2015) and second (in 2014 though he 
was DQ’d). Ricciardo says on his website that he’s looking forward to 2017 
because slight rule modifications mean extra cornering speed. Ricciardo has 
spent the off-season doing strength training and says it’s “time to unlock the 
hidden Honey Badger.”

April 6-9 will see Adam Scott and Jason Day head the Australian charge to a 
green jacket at Augusta National. Both players time their schedules to peak 
around the Major Championships, both players know Augusta and its undulations 
as well as anyone going around.

Scott has one green jacket. Day has been close several times. The 
international depth is strong – but of all the majors, given the tournament’s 
predilection to invite back past champions (Larry Mize, for instance) and that 
it’s on the same course each year, it’s perhaps the ‘easiest’ of the big four 
to win.

And finally, in the end of April, the six-team A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> finals begin. And we will talk 
no doubt much more of them.
 