
You sigh heavily, shut your eyes and rush your hand to your forehead. You weep 
silently for a few moments, keen not to let it escalate, then brace yourself, 
lifting your head to continue the meeting. I offer you some water and a tissue. 
Soon, we are busily talking through the strategy and your hopes for the 
financial settlement.

Disappointment and misery: I have an honorary degree in both. Sometimes, a 
client might mention some aspect of their failed relationship that triggers in 
my brain, making me wonder whether the same is true of my own marriage. A quick 
analysis ensues, but is usually dismissed as another red herring. Then I’m on 
to thinking of the next piece of advice, how much, how long, when. A constant 
list of to-do items are stacking up in my mind, while all the while trying to 
appear empathetic.

Middle-aged divorced men warm to me: perhaps I represent the sane version of 
their “mad” wife, or they appreciate a female opinion on the divorce. 
Sometimes, I wish for their sake that they’d get back together – I can tell 
they are still in love with their ex.

There aren’t many thank yous involved in divorce, the end result being a 
virtual decimation and division of their assets, and not a small fee for my 
help.

But occasionally something better happens: when a client leaves a meeting 
visibly more confident and hopeful than when they arrived; when a client is 
reunited with their child after being prevented contact and they telephone me 
to share their joy; when a client turns a corner with their depression and 
their email correspondence becomes sparky and fun. These short moments of 
lightness make it worthwhile.

I can go home, taking a heavy sigh myself, along with a large glass of pinot 
grigio, and feel satisfied that things are as they should be and that I helped 
things get there. Until the next email arrives from the opponent’s solicitor 
the following morning…

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>.
 