
An email arrives from a young, discouraged restaurant cook who has recently 
parted company with her employers. It had been her dream job; the kind of 
serious kitchen in rural England to which she had long aspired. There was a 
contract, giving her 40 hours a week on minimum wage. No, she wouldn’t get 
rich, but she would be doing something she loved.She would be learning on the 
job. Then the rota turned up: 60 hours a week. With no extra pay. For her 
labours she would be getting below the minimum wage. She took it up with her 
bosses. Ach, they said. Standard industry practice. She pointed out it was 
illegal. Now she is looking for another job.

While she showed me various documents to back up her claims, it speaks volumes 
that she wouldn’t go on the record. She wants to continue working in the 
industry and fears being blackballed. She may be very wise. Figures released 
last month showed that of 700 firms named and shamed by HMRC for paying below 
the minimum wage since 2014, only three have been prosecuted.

Instead, I went onto social media and invited other cooks to email me with 
corroborating evidence. As one tweeter put it: “You’re gonna need a bigger 
inbox.” It was a deluge. Of course, it’s not everybody. In recent months, the 
likes of Michel Roux Jnr and Sat Bains have cut the numbers of services they’re 
open for, specifically to attract and retain the highest calibre of staff by 
offering better terms and conditions. The higher reaches of the London 
restaurant business report chef shortages, with suitable applicants able to set 
their own terms.

Too few chefs: how a staffing crisis could change what we eat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/18/chef-shortage-could-change-way-we-eat-restaurants>
However, the stories from further down the industry – of young commis chefs 
simply expected to put up and shut up, of abuse by head chefs, of illegal 
working practices – give the lie to the glossy media image of life in the 
kitchen brigade. In these mythical kitchens in magazines and on TV you graft 
hard and pursue your passion – it’s always about “passion” – encouraged by 
sympathetic colleagues, and a fair wage.

Part of the problem is young cooks themselves who, as one chef put it to me, 
“love what they do, love doing it with the freaks and sociopaths around them 
and don’t care particularly for the world outside their steamy, hot and noisy 
caves”. They take what they’re given. But a bigger issue is the customer. Every 
week someone complains below my review online about price. It doesn’t matter 
whether it’s £50 for two or £140. It’s always too much. They think someone is 
screwing them.

Yes, there are people getting rich from restaurants. They’re usually the 
venture capitalists behind the dreary high-street chains, which use economies 
of scale to keep costs low. As to the rest, it’s a struggle. The middle classes 
will rally to the cause of low-paid workers in a sports merchandise warehouse 
but when it comes to the exploited ranks cooking their dinner they moan 
endlessly about price.

Earlier this year, revered New York chef David Chang wrote a piece for American
 GQ <http://www.gq.com/story/david-chang-resturant-business-challenges> in 
which he said bluntly that the business was all but impossible. “The longer 
chefs look at restaurant math,” he wrote, “the less it adds up for them.”

He described the costs he faced and concluded, “Food needs to get more 
expensive ...” Ignore him if you wish. Dismiss the young woman who wrote to me 
as a spineless whinger. But if you do, unscrupulous restaurateurs will simply 
carry on breaking the law. And all to keep us fed.
 