
"While pondering the former players from my club – Queen's Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenspark> – who hold current managerial 
positions with British senior clubs (as you do), I realised that all six I had 
come up with not only played for Queen's but actually started their senior 
playing career there," writes Alistair Murdoch. "Can any other club claim to 
have started so many current managers on their footballing career? Incidentally 
the six are Sir Alex Ferguson (Manchester United), Malky Mackay (Watford), Alan 
Irvine (Sheffield Wednesday), Ian McCall (Partick Thistle), Kenny Brannigan 
(Queen of the South), Jimmy Boyle (Airdrie United)."

Of the 87 league clubs south of the border Manchester United lead the way with 
five managers – Billy Davies (Nottingham Forest), Sammy McIlroy (Morecambe), 
Mark Robins (Barnsley), Darren Ferguson (Preston) and Mark Hughes (Fulham) – 
beginning their playing careers at Old Trafford. Next up is Southampton with 
four – Paul Tisdale (Exeter City), Alan Knill (Bury), Phil Parkinson (Charlton) 
and Keith Millen (Bristol City), while three – Ferguson, Mackay, Irvine – began 
their playing careers at Queen's Park.

Twelve other teams set two managers on the road to success – Bristol Rovers 
(Ian Holloway and Tony Pulis), QPR (Gary Waddock and Graham Westley), Bolton 
Wanderers (Peter Reid and Sam Allardyce), Sheffield United (Chris Wilder and 
Micky Adams), Leeds United (Gary Speed and Simon Grayson), Chelsea (Chris 
Hutchings and Terry Skiverton), Manchester City (Paul Simpson and John 
Sheridan), Tranmere Rovers (Nigel Adkins and Ronnie Moore), Tottenham Hotspur 
(Mark Stimson and Chris Hughton), Birmingham City (Mark Yates and Kevin 
Dillon), Arsenal (Paul Dickov and Brian McDermott) and Southend United (Steve 
Tilson and Peter Taylor).

In Scotland nods are due to Greenock Morton and Dundee United, both of whom 
have produced current Scottish league managers. Jimmy Nicholl's presence at 
Cowdenbeath would suggest that Queen's Park's efforts are equalled by the 
giants from Manchester, but one man was missed out in Alistair's question – 
John O'Neill, manager of Stirling Albion, also cut his playing teeth at Hampden 
Park, meaning the Spiders have a grand total of seven managers in positions 
across the English and Scottish leagues.

FIRST XIs WITHOUT INTERNATIONALS

"What is the last English top-flight club to put out a team without a single 
full international on the team or on the substitutes bench?"wonders Padraig 
McAuliffe.

An easy one this. In May 2006, with the Uefa Cup final against Sevilla a few 
days away,Steve McClaren fielded a team with an average of 20 against Fulham at 
Craven Cottage <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/may/08/match.sport13>.

The Boro line-up was: Turnbull, Davies, Bates, Wheater, Taylor, Morrison, 
Cattermole, Kennedy, Johnson, Graham, Christie. Substitutes: Cooper, Craddock, 
Walker, Knight, McMahon. James Morrison became the first of that number to 
receive an international call-up when he was named in the Scotland squad for a 
friendly against South Africa in August 2007.

FEYENOORD: 10-GOAL RECORD-BREAKERS?

"In the light of Feyenoord's 10-0 defeat to PSV at the weekend, when was the 
last time a European Cup-winning side conceded double figures?"ponders Rich 
Symes.

The Rotterdam side, winners in 1969-70, joined a rather exclusive group with 
that humiliation at the hands of PSV, possibly even a group all of their own. 
The vast majority of European Cup and Champions League winning sides have never 
shipped 10 times in one match – only three sides had done so before Sunday, 
although, unlike the Dutchmen, they had not been European champions at the time.

Barcelona were hammered 12-1 by Athletic Club (later Athletic Bilbao) in 
February 1931, Porto were pummelled 12-2 by Benfica in February 1943, and 
Dortmund were on the wrong end of an 11-1 against Bayern Munich in November 
1971, when Gerd Müller scored four, Uli Hoeneß bagged a brace and even Franz 
Beckenbauer got his name on the scoresheet.

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

"A litre bottle of a certain beer is known as a 'Drogba' in the Ivory Coast, 
on account of it being big and strong,"wrote Nathan Maddison in 2007. "Have any 
other footballers lent their name to food or drink?"

They sure have, Nathan, and some are more obscure than others. Take the 'Andy 
Porter', brewed briefly during the late 1990s by the Titanic Brewery in 
Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent, in honour of the eponymous Port Vale midfielder who 
made 357 appearances for the club between 1987 and 1998. By the time he retired 
in 2006, the Andy Porter was no more. When the Knowledge called Titanic to find 
out what happened to this 5% ale, we were told "it was a one-off for one 
person". Andy Porter, presumably.

Mart Poom may be the only goalkeeper to have a beer named after him. 
Poominator Ale is thought to derive from commentary by Simon Crabtree on Metro 
Radio in the north-east after Poom equalised in the last minute of Sunderland's 
Championship game against Derby at Pride Park in September 2003. The words, 
"It's the Poominator. He'll be back" appear to have inspired one listener to 
brew the beer. "I don't drink beer," Poom said, "but it was a nice gesture and 
meant I had some presents for my friends."

Jonny Lentoni alerts us to the brief existence of the Chimblonda ale at a 
Wigan beer festival. According to the Campaign for Real Ale's website (Wigan 
branch), the Chimblonda, named in honour of Pascal Chimbonda, cost £2 a pint, 
clocked in at 4.3%, and was a "new beer from Wigan's brewery, brewed specially 
for the festival. A very pale beer using Challenger and Cascade hops".

Mark McManus in Johannesburg writes in with an example of a beer – spotted a 
theme yet? – that took its name from a team. The Egyptian side Zamalek sport a 
red and black badge that matches the colours of Carling Black Label. "The beer 
was launched around the same time as Zamalek played a local team here," says 
Mark. Thus, if you want a Carling Black Label in South Africa, ask instead for 
a Zamalek.

And what about a player named after a beer? John Jensen, the former Denmark 
and Arsenal midfielder, was thought to have played for his country with his 
nickname "Faxe" emblazoned across his back. Faxe, needless to say, was a Danish 
lager.

As far as food goes, Luke Jackson points out that Walkers temporarily called 
two of their crisp flavours "Salt and Lineker" and "Cheese and Owen", but the 
word on the street in Liverpool is that sustenance of a less family-orientated 
kind became known during the 1990s as "Garys". According to one reader, who for 
the sake of his career shall remain nameless, ecstasy tablets on Merseyside at 
the time owed their nickname to a piece of rhyming slang derived from the 
former Liverpool defender Gary Ablett.

For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>

Can you help?

"I was reading that Yoan Gouffran is allergic to grass, are there any other 
more unfortunate allergies or phobias that either players or managers complain 
of?" wonders Harry Bronsdon.

"It seems Andy Legg won't ever quit," writes Kai Helge Aalhus. "On Sunday at 
the respectable age of 44 he played in Llanelli's 1-1 draw at home to Airbus UK 
in the Welsh Premier League. He has featured in seven of Llanelli's 11 matches 
so far this season. Is Andy the oldest active professional player in Britain?"

"At the time of writing, Rangers are 2,500-1 to win all their SPL games this 
season," writes Adam Timms. "Has a team in a professional league ever 
accomplished this feat?"

"I was wondering," writes Robert Sleigh, "what was the highest ever attendance 
at a reserve game?"

"Peter Hartley and James Poole were both on the pitch at the Vic for the home 
side as Hartlepool drew with Bristol Rovers at the weekend," notes Will 
Langley. "Has this phonetic miracle ever occurred before?"

Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com 
<mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>
 