
The restaurant chain Whitbread <https://www.theguardian.com/business/whitbread>
 has apologised after it was found to be serving “beef lasagne” in which more 
than a third of the meat content was actually pork.

The Sun reported that almost 250,000 of the affected dishes were sold 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2574959/restaurant-giant-whitbread-secretly-added-pork-to-lasagne-in-cost-cutting-move-and-sold-nearly-250000-dishes-to-unaware-diners/>
 over three months at scores of the company’s outlets including Brewers Fayre, 
Table Table and Whitbread Inn.

It said menus in some of the 99 restaurants still described the dish as “beef 
lasagne” while ingredient labels, unseen by customers, showed that it contained 
4.5% pork, or more than a third of the meat content in the dish.

Whitbread’s supplier, Creative Foods from Flint in north Wales, was also 
involved in thehorsemeat scandal in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/horsemeat-scandal>. Tests found it supplied 
Whitbread with lasagne containing traces of horsemeat.

Whitbread claimed it had not flouted food labelling laws. 

But in a statement it admitted that it failed to update its online menus after 
changing its “beef lasagne” to a more authentic lasagne recipe that included 
pork.

It said: “We mistakenly, and with no ill intent, missed updating the 
website/online menus for our Table Table and Whitbread Inns brands, but as soon 
as we were alerted to this we corrected them. This was a genuine mistake on our 
part and we sincerely apologise to customers if this resulted in any confusion 
when they were presented with the correct menu at the restaurant.”

 Creative Foods has not commented.

A Whitbread staff member told the Sun that management refused to clear up the 
confusion when the pork content was pointed out.

The whistleblower is quoted as saying: “I spotted the packs marked ‘beef 
lasagne’ started coming in as ‘meat lasagne’. I looked at the ingredients and 
noticed it actually contains pork and beef.

“I queried it with management but they didn’t care. Three months on and the 
menus still say beef lasagne, and waiters have not been told to warn customers.”

Although many traditional recipes for lasagne include both beef and pork, 
misleading menus offering “beef lasagne” risk offending Jews and Muslims, whose 
religions forbid eating pork.

Prof Chris Elliott, from Queen’s University Belfast and director of the 
Institute for Global Food Security, said Whitbread’s error was “unacceptable”.

In an email to the Guardian, he said: “It should be obvious to all in the food 
industry that there are enormous sensitivities around this in terms of 
religious beliefs.


“We seem to be faced with a case where pork has been knowingly added to a food 
that should be totally pork-free. Correctly labelled food is not only a matter 
of legislation but also having high moral and ethical standards. If the product 
is advertised as beef lasagne then this is exactly what it should be.”

Elliott also expressed alarm that Whitbread’s error had come so soon after the 
horsemeat scandal.

He said: “We all should remember the lessons of the horsemeat scandal, where 
the introduction of horsemeat to many products was aided and abetted by those 
who were driven to buy meat as cheaply as possible.

“Perhaps even more concerning is that the issue was flagged up to some staff 
members and they chose to ignore it. This suggests that Whitbread need not only 
to bring about a change in how they procure but also the culture within their 
organisation.”
 