
With one brief, shocking press conference, he was gone. Following Olympique 
Marseille’s 1-0 defeat to Caen in August, Marcelo Bielsa announced that he was 
stepping down as head coach. “I took my decision on Wednesday,” the coach told 
perplexed cluster of journalists. “I’ve finished my work here. I’m going back to
Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina>.”

After a characteristically headline-grabbing, exhilaratingly chaotic 12 months 
in charge, Bielsa’s rising tide in Ligue 1 was suddenly no more. He had drafted 
a resignation letter but left it in his office as he took charge of the club 
for the last time. Patrolling the technical area with the usual maniacal 
paroxysm, nobody inside the packed Stade Vélodrome would have suspected that, 
buried beneath a flurry of thoughts in Bielsa’s restless mind, he was planning 
to announce his departure.

Unsurprisingly, the news hit the fans and players hard. After arriving in the 
summer of 2014, the notorious, fanatical doctrine of “Bielsista’ had captured 
the imagination of the club’s voracious supporters. He had swept into the south 
of France in a wave of excitement and wasted no time in endearing himself to 
the raucous MTP (Marseille Trop Puissant – the club’s most hardened faction of 
supporters).

He started with a bang, too. Marseille, as documented by Philippe Auclair 
<https://8by8mag.com/olympique-marseille-rebellion/>, is one of France’s 
“crazier” clubs. AMarseillas is undoubtedly a fan of unrelenting passion, but 
the club’s support have experienced a whirlwind of emotions over the past 
number of years, with everything from winning the Champions League in 1993 to 
suffering a decade of decline prompted by the financial irregularities and 
match-fixing scandal surrounding then president Bernard Tapie, which plunged 
them into enforced relegation while being stripped of the Ligue 1 title they 
had won in 1993. The never-ending carousel of managers further added to the 
sense of volatility at the club.

Bielsa was the club’s 36th head coach in 28 years. Known affectionately as “El 
Loco”, he came with a sparkling reputation for being one of the most revered 
tactical thinkers in the game. By Christmas, the south of France was already 
gripped withBielsista fever. His remarkably intense persona seemed to align 
well with the club’s fans and the marriage was serene in its first few months.

After an initial stumble in his first two matches, a breathlessly frustrating 
3-3 draw with Bastia and a 2-0 home defeat to Montpellier, the Bielsa effect 
began to take hold – and the former Chile andAthletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> boss oversaw a glorious 
run of eight consecutive victories. Thanks in no small part to the prodigious 
goalscoring talents of André-Pierre Gignac up front, Bielsa’s well-documented 
hard-pressing philosophy had been embraced by the players and, as a result, 
they were operating with optimum efficiency and fluidity.

They alternated between his trademark 3-3-1-3 and a more conservative – but 
equally effective – 4-2-3-1. Although it differed slightly in shape from some 
of the Bielsa teams down the years, the philosophy was very much the same. 
Through a combination of tireless workrate and intelligent positioning,Marseille
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> bamboozled a number of teams 
as they rode the crest of a wave in September and October, recording resounding 
victories over Nice, Rennes and Reims.

By the start of December, Marseille were top of the table and plenty of column 
inches in the French press had been dedicated to portraying Bielsa as a 
mastermind coach. Marseille’s talented squad was tested to the extreme by their 
coach’s intensive, militaristic methods in training, but they were responding 
to his charisma – and his vision.

“The workouts are intense but enlightening, technically and tactically,” said 
Gignac. “He knows everything to the smallest detail. I glanced at his training 
schedules; there are hundreds of them and every one featured games he analysed. 
He taught us a vibrant, real type of football.” This snapshot of glowing praise 
from one of Bielsa’s prized assets illustrated exactly how he can enrapture 
footballing minds. Marseille’s young and technically gifted players were 
desperate for a leader and, with Bielsa’s level of meticulousness now available 
to them, they bagged themselves a pretty good one.

Plenty of footage from Bielsa’s training sessions 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=5&v=NLA7qPPgGso> at La 
Commanderie, Marseille’s resplendent training facility, is available on YouTube 
– and it makes for compelling viewing. We see him totally engaged with his 
side, barking orders and remonstrating wildly while they play the football of 
his making. At the end of the sessions, Bielsa claps and lauds the efforts of 
his players, patting them on the back while they attempt to get their breath 
back.

Bielsa demands a lot from players, but they respond to his philosophy and, 
like him, have confidence in the benefits of playing such chaotic, aggressive 
football. Bielsa has always issued instructions, team talks, lectures and video 
analysis sessions with the utmost self-confidence. At Marseille, certainly 
during the first half of the season, there was an overriding sense that the 
fans and first-team squad had bought it into what he was preaching.

Bielsa has always adhered to the “running is everything” motto and his players 
didn’t shy away from this taxing physical demand. From the outside looking in, 
Bielsa may have cut a ghastly figure, stalking the pitch on the touchline and 
displaying an explosive temperament. But to Marseille, he had quickly grown to 
become their leader.


However, not long after Bielsa’s honeymoon period at the Vélodrome, the 
romance petered out and made way for a spell of drama and discord. After the 
turn of the year, defeats became regular as performances became erratic. Having 
been perched at Ligue 1’s summit in December, they lumbered through a period in 
April that included four straight defeats, including a particularly bruising 
3-2 home defeat to PSG.

Wildly unpredictable by this stage, Bielsa guided his side through a strong 
finish in winning their last four league games, including an enthralling 4-0 
victory away at Lille in the penultimate game. But the mood had changed and 
matters behind the scenes had become less than sanguine. Club president Vincent 
Labrune had initially hailed the appointment of Bielsa as a wonderful moment 
for Marseille and compared it to “signing Lionel Messi for 12 months”. Labrune 
was hoping to retain Bielsa’s services for a far greater length of time but it 
didn’t work out as either party had hoped.

Bielsa’s departure seemed to come out of nowhere. Just 48 hours before 
addressing the media for the final time, the coach had talked positively about 
his contract but differences with Labrune had prompted his decision to depart. 
And like that, Marseille were plunged into darkness as Bielsa closed another 
eventful chapter in his storied career.

Why, then, do we celebrate a manager who overworked his side to the point of 
physical collapse and resigned after just a year in charge? Because his ideas 
are bold, daring and revolutionary. He may not be held in the same regard as 
more trophy-laden managers of the modern game, but he still stands among a 
select few as an innovator, a thinker, a mentor and a symbol of footballing 
intellect.

His acumen and grasp of tactical intricacies is borne out of his upbringing in 
a successful, career-driven family. His brother Rafael is a former minister of 
foreign relations in Argentina and his sister, Maria Eugenia, is a renowned 
architect. But Bielsa was not interested in such a career. He was driven from a 
very young age to be a footballer, and left home at 15 to live at the club 
accommodation at Newell’s Old Boys. It was here, at one of Argentina’s most 
illustrious clubs, that the seeds of Bielsa’s undying football obsession were 
sown.

Bielsa’s grandfather amassed a colossal collection of books and his grandson 
cultivated an unusual obsession with video footage. Bielsa has spent months of 
his managerial career consuming reams and reams of videos, constantly 
perpetuating his education as a student of football. He impressed the Vélez 
Sarsfield board when he was interviewed for the manager’s position in 1997 when 
he brought several tapes as proof of how he could improve the team. It quickly 
became apparent that he had an astonishing work ethic.

Bielsa is an exhausting coach to work with, something that has been attributed 
to his demanding mother who was tough to impress. However, in spite of this, he 
couldn’t quite make it playing football. He was a technical defender but lacked 
pace and spent the bulk of his career floating anonymously around Argentina’s 
lower leagues before deciding to quit the game and study physical education.

His first major coaching role was with the Buenos Aires university football 
team and he spent two years there before returning to Newell’s and establishing 
himself as a protégé with the reserves. He eventually replaced José Yudica as 
first-team coach and facilitated a dramatic change. Bielsa introduced a 
flexible, fluid 4-3-3 with pacey wingers who were able to adapt to a 3-4-3 
seamlessly. The system began to work after Bielsa organised structured, 
regimented and wholly intense training schedules that mixed tactical sessions, 
ball work and video analysis. Bielsa demanded a lot – even from the youngest 
members of the squad.

The players were required to prepare detailed dossiers on the opposition and 
have the capacity to highlight key moments in play during a video session. 
Bielsa would ask a player to demonstrate a tactical trend or mishap from 
screenshots and footage. This particular method has grown in popularity over 
the years, but back then it was fresh and innovative, with Old Boys claiming 
the league title after a playoff victory over Boca Juniors.

Of course, there were heartaches as well as ecstasies at Newell’s and, at 
times, football threatened to swallow him up. His reactions to losing were 
sometimes extreme and difficult to comprehend. After the acute ignominy of 
being hammered 6-0 by Santa Fe, Bielsa locked himself away and reflected deeply 
on the game. “I shut myself in my room,” he said. “I turned off the light, 
closed the curtains, and I realised the true meaning of an expression we 
sometimes use lightly: ‘I want to die.’ I burst into tears. I could not 
understand what was happening around me. I suffered as a professional and I 
suffered as a fan.

“For three months our daughter was held between life and death,” he later 
said. “Now she is fine. Does it make any sense that I want the earth to swallow 
me over the result of a football match? The reasoning was brilliant, but 
nonetheless, my suffering from what had happened demanded immediate 
vindication.”

Extraordinary. We can see how Bielsa views football. It is not just a game for 
him, but a way of life, an ideal. Like many, Bielsa became fascinated with the 
Total Football philosophy pioneered by Rinus Michels with the Dutch side in the 
1970s. Bielsa believed, like Michels and later Arrigo Sacchi, that it was 
important to embrace and encourage the versatility within a player.

He formulated the 4-3-3/3-4-3 system and has abided by four core principles: 
concentración, permanente movilidad, rotación y repenitización (concentration, 
permanent focus, rotation and improvisation). His school of thought occupied 
somewhere between the two prevailing ideologies in Argentinian football –
menottista(romantic idealist) and bilardista (territorial and tactically driven)
,from César Luis Menotti and Carlos Bilardo, who guided their country to World 
Cup success in 1978 and 1986 respectively.

Bielsa was also influenced by Uruguayan legend Óscar Tabárez and, solidifying 
his doctrine, he guided Newell’s to the Copa Libertadores final in 1992, where 
they lost to São Paulo. Following that Bielsa resigned, much to the dismay of 
his players. However, his managerial model and tactical approach had been 
cemented – and he was ready for new challenges.

Bielsa spent six years as the head coach of the national team, winning an 
Olympic gold medal in 2004. Although he didn’t succeed in the World Cup in 
2002, Bielsa’s reputation as an accomplished tactical brain was burgeoning and 
he was high in demand after leaving Argentina. His next journey was withChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile>, and it was under him that La Roja 
became one of the most electrifying teams in world football.

Innovative and thrilling in the 3-3-1-3 system, Bielsa’s Chile were inherently 
attacking and pressed high up the pitch aggressively. They progressed to the 
last-16 in the 2010 World Cup but were ultimately undone by an on-song Brazil. 
Although they were humbled by their South American counterparts, Bielsa’s 
popularity soared in Chile and there was, once again, a great deal of sorrow 
when he resigned, citing differences with the country’s football federation.

For many, it was Bielsa’s emergence as manager of Athletic Bilbao that made 
them sit up and take notice. He took over from Joaquín Caparrós in the summer 
of 2011 and once again enacted dramatic changes to the set-up and style of 
football. Bilbao had finished sixth under Caparrós but there were growing 
concerns over his particularly bland style and when Josu Urrutia – a former 
midfielder and club legend – became Bilbao’s president, Bielsa was instated.


Typically, Bielsa had no qualms in abandoning the tactics of his predecessor 
to mould his own side. Javi Martínez, Bielsa thought, was suited more to being 
deployed deeper into the defensive line, while he introduced genuine width in 
the play with Markel Susaeta, Iker Muniain and Ibai Gómez. Ander Herrera was 
signed from Real Zaragoza in 2011 and immediately became instrumental to 
Bielsa’s attacking vision at San Mamés.

Bielsa’s off-field eccentricities manifested themselves full throttle at 
Bilbao. Months after he had arrived, the players were still amused and baffled 
by him. His preparation for taking over as head coach was immense – and it 
amazed them. Before Bielsa took his first training session, he had watched all 
38 of Bilbao’s league games from the previous season, writing a mountain of 
notes and collating them together into coherent lectures. But, as it had done 
with the Chile national team, Bielsa’s madness was infectious and charming. In 
training, Bielsa demanded the absolute maximum from everyone, overseeing 
gruelling sprint sessions before playing out potential match situations, with 
Bielsa always preaching high pressure and joining in as much as he observed.

He taught the Basque players how to synchronise their movement and, most 
noticeably, how to out-run the opposition. Bielsa’s teachings came full circle 
in their fascinating two-legged display against Manchester United in the Europa 
League last-16 in March 2012. Bielsa’s hard-running, relentless outfit 
completely outplayed Sir Alex Ferguson’s side. Beleaguered, yes, from their 
group stage exit from the Champions League, but there wouldn’t have been much a 
high-flying United team could have done about Bilbao.

United may have taken the lead but Bilbao were never perturbed. They didn’t 
veer from Bielsa’s tactics and, come the end of the night, it was the men in 
green that were huddled in joy on the Old Trafford turf, as the home supporters 
applauded in appreciation at the sheer quality of the visitors. Bielsa was a 
bundle of restless energy on the touchline – as usual – but his incessant 
pacing wasn’t done in vain and, by the time Muniain had scored his side’s third 
goal, all of Europe were talking about Bielsa’s Bilbao.

That season, he guided Los Leones to the final of both the Europa League and 
the Copa del Rey. They fell short on both occasions, but Bielsa had constructed 
an exciting Bilbao team and drew glowing praise from onlookers. Pep Guardiola, 
who felt a strong affinity with Bielsa after seeking his advice at the start of 
his own managerial career, described Bilbao as “fascinating” and labelled the 
players as “beasts”. Ferguson complimented Bielsa’s organisation and 
determination, accepting that his United side had been well and truly beaten.

His project at Bilbao started to unravel before his eventual departure but he 
left a great legacy and impression in that part of Spain, like he did with all 
of his teams. Shortly after he resigned from Marseille, there were reports that 
he was in talks to succeed another towering personality in Miguel Herrera as 
Mexico coach. In a way, I’m glad that didn’t happen. When Sam Allardyce left 
West Ham, some fans dreamed of Bielsa. He is yet to grace the Premier League 
and, although some have argued that his chaotic style is more suited to 
international football, moving toSwansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> would represent another 
intriguing prospect in his career.

Some managers should not be judged on their haul of trophies and titles. 
Bielsa is one of them. Three Argentinian league titles and an Olympic gold is 
maybe not a spectacular return but that should not be the barometer with which 
we measure Bielsa’s genius and his impact on the way modern football is played.

Perhaps his theoretical preachings should be tempered to win trophies, without 
Bielsa we may well never have had the glory of watching Guardiola’s Barcelona, 
such was his impact on the Spaniard and his work as manager. His interminable 
quest for the ideal is what keeps drawing people to Bielsa. While he never may 
win a Champions League or World Cup, Bielsa’s profound effect on tactical 
trends and coaching philosophies is what makes him a mastermind. He is one that 
has always prioritised the execution of the process over the eventual outcome 
and football should love him for it, even if he exhausts as much as he 
invigorates. Savour it while it lasts.

• This article appeared first on These Football Times 
<http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Matt 
Gault <https://twitter.com/mattgault11> on Twitter
 