
the dilemma I’m a single man in my mid-30s. I was something of a monogamist 
throughout my 20s with only three relationships by 30. I’ve now been single for 
six years. I’ve had one relationship that I felt very happy in, but it didn’t 
work out. My problem is, having experienced what I’d consider to be a “good” 
relationship, I’m now finding it very difficult to find another. Finding 
someone I fancy and like (in the friendship sense) and who likes and fancies me 
is like searching for a needle in a haystack. I’ve met guys I fancy and guys I 
like, and sometimes even guys I like and fancy, but never one where it’s been 
reciprocated. Maybe I’m being a bit idealistic, but it seems to take gay men 
longer to settle down than their straight brothers and sisters. Should I be 
more flexible? I suppose I’m looking for reassurance that aspiring to have this 
type of connection is a reasonable thing to be pitching for.

In short, yes it is. If a relationship has any chance of surviving both the 
elements you mention, physical attraction and friendship need to be present. I 
certainly believe you need a good sprinkling of both in order to walk, hand in 
hand, with any confidence into a joint future.

That said, the auditioning process doesn’t always present both qualities 
simultaneously. Insisting on a relationship where friendship and sex are equal 
partners from the outset may be narrowing your field. People meet in mysterious 
ways.

I’ve got a friend who encountered his future wife in a nightclub at 3am and 
never looked back. That was definitely a case of lust at first sight. The 
realisation that they had a spark for each other that transcended the bedroom 
came as a surprise to them both. It also didn’t occur until they’d pretty much 
exhausted their initial ravenous passion.

I have a feeling that if such a union were to present itself to you, you’d be 
asking questions about where it was headed even before you’d emerged from 
between the sheets. Most people don’t want to talk long-term before their 
short-term desires have been sated. It might seem like I’m stating the obvious, 
but perhaps you’re approaching this whole dating game too seriously. Could it 
be time to rip off your lifejacket and jump in at the deep end? Sticking to the 
rules rarely nets love.

I have other friends who, after 10 years of platonic friendship, developed an 
overnight attraction to each other that baffled all in their inner circle. 
Having holidayed together and weekended together and discussed the intimate 
details of their rollercoaster love lives, they suddenly and inexplicably leapt 
enthusiastically into each other’s arms. For those around them it came as quite 
a shock and was initially as uncomfortable as witnessing your parents’ first 
date!

Dating is referred to as a 'game' for good reason. It’s more about luck than 
design

Dating is referred to as a “game” for good reason. It’s more about luck than 
design. Three relationships before you were 30, including one serious 
contender, is meagre by today’s sexually profligate standards. I’m not 
suggesting that you need to get busy on Tinder or Grindr, but there is a big 
difference between rampant promiscuity and embracing playtime with frogs while 
keeping the door ajar for the perfect candidate.

Love at first sight which doesn’t prove to be misguided and unsustainable 
after further examination is a rare occurrence indeed. Very often even those 
who are actively seeking a partner don’t know themselves what they’re looking 
for until they wake up beside someone who perfectly fits the bill. Your 
aspirations in the long term are perfectly reasonable, but expecting anyone to 
discuss curtain colours before you’ve enjoyed some unfettered fun together is 
less likely to be fruitful.

I have to say I don’t like your use of the word “pitching”. Maybe you are in 
the TV or advertising world and it’s an integral part of your vocabulary, but 
thrusting your wares at someone with the intent of closing the deal swiftly 
isn’t a realistic approach to romance. Love is not for the risk averse. There 
are winners and losers, and few of us find satisfaction after a totally smooth 
ride. You need to develop a little more of a robust approach to romance and 
stop digging your heels in as though virtue will secure you a perfect prince.

I appreciate that your youthful determined monogamy is unusual and your 
standards are no doubt admirable, but are you having a good time? It’s not just 
gay men who are settling down later, it’s taking us all a lot longer to reach 
the point of maturity where we are capable of accepting that what we have is as 
good as it gets. Ironically, in a world full of choice, choosing becomes an 
increasing challenge. My advice is to take a step back from your ambitious 
selection criteria, enjoy your friends and lovers without thinking ahead and 
let one thing imperceptibly lead to another.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 