
Bermondsey, Millwall’s south London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
home patch for the past 106 years, has been called many things in its time. 
“London’s larder” was one hopeful piece of rebranding, tribute to its many 
tinned food factories. “Biscuit town” came and went, legacy of the Peek Freans 
boom years, when the world’s combined Garibaldi reserves were supplied by 
London’s most unloved peninsula. Even snappier, although not often mentioned by 
local estate agents, was “Target Area G”, the Luftwaffe’s name for Bermondsey 
and surrounding areas during the nine-month firestorm of the blitz.

Miraculously the Den escaped the bombings untouched right up until April 1943, 
when it was all but destroyed in a raid. Millwall’s manager, Bill Voisey, 
sitting up late in his office, survived a direct hit, although his injuries 
meant he was succeeded by the legendarily debonair Jack Cock, England 
footballer, war hero, popular singer and star of the  filmsThe Winning Goal 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0164233/> and The Great Game 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0020936/>.

It is a very Millwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall>, very 
south-Bermondsey-cum-New-Cross-wilderness kind of story; a place that seems to 
have spent most of the past 500 years since Henry VIII demolished on a whim its 
only monastery, being unwanted, unloved and generally shot to bits.

These same qualities of resilience may be needed again after the decision this 
week by Lewisham’s Labour council to approve plans for compulsory purchase of 
land around the Den as part of a mass “regeneration” project. Millwall 
currently rent the land under threat, the loss of which could threaten the 
club’s basic operations. They offered to buy it at a higher price. Lewisham 
chose to go with the developer Renewal, which is ultimately controlled by 
offshore companies with mysterious owners and whose plan involves shoehorning 
in 2,400 homes, the huge majority for private sale, as part of Boris Johnson’s 
ramped-up “New Bermondsey” vision.

The end result of which is more of the same old, same old. Target Area G is 
once more in the crosshairs. The Den is again under attack. As indeed, more 
broadly, is football itself, or at least its fogged and dwindling status as a 
force for community and collectivism, to be prized and valued beyond the 
annihilating simplicities of the market.

This was probably always coming. From the outside, Bermondsey has always felt 
like an oddly abandoned place, hard to get to, hard to get out of, a hidden 
corner of outer-inner London jutting out into the southern bend of the Thames. 
Wealth and work have tended to dribble away, first the leather industry, then 
the food factories and finally the docks.

Millwall have at least stuck around, a marmalade and jam works team from the 
Isle of Dogs shifted up river and settled on Cold Blow Lane. It has been a 
febrile existence, right from the first dockers’ derby with West Ham, during 
which the East Ham Echo noted “all attempts at football were ignored”, 
culminating in West Ham’s Jarvis inflicting serious injury by smashing the head 
of Millwall’s Deans against a metal advertising board.

A period of success in the late 1960s was followed by the closure of the docks 
and an increased sense of inner-city alienation. The hand grenade chucked on to 
the pitch from the away end at Griffin Park may have been a harmless replica, 
but for two decades the Den attracted some genuinely frightening people. A huge 
amount of work has gone into tackling racism in the ground. But this was for 
many years a place where something curdled and scabbed did occasionally erupt 
into view. Football cannot solve these problems. It does at least try.

This is all a part of the current story. New Bermondsey. We get the idea. Time 
to flush out and rebrand. Revenue streams must be wrung, the light let in. The 
developers’ plan is, quite literally, to “clad” the Den, to make it look new 
from the outside, the architectural equivalent of slapping a new hat on 
grandma’s head and wheeling her off into the corner because the posh in-laws 
are coming round.

And yet, industry loyalties aside, there are some serious problems with what 
Lewisham and its developer are proposing to do. For a start, the plans to 
create a “new community” overlook the fact Bermondsey already has a community, 
one that has been flourishing, quietly, with help from Millwall themselves.

This is not simply a local leisure service provider. Football clubs do not 
relocate when times are thin (unless they are MK Dons). They stick it out and 
engage. London’s hunger for space may have finally touched the Den. But the 
club believes it has the right not to be edged out, but to play a role in the 
regeneration of the area. Instead it finds itself ushered to one side by a 
local authority that has little historic interest in sport of any kind, whose 
boundaries end a tantalising 500 metres west, and whose inhabitants have often 
been supported by the club’s own community initiatives.

Three years ago Millwall sent their players out to join the (successful) 
campaign tosave Lewisham hospital A&E department 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jan/24/protest-plans-shut-lewisham-hospital>
, a triumph that offered plenty of political capital to the same officials now 
selling their land from under their feet. The Millwall Community Trust has also 
been out there going above and beyond, offering education and opportunities, 
helping young offenders and kids with learning difficulties. By way of thanks 
the Trust will now be evicted when the compulsory purchase order goes through. 
Lewisham council has a motto:Salus Populi Suprema Lex, or “The welfare of the 
people is the highest law”. Words, huh.

Millwall struggle to see the benefits of revamped Checkatrade Trophy | Nick 
Ames
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/31/millwall-west-bromwich-albion-checkatrade-efl-trophy>
Millwall have offered to put forward their own regeneration scheme with the 
club at its heart. Instead Lewisham chose to partner with a developer whose 
ultimate parents are offshore companies owned by mysterious entities including 
a family trust. There is no evidence Renewal has ever carried out a major 
development project. It has no interests in the area.

What the council’s decision seems to say is that there are communities and 
then there are communities. A rising tide lifts all boats and Bermondsey is on 
the up. Just two miles from the Den they are still trying to sell the £50m 
penthouses of the glass and steel sky city, floors 53-65 of the Shard. Canary 
Wharf is just over the river, clearing house for transient global billions. The 
Rotherhithe peninsula sits crunched between the two. Welcome, then, New 
Bermondsey, heir to Biscuit town, Target Area G, and plain old Bermondsey. Let 
them come. Like Bill Voisey, Millwall will walk out of this bloodied but still 
alive, close-up witnesses to another digging down into the question of what 
value can be placed on unmonetised community, the ties that have bound an area 
like SE16; and beyond that the continuing, largely incidental question of what 
football clubs are really for these days.
 