
In the 1970s there was a Chinese restaurant near where I lived that served a 
dish they called sweet and sour pork. It was the colour of David Dickinson, and 
tasted of a cross between Tizer and orange-flavoured Nurofen. Naturally, being 
a kid, I thought it was brilliant. Doubtless anybody with a detailed knowledge 
of Cantonese food would have raised an eyebrow. What I suspect they wouldn’t 
have done is flown into a spittle-flecked rage at the way a culinary tradition 
was being traduced, and bellowed “cultural appropriation” at the chef. Not 
least because back then we didn’t know what cultural appropriation was.

Oh, for those lost days of innocence. Last year, students at the impeccably 
liberal Oberlin College in Ohio protested about the dismal food in the student 
canteen. They claimed poor versions of dishes from Vietnam and Japan were 
“culturally insensitive”. Apparently they were making banh mi with ciabatta 
rather than baguette. The sushi rice was undercooked. “If people not from that 
heritage take food, modify it and serve it as ‘authentic’, it is 
appropriative,” one furious Japanese student told theNew York Daily Post 
<http://nypost.com/2015/12/18/pc-students-at-lena-dunhams-college-offended-by-lack-of-fried-chicken/>
. Last month, a similar row flared when the websiteFood Republic 
<http://www.foodrepublic.com/2016/08/25/meet-the-man-who-launched-the-nashville-hot-chicken-craze/>
 credited a young white chef with launching a craze forNashville “hot chicken” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/17/top-10-nashville-restaurants-diners>
, fried chicken with a cayenne-boosted sauce. Furious critics pointed out that 
he hadn’t launched anything; that it was a venerable African-American dish 
which he had “appropriated”.

Oh dear. The whole argument is based on the notion that there’s such a thing 
as a correct way to make a dish and that a group owns the “authentic” version. 
In truth, there is never just one way to cook something. There is only good 
food and bad food. A country or ethnic group can take pride in their culinary 
traditions but the fact there are different versions cooked by others doesn’t 
diminish those original dishes.

Nobody ever accused the Japanese of cultural appropriation for nicking tempura 
from the Portuguese in the 16th century. The Vietnamese banh mi sandwich is 
only made with a baguette because the French were the colonial power. If it had 
been the Italians it could have been ciabatta. Except, of course, it couldn’t, 
because that authentically Italian loaf was only invented in 1982.

Of course, all of these geographical interplays lead to new dishes. We all 
know that chicken tikka masala was invented in the UK – maybe Glasgow, possibly 
Bradford; let’s not get involved – but is now available in restaurants in 
India. So is it British or Indian? And does it matter?

Call me an idiot, but I suspect the dishes of India, Japan, Vietnam and the 
rest are robust enough to survive the efforts of less than expert cooks from 
somewhere else. Indeed, I’d go further. There’s a lot to be said for 
experiencing crappy versions of food before you get to the good stuff. It makes 
the moment of realisation so very much better. And, sometimes when it’s late, 
and I’m deep down the bottom of the second bottle, there really is no 
substitute for sweet and sour pork the colour of a television auctioneer. Judge 
me at your peril.
 