
“There is no one alive who is youer than you.” So said Dr Seuss, who could 
have added “and there never has nor ever will be, too.” Your genome, the total 
collection of DNA that resides in your cells, is yours alone for all of human 
history. That precise remix of your parents’ DNA will never be repeated, even 
if you are an identical twin.

We are in the era of the genome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/human-genome-project>, where reading this 
unique coded script is easier than ever. For £100 you can exchange your spit in 
a tube for an analysis of your ancestry or your risk factor for various 
diseases or traits, or even your likelihood of sporting success. In my opinion, 
these are at best trivial – and at worst a form of astrology – but they’re 
alluring enough to indulge our solipsism and predisposition to crave simple 
answers to complex questions.

Genetics <https://www.theguardian.com/science/genetics> is really only the 
formal scientific study of families and sex. But everyone has a family and 
everyone is interested in sex. We’ve been observing and codifying patterns of 
inheritance throughout human history: the first piece of medical advice based 
on inheritance is probably in the Talmud, with special dispensation being given 
to a small proportion of Jewish boys who are permitted to avoid circumcision on 
the grounds of their being at risk from what we now call haemophilia.

Reading our genome indulges our solipsism and craving for simple answers – but 
human variation is infinite

We learn these patterns of inheritance at school, but we now know that they 
are actually not nearly as clear as we once thought. Eye colour is the classic 
example: there is a gene which determines blues or browns, and browns are 
dominant over blues. But there’s another gene for green, and so far, 13 other 
genes have been shown to have a significant effect on eye colour. It is 
effectively impossible to predict the colour of a child’s eyes, based on their 
parents’, and every combination of parent and child is possible, including 
blue-eyed parents making brown-eyed kids.

And so it is for all genes and all human characteristics. We long for 
narrative simplicity, for a simple line of cause and effect, as elegantly easy 
to understand as a family tree, or a will. In that sense, we are culturally 
programmed to misunderstand genetics. We now know that as Seuss points out, 
genomes are uniquely complex, and with everyone’s experience being unique, too, 
human variation is infinite. We know that most diseases and traits are governed 
by many – dozens, sometimes hundreds – of genes, in concert with every unique 
life lived.

So DNA is not a blueprint, or an instruction manual, as it is sometimes 
described. Your genome alone won’t reveal your personality, or explain your 
behaviour. It won’t tell you how intelligent, how tall, how violent, how 
beautiful, you will be, nor what gender or sexuality or sport you will prefer. 
We are more brilliantly, frustratingly, complicated than that. I learned 
recently that people bearing the name Rutherford have a motto:Nec fato nec sorte
 – by neither fate nor chance – which is oddly fitting.

The human genome is an epic sprawling saga that culminates in you. In it there 
are tales of your ancestors, of the history of our species, of disease, famine, 
culture, and a lot of sex.

Now we put this new science together with some older intellectual pursuits – 
history, archeology, paleoanthropology, psychology, medicine – and begin to 
paint a more complete – but never finished – picture of how we came to be what 
we are. The genome is a history book, now open to interpretation, and as long 
as there are people, our exploring will never be at an end.

A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived by Adam Rutherford is published on 
8 September (Weidenfeld & Nicholson, £20). To order a copy for £16.40, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brief-history-of-everyone-who-ever-lived.html>
 