
Only 30 fans had made the 500km journey from Burghausen in deepest Bavaria, 
but they had rehearsed their own choreography. Just before kick-off, supporters 
of the bottom-placed club in the German third division held up pieces of 
cardboard that spelled out 50+1muss bleiben ("50+1 must stay"), and then, after 
they'd flipped them over: Red Bullvertreiben ("Red Bull go away").

The 7,000 home fans could manage only a few half-hearted boos in response. 
Increasingly, they are used to this kind of reception: their club,RB Leipzig 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RB_Leipzig>, is fast on the way to becoming the 
most controversial club in the country. To their supporters, they are a rare 
beacon of hope in the bleak landscape of east German football. But their 
opponents fear the team's success could unravel the foundation of the 
Bundesliga's recent successes.

RB Leipzig <https://www.theguardian.com/football/red-bull-leipzig> used to be 
a fifth-division team called SSV Markranstädt that not many had heard of even 
in Saxony – until 2009, when the Austrian energy drink manufacturer Red Bull 
bought the club's license and changed the team's name, crest and kit.

In 2010 RB moved to the 44,300-seater stadium in the centre of Leipzig, which 
had been built for the 2006 World Cup but wasn't in regular use: Lokomotive 
Leipzig, the successor of the club who won the very first title in German 
football in 1903, are stuck in the fourth division, while local rivals Sachsen 
Leipzig were dissolved in 2011.

Two years later, the former Schalke coach, Ralf Rangnick, was installed as 
sporting director and was handed a transfer kitty of €100m. RB Leipzig has been 
gradually climbing up the leagues since. They are currently second in the third 
division and primed for promotion.

In a rare interview in 2011, Dietrich Mateschitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/01/dietrich-mateschitz-mediaguardian-100-2013>
, the notoriously media-shy owner of Red Bull, said: "We are developing RB 
Leipzig with the aim of playing in the Bundesliga in three to five years. We 
also want to get into the Champions League and be successful there, which is 
something you can only achieve with a club that plays in one of the top 
leagues."

Given Red Bull's financial acumen – their annual turnover exceeded the €5 
billion mark for the first time last year, a third of which they are expected 
to invest back into marketing – that kind of statement should have touched a 
few nerves not just in Burghausen, but also in Munich and Dortmund.

But Germans fans don't just worry that RB Leipzig could compete with their 
teams for the league title in 2020. They fear that the rise of this club could 
undermine the very structures that have given German club football such a good 
name in recent years.

The so-called "50+1" rule in the statutes of the German league association 
(DFL) guarantees that no investor can gain majority voting rights in a club 
registered as a stock company, thus givingmembers a crucial veto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/apr/11/bundesliga-premier-league>
 over issues such a ticket prices.

RB Leipzig doesn't break the letter of the 50+1 rule – it does have a 
membership scheme, and it's not registered as a stock company anyway. But it 
does break the spirit: becoming an RB Leipzig member will set you back €800 a 
year, on top of a €100 first-time registration fee (for comparison, being a 
member of Bayern Munich costs €60 per season). On top of that, RB Leipzig 
reserve the right to reject any application without justification.

As a result, more than four years into the club history, RB Leipzig have only 
11 members – most of them employees of Red Bull (Bayern, for comparison, has 
224,000). As the journalist Christoph Biermann wrotein a recent edition of 11 
Freunde magazine 
<http://www.11freunde.de/artikel/wie-gefaehrlich-ist-rb-leipzig>: "It's hard to 
imagine a more blatant way in which RB Leipzig could break the 50+1 rule."

Some fans dismiss such complaints as hypocrisy. They point out that other 
Bundesliga clubs already break the 50+1 rule, such as "company clubs" 
Leverkusen and Wolfsburg, or Hoffenheim, where the billionaire Dietmar Hopp is 
said to act as a de facto owner without holding an official function. "RB 
doesn't break with the principles of modern football, it merely exaggerates 
some of its principles", said Matthias Kiessling, who writes aperceptive blog 
about the club <http://rotebrauseblogger.de/>.

A self-described "tactics geek and pragmatist", Kiessling argues that Red Bull 
are offering a more permanent kind of investment than anything Saxony has seen 
since the fall of the wall. Fans of more traditional clubs in the region may 
express their disgust with the "plastic club", but in private they'll be proud 
to see an east German team put the frighteners on the traditional clubs from 
the west.

The much-lauded membership system, Kiessling reckons, only exists pro forma 
anyway, and workers' participation takes place via different channels now. "If 
you're a fan and you're not happy with the club hitching up ticket prices, you 
raise your voice on social media these days, not in the members' meetings."

Yet if you look more closely at how RB Leipzig is run, it's hard not to 
conclude that the club takes the commercialisation of football to a new level – 
not just inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, but 
Europe-wide. Other German clubs may be propped up by big business, but there is 
usually a geographical link between the companies and the region where the club 
is based: Volkswagen's offices are in Wolfsburg, software giant SAP is based in 
the next town down the road from Hoffenheim. Red Bull are based in Fischl, 
Austria, and owner Mateschitz has yet to attend a Leipzig match in person.

In the past, investors used to focus on propping up one club, but RB Leipzig 
is part of a global portfolio with clubs in Salzburg, New York, São Paulo and 
Sogakope, Ghana, all playing in the same red-and-white kit. (Rangnick acts as 
sporting director for both Salzburg and Leipzig, and one wonders what will 
happen when two Red Bull clubs face each other in the Champions League).

When Red Bull bought SSV Markranstädt in 2009, their bid to rename the club 
"Red Bull Leipzig" was turned down by the league – but Rasenballsport Leipzig, 
meaning "lawn ball sports", was waved through. In their merchandising, the club 
refer to themselves as Die roten Bullen, so that even the team's nickname 
already advertises the product. It's as if Wolfsburg were known as "The 
Beetles".

In brand management speak, this is known as "content marketing": rather than 
just pay to have their logo on a BMX cyclist's helmet, Red Bull organise the 
race. Rather than just sponsor Felix Baumgartner's parachute, they organise his
spectacular skydive from space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/14/felix-baumgartner-lands-safely-record>
. Rather than sponsor a successful team, they help a team climb from the lower 
leagues into the Champions League and become part of the story.

Up until now, the league association has largely turned a blind eye to 
developments in Leipzig. But there are growing signs that other clubs could try 
to block the club's licence if they get promoted at the end of the season.

Bernd-Georg Spies, vice-president of FC St Pauli, one of Leipzig's potential 
opponents next season, told the Guardian: "When a new club is promoted from the 
third division, it's only right that the German football league association 
examines closely whether that club complies with the letter and spirit of its 
jurisdiction. St Pauli would encourage the football league association to look 
closely at clubs who actively hinder their fans from becoming members with a 
right to vote."

RB Leipzig have until mid-March to hand in their licence application. Should 
the league association reject it, or tighten the 50+1 rule altogether, the 
soft-drink giant could take the matter to court. Either way, the fundamental 
values of German football will be put to the test.
 