
Where death is concerned I am with Woody Allen: I’m not afraid of it; I just 
don’t want to be there when it happens. My desire not to dwell on the subject 
is regularly undermined, however, by the number of people who ask me what my 
death row meal would be. My fear is that they are fantasising less about my 
food choices, and more about me being locked away in a cell contemplating a 
trip to the gallows, for crimes against self-control.

Personally, I think the interest is misplaced. Yes, there have been a few 
interesting last meals, especially President François Mitterrand’s humdinger of 
a blowout before he died of cancer in 1996. The banquet included the song birds 
ortolan. Mitterrand may once have upheld the laws of the Republic but on the 
way out he no longer cared. He indulged in the full ritual surrounding the 
illegal consumption of these birds: drowned in cognac, roasted, then eaten with 
a napkin over your head so the Lord might not see your sin. Those crazy French.

But that one is the exception. The evidence is that, when genuinely faced with 
the request, most people suffer a failure of imagination.The website 
famouslastmeals.com <http://www.famouslastmeals.com/> is one long list of 
boring eating options for serial killers. Velma Barfield, executed in North 
Carolina in 1984, wanted cheese doodles – think giant Wotsits – and a can of 
Coke. Teresa Lewis, executed in 2010, asked for fried chicken (as did many 
others). And then there’sTimothy McVeigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jun/11/mcveigh.usa4>, convicted of the 
Oklahoma federal building bombing in 1995, who wanted two tubs of mint 
chocolate chip ice cream. The fact that all three of these represent comfort 
eating, reaching back towards the certainties of childhood is barely worth 
pointing out.

The choice that intrigues me is Victor Feguer’s 
<http://www.famouslastmeals.com/search/label/Victor%20Feguer>, executed for 
murder in 1963. He asked for a single olive, complete with stone. I think I’d 
go for the same, though I would make one change. I’d lose the olive and make do 
with the empty plate. Here’s the point. The question says one thing – what 
would your death row meal be? – but is heard as another. Very few of us have 
the capacity to imagine what it’s like to be on death row, let alone to have 
committed the crimes that might have got us there. So what we actually hear is: 
if you were offered the chance to eat anything you like, anything at all, 
without a thought for consequences of any kind, what would you choose?

Last orders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2004/mar/14/foodanddrink.features11> 
And those two questions are not the same. The latter is about fantastic 
indulgence, and indulgence is about many things including building memories, 
whether we acknowledge that or not. When we construct a killer dinner party, we 
talk about cooking a meal to remember. We are all of us capable of becoming 
nostalgic for the thing we’re eating even as it disappears from the plate in 
front of us. The problem with death row meals is that all the opportunities for 
hardcore remembering have gone. Come the morning it will all be over.

So when I’m asked the question, I usually oblige by saying spare ribs, partly 
because I really like them, but mostly because they demand my attention. While 
eating them I’ll be able to avoid thinking about what’s to come. But in truth, 
if I was on death row, I would have completely lost my appetite. It turns out 
that there are some things that are more important than dinner, even for me.
 