
Having spent the summer in foreign parts, I was reminded how quintessentially 
British/English the cryptic crossword is. When you pick up a paper or a 
magazine on the continent, you will, of course, often see mots croisés, 
Kreuzworträtsels, palabras cruzadas and the like. But even when these aim to be 
a bit cryptic, they are in fact just quicks, or general knowledge tests.

The newspaper crossword was invented in 1913 by Arthur Wynne, a Liverpool-born 
journalist who had emigrated to the US. He sold his big idea to the New York 
World, but solving crosswords only became a national craze in 1923, when a 
couple of young Harvard graduates who wanted to make money out of publishing 
brought out a book of 50 puzzles that sold more than 750,000 copies overnight. 
They were called Simon and Schuster.

The disease did not spread to this country until 1924, when the same Arthur 
Wynne sold a puzzle to the Sunday Express. By the end of 1930, all British 
newspapers had overcome whatever hesitations they might have had about dumbing 
down, and were running a daily crossword puzzle.

These early puzzles, though, were not cryptic in the sense we know today. The 
cryptic puzzle as such was an evolution, led by Torquemada and Ximenes in the 
Observer, Afrit in the Listener, Akenhead in the Times, and more recently by 
Custos and Araucaria in the Guardian. To this day, American crosswords remain 
in their pre-cryptic state.

The post-1945 cryptic crossword has really only spread beyond these islands to 
those parts of the world that play cricket: Australia, New Zealand, South 
Africa, the Indian subcontinent, and the Caribbean.

Come to think of it, cricket and cryptic crosswords have quite a lot in 
common. They are both governed by laws that are arcane; they heavily depend on 
convention and gentlemanly conduct; they are totally unintelligible to people 
who don't play the game themselves, even after long and patient explanation; 
they can be over quite quickly or drag on for ever, and still end in a draw. 
With both, playing the game is the thing, rather than the result.

No wonder, then, that cryptic crosswords have not taken off in America. 

________________

 The English language is one explanation as to why cryptics have evolved here, 
and not in other parts of the world. First, there is the richness of a language 
that comes from its fusion of Germanic and romance roots, which means that 
there are at least two words in English for virtually every noun, verb and 
adjective.

Second, so many identical words can be either nouns, verbs or adjectives - 
"make a round corner", for instance, is a sentence made up of three such words. 
And third, English is unique in having so many words where both the 
pronunciation and the meaning are entirely dependent on context.

A couple of years ago I started a diversion whereby I noted down such words 
when I came across them. I am now up to a total of over 170. Sometimes the 
pronunciation is totally different, usually with a different vowel value. 
Examples: bass, bow, denier, entrance, flower, gill, lead, lineage, live, 
minute, row, sewer, tower, wind, and wound.

Sometimes moving the stress from one syllable to another changes the word from 
a verb to a noun or an adjective, or even changes its meaning entirely. 
Consider for instance absent, alternate, certificate, close, concert, contest, 
defect, deliberate, drawer, excuse, incline, intimate, moderate, perfect, 
present and second.

All these and many other words like them give the cryptic crossword compiler 
scope to say what he means without meaning what he says, something that is not 
available to those imprisoned in languages where pronunciation and meaning are 
more logical.

________________

I regularly get letters or emails complaining about themed puzzles, especially 
when they are Quicks. The two most common gripes are:

· The theme chosen (plays by Shakespeare, actors who have taken on the role of 
Dr Who, bright stars, French cheeses) was too esoteric;

· Twigging the theme at once, the whole puzzle became ridiculously easy.

It is certainly the case that many of our regular compilers like producing 
puzzles with a theme, partly to ring the changes, and partly because it makes 
filling the grid more of a challenge to them as well. In fact, left to their 
own devices, compilers would probably produce more themed puzzles than I 
presently allow.

I suspect also that solvers are more likely to put pen to paper or fingers to 
keyboard in order to complain, rather than in order to say "keep them coming". 
My instinct, backed only by the odd positive word from a crossword solver that 
I might happen to bump into, is that some themed puzzles, but not too many, 
would be the majority view. But on this, as on anything else to do with our 
crosswords, I should welcome your feedback.
 