
Wigan Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wiganathletic> are rising 
again, with due care and humility after two relegations in three seasons landed 
them in League One last May. Their 15th game in October took them into the 
play-off places, which they have not left since. A run of 11 games unbeaten 
lifted them to second and a 12th on Saturday, a 3-0 win over Bury at the DW 
Stadium, confirmed their position behind only Burton Albion.

It was almost embarrassingly easy. Bury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury> had knocked Wigan out of both 
League and FA Cup and Gary Caldwell, Wigan’s manager, had demanded a high 
tempo. They were two up inside 10 minutes. “It was incredible,” he said.

First Yanic Wildschut robbed Tom Soares and crossed for Will Grigg’s head to 
beat Ian Lawlor’s arms at the near post; the goalkeeper had received two 
minutes’ attention after an even earlier collision. Two minutes later Ryan 
Colclough cut in from the right and thrashed a left-foot shot beyond him and 
inside the far post.

Mission was fully accomplished by the 21st minute when Grigg brushed aside 
Bury’s last man on to a through-ball and was fouled by Lawlor on the linesman’s 
say-so. Grigg converted the penalty, his 12th league goal of the season. David 
Flitcroft, Bury’s manager, said later he had been looking for a central 
defender for a month.

Bury raised a flurry of reaction just before half-time but Jussi Jaaskelainen, 
at 40 no respecter of titles, denied Mayor (Danny) and Pope (Tom), with two 
point-blank saves in three seconds that brought the crowd to a standing 
ovation. When he added another straight after the interval, palming away Ryan 
Lowe’s glancing near-post header, Bury accepted it was not their day and let 
the game peter out with Jaaskelainen and Wigan’s defenders passing the ball 
among themselves unchallenged.

Against such acquiescence there was no need for Wigan to stir themselves, 
though Grigg and Max Power did hit Lawlor’s crossbar, the latter from 
Colclough’s sharp burst and cross.

Those three – Grigg (Brentford), Power (Tranmere) and Colclough (Crewe) – 
reflect the necessarily new Wigan. Saturday’s starters comprised eight signed 
since May, the speedy Wildschut on loan from Middlesbrough and only Chris 
McCann and Jason Pearce of the failing old guard. Almost 20 players left and 20 
came in as the wage bill was cut by 70%.

After faltering in the final stages of an astonishing 20-year journey under 
Dave Whelan from the ashes at Springfield Park, Wigan have recovered their 
touch after his last three managers failed to revive them. Whelan, who remains 
owner, had made plans. This week marks the first anniversary of his stepping 
down as chairman. His grandson, David Sharpe, stepped up a week later. It might 
have looked nepotic madness but he had been duly groomed.

Two years previously Wigan had won the FA Cup on Sharpe’s 22nd birthday. Now 
the club is in the hands of a chairman and manager with only 57 years combined. 
Caldwell, who lifted the cup that day, was appointed last April with five games 
to go. Four points left Wigan seven short. A clear-out and clean start was the 
chosen way.

Sharpe emphasised at once “the need to create a modern and robust player 
recruitment process … inside a sustainable long-term financial framework”. 
Saturday’s men endorsed a system whereby “every targeted player is researched, 
statistically measured and watched in different conditions”.

Sam Morsy, man of the match in front of the back four, was signed from 
Chesterfield last month after Wigan beat them 3-1. His fellow defensive 
midfielder, David Perkins (Blackpool), was a non-stop runner beside him, 
tackling and intercepting. Colclough, a wizard of control and acceleration at 
21, proved himself playing for Crewe against Wigan last month when, targeted 
after the interval and hit by Perkins’ crunching yellow-carded foul, he refused 
to be subdued. He was signed within a week.

Caldwell, a central defender, admits he learned a hard mentality playing for 
Celtic under Gordon Strachan. On Tuesday he takes his team to Millwall, whose 
Jed Wallace was similarly targeted by Peterborough after half-time. Eddie 
Jones, England’s Australian rugby coach, may be picking up his philosophy from
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>.

Millwall, fifth in the current table, were first to beat Caldwell in his 
second match last April, before they came down together from the Championship. 
There are scores to be settled. Matches in the remainder of the season may hang 
on the run of the ball or a referee’s whim but everything at the DW Stadium 
looks in place. For the moment the judges in the Wigan pen are nodding in 
approval.
 