
Wigan won at Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> 
for the first time in the league thanks to a fine display of counterattacking 
at the John Smith’s Stadium on Monday night.

Yanic Wildschut scored one goal and made another for Reece Burke as Wigan 
earned their first win under Warren Joyce. For Huddersfield, who defended 
poorly, it was a fourth game without a victory.

Burke had the freedom of the penalty area when he opened the scoring after 40 
minutes and even when the impressive Aaron Mooy equalised five minutes after 
half-time, Huddersfield failed to learn their lesson.

Wildschut, who had set up the opener, was allowed to run free at Danny Ward 10 
minutes later and kept his head to round the goalkeeper and poke the ball home.

Huddersfield had a penalty appeal turned down when Nahki Wells fell under 
pressure from Luke Garbutt but they could have few complaints after a 
performance that leaves further question marks over their promotion credentials.

David Wagner’s side remain in the playoff places but have won once in seven 
games after a flying start. And while the Huddersfield manager conceded some 
naive defending was complicit in their defeat, he was equally frustrated with 
the performance of referee Tony Harrington. Wagner sought the official after 
the final whistle for clarification on two penalty claims, the one involving 
Wells and another involving Elias Kachunga.

“I only spoke with him to say that I think he had the best views on the Nahki 
situation,” Wagner said. “That I’m not able to see this. But I was sure from my 
point of view that Kachunga’s one was a clear, 100% penalty.

“Our only problem was that we were not good enough to avoid their 
counter-attacks and we got this defeat which hurts. We played some good stuff, 
created moments and played with speed and were energetic. It was a good game 
from my side but unfortunately we didn’t get two penalties.”

Wigan remain in the bottom three but are level on 18 points with Cardiff City. 
Rotherham are last on seven.

Commenting on his team’s victory, Joyce said: “We came here with a plan with 
and without the ball. We worked hard on it in training and executed on the 
night. I’m pleased to get a big three points against a really good side.”
 