
Williams, the cruiserweight Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> team who consistently mix it 
with the heavyweights, reckon they have solved their problems coping with wet 
conditions and slow-speed corners.

The team, who on Friday became the first F1 outfit to reveal details of their 
car, think they have addressed their weaknesses of recent seasons.

Testing, testing: watch out for Ferrari, Red Bull and new kids on the F1 grid 
| Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/18/testing-f1-ferarri-red-bull-mercedes-lewis-hamilton-barcelona-haas>
The chief technical officer, Pat Symonds, said: “The FW37 was a pretty 
effective car and so we concentrated on understanding the areas where we could 
improve it without losing the attributes which made it effective.

“It is no secret the low-speed performance of the FW37 didn’t match its 
high-speed performance so a lot of time was spent looking into why this was and 
making changes, which we hope will improve the situation.

“On top of this we looked at the normal physical obstacles to development that 
one always meets during the life of a car and tried to push those barriers 
back.”

The popular British team’s FW38 features new sidepods and air intakes but 
retains its traditional red, white and blue stripes.

The founder and team principal, Frank Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>, said: “Williams has started to 
cement our position back amongst the front running teams after finishing third 
in the championship in the past two seasons.

“This has been a great achievement given the resources of those around us. 
Staying where we are will be a challenge in itself but we are determined to 
keep improving because only winning will ever be good enough.

“We have a very stable team going into 2016, with Felipe Massa and Valtteri 
Bottas teaming up for a third successive season. They work well together and 
both have the ideal blend of speed and consistency.

“Our technical team has also remained very consistent which will be to our 
advantage and we have some of the best engineering minds on the grid at our 
disposal.”

Massa said: “Securing third in the constructors’ championship for two 
consecutive years is a great achievement and one that comes with a lot of 
expectation – a momentum which I am excited to build on going into the new 
season.

“I have a lot of confidence in the team at Williams and I’m looking forward to 
getting behind the wheel of the FW38 to see how it performs.

“I’m equally delighted to be team-mates with Valtteri for another year. He is 
a very talented driver who brings a lot to the team.”

The car will hit the track for the first time in testing in Barcelona, 
starting on Monday.
 