
The British fans at Silverstone had the winner they wanted in Lewis Hamilton 
but they were treated to one of the best races of the season largely courtesy 
of the resurgence of another much-loved home-grown racing operation in the form 
of Williams. For a time it even looked like the world champion would be denied 
his third victory here by the team that have not won theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> since 1997 – also the 
last year they won the title.

When Felipe Massa made a blistering start and passed Hamilton and Nico Rosberg 
from third on the grid and his team-mate Valtteri Bottas claimed second after 
Hamilton had overcooked it trying to pass Massa following a brief safety car 
period, the unthinkable had happened and there was aWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> rather than a Mercedes one-two at 
the front of a Grand Prix in 2015. It was the shot in the arm the sport so 
needed and for 20 laps the glory days of the Oxfordshire-based team, which has 
won seven drivers’ world championships, were suddenly stronger, sharper 
memories. Although the two Mercedes were keeping them within arms length, the 
chance that they might claim a memorable home win seemed truly possible.

But Hamilton is a determined foe who was not going to let sentimentality get 
in the way of more championship points. Despite radio calls asking the Williams 
drivers not to race one another in the opening laps they were, as is the team’s 
ethos then free to go at it and they did, with Bottas climbing all over his 
team‑mate. He could not pass however and Hamilton had stayed in touch, enough 
indeed to take the lead when he came in for the undercut on lap 19.

Lewis Hamilton wins British F1 GP from Nico Rosberg at damp Silverstone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/lewis-hamilton-wins-british-f1-gp-nico-rosberg>
Massa and Bottas had stayed ahead of Rosberg through the only stop however and 
despite being told to push, the German could not get past. Williams had spent 
Friday practice working on race pace particularly on the hard tyre they were 
now using and it was paying off. A second and third place, still a fantastic 
result, looked on the cards. But motor sport is a cruel mistress and having 
done so much to put on a great show, the team were to be denied.

The late rain, that again even further enlivened what had already been a 
rapturously received race by the 140,000 fans, was not welcomed by Williams. 
Their car underperforms in the wet, in direct contrast to the Mercedes which 
has a downforce advantage in greasy conditions. Rosberg cleared both cars to 
take second and then, staying out one lap too long as the real downpour began, 
allowed Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, ever vigilant to changing conditions, to 
nip in and take third. Their potential one-two had fallen to a fourth and fifth 
and while the show had been brilliant, the result for the team and many of 
their British fans here, was disappointing.

Rob Smedley, who had been Massa’s race engineer when the driver was at Ferrari 
and is now the head of vehicle performance at Williams, accepted that it had 
been hard. “We want to come here and race and win and to get both cars on the 
podium,” he said. “It hasn’t happened and so therefore of course as we are all 
racers, we are all disappointed. We come here because we want to win. That’s 
why we get out of bed in the morning.”

Yet their performance is ultimately good news for the team and the sport. They 
cannot match the Mercedes for pace yet but they have proved that they can get 
among them and mix it. On the hard tyres, in the dry – the level playing field 
– they looked hard to pass and Hamilton did all but clamber over the top of 
Massa at one point. Indeed, Massa noted that: “It could even have been possible 
to win the race if it had stayed dry, which is great to see”. And it is 
reasonable to assume there is more to come. The Mercedes power unit they use is 
clearly solid and last season they out-developed their rivals to claim third in 
the championship.

At the race in Bahrain Pat Symonds, the chief technical officer, had said it 
was their firm intent to do so again this year and the upgrades they brought to 
Austria are already paying off. “The weekend has been really really positive,” 
said Smedley. “All the upgrades and development has worked really, really well. 
It is the first weekend since the start of the season where we have been 
clearly faster than our closest competitor, Ferrari. What is clear is that in 
the dry we were the second quickest car here and very clearly the second 
quickest car.”

They now trail Ferrari by 60 points in the constructors’ championship, a 
figure that would have been considerably lower had fate not intervened. Should 
they catch the Scuderia, second place in the championship will be their best 
result since 2003. After what was Williams’s lowest ebb just two years ago, 
when they scored only five championship points and finished ninth ahead of only 
Marussia and Caterham, that might be just enough of a fairytale finish to 
overcome the overwhelming sense of what might have been at their home grand 
prix.
 