
Finland’s Valtteri Bottas and the Brazilian Felipe Massa will be racing for 
Williams again next season, the Formula One team said on Thursday in an 
announcement that ends speculation about the possible return ofJenson Button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jenson-button>.

“Stability is key for any team to thrive in Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>,” said the team’s principal, 
Frank Williams, in a statement at the Italian Grand Prix.

“So to be able to enter a third season with one of the strongest driver 
lineups on the grid putsWilliams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> 
in a fantastic position to continue its momentum towards the front of the grid 
in 2016.”

F1 without Monza on the schedule simply wouldn’t be F1 | Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/27/f1-monza-schedule-contract-2016-grand-prix>
The decision means yet another unchanged lineup among the leading teams, with 
the champions Mercedes and Ferrari having confirmed their drivers and both Red 
Bull men under long-term contracts.

Bottas had been strongly linked to Ferrari as a likely replacement for his 
compatriot Kimi Raikkonen until the Italian team confirmed the 2007 world 
champion would be staying with them for another year.

There had also been speculation that the 2009 world champion Button could move 
from McLaren, who are having a dreadful season and have younger drivers 
knocking on the door, to Williams, where he started his career in 2000.

Bottas could still be in the frame to move to Maranello in 2017, however, with 
the statement referring only to next year.

“I am really pleased to be staying with the team for a fourth F1 race season,” 
said the 26-year-old, who took a third place in Canada earlier this season.

“We have been getting stronger as a team and I look forward to what next year 
will bring, as I believe we can achieve even stronger results than what we have 
seen so far.”

Massa, 34, had been expected to stay after joining from Ferrari in 2013. The 
Brazilian remains the last non-Mercedes works driver to take a pole position, 
in Austria last year, and has been on the podium four times for Williams.

“They respect me a lot and the results are there, and it has been so nice to 
be part of the big turnaround the team has seen since the end of 2013,” he said.

Williams are third overall, where they finished last season, after scoring 
only five points and ending up ninth in 2013.

“Both drivers have played a pivotal role in the rejuvenation of Williams,” 
said Frank Williams. “The successes we’ve enjoyed over the past two seasons 
would not have been possible without them.”

Button had been linked with a romantic move back to Williams next season, but 
Williams, the team principal, revealed he was delighted to retain Massa and 
Bottas for another campaign.

“I’m delighted to confirm that Felipe and Valtteri will be racing for Williams 
once again next year,” said Williams.

“Stability is key for any team to thrive in Formula One, so to be able to 
enter a third season with one of the strongest driver lineups on the grid puts 
Williams in a fantastic position to continue its momentum towards the front of 
the grid in 2016.”
 