
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> moved closer to a 
brave new world in 2017 with the confirmation from Williams that Canada’s Lance 
Stroll will become the youngest driver on the grid next season. Stroll, 18 last 
week and who does not have a road licence, will replace Felipe Massa, who is 
retiring after a 15-year career in F1.

Bernie Ecclestone, 87 next year, remains in place for now as the sport’s chief 
executive officer but with new regulations, faster cars, new owners in Liberty 
Media and a younger look to the grid, F1 is already freshening up for next 
season.

Sebastian Vettel escapes punishment for expletive-laden F1 Mexican GP outburst
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/sebastian-vettel-escapes-punishment-expletive-laden-rant-f1>
In the summer it was announced Stoffel Vandoorne would replace Jenson Button 
at McLaren, while Max Verstappen, who was only 17 when he made his debut last 
year, is now one of the stars of the paddock.

Stroll should help invigorate a Williams team who have stagnated. After 
overachieving in 2014 and 2015 – they finished third in the constructors’ 
championship on each occasion – they are fifth this season. The team were in 
need of some fresh paint – Valtteri Bottas has been there since 2010, 
originally as a test driver, while Massa is bringing down the curtain on a long 
career in F1, the past three atWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>.

Stroll, the European Formula Three champion,will become F1’s first Canadian 
driver since Jacques Villeneuve, who won the world title in 1997. He joined 
Williams’s young-driver programme a year ago and is a former Ferrari junior 
driver. Unsurprisingly, he has a rich father – Lawrence Stroll is a billionaire 
businessman.

Claire Williams, the deputy team principal, said: “Lance joined the Williams 
young-driver programme at the end of 2015 and has impressed our engineers with 
his maturity, talent and enthusiasm. We are pleased to be able to offer him the 
opportunity to step up and show what he can do in Formula One, after proving a 
dominant force in all the categories he has raced in so far.

“He is still young, and we looking forward to seeing him develop as a driver. 
Williams has a great record of introducing young drivers to Formula One, who 
have achieved great results, and we hope this will be the start of a long, 
successful career for Lance as well.”

Stroll, who dominated Formula Three this year, winning the title by more than 
100 points, said: “I can’t thank Williams enough for showing faith in my 
ability.

“Racing in F1 was something I dreamed about as a kid. When I began karting 
seriously, F1 was then the ultimate goal and especially when I started racing 
cars in 2014.

“It is going to be really amazing. Being in Melbourne and being in Montreal 
will be an exceptional feeling. I’m happy to be on the grid. To be honest I 
don’t think it has quite sunk in yet. I have been focused on F3.”

The Williams team principal and founder, Sir Frank Williams, has been 
discharged from hospital after recovering from pneumonia. Williams, 74, who has 
led his team to seven driver’s titles and nine constructors’ championships, 
contracted pneumonia shortly after the Italian Grand Prix .

Clare Williams, his daughter, said: “He has been in hospital ever since the 
start of September. It was a slow recovery but I am really pleased to say he is 
pretty much back to the Frank we know and love.”
 