
This was a wholly fitting summation of the thrill that has been Antonio 
Conte’s first six months at Chelsea, a frenzy of a contest to see out the year 
with the leaders, untouchable since the end of September, savouring a 13th 
victory in succession.Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> offered far more of a test of 
the leaders’ credentials than plenty of others in that sequence but still ended 
defeated, even if there was no disgrace in that. It is more than three months 
since anyone found a way of checking this team. They appear unstoppable.

Paul Pogba caps dramatic fightback to save Manchester United’s winning run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/manchester-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
The next side to try will be Tottenham Hotspur, bitter rivals still smarting 
from thecritical damage inflicted to last season’s title challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/03/tottenham-hotspur-lose-control-mousa-dembele-gouge>
 here back in May, but they will do well to contain them.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were pegged back twice 
by an impressive Stoke team, the hosts’ back-line unnerved by Peter Crouch, but 
the leaders’ self-confidence never wavered. They continued to sweep forward, 
convinced those forays would yield reward, and, eventually, buried Stoke’s 
intent beneath a two-goal lead.

It was Diego Costa who settled the occasion, thrashing home a wonderful 14th 
club goal of the term from a tight angle after turning Bruno Martins Indi five 
minutes from time. Only then could Conte skip down the touchline in delight in 
the knowledge the day was truly won.

“When you win a lot in a row, there is a great danger to be satisfied too 
early,” he said. “It’s not easy to show the character and reaction, above all 
after 12 wins in a row. After their second equaliser, we could easily be 
relaxed and think that, in the end, we’ve won a lot in the past so a draw, if 
we don’t win, is not important. But my players showed a great will to fight, a 
great will to win, a great will to take this great achievement for us. I’m 
pleased for them and they deserve this.”

This equalled the record for consecutive victories within a single season and 
another at White Hart Lane on Wednesday would bring Chelsea level with Arsenal 
for the all-time winning tally – set over two campaigns – of 14. Conte has made 
clear he cares little for such statistical achievements though, in the context 
of last season’s toils and this side’s apparent shortcomings in the autumn, the 
sequence already feels remarkable. It is astonishing to think they have dropped 
eight points by the season’s halfway point, and played in a fashion which has 
provoked admiration rather than envy from most onlookers. The challenge will 
change from now on in.

“We started this season as underdogs, underestimated,”said Conte. “But now the 
light is on Chelsea. We’ll have to work harder still to find, game by game, the 
right solution and carry on winning. It won’t be easy but, today, we are very 
happy.”

This had been a real test of their credentials. Stoke were awkward opponents, 
Crouch unsettling a back three who had only previously been breached twice in 
12 matches. It was the former England striker who leapt above Gary Cahill and 
nodded Charlie Adam’s deep free-kick back across goal for Martins Indi to 
volley the visitors level 55 seconds into the second period.

The 35-year-old forward would be rewarded himself just after the hour-mark 
with his team’s second equaliser, side-footed in from the edge of the six-yard 
box from Mame Diouf’s centre after N’Golo Kanté had missed his kick with the 
home side’s rearguard, initially shrinking from Crouch, pulled out of position 
by the substitute Bojan’s dart into enemy territory.

There were other awkward moments when Chelsea threatened to conceded again. 
Yet, where Stoke intent could never be questioned, their defending proved more 
accommodating.

Mark Hughes was left to bemoan the winner – “a throw-in which bounced in our 
six-yard box” – and the lapse of concentration that led to parity squandered 
immediately on the second occasion the visitors drew level, but acknowledged 
the opponents were devastating on the break.

Lee Grant’s superb reactions had frustrated the home side for a while, but 
some of the fragility that blighted Stoke’s start to the season has crept back 
in of late. Too many of Chelsea’s rewards were easily achieved.

Andre Gray grabs hat-trick as Burnley leave Sunderland floundering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/burnley-sunderland-premier-league-match-report-andre-gray>
Cahill’s header from Cesc Fàbregas’ corner had forced them ahead, though it 
was Willian who would edge them back in front twice thereafter. Victor Moses’s 
flash of skill dumped Erik Pieters on the turf, the wing-back’s cross touched 
into the Brazilian’s path by Eden Hazard and the left-foot finish unerring.

His second came from Fàbregas’s 100th Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> assist, a pass placed 
inside Pieters that Willian hammered home.

He had been Chelsea’s player of the year in last season’s toils and having 
initially lost his place after being granted compassionate leave following the 
death of his mother he is now back to his best.

“We all know the difficult period through which he passed. So I’m pleased for 
him,” said Conte. “He’s a really good guy and deserves this.”

This whole squad will go into the new year buoyed. Theirs is an air of 
invincibility at present.
 