
We know very little about the demographics of those of you who do the Guardian 
crosswords, beyond that you seem to be pretty much 50:50 male and female and 
that your ages are spread pretty evenly from, say, 25 upwards. I meet from time 
to time one or two punters who regularly do the Cryptic puzzles and am by now 
more or less inured to their barbed comments. But, as I think I have written 
before, the only Quick solver who I see regularly is a stepson, a Brighton and 
Hove primary school teacher, who is so pleased when he manages to complete a 
Quick successfully that he tears out the page and dances round the room, 
wearing it and singing.

So it was a delight to get an email from Jessica Spake, an astronomer at 
Warwick University, passing on the following information. Every weekday at 
lunch time a group of about 10 astronomers at Warwick print out and try to 
solve the Quick crossword together. If they manage to complete it without 
Googling (or otherwise cheating), they put it up, using Blu-Tack, on a 'Victory 
Wall' in their office.

In the photograph Jessica sent last month as evidence, there were 31 trophy 
Quicks displayed on the wall, next to a dramatic image of NGC 3603 (for 
non-astronomers, New General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars). No 
3603 is an open cluster of stars in the Carina spiral arm of the Milky Way, 
about 20,000 light years away from the solar system, and was first observed by 
Sir John Herschel, the German-born British mathematician and polymath, on a 
visit in 1834 to Cape Town to study the sky of the southern hemisphere.

The Warwick group consists of around 10 PhD students and researchers, ranging 
in age from 22 to 30 years old, with one older outlier of about 45. Two 
professors also occasionally pop in to help.

As to the data, Jessica did not say over what period the 31 hit results were 
accumulated and the images are too small for me to be able to read the puzzle 
serial numbers. However, she volunteered the information that, when the group 
first started, a puzzle took them most of their lunch break, but now, with 
practice they have got their best time down to seven minutes. That kind of 
timing puts them in the same league as those who claim to have done the Quick 
online by 00:05 and then comment under the grid (the puzzle having gone up, on 
a good day, at midnight but, in practice, often several minutes later) that 
they found that day's puzzle a bit harder than usual!
_____
A final related fact about astronomers: the professional crossword world is 
deeply in debt to one Antony Lewis, who invented and runs Crossword Compiler, 
which is by far the best crossword software package on the market. His day job 
is as a cosmologist, formerly at Cambridge, Toronto and Harvard, but now at 
Sussex University.
_____
I apologise for not being able to give you the final number of those who sent 
in entries for the last month's Genius (No 139 set by Brummie) but I still do 
not have access to the 'temporary' file to which your entries are going. 
However, congratulations to the January winner, Jane Gore of St Felix de 
Villadeix in France.

Some of you also noticed that there was an error with the originally published 
grid for the February Genius (No 140 set by Paul), which was not corrected 
until Wednesday 4 February. Entries made on basis of the original grid may, 
therefore, be difficult to check. So those who sent in entries before noon on 
Wednesday 4 February are invited to submit second entries. Everything submitted 
after noon that day on the basis of the correct grid will be OK.

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> . If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>
 