Murray Walker The pressure in the commentary box is enormous, because you have 
two pretty big egos. There is always the danger that someone will want to hog 
the microphone. But I have great respect for Martin, and I hope he thinks the 
same of me, so it doesn't happen too often. We have a signalling system and, 
broadly speaking, I do the continuity and he does the comment, using his 
specialist knowledge to interject.
We both have our own ways of preparing for a race. I beaver away like mad. 
I've been commentating for 51 years and have a hell of a lot in my head, but my 
life is still a constant round of talking to mechanics, engineers, drivers, 
sponsors, team owners, managers and other journalists in the hope I can use 
some of it in the race. When I get to the circuit, I walk the track to see if 
there are any changes from last year. Then we get on with preparing 
magazine-style stories for our Murray And Martin Show.

I first met Martin in the early Eighties when he was a touring car driver, but 
particularly in 1983, when he had a fantastic season-long battle against Ayrton 
Senna. Anyone who could hold a candle to Senna, and subsequently Michael 
Schumacher in the same team at Benetton, has to be one of the very best. In 
1995, Martin was driving part-time in the LigierFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> team, and when he wasn't 
driving, the BBC used him as a third commentator in the box. In my opinion, 
Martin is the finest commentator I've ever worked with. He's one of those rare 
sportsmen who can talk knowledgeably, authoritatively, entertainingly and with 
a sense of humour about what he does so well.

I was in a tank regiment in the army during the War, and when I came out, I 
started racing motorcycles with the desire to be as good as my father [Graham 
Walker]. It very rapidly became clear that I never would be. I was also making 
headway in a career in advertising. One of my campaigns was: 'A Mars a day 
helps you work, rest and play.' So I chucked the racing and started talking 
about it. I got an audition with BBC Radio in 1948, and then was asked if I'd 
like to be one of the commentators at the next British Grand Prix at 
Silverstone in 1949. I also did my first television broadcast in 1949, with my 
father who was then the BBC's top commentator on motorcycle racing. We worked 
together for 13 years as a father and son team. As far as I know, we are the 
only father and son team the BBC has ever had.

It's no secret now that I'm 75 years old and nearer the end of my career than 
the beginning. I adore commentating, and I won't stop unless I'm asked or I 
feel I'm flagging. You need physical and mental stamina because it is a tiring 
and stressful job. I go to a lot of trouble to stay fit. I visit a health club 
twice a week. I'm a bit of a legend in ITV circles because I go to bed at 
10.30pm, come what may. I go to bed when the rest of the crew is getting ready 
to go out for dinner. I'd like to go partying with them, but I know that if I 
do, I'll be like a piece of chewed string the next day. My wife went everywhere 
with me for 12 years, but she got fed up with waiting around in hotel rooms. 
It's not a woman's cup of tea.

Martin Brundle Murray really does get as excited as he sounds. He leaps around 
and paces and sways, particularly just before a race starts. Last year at 
Monaco, we were chatting away for 20 minutes before the qualifying session, 
talking about nothing in particular, when all of a sudden we came back from a 
commercial break and Murray started: 'And my heart is pounding on the inside of 
my ribs...' I thought, 'Where on earth did he get that from?'

Murray is exactly what people are looking for in a commentator. If you doubt 
how good he is, turn down the volume, start talking and see how far you get 
before you dry up. Always having to say something, and making it perfectly 
correct, no matter what is happening, is a difficult job. I've started 158 
Grand Prix and been racing for 25 years, so I have a lot of experience, and all 
I do is pass that over. But working with such a professional makes the job much 
easier. Murray gives me thinking time during the race, instead of having my 
head in the microphone the whole time.

I used to find it very difficult to criticise the drivers. I still view myself 
as one - I've driven at some point in my career for seven of the 11 teams in 
Formula One. I've either been a team-mate with, or raced against, or nearly had 
a fight with almost all the drivers. I am also still a significant part of 
David Coulthard's management team. But I don't find it difficult to be 
impartial. As long as I'm accurate and say something I can back up, I'm OK.

It's been 51 years for Murray. I can't see me doing that. But I hope we'll 
have a few more years together. I enjoy driving, the management side, and I 
have a family. I live out of the country three months a year and also have a 
family home in Yorkshire. Murray is on the South Coast, so we don't drop in for 
tea. But we see each other at official functions. I have a busy life beyond 
commentating. I'd love the time to do more motorcycling and skiing.

Thoughts that I'd rather be out there driving are fading. I do still drive at 
the 24-hour race at Le Mans. Certainly, at Monaco a couple of months ago, I 
would have adored to be on the grid. When it comes to doing 220mph in the 
pouring rain, no way. I'm 40 years old, so there's no chance I'll race in 
Formula One again. I've never really lost the desire to drive, so I can't 
relate to Damon Hill. He has temporarily run out of steam, but I guess he's got 
a few shillings and he's like any normal family man: he doesn't want to take 
risks any more. I'm delighted for fans that he is racing at Silverstone today. 
It's a highly technical circuit, so I predict a McLaren or Ferrari will win.
 