
The walls are wobbling at the big red house called Ferrari. The most important 
team inFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> had three 
victories last year, when they finished second in the constructors’ 
championship, and were expected to mount a serious challenge to Mercedes’ 
hegemony this year. But after 11 rounds the Prancing Horse are still looking 
for their first win of the season, 154 points behind Mercedes and a single 
point ahead of third-placed Red Bull, who appear resurgent.

A big piece of paper is required to list the problems at Ferrari. They have 
issues with their aerodynamics, their chassis, their strategy, their qualifying 
and their ability to get the most from their tyres. The engine is strong but 
you would expect that fromFerrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> – 
it’s just everything else that is proving difficult.

Crucially, there has been a development failure with their aero and chassis. 
There is, however, also the persevering notion that politics and management are 
more dominant than the engineering side of things.

Nico Rosberg thrills German GP fans by pipping Lewis Hamilton to pole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/nico-rosberg-pole-german-gp-lewis-hamilton>
It feels a little uncomfortably like 2014, when Ferrari failed to win a single 
race and were disrupted bythe departure of their chairman, Luca di Montezemolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/10/ferrari-president-luca-di-montezemolo-leave-criticism>
. There followed two changes of team principal in 12 months beforethe arrival 
of Maurizio Arrivabene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/24/ferrari-marco-mattiacci-maurizio-arrivabene-f1>
.

The 59-year-old grey-haired Italian has recently pleaded with critics and the 
media alike to let the team “work in peace”. Fat chance of that, the team being 
Italy’s motor sporting obsession. Ferrari will be granted peace only when they 
start winning again, as they did so regularly in the first half-dozen years of 
the century.

But following the departure last week of their highly respected technical 
director James Allison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/ferarri-technical-director-james-allison-leaves-team>
, they must refocus before they can move forward once more. Allison’s second 
stint at Maranello lasted just three years. He probably was not there long 
enough to make the profound changes that were needed. It was only two years ago 
that he took overall charge of technical matters. At least he brought some 
order to a disorganised team.

However, the 48-year-old Englishman now needs the freedom to spend time with 
his children following the sudden death of his wife from meningitis in March, 
which sent the entire Ferrari team into a period of mourning. Allison has been 
replaced by Mattia Binotto, the team’s old engine boss.

Jock Clear, Ferrari’s head of racing activities, says: “The team is going to 
have to work hard to cover the gaps – Mattia will need help and we have to pull 
together. There is no suggestion he can step into the role James was doing and 
cover the background but Ferrari is committed to pulling together in the areas 
where James was strong. A man of his calibre is going to be missed.”

But there is a feeling that Ferrari are turning their back on Allison’s 
greatest legacy and going back to their bad old ways – concentrating all their 
efforts on this year’s car when they should have at least one eye on the 
challenges of 2017.

Arrivabene said recently: “It is crazy to talk about next year – we need to 
focus on this year.” But Allison told me last year: “If I had to be immodest, 
the main contribution I’ve made has been to break out of the vicious circus 
Ferrari were in, which was to start the year with not the best car and then 
throw all efforts behind that car, having a quixotic assault on a championship 
that was already lost. We were robbing the future Peter to pay the present 
Paul. You pay enormously if you ignore the future.”

Strange though it is to say about an organisation that makes some of the most 
breathtaking road cars on the planet, Ferrari are an innately conservative 
racing team. There is little evidence of the invention and creative flair seen 
at Red Bull and Mercedes in recent years.

Even when they get it right they find a way to foul things up. Bad strategy 
calls probably cost Sebastian Vettel victory in Melbourne and Montreal. There 
have been others, but these were the most striking examples. In Australia, on a 
restart, they sent Vettel – who was leading the race – out on super-soft tyres, 
so ensuring that he would have to stop again. By contrast, Mercedes’ Nico 
Rosberg was shod with mediums and romped to victory. Then in Canada Ferrari 
again threw away Vettel’s lead when the virtual safety car came into play.

The decision to retain Kimi Raikkonen for next year showed a certain lack of 
adventure; the taciturn Finn is almost 37 and not quite as good as he was, 
despite some impressive work this year. Gary Anderson, now a pundit but who 
once ran Jordan, has the solution. “If they had Ross Brawn as technical manager 
and Adrian Newey as technical director they’d be OK. They have lost something 
on the engineering side and that’s what makes a car successful. You can have 
the best management in the world but the engineering side is what counts.”
 