
Wolves have been taken over for £45m by a Chinese group, Fosun International, 
the club has announced.

The Championship side have been up for sale since 2015 and Fosun is to pump up 
to £30m into the club over the next two years as part of the deal.

The investment group has links with the super-agent Jorge Mendes who 
represents José Mourinho and Cristiano Ronaldo and has stakes in the travel 
agent Thomas Cook, among other interests.

Fosun will have a football board of four people with Jeff Shi, who led the 
negotiations on behalf of Fosun, becoming the club’s representative. Sky Sun 
will join him with two local businessmen John Bowater and John Gough remaining 
as non-executive board members.

Football League investigates Nottingham Forest takeover bid by banned tycoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/football-league-investigates-nottingham-forest-takeover-bid-banned-tycoon>
“We are delighted to have completed the deal to become the new owners of such 
a famous and historic club as Wolves,” said Shi.

“Football is enjoying a huge growth in China and, of course, is England’s 
national sport. As part of our strategy, it makes perfect sense to buy a great 
football club.

“Our goal is crystal clear: we will do our very best to help take Wolves back 
to the Premier League as soon as possible and to stay there. We believe the 
club and the fans belong at the top of English football and getting there is 
our first and top priority.”

The chief executive Jez Moxey has been managing the club on a day-to-day basis 
but will leave in three months after overseeing the transition and Wolves are 
looking for his replacement.

The former owner Steve Morgan bought Wolves for £10 from Sir Jack Hayward  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/may/21/newsstory.wolverhamptonwanderersfootball>
in 2007 with the promise of investing £30m into the club.

He added: “It is the right time to be handing the baton on to someone else to 
take Wolves forward, and to that end I am delighted to have completed the 
transfer in ownership to Fosun International Group.

“Leaving the right legacy is hugely important to me and I am delighted that as 
part of my deal with Fosun they have made a commitment to invest between 
£20-£30m over the next two years into the club.”

The future of the manager Kenny Jackett, who is currently in Ireland with the 
squad, is now in doubt. The 54-year-old is understood to have told the team 
earlier this month that the takeover was going ahead and he had been given no 
assurances over his future.

Wolves finished last season 14th in the Championship, their second season back 
in the division after winning League One in 2014.
 