
Paul Lambert secured his first win as Wolverhampton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves> manager with a 2-1 victory over 
Queens Park Rangers in the Sky Bet Championship at Loftus Road.

The former Norwich and Aston Villa manager took over after Walter Zenga’s 
departure on 5 November and had managed only a draw and a defeat from his 
opening two games but his side’s task was made easier whenQPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> were reduced to 10 men after 35 
minutes when James Perch was shown his second yellow card of the game. Wolves 
broke the deadlock on the hour through Dave Edwards’s first-time shot before 
doubling their lead six minutes later through a fine solo effort from Hélder 
Costa.

The home side battled back in the last 10 minutes and mustered a consolation 
goal when defender Joel Lynch beat the substitute goalkeeper Andy Lonergan.

Both managers had made changes to their starting XIs with the QPR manager Ian 
Holloway,another recent appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/ian-holloway-qpr-returning-manager-loftus-road>
, swapping out three players following the 3-0 loss to Ipswich and Lambert 
changing five, including the goalkeeper Carl Ikeme who went off injured late on 
after pulling up while about to take a goal-kick.

QPR had a strong shout for a penalty just before the half-hour mark when the 
ball appeared to touch the arm of the Wolves defender Matt Doherty but the 
officials waved away the appeals.

The hosts looked to be in control of the game but it was turned on his head 
after 35 minutes when Perch was sent off for a second yellow card. The 
31-year-old, who had been booked early in the match for dissent, brought down 
Doherty with a mistimed lunge and the referee Tim Robinson had no hesitation in 
issuing a second booking.

Wolves, who had been without a league win in nine gamescorrect, tried to make 
the most of their numerical advantage yet it was the home side that started the 
second half the stronger.

As the 10 men of QPR began to tire however Wolves picked up their attack and 
on the stroke of the hour mark the visitors finally made the extra man count. 
Dominic Iorfa made a run down the wing and his cross into the box fell to 
Edwards whose first-time volley passed several players on its way into the goal.

The midfielder went close to a second just five minutes later but his shot was 
blocked by a low diving save from Alex Smithies, but just a minute later Wolves 
doubled their lead. Hélder Costa collected the ball outside the area and after 
dummying the QPR defenders twice, found the bottom corner.

The game looked won but QPR found an extra burst of power and in the 90th 
minute the defender Joel Lynch gave Holloway’s men a glimmer of hope when his 
shot beat the substitute keeper, Andy Lonergan. But, despite the game reaching 
a 99th minute, QPR could not find a leveller.
 