
Paul Lambert felt his Wolves side looked full of confidence as they stunned 
Stoke 2-0 in theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. Wolves 
ended their wretched recent Cup record thanks to well-taken goals from Hélder 
Costa and Matt Doherty, who sealed the upset 10 minutes from time with a lovely 
free-kick. It was a first victory in the competition since 2011 – the year that 
Stoke made the final under Tony Pulis.

Lambert took over as manager  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/07/wolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby>
at the Championship club at the start of November but he thinks he is beginning 
to put his mark on the team.

The Scot admits a lot of work still lies ahead but if he can carry on in the 
same vein then the future looks bright. “I thought we were great, I really did, 
right from the off,” said Lambert. “The whole performance from start to finish 
was terrific and we could have been two or three up before we even scored. We 
look like a team that’s full of confidence at the minute.

Tom Ince hits winner as Derby fight back to shock West Bromwich Albion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/west-bromwich-albion-derby-county-fa-cup-match-report>
“You need time to put your stamp on things, you’re never going to do it within 
three or four weeks. You won’t even do it in three or four months, you need 
about a full season to get your point across properly. But there is an 
accumulation of things now happening at the club.

“We’ve been working hard on certain things and there’s a lot of confidence in 
the group, a lot of good play and a lot of young players coming through and 
involved. It’s a lot better place now than when I came in, that’s for sure.

“But we need to keep going. Wolves is a big club with a big fan base and I 
think they can recognise now what can happen. We have a good young side who are 
still growing and who will take another few years to hit their full potential, 
some of them, but the future is very good.”

Wolves looked sharper than their Premier League hosts from the outset and 
twice in the opening 10 minutes Jon Dadi Bodvarsson burst forward down the 
right before sending efforts narrowly wide of the far post.

Costa made the breakthrough after 29 minutes, cutting inside on the edge of 
the area and, after riding a challenge from Marko Arnautovic, fired a shot into 
the bottom corner of the net, giving goalkeeper Lee Grant no chance.

Some home fans booed their team off at half-time and Mark Hughes obviously was 
not happy with what he had seen in the first half either as he made two changes 
at the break, with Giannelli Imbula and Bojan Krkic replaced by Joe Allen and 
Charlie Adam.

Krkic was already frustrated by a lack of starts, with a move away being 
mooted, and his representatives recently met Hughes to discuss the matter. 
Whether this was the Spaniard’s last appearance for Stoke remains to be seen. 
Hughes said: “You can read into Bojan and Imbula, they weren’t making an impact 
and we needed to change things. That’s the top and bottom of it.”

Stoke were much better in the second half and it took fine goalkeeping from 
Carl Ikeme to prevent them getting back into the tie, with Arnautovic, Ibrahim 
Afellay, Peter Crouch and Allen all thwarted.

Steve Morison sets Millwall on way to shock win over Bournemouth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/millwall-bournemouth-fa-cup-match-report>
Their hopes were dashed in the 80th minute when Bruno Martins Indi gave away a 
needless free-kick on the edge of his own area. Doherty clipped his shot 
perfectly over the wall and beyond Lee Grant’s reach and into the net.

Hughes said: “We lost the game on the first half. The strength of the team we 
put out should have been capable of getting a result.

“You need luck, and their keeper made several saves, but ultimately we weren’t 
good enough on the day and we have to give them credit.

“We wanted a Cup run, sadly that’s not the case and that’s disappointing. We 
need to pick ourselves up and get our act together next week now.” 
 