
Chelsea

Manager Emma Hayes

Speak to the Chelsea players and they’ll tell you that they love playing for 
Emma. I worked with her at Arsenal for a couple of years when she assisted Vic 
Akers and, like everyone else, found her to be a great coach – always 
forward-thinking and dedicated to improving herself and her players. That is 
exactly what we have seen atChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> since she took over in 2012 – 
they have not stopped evolving as a team.

How they will play

Chelsea will look for goals from the off. Emma loves the attacking game and is 
not shy about saying it, so the plan will be to get the ball as quickly as 
possible to players such as Gemma Davison, Eni Aluko andJi So-yun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/30/chelsea-ji-so-yun-fa-cup>. 
They have great firepower but showed with theirrecent signing of Fran Kirby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/08/england-fran-kirby-chelsea-reading-record-fee>
 from Reading that they are still building on their attacking threat.

Players to watch

Chelsea have a number of players who worked with Emma at Arsenal, and their 
experience of FA Cup finals will be important. One of them, Katie Chapman, is a 
midfield battler who has done the unseen, dirty work brilliantly throughout her 
career and is a key player for them. Niamh Fahey and Gilly Flaherty, at the 
back, are also well schooled in winning trophies from their Arsenal days.

Claire Rafferty, a forward-thinking left back, is a long-serving player who 
will also be very important. She recovered from injury to perform superbly for 
England at the World Cup. Ahead of her is perhaps the star of the show.

Ji is a wonderful, technical player who sees things that other people don’t – 
not unlike Kelly Smith in this country. She can turn you with a stepover, has 
great vision for a pass and can score. It’s the full package and she is 
definitely one you will not be able to take your eyes off at Wembley. But their 
attacking threat as a whole is unbelievable – you don’t want to see Davison 
running at you or Aluko bearing down on goal, and they scare opponents on a 
weekly basis.

Notts County

Manager Rick Passmoor

You’ll probably hear Rick if you’re sitting in the stands at Wembley. He’s a 
very vocal manager, talking his players through the game and demanding the 
highest standards possible from them. He has done a very good job since joining 
two and a half years ago.

How they will play

Every team hates playing against Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty>. You know you’ll be up 
against a physical side with a real aggressive element to them. That’s the 
biggest part of their game and, if you don’t match it, you’re going to come up 
short.

Players to watch

Laura Bassett is the cornerstone of Notts County’s defence. She made the 
headlines during the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/04/england-women-world-cup-laura-bassett>
 but has just gone back to doing what she does. Against my team, Arsenal, on 
Saturday she was just as you would expect – that solid, strong character at the 
back, going in for every single tackle and commanding everyone around her.

They have a good balance between the back four and a pacy, dynamic attack. 
Rachel Williams gives them that aggression getting up the pitch while 
spearheading the frontline they have Jess Clarke, who has scored goals for fun 
all season and was rightly disappointed to be left out of England’s World Cup 
squad. Ellen White is another who will always score goals and, if Notts County 
can keep a clean sheet, they will always have danger in them.

On that topic their goalkeeper, Carly Telford, is worth a mention too. She 
suffered a dislocated shoulder while with England during the World Cup and 
there has been some controversy about the fact that Notts County have not been 
allowed to call up a replacement for day. But she played against us on Saturday 
and had an outstanding game, showing no ill effects, and knowing her I have no 
doubt she will be fit and raring to go at Wembley.

Verdict

It should be close, with the teams sitting next to each other in the league 
and both having several players in superb form. Chelsea are the favourites on 
paper but they will find themselves in trouble if they do not match Notts 
County’s physicality and aggression. As long as they can stand up to it, they 
should have too much in their locker – too many attacking threats against a 
backline short of pace. That’s the area that may well be decisive.

Alex Scott, the England and Arsenal defender, is part of BBC Radio 5 Live’s 
lineup forSaturday’s women’s FA Cup final. Live on BBC1 and 5 Live, kick-off 3pm
 