 Under ordinary forms in the British way one of the extraordinary revolutions 
in democratic history has been ensured. In effect, even accomplished. In spite 
of the romantic resistance of a corporal's guard in the No lobby, the supremacy 
of a male electorate in this country was virtually abolished last Thursday by 
an overwhelming majority of male votes.
The astonishing figures of the division were 387 to 10. The protesters, 
abandoned by that large number of total abstainers who preferred prudence to 
valour, were so many Casablancas - the boys on the burning deck. Mrs Pankhurst 
and other leaders of the old desperate struggle before the war looked down from 
their gallery above the Speaker's chair on a final triumph almost unparalleled 
of its kind. The Bill will go on smooth lines through its remaining stages in 
the House of Commons, and the House of Lords cannot affect its further smooth 
progress to the Statute book.

The result will be to enlarge the electorate to the total of 26,000,000 
voters, amongst whom women-citizens to the extent of a couple of millions will 
outnumber the men. This surplus is at a temporary maximum owing to the 
consequences of the war. For various reasons, it is evident that the 
predominance of women on next year's register will become by degrees afterwards 
considerably less marked. But some majority of women must be henceforth a 
permanent feature of our electoral system as the well-known result of a high 
and preservative civilisation.

The thought is in itself no more alarming than the long-established rule that 
every man must have had a mother. The corporal's guard in the No lobby are 
themselves the result of this quizzical necessity. Coriolanus was a strong 
conservative, but 'Thou art my warrior,' said Volumnia. 'I help to frame thee.'

The gain by this sweeping change and final settlement ought to be that 
henceforth we shall hear less about sex and more about citizenship. In social 
and economic life there are still many traditional prejudices and obstructions 
to remove before women, in spite of this nominally complete emancipation, enjoy 
an actual equality of freedom, opportunity and reward. Nor can the changes 
required to bring about this practical adjustment be other than gradual.

Ultimately, though it may not be in the day of most of us, some woman 
pre-eminently as orator and leader will become Prime Minister.
 