
This was an occasion after which Tony Mowbray's status could have regressed 
from "under close scrutiny" to critical. Ultimately, the Celtic manager gained 
at least some salvation in otherwise troubled times from a fourth-roundScottish 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> win over ­Morton.

Mowbray's men were far more workmanlike than inspired against a side from 
­Scottish football's second tier, Niall McGinn the player his manager has to 
thank for averting a crisis. Amid a personnel shortage and a league run which 
has seenCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fall nine points 
behind Rangers – who tonight needed extra-time to overcome Hamilton 2-0 – 
Mowbray seemed to take solace that a place in the fifth round is secure.

"Cup football is all about getting to the next round," he said. "We ­managed 
to do that. We were not as fluent as we have been in recent months but that was 
never going to be the case; this was a tough match at a tough place for us."

First Division survival is Morton's main aim this season but they remain one 
of Scotland's traditionally bigger clubs; the rare visit of a top side to a 
packed Cappielow was one they were sure to relish. They may harbour a touch of 
regret that they did not put a shaky Celtic defence under more concerted 
pressure.

Celtic's Darren O'Dea had already been slightly fortunate not to concede a 
penalty for a tug on Brian Wake's shirt by the timeMorton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/morton> forced Artur Boruc into the first 
save of the game, 18 minutes in.

Defensive woes aside, wastefulness in front of goal has been Celtic's other 
fatal flaw of late. McGinn, handed a rare start by Mowbray, could hardly be 
accused of that as he sent the visitors in front with their first meaningful 
attack, 11 minutes before half-time. Marc-Antoine Fortuné was the creator, 
McGinn fiercely dispatching a cut-back from 12 yards.

A tame effort from the Celtic winger Aiden McGeady was the sum of the third 
­quarter of the game, a matter which would surely have boosted Morton. The 
hosts, though, were patently lacking in attacking punch.

The closest Morton came to increasing Mowbray's state of angst was through 
Wake, whose shot was blocked by Lee Naylor. Georgios Samaras had a Celtic 
"second" ruled out for handball while Naylor volleyed against a post. Neither 
moment was as definitive as McGinn's strike was for Mowbray's immediate future.

For now his attentions can turn to improving his squad, though he played down 
rumours that Philippe Senderos is on his way to Celtic from Arsenal.
 