
Ten of the world’s biggest carmakers were sued on Wednesday by American 
consumers who claim they concealed the risks of carbon monoxide poisoning in 
more than five million vehicles equipped with keyless ignitions, leading to 13 
deaths.


 According to the complaint filed in Los Angeles federal court, carbon 
monoxide is emitted when drivers leave their vehicles running after taking 
their electronic key fobs with them, under the mistaken belief that the engines 
will shut off.

Security flaw affecting more than 100 car models exposed by scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/18/security-flaw-100-car-models-exposed-scientists-volkswagen-suppressed-paper>
 The 28 named plaintiffs said this can injure or have “deadly” results for 
people who inhale the colourless and odourless gas, including when vehicles are 
left in garages attached to homes. They also said the defect reduces their 
vehicles’ resale values.

 A keyless ignition lets a driver start a vehicle by pushing an on-off button, 
instead of inserting a key, once the vehicle senses the presence of a nearby 
electronic fob.

The defendants include BMW, including Mini; Daimler’s Mercedes Benz; Fiat 
Chrysler; Ford Motor Co;General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors> Co; Honda, including Acura.

Also named as defendants were Hyundai, including Kia; Nissan, including 
Infiniti;Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota>, including Lexus; 
Volkswagen, including Bentley.

 The lawsuit is the latest seeking to hold the automotive industry liable for 
defects that could make driving unsafe, such as Takata airbags and ignition 
switches on GM vehicles.

 It claimed that the 10 carmakers have long known about the risks of keyless 
ignitions, which have been available in the US since at least 2003, yet 
deceived drivers by marketing their vehicles as safe.

The plaintiffs said the carmakers could have averted the 13 deaths, and many 
more injuries, by installing an inexpensive feature to automatically turn off 
unattended engines, and that GM andFord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> even took steps to patent a 
shut-off feature.

 They also said 27 complaints have been lodged with the national highway 
traffic safety administration (NHTSA) since 2009.

 “The automakers had actual knowledge of the dangerous carbon monoxide 
poisoning consequences of vehicles with keyless fobs that lack an automatic 
shut-off,” the complaint said.

 Unintentional carbon monoxide poisoning kills about 430 people a year in the 
US, says the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention.

 The lawsuit seeks class-action status, and an injunction requiring car-makers 
to install automatic shut-off features on all existing and future vehicles sold 
with keyless ignitions. It also seeks compensatory and punitive damages.

 Ford said it takes customer safety “very seriously” and that its keyless 
ignition system has proven “safe and reliable”.

BMW, Fiat <https://www.theguardian.com/business/fiat> Chrysler and Toyota 
declined to comment. None of the other carmakers had an immediate comment.

 Lawyers for the plaintiffs also declined to comment. A US transport 
department spokesman declined to comment on the NHTSA’s behalf.

 The lawsuit was filed in the same court where Toyota defended lawsuits 
claiming that its vehicles accelerated unintentionally.

A US district judge, James Selna, approved a $1.6bn settlement in July 2013 to 
resolve claims that Toyotas lost value because of that defect. It is unclear 
whether he will be assigned the keyless ignition case.


 