
To be left alone with our thoughts can be torture. Insomniacs who suffer 
agonies as they lie awake night after night soon learn that it is far better to 
get up and do something – anything – rather than thrash about with only their 
restless mind for company. Negative emotions such as guilt, self-doubt and 
anxiety run amok at night. Daylight, with its promise of mundane tasks and 
social interaction, usually sends these monsters of our imagination scurrying 
back to their caves, but they can re-emerge whenever there are no external 
distractions to occupy the mind.

Some people will go to extraordinary lengths to prevent this from happening, as
a series of experiments <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4330241/> 
carried out in 2014 by psychologists at Harvard and the University of Virginia 
demonstrated. College students were instructed to sit by themselves for up to 
15 minutes in a sparsely furnished, unadorned room and “entertain themselves 
with their thoughts”. They were allowed to think about whatever they liked, the 
only rules being they should remain in their seats and stay awake. 
Unsurprisingly, a majority reported afterwards that they found it difficult to 
concentrate and their minds had wandered, with around half saying they didn’t 
enjoy the experience.

Being left alone in an empty room was so unpleasant that many opted to give 
themselves electric shocks

A follow-up experiment, however, revealed that many found being left alone in 
an empty room with nothing to occupy their minds so unpleasant (this is, after 
all, what makes solitary confinement such a harsh punishment) that they would 
rather give themselves electric shocks. First, the volunteers were asked to 
rate the unpleasantness of a shock delivered via electrodes attached to their 
ankle and say whether they would pay a small amount of money to avoid having to 
experience it again. In the second part of the experiment, during which they 
were left alone for 15 minutes, they were given the opportunity to zap 
themselves again. Amazingly, among those who had said they would pay to avoid 
it, 67% of the men (12 out of 18) and 25% of the women (6 out of 24) opted to 
shock themselves at least once. One of the women gave herself nine electric 
shocks. One of the men zapped himself 190 times.

In their report for the journal Science, the researchers write: “What is 
striking is that simply being alone with their own thoughts for 15 minutes was 
apparently so aversive it drove many participants to self-administer an 
electric shock that they had earlier said they would pay to avoid.”

This goes some way towards explaining why many people initially find 
meditation so frustrating, because to sit quietly with your eyes closed is to 
invite the mind to wander here, there and everywhere. In fact this is the whole 
point of the exercise, because learning to notice whenever your mind has 
wandered is the secret to calming it. We can roll our eyes at the (now 
all-pervasive) talk of mindfulness, but perhaps we’d be more open to it if we 
saw it as simply a way to survive the onslaught of our thoughts. Only by 
noticing the way they ricochet about inside our heads like balls in a pinball 
machine can we learn to observe them dispassionately and let them come to rest, 
resisting the urge to pull back the mental plunger and fire off more.

So the purpose of mindfulness and meditation is to develop the ability to 
quiet the mind at will. “Without such training,” the psychologists conclude 
drily, “people prefer doing to thinking, even if what they are doing is so 
unpleasant they’d normally pay to avoid it. The untutored mind does not like to 
be alone with itself.”


Siddhartha’s Brain 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405768/> by James 
Kingsland is published by Constable & Robinson on 2 June (£13.99). To buy a 
copy for £11.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405768/>
 