
The Blue Square Premier leaders Wrexham sprung the shock of Saturday's FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> second-round ties, seeing off 
Brentford of League One to secure a place in Sunday's third-round draw.

Jamie Tolley's 33rd-minute goal proved decisive for the Welsh club in their 
trip to Griffin Park.

Their fellow non-league side Tamworth are also in the third round after 
winning 2-1 atGateshead. Francino Francis gave the visitors a 29th-minute lead 
before the home side had Chris Carruthers sent off for a professional foul four 
minutes before half-time. Kieron St Aimie missed the resulting penalty.

Nathan Fisher brought the scores level but Gateshead were eliminated by Kyle 
Patterson's 90th-minute winner.

Conference South side Chelmsford are in the draw, but they face a replay 
againstMacclesfield after a 1-1 draw in Essex. Max Cornhill struck for the home 
side in the 35th minute but Tony Diagne equalised in the 64th minute for the 
League Two club.

Salisbury are also in the hat after a goalless home draw against Grimsby.

The lowest-placed side in the competition, Redbridge of the Ryman League 
North, were beaten 5-0 atCrawley, Matthew Tubbs scoring a hat-trick for the 
League Two promotion contenders. Andy Drury and Kyle McFadzean also scored 
through while Redbridge had Vinnie Durrant sent off for a professional foul 12 
minutes from time.

Cheltenham defeated the Blue Square Premier side Luton 4-2. Darryl Duffy, 
Marlon Pack, Luke Summerfield and Russell Penn scored for the visitors - who 
had Duffy dismissed near the end. Aaron O'Connor twice had the hosts on level 
terms at Kenilworth Road.

League Two sides put out opponents from the division above at Colchester, 
where Matt Ritchie's goal just before the hour gaveSwindon victory, and at 
Leyton Orient, where Gillingham deservedly won 1-0 with Curtis Weston's goal 
just before the break.

Milton Keynes Dons were convincing 3-1 winners at Barnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet>, Darren Potter, Charlie McDonald 
and Daniel Powell getting the goals that meant Izale McLeod's 87th-minute reply 
was a mere consolation.

Michael Morrison and Jason Euell got the second-half goals that took the 
League One leadersCharlton through against League One rivals Carlisle.

An upset was on the cards at Bramall Lane when Rene Howe gave Torquay a 
third-minute lead - but Mark Ellis's own goal and two from Ched Evans turned 
things inSheffield United's favour within 10 second-half minutes. Danny Stevens 
made it 3-2 in injury time.

Ryan Lowe's 49th-minute goal gave Sheffield Wednesday victory over Aldershot, 
whileShrewsbury came from behind to sink Rotherham 2-1.

Lewis Grabban gave the visitors the lead from the penalty spot but they had 
Marcus Marshall sent off just before half-time and Ian Sharps and Nicky Wroe 
(with a penalty) turned things around.

In another all-League Two affair, AFC Wimbledon lost 3-1 at Bradford. Ross 
Hannah, Chris Bush (own goal) and Craig Fagan (penalty) gave the home side 
their goals, with Jack Midson replying at 2-0.

Dagenham & Redbridge and Walsall must replay after a 1-1 draw that sprung to 
life in the closing stages. Claude Gnapka's 76th-minute goal gaveWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> the lead but Jon Nurse levelled 
five minutes later and the visitors had the substitute Ryan Jarvis sent off for 
violent conduct at the end.

It was 1-1, too, at Southend, where James Wesolowski gave Oldham the lead only 
for Ryan Hall to level midway through the second half.
 