
As most of you will no doubt already be aware, 2013 marks the centenary of the 
appearance of what is now widely accepted as the first newspaper crossword. It 
was set by one Arthur Wynne for the long defunct New York World and appeared in 
its 8-page downmarket 'Fun' section on Sunday 21 December 1913, in the hope 
that it would help keep up circulation over the slack Christmas period. There 
is, so far as I am aware, no evidence that Wynne himself ever claimed to have 
'invented' the crossword, though that is what it will tell you if you Google 
him. Indeed, as a younger man in both Britain and the United States, he will 
have seen all sorts of word puzzles, with intersecting Across and Down 
solutions and many of the basic crossword tools we know and love today.

Wynne was born in Everton, Liverpool in 1871, son of the editor of the 
Liverpool Courier, and emigrated to the United States at the age of 19. After a 
variety of jobs he followed his father into journalism, developing interests in 
music and puzzles. For a while he was music critic of the Pittsburgh Despatch 
and played second violin with the Pittsburgh Philharmonic, before moving to New 
York. He made neither his name nor his fortune out of his crossword 
'invention', or out of the transatlantic craze that it generated after 1924, 
when two young tyro publishers, Dick Simon and Lincoln Schuster, had a huge 
success with their first book of his reprinted New York World puzzles.

Wynne became an American citizen after the First World War, worked for a 
features agency, married twice and died at Clearwater, Florida in 1945.

Nor can anyone honestly claim that Wynne's December 1913 puzzle bore any real 
relationship to the cryptic crossword puzzle that developed, though with very 
different characters, in the United States and Britain in the 1940s and 
subsequently. But once something has become a 'fact' it takes on a substance 
and an effectiveness all of its own. So let us accept that this is, 
unquestionably, the centenary year of the modern crossword (and that the 
Liverpudlian Arthur Wynne was its inventor) and use that 'peg' as an 
opportunity to promote the product.
____

Our very own setter Paul (aka John Halpern) has turned himself for 2013 into a 
one-man evangelist for the crossword. His tour this year to promote the cause 
has already taken in Brighton (where he now lives) and Liverpool (where Wynne 
once did). You can follow him round the country atwww.crosswordcentenary.com 
<http://www.crosswordcentenary.com> . The purpose of his crusade is to make 
crosswords cool, thus persuading new generations of solvers to engage with and 
derive pleasure from what he knows from personal experience to be the most fun 
that you can have with just a pencil and paper (or keyboard). Suggestions for 
additions of any kind to his programme will be very welcome.
_____

A note for your diaries. Araucaria's special Easter offering will appear on 
Saturday 30 March, with the solution being published and the winners announced 
on Monday 8 April.
_____

The February Genius puzzle (No 116 by Qaos) produced rather fewer total 
entries than of late: 253 by the deadline.

Congratulations to Ray Watkins from, Epsom, Surrey, who is February's winner.
____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 