
No goals, but four ripped kits and one burst ball. The shortage of action in 
France and Switzerland’s dull 0-0 draw in Lille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/switzerland-france-euro-2016-match-report>
 on Sunday night prompted increased attention on deficient equipment, with 
Swiss kits tearing easier than paper and the winger Xherdan Shaqiritelling Blick
 
<http://www.blick.ch/sport/fussball/euro2016/shaqiri-zum-nati-trikotgate-hoffentlich-macht-puma-keine-pariser-id5169144.html>
: “I hope Puma does not produce condoms.”

Granit Xhaka, the new Arsenal midfielder, had to change his jersey twice 
during the Group A game, while Admir Mehmedi and the striker Breel Embolo also 
required replacements following tugs that did not appear especially vicious.

“We have had a few problems with the jersey,” Embolo said. “The kit manager is 
not fully ready yet, but we are.”

Yann Sommer the goalkeeper added: “It can happen. It means it was a fight on 
pitch.”

A Puma spokesperson told the Guardian: “Five Puma teams have played 10 games 
in this tournament without such problems. Our product people are currently 
investigating the shirt material. We will provide a further update when we have 
one.”

In a later statement, the manufacturers added: “There was one batch of 
material where yarns had been damaged during the production process, leading to 
a weakening in the final garment. This can happen, if the combination of heat, 
pressure and time is not properly controlled in the manufacturing process. The 
tight fitting ACTV jerseys are made of an elastane and polyester material mix. 
The defective material was used in only a limited number of Swiss home jerseys.”

Adidas were also left red-faced when one of their Beau Jeu footballs burst 
when Antoine Griezmann was challenged by Valon Behrami. One of Griezmann’s 
studs appeared to put a hole in the ball. The balls retail at £105.

In a statement, Adidas said: “We are looking into what happened. Incidents of 
this nature are extremely rare. The reason for the tear has not yet been 
identified butBeau Jeu has been widely praised by respected experts for its 
contribution to the exciting start to the tournament.”

A point was enough for both teams to progress to the last 16. Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> will play the second-placed 
finisher in Group C in Saint-Étienne on Saturday afternoon, while the hosts 
will meet a third-placed finisher in Lyon on Sunday.
 