
The official report of the UN special rapporteur on violence against women, 
Rashida Manjoo, will censure the UK government forpreventing her  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/13/un-inspection-yarls-wood-detention-centre-blocked-claim>
from inspecting Yarl’s Wood detention centre in Bedfordshire.

Manjoo said that the incident was similar to the way Bangladesh blocked her 
from visiting a notorious refugee camp and India stopped her investigating 
state-run detention facilities. Manjoo said she hoped that other countries 
would raise the issue with the UK government of why she was not allowed to 
enter Britain’s largest immigration centre for women, questioning if there was 
“something to hide”.

During her two-week tour of Britain in April, organised by senior Home Office 
officials, Manjoo heard a series of allegations over the plight of female 
detainees inside Yarl’s Wood, includingallegations of inappropriate sexual 
behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/17/serco-yarls-wood-asylum-centre>
 and privacy issues, but was not allowed to inspect the facility at the end of 
her official visit.

Manjoo said the decision would be raised in the final draft of her report 
documenting Britain’s approach to violence against womenin the same way she 
raised concerns following similarly restrictive moves by the Bangladeshi and 
Indian governments. In May 2013 Manjoo was prevented from entering Bangladesh’s 
Kutupalong refugee camp, which houses members of the Rohingya community in the 
south-east of the country. Manjoo had received reports of “human rights 
violations, including violence against women” inside the Bangladeshi camps.

Speaking from Johannesburg, Manjoo said: “If you look at my Bangladeshi 
report, I was denied entry to a refugee camp and I have made a note in my 
report, in the same way I will put in the UK report that I was denied entry to 
Yarl’s Wood.”

Days before arriving in the UK last year, Manjoo published her investigation 
into India, which states: “The special rapporteur regrets that, despite her 
specific requests prior to and during the mission, no visits to state-run 
shelters, prisons or detention centres were programmed.”

She said the failure to allow her to inspect Yarl’s Wood meant the concerns of 
the detainees had been suppressed. “It’s a missed opportunity, let’s put it 
that way, to have a dialogue on conditions in such detention centres where 
there are all sorts of constraints in terms of disclosure, including the 
possibility of victimisation,” she said. “More importantly for people facing 
the threat of deportation, it’s in their interests to talk about this.”

Manjoo added: “I can’t speculate on the state’s reasons since I wasn’t giving 
access to discuss the issue. Whether there is something to hide, whether 
there’s a denial or whether there’s a lack of accountability I wouldn’t be able 
to comment, because I didn’t go.”

Her draft report is understood to have been submitted to the UK last month and 
contains recommendations to help tackle sexism and misogyny. Next month a 
parliamentary inquiry is expected to publish a critical report on immigration 
detention, followed by another report questioning the behaviour of some male 
guards inside Yarl’s Wood.
 