
The Yeovil Town manager, Darren Way, praised his side’s “fantastic 
performance” after they snatched a late equaliser against a Carlisle side who 
twice surrendered the lead in the FA Cup third round tie at Blackpool’s 
Bloomfield Road. Shaun Jeffers slotted in Yeovil’s second goal in added time to 
secure a replay against a Cumbrian side still playing home matches in exile
after last month’s flooding <http:>.

Way said: “It was a great finish. Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> slowed the game down and hit 
direct balls, making it difficult to play against, but I was pleased with the 
way the boys fought back.

“We showed bouncebackability and we are starting to get belief. It’s nice to 
be in the draw, but we know there is a lot of hard work to be done. I thought 
the lads deserved the draw and I want to create positivity about the place. So 
far it’s happened.”

Way was wary of focusing too much on the next round, with a third-round replay 
against their fellow League Two side still to negotiate in Somerset.

He said: “It’s a case of enjoying the moment. I’m not focusing too much on who 
we might get – but it’s good that there could be the opportunity to play 
against a big team.”

Way was disappointed his side conceded the first goal from a set piece, the 
Carlisle captain, Danny Grainger, thumping a free-kick around the defensive 
wall from 20 yards. Way said: “Too many times we’ve seen a free-kick and the 
ball flies into the roof of the net.”

The former Carlisle striker François Zoko headed Yeovil level for the first 
time after the break and Way said: “He rose well and it was something special 
for him against his old club.”

Carlisle’s manager, Keith Curle, said after the match at Bloomfield Road that 
his players were feeling frustrated. “The pitch made it difficult for us to 
play the way we wanted to play, but we took the lead twice and should have been 
able to see the game out.

“There is an air of disappointment because we knew we had done enough to win 
the game – and yet ultimately we didn’t. The Yeovil goals were pretty basic. We 
showed a bit of naivety but we have a replay to look forward to and we are 
still in the hat. Yes, we’re disappointed, but it’s a challenge we have to 
face.”

Carlisle’s second goal came from a header by the central defender Mark Ellis, 
who was celebrating signing a new two-and-a-half-year contract. Yeovil’s goal 
also had an incredible double escape in the 56th minute when Grainger shot 
against the underside of the crossbar and Charlie Wyke could only head the 
rebound against a post from inside the six-yard box.

Curle said: “If I was a gambling man I would have put money on him [Ellis] 
scoring today. By the end of the season I think he could have six or seven 
goals.”

The 52-year-old was also keen to praise the “phenomenal support” of 3,000 
travelling Carlisle fans. He added: “The surface didn’t allow us to play as 
they would have expected, but it was a typical cup tie.”

Blackburn Rovers step in to host Carlisle United game after floods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/blackburn-rovers-carlisle-united-storm-desmond> 