
A point of spelling was raised by a clue in the Quick crossword for March 24 
(No 11,508). It was "Tart - US bride's attendant (4,2,6)", with MAID OF HONOUR 
as the answer. A Manchester solver objected that this was an obvious error 
since, as the person in question was an American, she had to be a MAID OF 
HONOR. I don't know whether Americans eat the little round tarts with 
almond-flavoured fillings; nor whether, if they do, they call them "maids of 
honor". But I observe with relief that Collins has: "US and Canadian - the 
principal unmarried attendant of a bride". Chambers and the Oxford Dictionary 
of English, my other stalwarts, follow suit. I have also checked that the 
Guardian's house style is to use the English spellings of words, even when 
their context is clearly transatlantic, except where proper nouns are involved. 
Thus the seaboard of the United States boasts many fine harbours, but the naval 
base in Hawaii is Pearl Harbor. Similarly, President Bush has a defence policy, 
but the Pentagon at Arlington, Va houses the headquarters of the US Department 
of Defense.

_____

From time to time people complain that the type size of the clues when puzzles 
are printed off is too small for comfort. In response, my practical suggestion 
has been that, if you copy and then paste just the clues themselves to a new 
document in the normal way, you can print out the result in any size and font 
that takes your fancy. But this is clearly not enough for crossword addicts 
with serious macular degeneration, where the sufferer's very limited and often 
oblique field of vision calls not just for magnification but also for clarity, 
contrast and sharpness of line in both the grid and the type for the clues. If 
this is a problem for you, or someone you know, then the following notes kindly 
provided by a subscriber, Ian Hughes, may be of help.

For his wife, who is registered blind, he used to scan each day's puzzle 
directly from the paper into Photoshop, then enlarge the grid to A4 and 
"enhance" it, making the numbers and lines black but the black squares grey or 
hatched. The clues were printed out in 20 point on yellow paper. But the 
enlarged print from the paper still had rough edges and serifs. Taking out an 
on-line subscription seemed to be the answer, as the on-screen grid is sharp 
and the font is sanserif. But the problem is that you cannot copy and paste 
directly from a web page into Photoshop.

Ian's solution is to use the "print screen" facility, zoom to 180%, press F11 
to achieve full screen, work the slider to centre the grid and then press 
"Ctrl+print" screen or "Alt+print" screen. The resulting image is copied and 
pasted into a 25cm x 25cm Photoshop blank page using 72dpi resolution (which is 
the same as the web original) and cropped and sized to 20mm wide. His 
"enhancement" involves, first, selecting all the black portions of the grid 
with the magic wand tool and replacing the black with a pale grey, using the 
"fill" tool. Next, he blackens all the edges and the numbers using the stroke 
facility, adding a 1 pixel inside stroke. Finally, he selects all the remaining 
grey areas and replaces them with a grid pattern using the "pattern fill" 
utility. This gives good contrast and also saves ink by not having to print 
black squares. Making a small increase in contrast improves the final result. 
Dealing with the clues is easier. He just copies and pastes them from the 
printable page to Wordpad and thence transfers into Word to change the font to 
20 point Arial before printing out.

_____

Don't get me wrong and I'm not complaining. But, pace Abe Lincoln, at least so 
far as crosswords are concerned, you can't please all of the people some of the 
time. Last year there were complaints that the Genius puzzles were getting far 
too hard, demanding more perspiration than inspiration. April saw a swing the 
other way. We want more of a challenge, has been the cry. The Genius is not 
supposed to be something that can be finished in one sitting, was the 
complaint. The statistics certainly seem to indicate that people found the 
April puzzle less taxing than some recent offerings. There were 320 correct 
entries, with the first coming from Aberystwyth at 0719 GMT (0819 BST) on the 
Monday and another 26 arriving by the end of the first day. My guess is that 
Pasquale's offering for May will test you more and, no doubt, produce a crop of 
complaints from the other camp! My conclusion is that the only sensible thing 
is to have some easier ones, some stinkers and some in the middle.

* Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor.
 