
As good as it is to bake with chocolate – chopped, grated, melted, in slabs, 
chipped, or shaved into wafer-thin curls – every chunk of the stuff that I put 
into a cake batter or brownie mix is one less chunk for me just to snaffle at 
the kitchen counter. It can feel wasteful – and expensive – to slip 
good-quality dark chocolate into your baking, where it’s muted by all of the 
sugar and butter, its subtleties lost entirely. I prefer to bake with cocoa 
powder: it is more potent and bitter than processed chocolate, and with the 
depth of flavour to enable it to hold its own against the other ingredients in 
a recipe. Because it’s a powder, too, it’s far easier to incorporate without 
affecting the texture or mouthfeel of the bake.

Black treacle cocoa brownies with clotted cream

Black treacle adds a bittersweet depth to these brownies – they’re perhaps the 
richest and most chocolatey I’ve ever had. Spoonfuls of clotted cream for 
serving help to balance this sweetness, sitting bright against the dark clout 
of the cocoa and treacle. Bake these until they’re barely set for an almost 
melting, squidgy middle.


Serves 9
150g unsalted butter
3 tbsp black treacle
275g caster sugar
90g plain flour
75g cocoa powder
¼ tsp salt
2 large eggs
150g clotted cream, to serve

Our 10 best chocolate recipes | Our 10 Best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/04/chocolate-recipes-choc-chip-cookie-ganache-tart-10-best>
1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4 and line a 15x22cm rectangular tin 
with baking parchment. Any similar sized tin will do – a 20cm round cake tin 
will be more or less equivalent in volume, while a 20x20cm square tin will give 
you a slightly shallower brownie (be sure to decrease the baking time 
accordingly).

2 Melt the butter over a low heat, then whisk in the treacle and sugar. Stir 
the flour, cocoa powder and salt together in a separate bowl, breaking up any 
rogue clumps as you go. Whisk the eggs, one at a time, into the melted butter 
mixture, then lightly beat in the dry ingredients, just until the batter is 
smooth. Don’t worry if the mixture’s slightly grainy.

3 Spoon the brownie batter into the prepared tin and lightly smooth the 
surface. Place in the oven to bake for 25-35 minutes. Exactly how long it takes 
to cook will vary according to the size and shape of your tin, but the most 
important thing is not to over-bake the brownie. For a perfectly dense, fudgy 
texture, cook until the brownie mix no longer jiggles in the centre when you 
gently shake the tin. The surface should be dried and even, and a knife 
inserted into the centre should come out with just a little sticky batter on it 
– don’t wait until the knife emerges totally clean, or you’ll have cooked it 
for too long.

4 Leave the brownie to cool completely in its tin before serving in nine 
generous chunks, with scoops of thick clotted cream alongside.

Every chunk of chocolate I put in a cake or brownie batter is one less chunk 
for me to snaffle at the kitchen counter

Easy cocoa birthday cake

Chocolate <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chocolate> cake is all or 
nothing: if it’s not hyperbolically rich and chocolatey, it’s not worth making. 
It’s tempting, then, to throw everything you have into it – melted chocolate, 
chocolate chips or chunks, swirls of salted caramel or a capful of booze – to 
make it the best that it can be. But though I’m all for a commitment to 
extravagance, for me the best chocolate cakes are all the better for being 
pared back. Rather than weighing down the cake with extras here, I’ve just made 
a simple cocoa powder batter complemented by light brown sugar, vanilla, coffee 
and salt. The sugar adds a toffee edge to the sweetness, vanilla and coffee 
bolster the chocolate flavour, while the salt brings the whole thing into 
focus. No expensive chocolate, no fuss or fiddly detail – just a perfect 
chocolate cake.

You could swap the cocoa buttercream for a richer chocolate ganache, made with 
dark chocolate melted into an equal weight of scalding double cream, but I 
think that the heaviness of ganache smothers the mild cocoa kick of the cake. A 
compromise, if you want something a little more grown up, would be to ice the 
cake as detailed below, chill it well then glaze with a thin coat of ganache 
afterwards.

Serves 6-8
275g salted butter, very soft
275g soft light brown sugar
2 ½ tsp vanilla extract
4 large eggs
225g plain flour
75g cocoa powder
3 tsp baking powder
150ml weak black coffee

 For the buttercream
225g salted butter, softened
50g cocoa powder
2 tsp vanilla extract
325g icing sugar
2 tsp instant coffee dissolved in 2 tsp water

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Grease two 20cm round cake tins 
(loose-bottomed or springform are best) and line their bases with circles of 
baking parchment.

2 Beat the butter with the soft light brown sugar in a large mixing bowl for 
several minutes, creaming the mix until it is perfectly smooth and light. Stir 
in the vanilla extract. Add the eggs one at a time, beating well between each 
addition to minimise clumping and curdling. Stir the flour, cocoa powder and 
baking powder together, then add this mixture to the wet ingredients, mixing 
just until smooth. Add the dissolved coffee and fold it in to create a soft, 
velvety cake batter.

3 Divide the batter between the two prepared tins and bake for 30-35 minutes, 
until well-risen and springy to the touch. A small knife inserted into the 
centre of each cake should emerge with no more than a couple of crumbs stuck to 
it. Leave the cakes to cool completely in their tins before unmoulding.

4 For the buttercream, beat the butter until smooth, then stir in the cocoa 
powder and vanilla extract. Sift in the icing sugar a third at a time, mixing 
well as you go. The buttercream should be luxuriantly thick, but still soft 
enough to spread on the cakes without ripping them. Add a dash of milk or 
coffee to slacken the mixture, if necessary.

5 Smooth a thick layer of cocoa buttercream over one of the cooled cake 
layers, then sandwich with the second layer and ice the top. Spread the 
remaining cocoa buttercream generously around the sides of the cake.
 