
Zlatan Ibrahimovic struck twice as Paris St Germain made up for their midweek 
Champions League defeat to Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/real-madrid-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
 by crushing Toulouse 5-0 to stretch their Ligue 1 lead to 11 points on 
Saturday.

Ángel Di María netted after six minutes to set PSG on their way, while 
second-half substitute Lucas and Ezequiel Lavezzi also got on the scoresheet. 
“We’re doing something outstanding. I think we can finish the [league] season 
unbeaten,” said Lucas.

Caen beat Guincamp 2-1, thanks to second-half goals from Julien Féret and Andy 
Delort, to move to second place, though they will be overtaken if either side 
wins Sunday’s meeting between Olympique Lyonnais and St Etienne, both two 
points further behind on 22, having played a game fewer.

Di María put PSG in front with a long-range free-kick that flew just over a 
crowd of players in the box and bounced past theToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> keeper, Al Ahamada. Ibrahimovic 
then headed home his 50th Ligue 1 goal at the Parc des Princes in the 18th 
minute after Marcel Tisserand inexplicably headed the ball straight to the 
Sweden striker, who was standing five yards in front of an empty net.

Lucas came off the bench to replace Edinson Cavani and made an immediate 
impact, scoring with a header in the 66th minute. He then slalomed through the 
defence in the 75th minute and, though his shot was tipped away by Ahamada, 
Ibrahimovic poked in the rebound, his ninth goal in his last eight league 
appearances and his 115th in 140 games since joining PSG from Milan before the 
2012-13 season.

Lavezzi rubbed salt into Toulouse’s wounds three minutes later after 
Jean-Armel Kana-Biyik totally misjudged the flight of Ibrahimovic’s pass, 
allowing the Argentinian to run clear of the visiting defence. “If we continue 
like this we will be able to rest some players after Christmas in order to 
concentrate on the Champions League,” said the PSG centre back Thiago Silva.
 