
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 

I loved watching Eddie Murphy videos with my mates as a teenager, for his 
animated routines, the voices and, of course, the massive ego squashed into 
those ridiculous leather jackets. Things aren’t just funny when you are a teen, 
they are hysterical. Snorting with laughter fades with the onset of cynicism.

The funniest person I know




I have had the pleasure of working with Frank Skinner a few times and the man 
just makes me laugh so much. He delivers jokes in such a relaxed, easy manner 
that he can totally take you by surprise. Tis a joy to be side-swiped by humour.

The funniest hairstyle I’ve ever had




At uni, I had a string of beads plaited into my hair. If I turned my head too 
quickly it would swing around with tremendous momentum and smack me in the 
teeth. One night at the student disco I gave myself a black eye.

The funniest meal I’ve ever eaten

A massive steak at the Madonna Inn, San Luis Obispo, California. It’s 
part-diner part-David Lynch nightmare: bright pink with animatronic dolls 
everywhere; I don’t think they are meant to be quite as terrifying as they are.

The funniest item of clothing I’ve ever owned




A men’s Afghan hat called a pakol. They were briefly popular in the UK in the 
90s. It smelt like a dead cat and I looked ridiculous in it; although, mind 
you, I looked ridiculous for huge chunks of the 90s.

The funniest thing that shouldn’t be funny

Watching someone run to catch a train that you are already on and then miss 
it. Whenever I see it happen I do a little mental fist pump.

The funniest dream I’ve ever had




I have such vivid dreams all the time; sometimes I wake up exhausted from 
them. I once dreamed that I was a springer spaniel with the face of a baby. I 
was wearing a dog-sized jumpsuit and working as a backing singer for Beyoncé. I 
have no idea what my brain was trying to process to conjure up that scenario.

Zoe Lyons: Little Misfit <http://www.zoelyons.co.uk/live/>, touring to 3 Dec
 