
Manage your risk appetites. The general difference between men and women’s 
approach to money is that men are usually risk takers, they will be more 
speculative and go for a higher risk/higher potential yield. Women tend not to 
be, they want to play it safer, so this can lead to arguments. I’ve seen 
couples perfectly aligned in all other matters but, when they start talking 
about money investments, rows can erupt. Before you enter into any financial 
agreement, it’s a good idea to think not only of the different products 
available, but the different approaches to risk and security behind them.

The heart is where home is. The biggest arguments I see are where there are 
children at home. The person who is more “at home” wants less risk. A lot of it 
is to do with very emotive things: matters to do with children’s education are 
behind the biggest arguments I see. If private education is an option, one half 
of the couple usually wants it for the children (usually the one who is more at 
home with them) and the other is saying “the state is just as good and we can 
save the money”.

Open your post! This is one of the simplest things you can do to avoid rows. 
If there’s someone who has a habit of not opening financial post, then I advise 
you get into a routine of opening it together every evening. If that still 
doesn’t work, and your partner won’t open his or her post, then you just have 
to open it for them. Nothing gets better by not opening the envelope and often 
things can get very much worse.

Ringfence some of your wages. Debit or credit cards held in joint names can be 
a point of friction. Many couples argue about how that money has been spent. 
You may want to have separate cards and ringfence some of your wages to spend 
how you want.

Know where your money goes. Transparency and a realistic approach to how much 
money is coming in versus going out is key to avoiding almost all arguments. 
Yet very few couples will budget in this way until they are forced to. Some 
couples can be really shocked when I make them sit down and do this, and can 
find it painful. Mortgage financing these days can go into a lot of detail: the 
lender will want to know not only how much you earn, but also exactly where 
your money goes. Women tend to know this; men don’t. In my experience, men are 
terrible at discussing money with their partners. My advice is to have a 
realism check regularly: go through bank statements and work out what are fixed 
costs, what are variables. Then ask whether you can afford it.

Be disciplined. If you need to contribute to regular things like tax, then 
siphon away an amount into a separate account if you are not disciplined enough 
to avoid spending it.

Outline your ambitions. It’s not romantic but, before you set up home or knit 
together your financial lives, it’s worth having a chat about your different 
aims and ambitions. Not just about where to live or having children, but your 
approach to money. This can save lots of rows later on. Will you prioritise the 
latest car over a new roof (lots of people do). Will you want to have holidays 
every year if it gets you into debt? Does one of you believe in “live now pay 
later” and the other need money in the bank to feel safe? These are things that 
can split a couple asunder.

Don’t be shy and retiring. Lots of arguments, even among couples who have 
never rowed about money, can occur around retirement. This is in part because 
suddenly both people are at home all the time but also because of different 
approaches to retirement. One part of the couple may see it as a time to spend 
all the money they’ve earned over the years, the other suddenly becomes averse 
to spending.

Structure your debt. If you get into debt, look at your assets and put a 
structure into place.Citizens Advice <https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/> can 
help but also go back to the source of the debt and ask if you can work 
something out. Don’t panic, but face up to things. A financial advisor can be a 
great mediator and most people feel much better knowing where they’re at.

Keep talking. If things get really sticky, a chat about money once a week can 
stop things getting explosive.

Andy Bracken is a financial adviser at Timothy James & Partners 
<http://www.tjpltd.co.uk/>.
 