
The Isle of Skye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/23/top-10-days-out-skye-scotland> 
topped arecent survey 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/news/isle-of-skye-named-the-nations-most-desired-place-to-live/>
 which asked where people would most like to live in Britain. The more remote 
parts of Britain, especially Scotland, often promise a gentler way of life. 
Skye is undoubtedly stunning, but it’s not known as the Misty Isle for nothing …

Do some research. Don’t just dismiss your longings to move as a hopeless dream 
but, instead, find out all the facts that might be relevant to you: house 
prices, nearby facilities – which might well be revealed as being miles away – 
schools, work opportunities and any local or government schemes providing 
support into work. There are lots of very fit retirees who aim to make the most 
of the many outdoor activities on the doorstep. Some of the more remote parts 
of the country, however, enjoy neither the infrastructure nor the activities, 
especially in the winter.

Make a winter visit. In summer, Exmoor would enchant anyone, but the winters 
can be desperately bleak. That’s only the weather, as winter can also be a 
great time for socialising and community events, but restrictions on movement 
can be frustrating. Snowdonia is another stunning area that sees many summer 
visitors aiming to make a permanent move, but winter viewing is an absolute 
must. It’s equally stunning blanketed in snow for weeks, but know what you’re 
getting into as you’re aiming to escape the rat race, not add another layer of 
stress.

Do it in stages. This is particularly important if your move is prompted by a 
long-distance romance. You live in London and you’re regularly commuting to 
Skye, a wonderfully romantic quest by anyone’s standards. Move to a halfway 
house so that you can reach your beloved more often and actually spend some 
routine time together in the Misty Isle.

Go to every single public event, introduce yourself and be nice

Don’t burn your bridges. Still on the most practical approach, don’t sell up 
and jack in your job in one fell swoop. Find out if a sabbatical is possible 
and aim to rent out your home for a year while you discover whether your new 
life will work out. It might seem a little too careful in the light of your 
new, daring approach to life, but a safety net is always a good idea and it’s 
far easier to come back to your previous life if you still have a home and the 
possibility of a job.

Make friends. People in remote areas usually welcome new blood, especially 
those who genuinely want to be part of the local community. However, the 
downside to living in idyllic but distant parts is that they’ll have had more 
than their fair share of over-eager visitors who move there without any 
planning or preparation and give up at the first sign of any challenge. Go to 
every single public event, introduce yourself and be nice – don’t ever take the 
opportunity of explaining what the community is missing in your vast experience 
of civilised living. Keep such thoughts to yourself, but be ready to act on 
them when ready and always ask for help if needed. The Highlands and Islands of 
Scotland are peopled with hardy individuals from all over the UK who have found 
their dream lives and added a great deal to local communities in enthusiasm, 
expertise and diversity.

Be adaptable. You know what your skills and experience are, but finding the 
perfect fit jobwise might not be so simple, so try taking a different approach. 
Many people in remote places have two or three jobs – the fisherman who’s also 
the local taxi with his big estate car (and also the undertaker, as coffins fit 
in nicely when the seats are down, but we won’t mention that to the tourists) – 
so be prepared to do likewise and be ready to learn a new skill as well as 
dusting off an old one.

Talk it over. If your children are tiny or grown and gone it’s not a problem, 
but if they’re anywhere in between you might have a hard job selling the idea. 
Be honest about trying for a year, promise them that friends can come and visit 
and assure them thatbroadband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/more-than-1m-homes-still-dont-have-decent-broadband-says-ofcom>
 will, indeed, be available, although no one knows at what speed. This could be 
your biggest obstacle in achieving your dream life but if you can convince 
yourself, you can convince them.

Do it now. Planning, investigating and researching takes nothing but time, so 
stop talking and start moving. Many cliches can be applied here but they all 
come down to the same thing – you only have one life.
 