 A £14.5 million plan to protect small some of Britain's smaller creatures is 
to be launched by the Government.
 The UK Biodiversity Action Plan covers 103 species, including butterflies, 
moths, spiders, bees, crickets, grasshoppers and beetles. Jon Owen Jones, 
junior Welsh Office minister, will announce it at the National Botanic Garden 
of Wales.

 It will cost about £8 million in research, monitoring and conservation in the 
first five years and £6.5 million in the next five.

 Many of the species have been driven to the edge of extinction in Britain in 
the face of intensive farming and other big changes to the countryside.

 Roger Key, speaking for English Nature, said yesterday: 'Invertebrates play 
an important role in nature, including pollinating flowers, controlling pests 
and decomposing organic matter. They are brilliant at telling us how well we 
are looking after the countryside. Get it wrong and they are the first to go 
extinct.'

 The plan is aimed at protecting species including:

Chequered skipper butterfly (Carterocephalus palaemon): Small, mainly brown 
butterfly with pale yellow markings. Now extinct in England, although still 
flourising on some managed sites in western Scotland. Lays its eggs on tussocks 
of purple moor grass.

Ladybird spider (Eresus niger): Inhabits heathland, with males resembling 
ladybirds. Lives in a tube in the ground and now endangered.

Fen raft spider (Dolomedes plantarius): Large inhabitant of ponds in fens. 
Sits in emergent vegetation with forelegs in water to sense small fish swimming 
by, then grabs them. Has reserve on the Norfolk-Suffolk border but has died out 
elsewhere.

Silver-studded blue butterfly (Plebejus argus): Blue with dark spots on 
underwing, ringed with white. Now found only in a few sites in Wales, East 
Anglia and parts of the South.

Field cricket (Gryllius campestris): Large, black and noisy. Once common in 
the South but now recorded at only two sites, in West Sussex.

Large marsh grasshopper (Stethophyma grossum): Used to be found throughout the 
South but now restricted to East Anglia.

Dark-bordered beauty (Epione paralellaria grossum): Moth that needs aspens or 
closely related trees for its caterpillar. Population now restricted to tiny 
colonies in the North and Scotland.

Tiger beetles (Cicindela sp): Voracious predator. Declined dramatically in 
England this century due to changes in habitats, which include heathland, 
cliffs and sand dunes.

 The plan includes a partnership arrangement between statutory and voluntary 
conservation bodies.

 Chris Mead, a leading ornithologist, said yesterday that biodiversity 'should 
safeguard the totality of the wildlife in the country. This new initiative 
shows the Government is tackling the issue properly.'
 