
At a time when general practice is reeling from ever-increasing workload, 
rising patient expectations and burgeoning bureaucracy, it comes as no surprise 
that medical students are avoiding the profession in favour of secondary care 
specialties, leading to staff shortages.


It is, therefore, refreshing to meet Dr Maslah Amin – one of a rare breed of 
doctors who decided to switch to general practice after he was due to start 
training as an interventional radiologist. A graduate from the University of 
Sheffield and national medical director’s clinical fellow at Health Education 
England (HEE), Amin is working with HEE on itsNothing General about General 
Practice campaign <https://gprecruitment.hee.nhs.uk/Recruitment/Nothing-General>
, encouraging young doctors to choose a career as a family doctor.

My career in general practice opened up a world of possibilities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone/2016/nov/07/general-practice-careers-val-wass>
He believes there is an image problem afflicting general practice, which may 
partly explain why medical graduates don’t choose this specialty. “We were 
mostly taught in a secondary care setting by older consultants with traditional 
views,” he says. “The education wasn’t focused on general practice, nor were 
there many GP placements or GP educators, so a lot of us graduated from medical 
school without having an informed perception of general practice, and instead 
thought of it as a second rate specialty.”

Amin says he chose general practice not for what it is today, but for what it 
will be in the future. “When I see its future in 10 years from now, I see a big 
multidisciplinary community hospital with many allied healthcare professionals 
such as pharmacists, nurses, physiotherapists, healthcare assistants and 
doctors working together as a team,” he explains. “With more care services 
being provided through primary care in the future, I see general practice as 
the most important specialty and the best way to help patients.” A statement 
many would agree with.

The General Practice Forward View <https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/gpfv/>, 
launched earlier this year, said there is no more important job in modern 
Britain than that of the family doctor. With a growing and ageing population, 
GPs have to deal with more complex health problems – and as a result, their job 
is more challenging than ever before.

It’s the flexibility and variety which makes general practice stand out
Dr Maslah Amin 
As modern healthcare moves away from the hospital to the community, it is now 
widely acknowledged that sustainable primary care is essential for a 
sustainable NHS. An extra £2.4bn a year has been earmarked for GP services by 
2020-21 – increasing the spending from £9.6bn in 2015-16 to more than £12bn by 
2020-21. A portion of this fund will also be used to expand the workforce and 
hire 5,000 additional doctors in general practice (along with 5,000 other 
professionals) by 2020.


Students should be made aware about the opportunities general practice offers, 
says Amin. “It gives you great flexibility with your career … you can have a 
specialist interest, combining specialism with generalism, you can go down the 
leadership path, take up medical education, get involved in other academia such 
as research or be a pure clinician.


“It’s the flexibility and variety which makes general practice stand out. For 
our generation, the retirement age is probably going to be in the 70s, and 
general practice gives you the chance to reinvent your career and work in a 
team, which is important for young people. There is enough in general practice 
to keep me going for another 50 years, I don’t feel other specialties offer as 
much opportunity.”


While some doctors don’t relish management roles, for Amin, it was the 
leadership potential that attracted him to general practice. “I’m the sort of 
person that if I see a system not working, I want to improve it. And with GPs 
now in charge of commissioning, there is scope to lead the integration of 
patient care and to also promote innovation for our modern NHS.”


Mentorship also plays a vital role. “I met my GP role models during my 
clinical fellowship at HEE – eight years after starting medical school. Working 
with them first-hand made me appreciate the breadth of experience general 
practice can offer and motivated me to become a GP. If I had met them earlier, 
I would probably be a senior GP trainee by now.”


It gives you the ability to develop your talents the way you want and yet have 
a work-life balance
Prof Sheona MacLeod 
Amin is talking about his mentors – Prof Sheona MacLeod, postgraduate dean and 
chair of HEE’s postgraduate deans and Prof Simon Gregory, the regional director 
and dean of education and quality in Midlands and east at HEE and HEE’s GP 
lead. MacLeod agrees that mentorship is much more important than previously 
realised: “Our trainee doctors value personal input, they want us to share not 
just knowledge but our stories too.”


She says HEE is working with medical schools to make students appreciate how 
rewarding general practice can be as a career. “It gives you the ability to 
develop your talents the way you want and yet have a work-life balance. You can 
have a challenging job and still have time for your family. This is a very 
positive message for young people.”

Gregory adds that mentoring “someone like Maslah who is incredibly bright and 
caring” can be equally rewarding. “It is not a one-way relationship,” he says.


Interestingly, both MacLeod and Gregory say GP trainees are often surprised to 
discover how stimulating general practice is. They emphasise the need to raise 
the profile of family doctors among the wider public and introduce flexible 
recruitment procedures and training.


Besides working with medical schools, HEE is collaborating with local 
authorities to encourage sixth formers to explore the option of GP work 
placements. In addition, efforts are being made to broaden the talent pool to 
include trainees from diverse backgrounds. Amin says people from BME 
backgrounds have traditionally faced issues with career progression, and 
initially he had encountered some skepticism as well.

 “Actually, lack of diversity isn’t just a race or gender issue but a class 
one,” he adds, pointing out that medicine is still considered an elitist 
career, not known for attracting many working class people. If young people 
from BME backgrounds can relate to me and realise they can do what I’m doing, 
then that makes me happy. Medicine is challenging, but if you have the talent, 
right support and discipline, you can do it.

“Being a GP and trying to solve patients’ problems is a privilege. You can’t 
change the world but you can change someone’s world.”

Content on the page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed by NHS England 
and Health Education England
 