
A “brutal bully” who battered a disabled man to death before getting a 
vulnerable accomplice to dump the body by a footpath has been sentenced to a 
minimum of 23 years in prison.


Lee Irving’s profound learning difficulties made him a target when he came 
under the influence of James Wheatley, 29, and his chaotic household in Kenton, 
Newcastle upon Tyne.

The 24-year-old thought he was with friends, but Wheatley repeatedly beat him 
over a number of days, stamping on his ribs so badly that experts likened 
Irving’s injuries to those of someone in a car crash.

Wheatley’s mother, Julie Mills, 52, his then girlfriend Nicole Lawrence, 22, 
and his accomplice Barry Imray, 35, who also has learning difficulties, did 
nothing to protect Irving.

When police called at the house on another matter, they were kept away from 
Irving.

Mills gave him prescription drugs including morphine to sedate him, and 
Lawrence suggested taking Irving to Durham and dumping him there once his 
condition improved.

But he died in June 2015 and Wheatley told Imray to wheel the body in a 
pushchair and discard it.

Imray took the body 800 metres (2,625ft) before leaving it on a footpath 
beside the A1. He made a weak attempt to claim that he had only just found the 
body.

Mr Justice Soole sentenced Wheatley to life with a minimum term of 23 years 
for murder. He said: “You are a vicious and brutal bully, prone to sudden and 
explosive acts of sustained violence.”

One aggravating factor was the vulnerability of the victim. The judge told 
Newcastle crown court: “He was both unable and unwilling to resist and you knew 
it. There is a special revulsion for the assault and abuse of the vulnerable.”

During a two-month trial, the jury heard that Wheatley intended to get cash 
from Irving’s account and “hammer loads” on his card.

The judge sentenced Mills to eight years in prison for causing or allowing the 
death of a vulnerable adult and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. 
Lawrence was convicted of the same offences and given four years.

Imray had previously admitted perverting the course of justice and was 
convicted of causing or allowing Irving’s death. He was sentenced to three 
years in prison.
 