
“Can I speak to Peter Sutcliffe?”

The journalist was perfectly serious. I was working in communications at 
Broadmoor hospital and he saw me as a route to people he thought were patients 
there. He wanted Sutcliffe’s “take” on a series of recent “Ripper style” 
murders in the Ipswich area. I explained – while trying to not audibly gasp – 
that Broadmoor could not confirm who its patients were, let alone put them up 
for press interviews.

Every so often, an FOI request asks how much the NHS spends on 
“communications”. The easy headline is that theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> needs real doctors, not spin doctors. 
But it is only when you look at the range of activities that communications 
cover that you wonder if the real spin doctors are those writing the story.

To some, communications is just shorthand for public relations and spin. In 
fact, responding to media queries (and FOI requests) – which the NHS is rightly 
expected to do as a public service – is a tiny proportion of our work.

Much of it is about making sure staff know what’s going on in their 
organisation, that information for patients is clear and easy to access and 
that MPs, local councils, regulators and community organisations are kept 
informed and involved in what the NHS is doing.

I have worked at a large trust where there was no system in place for briefing 
staff on the wards about things they needed to know. I’ve worked in places 
where every department was producing its own, homemade newsletter that was 
badly written, misspelt and missed out the information patients needed. I have 
had to advocate for people’s right to know about changes to local services and 
to develop plans to reach people who don’t read newspapers, rarely visit their 
GP and certainly don’t attend NHS meetings.

Part of the job is to manage press and public interest in the event of a major 
incident. This involves careful planning, working with other emergency 
services. How do you keep people informed, including your own staff, concerned 
members of the public and relatives of those impacted? Where do they all go in 
a busy working hospital? And major incidents come in different shapes and 
sizes. If a high-profile patient dies in your hospital, you need to be able to 
manage not just a potential media scrum disrupting your hospital, but the needs 
of the family too. I recall liaising with one very high-profile family after 
their son died, because they wanted to visit the hospital morgue without being 
accosted by the press.

Then there is the navigation issue. How does a person find their way around a 
hospital, let alone the whole NHS? Part of our job is to make sure that 
patients can get to the service they need as quickly as possible. How do we 
reach every potential patient to achieve this? How do we describe different 
services to the public? (spoiler: not always very helpfully).

I don’t deny that the odd Amateur Alistair surfaces, desperate to turn their 
job running comms for a cottage hospital into The Thick of It. But they are a 
rare breed. The majority of us see our job as helping the public, the media and 
a huge range of stakeholders to understand how the NHS works, the challenges it 
is facing and how they might be able to help. If you think about the huge 
numbers of services we provide, the many different communities we serve and the 
amount of information that implies, this is far from easy.

In recent years we have seen the beginnings of a sea change in the way the NHS 
talks to patients and the public. Expertise in consultation and community 
engagement is increasingly valued, not just because these things are required 
of the NHS, but because we know that involving patients in the development of 
services improves those services no end.

Some of the best conversations I have had about the NHS have been with the 
public. Most people understand the challenges presented by an ageing society, 
flat funding and increasingly expensive treatments. While they will not always 
agree with each other – or the NHS – on the best solutions, I am yet to attend 
an NHS public engagement event where I didn’t hear several good ideas. Of 
course, there is the odd moment – one man went around each person on a table, 
asked them their background and announced none of them were as qualified as him 
to talk about “his NHS” – but we should not underestimate the positive 
contribution patients and the public can make.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 