
The Arctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> is experiencing 
extraordinarily hot sea surface and air temperatures, which are stopping ice 
forming and could lead to record lows of sea ice at the north pole next year, 
according to scientists.

 Danish and US researchers monitoring satellites and Arctic weather stations 
are surprised and alarmed by air temperatures peaking at what they say is an 
unheard-of 20C higher than normal for the time of year. In addition, sea 
temperatures averaging nearly 4C higher than usual in October and November.

“It’s been about 20C warmer than normal over most of the Arctic Ocean, along 
with cold anomalies of about the same magnitude over north-central Asia. This 
is unprecedented for November,” said research professor Jennifer Francis of 
Rutgers university.

Temperatures have been only a few degrees above freezing when -25C should be 
expected, according to Francis. “These temperatures are literally off the 
charts for where they should be at this time of year. It is pretty shocking. 
The Arctic has been breaking records all year. It is exciting but also scary,” 
she said.
Arctic sea ice extent 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-22T11:07:25/embed.html>
Francis said the near-record low sea ice extent this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/arctic-sea-ice-shrinks-to-second-lowest-level-ever-recorded>
 had led to a warmer than usual autumn. That in turn had reduced the 
temperature difference between the Arctic and mid-latitudes.


“This helped make the jet stream wavier and allowed more heat and moisture to 
be driven into Arctic latitudes and perpetuate the warmth. It’s a vicious 
circle,” she added.


Sea ice, which forms and melts each year, has declined more than 30% in the 
past 25 years. This week it has been at the lowest extent ever recorded for 
late November. According to the US government’s National Snow and Ice Data 
Centre, (NSIDC), around 2m square kilometres less ice has formed since 
September than average. The level is far below the same period in 2012,when sea 
ice went on to record its lowest ever annual level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/sep/14/arctic-sea-ice-smallest-extent>
.

Francis said she was convinced that the cause of the high temperatures and ice 
loss was climate change. “It’s all expected. There is nothing but climate 
change that can cause these trends. This is all headed in the same direction 
and picking up speed.”

Rasmus Tonboe, a sea ice remote sensing expert at the Danish Meteorological 
Institute in Copenhagen, said: “Sea surface temperatures in the Kara and 
Barents seas are much warmer than usual. That makes it very difficult for sea 
ice to freeze.

Record-breaking temperatures 'have robbed the Arctic of its winter'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/record-breaking-temperatures-have-robbed-the-arctic-of-its-winter>
“When we have large areas of open water, it also raises air temperatures, and 
it has been up to 10/15C warmer. Six months ago the sea ice was breaking up 
unusually early. This made more open water and allowed the sunlight to be 
absorbed, which is why the Arctic is warmer this year,” he said.

“What we are seeing is both surprising and alarming. This is faster than the 
models. It is alarming because it has consequences.”


Julienne Stroeve, the professor of polar observation at University College 
London said ice that should be growing at this time of year was retreating. 
“It’s been a crazy year. There is no ice at Svalbard yet. In the last few days 
there has been a decline in sea ice in the Bering sea. Very warm air has 
flooded into the Arctic from the south, pressing the ice northwards.

“Air temperature drives the formation of the ice. It has been really delayed 
this year so the ice is also much thinner than it usually is. The speed at 
which this is happening surprises me. In the Arctic the trend has been clear 
for years, but the speed at which it is happening is faster than anyone 
thought,” said Strove.

“Ice is very sensitive to weather. There is a huge high pressure over the Kara 
sea, and Eurasia and Canada. We are seeing very strong winds bringing warm air 
north.”

The significance of the ice forming late is that this affects its growth the 
following year, with consequences for climate. “Extreme wind and high air 
temperatures [now],” she said, “could see ice extent drop next year below the 
record 2012 year”.

She added: “The ice could be even thinner than it was at the start of 2012. 
This is definitely a strange year.”

Ed Blockley, the lead scientist of the UK Met Office’s polar climate group, 
said: “The sea ice is extremely low. It is freezing but very slowly. Last week 
the Barents sea reduced its ice cover. There was less ice at the end than the 
start.

“These temperature anomalies are not unprecedented but this is certainly 
extraordinary. We are seeing a continual decline in ice. It it likely to be a 
hiccup but it puts us in bad starting position for next year.”
 