
If a knockout defeat was the nightmare conclusion to his 15-year career that 
Ricky Hatton secretly feared,his losing performance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/video/2012/nov/25/ricky-hatton-retires-comeback-defeat-video>
 was as good as he was capable of at 34 after 42 months out of the ring, and no 
amount of repositioning to accommodate a hero should embellish that judgment.

In the immediate aftermath, the former world light-welter and welterweight 
champion, listening to friends, perhaps, had himself "four rounds up" in a 
non-title 10-rounder against Vyacheslav Senchenko, who had lost only once.

But his later utterances spoke more directly to a narrative that worsened 
after an encouraging start: Hatton, slain by a body shot – once his own 
favoured form of execution – knew he had no more to give and what he did bring 
was not enough. He lost his shape in the fifth, and a booming left hook in the 
sixth appeared to drain his legs of bounce and his blows of crispness. That was 
a significant turning point.

As the pressure mounted, his head movement slowed, except when snapped back by 
jabs, right crosses and left hooks. Senchenko, sensing the steady degradation 
of Hatton's work more readily than the fans, boxed patiently on the retreat to 
take rounds seven and eight going away. When he pounced in the ninth, it was 
without mercy – a knife-like left hook to the body on the blindside (with 
eight-ounce gloves) cutting a tiring Hatton in half for a full count.

Later, Hatton mixed regret with candour: "Even if he hadn't caught me with 
that body shot, if I'd got over the finish line, just scraped home, I still 
think I'd be telling you the same thing. I haven't got it [any] more. It 
doesn't matter how much you train, or how sharp ... I couldn't have done 
anything better: my sparring was great, my movement was great. Whether I was 
four rounds up or not, I don't need anyone to tell me."

The promised recalibration of his "red mist" boxing never materialised. He 
was, as his friend Ryan Rhodes said later, "as anxious as I've ever seen him, 
more even than against Manny Pacquiao".

What now? His business partner Richard Poxon put it succinctly: "This was 
about what Ricky has been, is now and will be in the future: big events, big 
venues and sellout crowds." And that's for the good; Hatton is safer outside 
the ropes, and outside the pub too. Whether he will be more content, he will 
discover in the months and years to come. He has some baggage to dump.

Senchenko, coming to the ring in a Manchester United shirt, was booed by 
Hatton's Blue Moon army, but he was here as a dancing partner; they meant him 
no ill. When it was done, they ignored him, which is about as good a reception 
as he could have expected. Nevertheless, he moves on — at 35, a year older than 
Hatton — to a rematch with Paulie Malignaggi, who ripped his WBA 10st 7lb title 
from him last April.
 