
I'm the Marmite of boxing," James DeGale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> says as, licking his lips, he 
stretches out on a chair in his ­parents' front room in Harlesden in north-west 
London. "Now that I've turned from being an Olympic gold medal-winning champion 
into a very slick professional boxer there ain't no doubt about it. People are 
going to either love me or hate me."

DeGale, who won the Olympic middle­weight title in Beijing and has since 
signed a reputed £1.5m contract to fight professionally for Frank Warren, 
ponders a possible new nickname and then bursts out laughing. "James 'Marmite' 
DeGale? Nah, I've been called 'Chunky' since I was a fat 10-year-old," he 
grins. "So I don't reckon that, even at the age of 22 and looking real fit like 
I do now, I'm going to change 'Chunky' to 'Marmite'. But everyone's going to 
say 'Wow! I love this guy!' or 'Yuck! Can't stand him'. It's definitely a 
Marmite thing."

As if to offer proof of his capacity to make other people scrunch up their 
faces in disdain at the very mention of his name,Joe Calzaghe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/joecalzaghe> and David Haye have already 
dismissed DeGale's swaggering belief in an elusive style of boxing which, he 
predicts, "will see me becoming a world champion in the next 3½ years". It says 
much for his Marmite theory that Calzaghe, whom DeGale reveres, should take 
time out from considering his retirement to pour scorn on the Olympian's 
professional aspirations, suggesting that the young southpaw lacks the power 
and the hunger to fulfil his world championship ambition.

DeGale admits to being hurt by his hero's reaction, particularly after they 
had chatted so amiably at the BBC Sports ­Personality of the Year Awards last 
month. But he is smart enough to realise that an acrimonious parting between 
Warren and Calzaghe has probably fuelled the Welsh boxer's comments. To 
compensate for his loss of Calzaghe, Warren has invested heavily in the three 
best technicians from the Great Britain Olympic squad with Frankie Gavin and 
Billy Joe Saunders joining DeGale as the promoter launches a new era of British 
boxing.

Each of the trio will make their professional debut on the same bill in London 
next month. DeGale is likely to command the most attention as he shows how 
­likeable he can be beneath a flash ­exterior. "We had some media training 
before the Olympics – and I was a complete prat. I was trying to be, like, posh 
and a bit ­articulate. But I ain't posh and, while I've got a fast mouth, I 
ain't so articulate either. I was pretending to be really clever, using all 
these big words I kept messing up. I decided then there was no point ­trying to 
be anyone else but me."

DeGale looks briefly pensive before he lights up at a query as to whether most 
of the young women in Harlesden love the self-proclaimed Marmite-Man. "Of 
course, big time," DeGale chortles, hugging himself in admiration. "I used to 
get women easy beforehand. But since I've become Olympic champion it's been 
crazy. I've been a very busy boy."

The fighter broke up with his long-term girlfriend just before the Beijing 
Games and he clearly relishes the fruits of his post-Olympic fame. "I still 
chat to my ex but I really like being single again and not having to think 
about that relationship stuff," he explains. "I was with her for seven years, 
on and off, and she was driving me mad, getting possessive and all that. But 
now I'm free and easy."

DeGale jumps up excitedly. "Did you see the new black Range Rover outside my 
mum's front door? That was given to me by Frank Warren. So now I got the Range 
Rover my popularity has gone up even more. It's going to be tough to be 
disciplined but from January 1 it's Serious James. No more playing around."

Aware of the jibes that he is too cocky for his own good, as if his 
self-belief is merely a façade to be shattered by the cruel ­realities of the 
professional ring, DeGale looks suddenly sombre. "Don't let the good looks and 
the playboy image fool you. I'm very serious. I know how dangerous this 
business is. I also know that if I muck this up then I would have to go back to 
learning about being a plumber. In life most of us are only really good at one 
thing – and with me it's boxing."

Although it has yet to be announced formally, DeGale, as part of his quest to 
underline why he will be relentlessly disciplined as a super-middleweight, 
suggests that he is likely to appoint Jim McDonnell as his trainer. "Jim is 
real hardcore when making sure his fighters are fit – and that was part of the 
reason why I'll probably favour him over another great trainer in Jimmy Tibbs. 
But people think Jim is just about fitness and that ain't true. Technique-wise 
he's great. When he was a pro he won his first 36 rounds and he nearly beat 
Azumah Nelson – a great boxer. Jim can make me slicker than ever."

McDonnell will be assisted by Steve Newland, who trained DeGale throughout a 
long amateur career which culminated in his startling victory in Beijing. 
"Everybody had written me off," DeGale says, "because I'd lost in the first 
round of the world championships in 2007. And even I thought I might struggle 
to get an Olympic medal. I had to beat a reigning Olympic champion, [Bakhityar] 
Artayev from Kazakhstan, in the quarters and then [Ireland's] Darren Sutherland 
in the semi and the Cuban [Emilio Correa] in the final. Sutherland had won four 
out of our five previous fights and the Cuban had beaten me twice.

"But I played with Artayev and my best performance in Beijing was against 
Sutherland. It was like a matador against a bull and I fought beautifully. The 
final was not so pretty, what with the Cuban ­biting me and brawling, but it 
still gives me goosebumps thinking how I won it – and how much I owed that gold 
medal to my parents."

A beaming Leroy, his black father of French Caribbean descent, and Diane, his 
mother, a white Londoner, emerge to entertain us – especially with an anecdote 
of how Leroy locked himself in a wardrobe at home during the final while his 
other children shouted out the round-by-round scoring. "My dad only stepped out 
of that wardrobe once I'd won," DeGale says. "But I sometimes think the only 
people who believed I could do it were [the British Olympic team trainer] Terry 
Edwards and my family. My dad put money on me at 80-1 and he won 11 grand. My 
brother Alex also won £8,000. That shows the faith my family have in me and why 
they saved me."

As his parents leave the room the usually extrovert boxer becomes more 
introspective. "I'm one of the lucky ones," he says quietly. "I could have 
ended up in a gang or in prison because Harlesden is real rough and I was 
always a naughty boy. That's how I got into boxing. My dad and my granddad took 
me down to the gym to sort me out and for a while that helped. But then I hit a 
very rough patch at 15 when I was Jack The Lad, roaming the streets until after 
midnight, smoking, getting up to no good. I was in danger of going off the 
rails but that's when my mum and dad gave me some tough love.

My mum was about to call Social Services and I really shat myself. I could 
tell she was proper serious. It was only when my dad said 'let's give him one 
more chance' that she backed down. Even now she says, 'James, you were so close 
to going because I knew you needed a real shock'. They shocked the hell out of 
me and I got my act together. I started dedicating myself to boxing and soon 
after that I was picked for England. I haven't looked back since."

Diane and Leroy will continue to monitor his "extra-curricular" activities 
closely and by staying in the family home for at least another year he is 
likely to retain the focus he will need as a professional fighter. His parents 
will also take charge of his ongoing legal battle with the AmateurBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Association who apparently owe him a 
£20,000 bonus for winning an Olympic gold medal. "I've got it in writing that 
they would pay me the money and so we're taking them to court," DeGale 
explains. "I'm going to let mum and dad handle it because it's now a matter of 
principle. Four months ago I would have said I wanted the money but, now, I'm 
going to give the 20 grand to charity.

"When I got back from Beijing I was in the Olympic bubble and saying, 'Mum, I 
want to stay amateur for 2012!' But the ABA didn't even meet me. I went up to 
Sheffield and Liverpool and they kept flopping the meetings. They all hate each 
other and it's a complete shambles. They're arseholes. So I made the best 
­decision possible in turning pro."

On cue, as if preparing himself for professional wealth and glory, DeGale 
shows me his new business card. 'James * Chunky * DeGale' is printed in black 
against a gleaming gold backdrop.

"Ain't that the business?" DeGale grins. "By the end of the year I want my 
name on everyone's lips and, just like Marmite, getting a really strong 
reaction. I'm kinda hoping they like me more than they hate me. But, whatever, 
they're all gonna have an opinion about me."
 