
Councils are facing a challenge in recruiting experienced social workers, 
leading some to encourage those who have left the profession to update their 
skills and knowledge, and return.

David Johnston, managing director for children’s services and learning at 
Buckinghamshire county council, says there is a shortage of social workers 
across England. When he became director at the end of 2014, he was keen to 
expand the number of in-house, experienced social workers and reduce agency 
staff. The spend on agency fees is not insignificant, Johnston says. “It 
normally comes with an overhead of 30-40% on top of what you would normally pay 
an employee.”

In 2014, around 37% of Buckinghamshire’s children’s social work workforce were 
from agencies, but by 2016 that number had been reduced to just over 20%.

“We looked at different initiatives to recruit an experienced workforce. One 
of the areas we looked at was those who had taken a break from social work,” 
Johnston says. “We made an effort to ensure that those people who hadn’t worked 
as social workers for a while knew that we had an offer to potentially support 
them to come back to employment.”

A number of incentives are on offer at Buckinghamshire, including competitive 
salaries and a comprehensive development programme. The authority has flexible 
working practices, offering part-time roles and the option of working from home.

Local authorities need experienced social workers who have the skills to do 
the job, yet some are choosing to work through agencies or leave the profession 
altogether. There are a number of reasons for leaving, including starting a 
family, a change in career direction or caring responsibilities. However, there 
are returners seeking to come back to the profession and some councils are 
actively targeting this group.


Many qualified social workers who have left the profession find it daunting to 
return as they need to keep their skills up to date. The requirements for 
re-registering with theHealth and Care Professions Council 
<http://www.hcpc-uk.co.uk/> (HCPC) differ according to the length of time spent 
away from the profession. Following a break of two to five years, social 
workers need to complete 30 days of continuing professional development (CPD). 
A break of more than five years will require 60 days of CPD.

Former social workers come back to the fold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/01/former-social-workers-come-back-to-the-fold>
Johnston says there needs to be a focus on recruiting career changers and 
returners by promoting flexible entry routes. Buckinghamshire has run return to 
social work programmes for the past five years, sometimes in collaboration with 
Milton Keynes county council. Buckinghamshire says it generally receives 10-15 
inquiries per year.

Its last return to social work programme in the summer of 2015 ran with a 
group of 11 candidates. The course, developed with the South Bank University in 
London, included up-to-date information about practice, issues and legislation 
in social work and offered shadowing opportunities in social work teams. It 
also provided advice and guidance so candidates could undertake the equivalent 
number of hours of self-directed learning to complete the requirements for 
applying to the HCPC for re-registration.

Annette Tahoe is a successful returner to social work. She first qualified in 
Liverpool in 1992 and took a job in child protection services before working as 
an early liaison officer. In 2003, Tahoe moved to Hounslow council, where she 
worked as the principal diversity manager. Then, in 2011, she was made 
redundant.

After taking a year out, Tahoe decided to return to the profession. It was 
searching “return to social work” online that brought up Buckinghamshire’s 
programme.

Tahoe had kept her registration up to date during the time she was not a 
practising social worker because she always thought a return was possible at 
some point in the future.

“As part of the programme, I was put on a 10-day placement with the children’s 
disabilities team – and I was shadowing one of the social workers,” she says. 
“The only thing challenging to me was the electronic systems and different 
processes.

Why I became a social worker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/15/why-i-became-a-social-worker>
“Just before the end of the 90-day course finished I was offered a post as an 
assistant social worker. I decided to take the position as a way in, and did it 
for three months. Then a position came up within the team, so I went for it and 
I got a permanent post in 2012.

“Buckinghamshire was really supportive. When I was offered my permanent post I 
negotiated my salary; I wasn’t coming in on entry level, and they accepted 
that. I’ve returned older and wiser. Best move I ever made.”

Andrew Carter, head of children’s social care at Thurrock council, says it has 
targeted returning social workers with a scheme offering a 10-day course with 
the opportunity to shadow a team, mentoring and one-to-one supervision before 
being interviewed for vacancies in the social work department. The council also 
offers a retention bonus of around £2,000-£3,000 for returners.

“The strongest thing for us is that we have a very solid training programme,” 
he says.

Support for returners is one of the most important factors, Carter believes. 
“For some people it’s like starting again, depending on how long they’ve been 
out. We try to be as flexible as possible. We are here to nurture people.

“I’m not expecting someone who can come in and have a good understanding 
straight away of all the legislative frameworks – we can provide training for 
that. We are looking for the basic skills, such as risk assessment.

“What we have learned as a department is that you can’t just throw people in 
and expect them to hit the ground running. It’s not a magic bullet but about 
long-term investment.”

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 