
The ‘national living wage’ means we have to do more with less

[The national living wage means] we are now expected to do more work in less 
time; as the length of our unpaid breaks were increased when it came in. 
Services are stretched and it always feels like you can’t do as much for the 
residents as you would like. It seems clear that to allow social care to be in 
the private sector is a mistake. We had a millionaire owner with a private 
helicopter making profits from the palliative care of people with dementia. 
Funding from either the council or the residents own savings are lining the 
pockets of millionaires who own the businesses. It shouldn’t be about profit: 
100% of funding should be going to the care; staffing, equipment, activities 
and food.An anonymous care worker in the north of England

What's it like to be a care worker in the UK? Share your stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/28/care-workers-share-stories-of-your-working-conditions>
Zero-hour contracts in this sector are disgusting

I have been a care support worker in the community for six months now on a 
zero-hours contract. I love my job, adore my clients, and give them the care I 
would give my parents. However, I am limited with the time I am given to each 
call, as I can do as much as 16 visits in a day. In the summer I worked 12 days 
in a row, which were all 12-hour days. The office did not care that I had 
worked this much, even though I could have been at risk of injuring clients. 
This industry is shocking. We can work all day, every day, and even on time off 
we are called in to work. We are expected to raise issues of safeguarding, 
problems, and constantly fill out forms, but all unpaid and in our own time. 
Zero-hour contracts are disgusting. There is no job security from one week to 
the next so you work as much as you can. We are expected to wake a client, 
shower and provide a breakfast within 30mins. If it takes longer, which it 
always does, we are not paid.


Care supports needs to be unified with one standard of care, one training 
standard, and the CQC [Care Quality Commission] performing regular checks. The 
sector also needs to get rid of zero-hour contracts. People don’t stay in this 
job for the money – I’d get more working in a bar or a cafe, but I stay because 
I respect and like my clients.An anonymous field care support worker

Despite working full-time I cannot meet my basic bills

I work on a zero hours contract for the NHS. Despite working full-time I 
cannot meet my basic bills – council tax, heating, transport and food (which 
comes last). I don’t eat a healthy diet, surviving on the very cheapest meals: 
bread, eggs and beans. I never have money left over for even the smallest 
luxuries, like a nice pineapple or piece of fruit, let alone socialising. I 
have lost my home as I could not keep up council tax payments, and I am 
currently looking for somewhere to rent. I am not eligible for help as I have 
no children. I am fortunate that my wage is above the national living wage, 
though utilities and food have risen, making it impossible to break even. Wages 
have fallen way behind living costs, making it impossible for people to keep a 
home.Care workers <https://www.theguardian.com/society/care-workers> are 
currently not respected. Low pay and poor working conditions result in high 
staff turnover. I love my job but sadly I may have to consider leaving just to 
make ends meet.An anonymous care worker in Glasgow

Underfunded and overstretched – the crisis in care for the elderly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/care-for-elderly-crisis-how-to-improve-quality-of-life>
We are regularly assigned too many hours to be safe

Pay <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> is docked, or incorrect, and often 
not corrected until months later. When the rota comes out, we are expected to 
drive into the office on our days off with no travel paid. We are regularly 
assigned too many hours to be safe for service users. The employment conditions 
are harsh and make you feel undervalued, de-skilled and affects motivation. 
It’s a demanding job where some clients will treat you like a servant. It’s 
also very rewarding and worthwhile, but I don’t think many people will last for 
more than eight to 10 years. After that the way we are treated begins to cloud 
how you perform. The minimum wage has had some effect, but the wages are still 
too low to provide a decent standard of living. It is a struggle at the end of 
each month. Frontline management need a better understanding of the issues 
workers face. And there needs to be more societal understanding of the value of 
care work.An anonymous support worker in Scotland

Care work has become dependent on untrained staff

I have been a professional care worker for over 10 years. I came to it 
expecting to build a career. Since joining I have observed a terrible decline 
in the value of my job and the service which I used to provide. I am expected 
to provide my own vehicle, in over 10 years the fuel allowance has not been 
increased. The work has become very stressful, with severe budget restrictions 
demanding severely limited time for each patient. Many patients live in 
isolated country locations making night visits difficult and worrying. Quite 
often I find myself providing extra services such as a bit of shopping for 
service users in my own time. As a care worker of 10 years I am entitled to 
certain sickness benefits. These included full pay for six months followed by 
six months on half pay. In my ten years of service I have seldom been off sick. 
In order to remove the sickness benefits the council re-constituted the care 
service under another name and attempted to abolish those benefits. I fought 
back and have managed to retain my benefits. But in my view the last vestiges 
of care work as a career have been stripped away. The work has become dependent 
on untrained workers taking up the job before finding something better. Few 
people will now see care work as a career.An anonymous care worker in Cornwall


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 