
Do you need a degree to run a string of businesses? Research 
<http://centreforentrepreneurs.org/cfe-research/beyond-the-first-business-the-myths-risks-and-rewards-of-being-a-serial-entrepreneur>
 by Coutts and the Centre for Entrepreneurs suggests the level of an 
entrepreneur’s education is inversely related to the number and turnover of the 
businesses they start.


Among those surveyed in the research, those that had a bachelor’s degree or 
above had started 2.7 businesses on average. For those with a lower 
qualification or no qualification at all, the average number of businesses 
started was 3.5. Meanwhile, a higher proportion of the non-university educated 
were running businesses with a turnover greater than £1m (34%) compared to the 
university educated (18%).


There is a long-term stagnation in graduate earnings 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-36144084> – in 2008 a young graduate was 
generally earning around £24,000, it was the same in 2015. As such, 
entrepreneurial teenagers might opt out of higher education.

According to the Centre for Entrepreneurs’ research, serial entrepreneurs who 
launch the most businesses tend to get off the blocks before they hit 25.

Luke Grimes, 28, is co-founder of Manchester-based web design agency Webantic 
<http://webantic.co.uk/>. The business, his third of four, is set to turnover 
£1m by 2018.


While at school, Grimes sold snooker cues to regulars at his local snooker 
club. He had no appetite for university after A-levels. Instead, he launched 
his first official business, installing wet rooms, despite having no expertise 
in plumbing. He bought intelligence on potential customers from DIY websites, 
paid self-employed salespeople to cold call and close the deals, and ran the 
building teams who did the work.


Aged 20, Grimes decided the wet rooms business wasn’t doing well enough. So 
his next move was to launch a short-lived IT support business, Tiga Tech, 
before moving on to Webantic, which he launched with his friend, Calvin Evans.


Grimes says: “We’d grown up with computers and programming, and it was the 
only skill we had.”

The pair made sacrifices for the business: they lived in a shared house in a 
cheap part of Manchester, cut their expenses to the minimum and worked every 
hour they weren’t asleep. Grimes says: “We had nothing to lose, no kids, no 
mortgage; we had very little business acumen, and very little to offer, just 
very, very hard work.” Grimes’s fourth enterprise sees him invest in other 
businesses, he runs this alongside Webantic.


Shazam co-founder: 'We were growing a business in a collapsing market'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/dec/07/shazam-co-founder-we-were-growing-a-business-in-a-collapsing-market>
The energy and fearlessness of youth appear to be defining features of young 
serial entrepreneurs. Technical skills, such as managing finances, are also 
extremely useful, says Jack Tang. Tang, 24, is the CEO ofUrban Massage 
<https://www.urbanmassage.com/en/london/> and a serial entrepreneur. But he 
thinks skills can be picked up along the way or brought in. “If I’m honest, I 
don’t know about finance, tax and human resources,” Tang says. “I have a head 
of finance who is also a lawyer, and a chief operating officer who has been a 
managing director of two very successful e-commerce companies. As CEO, I am the 
visionary for the business.”


As a teenager, Tang began building computers to a tailored specification for 
school friends. He then went to King’s College, London. But he dropped out when 
his venture thestudentjob.com, which listed part-time jobs and internships, 
started to grow so fast he couldn’t juggle study with work.


He never went back. Eventually he sold the site to the Daily Mail Group, for 
an undisclosed sum. He went on to co-found Urban Massage, a mobile massage 
company. Tang has been successful at securing over £5m of funding for this 
venture.


Detailed research into the sector was critical for winning investors approval. 
“I had to present myself in a very mature light so that as soon as I opened my 
mouth, they ignored what they saw and listened to what I said.”


His research, and presentation, included how much was being spent on massages 
globally; how much of that was spent in the UK; how much was spent with 
independent massage therapists or small companies and how many massage 
therapists operated a mobile service.


As Tang has discovered, a lack of academic credentials does not necessarily 
put off investors. When entrepreneurs apply for funding fromTransmit Start-Ups 
<http://www.transmitstartups.co.uk/?gclid=CJKNkqv1wdACFZUK0wod-MQBpg>, an 
official delivery partner for the government initiated Start Up Loans Company, 
the adviser doesn’t look at whether they have a university education, says 
commercial director Richard Myers.


A degree, Myers adds, has very little bearing on the success of a business. 
“You can spend years studying, accrue substantial debt, and there is no 
guarantee of a suitable, graduate-level job at the end [...] What you learn 
from starting your own business – making mistakes, connecting with people, 
researching, marketing, understanding the importance of looking after customers 
– is invaluable.”


Though some have taken targeted short courses, none of these young 
entrepreneurs have gone back to complete a degree.


Are universities doing enough to help students start businesses?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/01/universities-help-students-start-business>
Azam Jaafri, now 36, founder of healthy Indian food brand Gourmosa 
<https://gourmosa.com/> and halal brand Foodery, began his first business 
renovating and selling houses at 21. He has launched six startups to date, four 
of which he still controls. One of these is an investment business.


Jaafri says he would have no qualms in putting up money for the right young 
entrepreneur. “A 22 year old could approach me and, if they know their market, 
and have determination and hunger, even if they don’t initially know exactly 
what to do, I can tell they’ll get it done,” he says.


Jaafri’s family is entrepreneurial and growing up surrounded by 
business-minded relatives seems to be a relatively common factor in young 
people’s choice to set up on their own.


Not so, however, for Mark Pearson, who started his first restaurant business 
in his early twenties after working as a sous chef at Claridge’s. He’d always 
wanted to be his own boss, and was encouraged when a customer who owned a 
number of gastropubs suggested that Pearson use one of his premises to start a 
restaurant. For funding, however, Pearson had to look to his grandmother, who 
lent him £3,000. “Given we were far from rich as a family, I understood just 
how important it was to make it work,” he says.


The restaurant business turned a profit and grew from one member of staff to 
three. But Pearson’s interests moved on and he left it to his business partner, 
the owner of the gastropub chain. Age 27, he went on to launch
MyVoucherCodes.co.uk <http://myvouchercodes.co.uk/> and CouponCodes.co.uk 
<http://couponcodes.co.uk/>: the sites sold last year for £55m.


Like Grimes, Pearson initially spent every waking hour learning how to build, 
manage and market his online businesses. He says: “If you’re willing to do 
that, I do believe this is all the education you need.”


An unstoppable drive to get you through the bad times is also required, Grimes 
adds. It seems that if you’ve started in business young, you’re unlikely to 
rest on your laurels. Tang adds: “You need to have hunger, perseverance, be a 
fighter who will stand up straight after being beaten up – you need to be 
prepared to make a lot of sacrifices.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 