
Observing the actions and utterings of Tyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> this week has served as a 
reminder of just how complex the human mind is and how, for some, it can become 
too much to handle. There wasthe retirement that never was on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/tyson-fury-retirement-boxing-twitter>
 and then 24 hours later the publication of an interview with Rolling Stone in 
whichFury claimed he had taken “lots of” cocaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
 in order to deal with a bipolar disorder. If that was not disturbing enough, 
the 28-year-old openly spoke about being at “the brink of death”. “I don’t see 
a way out,” he added. “I don’t want to live any more.”

Fury has become a figure of ridicule for some and loathing for others but, 
with his life and livelihood on the line – the British Boxing Board of Control 
confirmed on Wednesday it will discuss withdrawing his licence on 12 October in 
light of the Rolling Stone interview – a more sympathetic consensus is 
beginning to form round the man who 11 months ago shook the boxing world with
victory over Wladimir Klitschko in Düsseldorf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
. A troubling figure for so long, it is increasingly clear he is troubled 
himself.

Few have more sympathy for Fury than David Allen, a fellow British heavyweight 
who stepped away from the sport in August so he could deal with his depression. 
Allen sees some of the reactions to Fury’s behaviour, this week and previously, 
as part of a lack of awareness in regards to mental health and, having got to 
know Fury, believes he has become a deeply misunderstood figure.

“When it comes to mental health we’re years behind where we should be,” Allen 
says. “People in this country either don’t know enough about it or don’t take 
it seriously enough and you can see that in the way the media in particular 
have questioned if Tyson has even got mental health issues. It’s just not the 
type of thing a person would make up.

“Tyson shares some of the behavioural patterns that depression has caused in 
me – being happy one second and down in the dumps the next – but, whereas I can 
deal with my problems in private, Tyson is the world heavyweight champion so 
can’t escape the spotlight.

“I trained at the Fury gym in Bolton in the buildup to my fight against Larry 
Olubamiwo in June 2014 and have been back a few times since. Whenever I’ve seen 
Tyson there he’s been great to me. He’s a really nice man, someone who’s got 
time for everyone and who never says no to a fan who wants a photo or 
autograph. I can’t say a bad word about him or the Fury family in general. 
They’re lovely people.”

Allen had fought 11 times as a professional, winning nine times. He took 
Dillian Whyte the distance in his most recent contest in July and the plan was 
to kick on. But the 24-year-old, nicknamed “White Rhino”, has instead been 
inactive for the past three months following a relapse into his long-standing 
mental health problem.

“I’ve struggled with depression since I was 14-15 years old but for a long 
time, swept it under the carpet,” he says. “But it got to a stage where I felt 
I had to get on top of it. I started seeing a counsellor in June 2015 and since 
then have been managing my problems. I’m in a good place at the moment but I’m 
aware a bad day, a bad week, is never far away. And when that moment comes I’ll 
go see a counsellor again and talk things through – I feel comfortable doing 
that now.”

Allen, who also admits to having had issues with gambling, plans to return to 
the ring in November. “I can’t face the gym right now but boxing is what I do 
and financially I’m not in a position where I can’t fight. So I’ll be back,” he 
says. “That’s not necessarily the case with Tyson but I hope to see him in the 
ring again. For now, though, he needs to take some time off. While he does, I 
hope his critics leave him alone.”

As far as Paul Farmer, the chief executive of the mental health charity, Mind, 
is concerned, Fury’s priority should be seeking as much help and support as 
possible. “We’ve had no contact with him but he’s clearly going through a tough 
time,” he says. “It’s important he’s been open about his mental health issues 
and not put them to one side. That’s maybe helping people understand some of 
the behaviour he’s exhibited recently.

“When people are in the public eye and speak about mental health it also helps 
others seek support – Mind consistently see a rise in people seeking help; it 
gives people permission to talk about it and help remove the stigma. That was 
certainly the case when Frank Bruno and Ricky Hatton spoke about their own 
problems. And the more we discuss mental health, the healthier society in 
general will become.”
 