
I was five when this picture was taken. Yes, we were poor, but it was Moss 
Side in 1969 – everyone was poor. It was better than the tenements in Glasgow, 
where we’d come from. My dad was a miner and couldn’t get work up there, so 
he’d moved the family toManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>. 
I was the fifth of eight children; in the picture, I’m to the left, standing 
just in front of my big brother. We had a happy upbringing: we were never short 
of a friend and we shared everything.

Our house on Moss Side was so derelict that we couldn’t use all the rooms. One 
door wouldn’t even open. Then one day Dad bashed it in and the whole ceiling 
just fell to the floor. The house was damp, with plaster falling off the walls. 
We kids all slept in the same room on some beds pushed together. We only ever 
had one lightbulb, which got moved around the house.

There was an Indian family next door, and I used to play with the children. 
When it was teatime, if you were over, you got fed. At a wedding there, money 
was being pinned to the groom and he gave some to me. Dad took it to get some 
shopping in.

My parents were very friendly but they were also hard as nails. Dad got work 
as a doorman. They would go without food but always made sure we had something. 
We didn’t really know we were poor. One day at school I was trying to get a 
teacher’s attention and she said, “Go away, you smelly little boy.” I cried 
most of that day. You say that to a five-year-old and it sticks with them.

I remember the photographer coming round. Mum told us, “We’ve got the papers 
coming tomorrow and I want you lot dressed in your best clothes.” Only now do I 
know he was with the charityShelter <http://www.shelter.org.uk/xmas_2016>. Not 
long after, they helped us move into another house in Chorlton. It was a 
mansion, with five bedrooms and hot water; we were thrilled. I consider that my 
childhood home. For our first New Year there, because we were Scottish and New 
Year was our thing, we had a party that went on for days.

We were the poorest people in Chorlton. Some of the neighbours weren’t too 
happy because we didn’t look the part, but at school, once people got to know 
me, I made friends left, right and centre.

I left school in 1979 and got work servicing old washing machines and vacuum 
cleaners. It was my first taste of engineering and I loved it. I’ve been doing 
that sort of thing since. I’m 53 now, and if I didn’t have work I’d go mad. I 
do worry about money. Things are harder than they have been. In the 90s I was 
on £15 an hour and now I’m on £8.50.

When Shelter got in touch about this picture, it was emotional for me. It’s 
the first time I’ve seen myself at that age. I was a good-looking boy. My 
siblings weren’t interested in talking about it, but I’m nostalgic. We were 
just kids: Mum and Dad were alive, and we all got on. It does make me angry 
that we had to live like that, though. The house got knocked down and there’s a 
doctor’s surgery there now.

I’m proud of what I’ve achieved since then. I’ve been with my wife for 35 
years and we’ve got five lovely kids. I’m not a millionaire by any stretch, but 
we’re happy. There’s not much more I could ask for.

• Slum Britain: 50 Years On 
<http://www.channel5.com/channel-5-teams-shelter-2015-bafta-winners-slum-britain-50-years>
 is on Channel 5 on 5 December, and has been made in partnership with Shelter.

Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>
 