
Frank Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, the chair of 
parliament’s welfare committee, has said that a company’s “reign of terror” 
over British tax credit recipients will be drawing to a close after HMRC 
decided not to renew its contract.

US company Concentrix was accused of making a string of mistakes including 
stopping a teenage single mum from receiving tax credits after wrongly claiming 
she was married to a dead pensioner.


Field had called on the government to investigate and act on concerns about 
Concentrix’s handling of tax credit claims.


Following HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>’s decision not to 
sign a new contract with the company, Field said: “Concentrix’s reign of terror 
is drawing to a close. Again the government has acted decisively in protecting 
vulnerable Britain. This holds out huge prospects and, for some exploiters, 
horror, in the near future.”

The company won a multimillion pound payment by results contract to prevent 
incorrect or fraudulent claims in a bid to save government money, earning more 
money the more claims it stopped.


But the Treasury said there had been 120 cases since October that did not 
fully comply with the contract requirements, with a Facebook campaign group 
suggesting many more might have been affected.


Some cases involved people being unfairly prevented from receiving tax credits 
but there were also questions over the general levels of service including over 
factors such as call waiting times.


HMRC’s chief executive, Jon Thompson, said: “We want to reassure customers who 
have had their tax credits stopped that we will prioritise their cases, and 
make sure that they are processed as quickly as possible.

“While it’s right that we ensure that tax credits customers only receive the 
money to which they’re entitled, it is vital that those customers have a high 
level of service.

“That’s why we have decided not to extend our contract with Concentrix and 
HMRC is redeploying 150 staff so that customers can get through to advisers and 
resolve any issues about their claim.”

A Concentrix spokesperson said in a statement: “We have operated 
professionally at all times and within the guidance set by HMRC. The HMRC 
statement not to renew the contract attacks our professional credibility, and 
the commitment of our staff who have performed determinedly, despite the issues 
with HMRC policies and procedures.

“In addition, throughout the contract, Concentrix has employed good 
hard-working people within the UK, at Concentrix expense, in order to staff 
phone lines and handle customer calls which were agreed by HMRC and were based 
on HMRC assumptions.

“To be clear, we have answered significantly more calls than planned with 
HMRC. Throughout the contract we have not been incentivised to make wrong 
decisions for claimants and, in fact, would be penalised heavily for failure to 
adhere to HMRC policies and procedures. Through the term of the contract we are 
pleased to have saved the taxpayer nearly £300m in authentic confirmed tax 
fraud and error which otherwise would have cost the taxpayer money.”
 