
It was the sight of a young male Adélie penguin attempting to have sex with a 
dead female that particularly unnerved George Murray Levick, a scientist with 
the 1910-13 Scott Antarctic Expedition. No such observation had ever been 
recorded before, as far as he knew, and Levick, a typical Edwardian Englishman, 
was horrified. Blizzards and freezing cold were one thing. Penguin perversion 
was another.

Worse was to come, however. Levick spent the Antarctic summer of 1911-12 
observing the colony of Adélies at Cape Adare, making him the only scientist to 
this day to have studied an entire breeding cycle there. During that time, he 
witnessed males having sex with other males and also with dead females, 
including several that had died the previous year. He also saw them sexually 
coerce females and chicks and occasionally kill them.

Levick blamed this "astonishing depravity" on "hooligan males" and wrote down 
his observations in Greek so that only an educated gentleman would understand 
the horrors he had witnessed. Back in Britain he produced a paper (in English), 
titledNatural History of the Adélie Penguin. However, the section about the 
animal's sexual proclivities was deemed to be so shocking it was removed to 
preserve decency. Levick then used this material as the basis for a separate 
short paper,Sexual Habits of the Adélie Penguin, which was privately circulated 
among a handful of experts.
 Two Adélie penguins with a chick. Steve Bloom/Alamy 
In fact, Levick's observations turned out to be well ahead of their time. 
Scientists had to wait another 50 years before the remarkable sexual antics of 
the Adélie were revealed. By this time his pamphlet and its detailed records of 
Adélie shenanigans had been lost to science.

But now a copy of Sexual Habits of the Adélie Penguin has been unearthed, 
thanks to sleuthing by Douglas Russell, curator of birds at theNatural History 
Museum <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/natural-history-museum>, who 
discovered a copy among records of the work of Scott's expeditions and has had 
it published in the journalPolar Record, with an accompanying analysis of 
Levick's work.

"The pamphlet, declined for publication with the official Scott expedition 
reports, commented on the frequency of sexual activity, auto-erotic behaviour, 
and seemingly aberrant behaviour of young unpaired males and females, including 
necrophilia, sexual coercion, sexual and physical abuse of chicks and 
homosexual behaviour," states the analysis written by Russell and colleagues 
William Sladen and David Ainley. "His observations were, however, accurate, 
valid and, with the benefit of hindsight, deserving of publication."

Levick's lost masterpiece certainly has its eye-watering moments with its 
descriptions of male Adélies who gather in "little hooligan bands of half a 
dozen or more and hang about the outskirts of the knolls, whose inhabitants 
they annoy by their constant acts of depravity". Injured females are mounted by 
members of these "gangs", others have their chicks "misused before the very 
eyes of its parents". Some chicks are crushed and injured, others are killed.

It is startling stuff, though Russell told the Observer that recent studies 
have helped understand the behaviour of these "hooligan" penguins. "Adélies 
gather at their colonies in October to start to breed. They have only a few 
weeks to do that and young adults simply have no experience of how to behave. 
Many respond to inappropriate cues. Hence the seeming depravity of their 
behaviour. For example, a dead penguin, lying with its eyes half-open, is very 
similar in appearance to a compliant female. The result is the so-called 
necrophilia that Levick witnessed and which so disgusted him."

In addition, the penguin is the most humanlike of all birds in its appearance 
and its behaviour is most often interpreted in anthropomorphic terms, added 
Russell. For this reason, Adélie behaviour, when it was observed for the first 
time in detail, seemed especially shocking. "Levick was also a gentleman, 
travelling with a group of men in very difficult circumstances, witnessing 
behaviour he neither expected nor understood," said Russell. "It is not 
surprising that he was shocked by his findings."

The discovery of Levick's paper is important because its helps shed new light 
on a species that has been called the bellwether of climate change. "The Adélie 
needs pack ice from which to dive to get fish. When that ice disappears, 
numbers may crash – and we will have a clear warning that things are getting 
bad," said Russell.

Levick's experiences with the Adélie penguins were not the only root of his 
suffering in the Antarctic. In February 1912, he and five other members of 
Scott's team were waiting to be picked up by the expedition ship, Terra Nova, 
but found that pack ice had blocked its route. The men had to spend an entire 
Antarctic winter huddled in an ice cave with no provisions and only an 
occasional seal or penguin to eat. "They ate blubber, cooked with blubber, had 
blubber lamps," recalled one expedition member. "Their clothes and gear were 
soaked with blubber, and the soot blackened them, their sleeping bags, cookers, 
walls and roof, choked their throats and inflamed their eyes."

Remarkably, the men all survived and Levick returned to England in 1913 – in 
time to sign up for the first world war. He served in the Grand Fleet and at 
Gallipoli, and after the war founded the British Schools Exploring Society in 
1932, of which he was president until his death in June 1956. An obituary 
described him as "a truly great English gentleman".

• Levick's notebook is on display at the Natural History Museum until 2 
September as part of theScott's Last Expedition 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/visit-us/whats-on/temporary-exhibitions/scott-last-expedition//index.html>
 exhibition
 