
The Australian economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy>
 could expect a stronger performance if the recent improvement in the terms of 
trade boosts business confidence and unlocks investment, the International 
Monetary Fund said.

The IMF said Australia’s economic performance had remained remarkable compared 
with other countries, but warns there was a downside risk to the outlook if 
investment remained subdued should company profits remain under pressure for 
longer.

“Consumption growth could turn lacklustre if wage growth stayed low,” it said 
in its concluding statement of its annual review of the Australian economy 
released on Tuesday.

Harping on about economic growth makes politicians seem out of touch | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/harping-on-about-economic-growth-makes-politicians-seem-out-of-touch>
It believed Australia’s recent growth spurt above 3% was partly due to 
“temporary factors”.

It said the Reserve Bank would need to keep interest rates low and the federal 
government boost infrastructure spending if it was to return to full employment 
against a weak global backdrop.

“While unemployment has remained relatively low, underemployment and 
longer-term unemployment has risen, and nominal wage and inflation have been 
weak,” it said.

The IMF said the fall in the unemployment rate had likely overstated the 
improvement in labour markets, with the underemployment rate having risen as 
some 80% of jobs created in the past year had been part-time.

The IMF added prudential policies had resulted in a tentative stabilisation of 
the country’s housing vulnerabilities as tighter lending standards improved the 
risk profile of new loans.


Overall housing credit growth and market turnover had remained lower than last 
year, but declines in longer-term interest rates and continuing strong demand, 
including from non-residents, meant upward pressure on house prices had 
remained strong in some cities.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said the statistics on underemployment 
would be embarrassing for Malcolm Turnbull as a “jobs and growth” prime 
minister.

He added: “The IMF has not for the first time raised the red flag on negative 
gearing and capital gains tax arrangements because they encourage household 
leverage and undermine Australia’s macroeconomic stability.

“The Turnbull government should take heed of the world’s pre-eminent economic 
institution, stop playing politics and immediately look to reform negative 
gearing and capital gains which would improve macroeconomic resilience.”

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, said: “The IMF once again affirmed Australia’s 
economic performance as remarkably strong in comparison to other advanced 
economies and noted that the government ‘appropriately plans to balance the 
budget’ by 2020-21.”

Regarding housing, Morrison said the IMF had noted action taken by the 
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority had “already resulted in a 
stabilisation of housing market risks” and that the IMF warned against policies 
that may trigger a “sharp correction” in the housing market.

“Labor’s ill-considered policies to deny mum and dad investors access to 
negative gearing for their modest real estate investments run the very real 
risk of realising such a correction, undermining Australia’s housing market as 
well as consumer confidence and the broader economy,” he added.

The IMF statement is the preliminary findings of an official staff visit to 
Australia.

Australian Associated Press contributed to this report.
 