
I was 11 when I went to see the whales stranded on Thorntonloch beach. There 
were 147 pilot whales, the largest beaching inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, and no one had any idea why they 
were there.

I must have heard about it from someone on the bus from Stenton, where I grew 
up, to Dunbar, which was the nearest town to the beach. The beaching was the 
talk of the villages. Stenton had a school, one shop, a bakehouse and a big 
church; just a few families lived in the village. I lived with my parents and 
three sisters in a two-bed council house, and when we moved a few years after 
this, I really missed it and regularly went.

That day, I cycled the 10 miles to Thorntonloch on my sister’s bike (she was 
the only one who had a bicycle at the time) after all the usual warnings to 
bring it back safely. It was a real adventure.

There was a lot of traffic, so I parked the bike at one of the holdings near 
the beach. There was a sea of whales stretched along the sand. Some were 
clearly dead, but many were still alive. When the larger whales, which were 
more than 20ft long, flapped their tails, people jumped. I was amazed: I’d 
never seen a whale before, only pictures in a book; there was no television in 
Scotland until 1952. The scene was like something you might see at the cinema. 
If you look closely, everyone is well dressed: men and women would not go out 
casually dressed as we do today.

I remember seeing people in uniform – the Scottish Society for the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animal – who were killing the whales with a crude bolt gun 
usually used to slaughter cows. I stood next to them as they put the guns to 
the whales’ heads, then there was a boom. Some were also shot with rifles. 
Cranes loaded carcasses on to lorries; others were hauled up manually, using 
ropes. The whales were transported to slaughterhouses all over Scotland and as 
far south as Cheshire. There was a real sense of sadness; everyone was very 
serious, and respectful of the whales, as you can see in the picture.

My mum saw this photograph in the Bulletin and Scots Pictorial newspaper, and 
ordered a copy. I thought it was great to see myself in a photograph, so I took 
it to school. There were reports of the whales in all the national UK papers 
and, as I discovered later, in papers in the United States, too.

When I look back, I can see the whales stretched out along the beach as if it 
were yesterday. Something like that never leaves you.

• Stranded: The Whales At Thorntonloch In 1950 – The Stories Of The People Who 
Were There <https://whalesbook.wordpress.com/>, by James E Herring, is 
published by the Dunbar and District History Society.

Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>
 