
The Guardian asked a number of doctors working in A&E departments across the 
country to explain how their departments have coped over the past seven days, 
said to have been the worst week ever forNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> emergency departments. These are some 
of their responses:

‘We are devastated by underemployment’

It’s been like an absolute war zone recently. The government at the moment, 
not to mention my regulatory bodies, are ignoring the worst hospital conditions 
in my memory. We have a brilliant team, but are devastated by underemployment 
and underinvestment. We have two permanent registrars on a rota of seven places.

On a recent shift, I walked in to patients waiting four and a half hours to 
see a doctor. This means every patient has failed the “breach” target by the 
time they’re seen.

A diligent staff nurse asked me to take a look at a patient she was “a bit 
worried about”. The woman was devastatingly ill with a perforated bowel, and 
could have easily become fatally unwell. She survived thanks to the 
observational diligence of my colleague, and later our excellent surgical team.

The London ambulance service is similarly overwhelmed. They couldn’t provide 
me with a transfer ambulance for another emergency case, an 11-year-old with a 
sight-threatening infection, in less than 70 minutes. The target is eight 
minutes. It is a miracle the child didn’t lose an eye.

‘Nothing can be done’

Our hospital is crumbling and is unsafe on a daily basis. On Thursday, there 
were 75 patients in a department that has 18 majors’ beds. Thirty-five of those 
were medical patients awaiting beds, 20 hadn’t been seen as there was nowhere 
to see them or no staff to triage them.

Theresa May cannot ignore NHS crisis or brush off critics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-cannot-ignore-nhs-crisis>
We have expressed our concerns verbally, via formal emails to trust, incident 
reports etc, but nothing can be done as it can’t elsewhere either. Medical 
professionals are talking about quitting as they believe soon someone will die 
on our watch … [It is] completely out of control. Maybe it has already happened 
and we just don’t know. I’m talking about a cohort of 11 doctors. God knows 
what people feel nationally. It scares me what we are heading for.

When a family member got admitted last weekend I panicked, not because it was 
that serious but I actually felt they may not be safe in hospital.

 I am angry that it is being ignored and swept under the carpet. I am angry 
that we are left to pick up the pieces and apologise for a system we’ve put our 
hearts and souls into, but now have no control over.

 ‘It’s not acceptable to practise medicine in this way’

This past week in A&E has been horrendous. There are no beds in this busy 
teaching hospital. There are more than 20 patients queueing in the corridor at 
any given time. We’re seeing, treating and discharging patients in the queue. 
It’s undignified to ask a miscarrying pregnant woman about her blood loss in a 
queue, never mind in one filled with loud drunks. It’s just not acceptable to 
have to practise medicine in this way, but what choice do we have?

Theresa May urged to get a grip on NHS as winter crisis spirals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis>
Patients in the queue have a substandard quality of care. Fact. So much for 
calling 999 in an emergency, then waiting an age for the crew to arrive because 
they’re all waiting in the corridors of A&E to unload patients. Even once you 
arrive at the department with said emergency, you’ll be waiting hours for any 
sort of assessment or treatment.

My collusion in this depravity is solely in an attempt to keep my patients as 
safe as possible, but mistakes are being made and this is not sustainable.

 ‘We were truly swamped’

I was on call at night for the last week at a small district general hospital. 
We had to put the hospital on divert. There were 15 ambulances waiting for 
entry and consultants doing their assessments in the back of them. On surgery, 
despite phenomenal work from the registrar on call, we were truly swamped.


 ‘These are just some of my experiences this week in A&E ...’

A four-bedded resuscitation unit expected to make capacity for eight patients; 
leaving a shift to come back 24 hours later and finding some of the same 
patients still in resus; being in charge of the emergency department [ED] 
overnight with rota gaps; and requesting a divert for a few hours to allow us 
to catch up, only to be told that the policy has changed and capacity issues 
now had to be dealt with internally.

The Observer view on the crisis in the NHS | Observer editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/observer-view-on-nhs-crisis>
‘Everybody is terrified’

In the accident and emergency department where I work, there is provision to 
keep up to 12 people overnight in case the wards are too full. On Tuesday night 
there were 27 sick patients all requiring hospital treatment who were kept on 
corridors and in the laundry room, being cared for by three nurses and one 
doctor.

It’s normal at the moment for 20 to be there overnight. We are having to send 
patients home we would rather admit, with little to no access to social care.

Everybody is terrified. Everybody is waiting for something terrible to happen, 
because no matter how hard you work, there are too many cracks that are 
widening for patients to slip through. Stafford is where everything went down a 
few years ago.

It seems the same situation is now happening on a nationwide level. I hope 
desperately that nobody I love or care about needs to be admitted to hospital 
right now. I just can’t believe how bad it is compared with last year.

 ‘The entire system is crumbling’

There are not enough staff and 12 ambulances regularly sitting in the 
corridor. There are designated corridor nurses. In this ED the patients can 
wait for eight hours. The emergencies do get seen first, as do the strokes, and 
the triage nurses pull the sickest out the corridor but sometimes they are seen 
in the corridor. A consultant is designated for the corridor to ensure safety.

A consultant has been staying overnight often lately due to the safety 
concerns, but that is unsustainable and they are burning out. No one is 
bothered about breaches any more, it’s the 12-hour trolley waits because the 
CCG [clinical commissioning group] has to know then and trust board get 
involved.

The entire system is crumbling. On New Year’s Eve our hospital asked for a 
divert when the wait was eight and a half hours with only 14 ambulances left on 
the roads in Merseyside. This is not uncommon. The divert was denied because 
the wait was not the longest, and every other department was in the same 
situation.

‘We have a daily lack of beds’

I’m a registrar in one of the busiest emergency departments in the country. 
This past week saw our busiest day on record with nearly 200 people waiting in 
our department at one point. There was a five-hour wait just to be seen, and a 
14-hour wait for beds.

I have people queuing to get a space in resuscitation and it regularly becomes 
dangerous. We have a daily lack of beds due to poor flow of patients out of 
hospital backing up to the emergency department. Patients are coming to harm 
and there are undoubtedly deaths arising from the current state of emergency 
medicine.
 