
A few weeks ago, a man came to stay at my house and he and I made so much 
noise at 1am that we feared we might wake the children. The next morning at 
breakfast, we had to explain ourselves and apologise.

The man was my ex-husband, and he was telling me an anecdote in the early 
hours that had us both in fits of laughter. We separated in January 2009, and 
divorced a year later. He has since remarried, and lives in another city, but 
often comes to visit our three teenage sons. We have spent several Christmases, 
Easters and birthdays together.

If liking and being nice to your former partner is the essence of Gwyneth 
Paltrow and Chris Martin’s “conscious uncoupling” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/25/gwyneth-paltrow-chris-martin-to-separate>
, it could be said that my ex-husband and I are living that dream. In the three 
years since they announced their much-ridiculed approach to family life and 
relations post-marriage, the idea of the friendly divorce has become 
increasingly mainstream. AsHelena Bonham Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter> said of Tim Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/timburton>, her former husband of 13 years, “
I think we’ll have something very precious still 
<http://www.redonline.co.uk/red-women/interviews/helena-bonham-carter-exclusive-interview-pictures-suffragette-tim-burton>
.” ActorKate Beckinsale <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kate-beckinsale> is 
so friendly with her exMichael Sheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen> (the father of their 
daughter) that she’s often seen hanging out with him and his girlfriend,Sarah 
Silverman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sarah-silverman>.

And then there’s the rise of the divorce selfie, taken outside the courtroom, 
showing smug ex-marrieds beaming away together in the spirit of a bright future 
ahead of them (with a caption such as “We smile not because it’s over but 
because it happened”). January traditionally sees a spike in calls to family 
lawyers from couples wishing to uncouple. The first question for many is: can 
you really have a happy split?

Divorce coach Carol Sullivan thinks so. She runs Divorce Negotiator 
<http://www.divorcenegotiator.org.uk>, which operates throughout England and 
Wales. Unlike solicitors who represent the separate parties, Sullivan assists 
both husband and wife and, “to stop the escalation”, maintains transparency 
between them. She claims to save a typical couple 80% of the cost of going to a 
solicitor, and 50% of their time. So far, she has helped more than 1,000 
couples, many of whom apologise to each other and go out for drinks despite 
their decree nisi.

“People are doing divorce differently – that is, better,” Sullivan says. “They 
are more aware that the only winners are the lawyers, and bitterness and 
vengeance don’t get anybody anywhere.”

Of course, most people would say they’d like to divorce “well”, at least in 
theory, usually for the sake of any children involved. But, in practice, anger 
and hurt usually muddy the waters.

I am insufferably smug about what my ex-husband and I have managed to pull 
off, but I won’t pretend it was instant. The parting of the ways was painful 
beyond anything I had ever experienced, but we managed to sort out our 
financial affairs and living arrangements ourselves. A lawyer friend kindly did 
the essential paperwork for both of us. We never went to court, and our whole 
divorce cost £90. Eight years have since passed, and time has done its cliched 
but excellent bit in terms of healing. Rancour has been and gone, leaving all 
the things we liked about each other in the first place: enjoyment of each 
other’s company, great communication, affection and respect. Plus all the 
things we have together accumulated over the years, namely three great boys, an 
important shared history and the recognition that prolonged bitterness eats 
away at people and benefits nobody.

It’s difficult, but this approach is becoming more common. I have a friend 
whose husband went off with another woman. After her shock and anger subsided, 
she had him to stay with his new girlfriend several times, and even took coffee 
up to them in the morning. (Talk about forgiveness.) “It was nice for the kids 
to see I was accepting of her with him,” she tells me. “I liked him. I liked 
her.” She says she didn’t indulge in any power play, at least not consciously.

The prevailing view is that good relations benefit the children, if you have 
them. Phyllis Maguire-Harrington, 33, is a carer and nursery manager. She sees 
many families who aren’t amicable, which has only compounded her belief that 
friendly divorce is vital – even when she found out, three years into their 
marriage, that her husband had been unfaithful.

“It hurt massively,” she says now, “but our daughter is my world. Even though 
I ended the marriage there and then, and never once wavered, I always spoke to 
him and let him see her. My daughter deserves both parents.”

There was no court case. The same lawyer represented them both. It was all 
their own terms; he just did the paperwork. Her ex-husband has exactly the same 
parental rights as she does.

The couple, both from Wokingham, met at a bowling alley in their early 20s. 
Kieran Harrington, 35, remembers that she “started dancing and I thought, wow!” 
He found her generous, with a lot of time for others. Phyllis says she is very 
energetic, while Kieran was “very chilled” and happy to go along with anything 
she threw at him. They married in 2008 and separated in 2011, when their 
daughter was a year old.

“To be brutally honest, I cheated on her,” Kieran says. “It’s one of those 
things I can’t explain. It was nothing she ever did or didn’t do. When she 
found out, she went ballistic. I’d never seen her like that. I deserved it. I 
tried to get her back, but eventually knew it was hopeless.”

You can be vengeful and angry and selfish. All those ugly emotions you can 
keep up for years, but that’s destructive

“It was complicated,” Phyllis says, “because in September 2007 he had a brain 
haemorrhage and that altered him.” Kieran says that, although he doesn’t 
remember being tempted before the brain haemorrhage, it is nonetheless too easy 
an excuse. Either way, he says, the two flings with colleagues “were a huge 
mistake”. Initially, he says, there was “some nastiness” from Phyllis, but then 
it went away.

“For a long time I wanted him to be my Kieran,” Phyllis says, “but he had 
changed. After the brain haemorrhage, I became more like a carer. I knew he was 
no longer fully in control of himself, and a psychologist told us he was never 
going to change. I had a baby and couldn’t live like that any more, the 
suspicious wife.”

The divorce came through in December 2014 and Kieran, a prison custody 
officer, now lives with his father and sister. He and Phyllis still see each 
other most days, and go on holiday together. They took Erin, now five, to 
Disneyland Paris for new year and glamping in Cornwall. Neither has another 
partner.

“I did for a while,” Phyllis says, “and he and Kieran accepted each other, but 
he wanted to get married and I didn’t. I think Kieran put me off for life,” she 
laughs.

These days, Kieran confides in Phyllis about dates and she gives him advice. 
He admits he’d like to get back together with her, but knows that’s never going 
to happen; he also knows that it could all have been very different had Phyllis 
not been so forgiving. “I could have lost a lot more,” he says. “As it is, the 
friendship we have – having a laugh, watching movies together, sharing a bottle 
of wine when the little one is asleep – is the best I can hope for, given I’d 
still like to be married to her. I’ll be a little bit jealous when she’s with 
someone else, but I messed up, so I haven’t a leg to stand on. I’m grateful 
I’ve got this much and know we will be friends for life.”

Phyllis agrees: “We’re very close. We couldn’t not be, after all we’ve been 
through. But the divorce was the right decision. Would I get back with him? 
Never. He’s not the man I fell in love with.”

***

Specialist family lawyer Peter Martin has been practising at London firm OGR 
Stock Denton for 40 years, and has worked with thousands of couples. In his 
experience, roughly 25-30% of couples are able to be friends afterwards, and 
it’s not always to protect the children. “In some ways, it is easier for 
couples without children to stay friends,” Martin says. “Once the finances are 
sorted out, they are able to get on with their lives. They can become friends 
again, because they no longer have any pressures on them.”

On the other hand, Martin says, couples without children have less reason to 
stay in touch. “Those with children have to continue to communicate, and they 
are more likely, because of that, to rebuild a friendship. A forced friendship, 
because of having children, often develops in time into the real thing. It’s 
the sort of thing I see a lot – I’m thinking of the first dance of a divorced 
couple as parents at their child’s wedding.”

Barry Rutter, 69, an actor, is founder and artistic director of Northern 
Broadsides <http://www.northern-broadsides.co.uk>, a touring company. He 
credits his ex-wife, Carol, 65, a professor of Shakespeare and performance 
studies at the University of Warwick, with their excellent relationship after 
nearly 20 years of marriage and 20 years of divorce. She credits him with not 
forcing her and their girls out of their home. “You can be vengeful and angry 
and selfish and do all that stuff,” Carol says. “All those ugly emotions you 
can keep up for years, but that’s just destructive.”

The couple met while Barry was on tour in America in 1976. “She, with her 
Californian chutzpah, came backstage to congratulate me,” he says.

“He had the tight curls of a Raphael angel and a boxer’s nose,” she says. “He 
was bolshie, challenging: a Yorkshireman. Everything around him was different 
and new.”

She moved to England a year later, and they soon married. Their shared passion 
meant they always had things to talk about. Briony was born in 1982; their son, 
Harry, two years later, but he died from cot death aged just 98 days. Barry’s 
support in the aftermath made Carol feel “an overwhelming sense that our 
marriage could survive; how amazing it was that he could love me that much”.

I wanted my freedom to roam, and yet the home and family. It was a stupid, 
macho, dumb attitude to have

When he set up his own company, Barry was working so hard, Carol says, “I 
think he started kind of shifting.” Rowan, their younger daughter, was four. 
Carol had a full-time job at the university and Barry came home “wanting shiny 
faces”. There was a gap. “It was,” Barry says, “a build-up of events, which I 
took to be a diminution between us. And my own restlessness. The cliche: the 
grass is always greener. The official divorce says adultery, but it is never as 
simple as that. I didn’t fall in love, but I was distracted.”

Barry says it was raw. “I remember we met in the garden shed and she asked 
what I wanted, and I said all of my freedom to roam, and yet the home and 
family. It was a stupid, macho, dumb attitude to have. It was my folly. You 
make choices, and choices can bite.”

“How did I come back from that?” Carol says. “I went to see a divorce person 
who said don’t fight, it’s not worth it; work it out between you. I was able to 
keep the man separate from the actor and, little by little, the birth of our 
three children, the death of our son, those things you shared,count. They 
represent the real core values of you two as people, as against the accidents 
of making bad decisions.”

Barry says it was entirely Carol’s “leading” that set them on the footing they 
are on today. “‘It’s got to be about the future’: I remember her saying that. I 
myself didn’t have it in me to come up with anything like that. It’s a 
testament to her. I’d hope she is my best friend. She’s kept the name [Rutter]. 
I’ve always been rather pleased about that.”

These days, their daughters are both married, and they still see each other at 
least once a month and speak often. Carol goes to watch her ex-husband perform. 
She says he is perhaps better at expressing his emotions on stage, but he 
always made her laugh off it, and always will.

Tara Saglio has been a couples and individual psychotherapist for two decades. 
She believes that most divorced couples have to experience a period of proper 
separation before they can actively be friends again. “As a generalisation, I 
think it takes five years for people to settle post-divorce,” she says. “It 
helps if both parties have reached a point where they can feel equally content, 
instead of one being miserable and the other blissfully loved-up with a new 
partner – or even of one being blissfully alone and the other in a less than 
ideal rebound relationship.” The chance of friendship depends on the emotional 
maturity of both parties. “In my experience,” Saglio adds, “it is usually the 
couples for whom the passion has dwindled or gone, and who don’t feel so 
betrayed or rejected, who can be friends. Sexual rejection or broken trust can 
skewer things.”

Facebook, Instagram and so on can make it harder for couples to move on. “Of 
course, social media always presents a happy if not idealised picture of 
everyone’s lives,” Saglio says. “It is hard to separate fully while having 
one’s nose rubbed in the ex’s new life. On the upside, technology can be a 
force for good, depending on how it is used. It makes continued contact quicker 
and easier. A text or email is more emotionally distant than a face-to-face or 
phone conversation. A bit of a barrier can be a good thing.”

Resolution <http://www.resolution.org.uk> is an organisation of family law 
professionals that promotes nonconfrontational divorce settlements. Nigel 
Shepherd, its national chair, says that avoiding unnecessary argument demands a 
shift of perspective: “By nonconfrontational, we mean focusing on what is 
required for the future, as opposed to getting stuck in what happened in the 
past.” A Resolution survey found that 90% of cases settle without a judge.

Current divorce law <https://www.gov.uk/divorce/grounds-for-divorce> doesn’t 
exactly help people to remain friendly: unless former couples are prepared to 
wait for two years once they have separated, they have no option but to cite 
adultery, unreasonable behaviour or (admittedly rarely) desertion on the 
paperwork. Resolution believes that a couple should be allowed to divorce 
simply if they think the marriage has broken down, a so-called “no-fault divorce
 <http://www.resolution.org.uk/editorial.asp?page_id=308>”, and are lobbying 
for change. “The current process, which pushes the majority into blame, often 
against their will, can really put the spanner in the works,” Shepherd says.

***

Businesswoman Sarah Bevan never lost sight of the fact that she wanted to 
retain her friendship with her husband, Tim, despite her deep sadness when 
their marriage came to an end. “We were originally friends, and I wanted very 
strongly to maintain that for the greater good of our family,” she says. “We 
always had a lot of fun and we managed to retain that.”

Sarah, who is now single and in her 40s, lives in south London, and is setting 
up her own company. Tim, 50, the MD of a packaging and design company, lives in 
Hove. The pair met at work in London and married in 1994. They have three 
teenage children. “The friendship was overriding in the relationship,” Tim 
says. “Any other issues were put to one side. That’s what carried us. But then 
I started to do better in my career, which made me more confident and, when 
other possibilities presented themselves, I was weak enough to succumb.”

It was 2004. He admitted he was having an affair (not his first); they finally 
parted in 2005 and divorced in 2011. Tim says he walked away with two pictures, 
a stereo and a pink tea towel.

There were no lawyers, and nothing on paper; money was divided according to 
their own agreement. The divorce cost £560. Rather than argue in court, he 
wanted Sarah and the children to have a home and security. He credits their 
friendship today to his ex-wife’s openness and strength, and thinks they have 
both pulled off something “pretty extraordinary”. According to Tim, both 
realise they are not going to be “jumping into bed with each other” again, but 
hopes they’ll be best friends for life.

“She’s currently offering me advice on cholesterol,” he laughs. “She’s still 
got my back!” It helped that neither of them “slagged each other off” to the 
children. The family has a group chat online most days and he visits them every 
Tuesday for a curry evening.

There were phases of extreme anger and massive hurt, Sarah says, but “even 
though he’s certainly a difficult character, I love him and we hug and say we 
love each other”. He remains an important part of her life, all the more so 
because her parents died recently in tragic circumstances. As Tim says, that 
“focused everyone on what’s important”.

“Despite everything we’ve put each other through,” Tim says, “we’ve come out 
of it. We will be sitting in our deckchairs in 30 years’ time with our mint 
tea, looking at the children, and thinking, ‘We’ve done good.’”

How to divorce well

1. Slow down. Reactive decisions are usually bad ones; if you are feeling 
hurt, or have just discovered your partner with someone else, don’t take any 
legal action until the red mist has gone.

2. Try to be rational. Going through a separation is highly emotional, but try 
to put that to one side and sit down with a neutral party with the aim of 
making sensible decisions. Remember that you loved the other person once.

3. Decide on your priorities. More often than not one of the biggest goals is 
to move on with your life with your dignity intact. The more amicable the 
divorce, the quicker it will be over, leaving you to get on with the next 
chapter of your life. It is also a lot cheaper.

4. Go to a good family lawyer. Find a family specialist committed to working 
out solutions as amicably as possible and in a way that will preserve your 
relationship with your spouse.

5. Expect a big change in your lifestyle. Your life is going to change 
dramatically; being shocked by this can often lead to resentment and breed 
conflict. Your partner’s life will be changing, too, and they will have the 
same problems adjusting as you are. Yes, really.

6. Don’t do it the celebrity way. You don’t have to fight dirty to get the 
best result – in fact, judges will frown upon it when making their settlement.

7. Don’t listen to your friends. Turn to them for emotional support but 
remember that every marriage is different and every divorce is different. Just 
because friends think it is a good idea, doesn’t mean it is.

8. Be the bigger person. Even if your nearly ex is trying to play dirty, don’t 
rise to the bait. It is easier said than done, but I often hear from people 
who, years later, regret that they allowed themselves to be brought down to 
that level.

9. Think about divorce before you get married. What will your situation be if 
things don’t work out? Consider how your partner is likely to behave in those 
circumstances as well. Think about a prenuptial agreement – realism does not 
have to be anti-romantic.

10. If you have children, be nice for their sake. It is only in the most 
exceptional circumstances that it is not in the children’s interests for their 
parents to remain friendly.

Peter Martin, family lawyer, OGR Stock Denton

 