
A relaxation in Queensland’s tree clearing laws led to the destruction of 
84,000 hectares of critical koala habitat in the two years after the national 
icon was listed as vulnerable, according to new mapping by conservationists.

That koala habitat made up about 14% of all land cleared between mid-2013 and 
mid-2015 was an alarming revelation, WWF and the Australian Koala Foundation 
said.

Deborah Tabert, the chief executive of AKF, said the loss of that much habitat 
was “shocking given the recent statement that koalas are functionally extinct 
in various parts of Queensland”.

Scientists write open letter in support of Queensland tree-clearing reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/scientists-write-open-letter-in-support-of-queensland-tree-clearing-reforms>
Tabart asked how this could have been allowed when the koala was listed as 
vulnerable by the commonwealth in 2012.

“Why wasn’t this land clearing referred to the federal government instead of a 
rubber stamp here inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>?” she said. “The AKF 
stands ready to give any member of parliament a briefing on the plight of 
koalas.”

WWF scientist Martin Taylor said: “If we want to save koalas in Queensland 
then we have to stop the bulldozers destroying their habitat – it’s that 
simple.”

A Queensland government bill to restore clearing controls unwound by the 
former Liberal National government was due for debate in parliament on 
Wednesday.

The government argues land clearing reforms to stop runoff to the Great 
Barrier reef were a key plank of its lobbying of Unesco to keep the natural 
wonder off its “in danger” list last year.

The proposed reforms have provoked staunch opposition from the rural lobby 
AgForce. The Liberal National party and two Katter party crossbenchers will 
oppose it when the vote is expected to take place late on Thursday.

The independent parliamentary speaker, Peter Wellington, who could cast the 
deciding vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/queensland-land-clearing-reforms-could-hinge-on-speakers-vote>
 if fellow crossbencher Billy Gordon backs the bill, was due to meet Greenpeace 
representatives before the session began to accept a petition of almost 24,000 
Queenslanders in favour of restoring controls.

An estimated 200 protesters earlier rallied outside parliament in favour of 
the laws.

The Queensland law society has condemned an aspect of the bill that reverses 
the onus of proof for landholders who must prove they did not unlawfully clear 
land. The Palaszczuk government has compared this situation to speeding tickets.

Last week the commonwealth environment department launched a landmark 
intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/coalition-split-over-intervention-in-queensland-land-clearing>
 to halt clearing on a north Queensland property to assess impacts under the 
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act. The department 
expressed concern about possible impacts on the reef.

Queensland senator Ian MacDonald raised concerns about Canberra intervening in 
permits already granted by the state government.

The mapping of koala habitat clearing – the product of joint work by WWF and 
AKF cross-referencing state government land cover surveys with AKF’s 
highly-regarded koala population maps – shows 91% of clearing was for cattle 
pasture.

The rate of loss increased from 37,000 hectares in 2013-14 to 47,000ha in 
2014-15.

Coalition split over intervention in Queensland land clearing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/coalition-split-over-intervention-in-queensland-land-clearing>
The single largest amount of clearing took place in the old National party 
heartland of Maranoa shire in western Queensland.

At 11,656 hectares, it was nearly double the rate in the next highest local 
government area, Murweh shire in south central Queensland (6,647ha).

There was also significant clearing of koala habitat in Balonne shire 
(6,425ha), Blackall Tambo shire (5,595ha) and Isaac shire (5,080ha).

All are rural areas and, with the exception of Isaac, lie west of the Great 
Dividing Range.

Clearing in Queensland has more than tripled from about 78,000 hectares in 
2009-10 to about 296,000 hectares in 2014-15.
 