
Manufacturer Nimisha Raja has been following the foreign exchange markets more 
closely than usual since the referendum. She makes dried fruit and vegetable 
crisps at a factory in Sittingbourne, Kent, and buying ingredients from abroad 
has become a lot more expensive since the Brexit vote sent the pound tumbling 
against the euro, the dollar and other currencies.

Like other manufacturers who buy materials from abroad, Raja has had to decide 
whether to take a hit to profit margins atNim’s Fruit Crisps 
<http://nimsfruitcrisps.com/>, charge more to clients or change her products.

“On the whole, because we have our own production we can change things as and 
when we need to,” says Raja. “We have had to be pragmatic and nimble.”

Inflation hits highest level in more than two years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
Raja opened her factory a year ago and has been in talks with high street 
retailers and supermarkets about selling her crisps. During talks with 
potential customers she has had to navigate swings in fruit prices, thanks to 
the weaker pound. The price she pays for pineapple jumped from 55p per kilo to 
70p per kilo, while watermelon went from 60p to 90p.

The company has just signed a deal with one retailer and, instead of raising 
the price it charges for pineapple products, Raja will absorb the higher cost 
herself. “We’ve decided we will make less on the pineapple, but they buy other 
products from us.” Watermelon crisps, meanwhile, have been postponed until the 
import price comes down again.

The higher costs of overseas fruits has pushed Raja’s firm to look at using 
more local fruits than before. Its apples, pears and vegetables are UK-grown. 
The company has also invested in a new pineapple peeling machine to cut its 
production costs and help offset higher import prices.

As for many other manufacturers, the pound’s weakness has a silver lining for 
the fruit crisps maker: export demand has gone up as Raja’s products have 
become cheaper to overseas buyers. “It’s been quite amazing,” she says. “We 
have had six emails from five different countries in the last couple of weeks. 
Lithuania, Italy, France, Belgium and Hong Kong.”

Overall, Raja says she will be watching the pound closely as Brexit 
negotiations kick off, but she is confident she is adapting her business to 
cope with higher import costs if the pound falls further.

“When I introduce new products now, I just have to make sure it’s not from 
imports but local produce.”
 