
Both my husband and I grew up moving around; it is very much a part of who we 
are and probably linked to why we chose this lifestyle. We like seeing and 
learning new things; we like mingling in new cultures. More importantly, we get 
bored easily.


We were both working in development when we first met, and travelling was part 
of the deal. We planned our wedding in Spain while I resided in Colombia and he 
in Kenya – a great way to avoid family conflict, not so great for menu tasting. 
When the kids came along they soon familiarised themselves with Skype and 
airport procedures – by the time the oldest was five they had already lived in 
three continents. But it soon became evident that moving every one to three 
years was too much, both emotionally and logistically. A job in the US came 
along that fit the bill. But we never intended for it to be permanent.

We were in complete denial about how hard it was going to be​ for them to say 
farewell to all their friends

About five years in, we started getting fidgety again. I wanted my children to 
have the freedom of moving: what I value most about my upbringing is that it 
gave me a sense of relativity. You realise that social rules are somewhat 
relative, and as such, it’s up to you to decide who you want to be.


Denial

But in all our preparatory work, my husband and I completely forgot to explain 
to the kids that moving is hard, and it can suck big time. We were in complete 
denial about how hard it was going to be for them to say farewell to all of 
their friends for an amount of time that, for them, is tantamount to an 
eternity. And how hard it was going to be to get them to go into a classroom 
full of strangers speaking a different language.


We were in denial about how lonely those initial weeks can be, spending days 
on end with no human interaction outside the house because we don’t know anyone 
in town. We were in denial about how frustrating it would be to wait entire 
afternoons in an empty house for the internet guy, a service we had completely 
taken for granted, only to have him not show up. And, to not know how to get 
anywhere, or where to buy simple things.


Anger

So that is when the blame game begins because, let’s face it, it’s got to be 
someone’s fault, right? I mean, yes, you agreed to this, maybe even planned it, 
but it is your partner’s job that brought you here. And they are the ones who 
are turning up late, having to travel, or rush off and skip the morning drama. 
They are not the ones who have to spend the entire day working in a cafe 
because the internet signal is gone (again).


The pain of leaving communities you love burns a hole in your heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/24/the-pain-of-leaving-communities-you-have-come-to-love-burns-a-hole-in-your-heart>
Then there is the anger at the poor internet guy, when he finally shows up and 
fails to deliver any results. You know you should lower your expectations 
because, after all, [insert country here] is known for a lot of things, but not 
efficiency. It doesn’t matter. This guy in front of you is single handedly 
responsible for your misery, that of your children, and possibly for world 
hunger. And you are going to let them know it.


Bargaining

This phase is filled with regret and nostalgia. You now wish that you had made 
a different choice and moved into the all-American compound as a permanent 
living arrangement because they have internet access. Imagine, you could even 
go get a drink (or a massage) without having to find a babysitter (another 
thing you still haven’t managed to do). So you start mentally negotiating 
whether you can move there in a year’s time, when the contract you literally 
just signed runs out.

This is when your son declares that he wants to go back in a year – an option 
that was initially suggested by you on purely hypothetical grounds to make the 
idea of moving easier – and starts planning his next birthday party around that.


Depression

The beginning of this stage can be identified by how soon you start looking at 
the watch to assess if it is too soon to crack open a bottle of wine. If it’s 
noon or earlier you’ve moved into stage four. You look around at what is only 
just beginning to look like a home and realise there is no way you are going to 
talk anyone into doing this again in 11 months, yourself included.


You realise that it is going to be months before you can go back to full time 
work because you left your entire support system behind and the kids still need 
you at pick up and drop off.


We still miss those who filled our old life with colour, but we reach out and 
begin to make new connections

This is the stage when you begin to meet other humans and realise that after a 
nice 30-minute chat, your face hurts from the effort to keep up a casual 
conversation with a complete stranger. It’s when you promise a teary eyed child 
to stay the whole day in the school car park to ease his anxiety, and spend the 
entire day feeling like the worst parent ever because you never intended to 
keep that promise. It’s when you look at Facebook and realise that, while your 
world has been turned upside down, everyone else’s life carries on as normal 
without you.


Acceptance

And then, at last, a bit of light begins to creep in. You’ll recognise this 
stage, because you start having more good days than bad ones. We still miss 
those who filled our old life with colour, but we reach out and begin to make 
new connections. In my case, in the form of flamenco lessons from a Venezuelan 
teacher – which is ironic given that I am originally from Spain. You start 
recognising faces at school pick up or at parties, and identify people you 
actually enjoy spending time with.

Slowly you begin to accept your new reality and begin to reorganise your 
everyday activities around it. For example, here in Panama, a small country 
where everything is close, a key element is traffic. There are times of the day 
when a 10-minute trip can take more than an hour – we have learned this the 
hard way, so now at certain times of the day we just don’t go anywhere unless 
we absolutely have to.

The kids begin having play dates and referring to some of their classmates as 
friends. They begin using local expressions and complain about the canteen food 
– a clear sign of integration. Finally, looking very stern, the little one 
informs you that you no longer need to walk him to his classroom, and you can 
now drop him off down the street.


Secret aid worker: is humanitarian work a career for escapists?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/23/secret-aid-worker-is-humanitarian-work-a-career-for-escapists>
A key part of this stage, and the reason that I personally love moving, is 
that it involves listening to your feelings and understanding your needs: 
recognising what is important to you, and what you need to move towards being 
happy again. As a result, we move, we change, we grow and evolve. We let go of 
what is not important. We become involved in other people’s lives and invest in 
new friendships, slowly morphing into a new version of ourselves. As my 
10-year-old put it, you get a second chance to define yourself.

Love and loss

And then, unbelievably, the time at your new duty station comes to an end. As 
a good planner you’ve been working on identifying a good new duty station for 
the family, you’re filled with anticipation for all the new things that you and 
the kids will get to experience, and grateful for all the everyday nuisances 
that you will no longer have to put up with.


And then it hits you. All the friendships you’ve made, many of them still 
flourishing, may never fulfil their full potential because you are about to 
walk out on them. Others you’ve met are now part of your existential fabric. 
You know you will remain friends for life. Unfortunately, from now on that will 
mean meeting here or there, briefly, every few years. It starts to dawn on you 
that together with all the nuisances, there are many things that you have come 
to love about your new home and you will now miss. And that’s when it hits you, 
the realisation that it takes a special kind of crazy to keep this lifestyle 
going.

Rinse and repeat.

Angélica Arbulu has been a humanitarian for over 13 years. She blogs about 
juggling humanitarian work with family life (
www.onmotherhoodandsanity.blogspot.com 
<http://www.onmotherhoodandsanity.blogspot.com/>) and is currently writing a 
book about gender identity.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 