
Steve Evans was delighted for the “wonderful” Mirco Antenucci after the 
striker’s ninth goal of the season sealed Leeds’ 2-1 win at Blackburn. A lively 
first half, which was end-to-end, swung in the visitors’ favour 34 minutes in 
when Sol Bamba volleyed in from six yards for his second of the season. The 
lead was doubled through a slick 69th-minute counterattack finished by 
Antenucci, who lifted the ball over Jason Steele.

A largely comfortable second-half performance was made nervy by Simeon 
Jackson’s first Blackburn goal a minute from the end but Leeds were able to 
hold on to register a first win in eight over Rovers. And after a fourth goal 
in his last three games, Evans was full of praise for Italian forward Antenucci.

He said: “When I see Antenucci go through in that fashion, I only think he’s 
going to score. I’ve said many times what a wonderful finisher he is on the 
training ground but there’s been a lot of wonderful finishers on the training 
ground over the years that can’t hit a barn door when they come out of it. 
Antenucci’s very much as good on the pitch as he is on the training ground. His 
touch before he dinks it over the boy Steele is a fantastic touch because the 
opportunity for the goalkeeper to advance and to put it where he wants. He’s a 
wonderful player. I’m so pleased for him. He is one player playing with 
determination for a place in the team. He’s often the difference between 
winning and losing.”

After the nadir of the 4-0 defeat at Brighton on 29 February, Leeds have 
bounced back in impressive style by winning three on the trot for the first 
time in over three years in the league and Evans could not hide his delight as 
his side crept into the top half of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> table.

“That’s a statistic we made the players aware of,” he said. “I think from the 
minute we scored the goal, Blackburn supporters will go home tonight as well as 
Leeds supporters and say what a wonderful performance that was from Leeds 
because our one- and two-touch passing around the pitch was fantastic to watch.”

The defeat ended Blackburn’s four-game winning run at home . It is hardly 
surprising considering the amount of games the club have had – a successful FA 
Cup run meant this was their ninth game since the start of February.

Paul Lambert sympathised with his side’s “gruelling” exertions, saying: “I 
don’t think we deserved to lose. I thought we were well on top until they 
scored. We started the game really well and losing the goal through a set play 
was disappointing. The second goal was even more disappointing but I’ve said to 
them, you’ve played so many games in a short space of time and I don’t know if 
any other team has had the schedule we’ve been on and it’s gruelling.

“It’s the same lads going out week in, week out, and I knew one game was going 
to come back and bite because of the amount of games we’ve played. I couldn’t 
fault the effort and the commitment. It was just a game too far for us with the 
games we’ve had.” 
 