
These are heady days for Heracles. The club from the small town of Almelo – 
situated 30 kilometres from the Dutch border with Germany – spent Friday night 
on top of theEredivisie <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eredivisie> after 
securing a sixth win in seven matches, including a famous victory over the 
reigning champions PSV Eindhoven last month.

Having never finished higher than sixth during a decade in the Netherlands’ 
top division, their blistering start under manager John Stegeman has been 
greeted with an air of disbelief among long-standing supporters, even after 
dropping back down to third after the rest of the weekend’s matches. But just 
as things are going right on the pitch, a ghost of the past has returned to 
haunt the people of Almelo.

In March, Steve “Kalamazoo” Mokone died in hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/21/steve-mokone-coventry-cardiff-dies-82-south-africa>
 in the United States at the age of 82. Heracles supporters held a minute’s 
silence at their next home fixture in honour of the man who had a stand in the 
club’s Polman Stadium named after him having starred for them during the late 
1950s. A few weeks later, the ashes of the first black South African to play in 
the Football League when he joined Coventry in 1956 and then enjoyed brief 
spells at Cardiff, Torino, Barnsley, Marseille, Barcelona and Valencia, were 
scattered in South Africa following a ceremony at Johannesburg’s FNB Stadium.

That adulation – and after the Guardian published an article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/02/south-african-footballer-steve-mokone-coventry-cardiff>
 telling the story of what happened to Mokone when his football career was over 
– prompted Mokone’s daughter, Thandi Chase, to speak out.Her blog in the New 
York Times 
<http://kristof.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/07/30/my-father-apartheid-trailblazer-and-domestic-abuser/?_r=0>
 at the end of July, “Father, Apartheid Trailblazer and Domestic Abuser”, which 
alleged that he was a violent and abusive man who had “sexualised” her, was a 
bombshell for Heracles.

“I am very shocked by the news,” said chairman Jan Smit. “They are nasty 
accusations. He is now deceased, the case should be properly sorted out after 
that incriminating letter. Whether a stand in our new stadium will be renamed 
after him is now part of government consultation.”

Chase, who lives in Atlanta, has since appeared in several media outlets in 
South Africa and on the BBC radio show Have Your Say, where she detailed some 
of the horrific abuse she suffered, including an accusation that Mokone would 
masturbate next to her while she was in bed.

“I no longer fear my father or his retribution,” she explains to the Guardian. 
“I had really never thought about coming forward and sharing any of this – I 
don’t even like to talk about his story because it almost sounds made up.

“After the recent memorial service at the FNB Stadium commemorating him as a 
national hero and lauding him as this legend and hero, I just found it so 
disturbing. While he was to some point, it was such a sharp contradiction of 
the man that I knew. He was no hero in my life.

“It was ironic, as if this man had done nothing wrong,” Chase adds. “But he 
was physically abusive, violent and sexualised me as a child. What’s troubling 
to me is that these famous athletes are dealt with using a different set of 
standards and I think they ought to be held accountable. We don’t value women 
in sports culture.”

The story of Mokone’s life after football in America is complex and riddled 
with inconsistencies. Inspired by his father’s memories of the striker’s two 
seasons at Heracles, the Dutch journalist Tom Egbers published De Zwarte 
Meteoor (The Black Meteor), which was made into a film in 2000. After nearly 
four decades away, Mokone was invited over to the Netherlands for the premiere, 
attended by Ruud Gullit, Guus Hiddink and Frank Rijkaard, among other 
luminaries.

It was ironic, as if this man had done nothing wrong
Thandi Chase 
“We drove from Amsterdam to Almelo and all the town was out having a big 
party,” remembers Egbers. “There was a street in the town named after him and 
when the new stadium was built, it was decided that one of the stands should be 
named after him as well.”

It was only a few days later that Egbers discovered Mokone – who was working 
as a social worker at a hospital in New Jersey – had spent almost 12 years in 
prison for two crimes. Having waived trial and pleaded guilty for a lye attack 
on his wife in 1977, Mokone was then charged with paying one of his former 
patients to throw sulphuric acid in the face of his wife’s lawyer, Ann Boylan 
Rogers, who was representing his wife in the custody battle over Thandi.

He was convicted by the jury in New York while co-defendant, Isaiah Campbell, 
who it was alleged had actually carried out the attack, was found not guilty 
despite the defence’s argument that both should be cleared.

“Why was Steve Mokone sentenced but the man who supposedly committed the crime 
was not guilty and could just walk out? How is that possible? It is very 
strange,” says Egbers. “But that’s what happened.”

Convinced of his innocence after investigating the case files in New York, 
Egbers wrote a second book. Twaalf Gestolen Jaren (Twelve Stolen Years) alleged 
that Mokone had been framed by the US authorities in collaboration with the 
South African Department of Internal Affairs (DIA). He discovered that the 
former striker had been actively involved in ANC activities throughout his life 
and wrote articles condemning South Africa’s apartheid regime for a respected 
left-wing journal.

Egbers also has evidence that Mokone’s South African-born son, Ronnie Sello, 
was forced to testify against his father by the District Attorney because he 
had been told he would otherwise be thrown out of the country – a theory that 
is totally rejected by Chase.

“My brother was never threatened with deportation but I’ll leave it at that,” 
she says. “I know he’s had a lot of strong feelings about the allegations made 
about him, particularly the passport and being threatened with deportation. I 
suggested if he wanted he could put the record straight but it’s in his own 
time.”

Chase also claims that Egbers did not call her back when they first spoke at 
the start of May, although he denies that is the case. Butin an article 
<http://www.tubantia.nl/regio/almelo/tom-egbers-diep-geraakt-door-beschuldigingen-rond-heracles-held-mokone-1.5156647>
 for Almelo’s regional newspaper Tubantia last month, Egbers admitted that the 
allegations about Mokone had “made his stomach turn” and questioned Chase’s 
motives for going public after her father had died.
 Steve Mokone, third right, appears at a press conference in New York to 
support a bid to boycott the 1968 Olympics in protest at South Africa’s 
proposed readmittance. Photograph: Bettmann/CORBIS 
“I had so many questions from television and newspaper journalists that I 
thought I don’t want to have to tell the same story 55 times. I did it for the 
people of Almelo because they were affected very much. They were devastated 
because he was their hero,” he says.

“I wanted to write something to state my point of view and try to bring an end 
to this. I have a lot of questions but you have to be very careful with a 
victim of something like that. I wrote these questions in the article and ended 
it by saying I don’t really want to dig any deeper into this tragic family 
crisis.”

Egbers adds: “But now this is out in the open, he is portrayed as a very 
dangerous man. If somebody was tell to me my father was like that and write 
articles about it, then it no longer is a private matter. My father would be 
publicly damned. It is quite something to do that.

“Of course, she does have a right to speak out but I just sincerely hope she 
has considered everything thoroughly because you can’t turn this around any 
more. The damage has been done to his reputation.”

Having since established a grassroots campaign against intimate partner 
violence calledWhy Speak Now? <http://www.whyspeaknow.org>, Chase says she has 
no interest in hearing Egbers’ side of the story. Her close family at first 
attempted to dissuade her from detailing the abuse she suffered at the hands of 
her father but now say they are fully behind her.

“I have no qualms about people celebrating my father’s life and acknowledging 
him,” she says. “Nobody would argue that he did a lot for the sport. I just 
think it’s important that people understand who the whole person is, that’s 
all. Underneath the fame was also a man who was a father and a husband, and not 
a very nice one.

“I realise that I’ve been given an amazing platform to speak out against 
domestic violence,” Chase adds. “But if my father was not who he was in 
sporting terms, nobody would be interested in speaking to me. I think this is 
yet again an example of our society’s unquestioning glorification of 
professional athletes. Perhaps Mr Egbers and his fans alike may have been 
blinded by his own unadulterated adoration of my father?

“To my brothers it was like: ‘I know but that was the past. Can’t we move on?’ 
But where do we move to? For the victims of this. For me, talking about this is 
moving on. But it’s always hard when the first person speaks out in the family. 
It’s creating a problem.”

For Heracles, it’s one that won’t go away.
 