 On a warm sunny afternoon last week the old buddleia outside the valley estate 
office was living up to its reputation as the butterfly bush. It was playing 
host to six species - comma, small tortoiseshell, peacock, red admiral and two 
of the cabbage whites, all busy sipping nectar from the long spikes of 
lavender-coloured flowers. This probably ranks as the most impressive gathering 
of butterflies I have seen all year.
On the same afternoon, walking over the local fields, I found there were still 
plenty of meadow browns about among the tall grass. On one bramble patch and 
the edge of a small wooded copse, there were more peacocks and commas, only 
this time they were resting, soaking up the warm sun with wings stretched flat 
over the leaves. By the time I got back to the village, speckled wood, 
gatekeeper, holly blue and small copper had all been added to the list.

Despite this successful day with the butterflies, it has not been a good year 
for most of them locally. For the first time I can recall, I have not seen 
either common blue or small heath, although this has not been the fault of the 
weather as much as the nearby road works which have swallowed up a prime 
habitat for at least one of these species. There have been exceptions, not 
least with the speckled wood which goes from strength to strength locally and 
this year has probably been the commonest butterfly in our gardens. This is 
quite remarkable considering that 10 years ago it was seldom seen in the valley.

The holly blues have also done well, and their second brood has been on the 
wing for the past three weeks in numbers as plentiful as the first generation 
in late April and May. These late summer adults of the holly blue will be 
searching for ivy, the food plant of their caterpillars, on which to lay their 
eggs. The spring generation chose holly for their offspring.

Several of the species on the list that day will be hibernating soon as the 
daylight hours shorten. Maybe the red admiral will survive if we have another 
mild winter.
 