
It’s 6.30am and still dark, and Jean is setting out for her job as a home care 
worker. When she returns in 12 hours’ time she will have made 23 house calls to 
sick and elderly people, driven 20 miles between appointments and earned £64.80 
before tax.

 Jean isn’t her real name. Along with fellow care workers in this northern 
town she is on a zero-hours contract and fears losing work if her employer is 
unhappy with her. She fears that speaking out about how she has to race between 
visits, cutting short her appointments in order to earn the “national living 
wage”, might result in an immediate loss of earnings.

Number of care workers on zero-hours contracts jumps to one in seven
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/17/care-workers-zero-hours-contracts-unison-minimum-wage>
Jean is one of an army of care workers who go into people’s homes every day to 
help with tasks that enable them to keep living independently. As the 
population ages it is a growing industry, and more than 600,000 people are now 
employed in the care sector. Those working on the frontline – often for 
agencies working on council contracts – do jobs such as preparing food, making 
beds, prompting people to take their medication and tidying up. These jobs are 
often advertised on minimal rates of pay, and typically they involve no 
guaranteed working hours.


The agency, as she describes it, is a hard taskmaster. “I leave home at half 
six and I’ll probably get home at about seven and I’ll get about £270 a week,” 
she says. “The clients are all lovely and sometimes you go out of your way to 
do more for them, but it’s hard because there’s no time to get from one place 
to the next.”

Jean works 12 days on and two days off. Her list of appointments comes through 
on a Friday but can change during the week as people are discharged from 
hospital and added to her client list, or admitted to hospital and removed. She 
may also be asked to cover a colleague’s visits if they are off.


With a zero-hours contract, there is no minimum guarantee of work, and Jean’s 
days can shrink or grow. She cannot be sure from one day to the next how long 
she will work or how much she will earn. It can even change while she is on a 
shift: on the day that I trailed her she was expecting a six-hour shift in the 
morning but saw an appointment disappear from the roster on her phone while she 
was at another house. That meant she was instantly down £1.80 on the amount she 
expected to earn for the day. “Probably once a week you get a cancellation or 
they will ring you up and ask, ‘Can you do extra?,’” she says.

Some agencies offer higher rates of pay than Jean is on, but the tendency to 
offer zero-hours contracts still causes problems for workers. One care worker 
on the London living wage of £9.40 an hour told the Guardian that her weekly 
pay fell by almost £70 after she lost seven hours’ work. The cuts to shifts 
come as patients die or are taken into hospital, and workers can wait weeks to 
be allocated new visits.

In her role as a care worker Jean visits some homes three times a day, making 
breakfast, lunch and tea, and providing some of her clients with their only 
human contact all day. Her phone roster lists the jobs scheduled for the day 
and the length of each appointment. Typically there is a mix of 15-minute and 
30-minute visits, although sometimes she is booked at a house for longer.

Councils typically pay agencies for visiting time. When Jean arrives at a 
house she swipes her phone to say she has arrived, and she swipes again when 
she leaves. She is paid for the time that is shown on the roster, rather than 
how long she is actually providing care. The phone tracks her movements 
throughout the day.

The roster allows no time for travel between appointments – and she is not 
paid for it. To stay with each client for the full appointment time and make it 
to the next one on time would require some kind of teleporter – in reality she 
has to cut every one of them short so that she can leave the house, sometimes 
put a key back into a safe, get back in her car and travel to the next address. 
As a result, sometimes appointments scheduled for 30 minutes actually last only 
20 so she can stay on schedule. “I’m going to be running around like a headless 
chicken later,” she says, looking at the afternoon’s roster of short 
appointments.


On the day I shadow Jean, she works nine hours over two shifts and takes home 
£7.20 an hour for that time – exactly the national living wage, but only 
because she cuts appointments short to travel between clients.

She says it is a good day. The morning appointments are straightforward and 
with people she has visited before, so she knows where they live and how to 
find things in their homes.

But it is not always like that. “If I have a new patient I have to read the 
care plan, so that takes longer,” she says. “And I’m often in a home for longer 
than is scheduled. If I have to call an ambulance for someone I have to wait 
for it to arrive and I don’t get paid for that time. If I go over by five, 10, 
15 minutes on a call then I don’t get paid for that.”


For Jean and other care workers, payment for transport expenses is erratic. 
She gets some money for petrol, she explains, but the amount varies and is 
never more than £10 a week. Business insurance cover for her car, along with 
wear and tear, all add to her costs. In London, one worker told the Guardian 
she received 56p to cover a week’s visits to a patient done by bus and on foot. 
A single fare costs £1.50.


For Jean, there are larger concerns than transport costs. It is stressful 
work, she says, and she feels she has little support. One of the worst things, 
she says, is the isolation. “It’s a lonely job,” she says – while she may see 
her colleagues driving past to their calls, she rarely has a chance to speak to 
them. “You are in the car on your own, you get to people’s houses and often 
face problems on your own. They tell you all of their worries and then you take 
them home. Often at night I’m tossing and turning worrying about them.” But 
despite this she says: “I love my job – I’m completely attached to it.”



 