
The City of London is one of the richest places in the world, but the 
glittering towers of its financial institutions are only a stroll away from 
some of the most deprived areas in the country. City firms are not unaware of 
this contrast and in an attempt to bridge the gap - and improve their public 
image - some have come up with imaginative social programmes for working with 
their less well off neighbours.

 Clare Gardner, head of the community affairs programme at Price Waterhouse 
Coopers, does far more than supervise charity fundraising. She encourages 
employees to become actively involved in donating their time and skills. The 
Price Waterhouse building is in Southwark, where nine secondary schools share 
one collegiate sixth form and many pupils leave without any educational 
qualifications, so education is obviously an area where the company can help. 
Staff are involved in a number of schemes to promote basic skills and 
employability.

 But the community affairs programme does not limit its activities to the 
immediate neighbourhood. There is also a scheme to fund employees who have 
volunteered to work for charities on their own initiative. Joan Baker, head of 
a team of secretaries, chairs the management group running a women's refuge in 
Essex.

 She became involved while working in a job share at what was then Coopers and 
Lybrand. Coopers became directly involved when the refuge was in the process of 
moving. Baker applied for a grant under the Voluntary Award scheme and the firm 
funded the transfer of the playground equipment.

 Over the years she has used her City skills at the refuge, for example 
interviewing jobseekers and helping draft policy statements. But the advantages 
aren't one-way; her work at the refuge has caused her to acquire new skills. 
Chairing last year's annual meeting she had to stand up and address almost 70 
people. 'A few years ago I could not have done it,' she says and adds that the 
transfer of skills 'effectively works both ways.'

From an employee's point of view it is also a wonderful means of networking. 
One of the most colourful activities the community affairs programme supports 
is the annual pantomime staged by employees. Linda Unsworth, a senior manager 
at Coopers, and has been involved for the last four of the 13 years it has been 
running, producing this year's offering - Jack And The Beanstalk at London's 
Mermaid Theatre. Most of the children came from hospitals, children's homes and 
East End schools, and many had never been in a theatre before. 'Some of the 
letters we get afterwards are really lovely,' says Unsworth.

 The audience is also made up of the cast's colleagues, so the production is 
also a great leveller. Participants come from every level, two of the firm's 
partners are in the band, and the cast includes secretaries, receptionists and 
drivers. The atmosphere is completely democratic. 'Nobody knows what anybody 
else does,' says Unsworth.
 