 You almost feel sorry for them. For months they have been a blip on the 
political radar screen, first forgotten among the distractions of summer, then 
obscured by the larger struggle for home rule in Scotland. Last week the Yes 
for Wales campaign was shoved further into obscurity, silenced by the death of 
the principality's fairest lady.
Now, the activists readily admit, they are in a battle to be heard at all. 
Scotland's referendum will dominate until Thursday, leaving the movement for 
Welsh devolution just six days to press its case - and to reverse the 4-to-1 
defeat it suffered when the matter was last put to the people, back in 1979.

And yet, hard though it has been to concentrate on anything beyond Westminster 
Abbey and London's various palaces these past few days, the changes bubbling 
away in Wales are worth a hard look. There is less of the heat and fury which 
one finds just below the surface in Scotland it is a softer, gentler 
nationalism inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> . But, almost for 
that reason, the arrangements the Welsh are now considering are much likelier 
models for the rest of Britain. In short, some day we may all be governed this 
way.

 The difference in nationalist temperature is crucial, ensuring that the 
atmospherics of the Wales campaign forms a sharp contrast with the one with 
just 72 hours to run in Scotland. There is no Welsh equivalent of the 
Braveheart-ism on show north of the border, little of Scotland's defiant urge 
to cast off the yoke of English rule. Indeed, the Labour ministers tasked with 
bringing a Welsh victory home, and who boast of a 2-to-1 lead in their own 
private polling, go out of their way to emphasise how tight the connection with 
England will remain.

 'Macroeconomic policy will still be set at the UK level,' soothes Ron Davies, 
the Secretary of State for Wales , addressing a gathering of business leaders. 
'This is not about the identity or integrity of the UK.' On the contrary, he 
and his colleagues insist, a Yes vote will only strengthen the union by 
limiting the scope for Welsh resentment of Westminster: now the nation will 
have only itself - or its 60 representatives - to blame.

 Davies's lieutenant, the junior minister Peter Hain, says the people of Wales 
must choose devolution - because everyone in England is about to go the same 
way. The North East, the South West and London are all 'champing at the bit' 
for a measure of self-rule, he says. 'We can't afford to get left behind.'

 Many veteran observers of the politics of the principality see arguments like 
those as typically Welsh, playing to the lack of self-confidence which has 
historically plagued the nation. There is something to that view: Labour 
strategists report that, in focus groups, Welsh voters say they'll back 
devolution because Tony Blair wants them to. 'If the boss wants it, we'll give 
it to him,' said one Labour voter in just such a session. It is fun to imagine 
what would happen to a member of Labour's Yes-Yes campaign who dared urge 
Scottish voters to vote for self-rule in order to make an English-accented 
prime minister happy. It would not be pretty.

 A library full of doctoral theses could be - probably has been - written to 
explain this relative weakness of Welsh national feeling. Riding in the back of 
his Cabinet-rank Jaguar, Davies spins his own theory. 'The vote in Scotland is 
about the re-creation of a parliament that existed 300 years ago. It's about 
righting a wrong, it's about national identity. That sense of confidence does 
not exist in Wales .'

 Huw Roberts, special adviser to the Welsh secretary, pipes up from behind the 
steering wheel. He points out that Wales never had a Robert the Bruce, that 
'there is no long history of Wales as a nation separate from England'. He and 
his boss recall the short-lived parliament at Machynlleth, but neither can 
quite pinpoint the date - they're pretty sure it was sometime in the 15th 
century. It's hard to imagine the equivalent scene being played out in Scotland.

 SUCH things seem to matter less in Wales . Sure there is a National Gallery, 
and a Welsh National Opera and the like. But the sense of distinctness is 
simply milder than elsewhere. Perhaps it's because the country's population 
includes so many incomers, particularly those who crossed over from Merseyside 
and beyond during the industrial revolution. Wales is highly tolerant of new 
arrivals. It is noticeable, for example, that no one seems to mind that Peter 
Hain speaks with an accent that is more Pretoria than Pontypridd. Others muse 
that it might, paradoxically, be Wales 's language that accounts for the 
country's laidback sense of identity. Because they have a national tongue - 
effectively lacking in Scotland - people are relaxed about the other trappings 
of nationhood. 'The language gives us definition without a political 
structure,' says Huw Roberts. Not that this cultural identity is always so 
cuddly. In the 1970s many English-speakers opposed devolution, then strongly 
identified with the Welsh language movement, fearing they would be forced to 
speak an alien tongue - so becoming strangers in their own land. Today's Yes 
effort has shrewdly moved to assuage that anxiety this time the Welsh Language 
Society is taking a back seat. Mind you, it's also true that the language 
campaigners have got most of what they want - from simultaneous translation in 
Welsh council chambers to S4C, the all-Welsh TV channel. Once a boiling issue, 
the heat has now all but gone.

 The simplest fact, explains Ron Davies, is that Welsh and English life are 
intricately woven together and, nearly always have been. There is no geographic 
'buffer' between the two, and economic life is all but inseparable.

 And so, Davies and his allies are obliged to make an argument that has little 
to do with St David and green valleys. The Yes campaign is not selling 
identity, but good governance. The result is a programme that is rational, but 
tentative. On offer is not Scotland's full-blown parliament of 129 members, but 
an assembly with just 60. Unlike the Scots, Welsh voters will face just one 
question on the ballot paper on September 18, with no option of arming their 
assembly with the power to bring in extra cash by adding a few pennies on 
income tax. The Cardiff chamber will simply allocate the money currently spent 
by the Welsh Office. As the city's chattering classes are quick to point out 
the referendum will not, strictly speaking, devolve power at all: rather, 
powers already farmed out to the Welsh office will now be subject to greater 
accountability. It is democratisation, rather than devolution, which is on 
offer.

 In these limited terms, the case for Welsh devolution is difficult to argue. 
It will allow people close scrutiny of the public action that is taken in their 
name - precisely the kind of decentralisation progressives have demanded for 
all Britain for so long.

 LISTENING to the arguments, it becomes clear that what Labour is involved in 
here is something quite rare: politicians who can currently exercise power - 
and spend lots of money - with very little scrutiny, are pushing for a system 
that will oblige them to face much more. It is not clear if the significance of 
this action has quite sunk in, in Wales or beyond.

 The point is underlined by the fact that 20 of the assembly's members are to 
be chosen by proportional representation, so denting the certainty that the 
Cardiff body will be a one-party fiefdom. Small sub-committees are to be 
established, to allay North Welsh fears that Cardiff and the south will 
dominate.

 The No campaign, woefully named Just Say No, says all this amounts to a 
'bureaucratic tier of red tape and gossiping men and women', in the words of 
its founder, Carys Pugh. But that seems an outdated critique. For the Welsh 
plan somehow feels in tune with the current direction of British politics - 
more coalitions, less central control. If Scotland votes Yes on Thursday, and 
the momentum nudges the Welsh to do the same a week later, we may all soon be 
living in a very different country.

 The Guardian Welsh Devolution Debate, with leading politicians and lobbyists, 
takes place in Cardiff on September 10. For tickets (free) call 01222 224488
 