
'I am so Anglicised that I felt I had to try my hand at being an 
entrepreneur.' So says German-born Bob Bischof. No novice to things English, 
the entrepreneurial apprentice in question first developed a taste for warm 
beer and strong tea when he arrived in Britain to set up a forklift truck 
factory in the late Sixties. Except for a brief period in Berlin in the early 
Nineties, Bischof, 58, has been here since.

A serial reorganiser, Bischof restructured Lancer Boss when Jungheinrich, his 
German employer, took it over in 1994. His thoughtful views on the 
idiosyncrasies of UK manufacturing brought him to the attention of the late 
John Smith and several Labour Shadow Ministers; he acted as adviser to all of 
them. He was a member of the Institute for Public Policy Research's Commission 
on Public Policy and British Business, which reported last year. But having 
quit Boss a couple of years ago to go out on his own, Bischof chose not the 
manufacturing sector but services: a Liverpool direct marketing and call-centre 
company called McIntyre & King. Services, says Bischof, a trained economist and 
merchant banker, 'are about 150 times easier to succeed in' than manufacturing 
in the UK. One reason is that the UK has a strong outsourcing culture. Many 
businesses buy in products and services from outside suppliers so demand is 
consistently high. 'You don't have to second-guess the market,' he says.

Another is that in labour-intensive services an inexpensive and 'flexible' 
labour force is a great advantage. A third is that although the UK is 
increasingly an exporter in the creative and media sector, most services aren't 
exposed to foreign competition.

'Call centres and home delivery don't on the whole attract international 
competitors, only domestic - and if you can't beat them, you shouldn't be in 
business.'

The reasons why services are attractive are exactly those that make 
manufacturing in the UK so difficult, even for companies such as BMW and 
Siemens. In Germany, where labour is expensive and hard to get rid of it is 
essentially a fixed cost, so there is an incentive to invest in 
productivity-raising machinery, and in training to get the most out of people.

Result: since the Fifties, German productivity has risen faster than in the UK 
and wages more slowly. There has also been a huge export surplus. This virtuous 
circle has led to a stronger and stronger Deutschmark. Or it did in the past. 
Germany is now in Euroland, where the strength of its manufacturing is 
countered by the weakness of others, so even this disadvantage no longer 
exists. Wunderbar!

Contrast this with the UK, where labour is cheap and capital dear. When he was 
running UK-based Boss, Bischof and his counterpart at a German plant submitted 
simultaneous investment requests to headquarters for identical computer-aided 
design systems. The German bid was authorised but Bischof's rejected - because 
the projected pay-back period was too long. He says: 'Low wages are a great 
disincentive to investment. Keeping six draughtsmen on at Boss was cheaper than 
the depreciation on the CAD package.'

This is why UK manufacturing is constantly behind the curve on productivity 
and quality. The problems are hugely compounded, Bischof says, by the British 
insistence on running the economy by interest rate manipulations. This weapon 
does much more harm than good by discouraging managers from investing and 
keeping sterling at prohibitive levels for export.

The really interesting question, says Bischof, is whether, in the light of 
this consistently unfavourable manufacturing environment, BMW and other foreign 
owners will continue to apply the stakeholder approach they employ in Germany 
to their British factories, or decide that when in Rome they should do as the 
Romans do and shut down Longbridge and other unprofitable plants. Can UK 
service firms take up the slack left by the current manufacturing cull? Bischof 
is proud of McIntyre & King's contribution to the booming call-centre movement, 
which has done much to spark life in Liverpool's reviving dockside economy.

But he doubts whether the UK has a future as the call-centre capital of 
Europe. In the first place, many services don't exist on their own. There has 
to be some manufacturing base for marketing services to be outsourced from.

Second, although services typically aren't subject to direct foreign 
competition, they are quite vulnerable to substitution. For example, when 
Jungheinrich bought Boss, it sacked its UK bankers and insurers and bought 
software from Germany. 'Every company coming in erodes the service businesses,' 
notes Bischof. 'Look at banking. The only clever bit is investment banking - 
and all of that, in the financial centre of the world, has passed into foreign 
hands.'

Bischof wants McIntyre & King to do its bit for beleaguered British 
manufacturing by developing home shopping. Home shopping, predicts Bischof, is 
a concept whose time has come because of the ageing population, the emptying of 
the high street and ever-increasing work pressures. Of course, Bischof has good 
financial reasons for hoping that home shopping 'will be huge in the next 20 
years'. But, you can't take the social-market economist out of the entrepreneur 
so easily.

Apart from anything else, he says, anything that supports manufacturing and 
chips away at retail power 'has an excellent purpose in itself'.
 