
At the Guardian, we cherish the trust our readers place in us to provide an 
accurate and vivid account of the world. That’s why we acted immediately to 
investigate when sources claimed that they had not spoken with the writer of 
the piece they were quoted in.

The article in question, from February, was by a freelance journalist, Joseph 
Mayton <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joseph-mayton>, who began writing 
opinion pieces for the Guardian in London in 2009, while based in Egypt. He 
contributed several opinion pieces before starting to write occasional US news 
stories, on a freelance basis, in May 2015 from California. These stories 
ranged from coverage of wildfires to issues related to marijuana farms, urban 
vineyards and whale deaths on the coast.

When Mayton was unable to provide convincing evidence that the interviews in 
question in the February article had taken place, we hired an independent 
fact-checker to investigate all of his prior work, which comprised 37 
single-byline articles published between 2015 and 2016, seven shared byline 
stories from the same period, and 20 opinion pieces written from 2009 to 2015.

In an investigation that included approximately 50 interviews, our 
fact-checker found articles that contained likely or confirmed fabrication, 
including stories about two events that organizers said he didn’t attend. 
Dozens of sources could not be found – either they had no online presence or 
they were anonymous and could not be substantiated – and several people quoted 
in Mayton’s articles either denied speaking with him or giving the quotes 
attributed to them.

Our editors met with Mayton twice in person and emailed him dozens of times, 
giving him more than a month from the time the first allegations were presented 
to him to provide notes, phone records, contact information and other evidence. 
All evidence he provided has been taken into account, but he was unable or 
unwilling to provide information on most sources.

Mayton has denied any fabrication, and did not provide any on-the-record 
comment about the findings of our investigation.

In light of the extent of the fabrication and the uncertainty surrounding many 
of the articles, we are removing 12 of the news stories, and one opinion piece 
from the Guardian website. In the articles that remain, quotes and information 
that could not be verified have been removed, and we have published footnotes 
on each article page to outline this. There were other stories which proved 
accurate, with no corrections needed, and have been left as is.

How did this happen? We receive thousands of ideas and pitches from 
freelancers every year, and we commission large volumes of writing from those 
not on staff. All freelancers are asked to abide by our editorial code and we 
take care to make sure that their reporting and writing is of the quality we 
expect, and you, our readers, deserve.

Mayton wrote only sporadically for the Guardian – he was an infrequent but 
long term contributor and many different editors in the organization have dealt 
with his work across opinion, news, arts, sports and features. At first, the 
quality of his writing met our standards, and thus a trusted working 
relationship was established.

It is incredibly difficult to detect manufactured quotes – the voices of 
people on the street who cannot later be verified, for example – which can go 
unquestioned without a reason to draw the attention of an editor to query them.

During the course of this investigation we have questioned ourselves at length 
over what we could have done differently to prevent this from happening and 
have come to two firm conclusions as a result.

First, we need to know more about the freelancers we work with before they 
start writing for us regularly. These are often people we haven’t met, but we 
go on to place an inherent degree of trust that the work they are filing to us 
is true. We are currently reviewing our processes in order to improve due 
diligence in relation to regular contributors.

Second, we need to take a closer look at occasions where individuals are not 
named in a story for no strong reason. We need to question the use of anonymous 
sourcing in any story; a policy we hold, but have not enforced strictly enough. 
There are occasions where it is of course necessary, such as in sensitive 
national security reporting, but these stories were not among them.

We want to apologize to those people whose words were misrepresented or 
falsified. We also want to say sorry to you, our readers, for the errors that 
have been made here, and hope that it has not compromised the trust you place 
in the Guardian. We assure you we will do better.

 * 29 May 2016: Joseph Mayton was not the Guardian’s Cairo correspondent and 
only contributed opinion pieces about Egypt, the last of which was published in 
2010. He did not report news stories from, or about, Egypt for the Guardian
 