
Australia threw a million dollars, its top civil servants and foreign 
embassies round the world into a campaign to prevent Kakadu national park - the 
backdrop to the film Crocodile Dundee - being declared "in danger" by Unesco 
last week.

The environment minister, Robert Hill, travelled to Paris to put the case for 
the Jabiluka uranium mine, in the centre of the park, against the combined 
forces of the Unesco scientific committee, environment groups and the 
Aboriginal tribe that had occupied the site for 40,000 years.

The minister had complained that Unesco's scientists had been influenced by 
campaigning groups and overturned the scientists' recommendation with his own 
successful international lobbying campaign among politicians. Immediately, the 
price of the shares of the mine developer, Energy Resources of Australia (ERA), 
rose by 8%.

Hill believes the mine is worth £2bn in uranium exports for Australia. But 
with low uranium prices caused by the world glut of ore and a nuclear industry 
in decline, this claim is hard to justify.

The campaign by Hill marks a new low in the environmental reputation of the 
Australian government which has earned the country the status of an 
international pariah, according to Friends of the Earth campaigns director Tony 
Juniper.

The country's slide in international green esteem began when diplomats did 
their best to wreck the 1997 Kyoto climate deal in Japan, demanding - and 
getting - a 12% rise in greenhouse gas emissions for Australia.

The Australian case is based on its energy-intensive industries and mineral 
wealth which, it says, it needs to exploit to survive. But in the case of 
uranium, of which there is already a world surplus and falling demand, there 
can be no case for exploiting the Jabiluka mine.

Australia, Canada and South Africa already have mines in less sensitive areas, 
and all the claims of the nuclear industry to be environmentally friendly are 
based on the fact that nuclear fuel can be recycled. Sellafield, disliked as it 
is by the green lobby, has its future based on re-using spent fuel to make new 
fuel for reactors. In other words, there's no need for fresh ore at all.

Hill's victory in Paris is likely only to fuel the dissent at home. The mining 
company already faces an extraordinary general meeting on October 29, forced by 
a petition of concerned shareholders.

Kakadu is the country's largest national park - 200 miles north of Darwin and 
home of the Mirrar people. Current government plans to mine this sacred 
homeland have profound implications for Australia's future.

Protests began from the moment Australian federal minister for resources and 
energy, Warwick Parer, gave the go-ahead for the Jabiluka uranium mine. This 
was not only because proposed mining would bury 60m tonnes of highly toxic 
tailings waste within Kakadu, nor because 80.5 hectares would be cleared within 
this World Heritage listed park, but because people did not believe promises of 
job increases and economic prosperity.

Since the election of his coalition government in March 1996, prime minister 
John Howard has been pushing forward plans to mine this and other regions in 
Australia, causing alarm among environmental groups and Aboriginals alike, who 
have formed a strong alliance to campaign against the illegal desecration of 
sacred homelands and protected countryside.

Uranium mining is hardly new to Australia. An estimated 30-42% of global 
uranium reserves are found there, and commercial mining has been taking place 
since 1910 - first in South Australia, then around sites in Queensland and the 
Northern Territory.

Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the British were conducting a range of nuclear 
tests in South Australia and off the coast of Western Australia, creating 
substantial radioactive contamination among Aboriginal people living nearby.

In the late 1970s to early 1980s, the Northern Land Council, representing 
traditional Aboriginal landowners, reluctantly gave the go-ahead to four 
uranium projects in the Northern Territory: Ranger, Nabarlek, Jabiluka and 
Koongarra. While the Narbarlek mine has been exhausted and decommissioned, 
Ranger has been operating for 17 years.

 Recurring water management problems, misplaced iron ore, high Aboriginal 
unemployment and continuous strikes have been the hallmarks of this mine. 
Neither Jabiluka nor Koongarra went ahead, due to the reluctance of the former 
Labour government, before the Howard administration was voted in three years 
ago.

But why did the traditional owners of Jabiluka, the Mirrar, accept mining in 
the first place? They explain that unrelenting pressure on Aboriginal people in 
the Kakadu region made initial resistance difficult. When this deal was 
achieved, two decades ago, indigenous people in the Northern Territory were 
struggling to get title to their land with the assistance of the newly-formed 
and inexperienced Northern Land Council.

Treated as second-class citizens on their own soil, the Mirrar insist that the 
initial mining agreement was signed under extreme duress and misinformation.

Kakadu has been home to the Mirrar people for centuries, even millennia. The 
Gundjehmi Aboriginal Corporation, representing the Mirrar tribe, has launched a 
court challenge to the validity of the Jabiluka mineral lease. Jacqui Katona, 
on behalf of the Mirrars, says: "Inherent in our law and culture is an 
obligation to protect and preserve our homelands for future generations. It is 
not negotiable. We refuse to simply be left to arrange the flowers on the 
coffins of any more of our mob (people). We will not agree to this mine, and we 
will take whatever action is necessary to halt the desecration of our country, 
our lives and our future."

The government and mining company have shown total disregard to the rights of 
the indigenous people living in Kakadu National Park. As Philip Shirvington of 
Energy Resources (ERA) said in May 1997, "ERA will push ahead with plans for 
Jabiluka whether or not it is ultimately opposed by the senior Aboriginal 
Traditional Owner of the land."

The Mirrar people have been told that the mine would create 2,000 jobs, and 
they have been offered £150m in royalties and £5m in benefits, such as new 
housing and a women's resource centre, if they approve the plan. They have 
rejected the offer and refused permission over their tribal lands for a new 
road between the new mine and the Ranger mine where existing milling facilities 
will be used to crush the uranium ore.

Traditional landowners have been assured that uranium mining on their land 
poses no serious threat to their safety. However, a 1998 report by the 
Australian Conservation Foundation reveals that "uranium is one of the most 
dangerous minerals on earth. Every gram is destined to become radioactive 
waste. Jabiluka is located adjacent to the World Heritage listed wetlands of 
Kakadu, which feed the region's vast food-plains and literally feed the 
traditional Aboriginal owners."

As Jacqui Katona, of the Gundjehmi Aboriginal Corporation, told the 
foundation: "Nothing can replace our country when it's mined. Nothing can 
reverse the damage to our water system and our food sources. Our culture can't 
be replaced by money."
 