
“The obligation for working parents is a precise one: the feeling that one 
ought to work as if one did not have children, while raising one’s children as 
if one did not have a job,” a friend recently wrote on Facebook. My immediate 
reaction was sadness as it made me think about my own roles as a parent and a 
senior HR manager. But do we really need to pigeonhole ourselves to be 
successful?

Forgive yourself for feeling guilt, you're not alone

For me, being a working parent takes its toll. I run out of my last meeting at 
4.30pm and dash to the tube. If I miss the train, I have to wait another 15 
minutes for the next one. I have to collect Emma, my daughter, from nursery by 
6pm and I feel rising anxiety trying to get back on time. I hate it when she’s 
among the last to be picked up and feel a sense of disappointment in myself.

When returning to work, most parents opt for some sort of flexible 
arrangement. When I returned to work I wanted to meet the expectations of my 
peers and managers, while knowing that I was giving my child the best possible 
start and as much time as I could. But I found it’s not as simple as switching 
into mum mode the moment I leave the office. I spent my commute on the phone, 
doing work calls, replying to emails, making every second count before making 
Emma my primary focus for the next few hours until she fell asleep. After that, 
I used to be back on my emails finishing my tasks for the day.

I felt I had to justify my new working arrangement by being available all the 
time, resulting in a sense of frustration that I wasn’t able to give either 
work or parenting 100%. This was not only exhausting, but impossible to keep up.

So how can you juggle it all in a way that works not only for you, but also 
those around you?

Be honest with yourself

Be fair to yourself and make sure your manager is aware of what is possible 
and what isn’t. I don’t work Wednesdays, but of course I would end up working. 
Although I am part time, my workload has not reduced – in fact, sometimes it’s 
more. At first I found myself with a relentless need to check my work phone and 
reply to emails while looking after Emma. This wasn’t feasible and I needed to 
find a balance. I now have arranged to work two hours from home on that day 
off. It’s a more realistic an expectation.

Think reasonably about your working practices and be accountable

The charities leading the way with family-friendly working cultures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/may/27/the-charities-leading-the-way-with-family-friendly-working-cultures>
Demonstrate how you will re-prioritise your meeting schedules, administration 
or email management by working such an arrangement to your own advantage and 
that of the company. Do your best work, follow your passions and be confident 
in your experience and voice.

Set limitations

Use the support mechanisms in place – they’re there for a reason and leaning 
on them doesn’t make you any less efficient or effective, quite the opposite. 
With more than 14 years’ experience in HR, I understand that overcoming the 
challenges of being a working mum is not something I can do alone. I feel lucky 
to be working in a supportive environment that embraces my role as a mother and 
as a senior member of the team.

Talk to your manager to reset goals and priorities

Don’t allow yourself to get anxious about the unknown when a simple 
conversation may be all you need to set things straight. Forgive yourself for 
feeling uncertainty or guilt, as you’re not alone. How accountable you feel 
depends on the kind of employer you work for and whether or not they have great 
policies, role models and can adapt to change. We can all get swept up in the 
way things have always been done rather than creating new ways of working that 
serve a better purpose in today’s reality.

Back to that original quote: is that how I feel? Perhaps at times, but only 
when I forget to feel proud of being a successful working mother – one busy, 
fulfilled person rather than two separate entities. I hope I am not alone in 
feeling that.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 