
My friend Abdul Hamed, who has died aged 68 after suffering from cancer, made 
a remarkable cultural journey and enriched many lives on the way.

He was born near Lyallpur (now Faisalabad) in Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, where his family had a small 
farm, to Janet Bibi and Mohammed Yacoob. The family came to Britain when he was 
seven, his father setting up as a tallyman, selling clothes door-to-door on 
credit then calling weekly to collect the payments. They lived in a tall 
terraced house in Newcastle’s inner west end, which they shared with some 
dysfunctional tenants.

It was there in Elswick that I first met Ab in the autumn of 1967, when I was 
carrying out some research into the lives of his generation of young Asians. I 
knocked on the door and he kindly invited me in.

Ab was then studying electronics at the Marine and Technical College in South 
Shields 
<http://www.clydemarinetraining.com/content/south-shields-marine-school-south-tyneside-college>
, having failed after 20-30 attempts to get an apprenticeship. Even when he 
qualified he had to wait a long time to get into his chosen career as a ship’s 
radio officer. He bore this self-evident discrimination with wry patience. 
Eventually he achieved his ambition, working on ships in the North Sea and the 
Baltic.

After two years at sea Ab changed direction. He applied to university and took 
a degree and a master’s in electronic engineering atSalford 
<http://www.salford.ac.uk/>. Here he met Pru, from Polmont, in Falkirk, 
Scotland, who was studying politics and sociology. They married in 1973 and had 
settled in Newcastle when Ab got a job lecturing at his old college in South 
Shields. He remained there until he retired in 2002.

Ab was not only a caring teacher, but a master of wallpapering and all manner 
of domestic skills, a maker of tiles, furniture and stained glass, a cooker of 
curries, a baker of chapatis and stotty cake, a green-fingered propagator and 
an allotment-holder.

But most appreciated by his friends was his gentle, attentive quality – gentle 
but also argumentative. He and Pru were well matched in this respect. They 
shared wide-ranging intellectual interests and philosophy became an enthusiasm 
for them both in later years.

Ab was active in his union, and they both became involved in local 
environmental issues. Ab, I think, was inhibited from wider political 
engagement by a kind of scepticism, often humorously expressed. When I 
championed the single transferable vote, he maintained that praying was 
probably as effective in politics as voting. He spoke as an uncompromising 
atheist; his prophet wasBob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan>.

Ab is survived by Pru, his daughter, Cordelia, sons Paul and Joseph, and a 
granddaughter.
 