
A Scott Vernon hat-trick helped Aberdeen ease the pressure on their manager, 
Craig Brown, with a convincing win overDunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline>. The Scottish Premier 
League's Friday night football experiment drew an impressive crowd of 8,333 to 
Pittodrie and the majority who turned up left content after a resounding Dons 
victory.

Vernon opened the scoring when he headed home a Richard Foster cross after six 
minutes and the former Colchester striker added a second after 35 minutes when 
he flicked the ball home from two yards out after Youl Mawene had nodded on a 
Kari Arnason cross.

Fraser Fyvie netted a third for the Dons on the stroke of half-time when he 
rifled the ball home from the edge of the area and Vernon completed the scoring 
with 10 minutes to go when he turned the ball home after Mohamed Chalali's 
long-range strike hit the post.

In their first home fixture since being knocked out of the League Cup by the 
Second Division part-timers East Fife,Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> made only one change from the 
side that was defeated 1-0 by Motherwell with Fyvie returning to the side after 
his Scotland under-19 commitments.

Dunfermline, looking to bounce back from last weekend's 4-0 defeat by Rangers, 
made two changes with the former Dundee United midfielder Craig Easton, who was 
back fit after a shin injury, and the defender John Potter replacing Joe Cardle 
and Ryan Thomson.

Aberdeen made a promising start to the match with Arnason dragging a shot wide 
from distance before Vernon just failed to connect with Rob Milsom's 
tantalising cross. However, the Englishman broke the deadlock two minutes later 
when he headed home a Foster cross from close range.

The Dons continued to enjoy the better of possession as Dunfermline struggled 
to settle with the New Zealand international Rory Fallon nodding over from a 
Ryan Jack corner after 15 minutes. Fallon went even closer after 17 minutes 
when his downward header from Milsom's hanging cross was excellently kept out 
by the Pars goalkeeper, Paul Gallacher.

Dunfermline created their first real chance on the half-hour mark when their 
captain Austin McCann's perfect delivery was headed wide by former Inverness 
striker Andrew Barrowman. The Pars had Gallacher to thank two minutes later 
when he pulled off a fantastic save to claw away another Vernon header from a 
Foster cross, before producing an equally fine stop to thwart Milsom.

But the former Norwich keeper was helpless to prevent the Dons getting a 
second after 35 minutes when Arnason's cross was nodded on by Mawene to Vernon 
who easily guided the ball into the net from two yards out. The Dons added a 
third on the stroke of half-time when Vernon laid the ball up nicely for Fyvie 
to slam the ball low past Gallacher.

Aberdeen continued where they left off after the restart with Milsom 
unfortunate not to add a fourth when his powerful free-kick crashed off the 
crossbar. Barrowman came close to pulling a goal back for the Fifers when his 
left-footed shot curled past the post after 58 minutes.

The Dons should have put the game out of sight after 62 minutes when Arnason's 
drive came back off the post to Fallon but the striker lashed the ball over 
when it looked easier to score. The one-way traffic continued with Fyvie almost 
grabbing his second with another powerful drive but again Gallacher managed to 
divert the ball to safety.

Milsom was guilty of passing up a wonderful chance with time running out when 
he was played in one-on-one with the keeper by the substitute Chalali but the 
midfielder could only find the side-netting. Vernon completed his hat-trick 
with 10 minutes remaining when he was quickest to react after Chalali's curling 
effort bounced back off the post.
 