
Ruthless Aberdeen swept aside St Mirren as they maintained the pressure on 
Celtic at the top of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a 3-0 
demolition of Gary Teale’s side at Pittodrie.

The Saints manager was powerless to help his team as he served a one-match 
touchline suspension, and could only look on as Adam Rooney’s double and a Mark 
Reynolds header saw his side well beaten.

Derek McInnes’s side were on top for much of the first half, and threatened 
early through the formerSt Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> player Kenny McLean, his header 
from a Ryan Jack cross just lacking the necessary conviction needed to pose any 
real threat.

There were a couple of further half-chances for Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> without St Mirren goalkeeper 
Mark Ridgers being tested, but the former Hearts man was picking the ball out 
of his net midway through the half.

Rooney saw his header from a Willo Flood cross deflected away off Sean Kelly 
for a corner, and McLean’s deep delivery saw Lewis McLear clear off the line 
from Andrew Considine. Peter Pawlett played the ball back in, and Considine 
again rose at the back post, his knock-back this time forced over the line by 
Rooney, who could hardly miss from a yard out.

The home side looked to build on that lead but Pawlett saw his shot on the 
half-hour slide just wide of the near post, before McLean’s low shot two 
minutes later was held by Ridgers.

St Mirren had struggled to threaten so far, but a low Stevie Mallan free-kick 
found Yoann Arquin at the back post, his scudding shot forcing a save from 
Scott Brown in the Aberdeen goal.

Two minutes later, Jason Naismith’s delivery from the right wing found John 
McGinn bursting in from the left flank, but Brown threw himself to his right to 
turn away the midfielder’s header and preserve his side’s lead.

If those chances had led to a sense of nervousness amongst the home support, 
the feeling was eased when Rooney doubled his side’s lead just two minutes into 
the second half.

Niall McGinn supplied the cross from the left side and, when McLean headed 
back across the goal, Rooney applied the finishing touch for his 23rd goal of 
the season.

The first change of the game was forced upon the visitors, with Jack Baird 
replacing the injured captain, Marc McAusland, after 53 minutes. Their second 
change came on the hour when the former Aberdeen player Gregg Wylde took the 
place of McLear.

It was almost a nightmare return to Pittodrie for Wylde though, as, just 
seconds after his introduction, Rooney came within inches of turning home 
McLean’s right wing cross. With the outcome all but settled, Rooney completely 
missed connecting with the ball when played in for his hat-trick by the 
industrious McLean.

However, a third Aberdeen goal did arrive, after 66 minutes. McGinn was the 
provider with his deep left-wing corner finding Reynolds at the back post, and 
the Aberdeen captain powered a header past Ridgers. The centre-half was helped 
by the defender Sean Kelly’s half-hearted challenge and the keeper’s lame 
attempt to clear the danger.

St Mirren threatened the home side’s goal in the 75th minute when the dogged 
McGinn raced down the right and worked his way inside, only to slip as he shot, 
leaving Brown with an easy save.

Aberdeen countered and the substitute David Goodwillie could have added a 
fourth with a left-footed shot but he fired over the crossbar after good work 
by Jack.

Rooney was replaced for the closing stages by youngster Lawrence Shankland. As 
the home side reaped the rewards of their creative football.
 