
A coal-burning power station in Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> 
repeatedly violated pollution controls for nitrogen oxide emissions, the 
European court of justice (ECJ) in Luxembourg has ruled.

It ordered the UK to pay the European commission’s legal costs after ruling 
thatAberthaw power station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/26/uk-faces-european-court-over-coal-plant-emissions>
, near Barry in the Vale of Glamorgan, should not have been allowed to exceed 
specially negotiated pollution limits.

The decision prompted calls from Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth for the 
power station to be shut permanently on health grounds.


The government had argued that the plant, which opened in 1971, was continuing 
to make investments to bring down the amount of nitrogen oxide it put into the 
atmosphere.


The ECJ, however, ruled a higher emissions thresholdthe government had granted 
to Aberthawshould not have been allowed because of the quality of 
“low-volatile” opencast Welsh coal being burned.


Aberthaw was releasing more than double the quantity of nitrogen oxide than it 
should have been during the years 2008 and 2011, the Luxembourg court ruled.


It said: “The UK argues that the derogation was negotiated to include a plant 
such as Aberthaw and … that it is principally due to economic constraints that 
arrangements have not been made to improve the environmental performance of 
Aberthaw.

“The court notes that it is clear from its case law that the UK cannot validly 
invoke reasons of a purely economic nature to dispute the failure of which it 
is accused. For those reasons, the court considers that the UK has failed to 
fulfil its obligations under the directive and orders the UK to pay the 
commission’s costs.”

In a joint report, Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth said Aberthaw belonged 
to a different era. “On average, pollution from Aberthaw is responsible for 
curtailing the lives of 67 people in Wales every year. This is equivalent to 
64% of the death toll on Welsh roads, yet there is no special strategy for 
securing the accelerated final closure of the plant.

“The emissions from the power plant are estimated to be responsible for 
195,000 days of illness per year, including 35,000 days of sick leave. On an 
average day, 530 people are ill due to the harmful health impacts of the 
pollution.

“The fact that its pollution has been causing respiratory sickness and 
prematurely ending the lives of thousands upon thousands of people in Wales and 
beyond for decades has eluded scrutiny.

“The Welsh and UK governments must do everything in their power to ensure that 
Aberthaw power station ceases operating. For good”.

Mike Childs, the head of science, policy and research at Friends of the Earth, 
said: “This is a vindicating decision. The pollution from Aberthaw is 
unacceptable for the people near the power station in south Wales, but 
detrimental effects are felt as far away as Exeter, Bristol, Swindon and 
Bournemouth. We need a full and permanent closure, and today’s decision should 
help bring that about. It is the only sensible solution unless we are prepared 
to accept premature deaths and children’s ill health as a reasonable price to 
pay for corporate profit.”

Rebecca Williams, the climate and energy specialist at WWF-UK said: “This 
judgment is yet another nail in the coffin for the UK’s dirty old coal-power 
stations. UK ministers have committed to phasing out coal, to improve public 
health, boost clean energy investment and tackle climate change. The new 
government should now publish the promised consultation on phasing out coal.”
 