
Tomorrow (21 October) marks the 50th anniversary of the Aberfan disaster  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aberfan_disaster>when the collapse of a colliery 
killed 116 children and 28 adults.

One of my old friends and colleagues, Alix Palmer, was then 27 and sent to the 
Welsh mining village. It was her first major assignment for theDaily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> and what she witnessed has 
lived with her ever since. At the time, apart from sending back copy to her 
newspaper, she wrote a letter to hermother describing what she saw.

Its simple recounting of the facts conveys the human drama. People often think 
journalists lack empathy. Her letter shows how wrong that is. Below is a 
slightly edited version. The full letter can be found on Alix’s Fleet Street 
Memories blog 
<https://fleetstreetmemories.wordpress.com/2016/10/07/aberfan-disaster/>.

Dear Mummy,

You probably noticed that I was in Aberfan this weekend. But you will have no 
possible idea of what hell it was. No newspaper could ever paint a picture 
terrible enough.

The first news reached the office at 11am, just that 50 children were trapped. 
I caught the midday train and met many other reporters from various newspapers 
also on it...

At Cardiff, the Express had hired cars waiting but we were told the only way 
to get through was by train. The roads were closed. Even then we assumed they 
were closed because the “landslide” had descended on them. We still didn’t know 
what had really happened.

We left the train at Merthyr Vale, the village before Aberfan, about two miles 
away, and walked. The roads were just like they were during the war, with many 
people in filthy clothes all plodding in the same direction.

These were the miners coming from the pits to join in the digging. In the 
village itself, women lined the streets and lorries and ambulances blocked 
every inch of the way. I think then we realised it was more serious than had 
first appeared on the news tapes.

But it wasn’t until we walked up the hill and turned the corner which gave us 
a view of what had once been a school, that we understood. And we stopped. Only 
a small portion was left but again, it wasn’t until I asked a policeman how 
many children had been in the school and he replied “about 200” that the full 
horror hit us.

Looking at that mess, that terrible black slag by this time sweating and 
sticky like tar, you knew it was impossible that anyone buried under it could 
possibly live. And of course, the last live person had been pulled out at 11.30 
that morning, two hours after it happened and five hours before we arrived.

Looking down on that terrible mess of a school from behind on the mountain 
side with a blanket of slag on it, nothing of the inside of the building could 
be seen.

Wherever you looked, women stood waiting. You could tell which were the 
mothers; they weren’t crying, just huddling together. The fathers straight from 
the pit were digging. No-one had yet really given up hope, although logic told 
them it was useless.

Every now and again the organiser of the operation would yell through a loud 
hailer for quiet. That was the most terrible moment of all. Someone had seen an 
arm or a leg and everyone longed for the sound of a child crying.

The gigantic bulldozer, operating in such confined spaces and with such 
deafening noise, would stop. The noise of spade against spade and the murmur of 
orders would cease, the women would draw a little nearer and everyone would 
hope.

Then a body would be brought out gently, cleared quickly of a casing of slag 
which clung to the skin and clothing. A doctor would push his way through and 
everyone waited. Then the doctor would wrap the little body gently in a blanket 
and it would be carried into the building of corrugated iron which served as a 
mortuary.

This went on for hours... All through the night we worked, talking to people 
or trying to, because how can you talk reasonably to mothers who have just 
identified a dead child?...

At eight o’clock, I went to the school in the next village where the parents 
were meeting the chief constable. They were asked to fill in forms, listing the 
children who had been at school that day which was the only way of checking 
because class registers were still buried. And as the mothers sat down to write 
the names of their children, the tears came.

Back at the site, everyone was praying that the threatened rain would not 
come. Just down the road, people waited patiently outside the little chapel 
named the Miners’ Chapel until they were called to identify the dead children 
brought one by one from the mortuary.

All through the night it was the same. We were nearly dropping. And there was 
a terrible moment when all the copy to our respective papers had been put over 
and we had time to think about the situation as a whole.

[The following day, Alix returned to the village, to report for the Sunday 
Express] 

The rain held off until teatime then started drizzling. By 7pm it was pelting 
down. One of the houses shattered by the avalanche was still burning. No-one 
had yet been found alive or dead from any of the ruined houses.

By this time, the slag had had time to corrode the skin of the children still 
buried and many brought out burned could only been identified by the clothing 
or things in their pockets. One little boy, whose father, a teacher at the 
school who had saved some of his son’s classmates, was identified by a slip of 
paper with his name on deep inside his wallet...

Men who had started digging at 9.30 the previous morning, were still digging, 
with shirts off and bodies sweating despite the cold.

I saw such dreadful things, Mummy. They brought out the deputy headmaster, 
still clutching five children, their bones so hardened that they first had to 
break his arms to get the children away then their arms to get them apart. And 
the mothers of two of them watched it happen.

I saw limbs brought out which bore no resemblance to human arm or leg, flesh 
burned away by this dreadful stuff, small children already beginning to 
decompose because there had been air-locks beneath the slag.

By Saturday, the anger had risen and if Lord Robens, chairman of the National 
[Coal] Board, had dared to set foot in that village, he would have been 
lynched. Sunday was dreadful too because the full realisation of what had 
happened had begun to hit home.

The church services were not beautiful. They were terrible. But the bravery of 
those people was incredible. I came home on Monday night having learned a great 
deal about life and death and finding it difficult to believe in anything at 
all.

Even now, I am trying hard not to feel, because once you feel, it will be too 
hard to bear.
 