
“I don’t like being a Band Aid on a class system that isn’t working, but 
that’s what I am,” saysMatt Pocock <http://www.elocutionlessonslondon.com/>. 
Pocock is a voice coach based in London, and while many of his clients are 
non-native English speakers who want to be more easily understood, others, such 
as a doctor at Great Ormond Street Hospital with a Cockney accent, were born in 
this country and dislike the assumptions made about them based on how they 
sound.

Pocock works with up to 20 clients a week, creates bespoke sessions for 
corporate clients and runs some open courses for the public. Business is 
thriving: at this time of year, he says, bookings are “massively up”. Many 
voice coaches find demand peaks each Autumn and New Year. “I think September 
and January are times of the year where people are looking to improve 
themselves,” suggestsFelicity Goodman <http://felicitygoodman.co.uk/>, a 
Manchester-based voice coach.


The Tutor Pages <http://www.thetutorpages.com/>, an online tutor business 
directory, saw enquiries for elocution lessons increase by almost a quarter 
(23.5%) in the three months following the EU referendum compared to the same 
period in 2015. Henry Fagg, founder of The Tutor Pages, says post-referendum 
there were enquiries from EU nationals (from outside the UK) who wanted their 
accent to blend in more easily.


Kevin Chapman, director of Rada in Business, a commercial arm of Rada (the 
Royal Academy for Dramatic Art), says there has been a significant uptick in 
customer interest in voice coaching. Rada in Business has seen a 300% to 400% 
increase in customers booking one-to-one voice training sessions in the past 
year.


Yes, we are judged on our accents | Hannah Jane Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/22/accents-altered-speak> 
A desire to phase out a regional accent is common among people who book 
elocution lessons, say coaches. But, as sessions progress, what typically 
emerges is that other aspects of clients’ speaking skills actually bother them 
more. “That could be bad posture, tension, or anxiety when doing 
presentations,” Goodman says.


Listening back to a recording of her Skype session with a client was the 
prompt forJane Hand <http://www.janehand.co.uk/>, a life coach from Altrincham, 
to book elocution lessons. “I was horrified,” she says in a soft, Lancashire 
brogue. Hand didn’t feel that her speech was as clear or attractive as she 
wished to be. From Wigan originally, Hand says that “softening” her accent was 
a concern but ultimately her aim is to be able to communicate more clearly with 
clients from all over the world, and build rapport quickly.


She’s done four sessions so far, exploring how to breathe, how to stand, and 
how to “own the room” in a presentation. She already feels that her confidence 
has grown so much that instead of her stomach churning at the prospect of 
public speaking, she positively “wants to speak”.


Goodman’s clients range from teachers to lawyers to tradespeople setting up a 
business. “It’s amazing to me that people have been told when they’ve been for 
interviews that their accent wasn’t right for the job,” Goodman says. “But I 
think that employers might be using ‘accent’ as shorthand, when what they mean 
is vocabulary, or diction.”


However, bias against particular accents can be very real, says Paul Russell, 
workplace psychologist and director ofLuxury Academy London 
<https://www.luxuryacademy.co.uk/>. His business offers soft skills training 
for people working in the luxury market, in which international customers can 
find regional accents tough to understand. Russell says: “Like it or not, 
people’s impressions of you are based on your accent. Do you think you would 
take me seriously as a luxury expert if I spoke with a broad Essex accent? It’s 
snobbishness, but unfortunately, it’s there.”


Changing the way you speak, however, doesn’t come cheap. Tuition ranges 
between £20 and £40 an hour, and 10 sessions is a standard kick-off package. At 
theBirmingham School of Elocution <http://www.schoolofelocution.co.uk/>, Robin 
Wooldridge doesn’t advertise because sessions tend to be booked up: people find 
him online – investment in a good website and search engine optimisation seems 
to work for elocution teachers.


Despite everything you hear about embracing diversity, scratch the surface and 
that isn’t really there
Robin Wooldridge, Birmingham School of Elocution 
Wooldridge’s prices ranges from £25 to £35 per hour, and are pegged to local 
music teachers’ rates. He typically sees 40 to 50 clients a month. Goodman, 
meanwhile, says she might see two a week, or she might see 10, so her income 
can fluctuate considerably.


So why are people shelling out? Wooldridge explains that many of his clients, 
including business people and academics, want to avoid people making 
assumptions about them. He says. “It’s what people read into [an accent]. 
Despite everything you hear about embracing diversity, scratch the surface and 
that isn’t really there. And it’s enough to drive people here.”

Wooldridge points out that the Lamda (London Academy of Music and Dramatic 
Art) elocution exam regulations state that regional accents are perfectly 
acceptable. However he adds: “Parents who send their children [ to the 
Birmingham School of Elocution], they’re already at private or grammar school 
and the one thing they don’t want is their child to have a strong Birmingham 
accent.”

Trainee teachers from northern England told to modify their accents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/12/trainee-teachers-from-northern-england-told-to-modify-their-accents>
Wooldridge’s other group of clients are non-native English-speaking medical 
professionals, their task goes beyond vowel sounds and consonants. “Unless you 
address modulation [changing the pitch, tone or volume], you won’t get the 
English language pattern, and it won’t sound right,” says Wooldridge.


Born in Brazil, lawyer Patricia Cassidy says that 15 sessions of voice 
coaching have made a huge difference to her both personally and professionally. 
She found it “a bit embarrassing” that after 16 years in the UK, her accent was 
still sometimes a barrier to being understood. Cassidy’s noticed that people 
aren’t asking her to repeat words and phrases nearly so often now. “If I was 
living in America, I think I’d sound more American than I do British,” she 
observes. “I think the British accent is more difficult.”


Voice coaches point out that accent tends to be inextricably wrapped up in 
identity, so total transformation may have longer-lasting implications on your 
sense of self and your relationships with family and friends.

Interestingly, notes Russell, some people now try to “de-posh” their voices. 
Regional accents, such as the Geordie accent, he says, are also “more 
acceptable” now in professional contexts than they would have been just a 
decade ago. So, what we like in voices, and the meaning and context we ascribe 
to accents, appears to alter over time.


It seems that people’s consciousness of how they sound – bolstered by the 
assumptions made about accents and the enduring British class system – means 
many voice coaches will have full diaries for years to come. It’s a job that 
needs sensitivity as well as technical expertise. Russell says: “There’s 
something very vulnerable about saying ‘I need you to teach me to speak in a 
different way’. Actually, it’s incredibly brave.”


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 