
Polly Toynbee (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/jeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016>
, 27 September) continues her assault on Jeremy Corbyn. She has binned Corbyn’s 
olive branch, his assurance that the vast majority of sitting Labour MPs will 
not face deselection, and demands that Corbyn should stop all talk of 
deselecting MPs.

But it is not in Corbyn’s gift – if the party is a democratic one – to prevent 
all deselections. What he has done is give a clear steer that no widespread 
purge should take place. That surely implies that a good constituency MP who 
opposes Corbyn’s policies should not face any undue threat.

In the normal course of events it would be entirely reasonable for a lazy MP 
who does not adequately represent his or her constituents to be deselected. And 
if the Tory proposals for boundary redrawing go ahead, it is inevitable that 
there will be contests between sitting MPs and others to secure candidacies in 
a reduced number of seats. But in present circumstances there will be another 
category of MP who will be at risk – not those who engage in reasoned criticism 
of Corbyn and his supporters, but rather those who persist in angry 
denunciations in every possible public arena and who insist thatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is unelectable, a stance that is 
in danger of becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy. It may well be that the 
leader’s olive branch will not protect them from the ire of their own party 
members.
John Gray
Belfast

• I cannot understand why Polly Toynbee is so opposed to what she calls 
deselection and the rest of us think of as normal democratic procedure. In the 
real world, outside the confines of politics and journalism, holding an 
election means the existing post-holder steps down and all contenders are on an 
equal footing. Holding public office should not be seen as a career move, but 
as a civic duty, like jury service. And yes, there should be a maximum tenure: 
three terms ought to be more than enough.
Jim Grozier
Brighton

• The “people power” backing Corbyn and Momentum needs to be reminded that 
legislation for change does not take place at rallies or community meetings: it 
is voted for in parliament. People did not get maternity or paternity leave, 
workers’ rights, climate change legislation etc through protest alone; it was 
debated and passed into law by elected MPs grouped behind an effective 
parliamentary leader. That’s why the Labour party has clause 1 in its 
constitution, stating that its purpose is to “organise and maintain in 
parliament and in the country a political Labour party”. The people-powered 
politics of the unions and the cooperative movement proved ineffective in the 
19th century at securing radical change and it was realised that only members 
of parliament could enact the necessary laws. Protest has to translate into 
constructive constituency Labour party activism leading to actual government – 
otherwise it is just hot air, which I fear is the case with much of the 
leftwing protest taking place away from parliament at the moment.
Jeanne Caesar
Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 