
South Sydney have re-signed a second big name in a week, handing halfback Adam 
Reynolds a lengthy contract extension until the end of the 2021 season. Seven 
days after tying down skipper Greg Inglis until 2020, Reynolds on Friday 
committed to another four years at Redfern.

A Rabbitohs junior who debuted for the club in 2012 and broke into the NSW 
State of Origin team this year, he will be 30 by the time his new contract 
expires. “Adam Reynolds is one of the elite players in our game,” coach Michael 
Maguire said. “His ability to guide the team around the field, as well as his 
general play and goal kicking makes him instrumental to our success.

“Reynolds is hungry, as are the rest of the playing group, for success at this 
club.”

Maguire also paid tribute to Reynolds’ emergence as a key leader in the 
playing group, and believes the playmaker’s best days are ahead of him. “Adam 
and I both believe he has his best football in front of him and we’re excited 
about working together to see that evolution of his game over the next five 
years,” he said.

Australia and New Zealand well set to justify pre-Four Nations scheduling | 
Matt Cleary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/australia-and-new-zealand-well-set-to-justify-pre-four-nations-scheduling>
Reynolds’ had agreed to a two-year contract extension in January believed to 
be worth $500,000 a year, which came just months after reportedly asking for a 
release. Parramatta had also been rumoured to be circling the goalkicking 
halfback following the departure of failed signing Kieran Foran this year.

However Reynolds spurned any interest, as well as sparing himself an anxious 
summer waiting for a new deal, saying he is proud to stay with his local club. 
He is currently third on the club’s all-time pointscorers list.

“I grew up in the area and it’s been a real honour to be able to represent the 
Rabbitohs and to continue representing the Rabbitohs is something I’m really 
proud of,” he said. “I’ve got a lot of great memories of growing up around 
Redfern and developing into the player I’ve become today. I’m happy that my 
family and I can remain here.”



 