
Aberdeen closed the gap on the leaders, Celtic, at the top of the Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> to four 
points with this convincing victory at Dens Park.

Derek McInnes’s second-placed side won with something to spare in the 
televised early kick-off with goals from Niall McGinn and Adam Rooney putting 
them in command.Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> never 
really rose to the occasion while their visitors took full advantage of 
Celtic’s postponement and stretched their unbeaten run to four games.

“It was an energy-sapping pitch and the Dundee ground staff deserve a lot of 
credit for getting the game on and we were glad they did,” said McInnes.

“Our start was vitally important. We really imposed ourselves, we were 
aggressive and played at a real tempo.The conditions were going to have a big 
impact on the game but we knew if we did a lot of things right then we would 
have opportunities to show our quality.”

McInnes also praised his players. “Kenny McLean was outstanding, especially in 
the first half, but he was ably supported by his team-mates and we could have 
scored a few more. I’m not too concerned about point margins, I’m just pleased 
to add three points to the ones we earned last week.”

Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> began strongly. 
Inside the first five minutes, Willo Flood fed McLean, whose shot from 25 yards 
was blocked by the Dundee defender Julen Extabeguren.

Then, after seven minutes, McLean tried his luck with a 30-yard free-kick that 
the home goalkeeper Scott Bain palmed wide for a corner.

Aberdeen did not have to wait too much longer to make the breakthrough when 
McGinn put them ahead after nine minutes. A short corner from Johnny Hayes was 
half-cleared as far as Ash Taylor. Taylor then laid the ball into the path of 
McGinn who rifled a low shot out with the reach of Bain from 16 yards.

The visitors were well on top and McGinn was causing the Dundee defence all 
sort of problems with his movement. In the 16th minute, the Northern Ireland 
international broke down the left and skipped past Paul McGinn. This time he 
opted to cross into the box but Bain was alert to the danger and he came off 
his line to gather well despite the wet conditions.

Dundee had a penalty appeal after that when Nicky Low was fouled by Taylor, 
but the referee, Bobby Madden, decided it was not inside the box.

None of that mattered as the visitors went further ahead after 25 minutes. 
McLean initially dispossessed Dundee’s Paul McGowan inside his own half as 
Aberdeen broke quickly. The ball broke for Flood who, in turn, sent Hayes free 
on the overlap before he crossed for Rooney whose cool finish at the far post 
rounded off an impressive move.

Aberdeen looked like they were hungry for more goals and on 35 minutes Hayes 
let fly from 30 yards out, forcing Bain to parry his effort around the post for 
a corner.

Dundee could not be as lacklustre after the break and at least they were 
beginning to be seen as an attacking force. After 53 minutes, Greg Stewart went 
on a run and tried a shot with his left foot, which was easily held by Danny 
Ward.

At the other end, McLean shot over the bar on the hour from close-range after 
Hayes’s initial shot had been saved by Bain.

Dundee huffed and puffed towards the end with Kane Hemmings bringing out a 
late save from Ward, but their opponents were always in control to move four 
points ahead of third-placed Hearts, who visit Pittodrie next Saturday.
 