
There would be no dramatic comeback from the Western Sydney Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers> this time. It 
was a grand final that had it all – a sell-out crowd, a play off between the 
top two sides vying for their first A-League title and some late suspense. In 
the end, however, two first-half goals and a late strike from super-sub Pablo 
Sanchez was enough for Adelaide United.

 The Reds won the game in the first half, going ahead on 22 minutes through 
Bruce Kamau and then again on 34 minutes after an inch-perfect free-kick by 
Isaias. It wasn’t a classic performance from the Reds but it was efficient – 
Marcelo Carrusca provided the creativity, Kamau the spark and Craig Goodwin a 
solid defensive performance at left-back.

Adelaide United beat Western Sydney Wanderers in A-League grand final – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/01/a-league-grand-final-adelaide-united-v-western-sydney-wanderers-live>
 Whether by bus, train, car or plane, a sea of red and black flooded 
Adelaide’s streets, but it was always going to be a huge effort for the 
Wanderers after last week, where they came back from three goals downto beat 
Brisbane Roar 5-4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/western-sydney-wanderers-into-a-league-grand-final-after-nine-goal-thriller>
. For a moment a second-half comeback looked on the cards, but it wasn’t to be. 
Was last week their grand final performance?

 Certainly for the first half they looked out of sorts, lacking rhythm going 
forward and struggling to gain control in the centre of the park. Their 
brightest spark was Brendan Santalab, their serial pest up front, who looked to 
pounce on the break and took a chunk out of Cirio’s leg in the opening minutes.

It was Santalab that brought life to the game on the 20 minute mark. His 
outrageous, frog-in-the-blender bicycle kick sailed over the bar, and in the 
very next move,Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> got the opening goal.

 It was Carrusca who found space down the left hand side, and with plenty of 
time swung a dangerous pass across goal. Poor defending from Wanderers 
left-back Scott Jamieson allowed Kamau to dart inside and side foot the ball 
into the back of the net. The majority of the 50,119 crowd went wild.

Brimming with confidence, just after the half-hour mark Kamau drew a foul just 
outside the penalty box. Adelaide midfielder Isaias picked his spot, and right 
in front of the Red and Black Bloc, placed an inch-perfect free-kick in the top 
left hand corner. The Spaniard was later named winner of the Joe Marston medal.


 Running toward a bay of thousands of their own fans, the Wanderers came out 
much better in the second-half. Their hero from last week, Romeo Castelen, who 
was shut out for most of the first half by Goodwin, found room to cross the 
ball to Santalab. The striker’s back-heel found Scott Neville, who blasted the 
ball past keeper Eugene Galekovic. Game on.

Western Sydney facing points deduction after flare lit at A-League grand final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/western-sydney-facing-points-deduction-after-flare-lit-at-a-league-grand-final>
 But where everything went right for the Wanderers last week, this time their 
lines were crossed. Where they found space, a Reds defender would arrive to 
clear the danger. Attacks fizzled out or couldn’t be converted.

 Much was made of the Spanish influence that permeates both sides, but it was 
the Reds armarda who had the better of this game. In the dying moments, as 
Adelaide fans prepared to celebrate, Sanchez buried a right foot strike past 
Andrew Redmayne to put the result beyond doubt. An inspired substitution from 
coach Guilleme Amor, and the perfect way to end a superb season.

 This grand final, however, might be best remembered by the performance of 
Kamau and Goodwin, a pair of Adelaide youngsters who did their city proud.

 For a club that was formed at the death of the National Soccer League to 
unite the city behind one set of colours, it was the dream ending. Premiers and 
champions, 21 games with just one loss, in front of a record crowd for a 
domestic game in South Australia. Adelaide United.
 