
An early goal by Adriano proved enough for Barcelona to win 1-0 at Sporting 
Gijón <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> on Sunday and return 
to the top of the Spanish league standings.

Adriano fired the winner in the 12th minute after Xavi's shot hit the post. 
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> had few problems 
against the league's bottom club but turned in a decidely lacklustre 
second-half performance.

The win took Barcelona top on goal difference above Levante, who continued 
their fine start to the season with a 1-0 win at Real Betis.

The Barcelona coach, Pep Guardiola, who opted for the 3-4-3 formation with 
which he has experimented several times this season, had to adjust his side to 
accommodate the absence from the defence of the captain, Carles Puyol, and his 
centre-half partner, Gerard Piqué, both of whom started on the bench.

David Villa seemed the most likely candidate to give Barcelona an early lead 
against the club where he began his career as a youth player, thrashing a 
left-foot shot narrowly over the bar in the 10th minute before being denied 
twice in less than a minute when the Sporting goalkeeper, Juan Pablo, blocked 
his shot and the Spain striker screwed a shot wide from a follow-up chance.

Sporting had barely touched the ball by the time Barcelona scored. Xavi 
received the ball 30 yards from goal and cracked a shot that hit the post and 
rebounded to Adriano, who finished first time into the far corner.

Despite missing Cesc Fábregas, Andrés Iniesta, Alexis Sánchez and Ibrahim 
Afellay, few predicted that Barcelona would meet much resistance from Sporting, 
and the Catalans duly dominated possession. But the Sporting striker Oscar 
Trejo headed weakly wide in the 22nd minute and Roberto Canella gave Victor 
Valdes some exercise with a shot in first-half stoppage time.

Barcelona had drawn their last two away matches and seemed content to hold the 
ball in a second half of few clear openings. Eric Abidal limped off with a 
thigh injury to add to Barcelona's injury worries. Piqué replaced Pedro soon 
after and Guardiola reverted to a more familiar 4-3-3 formation.

An unusually subdued Lionel Messi had a header saved in the 76th minute and 
Dani Alves had the ball in the back of the net as the clock ticked down but was 
ruled offside.
 