
The heads of 36 organisations representing homeless people in Victoria have 
signed an open letter criticising media coverage of homelessness inMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>, saying it “fuels public 
fear and resentment”.

The letter was co-signed by the heads of Anglicare Victoria, Domestic Violence 
Victoria, Council to Homeless Persons, the Salvation Army and Whitelion among 
others.

It called for a shift in the public conversation on homelessness to focus less 
on images of people sleeping rough and more on the critical shortage of 
affordable accommodation.

It followed a front page article in Melbourne’s Herald Sun newspaper on 
Wednesday, that showed pictures of a homeless camp at Flinders Street station 
under the headline “Grand slum” and “Homeless street camp blights city gateway 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/homeless-camp-engulfs-australian-opens-main-melbourne-gateway/news-story/67b9210712c3b496cbf0a7f7584d8680>
”.

The Herald Sun reported that the camp, which is home to about two dozen people 
and was targeted bya Melbourne city council “cleanup” operation last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/melbourne-city-council-denies-homeless-camps-cleanup-linked-to-australian-open>
, had “shocked overseas visitors.”

Later on Wednesday, it reported that some living in that place had “lashed 
out” at reporters who were filming them.

The coverage was criticised on social media as “scaremongering” and a campaign 
against homeless people.
 The front page of Melbourne’s Herald Sun newspaper on Wednesday featuring an 
article about homeless people sleeping rough at Flinders Street station. 
The council said efforts to “clean up” a number of popular sleeping spots in 
the citywere not connected to the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/melbourne-city-council-denies-homeless-camps-cleanup-linked-to-australian-open>
, which began on Monday, bringing an estimated 300,000 visitors to Melbourne.

The open letter said that “shaming” people who experienced homelessness would 
not fix the problem and urged media to focus instead on housing affordability.

“Vilifying people sleeping rough does not help them, splashing the faces of 
people in crisis in the paper only further stigmatises and isolates them, and 
fuels public fear and resentment,” it said.

“Yes, it is shameful that there are people sleeping on the streets in a 
country as affluent as Australia. The real shame is that this crisis has been 
with us for some time and it is only now that it has become visible in our 
streets that there is outrage and reaction.

“Perhaps we are more self-conscious of it with the international spotlight on 
us this week but this crisis is not a new one. And the causes of it are not 
new; Australia is in the grips of an affordable housing crisis that has been 
building over many years and we currently don’t have a strategy for how we will 
solve it.”

A large group of homeless people camped out at Flinders Street station, the 
thoroughfare used by many flocking to the Australian Open, said they were only 
there because it was safe.

Related: Homeless people gatecrash CEOs on charity sleepout in Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/17/homeless-people-gatecrash-ceos-on-charity-sleepout-in-adelaide>

Greg Brown said the well-lit area was a smarter choice for sleeping rough than 
an alleyway where you could be “robbed or bashed”.

Brenda Nguyen, who has been homeless for seven years, said the group was safer 
together and shared food, blankets and spare change.

The letter said Melbourne city council was “struggling valiantly” to balance 
the needs of homeless people with its obligations to maintain public health and 
safety but that the real solution to the crisis was providing stable, 
long-term, affordable and appropriate housing.

There are an estimated 23,000 people experiencing some form of homelessness in 
Victoria, of which just over 1,000 are sleeping rough. At the last informal 
homeless count, conducted by organisations that assist people who are sleeping 
rough, there were 247 people sleeping on the streets of Melbourne CBD, making 
up just over 1% of all people sleeping rough in the state.

“Let’s not think for a moment that by moving people on or placing them in 
temporary accommodation like rooming houses and motels that the homelessness 
problem will go away,” the open letter said.

“Poverty and disadvantage behind closed doors is still poverty and 
disadvantage. We need to stop demonising those without a home. We need to stop 
trying to come up with quick fixes.”
 