
AFC Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> have been 
granted permission to return to Plough Lane and build a new stadium.

After a lengthy period of consultation with Merton Council, the Dons have been 
given permission to make the move from Kingsmeadow back to the area where 
Wimbledon played up until 1991.

Blackburn Rovers step in to host Carlisle United game after floods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/blackburn-rovers-carlisle-united-storm-desmond>
AFC Wimbledon chief executive Erik Samuelson believes it is one of the most 
significant moments in their history, having formed in 2002 after Wimbledon 
relocated to Milton Keynes and were rebranded MK Dons.

“We are all absolutely delighted,” Samuelson told the club’s official website. 
“This has been a momentous day for our club and the most important event since 
we re-formed it 13 years ago..

“Following the sale of our former Plough Lane site and the decision by the FA 
to allow Wimbledon FC’s Football League place to be moved to Milton Keynes, our 
fans did something unprecedented in the football world - we decided to re-form 
the club, enter the football hierarchy at the lowest level and repeat what the 
old Wimbledon FC did with massive success, namely make our way up through the 
many leagues into the Football League.

“We started with nothing, no team, no stadium, no manager, not even a strip to 
wear.

“But what was different this time was that the club was formed by and remains 
owned by the fans, in other words we are firmly rooted in our community.

“We have never lost sight of that and so we have focused the majority of our 
community works on Merton because this is our home and we are delighted that we 
have been granted planning approval to return to Wimbledon.”

AFC Wimbledon’s stadium plan is for a 20,000-seater stadium with an initial 
capacity of 11,000.

The plans include the provision to build 602 residential units, along with 
retail and commercial space and a leisure club.
 