
Dramatic tales at the Curzon are usually played out on the silver screen but 
this comeback story in Ashton-under-Lyne was worthy of any script, even if the 
ending was a heartbreaking one.

Non-league Curzon Ashton had played quite superbly until the 80th minute of a 
match that will live long in the memory for those who follow “the Nash”. They 
were brutally close to a place in the third round of the Cup for the first time 
but in the end their hat-trick hero, Adam Morgan, sat crying in the home 
dressing room after a frenzied finale.

Curzon Ashton 3-4 AFC Wimbledon: FA Cup second round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/04/curzon-ashton-v-afc-wimbledon-fa-cup-second-round-live>
Morgan had demonstrated the kind of qualities that helped him ascend into the 
Liverpool first team under Brendan Rodgers, when he played briefly alongside 
Steven Gerrard and Luis Suárez. However, not even he could preventAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> usurping their Conference 
North opponents to snatch a place in the hat alongside the big boys with a 
late-goal bonanza that was equally as cruel as it was compelling.

John Flanagan’s side were 3-0 up with 10 minutes remaining until the most 
exhilarating of endings. Curzon Ashton had given their all to the cause but by 
the last quarter of the game their legs were gone, and AFC Wimbledon of League 
One kept their composure to secure one of the most remarkable victories in 
their history.

There were just 162 seconds between Tom Elliott’s first goal and Wimbledon’s 
third in the 82nd minute. Dom Poleon and Tyrone Barnett brought the scores 
level until Elliott rose tallest in the last minute of injury time to steer a 
header past Hakan Burton in front of the disbelieving travelling supporters.

For Morgan there is solace in the fact that he scored three wonderful goals in 
front of the TV cameras. The 22-year-old has endured a difficult few years 
after being released by Liverpool in 2012 – including spells at Yeovil Town and 
Accrington Stanley – but his rebirth at Curzon, for whom he signed in October, 
continues.

“It’s the most important goal I’ve ever scored,” he said of his stunning early 
effort, a 25-yard effort that brought the game to life after 35 seconds. “I had 
a feeling last night that I was going to score. I believe in my ability and I’m 
glad that I proved a lot of people wrong today. Wimbledon are flying high in 
League One and I scored a hat-trick against them so I’m happy with that.

“It’s not about me though. I’d give the goals back to win 1-0 and be in the 
next round. If I see Wimbledon draw Liverpool tomorrow I’m going to retire. I’m 
just gutted we’re not in that third round draw. There was no way we deserved to 
go out today.”

Morgan’s dismay was echoed by his manager, Flanagan, but there was also pride 
following a performance in which Curzon played with calibre on the ball as well 
as heart and determination off it.

Their first goal was a piece of individual brilliance, but the second after 21 
minutes was a fine team move that saw Joe Guest advance expertly to the byline 
and cross for Morgan to finish with a simple header. Guest was integral once 
again in the third, brushing off a challenge down the left before advancing 
into the penalty area and pulling back for Morgan to complete his hat-trick. 
There were other chances too, but it was not to be.

Outside this stadium, near Ashton-under-Lyne, is an unlikely statue of three 
World Cup winners who were all born in the area. Sir Geoff Hurst and Jimmy 
Armfield flank the Italian Simone Perrotta, and all would have approved the 
manner in which Curzon acquitted themselves.

Flanagan said: “I’m gutted, I’m feeling for the lads. We gave a good account 
of ourselves and at the start of the game that was all we were really trying to 
do. But it’s very cruel and harsh not to get a draw from that game.”

To Wimbledon, though, the spoils. Neal Ardley’s side joined this competition 
in round one while Curzon had played seven matches just to get to this stage, 
but their persistence paid off in the end.

Adam Morgan content with Curzon Ashton after Liverpool rejection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/adam-morgan-curzon-ashton-liverpool-afc-wimbledon-fa-cup>
With the wind behind them in the second half, Wimbledon went direct and caused 
goalkeeper Burton no end of trouble from corners. Their first two goals from 
Elliott and Poleon were tap-ins, before substitute Barnett completed a manic 
few minutes to equalise and Elliott broke Curzon hearts at the death.

Ardley said: “When they got their third goal I thought that was it. But I’ve 
got a set of boys in there who don’t give up. What a Cup tie, and part of me 
feels really sorry for Curzon because I thought they were absolutely 
incredible.”
 