
At first glance, it may not be evident how much AFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> and Luton Town have in 
common. Delve a little deeper and the spectre of top-flight football, trophies, 
financial challenges, spells in non-league, impending new-stadium projects and 
now League Two all come into retrospective and current view.

Both have gradual aspirations to return to a higher level and to emulate a 
time which saw the original Dons lift the FA Cup in 1988 and the Hatters lift 
the League Cup in the same year.

Neal Ardley played 245 times for Wimbledon. Appointed Dons’ manager in October 
2012, he is the ninth longest-serving manager in the top four English 
divisions. The Dons had lost only once in their past seven matches, but that 
defeat had come against Yeovil Town in their last home game. Having been 
frustrated due to last week’s washout at Bristol Rovers, Ardley sat back to 
watch his side conquer Luton with lethal two-minute spells in both halfs and 
which yielded four goals. Despite the scoreline, Ardley was conciliatory 
towards the visitors.

“I think the scoreline in the end doesn’t do Luton justice,” he said. “I think 
for large parts they caused us problems, they had 15 attempts at our goal, with 
six on target. That’s rare, we’re the second best in the league for having 
[fewest] attempts on our goal. Portsmouth are above us, but we’re the second 
best in the league at that. It’s rare and that’s credit to Luton.

“The difference is, we defended our box and they didn’t. Ultimately we scored 
at good times and if you look, we scored two in the space of two minutes of the 
first half and two in the space of two minutes again [in the second half] that 
makes all the difference.”

The win lifts Wimbledon into 10th place, three points off a play-off spot. 
With planning permission to build a new 11,000-seat stadium at Wimbledon’s 
greyhound stadium approved, the Dons are closing in on a return to their 
spiritual home at Plough Lane. The application includes 602 residential units, 
with retail and commercial space, and a leisure club. After bowing out in the 
FA Youth Cup fifth round to Chelsea, Ardley is content that the club are 
progressing and stresses the dream is to win promotion to League One.

On the pitch, Ardley has a team with a potent strike force. Tom Elliott, Andy 
Barcham and Lyle Taylor, who scored twice, ran Luton ragged. With legs tiring, 
the Hatters were then tormented by the substitutes Adebayo Azeez and Adebayo 
Akinfenwa. With seven games in three weeks ahead of them, Ardley hopes the 
strikers keep firing.

“That’s what we hoped for at the start of the season. We sat down and had a 
seven-hour staff meeting and talked about what promotion might look like. We 
said four good forwards, competition for places, the ability to take two off 
and [put] two on, all different qualities, and we’ve got that. In these seven 
games in three weeks, I won’t worry which forwards I play. I don’t think I 
weaken the team playing any of them, they all bring different qualities that 
can win games and they’re all unplayable when they’re at it. Just got to keep 
them at it.”

Ryan Sweeney opened the scoring, with the last touch coming off the Hatters 
captain, Scott Cuthbert, with Taylor turning in Barcham’s acrobatic cross for a 
2-0 half-time lead. Lively and inventive, Barcham was at the heart of all the 
Dons’ creativity.

Steve Davis keeps Crewe’s playing style on track with Wigan draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/jan/24/steve-davis-crewe-alexandra-wigan-draw>
The visitors’ response was to remove Craig Mackail-Smith for the defender 
Magnus Okuonghae at the interval, but it mattered not.

Sean Rigg’s drive gave the Dons a 3-0 lead with Taylor grabbing his second 
from George Francomb’s 49th-minute corner. Luton’s consolation came from a 
fierce shot from Jack Marriott, meaning the excellent debutant keeper Kelle 
Roos was denied a clean sheet.

Having seen his side torn apart, the Luton manager, Nathan Jones, acknowledged 
which area proved costly.

“In our defensive responsibilities we didn’t do them well enough and it cost 
us. It was a very disappointing performance.”
 