
D-Day has arrived for prospective AFL players around the country with the 
national draft to take place at Sydney’s Hordern Pavillion on Friday evening.
Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> are expected to take 
Sandringham’s Andrew McGrath or North Ballarat’s Hugh McCluggage with the top 
pick in one of the most even drafts in recent memory.

The Bombers have decided who they will select with the No1 pick but are 
keeping their choice a closely guarded secret. Barring a late change of heart, 
it is likely McGrath or McCluggage – both gun midfielders – will join John 
Worsfold’s effort to propel this year’s wooden spooner back up the ladder in 
2017.

GWS charged but not docked draft picks by AFL over Whitfield affair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/gws-charged-not-docked-draft-picks-whitfield-affair>
McGrath announced himself as a potential No1 pick in a stunning season where 
he captained TAC Cup side Sandringham and school team Brighton Grammar to 
premierships and co-captained Vic Metro to a national championship.

“Obviously that pick carries a bit of weight and expectation but it’s a 
massive honour too,” McGrath said. “If the cards were to fall that way I’d be 
really humbled and privileged to accept that responsibility. Hopefully I’d take 
it with both hands and represent myself and my club in the best possible way.”

Both players have toured Essendon’s facilities in recent weeks but say they 
are none the wiser as to the Bombers’ intentions. “They’re keeping their lips 
shut pretty tight,” McCluggage said. “I don’t think anyone has much of an idea. 
Whatever happens, happens. I’ve been pretty nervous ... it’s been a pretty big 
build-up over the last few weeks without school to keep your mind off things.

“So I’m nervous but really excited at the same time to get stuck into things.”

Unlike recent years when the likes of Jacob Weitering, Paddy McCartin and Tom 
Boyd have announced themselves as the best young player in the land a long way 
out from the draft, the race to No1 has been much closer for this draft class.

“Most other years No1 has been declared from about July,” AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> national talent manager Kevin Sheahan 
said. “So it’s been very tight at the top and then settled down to two or three 
most likely to go to Essendon.”

But clubs who don’t have a first round pick need not despair, according to 
Sheahan. “We think up the front that the midfielders are as good as any year 
but it’s down the back end that we reckon is special because our game is 
growing,” he said. “We’re really buoyant about what’s down the back. We’ve seen 
the likes of Adam Goodes, Dane Swan, James Hird and Rory Sloane (go late) in 
years past.”

“There have been some wonderful players and we think there are a bunch of 
players who could be taken down the back of this draft that will end up 
champions of the game, such is the depth of talent.”
 