
I was 12 years old when I was first taunted with, then refused, the 
opportunity to play with my twin brother’s footy team. Throughout my primary 
school years I’d trained alongside them, all those cold wintry nights, air 
frosty and hard as ice, or rancid with mud and overripe grass, I’d steal my way 
into practice matches or scrimmages, kick-to-kick or backyard footy, forcing 
the boys to let me play, not with demands of fairness or anguished pleas, but 
simply by refusing to go away.

The coach noticed, and approached the tribunal to have me listed. But footy 
wasn’t ready for girls then, or the administrators weren’t, and so the coach’s 
appeal was thwarted, and I was deemed officially “ineligible”. Footy, they 
decided, “isn’t safe for girls”.


That decision was like a fist to my gut, expelling me from the game until I 
found my way back, not as a player – that was dead forever – but as an 
observer. A one-eyed fan. The female kind. A girl in a world that was 
unapologetically for and about men.

Impressive viewing figures for exhibition match at odds to paltry women's AFL 
pay | Craig Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/impressive-viewing-figures-for-exhibition-match-at-odds-to-paltry-womens-afl-pay>
Until now. Because last week, it was all about women. Our rules. Our game. Our 
story.

Saturday night’s final of the women’s exhibition series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/moana-hope-western-bulldogs-afl-womens-all-stars>
 of matches between the Melbourne Demons and the Western Bulldogs carried with 
it the mantle of being yet another footy first – open to the public, free and, 
unencumbered by competition from the AFL men’s game, it was also being 
broadcast on prime time TV on Channel 7. It was billed as the last hope for the 
players not yet drafted to the 2017 women’s competition.

It was an event that meant so much to so many – except, it seemed, the media, 
who barely noted its approach in the days leading up to it and decried the 
“weekend with no footy”. This, despite Monday night’s widely watched Australian 
Story episode featuring two of the stars of the women’s game – on field 
favourite Moana “Mo” Hope, and off-field champion, the inimitable Dr Susan 
Alberti – and the many events and promotions that followed.

As one sixth of the Outer Sanctum podcast, I had more footy commitments this 
past week than ever, and I couldn’t understand why the women’s game wasn’t 
being celebrated and promoted as widely as it deserved. To us it was 
monumental. It wasn’t so long ago that it had seemed unthinkable.

The whole Outer Sanctum team would be attending the game on Saturday night, as 
well as many of the events leading up to it, including Dr Alberti’s breakfast 
on that Friday, the history making all-female panel on Thursday night’s 
Marngrook Footy Show, and we’d been invited to sit in on the Demons’ pre-game 
training session. The Outer Sanctum was suddenly The Inner Sanctum, and we were 
thrilled.

This was a world we’d been excluded from, an opportunity never lived, for 
some, never even offered, and yet, there we were, watching in awed silence 
while these young women – these footballers – were being coached by the 
charismatic Michelle Cowan, as she told inspiring stories of what the game 
meant to women and girls everywhere, and what it should mean to the women in 
front of her, before taking them through the match day plan. The players 
watched rapt, determined. They were not going to step lightly out of anyone’s 
way. They would chase that ball, defend their team-mates, and win the contest 
if it killed them.

From the outer sanctum: what it's like to be called 'excrement' by Sam Newman 
| Nicole Hayes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/from-the-outer-sanctum-what-its-like-to-be-called-excrement-by-sam-newman>
It gave us shivers and a powerful sense of the moment. I’ll admit, too, to an 
unexpected twang of jealousy. Despite the embarrassingly long time since the 
Under-12s, the sting of it was still sharp enough to bring an unwanted tear.

Michelle’s words still ringing in our ears, we headed to EJ Whitten Oval, 
anticipation thick in the air. The ground had a suburban feel, with deck chairs 
and kids running everywhere, a sense of community and togetherness around this 
small but significant event. The whole crowd was on the same side for once, 
sharing a genuine sense of joy and celebration at what was about to happen and 
what it represented, encapsulated in the moment when Dr Alberti made her way to 
her seat in the stadium to an impromptu standing ovation. It felt more like a 
party than a footy match.

Carlton to complain to police over alleged women's AFL recruitment leak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/carlton-to-complain-to-police-over-alleged-womens-afl-recruitment-leak>
And I remember, as I was weaving through the jostling crowd, pie in one hand, 
record in the other, hurrying to my seat before the first siren, being struck 
by the sheer weight of the moment. The rest of The Outer Sanctum team were 
already seated with the women from Joy 94.9’s Chicks Talking Footy, my teenage 
daughters beside them, all lined up waiting to see this thing we were told for 
too many years would never happen. Could never happen. No one wanted to watch 
women play footy. No one was interested in watching amateurs –a bunch of girls 
– botch the game good men had worked for decades to perfect. Even as the siren 
sounded, there were tweets saying as much.

Until that first bounce, when the game spoke for itself. Early in the first 
quarter, the Bulldogs star and marquee player, Katie Brennan, took a hard knock 
to the face, and was immediately helped up by the Melbourne fullback (and her 
Darebin team-mate), Melissa Hickey. Hope slammed six glorious goals, including 
one unlikely winner from the boundary. Tayla Harris nailed a 50-metre monster, 
and I watched a passage of footy – Carney to Vescio to Hope – that would have 
warmed anyAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> coach’s heart. Free 
flowing with few stoppages, the game was footy at its purist, and in response, 
the umpires were not booed even once.

The numbers tell one story of this game’s extraordinary success – more than 
one million viewers of the broadcast nationwide, six and a half thousand fans 
who showed up to watch, and the wildly enthusiastic commentary that followed.

But none of the statistics matter to the little girls who played kick to kick 
after the match, or the women who joined in beside them. They wouldn’t even 
have mattered to that 12-year-old girl who never got to play. The one who later 
became me. What did matter that night was for a single evening, it felt like 
the whole world wanted to be a part of this new and glorious game – footy, by 
and for women.
 