
Of all the people in all the world, it had to be him. Nine years they had been 
trying and failing. Nine bloody years. Hundreds of them in four different 
countries. Sir Alex Ferguson couldn't do it, Rafa Benítez couldn't do it, Harry 
Redknapp couldn't do it. João Pereira couldn't do it and Cesare Prandelli 
couldn't do it. Nor could Claudio Ranieri, Jacques Santini or Roberto Donadoni. 
Even Kevin Keegan couldn't do it. Quique Sánchez Flores couldn't do it either. 
And nor could Manuel Pellegrini.

But then again Manuel Pellegrini wasn't tying to do it. Or so he claimed 
<http:// 
www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/mar/04/manuel-pellegrini-malaga-real-madrid>
. In total, 107 coaches couldn't do it. Manolo Preciado, on the other hand, 
could.

He was the first man to do it since António Sousa and only the second ever. 
Nine years, one month and 10 days later, José Mourinho's mind-blowing record 
came to an end. Porto, Chelsea, Inter and Real Madrid had not lost in 150 games 
under him. He'd not been defeated in a home league game since 23 February 2002, 
when nine-man Porto lost 3-2 to Beira-Mar. 150 matches, 125 wins and 25 draws, 
342 goals scored, 87 conceded. And then his record ends – even if Marca's José 
Vicente Hernáez overlooked the presence of Ricardo Carvalho, Sami Khedira, 
Angel di María, Mesut Ozil, Emmanuel Adebayor and Sergio Canales to claim "this 
should go down as Pellegrini's loss really; it was his team, not Mourinho's". 
And then he goes and loses 1-0 at the Santiago Bernabéu toSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>.

Yes, to Sporting Gijón! The team that had not won at the Bernabéu in 16 years 
and went into this weekend's game just three points from the relegation zone. 
The team whose star signing is Nacho Novo; cannon fodder for Madrid, a mere
trámite.

A formality. Lambs to the slaughter, the first step to a perfect weekend: 
Madrid would beat Sporting and then Barcelona would lose at Villarreal, their 
hardest match left this season. Suddenly, the gap at the top of the league 
table would be just two points.¡Hay liga! as they say: there is a league. Game 
on.

Game over, more like. It was just about the time that the Bernabéu, bored of 
whistling and muttering and tutting at a game that was wrist-slittingly dull, 
started chanting "¡A Segunda oé!" – the Spanish equivalent of "Going down!" – 
when Sporting scored. A wonderfully slick, precise move down the left, clever 
dummy included, got a perfect finish from Miguel de las Cuevas. Suddenly the 
song changed.

From high in the north end where 3,000 Sporting fans were gathered, plus a 
little pocket down on the west stand with 300 more, a different song sprang up: 
"¡Adiós a la liga, adiós!" Most agreed. Before the game, Mourinho had insisted 
that if his side lost another game their title challenge would be over. And 
lose they did. Madrid launched themselves forward. They launched the ball 
forward too – mostly aimlessly – but came across Juan Pablo in the Sporting 
goal, "an orange octopus with a thousand hands", as AS said. They had 13 shots 
on target to Sporting's one. They had a goal disallowed and a penalty shout 
turned down after Alberto Lora leant into a cross, arm first. They also had key 
creative players missing – Karim Benzema, Xabi Alonso, Ronaldo and Marcelo. And 
yet you could hardly say they were robbed, even if that is exactly what the 
Madrid press are saying. They couldn't even say they were caught cold on the 
break – Sporting's goal was an eight-pass move, built from deep, no long-ball 
fluke.

Saturday's failure was, rather, symptomatic of Madrid's problems. Not least 
the fact that just being very, very good is not enough to win this title. 
Mourinho complained that he had little choice but to play more directly in the 
absence of his most creative players, and yet he still had Ozil, Di María, 
Adebayor and, later, Gonzalo Higuaín and Canales on the pitch.

Time and again, Madrid launched the diagonal ball, right to left, looking for 
the head of Adebayor, Marca's match report likening them to Stoke. And time and 
time again, it was predictable. Madrid are a side largely built to 
counterattack. As the season has worn on, teams have worked that out: earlier, 
they attacked Madrid, now they wait for them. And occasionally, riding their 
luck a little, they get away with it.

Madrid have been beaten by Osasuna and Sporting 1-0, and have drawn with 
Mallorca, Levante and Deportivo 0-0, as well as drawing 1-1 with Almería. 
That's 14 dropped points against teams that are all lower than ninth; teams 
that waited, that in Mourinho's words "defend, defend, defend". It is not easy 
to break sides down but with Madrid's budget and Madrid's demands, you have to. 
"There's no defence," moaned mad Madridista Tomás Roncero.

Only there is. It is the attack that is the problem. The attack and the 
opponent. "If I wanted to draw 0-0, I could have," Mourinho said. Anywhere 
else, he might have been able to. But not in Spain. As he rightly noted, in 
this league a 0-0 is a bad result, given the ludicrously high points totals 
being racked up by Barcelona. Madrid have paid dearly for those points. These 
three, especially.

Saturday's defeat was nine years in the waiting and had a devastating effect. 
When the whistle went Mourinho disappeared down the tunnel. Soon there was a 
knock on Sporting's dressing-room door: as Preciado admiringly revealed, the 
Portuguese had came in to congratulate them on a huge victory for them. It was 
a touch of class after all that has happened and after a hugely significant 
defeat for him. A hugely costly one too. Asked afterwards if there was still a 
chance of Madrid winning the league, Mourinho noted the mathematical 
possibility. But, he added: "Objectively, pragmatically, if the distance is 
extended to eight points later on [tonight], it is virtually impossible."

Four hours later, that was exactly what happened. Víctor Valdés's saves and 
Gerard Piqué's goal – which looked suspiciously like a handball – gave 
Barcelona a 1-0 win and an eight-point lead. Eight points plus head-to-head 
goal difference. With eight games left. Assuming Madrid do not beat Barcelona 
by 5-0 or more, even if they were to win El cClásico, Madrid would need to win 
every game and for Barcelona to lose twice – or draw three times — in their 
final seven matches. Madrid need Barcelona to drop nine points in eight games – 
the same amount they have dropped in 30 matches so far. No wonder AS lead on 
"Eight points, a whole world." Marca's headline declared: "Goodbye league, 
goodbye record." Over in Catalunya, Sport described it as "half a league title 
in the bag". And all because of Sporting Gijón. Manolo Preciado's Sporting 
Gijón. The name might ring a bell. Manolo Preciado: the coach with the most 
fantastic facial foliage known to man, a 40-a-day habit, a potty mouth and a 
voice so deep floors vibrate.

Mourinho's Moriarty. The man who called Mourinho a "scumbag" and suggested – 
and amid all the moral outcry about the word he used, this was actually the 
worst thing he said –that the Madrid manager should be put in among Sporting's 
ultras 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/nov/15/la-liga-manola-preciado-jose-mourinho>
. The man who got involved in a furious argument in the Molinón carpark after 
Madrid had beaten them 1-0. The man, let's not forget, that Mourinho had 
accused of throwing his match against Barcelona at the Camp Nou, even though 
they only lost 1-0, the third best result there this season.Who then drew with 
Barcelona at home 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/feb/14/la-liga-sporting-blunt-barcelona>
 – one of only four sides to take points off Pep Guardiola's team all season.

The man who is now the league's most successful manager against the big two, 
having picked up four points against them; two 1-0 defeats already made his 
side one of the hardest the big two had faced; four points via a win against 
Madrid and a draw against Barcelona confirmed it. Six weeks ago, Preciado gave 
Madrid hope. Now he has snatched it away again.

By beating Mourinho in a home league match for the first time in nine years, 
despite having six first-teamers missing, including Diego Castro who is easily 
their best player, and despite playing with a side that included six of those 
"reserves" who played at the Camp Nou. By doing what 107 coaches could not. It 
had to be him. "This is not about revenge," Preciado said, but few believed 
him. As Juanma Trueba put it: "Football is as capricious as a platinum blond 
and as merciless as the Mafioso that keeps her. Accounts are always settled."

When the final whistle blew, Preciado dashed on to the pitch arms in the air 
and his players sprayed him with water, as if they had won the league. He was 
still soaking when he appeared in the press room and declared: "This is the 
kind of thing you tell your grandchildren." A text message came through from 
his son telling him his other son and their mother – killed in separate 
accidents – would have been proud. The result saw Sporting climb to 13th, nine 
points clear of the bottom and left Barcelona virtually nine points clear at 
the top.

Nine years later, Mourinho finally lost his record, and the league title with 
it. Against Manolo Preciado too – the nearest thing he has to a nemesis. The 
man who back in November warned: "If you spit upwards, it comes down 
eventually."

Talking points

• You score a goal, you're pleased as punch. But you can't show it. It's hard 
enough trying not to smile once. Trying not to smile twice is even harder and 
trying not to smile three times is agony. But four times? Four times is bloody 
murder. No punch of the fist, no grin, no Wayne Rooney moment with the camera. 
How is anyone expected to control themselves? Well, Valencia's Roberto Soldado 
did – with the ultimate act of self-restraint. The former Getafe player 
promised not to celebrate on his return to the Coliseum. What he never expected 
was that he would score four times in one night – and four lovely goals too. 
Four goals that take him to 10 for the season and mean he has scored more at 
Getafe's ground than the man the club signed to replace him.

• Hércules in winning game shocker! And away from home, too – the first time 
since they beat Barcelona in week two. Hércules in playing Royston Drenthe 
shocker as well. Hmm, wonder if the two things are related? After all Drenthe, 
playing under new manager Miroslav Djukic, did get both. The other was scored 
by Javier Portillo. Yes, that one.

• No Forlán, no Kun. And Diego Costa goes and gets a hat-trick for Atlético 
Madrid. Look how good he can be when he is not obsessed by diving. Well, not 
only obsessed by diving, anyway. There were still a couple of masterful pieces 
of acting.

• Barcelona's win was not only a huge step towards the title, it was also much 
needed after a week of cock-ups. First with the president, Sandro Rosell, 
predicting a 5-0 win overReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> in El Clásico "in order to 
keep up with what we're used to" and then being forced to apologise for the 
"offence". Then with the release by Italian channel RAI of Pep Guardiola's 
comments saying that his time at Barcelona was "coming to an end". Although the 
comments were similar to things he has said before, this was a step again, a 
little more definitive than in the past, and the spin and clean operation was 
comic. First, it didn't happen. Then, it was a lie. Then, those Italians were a 
bunch of pirates. Then, it was nothing new. The fact that the job has had a 
huge impact on Guardiola and that he suffers for it is certainly no secret. 
Asked on Saturday night if he should go to England where he could control more 
and have more responsibility – where he could be manager, not just coach – he 
replied: "but I don't want more responsibility! I've already lost my hair and 
got a bad back."

• Málaga still aren't out of trouble. Levante on the other hand, are. Luis 
García's team continued their amazing second half of the season – in which they 
are Spain's third-best club after Madrid and Barça – with a 3-1 win and, having 
looked dead and buried, are now just four points off the European places. Mind 
you, they were helped out by some ridiculous 'defending' from Málaga.

• Oh, Espanyol. What have you done. You silly, silly people.

Results: Real Madrid 0-1 Sporting, Getafe 2-4 Valencia, Villarreal 0-1 
Barcelona, Real Sociedad 1-3 Hércules, Espanyol 1-2 Racing, Levante 3-1 Málaga, 
Deportivo 2-1 Mallorca, Sevilla 3-1 Zaragoza, Osasuna 2-3 Atlético

Tonight's is-there-really-a-game?-game: Almería-Athletic

Latest La Liga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=29>

Follow Sid Lowe on Twitter <http://twitter.com/#!/sidlowe>
 