
A former senior executive at world boxing’s embattled governing body who was 
ousted in a bitter power struggle has claimed its president was intimately 
involved in securing a controversial loan from Azerbaijan.

The new claims about the genesis of the deal come amid wider concern over the 
organisation’s finances and the details of a looming 100-year commercial deal 
with a Chinese firm.

Aiba, the world governing body for amateur boxing and a recipient of millions 
of pounds in International Olympic Committee funds, negotiated the 
controversial Azeri loan in 2009. It was alleged by the BBC in 2011 that the 
deal was linked to a promise to favour Azerbaijani boxers at the London 2012 
Games. Aiba has consistently denied there was any link and said earlier this 
year, after the Guardian revealed fears over a corruption crisis at the Rio 
Olympics that later led toall 36 judges being suspended  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/aiba-sideline-all-referee-and-judges-used-at-rio-olympics-pending-an-investigation-boxing>
pending a continuing investigation, that the loan was in the process of being 
repaid. Last week the governing body said it was still in discussions with the 
Azerbaijani investor.

Olympic boxing corruption alive and well, says official as rows continue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/michael-conlan-accuses-boxings-ruling-body-after-being-cheated-in-defeat>
Since then a confidential PriceWaterhouseCoopers report compiled in 2015 and 
seen by the Guardian has revealed a host of financial issues at Aiba related to 
the loan, including irregularities so serious that the auditor recommended a 
criminal lawyer be retained by the governing body.

Amid a hail of claim and counter claim, Aiba has said the former executive 
director Ho Kim was solely responsible for the operations of World SeriesBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> – an ambitious attempt to establish 
a new global tournament between competing franchises – in America and that he 
“found the Azeri investor and enjoyed wide discretion in the negotiations and 
implementation of the transaction”.

It is believed that Aiba plans to take legal action against Kim in 
Switzerland, where its headquarters are based, but it is as yet unclear on what 
grounds. But Kim, who denies any wrongdoing, has now told the Guardian that Dr 
CK Wu, the controversial president of the amateur world governing body, who is 
also an IOC executive board member, was intimately involved in signing the deal.

“A long story to be short, yes, [the] president went to Baku for the final 
negotiation to sign the investment agreement. After this visit the agreement 
was signed with the Azeri company based in Switzerland,” Ho Kim said. “However, 
later Azerbaijan could not do this way and changed the agreement by investing 
directly from Azerbaijan – we had to sign the agreement again. Yes, [the] 
president was involved [in] all negotiations and progresses from the start to 
the end of this deal.”

Documents seen by the Guardian, including a letter from Dr Wu to the 
Azerbaijani minister of emergency situations, Kamaladdin Heydarov, in August 
2010 appear to back up the claim that the president was closely involved in 
negotiating the loan. In the letter, in which Dr Wu appears to mention meeting 
the minister (who is also head of the Azerbaijan boxing federation) in Baku the 
previous month, he asks Heydarov to finalise the payment as soon as he can.

The details of the letter also appear to raise questions over the conclusions 
of Aiba’s own internal review, which concluded in December 2011 that the loan 
came from a private sector investor, about the extent of the government’s 
involvement. In a statement to the Guardian Aiba again insisted it was Kim who 
was chiefly responsible for negotiating the loan and for how it was spent. “We 
confirm that Ho Kim found the investor and enjoyed wide discretion in the 
negotiation and in the implementation of the transaction. Significantly Mr Kim 
signed alone the first Memorandum of Understanding that eventually led to the 
loan,” said a spokesman.

Aiba sidelines all Rio Olympics boxing referees and judges amid inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/aiba-sideline-all-referee-and-judges-used-at-rio-olympics-pending-an-investigation-boxing>
“This loan was arranged for a separate legal entity from Aiba, WSB America 
Operations SA, which was operated solely by Mr Kim. The loan was expected to be 
used to help grow boxing in North America under Mr Kim’s responsibility. Mr Kim 
was the sole board member not only of WSB America Operations SA but also of all 
its affiliates.”

Kim denied that he was responsible for any accounting irregularities.

Kim, who alleges that Dr Wu was personally involved in the loan and employed a 
consultant to act as his “eyes and ears” in America, was acrimoniously ousted 
in 2015 to be replaced as executive director by Karim Bouzidi. The Guardian can 
reveal that Bouzidi has now also left the governing body after his role was 
“reassigned” in the summer at the height of the controversy over claims of 
judging corruption. Bouzidi has not yet commented publicly about his position.

Kim also spoke in detail about a $10m loan he and Dr Wu solicited from a 
Kazakhstani investor and a Chinese investor, Di Wu, who discussed lending 35m 
Swiss francs ($34.9m) and is said to have eventually invested around half that 
amount.

Aiba’s critics believe the rush to conclude a wide-ranging, 100-year 
commercial deal with AliSports, a division of the Chinese giant AliBaba, is 
partly due to the urgency in repaying the various loans and part of an attempt 
by Dr Wu to entrench his powerbase before a special congress he has called next 
month. Aiba denies the proceeds from the Chinese deal will be used to repay the 
Azerbaijan loan.

Wu’s current term as president runs out in 2018. Some insiders believe he is 
looking for ways to extend that tenure, others that he will give the new 
Chinese investors greater influence. Some in the boxing world fear that the 
Chinese firm will be given unprecedented influence over the future of the sport.

In response to questions from the Guardian, Aiba insisted the deal – which it 
is understood will give AliSports a 67% stake in a new 100-year joint venture 
in return for an up-front investment of around 110m Swiss francs ($109m) – was 
purely a commercial one and had nothing to do with repaying outstanding loans.

“The two entities are close to reaching a final agreement. Details will be 
announced shortly,” a spokesman said. “This agreement has nothing to do with 
the repayment of the said loan you mention. It is a long-term partnership which 
will benefit our sport and its boxers. The Joint Venture with Alisports will 
focus essentially on the commercial and marketing rights of boxing. The 
governance of boxing remains under the attributes of Aiba.”

Negotiations over the Chinese deal are believed to be close to a conclusion 
and some Aiba executives and national boxing federations are currently in 
St Petersburg for the Youth World Boxing Championships.

In the wake of the scandal in Rio, when the Guardian’s warnings about fears of 
corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/rio-2016-olympics-boxing-corruption-allegations>
among concerned senior Aiba insiders were followed by a global outcry during 
the Olympics and the suspension of all 36 officials afterwards – pending 
investigation – there were calls for more transparency and a comprehensive 
overhaul of Aiba’s governance. Those loyal to Dr Wu insist his recent actions – 
including an internal review into the judging claims – prove that he is serious 
about cleaning up the sport and that the Chinese deal is part of a plan to put 
it on an even keel financially. They claim that Ho Kim is a bitter ex-employee 
and that his account is therefore compromised.

However, Dr Wu’s long list of critics believe the opposite is true and that 
the power-hungry president is increasingly desperate to find a quick fix to the 
mounting financial and organisational problems by sealing the AliBaba deal 
before December’s special congress in order to cling on to power. Under Wu a 
series of increasingly ambitious schemes to expand Aiba’s influence – including 
WSB and the Boxing Marketing Arm – have combined with a push to allow 
professionals into the Olympics and the rejection of headguards to make its 
competitions more attractive. But well-placed insiders alleged they also 
coincided with financial and organisational chaos that left Aiba unable to 
function effectively.

An Aiba spokesman reiterated that it had commissioned the PWC report itself to 
try to get to the bottom of where the Azerbaijan loan had gone and planned to 
take further action. “We would like to underline that in the draft PWC report 
you mentioned and which was circulated illegally, much of the findings require 
further investigation,” he said. “This is why Aiba—who has taken the initial 
step of commissioning the report and is addressing the contents of the report 
in a serious manner—has requested an additional report to confirm the financial 
discrepancies found in the initial report.”
 