
If you thought Jeremy Corbyn divided opinion, take a look at Al Haymon, 
boxing’s most famous mystery man. He might be the new Don King, he might be 
Father Christmas.

Haymon collects fighters like writers collect quotes. However, unlike King, he 
is all but invisible. As far as we know, he is as clean as a dog whistle – and 
twice as hard to detect.

I ambushed him for a five-minute chat after a Floyd Mayweather press 
conference in Las Vegas once, and, smiling, he said four-fifths of bog all. His 
people have declined every interview request since then, the most recent a few 
weeks ago – as they have done on his behalf with any boxing hack wanting a few 
words on how he is taking over the sport.

With boxing's return to prime-time network TV, Al Haymon makes his move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/06/with-boxings-return-to-prime-time-network-tv-al-haymon-makes-his-move>
Because, if you believe Bob Arum and Oscar De La Hoya, that is what he is 
trying to do. Haymon’s PremierBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> 
Champions enterprise has scooped up so many fighters (estimates vary between 
140 and 200) from rival camps – Bob and Oscar being the owners of the most 
high-profile chicken coops – that contenders chasing a big payday rush weekly 
to do business with him. He’s a cash magnet.

And that’s even when they know they might end up with zilch, as Amir Khan has 
learnt to his cost in his fruitless pursuit of Mayweather, boxing’s biggest 
bank. The latest boxers from these islands to fall for Haymon’s charms include 
world champions Carl Frampton andJames DeGale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale>. Wish them luck.

But is Haymon the devil incarnate, as Arum and De La Hoya paint him in their 
extant US Federal Court lawsuit, claiming he has violated the Ali Act, which 
(in theory) prohibits promoters doubling up as managers? They say he’s freezing 
them out of venues and fighters, creating a monopoly. Haymon’s lawyers describe 
the suit as “baseless”.

Or is Haymon the accidental saviour of a sport that lurches from amazing to 
dire in the space of a week?

What is the substantive difference between Haymon’s reductionist cornering of 
a part of the market – mainly on free-to-air TV and some cable channels you’ve 
never heard of – and the way Showtime and HBO, along with Arum, De La Hoya, 
King and a handful of others, have run boxing for decades?

The many ways to kill a boxing match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2014/aug/07/ways-kill-boxing-match-mayweather-pacquiao-lewis-tyson>
Frank Warren, who knows more wrinkles about promotion and management than most 
people in the business, welcomes the rise of Haymon – with caution.

“What he’s doing is fabulous,” he tells the Guardian, “because he’s getting 
boxing on different channels in America, and that’s great. It doesn’t seem he’s 
interested in titles [no PBC boxer, whether or not a holder of a recognised 
belt, is introduced as such on his shows]. That I don’t agree with, because he 
suddenly can start owning everything and you can basically shut people out. If 
you’ve got title fights, guys can fight for a mandatory position and get a 
chance for a title. I think that’s important.

“The rest of it remains to be seen how it works. He’s obviously got his game 
plan. He’s raised a lot of money, got a lot of financial backing to do it. It’s 
a very brave move. Only time will tell if it works or not.”

Would Warren work with Haymon?

“I’d work work with anyone. I’ve got no problem working with people. BoxNation 
buy fights from him, everybody, every single promoter that’s not tied in with 
other channels.”

That is the voice of pragmatism – the voice in boxing that matters most. There 
are no saints or sinners in the fight game, just pragmatists.

And Haymon has learned a simple lesson from his predecessors: control at least 
one weight division. For instance, by wrapping up 14 leading contenders at or 
around the 147lb classification that Mayweather has ruled for nearly a decade, 
Haymon has – as Warren suggests – virtually closed out his rivals. That’s why 
Andre Berto (who has lost three of his past six bouts) has been widely touted 
as Mayweather’s next opponent, although, at time of writing, the fading 
31-year-old had yet to see a fight contract that proves it.

While boxers are fed up with being the property of faceless suits, they will 
follow the money. And the money is with Haymon, whose fighters become PBC 
champions without the encumbrance of sanction fees to any of the four main 
world governing bodies. Afterbeating Manny Pacquiao in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/02/floyd-mayweather-v-manny-pacquiao-mgm-las-vegas-live>
, Mayweather declined to pay the $200,000 sanction fee demanded by the WBO for 
their title, and handed them back their trinket. Like, who wins that one?

Certainly, Haymon has livened up his sport. We might not hear what he says or 
see where he goes, but we know he is upsetting some people and pleasing others. 
And one group less pleased than most with the status quo are the fans, who are 
increasingly annoyed with the standard of pay-per-view fights, on both sides of 
the Atlantic. For too long, it’s a complaint Arum and others have been deaf to.

As the excellent Ron Borges observed in the Boston Herald this week: “While 
Arum stomps his feet and acts like Donald Trump with less hair, Haymon goes 
about his business, using a $400 million war chest from the investment firm 
Waddell & Reed to buy time on both free TV [NBC and CBS] and cable to present 
his stable of 200-plus fighters to a public starved to see them but tired of 
needing a bank loan to do so.”

American boxing promoters and managers have always come in a kaleidoscope of 
shades and volumes. There were Doc Kearns and Tex Rickard, megaphone scam 
artists of the pioneer days a century and more ago; there was Frankie Carbo, 
his fellow mobster Blinky Palermo and their flash front man, Jim Norris, a 
gentleman crook who dressed as well as he spoke. Haymon, on the other hand, has 
a clean sheet, and his lawyers say the claims against him are, “entirely 
without merit”.

And, apart from those boxers in his employ, Haymon does have friends in 
boxing. “Al Haymon is the man,” King told Boxingscene.com. “His word is his 
bond... I love what he’s doing, but you have to understand that black success 
is unacceptable - because for 400 years it’s been deeply engrained into the 
psyche of America [that] people of colour are inferior, whites have supremacy … 
When they see [black success], it causes the problem because it differentiates 
from everything that they’ve been taught. The youth [are] not buying it, the 
young kids are not buying it. I’m proud of Al Haymon, he’s doing a great job.”

Now there’s an endorsement.

• This article was updated on 28 July 2015 to remove a reference to Andre 
Berto being Puerto Rican
 