
Alan Rickman would have been proud that his last on-screen performance will be 
in the upcoming thriller about drone warfare, Eye in the Sky, according to 
co-starHelen Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren>.

Mirren said the film, which follows the progress of a drone strike from 
multiple viewpoints and features Rickman as a British general trying to get 
authorisation for a strike, suited the late actor’s “intelligence”.

“It was the Alan that I know: the witty, thoughtful Alan rather than the 
villain that he played so brilliantly,” she told theRadio Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-times>. “I hope I don’t speak out of 
place, but I think that if Alan had the choice, he would have been proud of 
this as his last movie.

“The subject matter is absolutely where his intelligence was. He was very 
politically aware, conscientious and thoughtful. I’m sure that’s why he would 
have chosen it in the first place.”

Rickman died from cancer at the age of 69 in January. He was one of the UK’s 
most loved actors, achieving global fame through roles such as Bruce Willis’s 
nemesis Hans Gruber in Die Hard , and more recently Professor Severus Snape in 
the Harry Potter films.

Eye in the Sky, which is released on Friday and also stars Breaking Bad’s 
Aaron Paul, is dedicated to Rickman’s memory. The film is Rickman’s last on 
screen, however he will voice a character in the Alice in Wonderland Sequel, 
Alice Through the Looking Glass, which is due for release next month.

Mirren was a contemporary of Rickman’s and starred “rather disastrously” with 
him in a theatre production of Anthony and Cleopatra in 1989.

In Eye in the Sky, Mirren plays Colonel Katherine Powell, who is directing the 
strike. She said one of the things she enjoyed about the film was its attempt 
to explore different sides of the debate, and shift sympathies between 
characters. In one instance a female politician argues against killing 
civilians, only to justify her stance based on the need to win a propaganda war 
against the enemy.

She said: “She comes out with the most unbelievably cynical reasoning, … But 
then again, it’s true: you do have to win the propaganda war. But that’s the 
beauty of the film. You see the issue from all sides.”
 