
Rafael Benítez’s success in reconnecting Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> with its previously 
disenchanted, disenfranchised supporters was affirmed by an attendance of more 
than 49,000.

Astonishingly high for a League Cup tie between two Championship sides, it 
offered further proof that something very special is happening in this corner 
of north-east England. Certainly as the goals from Aleksandar Mitrovic (twice), 
Mohamed Diamé (twice), Matt Ritchie and Ayoze Pérez flew in and the almost 
religious fervour mounted, it was possible to believe that Benítez really could 
walk on the River Tyne.

Leeds rely on Marco Silvestri heroics to send Norwich City crashing out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/leeds-rely-on-marco-silvestri-heroics-to-send-norwich-city-crashing-out>
The final whistle could not come soon enough for Simon Grayson, whose Preston 
side spent most of the tie down to 10 men after Alan Browne’s sending off.

“A horrible night,” Grayson said. “Exceptionally disappointing – but Newcastle 
have exceptional players. They were magnificent but they’ve got a manager who, 
this time last year, was at Real Madrid and they’re geared for success.”

Benítez could hardly be happier in his new habitat. “I’m really pleased to see 
so many fans here,” he said. “And for them to see us playing well and scoring 
goals.”

While Grayson made nine changes to his starting XI, Benítez’s team-sheet 
featured seven alterations. It meant some expensive backsides resting on a home 
bench populated by, among others, Dwight Gayle but Newcastle’s stand-ins were 
far from shabby.

Indeed, the recalled Mitrovic and Diamé soon delighted in stretching Grayson’s 
back three in what could be seen as a somewhat peculiar dress rehearsal for the 
Championship game between these teams at Deepdale on Saturday. “It will be 
different,” Grayson promised. “I’m not going through that again.”

If Benítez was always determined to guide Newcastle into only their second 
domestic cup quarter-final in 12 years, Isaac Hayden set them on course when, 
minutes after seeing his viciously angled shot rebound off the inside of a 
post, the midfielder won a game-changing free-kick.

Ritchie’s looping, floated, execution of that set piece confounded Grayson’s 
backline, leaving the totally unmarked Mitrovic to head beyond Anders 
Lindegaard.

If Benítez cut a study in quiet contentment as he adjusted his glasses, 
Grayson’s scowl reflected his displeasure with Eoin Doyle whose challenge from 
behind on Hayden began Newcastle’s goal rush. Preston’s discipline deteriorated 
further as Browne smashed an elbow into Jack Colback’s face as they challenged 
for an aerial ball, resulting in red for the midfielder. Unable to continue, 
Colback was in hospital on Tuesday night.

Interruption over, Diamé extended Newcastle’s lead. The former Hull City 
midfielder has had a quiet, slightly underwhelming, start to Tyneside life but 
finally he reminded everyone of his ability by meeting Mitrovic’s deflected 
pass and unleashing a superlative, low, first-time, 25-yard shot into the 
bottom corner.

Within minutes, though, Diamé was prone on the turf, thumping it in despair 
after making an awful hash of a wonderful opportunity to score again following 
an intercepted Preston back pass and Mitrovic’s unselfish lay-off.

Less altruistically, Mitrovic was soon begging Ritchie to allow him to take a 
penalty after the winger was brought down in the area by Bailey Wright but 
Ritchie clung on to the ball with grim determination before beating Lindegaard 
from the spot.

Intent not to be eclipsed, Mitrovic immediately scored an absolutely brilliant 
goal after adroitly controlling the ball with his chest and wrong-footing two 
defenders and Lindegaard before firing home. Predictably, the exultant Serbia 
striker was booked for ripping his shirt off.

There was still time for Diamé to use his right foot to despatch a spectacular 
long-range fifth and Pérez to score the sixth as St James’ sang “We’re going to 
Wemberlee”.
 