
FIVE weeks ago Maurice Strong could say confidently that the preparations for 
the Earth Summit in Rio were on course for success. Last Sunday, after 15 
weeks' high level negotiating between governments and the input of thousands of 
independent groups, the director general of the UN Conference on Environment 
and Development (UNCED) admitted frankly that there would be 'serious failures'.

 Yet, ever the optimist, the exhausted, undefeated Strong could still insist 
the next day that the world was on 'a real point of civilisational change. I 
cannot say at this stage that the conference will be a success. I believe, 
however, that that success is in prospect. It's possible.'

 But how possible? Given governments' entrenched positions on so many items of 
the agenda and the resultant watering down or complete scotching of so many of 
the proposals, any hopes that the Earth Summit would truly set a path to a new 
world ecoonomic and environmental order are now desperately slim. While there 
may be progress in negotiations at or even before Rio - two more days have now 
been set aside for governments to informally negotiate in Brazil and there will 
be major meetings in Malaysia and London beforehand - so many of the noble 
intentions that were up for discussion at New York have now been negotiated 
away that it is hard to see how any agreements will have enough bite to be 
anything but rhetoric.

 Not all is lost, however. Here we present for the first time details of what 
UNCED wanted, what was chucked out in New York and the prospects for Maurice 
Strong's vision of world environmental security.

 RIO OVERVIEW: Known as the 'chapeau', this doc ument is vital for the success 
of the Earth Summit because it will set the political tone. New York ended with 
an agreed text but no decision was made as to the political level governments 
would attach to any agreements. The need for national environment/ development 
plans is still included in the text that now goes to Rio , but the important 
issue of follow-ups has not been decided.

 Prospects: Real progress still possible. 

 BIODIVERSITY: Mexico and Peru argued strongly that the country of origin of 
plants and animals should share any commercial benefits from their use. This 
received short shrift from the UK and US. Brazil wanted a paragraph added to 
ensure that indigenous people received some of the profits from the 
exploitation of their resources. The US weakened this to say that countries 
should 'encourage' rather than 'ensure' it.

 Prospects: Small progress possible. 

 BIOTECHNOLOGY: The US took the lead - and a number of countries, including 
Britain, hid beneath its cloaks - in trying to delete all references to safety 
standards in the development of new products. The US also tried to remove all 
references to women, notably a paragraph that wanted an end to the testing of 
fertility drugs on women in developing countries. The UK, with every developed 
country, sought to keep existing, weak standards.

 Prospects: Depends on biodiversity convention being negotiated separately. 
The Rio text is weak: developed countries don't want a link to be made between 
biodiversity and biotechnology for commercial reasons.

 HAZARDOUS WASTE: African countries wanted a world endorsement of the Bamako 
Convention banning the shipment of all toxic wastes across national borders. 
Only Poland and Senegal supported a complete ban on exports of hazardous 
wastes. Opposition led by EC and US.

 Prospects: Weak agreement possible but US wants all commitments removed. 

 CLIMATE: Also being negotiated separately as a convention. The US is the only 
country still refusing to sign an agreement to reduce carbon dioxide emissions 
to 1990 levels by 2000. It was attacked by Japan and Britain, two of its 
staunchest allies. When Tunisia suggested there should be a study of the per 
capita production of greenhouse gases the US insisted on deleting the proposal. 
Yemen, on behalf of Arab oil nations anxious not to include commitments on the 
pricing of energy, threw the climate chapter back to Rio .

 Prospects: Depends on more talks at end of April. At the moment everything is 
in doubt. President Bush says he wants to sign agreements but won't accept 
targets. EC and everyone else wants targets. Impasse.

 CONSUMPTION: The US asked for a deletion of all 16 paragraphs that referred 
to over consumption being a cause of environmental degradation. Canada, New 
Zealand and Australia blocked this move but the US managed to water it down 
considerably by the end of the negotiations.

 Prospects: Meagre. Link between poverty and development not accepted because 
it would affect multinational corporations and trade issues.

 DESERTIFICATION: African countries, feeling marginalised by the North and the 
G77 nations (who include major semi-industrialised countries like Brazil and 
Malaysia), pressed for a world convention on desertification but received 
little support beyond Sweden and the Middle East. Developed countries, 
including UK, argued that the problem was not global but one of bad economic 
development which caused people to cut down what little remained of plant cover 
in order to survive.

 Prospects: There are prospects for a convention after Rio but this in turn 
depends on a forest convention. The South is using desertification to bargain 
against the North's desire for a forest convention.

 FORESTS: A convention for the protection of forests should still be signed at 
Rio . Previous negotiations broke down when developing countries argued that 
this was an attempt to take over national sovereignty and use the forests as 
global 'sinks' to absorb carbon dioxide levels and slow global warming without 
the developing countries having to cut back. Compromise reached but equal 
weight has been given to nations' right to fell forests as to protect them.

 Prospects: The principles so far agreed are tantamount to an international 
agreement but a convention, if signed in Rio , will be weak on protection.

 TRADE: Curtis Bohlen, chief US negotiator for the summit , has admitted that 
the free trade rules being drafted by Gatt are environmentally bad, but the 
status quo - that free trade is the best system - was hardly questioned. The US 
line, that free trade and the environment are separate issues and that it 
merely needs a correction in the trade rules to take account of environment 
costs, prevails.

 Prospects: Nil. 

 INDIGENOUS PEOPLES: The political rights of indigenous peoples to determine 
their own development is covered in many parts of the conference but was 
systematically diluted at the New York meeting. Some progress has been made 
(but not in the legal sense) if only because governments now accept it as a 
populist issue. How any agreements would translate into national policies is 
still unsure.

 Prospects: Heavy lobbying in Rio from the largest gathering ever of the 
world's indigenous peoples may be important.

 INSTITUTIONS: Argentina, India, Japan, Kenya and the UK want the 
strengthening of the UN Economic and Social Committee (ECOSOC). Benin, France, 
Australia, Mexico and the US want an organisation called the Sustainable 
Development Commission to be set up.

 Prospects: A choice between the two may be made but a third proposal, of a UN 
'independent ombudsperson' to deal with development/environment appeals may be 
more acceptable.

 MILITARY: The US insisted that every mention of the military's role in 
environment and development be deleted. Sweden tried to include the military 
role in toxic waste problems but the US struck a deal with them to knock out 
any mentions in exchange for keeping a chapter on radioactive waste which the 
Swedes were opposing. India and Japan supported US moves to cut all references 
to military waste and all mentions of military technology for peaceful purposes 
was deleted.

 Prospects: Nil. 

 OCEANS: Support and strengthening was sought for existing international 
treaties. Greenpeace lobbied heavily through New Zealand for a ban on whaling, 
which Iceland and Japan predictably opposed. Iceland, to take the heat off 
them, argued unsuccessfully for a ban on waste dumping at sea.

 Prospects: Not good because of entrenched positions. The EC was asked to 
return to Rio with a more positive approach.

 TECHNOLOGY: The US stonewalled the transfer of 'environmentally sound' 
technology to developing countries. Finally agreed, subject to maintaining 
intellectual property right of companies. Problems over transfer of nuclear 
technology.

 Prospects: Much to play for. 

 TNCs: Multi-national corporations, or transnationals, control 70 per cent of 
world trade and as such are some of the world's most powerful development 
organisations. A proposal by China, the G77 nations and the Nordic countries 
that TNCs should accept environmental liability was defeated by the UK, US and 
Japan.

 Prospects: Nil.
 