
In the 24 hours following midnight on Wednesday 9 March there were 122 emails 
to the readers’ editor setting out complaints and queries about the Guardian’s 
journalism and other matters. This Open door column aims to give a flavour of a 
day’s work; including an example of when we decide not to publish a correction.

There are usually two of us dealing with complaints at our third-floor desks 
(OK, I get an office) during office hours, five days a week. Outside those 
hours senior editors have a set of guidelines for amending and footnoting 
online articles when necessary.

Among the complaints that day were 19 alleging anti-Israel bias and one 
complaining of anti-Palestinian bias. There were also 16 complaints about 
factual errors, of which 11 were fixed and five were carried over for a variety 
of reasons; and five complaints of bias in other stories, including two 
involving our coverage of Bernie Sanders, who is fighting for the US Democratic 
presidential nomination. There were three requests for the deletion of 
material: one refused, one granted and one unresolved request as yet.

One way to categorise the complaints and queries is the speed with which 
problems can be tackled: fast, medium and slow. My colleague tends to 
concentrate on the first two and I deal with the last. Fast includes things 
that are uncontroversial and don’t require a call or further email to the 
journalist or relevant editor – for instance, a lost web link or a credit for a 
photographer that has been forgotten.

This kind of problem – there was one of each on Wednesday – are often handled 
by an administrator on the desk. One of the most important aspects of the work 
is to try to send a personal response to a complainant as well as an automated 
one. This is not always possible but we estimate we respond to 85% of all 
correspondents within three days.

Administrators play a key role in that. For instance, on that day we had 15 
people offering articles or suggesting projects, to whom they responded. We are 
not commissioning editors but if we can point someone in the right direction we 
do, but it is not always possible.

Here are two examples from that day that fall into the medium category.

The first concerns a picture and its caption used to accompany an online story 
about the UK donating military vehicles to the Bulgarian government to help 
police its borders despite allegations that the Balkan state allows human 
rights abuses against migrants.

A reader wrote: “I am confused as to the link between the photo at the start 
of this article, captioned ‘Romanian migrants wait at Kulata, Bulgaria, to 
cross the border into Greece in February. Photograph: Valentina Petrova/AP’ and 
the ensuing content of the article.

“The article seems to be referring to the migrant refugee crisis that Europe 
is contending with. However, the inference one would make based on 
the juxtaposition between the photo and the title is that Bulgaria is grappling 
with a wave of Romanian migrants, which, to my knowledge, is not and has never 
been the case.”

My colleague Barbara Harper discussed it with the editors and all agreed it 
was a misleading choice,so the photograph was changed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/britain-to-send-land-rovers-to-bulgaria-to-help-police-borders>
. Because it was changed within hours of publication there was no footnote and 
no correction, which is consistent with the internal readers’ editor’s 
guidelines.

The second was on the cusp of medium and slower in terms of difficulty to 
resolve and took 48 hours to get to grips with. A reader questioned a statistic 
in the graphic on the front of the Guardian of 8 March, which illustrated the 
stories about the economic crisis facing young adults. She questioned the 
figure that one in three 16- to 24-year-olds owned their own homes in 1991. It 
eventually became clear that we had misinterpreted figures from the Office for 
National Statistics (ONS). And not for the first time – three other stories and 
a graphic accompanying one of them carried the same error.

In fact, as the correction published on 10 March made clear: “Those figures, 
from the ONS, are not for all people in those age groups, but only for those 
who are “household reference persons”. The concept of a household reference 
person was introduced in the 2001 census and in other government surveys to 
replace the traditional concept of the head of the household.” All four stories 
were amended and footnoted.

At the end of that day there were still at least two complaints that I was 
working through, which I regret are in my slow lane, which, even as I write 
now, I have not been able to resolve, as well as several deletion requests 
carried over for some days.

A busy day, but by no means unusual.
 