
This month, marine conservation NGO Oceana released a major report 
<http://usa.oceana.org/publications/reports/deceptive-dishes-seafood-swaps-found-worldwide?_ga=1.60306413.1738658057.1471597147>
 onseafood fraud <http://oceana.org/our-campaigns/seafood_fraud/campaign>, 
which reviewed more than 200 scientific studies that had collectively examined 
over 25,000 fish samples from around the world. Through its analysis, Oceana 
was able to show that an astonishing one in five seafood samples globally is 
mislabelled to represent other species and mislead consumers. Nestled within 
that report was the case of the Amazon river dolphins – a peculiar testimony to 
the often bizarre, trickle-down effects of seafood fraud.

These freshwater dolphins occupy the Amazon and Orinoco river basins that 
stretch across the northern half of South America. They have historically been 
abundant across this vast watery network, and are protected by law, making it 
illegal to kill them. But for years, poachers have been targeting the dolphins 
and using them as bait to catch a much smaller type of catfish.

Two species – the tucuxi and boto dolphins, the latter also recognisable as 
the charismatic ‘pink river dolphin’ – are at the centre of this trade. But 
what’s truly peculiar about this situation isn’t just the strange juxtaposition 
of dolphins being exploited to feed much smaller fish: it’s the identity of the 
fish they’re being killed to catch in the first place.

In South America, Haydée Cunha, a conservation geneticist at the Rio de 
Janeiro State University, has been investigating this problem ever since a 
mystery fish first started appearing in Brazilian grocery stores and street 
markets in 2008. In 2015 when she was at the Federal University of Rio de 
Janeiro, she produced aresearch paper 
<http://jhered.oxfordjournals.org/content/106/S1/565.full.pdf> on seafood fraud 
that was featured in the Oceana report: it detailed the findings of a survey 
carried out in Manaus, the capital of Brazil’s Amazonas state, which showed 
that a series of fictitious species names – ‘douradinha’, ‘douradinho’, and 
‘piratinga’ – were all being used to describe the same type of fish. Using DNA 
tissue analysis, Cunha identified this species as a common catfish, known asC. 
macropterus.

“We found that 60% of fillets being sold as ‘douradinha’, ‘douradinho’ and 
‘piratinga’ were actuallyC. macropterus,” Cunha says. The fraudulent names were 
deemed necessary to cover up the catfish’s true identity, she explains, because 
it is a scavenger fish that would repel buyers if they knew. “Brazilians find 
this catfish disgusting, because they know that it is necrophagous 
[carrion-feeding]. They refer to it as ‘water vulture’,” she says.

The original driver for this fraudulent trade was the overfishing of another, 
much preferred catfish species, the ‘capaz’, a regional delicacy that fetched a 
high price from consumers before its population began to dwindle. To replace 
the diminishing supply, fishers have since turned toC. macropterus, also known 
as ‘mota’. Because this particular species is drawn to carrion, large river 
dolphin carcasses – especially the larger pink boto dolphin – provide the ideal 
bait for attracting large numbers of these fish.

Boto and tucuxi dolphins aren’t currently listed as endangered; the 
International Union for Conservation of Nature describes their cases as 
‘data-deficient’, meaning it can’t make a definitive estimate about how 
threatened they are. But there’s evidence of an increasingly sophisticated 
industry that’s sprung up around these creatures. “There are reports of dolphin 
hunters that supply the fishermen, and also of freezing plant owners that keep 
dolphin carcasses to supply fishermen,” Cunha says.

The trade has undoubtedly also grown over the years. Vera da Silva, an aquatic 
mammal researcher with the National Institute of Amazonian Research, who has 
beensurveying <http://www.avvx62.dsl.pipex.com/boto/about.htm> boto dolphin 
populations for over 20 years, says that over the last decade its population 
has declined by 60% in one part of the Central Amazon. “The curve went down 
dramatically after 2000,” she notes – around the same time fishermen started to 
target the scavenging catfish.

Last year, a moratorium on fishing the C. macropterus catfish came into force, 
largely motivated by potential health impacts on humans, because the scavenging 
fish are also exposed to high levels of mercury. But despite the ban it’s 
suspected that the trade continues: enforcement is weak, Da Silva says, and in 
her research Cunha notes that it’s easy enough to invent new names for the 
species to hide its true identity.

Now Cunha and Da Silva are working together to use DNA analysis to identify 
signs of seafood fraud and track its spread. “We need to check markets 
regularly in search of new disguises –new fictitious names – forC. macropterus, 
and to use DNA to identify fillets,” Cunha says. She and her team are also 
currently developing a rapid diagnostic test that will be used to identify the 
stomach contents of mystery fish for traces of dolphin or caiman DNA (these 
reptiles are less favoured, but also targeted by fishers as bait.) This could 
help environmental officials pinpoint hotspots of illegal activity.

This month, Da Silva and other researchers will begin a new survey to monitor 
the densities of dolphins in parts of the Amazon. But from her point of view, 
the fishing moratorium, which will end in 2018, is too short. “Five years is 
not enough for the recovery for any kind of mammal,” she says; the boto breeds 
in three-year cycles, so population surveys won’t be able to provide a full 
picture of the how well or poorly the dolphins have fared in this time. But, 
she adds, “No matter how much [fishermen] are killing now, they are killing 
less than they were before the moratorium. So we need to show that it’s 
important to continue it for a longer period to allow the population to 
recover.”

Whatever the dolphins’ fate, their case reveals that far from simple name 
switching, seafood fraud is a front for a backlog of crimes being perpetrated 
against aquatic and marine life. How many other fraudulent species names might 
hide stories just like this one?

• This article was amended on 3 October 2016. An earlier version misspelled 
the name of one of the freshwater dolphin species as tucixi. The correct 
spelling is tucuxi.
 