
Paramedics have accused their own NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
 ambulance service of endangering lives in a bid to save money by cutting a 
system under which they abandon meal breaks to respond to patients with 
life-threatening conditions.

Crews at the South East Coast ambulance service (Secamb), which covers a huge 
swath of south-east England, were told that they would no longer be paid 
overtime for abandoning their breaks to respond to some 999 calls including 
emergencies involving strokes, seizures and breathing problems. The instruction 
came as it emerged that medical staff across the UK faced an unprecedented 
demand on emergency resources last week.

'The worst conditions in memory': NHS doctors describe their week in A&E
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/an-absolute-warzone-nhs-doctors-describe-their-week-in-ae>
Frontline staff with Secamb have complained to the Guardian about the 
controversial change of policy as pressure mounted on the government to respond 
to the growing crisis engulfing NHS emergency departments.

Paramedics have warned that patient safety and lives could be put at risk 
because it will lengthen the service’s response times, which its boss recently 
admitted were already poor.

Ambulance crews will no longer be paid the £25 they receive each time they 
interrupt the single – and unpaid – 30-minute meal break they get during their 
12-hour shift in order to answer a Red 2 call, which can involve someone with 
chest pains or car crash casualties.

The Patients Association said the policy was short-sighted and the welfare of 
patients should never be sacrificed in a quest for savings. It comes as NHS 
governance grew into a major political issue in the wake of three patientdeaths 
at Worcestershire Royal hospital last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/it-was-manic-patients-describe-meltdown-at-worcestershire-hospital>
.

On Sunday, Theresa May rejected the British Red Cross’s claim that hospitals 
and ambulance services were under such pressure that it constitutes a 
“humanitarian crisis”. The prime minister made clear she would not be producing 
an NHS rescue plan.

Theresa May denies 'humanitarian crisis' in Britain's NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-denies-humanitarian-crisis-in-britains-nhs>
But in a series of extraordinary accounts obtained by the Guardian doctors 
working in A&E departments across England detailed “appalling and chaotic” 
conditions last week.

Jon Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said the Secamb measure was the 
latest “shocking revelation” about a service that has been involved in a number 
of controversies over its approach to patient safety and quality of care over 
the past year.

Secamb was put into “special measures” in September after inspectors found a 
litany of failings, including poor response times and lapses in patient safety, 
as its financial situation deteriorated.

Critics believe Secamb’s new policy is reckless, especially as the service 
depends so heavily on ambulance crews routinely abandoning their breaks to help 
patients. Secamb, which covers Surrey, Sussex, Kent and north-east Hampshire, 
spends £200,000 per month on its system of payments for “disturbed meal 
breaks”, which it has operated for eight years and which paramedics say has 
saved countless lives.

One Secamb paramedic said: “In many calls that are potentially 
life-threatening, patients will receive delays in being reached by a crew. Red 
2 calls include things such as chest pain, unconscious patients, seizures, 
breathing problems, road accidents and many more which all fall under the 
eight-minute target set out by the government. The service is now putting money 
as a priority over patient care.”

Another added: “I believe this cost-cutting will result in huge amounts of 
increased mortality and morbidity and associated suffering. Without these 
disturbances, and with the increasing demand, the public will wait longer for 
an ambulance, with possible and likely serious consequences.”

Paramedics will continue to attend Red 1 calls, which Secamb says “are the 
most time critical and cover those patients who are not breathing and don’t 
have a pulse, and other severe conditions.” But they will now not be paid for 
responding to Red 2 patients, which Secamb says are “serious but less 
immediately time critical and cover conditions such as stroke and fits.”

England’s 10 regional ambulance services are expected to respond to 75% of 
both types of calls within eight minutes, though this target is widely 
breached. In 2015-16, Secamb responded to only 71.6% of Red 1 calls and 67.3% 
of Red 2 calls in the target time.

Joe Garcia, Secamb’s interim director of operations, announced the change to 
staff last Thursday in an email, which the Guardian has seen. He explained that 
it was being made in order to tackle its deficit.

“As you are all no doubt aware by now Secamb is currently facing a severe 
financial challenge. In order to ensure spending is controlled going forward we 
are scrutinising all our activities in operations,” he wrote. “One of the 
significant factors contributing to overspending against our budget this year 
are meal-break disturbance payments. It is clear we can no longer sustain the 
level of expenditure that is being generated by these payments or overlook the 
impact it is having on the health and wellbeing of our staff.”

Garcia said that “with immediate effect” the new policy was: “Operational 
crews on an allocated meal-break will only be disturbed as necessary to attend 
Red 1 calls; requests for grade 1 back-up; [and in] other exceptional 
circumstances.”


One Secamb paramedic told the Guardian: “Myself and my colleague were on our 
break yesterday in one part of Kent when control interrupted us to attend a 
patient with breathing problems nearby. Had they not done that, the nearest 
available crew was more than half an hour’s drive away from where the patient 
was, which is way outside the eight-minute target.”

The Guardian revealed in December that Secamb was under fire for changing the 
role of its most highly-trained paramedics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/30/nhs-south-east-coast-ambulance-service-critical-care-paramedics>
 and forcing them to start responding to calls about even minor ailments, 
despite their advanced life-saving skills, to improve response times.

A separate leaked memo from within Secamb underlines the extent of its 
financial plight. In an email to staff on 23 December, David Hammond, the 
director of finance and corporate services, revealed that it was on course to 
end the 2016-17 financial year at the end of March with a £7.1m deficit.

The changes needed to tackle that overspend would be “difficult” and involve 
“unpalatable decisions” to save money and increase efficiency, he revealed, 
because of “the critical nature of the trust’s financial position”. 
Cost-cutting would start with an attempt to save £2m between January and March, 
Hammond said.

Ambulance privatisation descends into 'total shambles'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/12/patients-wait-hours-for-ambulances-nhs-transport-service-privatised-sussex>
Katherine Murphy, the chief executive of the Patients Association, said: 
“While we acknowledge the financial pressures the NHS is under, this shouldn’t 
compromise access to the most appropriate care, diagnosis and treatment. Where 
time is of essence, then it’s important patients get the right diagnosis as 
fast as possible. With someone having a seizure, for example, the sooner they 
get help the better the outcome is likely to be. That’s what [ambulance] 
services are there to provide.”

Labour’s Ashworth said underfunding of the NHS lay behind Secamb’s decision. 
“We’ve already called for urgent reassurances that previous decisions by Secamb 
won’t affect patients’ safety. Now paramedics are understandably raising grave 
concerns about this proposed change to meal time callouts. Patients should not 
be forced to wait even longer for an ambulance because of decisions like this 
which are taken in the context of the huge financial squeeze the government has 
imposed on the NHS.”

A Secamb spokeswoman said: “Staff will continue to receive a payment for a 
disturbed meal break and will still be disturbed for life-threatening 
emergencies as required and in line with the policy. The email sent out to 
staff was about tightening controls around the implementation of the meal break 
policy.”

Secamb did not respond to the Guardian’s request for a response to the fears 
that the new policy could risk patient safety.

Dr Rachel Clarke, the junior doctor who collated accounts from accident and 
emergency departments, said: “This testimony captures the almost total 
disconnect between the conditions frontline staff and patients are actually 
enduring in our A&Es right now and the government’s attempts to downplay and 
deny these.

“Frontline doctors like me are feeling frankly ashamed of the conditions to 
which our patients are being subjected daily. They might not be in Aleppo, but 
they are so very far removed from even the most basic levels of dignity and 
humanity we’d expect in the world’s sixth richest country.”
 