
The wife of boxer Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> has 
said she will not stay silent after alleging that she suffered abuse by her 
in-laws while she was pregnant.

Faryal Makhdoom Khan made the claims of bullying in a series of online posts, 
saying that she represents the voice of “every abused woman”.

The model and makeup artist accused her in-laws of trying to destroy her 
marriage and said many Muslim women suffer in silence in their communities.

In the Snapchat post she said: “When you force your son to divorce his wife, 
when she’s nine months pregnant!!! And your son doesn’t … and he sticks besides 
his wife. He’s called a pussy? Then they think it’s OK to bully you in public.”

Makhdoom Khan went on to claim that her “evil, hating sister-in-law” Mariyah 
tried to hit her while her husband was not at home.

Khan’s family have denied the allegations and his siblings have also taken to 
social media. His sister responded to the assault allegations saying: “Do I 
look like I can beat someone up?”

Makhdoom Khan, a cosmetics entrepreneur, then reiterated her claims in a 
Facebook post, describing herself as the voice of “every abused woman”, and 
adding that her husband was standing by her as she spoke out.

She said: “There are many women who suffer in silence due to ill treatment 
from the in-laws. This dark side is usually kept hidden.

“We need woman at all levels, including the top, to change the dynamic, 
reshape the conversation, to make sure women’s voices are heard and heeded, not 
overlooked and ignored.

“I am every abused woman’s voice and I am grateful for my husband’s support 
throughout my ordeal. I am an entrepreneur with a successful makeup brand, my 
own career and fierce independence, I continue and will continue to break 
stereotypes.”

The post has now been removed. 

Khan has not spoken publicly about his wife’s allegations but he is known to 
be very close to his family. Earlier this week he posted a picture of his wife, 
congratulating her on her “amazing” catwalk debut.

The very public family argument began when Makhdoom Khan used a series of 
Snapchat messages to accuse her husband’s family of abusing and bullying her.

She claimed that Khan’s parents, Falek and Shah, had tried to break them up, 
adding that the family’s treatment of her husband was “disgusting”. She claimed 
the abuse took place while she was pregnant with their now two-year-old 
daughter.

Using the Snapchat name Faryalxmakhdoom, she wrote: “Don’t get your sons 
married if you’re going to abuse and bully the wife.

“I’ve always been so quiet but seriously this message is for everyone! When 
you bring someone’s daughter – treat her as your own. Your son will be much 
happier & so will you. :)”

She also shared a screenshot of her sister-in-law laughing at a comment on 
Instagram which suggested Makhdoom Khan should have been on the “dogwalk” 
rather than the catwalk.

Makhdoom Khan added: “What have I actually done lol been a good wife to your 
broth.I worked my ass off on a catwalk from 7am till 12am at night.

“My husbands a multi-millionaire but still work and do my own as I can never 
touch his BLOOD money, when I have a right too! and then I get hating evil 
sister in laws s******g on me?”

But Khan’s family defended themselves against the tirade, his brother Haroon 
tweeting: “The world knows how good the khan family is #saynomore.”

In an interview with his local newspaper, their father also said the 
allegations were false.

Shah Khan told the Bolton News: “I don’t know why she has said it at all. Amir 
tweeted something before that about buying my mum and dad a house. Maybe that 
upset her. Then about an hour or two afterwards she tweeted all that.

“At the end of the day, Amir is my son. That will never change. Obviously she 
is his wife and our daughter-in-law and nobody can change that.”

Representatives for Amir Khan said they did not wish to comment on the 
allegations. His wife’s representatives have also been contacted for a comment.


The Muslim Women’s Network said that Asian and Muslim women suffering domestic 
abuse face additional cultural barriers.

The charity, which runs a domestic abuse helpline, say that some Muslim women 
are prevented from seeking help for fear of dishonouring family and being 
rejected by the community.

After the series of online posts, Reham Khan, the former wife of Pakistani 
politician and former cricketer Imran Khan, wrote a message of support. She 
tweeted: “A woman has a voice for a reason! Condemn the bullies not the woman 
who speaks out. #FaryalMakhdoom”


Makhdoom Khan, who was born in Brooklyn, New York, to a Pakistani family was 
introduced to Amir Khan through a mutual friend after graduating from Rutgers 
University with a double major in political science and journalism. The couple 
married in front of celebrity guests at the Waldorf Astoria in Manhattan.
 