
Amir Khan has insisted he would not be interested in fighting Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> if the American makes his 
expected return from retirement, even if he defeats Saúl Álvarez to win the WBC 
middleweight title.

He challenges Mexico’s defending champion “Canelo” Álvarez on Saturday at Las 
Vegas’s new T-Mobile Arena when he is such an underdog that victory would be 
among the greatest ever by a British fighter.

Kell Brook should not get too excited by Floyd Mayweather rumours | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/02/kell-brook-should-not-get-too-excited-at-floyd-mayweather-rumours>
Mayweather has this week attracted significant attention since hinting at 
plans for a comeback and speaking of talks with American television networks 
CBS and Showtime, and if Khan were to hold a middleweight title where the 
39-year-old is yet to fight, the potential money involved would be likely to 
get Mayweather’s attention.

Asked if he planned to pursue the former five-weight world champion in the 
event of defeating Álvarez both on Saturday and after the Mexican had exercised 
his rematch clause, however, Khan said: “Do I want to fight Floyd Mayweather 
with all the messing around he’s given me?

“He messed me around a lot so I don’t think I’d take that fight. He messed me 
around, so I’d probably treat him the same way.

“Floyd’s probably missing not having his picture on the MGM. He must see my 
picture and Canelo’s picture and think: ‘People have forgotten about me.’ As 
soon as you say you’re retired, we do forget about the people who say that.

“Mayweather’s feeling that now, he’s feeling like no one’s talking about him, 
that he’s old news, and maybe that’s why he’s trying to get everyone supporting 
him again by saying: ‘I want to make a comeback.’ Whatever Mayweather says, let 
him say it.”

It was when Khan’s very public pursuits of Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao 
failed that the advice he was receiving was questioned.

The team guiding his career, including father Shah, was criticised when it 
stalled during that period but they have since delivered the Álvarez fight, 
which Khan believes vindicates the faith he has shown in them.

“If I look at my career financially, I think it’s one of the best careers any 
fighter’s had,” said the 29-year-old. “I could stop now and I’d be very happy 
with my whole career. Boxing’s a business, and I’ve got a great team around me 
who have been looking after me in that sense.

“My team’s done a great job with me, they’ve put me in the right direction. 
I’ve been around since 2004 in the Olympics. We’re still going strong now in 
2016: my family have been great, my team’s been amazing, they’ve kept me on the 
right track.

“I was looking at the Mayweather fight, I was looking at the Pacquiao fight, 
and they didn’t happen, I’m fighting now against Canelo where it’s a huge 
fight. I’ve always wanted to be in a big fight like this.”
 