
Amir Khan has not ruled out the prospect of a blockbuster British super-fight 
withRicky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton>. The boxer 
believes such a contest would be "bigger" than last Saturday's David 
Haye-Dereck Chisora bout, though the 25-year-old is intent first on a rematch 
with Danny Garcia in December after his defeat at the weekend. While Hatton, 
the former light-welterweight and welterweight world champion, is thought to be 
considering a comeback, he might also consider the intriguing option of 
training Khan.

Regarding a potential match with Hatton, Khan said: "I don't think Ricky will 
want to fight us. I try to avoid the Ricky fight but you never know. It'd be a 
huge British fight and I don't think we've had a British fight like that. It 
would be bigger than the Dereck and David fight but who knows? For the moment 
I'm more focused on the Garcia fight because what burns me is that you know you 
made a mistake and you know what mistake you made."

After Garcia's fourth-round knockout of Khan in Las Vegas that won his WBA 
light-welterweight belt the Philadelphian signalled he would not want a 
rematch. But Khan believes Golden Boy, which promotes both of them, may find a 
way to make it happen. Khan said: "I know he doesn't want to but Golden Boy 
have shown there is a way of trapping you in there and getting you that fight 
by cornering you. I didn't want to fight [Marcos] Maidana [in 2010] that time 
but in a way I was trapped in a corner: I thought to myself, 'I never want to 
give up my titles so I will take the fight' because I was cornered.

"So the same thing, [if] he is in the corner there, he'll have to take the 
fight. No fighter likes to vacate titles so, if Garcia doesn't want to fight 
me, he might have to vacate the titles which I think is very bad. Let's see 
what happens."

Though Hatton is retired, he has recently begun gym work, with it being 
understood some exercises are being undertaken that would usually only be part 
of his pre-fight routine. He has not fought since losing to Manny Pacquiao, who 
is also trained by Khan's coach, Freddie Roach.

Though Hatton's spokesman would not be drawn regarding a potential comeback, 
he did say that the 33-year-old is now a coach and would not be averse to 
considering training Khan, who has already decided to hire a defensive coach 
and over the coming weeks will consider whether to stay with Roach.

"A lot of people just see Hatton the boxer as opposed to Hatton the trainer 
and, bearing in mind he's just got his first European champion in Sergey 
Rabchenko and he's only been at it for six months and he's got a European 
champion already, who knows?" Hatton's spokesman said.

Khan lost to Garcia after being drawn into a slug-out with the Philadelphian.

If he were to meet Garcia again, he said he would do things differently. "I'd 
just take my time. One thing about me is that my training, my sparring, is so 
fast and I'm too explosive for my own good and [have] too much heart," Khan 
said. "I would take a step back and just start boxing and seeing things more 
instead of rushing and taking loads of shots. Why fight like an amateur? It was 
in the back of my mind that I shouldn't do this but then I thought its working 
for me [so far] so I'm going to stick to it."
 