
Normal service was resumed as Rangers finally made Berwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/berwick> pay for their temerity and 
earned themselves a home fourth-round tie against Hibernian on Saturday.

The Wee Rangers had continued where they left off last week with another brave 
performance in this replay but then goals from Lorenzo Amoruso, Bert Konterman 
and Shota Arveladze in 10 second-half minutes ended the dream and stopped the
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager Alex McLeish's 
43rd birthday from becoming a nightmare.

In the first half Berwick heaped more embarrassment on their illustrious 
namesakes and without too much stress, such was the paucity of the home team's 
pedestrian effort.

The Ibrox side began brightly enough and a timely interception from Alan Neill 
thwarted Amoruso, Stephen Hughes headed over and Arveladze fired wide. But when 
that flurry failed to bring the expected goal Rangers retreated into a shell.

That in turn allowed Berwick to become a little more adventurous and twice 
they went close. After 15 minutes Amoruso rushed to stop Craig Feroz taking 
advantage of a Konterman blunder and four minutes later there was an 
astonishing let-off for the Premier League team.

The referee Dougie McDonald decided a Konterman clearance that ended up with 
Stefan Klos was a pass-back but from an outstanding position at the angle of 
the six-yard box Marc Anthony touched the ball back to Darren Smith, whose shot 
cannoned off the wall.

It was a measure of Rangers' desperation that Ronald de Boer and Billy Dodds 
came on for Tony Vidmar and Michal Mols for the second half. But Rangers were 
still playing hopeful football.

Yet an optimistic drive from Amoruso after 59 minutes brought the 
breakthrough, following a Gerry Farrell foul on Neil McCann which earned the 
roadsweeper a booking.

Their second goal, eight minutes later, was almost identical - a Farrell foul 
on McCann, a touch each from Barry Ferguson and De Boer, and a long shot from 
Konterman.

The third was another goal from distance as Arveladze took a pass from McCann 
to beat Willie McCulloch, who got both hands to the ball but could not keep it 
out.
 