 Evolution or revolution? Next month's elections in Scotland and Wales will set 
off a process in which central government and the Westminster parliament will 
progressively surrender old powers and responsibilities on a quite astonishing 
scale.
Scotland will get full-blooded home rule, Wales a watered-down version. If 
negotiations succeed,Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> will be included as well. The 
beginnings are also emerging of a pattern of regional government for the 
English: so far in terms of regional government offices with no sign yet of 
elected assemblies, but those may follow in time. And if Britain goes into the 
European Monetary Union, that will signal its entry into a process whose 
effects could in time be more revolutionary still. The last year of our century 
will thus take its place in the catalogue of events which have changed the 
constitutional landscape of Britain and the nature and powers of its 
parliament. It is a long and insalubrious story, in which for the most part 
events moved majestically forward on a lavish tide of sleaze, with virtually 
every episode until this one reflecting a theme: the English getting their way, 
and the rest putting up with it.

Convenient marriage

The marriage of England and Wales came first, transacted by Henry VIII, a 
Tudor (and therefore Welsh), in 1536. The legislation was put through a 
parliament which had no Welsh members. In any case, the official (English) 
version was that nothing had happened. Wales had always been joined with 
England: this act was merely confirming that fact. Unlike the subsequent 
marriages in this series, this one provoked little resentment. 'As from that 
moment, as by a charm,' wrote Edmund Burke in 1780, 'the tumults subsided... 
peace, order and civilisation followed in the train of liberty.' 'For 
centuries,' says a modern historian, 'the "union" was considered to be an 
unmixed blessing toWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.'

 The marriage of England and Scotland in the 1707 act of union might logically 
have been completed a century earlier. In 1603 James VI of Scotland became 
James I of England. English and Scottish commissioners were set to work to 
devise a system of union, but their work came to nothing and the project was 
lost in the press of more vivid events. There followed civil war and a real 
revolution which abolished the king, abolished the lords, and in time shut down 
the Commons. Initially the union was fractured. After the execution of Charles 
I the Scots crowned his son at Scone. But Oliver Cromwell swiftly brought them 
under control.

 The restoration of 1660 which brought back the monarchy also re-established 
parliament, which in 1688 deposed James II in favour of William and Mary. That 
put the union of England and Scotland firmly back on the agenda. England, which 
feared a Scottish attempt to call back the Stuarts, and a Scots alliance with 
France, embarked on a course of coaxing mixed with coercion. Negotiations were 
rigged. Of 31 Scottish commissioners, only three had opposed a union in the 
Scottish parliament. The ambitious and deeply contentious enterprise was 
lubricated by sleaze. Bribes and sweeteners were enthusiastically offered and 
snatched at.

 The Scots succeeded in keeping their legal and judicial systems but elsewhere 
were short-changed. The English outnumbered the Scots by roughly five to one. 
Yet the Scots were forced to make do with 15 peers against England's 190, and 
45 commoners against England's 513 a ratio in each case of 12 to 1. But the 
Scottish parliament voted itself out of existence. 'There's ane end of ane auld 
sang,' said the Scottish Lord Chancellor.

 A new political entity, Great Britain, had been created. There were wild 
celebrations in London: in Scotland, days of fasting and humiliation were 
declared in many parishes. Thirty-one white whales, it was fearfully said, had 
been washed up dead on the banks of the Forth.

Bad omens

 And such omens were not out of place. Trade advantages failed to materialise: 
instead came taxes which damaged Scottish industry. The kirk, apprehensive 
throughout, got what it feared: its protector, the Scots privy council, was 
swept away. When Scots complained at Westminster, one English MP explained the 
new facts of life: Scotland was now subject to England, and must therefore be 
governed by English laws. In 1713 a motion in the lords to rescind the union 
was supported by every Scottish member, Whig and Tory alike. But the English 
outvoted them.

 Ireland was given the union treatment in 1800 in response to that country's 
rebelliousness. Everything else had been tried everything else had failed. By 
an act of union, the trublesome, alienated Catholics of Ireland would cease to 
be a majority, and become a mere minority within the union. If Ireland lost its 
former freedom to govern itself, it lost very little. The executive in Dublin 
had invariably done as London told it. The Irish parliament (from which 
Catholics, of course, were excluded) had been for much of the time a poor, 
uninfluential creature. Initially it said no to union, but the sweeteners 
started to flow and in time it said yes. And so the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Ireland came into being on January 1 1801. William Pitt wanted, 
once the deal was concluded, to give the Catholics rights long been confined to 
Protestants: George III declared it unthinkable (whereupon Pitt resigned).

 Pitt's solution proved to be no more appropriate or effective than those 
which preceded it. It did not tranquillise Ireland. And few had foreseen the 
consequences of having 100 Irish MPs at Westminster. By the end of the century, 
two bills for Irish home rule had been tried and lost. Part of the case was 
idealistic: to let the Irish govern themselves, though within a United Kingdom 
framework. But another attraction was to extirpate the difficult, wrangling, 
obstructive Irish MPs from the UK parliament. The reduction of the powers of 
the lords in 1911 made home rule possible. A bill was enacted, but frozen 
because of the war. The Irish did not wait. Nationalist MPs elected in December 
1918 refused to come to Westminster and met, as the Dail, in Dublin instead.

 The home rule bill of 1920 sought to create subordinate parliaments for 
Belfast and Dublin. But the 1921 treaty which sent up the Irish free state 
disposed of all that. The home rule solution was reserved for the north, whose 
Protestants had so long and fiercely resisted it. Thus was born yet another 
constitutional concoction: the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland . Since then we have had further evolutions, some of them, in terms of 
the changes they mean in the way we govern ourselves, revolutionary. By joining 
the European Community in 1973, we assented (though the implications were 
muffled) to a progressive transfer of power upwards to Brussels.

Surrender of power

 Thus in a quite exceptional spasm of self-abnegation the British government 
and parliament are simultaneously surrendering power upwards to Brussels and 
downwards to Scotland and Wales. Also, if things work out, on a limited scale 
to a Northern Ireland which lost its right to home rule in 1973 with abolition 
of its parliament at Stormont. The changes happening now reverse previous 
practice. Before, through most of this history, things were done at the behest 
of the English, and largely for English advantage. This time, it has been the 
other constituent parts of the kingdom that have forced the pace. And this 
time, it has all been done without the old inducements of money, honours and 
favours.

 Evolution or revolution? It is still too early to say. Will some 21st century 
Edmund Burke be able to write of Scottish devolution: 'as from that moment, as 
by a charm, the tumults subsided... peace, order and civilisation followed in 
the train of liberty'? Or will Scottish devolution prove to be the slippery 
slope that has long been warned about, setting up an inexorable pressure for 
Scottish secession from the UK? If dead whales arewashed up on the shores of 
the Firth of Forth on the night of May 6, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown will know 
what to expect.
 