
Andre Savelio has refused to draw a line under his time at St Helens but 
admits he is not sure what the future holds for him at his hometown club once 
his loan spell atCastleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> has 
concluded.

Savelio was widely regarded as one of Super League’s brightest talents last 
year, after a breakthrough season which saw him make almost 30 appearances to 
become a pivotal part of Keiron Cunningham’s side in 2015. Yet this year the 
21-year-old has been forced to look elsewhere for regular action, eventually 
joining the Tigers on loan last month.

Savelio made his debut in their victory against Wakefield a fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/wakefield-castleford-super-league-match-report>
 and will again feature on Friday night as they travel to the league leaders 
Hull FC looking to keep their top-four hopes alive – but Savelio, still under 
contract at the Saints next season, is non-committal over where he will be 
playing in 2017.

Catalans Dragons’ alarming slide continues as Castleford seal Super 8s spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/castleford-tigers-catalans-dragons-super-league-match-report>
“I’m refusing to think about next year,” he said. “I’m sure at the end of the 
year when it comes to having a sit-down we’ll come to some form of agreement 
regarding how we go about next year. I need to be playing to be happy because I 
get a bit down when I’m not playing, so if I get my chance back at Saints 
great, or whether it’s somewhere else, we’ll just see.”

Savelio insists he was in the best shape of his career heading into this 
season but a lack of opportunities in his preferred position of second-row 
hindered his progression at Saints to the point where he began to look 
elsewhere. However, the chance to play under a man well regarded by many within 
rugby league, the Castleford coach Daryl Powell, has now given him the 
opportunity he craved.

“I desperately need game-time,” he added. “Unfortunately, for whatever reason, 
that just wasn’t happening at St Helens. I spoke a couple of times to Mike Rush 
[theSt Helens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sthelens> chief executive] who 
was really good and he didn’t want me to leave, but I couldn’t see a chance 
cropping up where I wanted to play.

“I was being utilised as a prop and I just wasn’t confident playing there: I 
wanted a chance out wide. I know I’ve trained harder than last year and I’m in 
better shape than I’ve ever been, but things just didn’t click at Saints.

“Keiron was covered for back-rowers and I felt if I looked around I’d get a 
chance somewhere. I actually mentioned to my management that I’d like to play 
under Daryl Powell; my old man played against him and he said that if he 
coaches like he played he’d be great for me.”

Savelio marked his debut under Powell with a try as Castleford remained in the 
hunt for the play-off semi-finals with victory against Wakefield. Seven points 
adrift of the fourth-placed Saints heading into the Super 8s, Castleford’s 
top-four hopes have been written off by many, but the 21-year-old insists it is 
still an achievable goal.

He said: “It’s nowhere near over in terms of making the semis. If we can go 
six from seven, who knows? It’s going to take results falling our way but 
there’s always a chance as long as it’s mathematically possible. Hull are 
playing well but if we can get the win it would really give our season a 
boost.” Powell will welcome back Denny Solomona, the competition’s top 
try-scorer, as well as Rangi Chase and Lee Jewitt for the trip to the KCOM 
Stadium.
 