
Portsmouth are popular visitors in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> – and not just because 
they have won away only once, in August. The lower they slide the more their 
away support is appreciated and it was there in numbers at top-of-the table 
Wycombe Wanderers. Surprisingly, perhaps, the goalless draw satisfied both 
managers.

Pompey had gone eight games without a win anywhere and slumped to 18th, only 
two points from a relegation place. They remain there but, with four of those 
below winning, defeat would have dropped them to 21st. They were fortunate that
Wycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe>, though unbeaten in 10 
games, had won only twice in seven, in which they had scored only five goals. 
Shrewsbury and Burton overtook them at the top with victories.

Five seasons ago this fixture would have been inconceivable. Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> were in the Premier League, 
having played in Europe the previous year as FA Cup winners. Three relegations 
in four seasons, each aided by points deducted for administration, brought them 
together for the first time last season. By then Pompey had followed Wycombe’s 
example of 2012 and achieved ownership by supporters’ trust. Their first league 
meeting in 2013 ended after 45 minutes when Fratton Park was flooded. This 
season the crowd there of 16,171 was the highest Wycombe had enjoyed in the 
division.

Even then, when they drew 1-1, it was hard to imagine the current position. 
Portsmouth had started as they ended last season, when Andy Awford, already in 
the club’s hall of fame as a 300-match player, came in with seven games left, 
won five then drew the last two and lifted them from 22nd to 13th. On the last 
day Wycombe won at Torquay to avert a return to the Conference after 21 years, 
and stood by Gareth Ainsworth. There was a happy reunion on Saturday – Gary 
Waddock, his predecessor who took him to Adams Park as a player, is now 
assistant to Awford.

At the end of a match that in a goal-to-goal gale seldom reached the heights 
except in ballooning clearances, the managers agreed it was a game of two 
halves. Wycombe were woeful into the wind when Matt Tubbs, newly on loan at 
Portsmouth from Bournemouth, twice failed to beat Matt Ingram one-on-one. The 
goalkeeper had to save more sharply from Jed Wallace who, in both directions, 
maintained propulsion as the one in a 4‑3‑1-2. Though Wycombe controlled the 
second half, they came closest to scoring in the first when Joe Jacobson hit 
the bar and Sam Wood headed Peter Murphy’s cross wide.

Wycombe missed the creativity of their injured captain and leading scorer, 
Paul Hayes, and have sold Josh Scowen to Barnsley to make good the loss of 
income from Wasps’ tenancy. “The process of this club is stability, then 
success,” said Ainsworth. “The wind kept blowing things back down our throats. 
Elusive today that final touch but we’ll take a point.” He was pleased with a 
fifth clean sheet in six. A creative winger in his day, he still registers as a 
player just in case in a tiny squad – No40 last year, 41 this, to match his age.

Awford, on the back of a watery vote of confidence, said: “The table doesn’t 
lie but we were an attacking threat and should have won on chances.” The local 
paper’s poll on whether to keep him split 50-50. The travelling fans heartened 
him to the end and echo. “I’ve had that support ever since I walked into the 
club,” he said. But, if it all turns into a hall of shame, the Conference will 
welcome his Portsmouth.
 