
Dunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> can dare to 
dream. Given their woeful home record, Jim Jefferies and his players could only 
– and just about – relax when sent three goals ahead by Andy Kirk with 13 
minutes left remaining to play.

It is a sad indictment of Hibernian's season that they are now just three 
points ahead of bottom-placed Dunfermline in the Scottish Premier League before 
facing St Mirren . This eventually comfortable Dunfermline win overAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> was their first at East End 
Park in this league campaign and ensures Hibs' thoughts must remain on a 
relegation struggle rather than their upcoming Scottish Cup final.

It would rank among the finest achievements of Jefferies' career if he could 
complete an overhaul of Dunfermline's fortunes sufficiently to preserve their 
top-flight status. When arriving at the club in March, Jefferies looked to be 
presiding over certain candidates for the drop. What has followed is not quite 
a rousing renaissance, but the manager has avoided defeat in three games out of 
five.

While Dunfermline are due credit for finally ending their barren run on home 
soil – a Kirk double and goal from Joe Cardle ensured that – it would be remiss 
to ignore Aberdeen's abject showing. Words can barely describe how poor 
Aberdeen were here, with the unusually meagre support they brought to Fife an 
indication that their season cannot end quickly enough. Unfortunately for 
Aberdeen, such troubles are hardly new. Scottish football unquestionably 
benefits from a strong Aberdeen and the following such a scenario would 
command. Sadly, there is no hint whatsoever of them returning to anything even 
close to their former, impressive status.

Dunfermline's lack of early confidence was hardly a surprise. Their hitherto 
dismal home record is largely on account of the former manager, Jim McIntyre, 
making the common mistake of believing SPL survival could be guaranteed with a 
First Division defence.

Coming into this fixture, Dunfermline had conceded 42 league goals at home and 
a staggering 76 in total. Their goal difference of minus 40 compared to the 
dreadful but not quite so poor minus 29 of Hibs has to be taken into the 
relegation equation.

Here, Dunfermline were aided for long spells by Aberdeen's latest tepid 
attacking display. For a second season in a row, the Aberdeen managed Craig 
Brown has insisted those at his disposal have proved themselves not good enough 
to improve football fortunes in the north east. A Scottish Cup semi-final loss 
to Hibs earlier this month ended Aberdeen's season in all-but name.

To claim the first half was a non-event would represent kind sentiment. 
Dunfermline were handed an opportunity after Jamie Langfield was penalised for 
picking up a Gavin Rae back pass; the resultant free-kick was played into 
Martin Hardie's path but the veteran screwed his shot wide.

During the interval, it would have been reasonable for Jefferies to point out 
to his team just how desperate Aberdeen were. With their first attack of the 
second period, the hosts duly claimed the lead.

Cardle, who had been the one Dunfermline player displaying the kind of pace 
and guile which troubled the visiting defence, cut inside Ryan Jack and Josh 
Magennis before slamming a shot beyond Jamie Langfield. Aberdeen had earlier 
been lax when attempting to clear a long Alex Keddie pass.

Cardle played a part in the second goal. The winger's free-kick found the head 
of Kirk, who nodded home. Again, the Aberdeen back line was clearly culpable.

For the away side, worse was to follow. Fraser Fyvie attempted a backpass to 
Langfield which proved too short; Kirk nipped in to claim a Dunfermline third 
despite the goalkeeper's best attempts to keep the ball from his net.

Aberdeen had offered nothing in attack all afternoon. Any form of comeback was 
never likely.
 