
Not since Muhammad Ali entertained his battalion of media admirers with 
unprecedented wit and charm in the 60s and 70s has a world heavyweight champion 
seemed so disarmingly comfortable in his skin asAnthony Joshua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua> on the eve of battle. He 
does not perform like Ali, but open, engaging, regular laughter is his calling 
card, and the prospect of sharing a ring with a dangerous if lightly regarded 
challenger, Eric Molina, here on Saturday night seems as threatening to him as 
a passing bird.

Anthony Joshua shuns table-throwing but admits ‘this is fighting not tennis’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/anthony-joshua-eric-molina-table-throwing>
“I’m going to make him look like a novice,” was the extent of his aggression 
when he shared a platform with the exceedingly respectful American on Thursday, 
and again at the weigh-in on Friday when they went through the obligatory 
staring routine … then shook hands. Joshua scaled 17st 11lb, a stone heavier 
than his opponent.

How at odds was all this with the weighing of the British heavyweight 
tearaways Dereck Chisora (17st 12lb) and Dillian Whyte (17st 8lb), who had to 
be separated by an hour afterChisora threw a table at Whyte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/dereck-chisora-throws-table-dillian-whyte-british-boxing-heavyweight-title-press-conference>
 earlier in the week, earning a two-year suspended sentence and a £25,000 fine, 
plus £5,000 costs. It seems like a storm that has passed. Their fight, an 
eliminator for the WBC world title, might well be an anti-climax.

Joshua, meanwhile, knows the prize for beating Molina will be a showdown with 
the former champion Wladimir Klitschko at Wembley on 29 April. “Yeah, I’ve been 
winning,” the IBF champion says, looking back on his run of 17 stoppage 
victories, “but now it is up to me to start adding the names. It’s like an 
Olympic cycle: in 2013 I turned pro, so in 2017 Klitschko should be my gold 
medal fight.”

Molina was respectful of his opponent, saying: “He’s getting everything he 
deserves, I’ve got a lot of respect for him. He’s bringing excitement to the 
heavyweight division so, whatever it is, I’m grateful to be here to have my 
opportunity to fight him. He thinks it’s going to be an easy night, the whole 
world thinks it’s going to be an easy night. So my most powerful weapon is the 
element of surprise.”

His friend and mentor, Oliver McCall, brought just that with him to Wembley 16 
years ago when he knocked out Lennox Lewis in the second round to win the WBC 
title.

“Oliver came across to me six years ago,” Molina says. “He guided me through 
some of his mind-frame of his first fight against Lewis [who stopped him in the 
second round of an emotional rematch in Las Vegas three years later]. He’s a 
great guy – and what a great moment it was for heavyweight boxing. History has 
a moment now to repeat itself.”

While it is a moment that is likely to pass Molina by before the bout reaches 
half way, he insists: “Just because all you guys sit here and believe my shot 
is this small, I can’t sleep at night and think it’s small. I’ve got to think 
it’s ginormous.

Boxing brawls, junior Joe Cole, plus Bob Paisley – This is Your Life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/boxing-brawls-junior-joe-cole-plus-bob-paisley-this-is-your-life>
“The whole world is against me. This is nothing new to me. You guys will never 
sit here and interview another heavyweight who’s come from 0-1. None of it 
fazes me. I’ve proved all the media wrong.”

The disastrous start in boxing Molina alludes to was a first-round knockout at 
the hands of a similarly ambitious young heavyweight called Ashanti Jordan in 
Las Vegas in 2007. Both were fighting professionally for the first time. Molina 
was counted out in one minute and 45 seconds of a four-rounder. Jordan went on 
a 10-fight winning streak before losing to unbeaten Joe “The Future” Hanks two 
years later, and retired. The Future, like Jordan, is now The Past, quitting on 
his dream two years ago after two losses – one of them to Andy Ruiz Jr, who 
overnight was challenging Joe Parker for the vacant WBO version of the 
heavyweight title.

Molina, 34, is still standing after three defeats, the latest of them in June 
last year, when he got up three times but not the fourth when the WBC champion, 
Deontay Wilder, beat him in nine rounds.

He gives himself the same chance against Joshua as McCall was given against 
Lewis in 1994, adding: “If I came over here with 28 wins and just five 
knockouts, I’d be in trouble. But I’ve knocked out a lot of opponents [19 in 25 
wins]. If I was coming here without that in my bank I’d be in trouble.”

Nice as he is, trouble is what he’s in.
 