
Celtic's trip to Motherwell on Sunday always had more significance for Neil 
Lennon than this visit ofRennes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes>.

Still, the Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager can 
take heart from the manner in which his patchwork team recovered from 
Saturday's dismal home draw with Hibs. They also fought back from a goal behind.

What Celtic conceded in technical ability to the French side – and that was 
plenty – they made up for with commitment. Lennon needs similar effort levels 
if Celtic are to claw themselves closer to Rangers on the domestic front.

Progression from Group I remains possible for Celtic. Their opponents last 
night played the last four minutes with 10 men after Yann M'Vila picked up a 
second booking. Celtic would, however, swap progress in Europe for success 
closer to home. The first step with that in mind is seeing off Motherwell, who 
sit ahead of Lennon's men in the SPL.

Lennon's unsuccessful quest for consistency of selection was highlighted by 
the fact Glenn Loovens here became the eighth player already this season to 
captain Celtic. Amid a raft of injuries, this was a makeshift home line-up. It 
was also one which got off to the worst possible start. A corner which Celtic 
needn't have conceded resulted in Kader Mangane heading home Julien Féret's 
low, powerful cross.

Almost 10 years ago to the very day, Lennon formed part of a Celtic team which 
defeated Juventus in the Champions League. A decade on, the hosts spent the 
early exchanges as clearly second best to an athletic, threatening Rennes side.

A goalkeeping blunder allowed Celtic to restore parity. There seemed little 
menace in a long-range shot from James Forrest, yet Benoit Costil could only 
parry the attempt to the feet of Anthony Stokes, who slotted into an empty net. 
That goal steadied Celtic, with Forrest particularly prominent for the 
remainder of the first half. It was Stokes who sent them ahead, after some 
brilliantly route one stuff. Fraser Forster's goal kick was flicked on by 
Georgios Samaras, Stokes collecting the ball before offering a fine, angled 
finish.

Loovens was an enforced withdrawl at the interval, meaning a Celtic debut for 
the teenager Marcus Fraser and an addition to Lennon's casualty list. The 
replacement and his defensive colleagues looked on anxiously as Victor Montano 
somehow headed over the Celtic crossbar after an hour.

The impressive Victor Wanyama offered a Celtic response, with a shot which 
flew just wide. Forster then tipped Youssouf Hadji's attempt over the bar, 
before turning a header from the same player wide.

Gary Hooper endorsed the victory, playing a one-two with Samaras before 
slotting under Costil.
 