
Anthony Crolla has vowed to target Jorge Linares’ vulnerable streak by 
pressuring him from the opening bell during Saturday’s WBA lightweight title 
fight.

Linares, who represents Crolla’s toughest opponent to date, was once 
considered one of the sport’s coming talents and compared to Oscar De La Hoya.

Tyson Fury v Wladimir Klitschko rematch set to be called off again – reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-called-off>
His technical ability, however, has often been undermined by the perceived 
lack of composure that significantly contributed to his three professional 
defeats.

In his May 2015 WBC title defence against Kevin Mitchell, he again appeared 
fragile in the opening rounds and suffered a knockdown in the fifth before 
recovering to stop his challenger in the 10th.

Crolla believes the 31-year-old retains that vulnerability and told Sky Sports 
News: “I’ve got to stamp my authority and gain that little bit of respect from 
him early on.

“I have got to be patient but it’s a very different fight from Ismael Barroso 
[whom Crolla stopped in eight rounds in May]. Linares will be much smarter so I 
can’t be too patient.

“Certainly of late the shots to the body have been kind to us. It’s certainly 
part of my game but that’s not something I’ll be looking for straight away 
because he’s got a great team around him and they’ll have studied me.

“You’re going to see a bit of everything – a chess match at times and a bit of 
a brawling slugfest at times.”

Saturday’s fight, at the Manchester Arena, has also been compared to that in 
June 2005 between Ricky Hatton and Kostya Tszyu, one in which a passionate 
crowd appeared influential.

That victory proved the finest of Hatton’s career and, for all the Manchester 
fight scene’s success since, he remains its highest-profile figure.

“That was not only one of the greatest nights in Manchester boxing but in 
British boxing so to even be compared means an awful lot,” said Crolla, 29, who 
on Friday outweighed Linares by three ounces when he tipped the scales at 9st 
8lb 5oz.

“Win on Saturday and it’ll be put me on the big, big stage, which is something 
I really want. I’m going to be that superstar.”
 