
The promoter Eddie Hearn is determined Anthony Joshua will defend his IBF 
heavyweight title in Manchester on 10 December, whether it is againstWladimir 
Klitschko <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> or another 
fighter.

Anthony Joshua close to confirming December fight with Wladimir Klitschko
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-joshua-wladimir-klitschko-boxing>
Joshua and Klitschko had agreed terms on a world heavyweight title unification 
bout but the contest has been thrown into doubt over issues with the 
sanctioning bodies. Klitschko is reportedly reluctant to fight without at least 
one of the WBA or WBO titles on the line – and both organisations are yet to 
confirm this will be the case.

With suggestions that Klitschko has now lined up an alternative fight in 
Germany, Hearn confirmed he is looking at other options for Joshua should the 
multimillion pound fight against the Ukrainian fail to materialise.

“With the hold-up from the WBA, we need a little more time, so regardless of 
if it’s Klitschko or not, AJ will return on 10 December in Manchester,” Hearn 
said in an interview with Sky Sports.

“We are beginning discussions with other opponents now while crossing our 
fingers that Klitschko takes the fight, regardless of how many belts are on the 
line. In an ideal world, there would be as many belts as possible on the line, 
but I hope he takes up the challenge rather than a soft touch in Germany.”

Klitschko has been without a title since losing them to Tyson Fury last year 
and has a number of options with the WBA and WBO belts now vacant.

One possibility is that the Ukrainian will agree instead to fight 
highly-ranked Joseph Parker for the WBO belt in Germany - which is arguably an 
easier option than facing Joshua in front of his home fans.

Should Joshua be forced to put a Klitschko fight on hold, he could instead 
face Bulgaria’s Kubrat Pulev or even fast-track a huge domestic British 
showdown with David Haye.
 