
Ants don't seem at first sight to have much to teach managers and economists. 
Yet they do. It is not the insects' legendary hard work that provides lessons 
but their ability to influence each other.

For example, ants secrete a chemical to inform peers that they have found 
food. When faced with a simple decision - say between two equally attractive 
sources of food - the colony as a whole exhibits remarkably complex behaviour. 
However long entomologists experiment, the choice fluctuates wildly and 
unpredictably: even individual ants keep changing their 'minds' about the 
foods' merits.

Still puzzled? It now appears that such things can be modelled mathematically, 
and that how the ants behave throws a lot of light on issues which economists 
and social scientists have struggled with for decades: why small-budget 
independent films, such as Four Weddings or Shakespeare in Love, can be hits 
while star-studded Hollywood mega-productions bomb, why stock markets are so 
volatile, how crime waves happen and how the VHS video format triumphed over 
Betamax.

The short-term performance of the economy as a whole, made up of individuals 
behaving unpredictably like the ants, shows fluctuations similar to an ant 
colony in motion - and in the short term is equally unpredictable.

Ants are the reference model in Paul Ormerod's new book, Butterfly Economics, 
published by Faber. Ormerod is a fiercely non-orthodox economist who believes 
his profession has a duty to fit theory to empirical evidence rather than the 
other way round.

He subtitles his book, A New General Theory of Social and Economic Behaviour. 
The bracketing of 'economic' and 'social' is key. For one of the glaring flaws 
of conventional economics, Ormerod believes, is its refusal to allow that 
economic actors, whether individuals or firms, influence each other.

Instead, economic theory assumes that each individual is completely free 
standing, with tastes that are rational and fixed to maximise each person's 
economic well-being.

Hence the importance of the ants. Once it is admitted that economic actors do 
interact, fluctuations in stock markets, film audiences, crime waves and 
economies as a whole become much easier to explain, although not to predict. As 
just one example: word-of-mouth can turn into a self-reinforcing mechanism, or 
snowball effect.

At some point, the snowball can deliver increasing returns in which the more 
of a market a company or technology has, the more it gets, sometimes to the 
point of complete dominance. VHS and Microsoft's Windows are examples.

Business is coming to terms with these principles in practice. Ormerod says it 
can have 'a better intuitive understanding of the complexity of the world than 
government does, and certainly than most academic economists'.

This is one reason for the otherwise perplexing fact that most business people 
take little notice of economists, even though their subject matter is the same. 
Ormerod's book has heavy-duty maths to back up the argument. It is as witty and 
wide-ranging as it is rigorous, and provides excellent reasons for business and 
economics to start talking to each other again.

Ormerod aims to provide solid intellectual backing for the notion that biology 
is a more helpful metaphor for thinking about economies than the machine-like 
models of the past. As such, he supplies the essential aid for viewing the 
stream of more directly managerial offerings that are beginning to flow from 
the same basic idea.

One example is Kevin Kelly's New Rules for the New Economy (Fourth Estate).

Kelly, who wrote the influential Out of Control and is executive editor of 
Wired magazine, is a relentless 'new economy' enthusiast, and his 10 cool rules 
for life in the Internet age include: 'Embrace the swarm', 'Follow the free' 
and 'No harmony, all flux'. Although he claims to have consulted prominent 
economists, he has none of Ormerod's caustic rigour, and a glib-hip California 
style.

Yet with the benefit of Ormerod's foundations, it is possible to see why, 
under the hype, a good deal of what Kelly says makes sense.

For example, 'Embrace the swarm' has some fascinating descriptions of ant-type 
behaviour adopted by companies. In Mexico, a cement company has organised its 
fleet of delivery trucks in a flock that perpetually criss-crosses the town. 
When an order comes in, the drivers themselves schedule delivery, with the 
nearest making the drop.

Each movement is unpredictable and unplanned; as a whole the system is a 
marvel of self-regulating complexity.

Similarly, Japanese bullet trains use 'swarm technology' to solve complex 
scheduling problems where centralised control fails. Switching is done locally 
and autonomously, he says, with trains communicating among themselves like a 
swarm of ants.

Kelly well illustrates the importance of the power of a network to amplify the 
value of the bits attached to it, as in some of the Internet firms. Silicon 
Valley is a case of the network effect at work.

You may not agree all the way with Kelly's claim that the network economy will 
change and dwarf everything previously seen. After all, railways, electricity 
and the telephone are previous networks which have also radically changed the 
way business is done. Ormerod's ambitious attempt to provide a unifying theory 
for all social science has much more potential for long-term effect.

On the other hand, reading these two books together has a happy network effect 
of its own. For all their difference, the combined total of insight gained is 
greater than from the sum of the two parts: a happy example of increasing 
returns at individual level.

management@observer <http://management@observer.co.uk>
 