 The make-up of the new Welsh Assembly will be known by this afternoon, along 
with the answer to the crucial question of whether or not it includes Labour 
leader Alun Michael.
Mr Michael, Prime Minister Tony Blair's choice as First Secretary, is standing 
for election in the regional list for Mid and WestWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

 A BBC Wales election night poll of 4,000 voters projected that Labour would 
take between 29 and 33 of the 60 Welsh Assembly seats.

 Plaid Cymru was forecast to win between 14 and 18 seats, with the 
Conservatives between five and nine and the Liberal Democrats between four and 
eight.

 The BBC poll clearly makes the Welsh Nationalists the main threat to Labour 
and could deny Labour an overall majority in the Assembly.

 In the poll, Labour was given 45% in the first past the post constituency 
seats, with Plaid Cymru on 26%, Conservatives 14% and Lib Dems 12%.

 In the regional "top up" list seats, Labour had 41% support, with Plaid Cymru 
on 29%. Conservatives and Lib Dems were equally supported at 13%.

 Alun Michael's prospects of winning a seat in Mid and West Wales also look 
too close to call.

 But the vagaries of the complex voting system adopted for the Assembly 
elections may mean that Michael does not even win a seat, let alone become the 
body's leader.

 Although Labour campaign managers are confident Mr Michael will take his 
place as head of the 60-seat Assembly, nothing is certain until the complicated 
calculations of the new proportional representation system are complete.

 Mr Michael, number one on Labour's list, could miss out depending on voting 
patterns in eight constituencies which form the Mid and West Wales electoral 
region.

 Labour is keen to avoid a third leadership battle on the lines of the 
divisive drawn-out contests which variously involved Mr Michael and his fellow 
MPs Rhodri Morgan and Ron Davies, both of whom are standing for the Assembly.

 If Mr Michael fails to win a seat, an Assembly leader is expected to be 
swiftly chosen by a ballot among Labour Assembly members and the 30 members of 
the Welsh party executive.

 Counting of the Welsh Assembly votes was beginning across Wales at 9.30am 
this morning, with the first results expected about noon.

 Newly-elected Assembly members will convene informally for the first time 
next Tuesday at their temporary home - a converted office block in the Cardiff 
Bay dockland area.

 The first proceedings take place the following day, when key decisions are 
taken to appoint a Presiding Officer, equivalent to the Commons Speaker.

 The Queen, accompanied by Prince Phillip and the Prince of Wales, will 
officially open the Assembly in a ceremony on May 26.

 Unlike the Scottish Parliament, the Assembly has no law-making or tax-varying 
powers.

 But from July 1 it will have a £7 billion budget at its disposal and take 
over responsibility for a wide range of decisions on health, education, jobs, 
agriculture and the environment.

 Backbench members will earn a salary of £34,438 a year under a recommendation 
by the Senior Salaries Review Board - less than their counterparts in the 
Scottish Parliament and Northern Ireland Assembly.

 If Mr Michael becomes First Secretary he can expect nearly £100,000, although 
he has said he will forego some of his salary. If elected, he would resign his 
current Cabinet post of Welsh Secretary after a short handover period.

 The Assembly is expected to cost up to £20m a year to run.
 