
The Archers’ writing team had originally planned to kill off Rob Titchener, 
the husband in the show’s domestic abuse storyline that has gripped the nation, 
its editor has revealed.

Last night, in the first hour-long episode in the BBC Radio 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> drama’s 65-year history, a jury 
decided that Titchener’s wife, Helen, was not guilty of attempted murder after 
she stabbed her husband. It was the climax of a three-year storyline of 
emotional and physical abuse that sparked a national debate on the issue.

'Frighteningly relevant and superbly handled': readers on the Archers' verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/frighteningly-relevant-and-superbly-handled-readers-on-the-archers-verdict>
Editor Sean O’Connor told the Today programme: “When we first started thinking 
about the story we were going to kill Rob … the legal advisers said if you do 
that it’ll be much cleaner, it’ll be quicker, you’ll definitely get Helen off.

“So we deliberately decided to use the dirtier route and not have him die, 
because now they are umbilically linked together as long as they have those 
children together, so I think they have another 20 to 30 years of the story.”

Sunday night’s episode hinted at this. A custody battle is due to take place 
on 14 September and at the end of the episode Helen had a chilling run-in with 
Rob. “Did you think you could tell all those lies about me and I’d just 
disappear?” he said. “Well, you might have fooled everyone else, but we both 
know the truth … You haven’t got rid of me. As long as we have a child 
together, you never will.”

The topic of domestic abuse was not a new one for the Archers, O’Connor 
pointed out: the very first episode of the farming drama, broadcast in 1950, 
included Peggy leaving her abusive, alcoholic husband Jack.

Millions of fans of the show tuned in on Sunday to the deliberations of the 
jury at Borchester crown court before the verdict was handed down. #thearchers 
was the top trending Twitter hashtag during the show and #freehelen has been 
trending all week.

Listeners heard evidence during the five-day trial from the defence arguing 
that she acted in self-defence after months of mental and physical abuse and 
due to the need to protect her five-year-old son, Henry, who was present during 
the stabbing. The prosecution portrayed her as unstable and volatile.

The episode was praised by Polly Neate, the chief executive of Women’s Aid, 
for the way the jurors deliberated the verdict. “I get into a lot of 
conversations as you can imagine about domestic abuse and about women and men 
and abusive relationships. I thought the range of views expressed were very 
typical.

Louiza Patikas: ‘I’ve read scripts and thought, I don’t want this to happen to 
Helen – I can’t bear it’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/09/louiza-patikas-ive-read-scripts-and-thought-i-dont-want-this-to-happen-to-helen-i-cant-bear-it>
“Helen was jolly lucky to have someone like Jacqui in the jury, but it’s not 
surprising that there would have been jurors with personal experience of 
domestic abuse because the vast majority of us know someone who has been 
affected even if we don’t realise it.

“There were some people in the jury who understood coercive control and 
understood domestic abuse and what I really hope what this storyline will mean 
is that in future for women there might more jurors who are more likely to 
understand the issues. It’s as basic as that. It’s awareness that saves lives 
when it comes to domestic abuse, which is why this storyline has been 
overwhelmingly positive.”

The Helen Titchener fund 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/helentitchener>, set up by a fan of the 
show, Paul Trueman, reached its target of £150,000 as the episode was on air. 
The money raised will go to Refuge, the domestic violence-support charity.

The episode was O’Connor’s last at the show. He had expected the storyline to 
be “quite big”, he said, but had not realised how powerful social media would 
be in generating debate, with Twitter picking up on subtle aspects of Rob’s 
control over Helen very early on in the storyline. “It’s the audience who have 
made it a success,” he said.
 