
In Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, 138 
union members at the German Creek coal operation have been striking since 
August. Anglo American, the coal mine owners, have been using increasing 
amounts of labour hire workers there. Last month, under the cover of a 
restructure, 82 of the German Creek’s workforce were made redundant. Of the 47 
permanent workers terminated, only one was not a union member. What a 
coincidence.

As is, presumably, that while firing one cohort of permanent workers, Anglo 
American seems to have been hiring fresh casuals. Local state LaborMP Jim 
Pearce has been fighting the sacked workers’ corner 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-10/mine-workers-redundant-central-qld-mine-mp-jim-pearce-says/8012026>
. “As they are told they no longer have a job, a labour hire company will be 
driving casual workers through the gate to replace those who have been dumped,” 
he told Queensland parliament at the end of November, “dumped because Anglo 
Coal can do just that.” How much can Anglo American do? The CFMEU spokesperson 
told me the families of redundant workers will be obliged to move out from 
their on-site housing ... on Boxing Day.

Don't let the election distract you from what's happening to workers | Van 
Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/dont-let-the-election-distract-you-from-whats-happening-to-workers>
The sacked workers at German Creek will be fighting their terminations but 
they’re not fighting alone. Stories of brutal managerial “restructures” that 
outsource, subcontract or casualise workers to smash rates of pay and 
conditions are told around the country. It took 181 days on a picket and a 
national consumer boycott for theCUB55 electricians and machinists to win their 
jobs back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/cub-55-workers-have-won-all-demands-in-industrial-dispute-says-union>
 from subcontractors at the Carlton United Brewery in Melbourne.



We’ve become so used to these tales from blue collar communities, that hearing 
that there are similar industrial confrontations taking place in the “ivory 
towers” of academia comes as a surprise. But in Australia’s universities, we’re 
seeing unprecedented terminations of agreements, stripped conditions, pay cuts, 
legal intimidation of union officials and insistence upon nefarious clauses to 
terminate employment in the case of “threatening” a brand’s reputation.

I’d suggest to those whose minds swirl with visions of flowing-robed Oxford 
dons galloping under sandstone arches and eccentric professors marking a few 
papers between sips of tea visit Murdoch University in Perth. An industrial 
stoush as nasty as any other boiled over on 9 December when, after seven months 
of failed negotiation of a new enterprise agreement, the university applied to 
the Fair Work Commission to terminate the enterprise agreement with its staff, 
reducing industrial protection of university workers to the bare-bones standard 
of the modern award.

According to the National Tertiary Education Union 
<http://www.nteu.org.au/wa/article/Union-outraged-as-Murdoch-University-seeks-to-cancel-enterprise-agreement-19278>
, if the action taken by the university is successful, Murdoch will have the 
capacity to inflict wage cuts of 25%-39%, a cut to redundancy entitlements by a 
third for academics and up to 80% for other staff, the removal of any workload 
regulation, the elimination of paid parental leave and an end to the right of 
academic freedom. TheMurdoch University Provost Andrew Taggart said 
<http://www.communitynews.com.au/melville-times/news/murdoch-university-in-bid-to-cut-wages-of-academic-and-general-staff/>
 the termination of the agreement was made in order to move past the impasse 
and that the university seeks “employment conditions that provide for 
flexibility and agility to take advantage of new opportunities.”

 If by “new opportunities” he means “to exploit staff”, he’s bang on. 
Workplace casualisation has exploded to 50% of the academic workforce across 
the Australian sector, NTEU spokesperson Gabe Gooding told me. “In Murdoch’s 
present collective agreement there are some commitments to casuals that would 
disappear: the right to facilities, library cards, email accounts, internet 
access, and payment when they have to attend induction sessions,” she told me. 
“They would no longer be guaranteed.”

The writer Ursula K Le Guin once described universities as the place where 
“the aristocracy had sent their sons ... conferring superiority on the 
institution. Nowadays ... the university conferred superiority on the man”. 
Forget “superiority”, how can even basic educational standards be met if a 
teacher doesn’t even have the “flexibility and agility” of a room to meet a 
student in? “We’re supposed to do everything online now, because it’s cheaper,” 
said Gooding, and added that resulting low morale is a malaise in the 
university sector that expands far beyond Murdoch.

How did it possibly get to this? “It’s like boiling a frog, isn’t it?” Gooding 
said, “It was accelerated by the continued underfunding of the sector, and the 
need to do more with less. So management will always take the cheaper option 
and with it the option that allows it to take more managerial control.” One of 
the provisions Murdoch is seeking to remove is the right for casuals to request 
a review into whether their job is really casual. Gooding currently represents 
workers who’ve been casual for as long as 15 years. “Doesn’t really sound that 
casual, does it?” she said.

“The culture of managerialism you can impose when you have your employees in 
insecure work threatens the core and function of universities as critics and 
conscience of society,” Gooding added. “Casual employees are not going to stick 
their hands up, say what they must and demand what they should, because they 
worry about losing their jobs.”

Britain’s shame: the people who are homeless, even though they’re in work | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/working-homeless-britain-economy-minimum-wage-zero-hours>
The words mirror my conversation earlier in the day with the CFMEU 
spokesperson representing German Creek who said that contract workers are 
unlikely to raise concerns due to fear of reprisal from the company. In an 
environment where 17 cases of black lung disease have been discovered in 
Queensland in the past year, silence from employees in coal mines – which 
self-regulate exposure to coal dust – can be deadly. “An increase in 
casualisation in this workforce means a decrease in occupational health and 
safety conditions,” he said.

It’s hard to ignore the correlation between the communities. As removed as the 
experience of academics may seem from coal miners, or beer brewers, precedents 
that allow agreements to be eroded and casualisation to run rampant has dire 
effects for all workers. Gooding can see it: “They’re using the same tactics,” 
she says. “They’ve put themselves in the same category. We’ve seen an email 
from a senior manager to another senior manager that says ‘we must remove union 
control from the agreement’.”

I remember my visit to the “community protest” for the CUB55 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/dont-let-the-election-distract-you-from-whats-happening-to-workers>
 when the dispute began back in June, and the placard those workers were 
holding aloft reading “Are you next?” I look at what’s happening at German 
Creek and at Murdoch University and I think: anyone could be next.

Van Badham is vice-president of the MEAA, Victoria
 