
A lot has been said these past few weeks about grammar, and to what level 
children should be taught it. I’m not about to wade in. But as someone who 
makes her living from words, all I can tell you is that even now I still 
desperately wish my own was better. Unfortunately, my secondary school 
preferred to take us on day trips to sexual health clinics than to teach us 
grammar, so while I struggle not at all with the spelling of gonorrhoea, 
correlative conjunctions and the rest remain a mystery to me.

Fry and Kirton always have the answer, and yet they never make me feel like a 
fool for not having known it myself

Does this matter? Yes. I noticed it first when I left school, and tried to 
learn another language quickly: those with good, formal grammar didn’t struggle 
as I did. And I still feel it now. Sometimes, I can’t quite work out what’s 
wrong with a sentence; it feels clotted, clunky, and I don’t have the know-how 
to fix it quickly. Even worse, I don’t get the gerund jokes inGeoffrey Willans 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/molesworth.html>’s Molesworth stories.

What pitiful knowledge I do have comes mostly from a children’s book that 
belonged to my mother as a girl:Grammar Can Be Fun by Munro Leaf, which makes 
characters of such things as prepositions and pronouns (copies are to be found 
onabebooks.co.uk 
<http://www.abebooks.co.uk/book-search/title/grammar-can-be-fun/author/munro-leaf/>
, and if you’re a desperate parent, I recommend it, old-fashioned though it 
undoubtedly is).

But on a shelf by my desk, I now keep a copy of Grammar for Grown-Ups 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/grammar-for-grown-ups.html> by Katherine Fry 
and Rowena Kirton, an incredibly useful book that I’ve owned ever since it was 
published in 2012. It wants for an index, which is exasperating, but it has 
also saved my skin on countless occasions. Let’s say I’m reviewing a book, and 
I find myself thinking: what’s the name of the tense this cool cat has used for 
his first novel? Or perhaps, while writing a proposal to some serious literary 
personage or other, I get into a state about “who” versus “whom”. Fry and 
Kirton always have the answer, and yet they never make me feel like a fool for 
not having known it myself. They’re not rigid, these two. They know our 
language is changing. But they also understand the sense of power that comes 
with knowing how to write clearly and well – a feeling they want democratically 
to share.
 