
Embattled Australian Rugby League Commission chairman John Grant has ruled out 
standing down over his deteriorating relationship withNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> clubs. Disgruntled clubs have called an 
emergency general meeting in a bid to oust Grant amid failed discussions on 
their disputed funding, and an emergency general meeting pencilled in for 20 
December will test the support of the chairman, with clubs requiring a minimum 
14 votes to remove him.

Grant on Tuesday denied his position was untenable, indicating he would stay 
in the position ahead of the meeting as he attempts to bring the 16 clubs back 
to negotiation table. “Will I step down? It’s not being considered at the 
moment,” said Grant, whose seven fellow directors have unanimously thrown their 
support behind their boss.

Clubs call for no-confidence vote in NRL chairman John Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/clubs-no-confidence-vote-nrl-chairman-grant>
He re-iterated his reasons for reneging on a funding model agreed to last 
year, citing the need to fund the grassroots, women’s game, participation and 
digital exposure. “My job is to make sure that this game prospers,” he said. 
“Part of that is for the clubs to prosper, but the other part is for us to make 
sure we get the funds back into the grassroots.”

Grant was confident clubs would accept his position. They return to the 
negotiating table sometime this week. “We have all the information. We’re able 
to see a position that we think they will see as well,” he said. “We all need 
to focus on the future. We need to stop personalising it. We need to start 
thinking about the game and our clubs. In fact, there’s an obligation with the 
chairs of clubs to do the right thing by their clubs. Funding is short.”

Grant declined to comment on whether he could get the numbers to survive a 
vote on his position, something that appears unlikely currently despite seven 
fellow ARLC directors offering their support on Tuesday. “It is highly 
disappointing that they [clubs] have taken this course of action given John’s 
unwavering commitment to the game over the last five years,” the commissioners 
said.

“John’s appointment as inaugural chair recognised his qualities as a 
successful business man, who as a former Kangaroo, was ideally suited to take 
the game forward. He has since undertaken his role without bias and with the 
best interests of the game as his priority at all times.”
 