
When memories of Ronald Koeman’s first win at Goodison Park have faded in 
others’ minds they will linger long with one Evertonian. Ross Barkley captained 
his home-town club for the first time and marked a poignant occasion with a 
goal and the game’s outstanding performance aslast season’s semi-finalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/27/manchester-city-everton-capital-one-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 ensured smooth progress. They have not exited at this stage since 2001 and 
while Yeovil have a proud giantkilling pedigree, they have not eliminated 
top-flight opposition from any competition since 1949. A gulf of 79 league 
places proved too wide to bridge for Yeovil, a club who could name only five 
substitutes.

Liverpool rout Burton with Daniel Sturridge double icing on the cake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/burton-albion-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
It illustrated the differing worlds they occupy that Everton could give maiden 
starts to two newcomers acquired for a combined fee of £39m before bringing 
Arouna Koné off the bench. The Ivorian struck twice in nine minutes to give the 
scoreline an unflattering sheen for Yeovil. “I was proud of the players,” said 
their manager,Darren Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/yeovil-town-manager-darren-way-fortunate-to-be-alive-everton-efl-cup>
. “You can’t be too critical.”

Nor did Koeman get carried away. The night’s tribute came instead from Barkley 
and was dedicated to the scout who discovered him, who passed away last week. 
The 22-year-old celebrated his goal with by unveiling a T-shirt reading “RIP 
Sid Benson”.

Barkley owed his elevation from the ranks to the absence of the rested trio of 
Phil Jagielka, Gareth Barry and Leighton Baines.

Nevertheless, it was an indication of a newly conferred seniority at a club 
that parted company with four long-serving players in the summer. “If you look 
around the team, maybe the best option was Ross to be captain,” Koeman 
explained. “It means a lot to him. He is a big Evertonian who started in the 
academy.”

Barkley was emblematic of Roberto Martínez’s Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton>, a player whose attacking verve 
was immediately evident but who lost his way in the traumatic end to the 
Spaniard’s reign. A troubled summer followed, with Barkley the only midfielder 
or forward in England’s Euro 2016 squad who was not granted a minute of action 
but he is already looking a beneficiary of Koeman’s appointment. He has scored 
with a free-kick in both games at Goodison Park.

This time, unlike against Tottenham Hotspur, there was no doubt he was 
shooting. He spotted the Yeovil goalkeeper Artur Krysiak had strayed too far 
towards his far post and capitalised. That goal, Everton’s second, was overdue, 
Koeman felt.

Their opener pleased him. “A great team goal,” the Dutchman said. Aaron Lennon 
was left with a tap-in when James McCarthy showed vision and incision with a 
sharp cutback following a defence-splitting pass from Romelu Lukaku. It proved 
the highlight of the Belgian’s night. He had an effort cleared off the line by 
Alex Lawless but was profligate in the extreme, betraying signs of rustiness as 
his longest drought in Everton colours extended to a 12th game. “Normally, when 
he is on his best level he will score at least one goal tonight but I am not 
worried,” Koeman said.

There have not been many occasions over the past three years when Koné has 
appeared the assured finisher and Lukaku has looked erratic in front of goal. 
This was one such night. The substitute emerged with a sense of purpose and 
drilled in Everton’s emphatic third goal before darting between defenders to 
poke in an injury-time fourth.

Four goals were accompanied by four new signings. All of Koeman’s recruits 
began, offering evidence of his rebuilding, as Ashley Williams and Yannick 
Bolasie made full debuts. The winger roamed with typical pace without exerting 
a decisive impact. The midfielder Idrissa Gueye added to the impression that 
his energetic style and combative approach will render him a crowd favourite. 
Williams could coast through his first start since Wales’ Euro 2016 semi-final 
and the goalkeeper, Maarten Stekelenburg, did not have a shot to save. After 
the talk of borrowing Joe Hart, he was not required. Instead Everton’s 
inspiration was one who has been at the club since he was 11.
 