
Arsène Wenger has responded to Arsenal's troubled start to the season by 
making a bid for the Rennes holding midfielder Yann M'Vila. The manager's 
attempt to strengthen his team came as hopes grew that Jack Wilshere will 
return from ankle trouble to face Udinese in Wednesday's pivotalChampions League
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> play-off second leg.

M'Vila, who has established himself as a regular in the France team, would 
cost £12m. The 21-year-old is under contract until 2015 butRennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> have allowed Wenger to talk to 
him. Arsenal's manager also has an interest in Sochaux's attacking midfielder 
Marvin Martin.

Wenger's immediate concern, though, is his midfield to face Udinese. Wilshere, 
who has not featured this season, had been considered a major doubt for the 
trip to north-eastern Italy, whereArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> will attempt to protect a 1-0 
lead and qualify for the group stage of Europe's elite competition for the 14th 
year in a row.

He left the Emirates Stadium after last Tuesday's first-leg against the 
Italian team with a foot in a protective boot and he missed the morale-sapping 
2-0 home defeat to Liverpool on Saturday, when the problems mounted for Wenger.

Wilshere, though, came back to training on Thursday and provided he suffers no 
reaction before the squad fly to Italy on Tuesday afternoon, he will board with 
them. "Jack has a chance to play," Wenger said. "He has trained Thursday, 
Friday, Saturday."

Wenger's attitude towards Wilshere will be coloured with caution but given the 
stakes at the Stadio Friuli, he will be tempted to press him into action. The 
manager was without nine players against Liverpool through injury and 
suspension, and he lost the centre-half Laurent Koscielny to a back spasm in 
the 16th minute.

He will be able to pick the midfielder Alex Song and the forward Gervinho, as 
their three-match bans apply only to domestic competitions, while the central 
defender Johan Djourou "has a chance", according to Wenger, of returning from a 
hamstring injury. The midfielder Emmanuel Frimpong, who was sent off against 
Liverpool and will be suspended for Sunday's league fixture at Manchester 
United, will also be available against Udinese.

The obvious solution to the club's personnel problems is for Wenger to 
strengthen in the transfer market, and many supporters at the Emirates were 
keen to remind the Frenchman of that. Wenger said that Arsenal had "the money 
to buy players, we are not short of money", and he rejected the notion that the 
more he was urged to spend, the less likely he would be to do so.

"People feel I'm stubborn … I'm not," Wenger added. "I just want to do the 
best for the team and to buy the right players. If I have shown one thing in 
the last 15 years, it's that I have bought good players here.

"What you forget is we have bought players. We have bought Gervinho, [Alex 
Oxlade-] Chamberlain, [Carl] Jenkinson, [Ryo] Miyaichi, and you will see during 
the season they are top-quality players. But at the moment, we have to give 
them some time.

"Overall, we will buy. We will bring experienced players as well. People just 
say 'buy' but it's to buy the right player which is difficult."
 