
So wheelchair rugby will not be funded for the Tokyo cycle. According to Liz 
Nicholl, the CEO of UK Sport, who gave me the news this morning, this is not 
because wheelchair rugby has no potential to medal in Tokyo, but because there 
is just not enough resource to go round.

The implications of this are significant – there is little or no likelihood 
that Great Britain will have a national wheelchair rugby team and certainly not 
one which can compete with the best in the world. GB is currently ranked fifth 
in the world and only lost to Australia, the Rio gold medallists, by two points 
in extra time.

Russian state doped more than 1,000 athletes and corrupted London 2012
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
Where does this leave the 2012 legacy? In 2012 wheelchair rugby had seven 
teams in the country and no real performance system in place. Since then the 
sport has grown to 22 teams and it continues to grow with new clubs in Norwich 
and Brighton about to come on line.

We are also now delivering programmes in military recovery centres, spinal 
injury units and as part of rugby foundations including Saracens, Gloucester 
and Exeter. We now have a BT-funded youth programme delivering across the 
country. Our GB athletes are role models for many communities.

Ayaz Bhuta, a young Muslim GB athlete, regularly speaks to schools and 
community groups in his Bolton community. The implications for athletes like 
Ayaz are stark – there will be no opportunity for him to realistically 
represent his country. Moreover, when his personal funding stops he will be 
trying to find other employment – not straightforward if you are a quadriplegic.

It is also a surprise that wheelchair rugby appears to be the only Paralympic 
sport that has not received funding. This would make more sense if the sport 
had not been in receipt of podium potential funding in the last cycle which in 
itself meant that it was understood that it was likely to take more than one 
cycle to medal. I think it is true to say that cycling took 12 years before it 
started to get the consistent medal success that it does today.

Badminton among sports to lose Tokyo 2020 funding from UK Sport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/badminton-archery-fencing-weightlifiting-wheelchair-rugby-olympic-funding-cut-uk-sport>
There is so much bad news in the press at the moment about sport – doping, 
safeguarding, bribery – yet our game is more than a sport, it is a rich 
community. Listen to the words of Luke White, a former GB squad member and now 
a coach who as a result of amniotic band syndrome suffered multiple limb 
amputations. “It’s difficult to overstate the impact that wheelchair rugby has 
had on me. Within a very short space of time I went from playing no sport and 
being physically inactive to playing wheelchair rugby at least three times a 
week and doing gym work too. My perception of what kind of person I was and 
what I was capable of changed dramatically and I was much happier with my new 
perception. Furthermore, the change was permanent”.

This is a sport worth the small investment being requested. Frankly if you 
removed £100k from each of the sports that have been awarded huge sums you 
would more than meet the £2m that was the wheelchair investment requested from 
UK Sport.
 