 A Welsh assembly will continue the process of devolution by passing power on 
from Cardiff to North and Mid Wales, the Education Secretary, David Blunkett, 
said yesterday.
Acknowledging continuing unease about the north-south linguistic and cultural 
divide inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> , Mr Blunkett insisted 
the Cardiff-based assembly would provide voices for communities in the north 
and centre which were not heard in the Welsh Office.

 'There must be more decentralisation,' he said. 'It does not matter, in the 
age of new technology, when you can press a button and find out what is going 
on, where you hold the assembly meetings. The issue that matters is whether we 
can see the process of devolution continue.'

 The north-south issue, which has emerged as a leading factor in the run-up to 
Thursday's devolution referendum, was raised when Mr Blunkett answered 
questions from sixth-formers at Welshpool high school.

 Welshpool, a largely English-speaking market town in the midst of 
Welsh-speaking sheep-farming country, lies in the very centre of Wales , on the 
fault line of mutual suspicion between north and south.

 English speakers, especially in prosperous parts of the south, often resent 
what they see as preferential treatment given to Welsh-speaking areas. In 
northern and central Wales , there is bitterness about the relative affluence 
of the south, and about a continuing influx of English people.

 Even among the ultra-respectful pupils of Welshpool high, the issue is 
clearly topical. Rachel Konerzewski put it politely but firmly to the Secretary 
of State that, from Mid Wales , Cardiff was seen as inaccessible. It was feared 
that South Wales would dominate the new assembly.

 Mr Blunkett said that although the structures overseen by the Welsh Office 
would not be moved, on cost grounds, the new assembly would provide a voice, 
and influence, to the people of the north and centre.

 He said he found it extraordinary that some people were arguing against 
devolution . 'Britain must be the only country in the world where, if you offer 
people more power, there are those who argue it is a bad thing,' he said. The 
English lacked confidence about their own culture, and that was why they 
questioned the ability of others to run their own affairs.

 The session raised few difficulties for Mr Blunkett, one of the few 
heavyweight campaigners to visit this sparsely populated area. Most of the 
questions dealt with education, and there was no evidence of passionate views 
for or against the assembly.

 The sixth-formers seemed to be taking much the same line as the excellent 
local paper, the County Times, which led last week's edition with speculation 
about a new superstore, and relegated devolution to a ritual Yes-No debate on 
page seven.

 The letters page was more heated, with six out of seven writers favouring a 
Yes vote. The dissident, David Rowlands of Llanerfyl, wrote of 'the serious 
risk that domination by a small corner of Wales will lead to the rest being 
starved of resources'.
 