
Australia’s Tom Burton has been made to wait to begin his final assault for 
sailing gold after a lack of wind left insufficient time before sunset to 
complete the men’s laser-class competition.


 Burton, who said the postponement was “not a big surprise”, will now race on 
Tuesday as the only man who can prevent the current leader, Croatia’s Tonci 
Stipanovic, from taking gold.

Burton is assured of a medal, but will need a strong performance to topple 
Stipanovic, and to ensure he does not slip down to the bronze position.

Anna Meares to take time to consider future after bowing out of Rio Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/anna-meares-to-take-time-to-consider-future-after-bowing-out-of-rio-games>
If Tuesday brings another medal-race cancellation, Laser and Laser Radial 
medals will go to the current leaders after 10 opening round races. Croatia’s 
Stipanovic would win gold, Burton silver and New Zealand’s Sam Meech bronze.

Australia’s 49er sailors did manage to see some action on Monday, getting back 
into gold medal contention even though it is unlikely they will catch 
favourites New Zealand.

Nathan Outteridge and Iain Jensen sit third overall, 33 points behind Kiwis 
Peter Burling and Blair Tuke. The 49ers still have three races to go before the 
double-points gold medal race.


 There was disappointment at the quarter-final stages for both the women’s 
water polo and hockey teams.

The Stingers led at each break against Hungary but finished 8-8 at the end of 
regular time, before their European rivals won the shootout 5-4, while the 
Hockeyroos lost 4-2 to New Zealand in their last eight match-up.

Following on from the Kookaburras’ exit a day earlier – to the Netherlands – 
it is the first time in 32 years both Australian hockey teams have failed to 
make it past the quarter-final stage.

 On the athletics track, Madeline Heiner-Hills and Genevieve LaCaze both set 
personal bests to finish in the top 10 of the women’s 3000m steeplechase. 
Heiner-Hills was seventh and LaCaze ninth, with gold going to Ruth Jebet of 
Bahrain.

The promising Ella Nelson reached the semi-finals with a time of 22.66s that 
put her second in her heat, and 11th overall.

“I am so happy just to have completed that race, I haven’t raced since April 
so coming in here I was super nervous. I had to really think about my race plan 
last night and go through the motions,” she said. “I kind of forgot out there, 
I ran a bit scared so I am definitely going to improve on that for the semi. I 
think I could have won that heat.”

An impressive performance from discus thrower Dani Samuels has seen her 
qualify for the final, with her best throw of 64.46m the second farthest in her 
qualifying group.

The 2009 world champion appears back to her best despite difficult conditions 
in Rio which saw her first attempted throw slip from her hand amid heavy rain.

 Chelsea Gubecka finished 16th in the women’s marathon swimming event, having 
been in fourth spot at the 2.5km mark of the 10km swim off Copacabana beach 
before slipping to 14th by halfway.

In the cycling, a disastrous mid-event crash in the points race dashed Glenn 
O’Shea’s hopes of a medal in the men’s omnium, but despite the incident the 
Australian continued to finish seventh.

Fifth overall at London, O’Shea was looking to mount the dais, but had to 
settle for seventh place overall,behind Italian Elia Viviani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/mark-cavendish-silver-rio-olympics-cycling-omnium>
, with Great Britain’s Mark Cavendish grabbing silver, and defending Olympic 
champion Denmark’s Lasse Hansen settling for bronze.

In the women’s omnium Annette Edmondson was also in seventh place after three 
of six events. A fifth place finish in the elimination race sees Edmondson not 
far from fourth overall, with defending London 2012 gold medallist Laura Trott 
of Great Britain leading.

Edmondson, who finished with bronze in London, also trails American Sarah 
Hammer and Belgium’s Jolien D’Hoore, but has the time trial and flying lap 
disciplines yet to come.

In kayaking, Murray Stewart has qualified fastest for the men’s K1 1000m final 
on Tuesday night (AEST), after winning his semi-final. Stewart had come through 
his heat in second place, but only ninth fastest overall, but paddled well to 
ride down rival Portugal’s Fernando Pimenta.

Stewart was a part of Australia’s successful K4 1000m at London but missed the 
four-person team after suffering glandular fever at the national championships. 
The silver lining being that he now has the opportunity to race for individual 
gold.

In the women’s K2 500m event, Australian duo Alyce Burnett and Alyssa Bull 
qualified through to the final, following placing third in their semi-final. 
The duo face a tough task in running down Polish duo Karolina Naja and Beata 
Mikolajczyk who finished almost three seconds ahead of the young Australians.

And at the Greco-Roman wrestling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/greco-roman-wrestling-beasts-mijain-lopez-rio-2016>
 Ivan Popov has lost his opening bout to giant Swede Johan Magnus Euren in the 
men’s 130kg division. The Australian was no match for the London bronze 
medallist who had a 14kg weight advantage and registered very early points in a 
convincing first foray at these Games.

Stuck on six gold medals for two days, Australia sits in ninth place on the 
medals table.
 