
Australia winger Josh Mansour is out of the Four Nations after suffering a 
torn anterior cruciate ligament. The Penrith wideman had locked in one of the 
wing spots for Saturday’sFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> line-up to face New Zealand, 
but is set to return to Sydney after his worst fears were confirmed by a MRI 
scan.

Mansour scored twice and ran for a game-high 247 metres in the 54-12 win and 
was singled out for praise by coach Mal Meninga, who all but admitted he’d line 
up against the Kiwis in Coventry.

Kangaroos handed warm up game as Four Nations opener underwhelms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/29/australia-scotland-rugby-league-four-nations>
The 26-year-old fell to the ground during the latter stages of the team’s 
final training session at the St George’s Park complex in Staffordshire, in 
central England, and was taken from the field.

Mansour cried out in pain and he was helped from the field after an 
innocuous-looking collision with Josh Dugan towards the end of a small-sided 
game between squad members which was immediately stopped.

The setback is a crushing blow for Mansour, who suffered a long-term medial 
ligament injury two years ago, and was planning to go on honeymoon in Europe at 
the conclusion of the tour following his recent wedding.

Tournament rules do allow the option of adding a replacement player, but there 
are no immediate plans to supplement the 24-man squad.

The Kangaroos will leave Burton, which is the state of the art training base 
of the England football team, on Thursday and head to Birmingham. A win for 
either side will earn a spot in the final at Anfield on 20 November.

Meninga and his staff will now have to rethink their line-up, which will 
almost certainly see the return of Darius Boyd, Matt Scott, Greg Inglis and 
Johnathan Thurston, who were rested last Friday.

Sydney Roosters outside back Blake Ferguson was going to lose out to Mansour 
and Valentine Holmes, who sat out the Scotland match and will now keep his 
place in the team.

There has also been speculation Cooper Cronk may be rested to preserve him for 
the England fixture at London’s Olympic Stadium on 12 November. If the 
Melbourne five-eighth is left out, James Maloney would be in line to win his 
second cap after debuting against the Scots.

Meninga will name an extended 19-man squad on Thursday (Friday AEDT).
 