
Australian Tyler Wright won her maiden world surfing title sparking emotional 
scenes on the beach at Hossegor in France. The 22-year-old claimed the title 
when her only rival, America’s Courtney Conlogue, was toppled in the 
semi-finals on Wednesday.

Wright, who took out Tatiana Weston-Webb in her semi-final, would go on to 
lose to Conlogue’s conquerer, three-time world champion Carissa Moore, in the 
final. But it didn’t matter, as she did so as the world champion.

Bethany Hamilton: surfing with only one arm isn't as hard as beating the stigma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/25/bethany-hamilton-surfing-espy-award>
“There’s a lot that’s gone into this, a lot of hours. A lot of fun,” said 
Wright, who won four events this year. “I’m surprised I’m not coming, but it’ll 
come.”

The breakthrough victory caps a difficult 12 months for Wright, whose brother 
Owen has endured a very public recovery from a serious brain injury suffered 
while competing.

Less well known has been her private battles dealing with the death of her 
uncle, who she promised a world title to.

“There’s a lot of reasons why I set out to win this world title this year, a 
lot of reasons I didn’t mention to the public,” Wright said. “Last year was 
such a hectic year, even this year ... I lost an uncle and this was his last 
event that he ever saw me compete in.

“A lot of emotional moments but pretty much from that moment, I promised him 
I’d win a world title. And I did. And from that point, so many things happened 
this year. [My family] I just love them so much.”

Wright, who has won the past two titles at the Landes break, held a commanding 
lead heading into the season’s penultimate event but, despite reaching the 
final early on Wednesday, had to hold onto her victory dance until the final 
seconds of the second semi-final.

As she walked down the beach, and Conlogue’s final wave scores were read out 
over the loudspeaker, it became clear that the 24-year-old hadn’t done enough 
to reel in fellow American Moore.

It prompted Australia’s six-time world champion Stephanie Gilmore to give the 
new champion a hug before Wright broke away to raise her arms in triumph.
 