
Made coffee, ate a yogurt, read a feature on Taylor Swift, drank coffee, 
Googled New Zealand utility Lewis Brown (from Christchurch), trawled Twitter, 
liked stuff on Facebook, sent work emails, Googled Australia forward James 
Tamou (from Palmerston North). These are just some of the things I did while 
watching Australia beat New Zealand last Friday. It was that boring.

The 28,000 who almost filled Newcastle’s stadium experienced the numbing 
sensation 45,000 of us suffered at the second England-New Zealand test at 
Stratford last year. We all know the Kangaroos can play the game by numbers, 
but when did the Kiwis become so dull and lacking inspiration?

Kangaroos snap losing streak with Trans-Tasman Test shutout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/06/australia-v-new-zealand-test-match-report>
“There’s hardly anything to get excited about,” said bewildered co-commentator 
Phil Gould on Premier Sports. “If this is the best that this Australian 
combination can produce they’re kidding themselves if they think they’re going 
to win the World Cup next year with this side, given the talent not in the 
Kiwis side tonight. An ageing Australia team are just lumbering around. Gee 
whizz!”

New Zealand had excuses for their lacklustre display. The Absent Kiwis XIII 
looked awesome on paper. I saw a Missing New Zealand 17 that could win the NRL. 
But for his first Test, new Australia coach Mal Meninga appeared to have 
selected a side based on nostalgia, a Kangaroos team from a couple of years 
ago. There is a place for loyalty but Wayne Bennett must be hoping Meninga 
continues to pick so many veterans to take on an effervescent England in the 
autumn.

After 69 excruciatingly dull minutes, the stadium PA was so desperate to wake 
the crowd from their slumber that David Bowie’s Let’s Dance was put on at full 
volume as the game continued. According to Fox Sports, Australia half-backs 
Johnathan Thurston and Cooper Cronk are paid a combined salary of over £1m a 
year, with Cronk due a pay rise. Two of the world’s highest-paid players 
struggled to open up a second-string New Zealand defence.

Kangaroos face Kiwis in climate of international rugby league indifference | 
Paul Connolly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/06/kangaroos-face-kiwis-in-climate-of-international-rugby-league-indifference>
The good news is that we won’t have to suffer this too often in future. As the 
RLIF circulate their eight-year plan to interested broadcasters and potential 
sponsors, Australia’s Players Union reminded them that they are only committed 
to playing 24 games between 2018 and 2025. Once you strip out the World Cup and 
the new Intercontinental Cup, that could leave just the annual Trans-Tasman 
Test against the Kiwis. The Aussie stars will be given the fallow year they so 
desperately desire, maybe even two in each World Cup cycle.

And yet attendances and TV viewing figures are seriously strong for all 
representative rugby league down under. State of Origin accounted for three of 
the top five most-watched sports shows on Australian TV last year, with rugby 
league having seven entries in the top 20 of all TV shows watched in Australia. 
And last Friday, one in every hundred Australians watched the Jillaroos v Kiwi 
women’s test match. No wonder the new NRL broadcast deal is worth $400m a year. 
Maybe it will take England to beat the Kangaroos this autumn – and maybe even 
again in the World Cup – for the NRL to realise that international rugby league 
can be a license to print money if you commit to it for the long run. If Gould 
is right, that might well happen.

Clubcall: Hull FC

The Pacific Tests on Saturday, in which Papua New Guinea came from behind to 
beat Fiji 24-22 and Samoa held off Tonga 18-6 in front of over 15,000 raucous 
islanders at Parramatta, sounded far more fun. Sadly they were not on British 
TV this year. Incredibly, it was PNG’s first win away from home for over 15 
years! The second game was notable for the opposing teams both being captained 
by players from Hull FC: Samoa’s Frank Pritchard and Sika Manu for Tonga. 
Credit to the Airlie Birds that they agreed to this – although it may well have 
been in their contracts - at a time when you would have thought they might need 
them for the cup tie at St Helens. Instead, Hull’s pack steamrollered Saints 
without them.

That gladdened the heart of Hull FC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hull-fc>
 fanatic Adrian Durham, presenter of the nation’s biggest sports radio show, 
Drive on TalkSport. He will be hosting his Saturday show from St James’s Park 
at the Magic Weekend, with live coverage of the Hull derby on Sunday night.

If the RFL are thinking of a gimmick for the Magic Weekend, how about an 
all-Taylor super-heavyweight wrestling match between in-form giants Scott of 
Hull FC and Catalans’ Dave? I’d pay to watch that.

Foreign quota

There will be no league and cup double for Les Baby Dracs. After winning the 
Lord Derby Cup a month ago, Catalans Dragons’ reserve grade fell at the 
semi-final hurdle of the French Championship on Saturday, losing a thriller 
17-16 to favourites AS Carcassonne, while Limoux squeezed past Lezignan 22-18 
in the other semi, both played at neutral Foix. Starring for ASC was former 
Wakefield and Featherstone half-back Maxime Greseque, the French international 
rolling back the years at 35 to run the show.

The problems of having a reserve team competing against first teams – when you 
don’t know which star players will be at your disposal each week (rather like 
the junior partners in our duel-reg relationships) came to the fore as the 
Catalans faced ASC without the Dragons’ stars who have graced them in Elite 1 
this spring. For example, when they beat Limoux in the cup final they had 
Morgan Escare at full-back and Fouad Yaha on the wing. Les Canaris of 
Carcassonne now face Limoux in the Championship Final at Albi on 21 May.

Goal-line drop-out

Rugby league’s fourth estate are not great fans of Brian McDermott. They 
appreciate his quality as a coach and his unrivalled CV but they have sat 
through too many press conferences and awkward interviews to remain on his side.

Luke Gale leads Castleford to crushing victory over Leeds Rhinos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/12/leeds-castleford-super-league-match-report>
On Thursday night, after Leeds’ annihilation by Cas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/12/leeds-castleford-super-league-match-report>
, he was understandably ashen faced when facing the Sky cameras. Having gone 
out of the Challenge Cup at Huddersfield the week before, McDermott gave a 
thoroughly decent press conference. But when he spoke with Dave Woods on BBC 
Five Live Sports Extra, he answered most of Woods’ perfectly reasonable 
questions with “yes” or “no” before striding off and leaving a stunned Woods 
slack-jawed (by the sound of it).

“Well, that was short and sweet,” said the understated Woods. The last 
McDermott press conference I attended this season, following another defeat, he 
behaved similarly. After answering the first question reasonably, he said “nah” 
to the second and “possibly, but I doubt it” to third before getting up and 
rushing out. We know you are hurting badly, but your supporters deserve more, 
coach.

Fifth and last

Castleford’s record-breaking dismantling of Leeds on Thursday night made 
wistful viewing forLondon Broncos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-broncos> fans. Thirty of the first 34 
Cas points came from former Broncos players: man of the match Luke Dorn spent 
two spells at the club, Leeds academy product Luke Gale was an exciting 
half-back under McDermott in the capital, Kiwi winger Denny Solomona has 
continued his prolific and thrilling try-scoring in the West Riding, while Mike 
McMeeken (of Basingstoke) stood out yet again and veteran Matt Cook (junior 
club: Bedford) did a shift in the forwards.

Solomona, Cook and McMeeken were Broncos regulars during the dreadful 2014 
season in which they lost every game but one. Taking the Broncos’ top 17 
appearance-makers that season, 10 are now establishedSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> players and half-back flop Josh 
Drinkwater is now in the NRL with Wests Tigers. Four more are helping the 
Broncos challenge now at the top of the Championship.

So how did such a talented squad fail so dismally? Well, 24 of the squad were 
aged just 21 or under. Solomona arrived, aged 20, from Melbourne without a 
senior game to his name; James Greenwood had played twice for Wigan; McMeeken 
and Thomas Minns were teenagers. With some more experienced heads around them, 
it is hard not to wonder what London could have done. Dorn explained what Cas 
coach Daryl Powell has done for the London recruits: “He’s given them 
confidence and a game plan that best exploits their talents.” He certainly has.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 