
On the day when rugby league broke new ground in Coventry, it is clear some 
things in the sport will never change: Australia’s participation in major 
finals. There may still be an asterisk aside certain qualification for theFour 
Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/03/scotland-four-nations-developing-rugby-league-countries>
 final, but only a mathematical miracle will now prevent the Kangaroos from 
making it to Anfield later this month after victory of a very different kind in 
week two of the tournament.

Had New Zealand beaten the Kangaroos, it would have created a winner-takes-all 
scenario in London next week between England and Australia for a place in the 
final alongside the Kiwis.

Elliott Whitehead revives England in Four Nations after Scotland scare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/england-scotland-four-nations-rugby-league-match-report>
David Kidwell’s side certainly put up a real fight and a narrow defeat helps 
their case for qualification if it boils down to points difference – but in the 
end, as has been customary over the years, Australia simply found a way to win.

Much like last week against Scotland in Hull, the Kangaroos were 
near-faultless in the opening quarter – and that was the backbone for their 
victory. After 13 minutes they had surged into a 10-0 lead with two tries of 
the highest quality to Blake Ferguson and Johnathan Thurston.

The Kiwis did manage to stem the flurry of Australian points for the remainder 
of the half, however, but it was not until the second half when they were able 
to test the Kangaroos’ line properly themselves.

The Kiwis were shorn of possession throughout the first 40 minutes but after a 
penalty sprung them into Australian territory, their resolve earned them a 
reward when Solomone Kata barged over.

From there, New Zealand were suddenly on top and the side hunting points – but 
two penalties from the boot of Thurston settled the Kangaroos’ nerves soon 
after.

New Zealand, however, set up a grandstand finish when Shaun Johnson produced a 
wonderful piece of individual magic, laying the platform for Jordan Rapana to 
touch down – and Johnson almost did something even more extraordinary on the 
hooter when he danced through the Kangaroos’ line.

But the mercurial Kiwis’ scrum-half could not ground the ball, meaning his 
side fell desperately short.

It means that should they win by less than 30 points against Scotland on 
Friday, England know they merely have to beat Australia without points 
difference coming into play. That, however, is a far more daunting task than it 
sounds – and the Aussies are far more certain of their destiny.

NEW ZEALAND Kahu; Beale, Kata, Kenny-Dowall, Rapana; Leuluai, Johnson; 
Bromwich, Luke, Eastwood, Proctor, Harris, Taumalolo.Interchange Blair, Brown, 
Taupau, Ma’u.

Tries Kata, Rapana.

AUSTRALIA D Boyd; Ferguson, O’Neill, Inglis, Holmes; Morgan, Thurston; Scott, 
Smith, Woods, Cordner, Gillett, Merrin.Interchange S Boyd, Maloney, Klemmer, 
Thaiday.

Tries Ferguson, Thurston. Goals Thurston 3.

Referee B Cummins. Attendance 21,009.
 