
Annihilation, destruction, devastation – and that was just in the first half. 
Australia started theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> exactly as expected, crossing 
for six tries in a clinical first 40-minute spell and adding four in the second 
half to thrash Scotland 54-12.

There may have been some danger of complacency for the Kangaroos in a game 
that everyone forecast them to win easily but it was not to show itself on this 
cool night in Hull.

The green and gold were in imperious form, taking only four minutes to cross 
the line and then punishing every Scottish error with brutal efficiency in a 
10-try haul.

Rugby league Four Nations: team-by-team guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/rugby-league-four-nations-team-by-team-guide>
The Australians are in the UK to win back the Four Nations title they lost two 
years ago and to regain the No1 world ranking, currently held by New Zealand. 
They mean business and they certainly showed that in front of 5,337 fans at the 
KC Lightstream Stadium.

It was Blake Ferguson who got the first four-pointer of the night, taking 
several defenders over the line with him for a simple score.

Then Cameron Smith, equalling coach Mal Meninga’s record of 46 appearances for 
Australia, starting to take control and his side’s next try was one straight 
from the Melbourne Storm playbook.

Smith ran left and grubbered right perfectly into the path of his Storm 
teammate Cooper Cronk, who dived over for an easy second try.

The points were raining in as Sean Maloney was the next to touch down, 
followed by Cronk’s second and then a double by the winger Josh Mansour.

After 34 minutes a shell-shocked Scotland were staring down the barrel of a 
30-0 scoreline. But the Bravehearts, to their credit, lifted and finally broke 
the deadlock. The Kangaroos coughed up the ball near their line and Scotland 
zeroed in.

Their captain, Danny Brough, dinked in a kick behind the Australian line and 
his half-back partner, Ryan Brierley, was on the spot to score.

The try gave Scotland some respectability at the break but normal service 
resumed in the second half as Australia took only two minutes to notch their 
next try.

Josh Dugan, starved of possession in the first 40 minutes, received the ball 
in his own half and showed his speed to glide over from long range. But his 
night was over in the 53rd minute when he clashed heads with Scotland’s prop 
Luke Douglas.

Australia’s momentum started to slow and Scotland stemmed the bleeding for a 
while with some hearty defence. Brough almost grabbed a second try for Scotland 
after intercepting and broke away for 70 metres, before he was pulled down by 
Cronk. But an offload from Adam Walker soon after put Ben Kavanagh over to 
score.

The try gave Scottish spirits the lift they needed and tensions were raised as 
Adam Walker and David Klemmer got involved in some push and shove.

However, it was short-lived as Tyson Frizell, Michael Morgan and Jake 
Trbojevic crossed in the final 15 minutes for the Kangaroos’ final tries.

Australia Moylan; Mansour, O’Neill, Dugan, Ferguson; Maloney, Cronk; Woods, 
Smith, Klemmer, Thaiday, Frizell, Trbojevic.Interchange Friend, S Boyd, Merrin, 
Morgan.Tries Ferguson, Cronk 2, Maloney, Mansour 2, Dugan, Frizell, Morgan, 
TrbojevicGoals Maloney 7

Scotland Coote; Tierney, Aitken, Linnett, Russell; Brough, Brierley; A Walker, 
Hood, Douglas, Addy, Ferguson, Kavanagh.Interchange Hellewell, Powe-Hobbs, 
Brooks, McConnachieTries Brierley, Kavanagh Goals Brough 2 Referee Ben Thaler 
(RFL)Attendance 5,337
 