
The disappointment surrounding England’s failure to reach the Four Nations 
final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/england-australia-four-nations-match-report>
 is fresh in the memory but as one of the sport’s greatest players prepares for 
his final appearance in the UK on Sunday there is at least an opportunity to 
enjoy watching a master at work rather than be tormented by his talents all 
over again.

Johnathan Thurston’s time in England has been garlanded with success: a Four 
Nations winner twice in this country,a World Cup victory in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/30/new-zealand-australia-rugby-league-world-cup-final>
, victory in this year’s World Club Challenge with North Queensland, and now he 
lines up in the Four Nations final against New Zealand.

RFL hopes Four Nations final at Anfield will boost ticket sales after poor 
gates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/rugby-league-four-nations-final-ticket-sales-attendances-gates>
“When I retire, I’ll know I can sit back and look back with happiness at what 
I’ve achieved in England,” he said.

At a press conference before the final at Anfield, there was a queue as long 
as the Kop to speak to the North Queensland captain. Thurston laughed, joked 
and smiled his way through every interview. On Sunday several young rugby 
league fans will be lucky enough to grab the kicking cones he tosses into the 
crowd after each conversion. “I’ve really enjoyed myself every time I’ve played 
in this country,” he said.

“I’ve had so many special memories to cherish from playing in front of the 
English fans, who are just incredible. It’s completely different from back 
home, they sing all game and it’s quite a hostile environment to play in – I 
love that.”

There will be a long goodbye in Australia for the 33-year-old, surely 
culminating in him becoming only the ninth Immortal in rugby league history, 
but in the UK, local fans will get only one more glimpse of Thurston’s 
greatness.

“I think this will be the last time I play in this country – in fact, I know 
so. My goal is to play in the World Cup next year but I want to go out in this 
country with a bang. I’ve never lost a game in this country and some of my 
fondest memories in the green and gold have been in England.”

So many things remain the same about Australia since Mal Meninga’s arrival as 
coach, not least the fact that their dominance over England remains a constant. 
But while State of Origin remains the pinnacle for many Australian fans, 
Thurston is intent on putting the international game back on top before he bows 
out; victory on Sunday and becoming the world’s No1 side may go a long way to 
doing that.

“There’s no doubting that State of Origin is special but representing your 
country is the pinnacle of any sport, without doubt. I still get chills every 
time I see that jersey in the locker room that I get to pull on. It has so much 
history attached to it and as a playing group we’re trying to leave a legacy – 
starting this Sunday.”
 