
Australia secured netball’s Constellation Cup, beating a gutsy Silver Ferns 
49-45 on Thursday in the fourth and final Test in Invercargill. The Diamonds 
were all but assured of retaining the trophy for the sixth time in seven years, 
after winning the first and third Tests by 12-goal margins.

But the Kiwis rediscovered some of the fighting spirit which won them the 
second Test 53-51, closing to within two with a late turnover and less than a 
minute remaining.

Netball Australia announces Suncorp as new principal sponsor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/netball-australia-announce-suncorp-as-new-principle-sponsor>
They couldn’t maintain the run to the final whistle, leaving coach Janine 
Southby regretting lost chances. “I felt we had opportunities, and we could 
have actually taken it,” she said. “Unfortunately, we just didn’t have the 
connections on attack and the confidence to let the ball go forward at times, 
and that really hurt us.”

After bossing the midcourt in their 62-50 third Test win, the Australians were 
forced to work much harder. Retiring Diamonds captain Clare McMeniman, who 
partnered goal keeper Sharni Layton in the Australian circle, said the 
relatively low-scoring match was testament to strong defence from both teams.

“It was a very defensive game at both ends of the court and there were 
passages where the ball was coming up and back with no goals scored,” she said. 
“The defensive pressure the Silver Ferns put on tonight was pretty phenomenal. 
They were having a fly at the ball, confusing space, and they were doing a 
great job.”

But for much of the first quarter, it looked as though the Diamonds were going 
to pick up where they left off in Auckland. Layton and McMeniman shut down the 
circle, and pressure outside from Gabi Simpson and Kim Ravaillion forced a 
disjointed feed into Silver Ferns shooters Bailey Mes and Te Paea Selby-Rickit.

The Kiwis battled to stay in touch as Caitlin Bassett and Gretel Tippett shot 
100% to give the Australians a 13-9 lead after 15 minutes. A much tighter 
Silver Ferns through-court defence slowed down the Diamonds’ quick feed into 
Bassett in the second quarter, goal keeper Anna Harrison particularly effective 
in generating turnover ball with a series of deflections.

However, the introduction of 104-cap veteran Maria Tutaia for Selby-Rickit 
kickstarted something of a renaissance for the Kiwis, who reduced the 
Australian lead to 22-19 at half-time. The Diamonds also made a switch at goal 
attack midway through the second quarter, but Natalie Medhurst proved 
ineffective, and Gretel Tippett returned for the third spell.

Bassett again shouldered the bulk of the shooting duties, bagging 42 from 46, 
with Tippett contributing seven from 10.
 