
Losing to Australia is nothing new for England – and it is certainly nothing 
to be embarrassed about – but this time there seems a more pressing need for 
questions to be asked of the national side. On an afternoon when Wayne 
Bennett’s side had merely to avoid defeat to qualify for theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> final – against the same 
opponents – the fact that they trailed by four points at half-time to a team 
who had barely got out of first gear was an ominous warning of what would 
follow.

If England were competitive in the first half, the pressure was too much to 
bear in the second as the Kangaroos began to show their class. Tries for Greg 
Inglis, Matt Scott and Josh Dugan quickly turned a four-point gap into a 
22-point one from which England could not recover and Australia ran out 36-18 
winners and now face New Zealand in Sunday’s final at Anfield.

England, as in their narrow defeat by the Kiwis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/england-new-zealand-four-nations-match-report>
a fortnight earlier, had started well enough, going ahead via a penalty from 
Gareth Widdop and, after Johnathan Thurston had levelled to make it 2-2, they 
went back in front when Jermaine McGillvary touched down. At that point a 6-2 
lead was no less than England’s effort deserved.

But as half-time approached and the Australians began to find their rhythm, 
England began to toil under the increasing pressure. Blake Ferguson capitalised 
on an error from Mark Percival to level the scores again and from there 
Australia never trailed.

After failing to find touch with a penalty 30 seconds from half-time, a 
penalty conceded by Sam Burgess – “Sam gives away too many penalties, he needs 
to change that,” Bennett said post-match – afforded Thurston, who had converted 
Ferguson’s try, the opportunity to nudge the lead out to four. Given how they 
had been way below their best, that was a fairly grim warning for what was to 
follow.

After the break Inglis, Scott and Dugan quickly gave Australia an unassailable 
advantage. England, to their credit, rallied with tries from Widdop and Ryan 
Hall but two more Australia tries in response illustrated what people feared: 
England cannot get the better of the Kangaroos.

Bennett said afterwards England are capable of winning the World Cup next year 
– the work he does between now and then will determine how feasible that is 
after another year of failure and disappointment – and another demoralising 
postmortem is now all England and Bennett can look forward to.

So what now? For the Kangaroos and New Zealand it is the final while England 
take on a watching brief wondering, as they have so many times down the years, 
what if. And what of Bennett? Criticism of his approach to the media since his 
appointment as coach in February was met with a philosophy of “he’s here to win 
games”. Sadly Bennett is not doing that. Though Englandlimped to victory 
against France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/france-england-rugby-league-match-report>
 and Scotland, against the world’s top two they have failed again.

It is reasonable to question whether England have actually gone backwards 
since Steve McNamara’s departure. For all the hype surrounding Burgess’s return 
to international rugby league, he has failed to hit the heights that brought 
him universal acclaim before his switch to rugby union in October 2014– and 
England’s age-old problem at half-back remains unresolved.

Bennett’s decision to try a third different half-back pairing in the three 
games illustrates the point: nobody, not even the coach, knows the solution 
right now. The result, therefore, remains the same – and 12 months away from a 
World Cup England have once again shown they are not at the level of the 
world’s two best sides.

For all the effort and endeavour from England – and there was plenty – it was 
the same misgivings which cost them. The failure to find touch from routine 
penalties, the lacklustre discipline and the poor attacking play all combined 
to make an afternoon which had a distinctly familiar feeling to it. Some things 
in sport are destined never to change, and the more England play Australia, it 
looks as if their ability to beat the world champions is one of those examples.

“The job is a bit easier than I thought, believe it or not,” Bennett said. “I 
thought I’d have a lot more issues than this. England are capable of being a 
lot better than they are now, I know that much. They’re a lot closer than a lot 
of you guys realise. You just can’t get away with the mistakes at this level.”

England Lomax; McGillvary, Watkins, Percival, Hall; Brown, Widdop; Hill, 
Hodgson, Graham, Bateman, Whitehead, S Burgess.Interchange T Burgess, G 
Burgess, Cooper, Williams.

Tries McGillvary, Hall, Widdop Goals Widdop 2.

Australia Boyd; Holmes, Inglis, Dugan, Ferguson; Thurston, Cronk; Scott, 
Smith, Woods, Cordner, Gillett, Merrin.Interchange Klemmer, Morgan, Frizell, 
Thaiday.

Tries Ferguson, Inglis, Scott, Dugan, Gillett, Holmes Goals Thurston 6.

Referee R Hicks (Eng) Attendance 35,569.
 