
Sailor Tom Burton claimed Australia’s seventh gold medal of the Rio Olympics. 
Burton was in second going into the Laser class final, 10 points behind 
Croatian Tonci Stipanovic, and needed to finish five places in front of him to 
claim gold.

Elsewhere in the regatta, two of Australia’s other sailors, Jason Waterhouse 
and Lisa Darmanin, won silver in the Nacra 17. The pair finished second in the 
medal race after Argentina’s Santiago Lange and Cecilia Seroli overcame a bad 
start to claim gold.

'He got robbed': boxer Gary Russell's father claims Olympic bout was rigged
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/gary-antuanne-russell-boxing-fixing-allegations-rio-olympics>
“It feels great to win gold,” Burton said. “The amount of hours I have put 
into this, the sacrifices I have made; not going to my sister’s wedding, 
skipping the Opening Ceremony to try and get a good result and it’s all perfect 
now.”

The upset of the night came in the women’s basketball, with Australia leaving 
the Olympics without a medal for the first time in almost 30 years after a 
shock 73-71 loss to Serbia in the quarter-finals. The Opals went through the 
group stage undefeated only to be stunned by the world’s No14 team. Australia’s 
men will need to beat Lithuania to secure a semi-final slot.

“It will be even more difficult [than the group games]. We will be ready for 
that game,” said Boomers veteran David Andersen. “We have big targets. We are 
aiming for the medals. We feel confident. We have played good games and to get 
four wins is great but it doesn’t count if we go out in the quarter-finals.”

Kim Mickle’s Games ended in agony after the javelin thrower dislocated her 
shoulder and was taken from the Olympic Stadium to hospital. The 2014 
Commonwealth Games gold medallist’s shoulder popped out on her final effort in 
qualifying in the evening athletics session.

 In the high jump, there was disappointment for Brandon Starc, who couldn’t 
get over the 2.25m mark and bowed out early in the final, which was eventually 
won by Canada’s Derek Drouin, but there was better news in the long jump, where 
Brooke Stratton, the Australian record holder, made it through to the women’s 
final with a jump of 6.56m on her third attempt.

On the track, Ella Nelson ran a personal best in her first Olympics and came 
third in her 200m semi-final but missed out on qualification by the smallest of 
margins – just 0.01s. Still, the 22-year-old was delighted with her time of 
22.50s and said after the race, “It’s given me the confidence that I can do 
this on the world stage”. Lauren Wells also bowed out in the semi-finals of the 
400m hurdles.

There was bad news for Australian discus thrower Dani Samuels, who missed out 
on a medal by 44cm, finishing fourth in the women’s final. The 2009 world 
champion’s best throw of 64.90m wasn’t quite enough to overtake bronze 
medallist Denia Caballero from Cuba (65.34m).

Michelle Jenneke was eliminated in the opening round of the 100m hurdles after 
finishing sixth in her heat in 13.26 seconds, almost half a second slower than 
her personal best but Australian record holder Alana Boyd cleared 4.60m to 
progress to the women’s pole vault final.

On a disappointing day it the velodrome, Australian cyclist Annette Edmondson 
came in eighth place overall in the omnium, with 168 points, while Matthew 
Glaetzer also missed out on the medals in the keirin, having to settle for a 
place in the seventh to 12th race.

Sprint kayaker Murray Stewart faded to finish fourth in the men’s K1 1000m 
final. London gold medallist Murray was leading at the three-quarter mark but 
couldn’t hold on in the mad dash to the line. There was a heartbreaking end to 
the men’s swimming marathon. After leading the pack until the last turn, 
Australia’s Jarrod Poort has finished third last.

And in the equestrian, Australia bowed out of the team’s show jumping 
competition but Edwina Tops-Alexander and Matt Williams are still alive in the 
individual event. To reach Wednesday’s team final the Australians will need to 
finish the day in the top eight teams.

 