
As far as silly misnomers go, "Herbstmeisterschaft" (autumn championship) is 
on a par with Bild's "Pop-Titan Dieter Bohlen" (Modern Talking 
<http://www.amoeba.com/dynamic-images/blog/Eric_B/modern_talking.jpg>'s 
slightly less effeminate member does a poor Simon Cowell impersonation on the 
German X-Factor) and "Hoth", the snow-monster infested, Tauntaun-killing ice 
planet from The Empire Strikes Back.

No, this meisterschaft is patently not a real championship of any sorts. If it 
was, perennial runners-up Leverkusen, the club who would probably manage to 
botch a one-horse race, could not possibly have won it, of course. And the 
"autumn" bit is even more misleading, when the last round of matches before the 
winter break sees temperatures that range from "brrrrr" (-10C) to "sorry, I 
can't speak because my tongue just fell off" (-15C). Snow covered many pitches 
despite under-soil heating at the weekend, so the referees brought out orange 
balls that looked suspiciously like merchandise from the (now sadly defunct) 
summer holiday section ofwww.liverpoolfc.tv <http://www.liverpoolfc.tv>.

The serious broadsheets have for many years refused to acknowledge the 
existence of the Herbstmeisterschaft thingy altogether. But the popularity of 
the term among ordinary football folk has forced their hand: these days, 
everybody reads much into the table at the end of the first half of the season. 
"Leverkusen crowned, provisionally", wrote Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung after 
Bayer's 3-2 win over Gladbach cemented their position at the top, one point 
ahead of Schalke. Der Spiegel thought that "Neverkusen" could allow themselves 
some "title dreams instead of title trauma" for a change and Süddeutsche 
Zeitung congratulated the side for "breaking their mould" – and not finishing 
in second place.

The stats say that 67% of autumn champions end up winning the trophy in May, 
so the Matchday 17 positions do at least offer some vague hint. Neither 
Stuttgart (champions 2007) nor Wolfsburg (2009) were anywhere near the top at 
Christmas, however, and last year's first-half hotshots and league leaders 
Hoffenheim crashed down to seventh when the games resumed.

In Leverkusen they are convinced they have what it takes to go all the way. 
Their numbers are certainly impressive. Jupp Heynckes' team is the only 
unbeaten side in all three professional divisions in Germany. They have the 
best attack (35 goals) and best defence, along with Schalke (13 conceded). 
Bayer have consistently played the best, most aesthetically pleasing football 
as well and they have done so despite losing three or four key players to 
injuries in recent weeks. And their manager, Heynckes, at 64 years of age, has 
proved himself exactly the sort of relaxed, experienced operator and tactician 
that his young ensemble of skilled players desperately needed.

Against a resurgent Gladbach side, Leverkusen showed a bit of mettle, too. The 
visitor's Brazilian defender Dante, who could literally put Marouane Fellaini 
in the shade with histremendous afro 
<http://www.hln.be/static/FOTO/pe/3/14/10/large_709900.jpg>, gave Borussia a 
2-1 lead after the break but Eren Derdiyok equalised before the magnificent 
Toni Kroos scored his second goal to secure all three points. "If we had lost 
this lead, the whole league would have slagged us off," said the striker Stefan 
Kiessling. Sporting director Rudi Völler took heart from the result, too: "This 
has sent a message to the competition."

Franz Beckenbauer praised Kroos as "the next Michael Ballack" on Sunday but 
that shouldn't fool anyone – the kid, on loan from Bayern until the summer, 
really is very good. Kroos, 19, has been the Bundesliga's most impressive 
individual performer after Bremen's Mesut Ozil; unfortunately for Bayer, he's 
been so consistently brilliant that Bayern will certainly ask for his return 
after the World Cup. One should also mention Sami Hyypia's flawless positional 
play, Kiessling's steep learning curve and the unassuming excellence of captain 
Simon Rolfes, the unobtrusive beanpole in front of the back four. But first and 
foremost, Bayer have excelled as a team. Whether they can really rage against 
the red machine and win their first ever title remains to be seen: Bayern are – 
for better and for worse – still most people's favourites. But in the meantime, 
Leverkusen should really enjoy basking in the glory of their imaginary trophy 
win. They truly deserve it.

Talking points

• All the gushing Leverkusen tributes would almost never have been written. 
Schalke's 1-0 win over Mainz made them Herbstmeister for one night on Friday; 
Felix Magath's miracle work shows no signs of abating. His incredibly young, 
radically reconstructed team played pretty functional stuff again (emphasis on 
"functional") but collected the points all the same. "I don't care about the 
table, we're not a top side yet," said Magath, despite results to the contrary. 
The 46-year-old fears that the club's financial problems might force them to 
sell keeper Manuel Neuer and striker Kevin Kuranyi but Schalke will certainly 
get Tore (German for "goals") in 2010. Tore Reginiussen, a Norwegian defender, 
to be precise – the 23-year-old will join from Tromso in the new year.

• Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> finally managed to 
beat their bogey team and fierce northern rivals Werder Bremen in another 
high-charged, breathless encounter on Sunday night. Bruno Labbadia's side had 
Jerome Boateng harshly sent off for a professional foul on 32 minutes but 
managed to double their lead soon after: Marcell Jansen took advantage of a 
rash decision from the Werder keeper, Tim Wiese, and scored from outside the 
box. Bremen hit the bar three times but could only pull one goal back in the 
dying seconds. Naldo's goal was not enough to deny the home side a 2-1 win that 
keeps them very much in the title race.

• Bayern enjoyed another easy, high-scoring win over Tasmania ... sorry ... 
Hertha Berlin. The 5-2 demolition of the Bundesliga's second worst team in 
history – six points after 17 matches leaves them all but doomed – secured a 
merry Christmas for the Bavarians, who are kindly prepared to let Luca Toni go 
on a free transfer this winter. Strangely enough, there have been no takers for 
the 32-year-old, £171,000 a week striker so far.

• Dortmund celebrated the club's centenary with giant fan banners and a 1-0 
win over Freiburg. Both teams didn't offer much to keep the crowd from freezing 
but Lucas Barrios's ninth goal of the season underlined Borussia's positive 
development in recent weeks. Dortmund haven't lost in 10 games and only 
conceded four goals since the end of September. Jürgen Klopp's new 4-2-3-1 
system works well enough to keep them in touch with the European places a bit 
longer.

• Michael Oenning, one of the league's youngest and most promising coaches, 
was sacked today after losing heavily away to Cologne. "The situation is 
catastrophic," said the Nürnberg president, Franz Schäfer. Dieter Hecking is 
widely tipped to succeed Oenning on the "Club" bench.

Happy holidays and Frohes Neues, everyone! I'll see you on the other side.

Results

Schalke 1-0 Mainz

Bayern 5-2 Hertha

Leverkusen 3-2 Gladbach

Dortmund 1-0 Freiburg

Hannover 2-3 Bochum

Frankfurt 2-2 Wolfsburg

Hamburg 2-1 Bremen

Stuttgart 3-1 Hoffenheim

Köln 3-0 Nürnberg
 