
1 How is Azed different?

Essentially, there is no difference between Azed puzzles and other cryptic 
crosswords, though they are tougher than most, and make frequent use of obscure 
and unusual words. In addition, roughly every sixth or seventh puzzle has a 
special theme, explained in the preamble.

2 What do the bars (thick lines) mean?

They have exactly the same function that black squares do in more conventional 
crosswords, ie they indicate where words end. A square between two parallel 
bars is thus 'unchecked' by a word crossing it. The number of unchecked squares 
in a barred puzzle is considerably smaller than in a blocked puzzle, and this 
means that the solver has potentially more help from cross-checking letters.

3 What is the best dictionary to use?

The Chambers Dictionary (current edition 2011) is explicitly recommended each 
week. The source for the occasional words used which are not in Chambers or for 
less familiar proper names is normally indicated.

4 How do I write a prize-winning clue?

There is no magic formula that will guarantee success, but here are some 
useful tips: (i) every clue should contain a definition/indication of the 
answer, plus a cryptic treatment of it, and nothing else (ie no superfluous 
wording); (ii) every clue should be grammatically sound in indicating the 
answer, eg its part of speech etc; (iii) aim for accuracy, conciseness and wit 
and/or elegance of wording. All entries are judged by Azed personally.

5 What is the Azed slip <https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/azedslip>?

The slip is a monthly news-sheet giving details of the winning clues and 
runners-up in the month's competition, plus Azed's comments on the competition 
and on crosswords in general. It is available on subscription in printed form 
and ontheguardian.com. <https://www.theguardian.com/uk> 

6 How is the weekly puzzle different from the once-a-month competition puzzle?

Competition puzzles normally appear on the first Sunday in each month, plus an 
extra one at Christmas, ie 13 in the year. On every other Sunday in the year 
there is a prize puzzle, occasionally a thematic one but otherwise no different 
from the competition puzzles. Prizes are awarded in these for the first three 
correct solutions opened.

7 How do I submit my solutions to Azed puzzles?

Weekly Azed prize puzzles
For a chance to win a £25 book token in a weekly Azed prize puzzle, print off 
your solution and send it to AZED No. [enter puzzle number], The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Entries should be postmarked no later 
than the Saturday following publication.

Monthly Azed competition puzzles
Send your solution and your attempt at a prize-winning clue as instructed to 
AZED No. [enter puzzle number], PO Box 518, Oxford OX2 6WX. Please note that 
your clue should be on a separate piece of paper, securely attached to the 
solution sheet, and your name and address should be on both. Please also add a 
brief explanation of your clue (one entry only). Entries should be normally 
postmarked no later than the Saturday following publication. The three clues 
that Azed judges the best will win £35, £30 and £25 prizes, plus Azed 
bookplates. There are also prizes each year for non-prizewinners who have 
gained the most commendations.

8 Where do I send queries about Azed puzzles?

Email us at userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> if you 
have any queries about Azed puzzles. Also keep an eye on the monthly Azed slip 
for news, tips and hints.
 