
IMPROPERLY

1 J. C. Leyland (Huddersfield): How intimate embraces lead to rakish Don 
Giovanni maybe getting end away? (r oper(a) in imply, & lit.).

2 Dr S. J. Shaw (Lancashire): Doctor acting thus to get priority GMC panel 
(comp. anag. & lit.).

3 T. C. Borland (West Sussex): Disgracefully sloppy primer, leaving beginners 
confused (anag. less first letters).

VHC

D. K. Arnott: Suggest vices or perversion, wanting variety so? (anag. less 
version in imply, & lit.; vice = grip; version = variety).

D. & N. Aspland: Declaration of profession by hooker, a lady wanting publicity 
in an unseemly way (I’m pro + per + l(ad)y).

C. J. Brougham: Mean lassoer encapsulated how cowboys work (roper in imply).

Dr I. S. Fletcher: Signify catching one with lasso, perhaps, ‘cowboy-style’? (
roper in imply).

D. V. Harry: Europhile Tory MP’s pestered to reject ‘Out’ – he’s wavering 
unacceptably (anag. less anag.).

R. J. Heald: Widdy and partner’s close intimate holds displaying ineptitude (
Strictly it ain’t!) (rope r in imply; ref. Anne Widdecombe in ‘Strictly Come 
Dancing’).

M. Hodgkin: Unseemly to suggest sticking in Europe after rejecting EU rule (
(EU)rope r in imply).

R. J. Hooper: Might one who’s into bondage demand intimate embracing thus? (
roper in imply).

D. R. Jones: Inaptly confuse prim reply with love (anag. incl. 0).

E. C. Lance: Ropy prelim results from revising thus? (anag.).

M. A. Macdonald-Cooper: To suggest holding referendum initially works, though 
ultimately failing in unseemly manner (r oper(a) in imply).

D. F. Manley: What Chilcot’s written shortly coming up, with hint about how 
Iraq War’s bunglers acted? (repor(t) (rev.) in imply).

T. Rudd: Suggest getting e.g. a cowboy in, to construct ——? (roper in imply, & 
lit.).

I. Simpson: Not a little shoddy, without qualification, fencing cowboy might 
work like this? (roper in (s)imply, & lit.)

P. L. Stone: A troop playing crimes wantonly could be acting so —— (comp. 
anag. & lit.).

J. R. Tozer: In an unfit way? I advocate exercise half hourly (I’m pro PE 
(hou)rly).

Mrs A. M. Walden: Inappropriately intimate, embracing one making lunge? (roper 
in imply; see lunge2).

HC

M. Barley, Ms K. Bolton, Mrs S. Brown, J. A. Butler, D. Carter, P. Coles, V. 
Dixon (Ireland), W. Drever, Dr M. Ewart, J. Fairclough, Ms N. Fullarton, G. I. 
L. Grafton, Mrs E. Greenaway, J. Grimes, P. Halse, J. R. Howlett, C. Loving, W. 
F. Main, G. Maker, P. W. Marlow, P. McKenna, C. G. Millin, T. J. Moorey, D. J. 
R. Ogilvie (USA), J. Parke, D. P. Shenkin, N. G. Shippobotham, Dr G. Simpson 
(Australia), J. Smailes, P. A. Stephenson, P. Taylor, K. Thomas, A. J. Varney, 
Ms S. Wallace, A. J. Wardrop, A. Whittaker, Dr E. Young.

Comments

179 entries, no mistakes. Favourite clue: of 14 nominated at least once, the 
runaway winner was ‘What happens when name’s forgotten? Ask!’ for EVET, mainly, 
no doubt because of the pleasing ambiguity of the word ‘ask’, a bit of a gift 
for setters. The puzzle as a whole was clearly of about-average difficulty 
(though this seems to have had little effect on the size of the entry, smaller 
than I hope for). A few competitors, not only from overseas, were foxed by the 
clue to READER, and in retrospect thiswas a bit unfair. Few, I guess, will have 
more than a hazy recollection of Ralph R. and his Gang Shows, which featured 
groups of wholesome-looking boy scout types performing jolly songs and dances 
and were very popular in their day (between the 1930s and the 1970s). Their 
best-known song was probably(We’re Riding Along) On the Crest of a Wave. These 
cases involving bits of specialized knowledge do involve a certain amount of 
fine judgement. Several clues submitted included references to Mildred and 
George, without explanation until I came to one which told me that M. & G. 
Roper were characters in the old TV comedy seriesMan About the House. How 
widely known was this surname, I wonder? Not very, I guess, though I’m being 
highly subjective in my judgement. (There was also one clue which included 
reference to the character played by Hugh Laurie in the recent Le 
Carré-inspired television seriesThe Night Manager, also called Roper. I did 
recall that, having watched it, but still regarded it as a bit too 
specialized.) Another bit of specialized knowledge was needed to understand the 
clue to CRIER, namely thatencrier is French for inkwell (itself a somewhat 
dated item). I’m not averse to the use of relatively common words from some 
European languages in my clues, and I was scratching my head what to do with 
CRIER, a horrid word to clue interestingly. No one actually complained, beyond 
one oblique comment about my expecting solvers to be as familiar with French, 
German, Italian, etc as I am, i.e. a bit.


Adverbs present their own cluing problems, especially when it comes to the 
definition. There are of course ways round simply finding an appropriate ‘-ly’ 
synonym, as many of the clues quoted above illustrate. Always look for ways of 
defining a word by means ofexemplification rather than straight definition. 
IMPROPERLY offered plenty of scope for this, being pretty broad in its range of 
senses.

 Along with several regular Azed solvers I recently attended the memorial 
service for Jeremy Morse in New College Chapel, Oxford, at which I was also 
invited to speak. It was a very moving occasion in a glorious setting, 
dedicated to the memory of a remarkable man who excelled in so many different 
fields and will be greatly missed.

The result of the EU referendum has just been announced and I can write no 
more.
 