 The dishwasher is in denial. It grumbles away in the corner, chewing over the 
greasy scraps of its past. So does ex-Spouse, assisted by a bottle of whisky. 
He's supposed to be house-hunting. The Life Of Birds video is revealing that 
some birds are just as promiscuous as we are, though I don't recall a female 
bird who actually ejects the male from the nest and welcomes a younger rival.
 'Er, want the Rusbridge Gazette?' I hover accusingly. 'A few nice flats in 
there.' 'So this is what it's come to,' he growls.

 'Queuing in Somerfield for a Ready Meal For One. I've joined the Sad Old Gits 
Club.' 'Mum . . .? I've worked 'ow how to Chat wiv Others!' Harriet dashes into 
the kitchen and grabs a packet of crisps and a can of Coke. 'How d'you spell 
oral, as in sex?' she whispers. 'Is it oral wiv an 'o' or aural wiv an 'au'?' 
'What do you mean, Chat with Others? What's going on?' 'Not now!' Attic door 
slams. Blasted Internet! Is it legal for strange men in Ohio to talk dirty to 
my child? Not sure which is worse, Harriet going to parties and getting pawed 
by real boys or experiencing electronic eroticism. I suppose nobody ever got 
pregnant on-line or caught VD from their VDU.

 Phone rings. Ex-Spouse glares squiffily at it. Elaine doesn't ring any more. 
She is too busy frolicking with Tom, though ex-Spouse and I never mention his 
name. Recall fondly occasions when I frolicked with Tom, though I did not go 
the whole hog and throw Spouse out on to the street. Envy Elaine her decisive, 
fearless life-transforming ruthlessness, and wish I had not been born a Virgo. 
Still, we Virgos can always cheer ourselves up by scraping a bit of filth off 
the hotplates.

 However, embarrassed about dishwasher as it has lost the plot and produces 
only a kind of low-budget mushroom soup which won't go away. Engineer arrives 
and assures me he's seen much worse. In fact, some people seem to think they're 
waste-disposal machines and try to force whole chicken carcasses down them. 
Ours is merely bunged up with horrible old gunge.

 'The only way, really, to deal with this,' he confides, 'is to suck it.' He 
applies his lips to vile tube - part of the dishwasher's intestines. Harriet 
appears.

 'Now listen, Harriet, you must be careful about these Others you're chatting 
to.' 'Don't insult my friends! There wunnderful-n-inneresting! Specially 
Honker! An' you've always said looks don't ma'er, ri'? Well, the grea' thing 
about it is you don' know what anyone looks like!' 'But what if Honker is a 
smelly old pervert?' 'Don' be stupid, Mum! He said he was 17 and 6ft tall with 
black hair and blue eyes!' Well, you would, wouldn't you? Furtive exchange with 
Harriet interrupted by retching sound as engineer spits debris from last 
month's meals into convenient bowl. Hastily offer tea, crisps, chocolate cake. 
Ex-Spouse has got up and is slumped against the doorpost, staring in 
incredulity as engineer restores the dishwasher to action.

 'Next time,' I quip merrily, 'I'll make my ex- husband do it.' Engineer 
departs with uneasy laugh.

 Try to wean ex-Spouse off whisky bottle and on to Earl Grey. No joy, and am 
interrupted by doorbell. Dismayed to find Tom standing there looking uneasy and 
not so young as he was.

 Receding hair and faint hint of paunch.

 'Look,' he says, 'I know this is going to be pretty hard for you to swallow.' 
Before I can speak, ex-Spouse thrusts me roughly aside and, in a surge of 
Teacher's and testosterone, punches Tom on the chin. Tom staggers backwards 
rather like David Attenborough when surprised by the capercaillie and crashes 
down on to what were the first hopeful shoots of my snowdrops.

 Make hasty plans to embrace lesbianism immediately, preferably via Sapphic 
Website.
 