
First speech on Iraq as President Bush authorises going to war

2 October 2002
Federal Plaza, Chicago

I don't oppose all wars. What I am opposed to is a dumb war. What I am opposed 
to is a rash war. What I am opposed to is the cynical attempt by Richard Perle 
and Paul Wolfowitz and other armchair, weekend warriors in this administration 
to shove their own ideological agendas down our throats, irrespective of the 
costs in lives lost and in hardships borne.

What I am opposed to is the attempt by political hacks like Karl Rove to 
distract us from a rise in the uninsured, a rise in the poverty rate, a drop in 
the median income, to distract us from corporate scandals and a stock market 
that has just gone through the worst month since the great depression.

That's what I'm opposed to. A dumb war. A rash war. A war based not on reason 
but on passion, not on principle but on politics.

Keynote address to the 2004 Democratic convention

27 July 2004
Fleet centre, Boston
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1UDKXKGZ3PY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1UDKXKGZ3PY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1UDKXKGZ3PY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Even as we speak, there are those who are preparing to divide us, the spin 
masters and negative ad peddlers who embrace the politics of anything goes. 
Well, I say to them tonight, there's not a liberal America and a conservative 
America; there's the United States of America. There's not a black America and 
white America and Latino America and Asian America; there's the United States 
of America. The pundits like to slice-and-dice our country into red states and 
blue states; red states for Republicans, blue states for Democrats. But I've 
got news for them, too. We worship an awesome God in the blue states, and we 
don't like federal agents poking around our libraries in the red states. We 
coach Little League in the blue states and have gay friends in the red states. 
There are patriots who opposed the war in Iraq and patriots who supported it. 
We are one people, all of us pledging allegiance to the stars and stripes, all 
of us defending the United States of America.

In the end, that's what this election is about. Do we participate in a 
politics of cynicism or a politics of hope? John Kerry calls on us to hope. 
John Edwards calls on us to hope. I'm not talking about blind optimism here - 
the almost wilful ignorance that thinks unemployment will go away if we just 
don't talk about it, or the healthcare crisis will solve itself if we just 
ignore it. No, I'm talking about something more substantial. It's the hope of 
slaves sitting around a fire singing freedom songs; the hope of immigrants 
setting out for distant shores; the hope of a young naval lieutenant bravely 
patrolling the Mekong delta; the hope of a millworker's son who dares to defy 
the odds; the hope of a skinny kid with a funny name who believes that America 
has a place for him, too. The audacity of hope!

On black community responsibilities

1 May 2005
National Association for Advancement of Colored People, Detroit

Our grandparents used to tell us that being black means you have to work twice 
as hard to succeed in life. And so I ask today, can we honestly say our kids 
are working twice as hard as the kids in India and China who are graduating 
ahead of us, with better test scores and the tools they need to kick our butts 
on the job market? Can we honestly say our teachers are working twice as hard, 
or our parents?

In defence of women's right to choose

10 November 2005
National Women's Law Centre, Washington

The other side knows that equal opportunity has always been a winning argument 
for us. And that's why those who don't want to make it a reality choose to 
fight on other terms. They make sure that in any given campaign or debate, the 
only woman's issue that ever comes up is not equal pay or healthcare or family 
leave, but the narrowest, most divisive issues like late-term abortion.

Now, the ability for a woman to make decisions about how many children to have 
and when - without interference from the government - is one of the most 
fundamental freedoms we have. We all know, becoming a parent is one of the most 
- if not the most - important jobs there is. No one should make that decision 
for a woman and her family but them. And we must keep defending their right to 
make this choice in the years to come.

On ending America's fossil fuel addiction

3 April 2006
Chicago

When it comes to finding a way to end our dependence on fossil fuels, the 
greatest vacuum in leadership, the biggest failure of imagination, and the most 
stubborn refusal to admit the need for change is coming from the very people 
who are running the country.

By now, the Bush administration's record on climate change is almost 
legendary. This is the administration that commissioned government experts and 
scientists to do a study on global warming, only to omit the part from the 
final report that said it was caused by humans. This is the administration that 
didn't try to improve the Kyoto Treaty by trying to include oil guzzlers like 
China and India, but walked away from the entire global effort to stem climate 
change. And just recently, this is the administration that tried to silence a 
Nasa scientist for letting the rest of us know that yes, climate change is a 
pretty big deal ...

This is not a serious effort. Saying that America is addicted to oil without 
following a real plan for energy independence is like admitting alcoholism and 
then skipping out on the 12-step program. It's not enough to identify the 
challenge - we have to meet it.

The challenge of going into politics, with 'that funny name'

11 May 2006
Emily's List annual lunch, Washington

I remember when I first ran for the state senate - my very first race. A seat 
had opened up, and some friends asked me if I'd be interested in running. Well, 
I thought about it, and then I did what every wise man does when faced with a 
difficult decision: I prayed, and I asked my wife.

And after consulting with these higher powers, I threw my hat in the ring and 
I did what every person on a campaign does - I talked to anyone who'd listen.

I went to bake sales and barber shops and if there were two guys standing on 
the corner I'd pull up and hand them literature. And everywhere I went I'd get 
two questions:

First, they'd ask, "Where'd you get that funny name, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>?" Because people just 
couldn't pronounce it. They'd call me "Alabama," or they'd call me "Yo Mama". 
And I'd have to explain that I got the name from my father, who was from Kenya.

And the second thing people would ask me was, "You seem like a nice young man. 
You teach law school, you're a civil rights attorney, you organise voter 
registration, you're a family man - why would you wanna go into something dirty 
and nasty like politics?"

On the embarrassment of his first Democratic convention

2 June 2006
University of Massachusetts, Boston

It's always great to be back in Boston. As some of you may have heard, I was 
here a few years ago to give the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic 
convention.

It was an amazing experience for me. A humbling honour. A tremendous 
opportunity. And if you had come up to me a few years earlier and told me I'd 
be there, I would've politely told you that you were out of your mind.

Let me tell you what happened at the last convention I had been to.

It was the year 2000, and I had just gotten my rear-end handed to me in my 
very first race for Congress. Didn't even make it past the primary. I was a 
little depressed, and more than a little broke, but some friends suggested that 
I get my mind off it by going to Los Angeles, where that year's Democratic 
convention was being held.

So I decided to go. And when my plane landed in LA, I got my luggage, walked 
on over to the Hertz counter, filled out all the forms to rent a car, gave my 
credit card to the nice woman behind the counter who, moments later, handed it 
back to me and said, "Mr Obama, it seems we have a problem."

That's right, my credit card was denied.

After 30 more minutes of haggling, I finally made it to the convention, only 
to learn that I was thought of so highly by the Democratic party that my 
credentials barely granted me access to the men's room - let alone backstage 
where all the action was. And so, being the VIP that I was, I spent the rest of 
the week as the guy in the room who nobody knew, but everyone knew didn't 
belong.

Needless to say, when they asked me to be the convention's keynote speaker 
just four years later, I made sure I was getting a car. All joking aside, 
receiving that honour was a welcome change - and, as MasterCard could attest, 
more than a little unlikely.
 