
Lionel Messi’s first hat trick of the season helped Barcelona beat Granada 4-0 
and take the top spot in the Spanish league on Saturday. Messi scored twice 
within the first 15 minutes at the Camp Nou, and added his third in the second 
half asBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> cruised to 
victory. Neymar completed the scoring with seven minutes remaining .

The victory lifted Barcelona one point above Atlético Madrid, who play at 
fifth-place Celta Vigo on Sunday. Barcelona will have a game in hand after the 
19th round this weekend. Third-placed Real Madrid trailed Barcelona by five 
points. Barcelona had drawn four of their last six matches but werecoming off a 
4-1 win over city rival Espanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey-match-report>
in the first leg of the round of 16 of the Copa del Rey.

“I’m very satisfied with how the team played today,” Barcelona’s coach, Luis 
Enrique, said. “Everybody was focused from the beginning. The players knew how 
important it was to win these three points.”

Barcelona dominated Granada, who were only 17th in the 20-team La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> table. Messi and Neymar 
got the goals but Luis Suárez also played well and had chances to score. “We 
could have scored more,” Barcelona defender Aleix Vidal said. “But the main 
thing was to get the three points. We are back in the lead, now we’ll see what 
happens in the other matches.”

Messi found the net from close range after a pass from Arda Turan, then bagged 
his second six minutes later by striking an open net after a pass by Suárez. 
Messi completed his hat-trick after Neymar struck the post and the ball 
rebounded to the Argentinian inside the area for his ninth league goal of the 
season. It was Messi’s 33rd career hat-trick. He has a strong chance of winning 
a record fifth Ballon d’Or on Monday, from a shortlist which includes Neymar 
and Cristiano Ronaldo. Neymar sealed Barcelona’s victory from close range, 
scoring his 15th league goal to tie Suárez as the competition’s leading scorer.

Dani Alves, who this week called the Spanish media “garbage” for the way it 
covers soccer, came off the bench in the second half and was loudly cheered by 
the Barcelona fans. The club initially condemned Alves’ comments, but late on 
Friday said it would give its support to the player in case a local association 
of sports media went ahead with its threat to sue the Brazilian right back.
 