
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> compounded their 
exit from the Champions League by losing 1-0 at Granada on Saturday, missing 
the chance to take an at least temporary lead of La Liga.

Barcelona's defeat ensured that Atlético Madrid, who ousted them from the 
Champions League, will stay top, regardless of the outcome of their game at 
Getafe on Sunday.

Granada's Yacine Brahimi scored what proved to be the winner in the 16th 
minute and goalkeeper Orestis Karnezis made saves to deny Lionel Messi and 
Neymar amid a plethora of scoring chances that Barcelona failed to convert.

Barcelona have four days to regroup from back-to-back defeats before they play 
Real Madrid in the Copa del Rey final in Valencia. They will then have five 
more games in the league in which to defend the title.

"It's a step back," said the Barcelona midfielder Andrés Iniesta. "It hurts 
more, given how few games are left. Sometimes it's difficult to explain it when 
you lose. We did everything but score. We controlled everything else, but just 
couldn't finish our chances. That's the hard part."

With his centre-backs Gerard Piqué, Marc Bartra and Carles Puyol all injured, 
the Barcelona coach, Gerardo Martino, shifted Sergio Busquets into his back 
line and started Alex Song in midfield.

It did not take long for the shuffling to backfire, when Song lost the ball 
and Granada sprung a counterattack. Fran Rico quickly played Brahimi through 
for the forward to ride Martín Montoya's challenge before he shot past 
goalkeeper José Pinto.
 Granada midfielder Yacine Brahimi (left) celebrates after scoring the only 
goal of the game against Barcelona in La Liga. Photograph: Jorge 
Guerrero/AFP/Getty Images 
Barcelona peppered Granada's area with crosses and shots but went no closer in 
the first half than Neymar's long-range attempt that Karnezis pushed wide.
The visitors kept pressing after the restart and Karnezis pushed Cesc 
Fábregas's volley around his post. He then stretched to palm Messi's free-kick 
before he was well positioned to block Busquet's effort.

Granada's Youssef El-Arabi almost scored his side's second goal two minutes 
from time, but he couldn't beat Pinto when through one-on-one.
 