
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> are champions for 
the sixth time in eight years after Luis Suárez’s hat-trick defeated Granada 
3-0 on the final day. There were four minutes left when he scored the third, 
rolling in Neymar’s assist to take him to 40 goals for the season and his team 
to the title. He, Messi and Neymar embraced, along with the rest of the side, 
champions once more. At the final whistle, supporters sprinted on to the pitch 
to join in. Europe eluded them this year but with a Copa del Rey final to come, 
they may still finish with a double.

Ultimately, it seemed so easy, but the end of this season said otherwise. A 
victory would guarantee Barcelona a title that most had thought was already 
secure six weeks ago, but the slightest slip and Real Madrid would be 
champions, with them cast as the team who threw it away. Their response was 
emphatic, from Suárez, especially. Five wins in five, with an aggregate score 
of 24-0, took them over the line.

Deportivo 0-2 Real Madrid: La Liga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/14/deportivo-v-real-madrid-la-liga-title-race-climax-live>
“We had to win this title twice,” Gerard Piqué said. “Twenty years ago 
Barcelona wouldn’t have done; so often in the past we’ve been sunk by our 
pessimism.”

The Barcelona manager, Luis Enrique, said: “Over the season, the most 
consistent team takes the title. We deserved this. People think not winning a 
trophy is disaster but we know how difficult it is to do. We’ve won six of 
eight leagues; some other teams find it harder.”

Teams like Madrid, in other words. They have won one of those eight but came 
into this season hoping to make it two and ultimately pushed Barcelona to the 
wire. The last stop took Barcelona to Granada and Madrid to Deportivo La 
Coruña, two teams with nothing to play for against two with everything to play 
for and no room for errors.

A win would be necessary for Barcelona and any doubt about that was removed 
after seven minutes, when Cristiano Ronaldo put Madrid 1-0 up and temporarily 
top 1,000km away, while there was a brief reminder of the risk a minute later 
when Youssef El Arabi sprinted beyond them only to scuff his shot.

But Luis Enrique’s side were not keen to waste time, nor to allow nerves to 
take hold. No concessions were made; the ball was theirs, chances too. Piqué’s 
header had already been pushed away by Andrés Fernández and then Neymar lifted 
over, forcing a corner from which Fernández again saved from Piqué. Then, on 21 
minutes, Barcelona beautifully made the opener, laying one hand on the trophy. 
Figuratively, at least; it will not be given to them until the start of next 
season.

Javier Mascherano, Andrés Iniesta, Jordi Alba and Neymar made it, a neat 
give-and-go leaving the full back dashing into the area and pulling back for 
Suárez to nudge in his 38th goal of the season. He is one of five players to 
reach that figure and was soon beyond it. Up in A Coruña, Ronaldo had made it 
2-0; 13 minutes later, down in Granada, so did the Uruguayan.

Granada v Barcelona: La Liga title race climax – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/14/granada-v-barcelona-la-liga-title-race-climax-live>
Dani Alves somehow reached Mascherano’s long diagonal ball, turning it inside 
first time, where Suárez was steaming in at the near post to head home, nudging 
him to his second league title in Spain.

There would be celebrations at Los Cármenes. Perhaps Madrid realised that too. 
In Galicia, Ronaldo was removed at half-time, the title over for another season 
and, on 35, his bid to be top scorer too. Suárez made it to 40, the first time 
the top scorer has not been either Ronaldo or Messi since 2009.

The second half brought the hint of a match. Carlos Peñaranda took the 
baffling decision to dive when he might have a chance and then Marc-André ter 
Stegen saved from Fran Rico as the Granada midfielder found himself clear on 
the edge of the area. There was intent about Granada now, a willingness to go 
forward, while tackles came too. They would continue, provoking a mass 
confrontation late on, but Barcelona reasserted themselves.

Suárez created for Neymar, whose shot was saved, then Fernández cut out yet 
another Alves ball. There were still 25 minutes left and a Granada goal would 
alter things, but it was Barcelona who got it. And it was Suárez again.

In the stands, their fans dared to sing “campeones” for the first time. No one 
had expected them to have to wait until the final day to do so, but they are 
there now. “I would tell our fans to enjoy it,” Luis Enrique said.
 