
An under-strength Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 
side consolidated top spot in the Primera División on Saturday afternoon with a 
comfortable 4-0 victory over Granada at the Camp Nou.

Two first-half penalties, from Andrés Iniesta and Cesc Fábregas, set the 
champions on their way and Alexis Sánchez put the result beyond doubt 19 
minutes from time – soon after the visitors had lost the midfielder Manuel 
Iturra to a red card.

Pedro added a fourth in the final minute to complete the rout as Barça moved 
provisionally six points clear at the summit ahead of the rest of the weekend's 
action.

The Catalan club headed into the game decimated by injuries, with Víctor 
Valdés, Dani Alves and Xavi having recently joined Lionel Messi, Jordi Alba, 
Jonathan Dos Santos, Ibrahim Afellay and Cristian Tello on the sidelines.

Fábregas and Gerard Piqué returned after injury, though, and the home team 
always looked like they had too much for the eighth-placed visitors.

Sánchez and Iniesta tried their luck from the edge of the box in the opening 
few minutes, but the Granada goalkeeper Roberto was equal to both, while Neymar 
also lashed over the bar from 20 yards.

The best Granada could muster in the early stages was a couple of long-range 
efforts – from Youssef El Arabi and Piti – neither of which troubled Barça's 
goalkeeper, José Pinto.

The hosts took the lead in the 20th minute, Iniesta coolly placing his 
right-footed penalty into the bottom-right corner after the referee adjudged 
Fábregas had been fouled by Dimitri Foulquier.

Piti went within a whisker of snatching a swift equaliser, but saw his fierce 
left-footed shot hit the bar.

And before the break Gerardo Martino's side had doubled their advantage – 
again from the penalty spot. This time it was Iniesta who won it, when he was 
brought down by Fran Rico, and Fábregas who converted, despatching into the 
top-right corner of Roberto's net.

Granada could have pulled a goal back soon after the restart, but El Arabi 
directed his header over the bar.

The visitors' afternoon took a turn for the worse midway through the second 
half when Iturra was sent off for a second bookable offence following a foul on 
Pedro, having been shown the yellow card in the first half for a challenge on 
Neymar.

Again they showed they should not be written off and forced a decent save out 
of Pinto soon after, the Barça keeper parrying a close-range attempt from Allan 
Nyom in the 70th minute.

However, the game was put beyond their reach moments later when the Chile 
forward Sánchez latched on to Neymar's slick pass and dinked over the advancing 
Roberto for his eighth goal inLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> this term.

With the points in the bag, Martino handed a first-team debut to 17-year-old 
Adama Traoré in place of Neymar with seven minutes left.

And then, just to rub salt into the Granada wounds, Fábregas teed up Pedro for 
a fourth goal in the 90th minute.
 