
A Neymar double, a spectacular volley from Luis Suárez and a goal for Lionel 
Messi enabled Barcelona’s unstoppable strike force to sweep asideReal Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> 4-0 on Saturday and extend 
their lead at the top of La Liga to seven points, at least for a few hours.

Neymar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/neymar> slotted home a Dani Alves 
cross after 22 minutes and Alves was again the provider for Suárez who 
acrobatically beat the Real keeper Geronimo Rulli before half-time to take his 
tally to 11 goals in seven games.

La Liga’s top scorer Neymar took his total to 14 as he knocked in a Jérémy 
Mathieu cross after 53 minutes and in injury time he set up Messi to score from 
close range.

Barça have 33 points from 13 games, with Atlético Madrid, who face Espanyol 
later, on 26 points. Real Madrid,who were hammered 4-0 by Barça last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/real-madrid-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
 and are now nine points off the pace, play Eibar on Sunday.

Astonishingly, the trio’s latest heroics meant that Messi, Neymar and Suárez 
have so far scored 125 goals between them in all competitions for Barça over 
the calendar year.

“Between them, they look for each other all the time and the objective is for 
them to be happy which happens when they score,” said Alves.

Suárez could have put Barça ahead within three minutes as he went through on 
goal but Rulli got down well to block his shot and the Real keeper had to be 
alert again to take the ball off the feet of Neymar, who tried to go around him.

Andrés Iniesta was close to scoring with a rare header from a Suárez cross but 
the ball came back off the left post.

The Sociedad coach, Eusebio Sacristán, who replaced David Moyes earlier this 
month, won his first game in charge against Sevilla. Yet despite his knowledge 
of Barça as a former player, assistant and youth team coach he was unable to do 
anything to head off his side’s 19th straight defeat at the Camp Nou.

Alves crossed for Neymar to slam the ball into the roof of the net with his 
left foot and with Barça continuing to press, it was Alves again, having been 
found by a raking pass from Iniesta, who sent a deep cross for Suárez to volley 
home.

With Barça comfortably in charge and the Real defence stretched, Neymar 
notched his second before Messi scored in the final moments, having hit the 
crossbar with a strike from the edge of the area minutes earlier.
 