
To say this has been a Jekyll-and-Hyde season for Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> would be something of an 
understatement. After 20 games they were rock bottom of League One and had just 
been knocked out of the FA Cup by non-league Altrincham. Now they are in the 
play-off mix and have their first piece of silverware since 1955 after a 
Johnstone’s Paint Trophy final that mirrored their campaign as a whole.

The Tykes were dismal in the first half and deservedly trailed to Callum 
O’Dowda’s header forOxford United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united>, the League Two side who 
were hoping to become the first fourth-tier team to win this competition since 
Luton Town did so in 2008-09. But Chey Dunkley’s own goal, Ashley Fletcher’s 
close-range finish and Adam Hammill’s wonderful strike turned the game around 
and Paul Heckingbottom’s side survived the late pressure brought on by Danny 
Hylton’s reply.

“It’s been a strange season,” said Heckingbottom, who admitted he “rattled a 
few cages” in the dressing room at half-time. “After the run of defeats, we 
turned a corner. To get in the position we’re in now, just outside the 
play-offs and into a final, if we’d not achieved something this season it would 
have been a disappointment.”

It is the club’s first successful trip to Wembley, their two previous visits 
ending in defeats to Ipswich in the Division One (now Championship) play-offs 
in 2000 and Cardiff in the 2008 FA Cup semi-finals. Their 1912 FA Cup win, the 
only trophy Barnsley had won other than a trio of Division Three North titles 
(the last of which was 61 years ago), came at Bramall Lane.

Heckingbottom must take huge credit. Lee Johnson, who was in attendance at 
Wembley, presided over the club’s hapless early-season run then oversaw the 
revival. Two days after he steered Barnsley into this final with a penalty 
shootout win over Fleetwood, he left to take the reins at Bristol City. In 
caretaker charge since, Heckingbottom, a boyhood Barnsley fan and former 
season-ticket holder, has maintained the momentum.

Last season Bristol City, then under Steve Cotterill, coupled success in this 
competition with promotion to the Championship. Remarkably given they began 
December bottom of the pile in League One, Barnsley still have hope of doing 
the same, though with Wigan Athletic and Burton Albion disappearing over the 
horizon at the top it will take a return to Wembley to do it. They are four 
points off the play-offs but have a game in hand.

“We’ll celebrate tonight, we’ll make sure everyone does – it’s important,” 
said Heckingbottom. “You don’t often get everyone from a football club in the 
same place. And to build what we want to build that’s what you have to do. 
Everyone has to be on the same page, everyone needs to get to know each other, 
everyone needs to respect each other, and everyone needs to be pushing forward 
in the same way. Tonight’s a great opportunity.”

This was the 10th and final year of the competition in this guise, with 
Johnstone’s Paint heading off into the ranks of Football League Trophy sponsors 
past, joining Freight Rover, Sherpa Vans and Leyland DAF in the dusty box of 
football’s obscure pub quiz answers. Next year’s half-time “entertainment” will 
have to involve something other than fans of each club attempting to dink balls 
into a giant paint pot in the centre circle.

But, either side of the interval, the JPT got a decent send-off, with five 
goals scored and 59,230 in attendance. O’Dowda’s 29th-minute header from Alex 
MacDonald’s cross gave Oxford a lead they richly deserved but the League Two 
side could not turn their first-half superiority into a more comfortable 
cushion.

Barnsley, a dipping Hammill volley that was tipped over aside, struggled and 
their chief threat came from Mark Roberts’s long throws. But Heckingbottom’s 
half-time hammering had the desired effect. Sam Winnall nodded in what he 
thought was his 19th goal of the season, though a deflection off the Oxford 
defender Dunkley made the difference, just after the break and then Fletcher, 
on loan from Manchester United, smashed home from close range on 68 minutes to 
give Barnsley the lead.

It took a stunning save from Adam Davies in the Barnsley goal to deny Liam 
Sercombe an equaliser and preserve their lead – “It’s what he’s paid to do,” 
was Heckingbottom’s matter-of-fact assessment – and the lead was doubled 15 
minutes from full time. Winnall, who had been carrying a hip injury coming into 
the game, had hobbled off between the goals but Barnsley’s other standout 
player, Hammill, drove forward and produced a scorching effort from the edge of 
the area that appeared to have ended the contest. Although Hylton’s header 
ensured a nervy finish, Barnsley’s 3-2 advantage was never placed in serious 
jeopardy.

As a comfort, Oxford have their own promotion push to return to, though unlike 
their opponents they have no plans on returning to Wembley later this season. 
“We’ve got six massive games coming up,” said Michael Appleton, whose side are 
second in League Two but just two points clear of the chasing pack. “Hopefully 
we can use this as some sort of motivation to make sure that we don’t have to 
come back here.”

Johnstone’s Paint to end sponsorship of Football League Trophy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johnstones-paint-football-league-trophy-sponsorship> 