
Martin Allen is more accustomed to final-day drama at the wrong end of the 
table, so this was something of a novelty – a final day which saw his Barnet 
side crowned as Conference champions and one that was relatively stress-free. 
Mauro Vilhete’s two goals were enough to see offGateshead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gateshead> and secure a return to the 
Football League after two years away.

The equation had been straightforward – equal or better Bristol Rovers’ result 
against Alfreton. A five-minute spell in the first-half apart, when Rovers led 
andBarnet <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> had not found a 
breakthrough, the Bees were always ahead of the curve. There was little doubt 
on the day but for Allen there had been little doubt for quite a while.

“To be top of the league from wire to wire has been quite remarkable,” said 
Allen. “Nobody expected us to do it, the bookmakers, the pundits, the experts. 
But with the players we had and the way we played in pre-season, I knew a week 
before the season started that we were going to be the champions, I just knew 
it. There was no one that could stop us. Behind the scenes I knew we were going 
to get 90-plus points and win the league.”

Allen is now in his fourth stint with the club, having led the side with some 
distinction in 2003-04, 2011 and 2012. Those spells did not always end well but 
he is now firmly back in the good books. “I think I owed the supporters 
something to be honest,” he said. “Walking out of the relationship, ditching 
them, going for money, which is what I have done, I’ve never made any secret of 
that … I think perhaps today for the first time all season I’d say I think I’ve 
paid it back, I’ve paid them back.”

The club’s chairman, Tony Kleanthous, set his sights on a League Two promotion 
campaign next season – “We’ve only just begun. It’s always been the plan and 
now we’ve got the vehicle to take the journey with” – but first he must ensure 
that his manager doesn’t escape again. Allen’s contract runs out this summer.

Predictably enough the Hive was buzzing throughout. This was the first time 
that Barnet had sold out their new ground, having left the rather more 
ramshackle charms of Underhill two years ago and the mood was euphoric. Allen 
had put last weekend’s draw at Kidderminster down to nerves but if the manager 
was edgy he did not show it – indeed, he was a one-man wall of noise – and 
there was nothing too nervy about the way his team performed.

Some trepidation did creep into the Hive when news of Rovers’ opening goal 
filtered through after 20 minutes but that was quickly assuaged. Five minutes 
later Sam Togwell swung in a free-kick and Mauro Vilhete was left unmarked 
eight yards out to nod powerfully past Adam Bartlett.

Rovers were doing their part to keep the pressure on – a 3-0 half-time lead 
left Barnet in no doubt as to what was required. But any pressure was relieved 
with the second goal five minutes into the second half. Togwell slung in a 
corner and though Bartlett was equal to the initial header, Vilhete was on hand 
to slam home the loose ball and send the Bees up, despite Rovers’ seven without 
reply in Bristol.
 