
Barnet and Hereford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hereford>, League 
Two's endangered clubs who go into Saturday's final fixtures battling to avoid 
relegation to the Conference, have an awful lot in common apart from the dismal 
form that has dogged their chances of staying up. Both have average attendances 
in the low 2,000s and have spent most of the year concerned about their futures 
at their historic grounds, both have managers on short-term deals hired to give 
the team a fillip, and both the Bees and the Bulls pulled off extraordinary 
victories last week to keep their hopes alive.

Barnet <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet>, who appointed Martin 
Allen for his third spell as manager to oversee the final three games of the 
season, thrashed AFC Wimbledon 4-0 at Underhill to remain two points ahead of 
Hereford. It was their first victory in 10 matches and ruined United's day 
after they had gone to promotion-chasing Crawley and improbably won 3-0, their 
first in nine.

Beginning the final day with so much at stake is a well-trodden path for 
Barnet. Two years ago they defeated Rochdale while Grimsby lost and last year 
started the day two points behind Lincoln City and ended it a point above them 
by beating Port Vale while City lost at Aldershot.

That is precisely the position Hereford, who were relegated on the last day of 
the season in 1997 in a head-to-head match for survival against Brighton and 
spent nine years in the Conference, find themselves in this weekend. They are 
two points behind with a home game in front of a sell-out crowd while Barnet 
have to go to Burton Albion, a team they were holding at 2-2 after an hour at 
Underhill in October but subsequently lost the game 6-3. Izale McLeod scored 
for Barnet in that defeat during a rich vein in which the striker who was 
transferred from MK Dons to Charlton for £1.1m in 2007 managed 21 in 37 games. 
In the 15 matches since he has scored once and now the powerful, pacy forward, 
who was named by his peers in the PFA'sLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> team of the season, 
has suffered an injury in training that will keep him out of the trip to the 
Pirelli Stadium.

Dennis Signy, the veteran journalist who has been Barnet's PR consultant for 
the past decade, feels this season has been a replica of the past two. "It's 
déjà vu with it all on the last game again. We've got to keep our fingers 
crossed we can get out a third time. It's a tremendous gamble appointing Martin 
with so little time to turn things around but he certainly does have an impact 
with his motivational qualities."

If Barnet left it ludicrously late to change their manager, Hereford's 
decision to replace Jamie Pitman with Richard O'Kelly for the last 12 games of 
the campaign looks positively judicious by comparison, though the chairman, 
David Keyte, rues dallying. "We should probably have made changes earlier," he 
said. O'Kelly was the assistant at Edgar Street to Graham Turner for two years 
before leaving to spend seven years as No2 to Sean O'Driscoll at Bournemouth 
and Doncaster and is relishing his return to the club. He has taken only 10 
points from his 11 games so far, but five from the last three have given him 
the confidence that Hereford can get the victory over Torquay, who are chasing 
the final automatic promotion spot, that would force Barnet with their inferior 
goal difference to win to stay up. "We're starting to get the bounce of the 
ball and there's a really good feeling about the club," he says. "Torquay are 
up there on merit and both teams have something to play for. We've both got 
such a good cause to go for. This is such a tight, community club and the 
spirit is excellent."

Hereford have looked top heavy with coaching staff all season and, though 
Keyte expects there to be a cull whatever the outcome, O'Kelly is sure to be 
offered a deal if they maintain their Football League status but he refuses to 
look beyond Saturday. "We're 100% focused," he says, "or as they say on the 
X-Factor, 110%."

Graham Turner, who spent 15 years as chairman and owner of Hereford, 
ultimately winning promotion from the Conference and to League One before 
returning to Shrewsbury and masterminding his second promotion campaign for 
that club this season 23 years after his first, has been in regular contact 
with his former assistant.

"I've got his full support," says O'Kelly. "That good fortune that Shrewsbury 
had to win promotion, and no matter how excellently you perform you always need 
luck, he said that he doesn't need it any more this season and he'll lend it to 
me this week." Fortune and fortitude have been Barnet's accomplices on the last 
day of the past two seasons. No wonder Hereford fancy a measure of their own.
 