
Seven teams were at risk of relegation from the Football League and on a 
predictably tense final day, in which almost every team appeared to be gripped 
by nerves in front of goal,Barnet and Aldershot slid into the Conference.

The anxiety was palpable everywhere with not a single goal in any of the 
matches involving the bottom seven until the 31st minute, whenTorquay conceded 
toBristol Rovers, but the Gulls were always outsiders for the drop and their 
3-3 draw was rendered less relevant by events elsewhere.

It was the habitual final-day escapologists Barnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> who finally fell, as AFC Wimbledon
 overtook them with a tense 2-1 win overFleetwood while the Bees were 
well-beaten, 2-0, atNorthampton and must now face their first season away from 
their home borough – and their ground of more than 100 years, Underhill – back 
in non-league football.

Northampton were always the dominant side against Barnet, and second-half 
goals from Roy O'Donovan and Luke Guttridge ensured a comfortable win for the 
play-offs-bound Cobblers at Sixfields.

Wimbledon survive after a difficult second campaign in the League. Neal 
Ardley's team went into the game against Fleetwood in the second relegation 
place and remained set for the drop after a goalless first half. Home fans' 
nerves were eased when the much-travelled Gary Alexander, on loan from Crawley, 
put the Dons ahead after 61 minutes only for the visitors to equalise within 
three minutes through Andy Mangan.

The Dons were awarded a penalty eight minutes later after a foul by Rob 
Atkinson on Curtis Osano and Jack Midson, making his 100th Wimbledon 
appearance, hit the goal that ensured survival and celebration in south-west 
London.

Dagenham & Redbridge were also reprieved, but only on goal difference after 
losing toYork in a match that both sides went into in peril but came out of 
with Football League places intact. Chris Smith's 68th-minute goal secured 
victory for York, who avoid an immediate return to the Blue Square Premier 
after winning promotion via the play-offs last season.

Joining Barnet back in the Conference will be Aldershot, whose task always 
looked formidable away to aRotherham side who needed to win to clinch automatic 
promotion, which they duly did. Johnny Mullins broke the deadlock from close 
range in the 64th minute before Lee Frecklington scored Rotherham's second in 
injury time. Aldershot's immediate future is also shrouded in doubt, with the 
chairman, Shahid Azeem, seeking new investors to stave off the risk of 
administration.

Torquay were another side in danger of relegation but their 3-3 draw against 
Bristol Rovers saw them to safety. Elliot Benyon scored either side of Ryan 
Jarvis's goal after Rovers had been 2-0 up thanks to Tom Hitchcock's 
31st-minute strike and Jarvis's own goal.

Torquay looked set to end a troubled season with a win – their manager, Martin 
Ling, is still absent on long-term sick leave – but Rovers' Matt Harrold denied 
them with a stoppage-time header.
 