
Sam Winnall scored in the last minute to earn Barnsley a draw and pile more 
pressure on theAston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> 
manager, Roberto Di Matteo.

Jordan Ayew opened the scoring with his first goal of the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> season in the 61st minute 
before Winnall, a second-half substitute, headed home in dramatic style. Villa 
have drawn their past five league games while Barnsley ended a run of two 
successive defeats.

Aston Villa running out of patience with Roberto Di Matteo after poor start
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/aston-villa-patience-roberto-di-matteo-sack-tony-xia-championship>
Villa were already reported to be considering replacing Di Matteo following 
their poor start. Now his team visit Preston North End on Saturday and failure 
to pick up a win there may lead to the Italian’s dismissal, less than four 
months after he was appointed.

Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> had the first chance 
to go ahead but Marc Roberts headed over Conor Hourihane’s corner from inside 
the six-yard box. Jonathan Kodjia was the first Villa player to get a shot on 
target when his powerful drive from range was parried away by Adam Davies.

Mile Jedinak then gifted the home side a chance when he lost the ball to 
Hourihane. The Barnsley captain reacted quickly to release Tom Bradshaw on the 
edge of the box but the striker fell over at the pivotal moment and scuffed his 
shot high and wide.

Pierluigi Gollini had to be at full stretch to stop Hourihane’s free-kick, 
which was driven low and into the bottom corner. Kodjia had a moment to forget 
after Jack Grealish rolled him in down the side of the Barnsley defence but to 
the home crowd’s delight he slipped before he could get a shot away.

Aly Cissokho sent in a teasing low cross just after the break but Kodjia 
failed to get a touch and Davies came out to smother any danger.

Villa continued to press and when Kodjia broke into the penalty area, he 
selflessly laid the ball to Grealish but his touch let him down and Barnsley 
cleared.

Leandro Bacuna then received his fifth booking of the season and will miss 
Villa’s trip to Preston.

Villa went ahead when Kodjia forced a good save from Davies but Ayew was alert 
to pick up the rebound and ran at the near post before smashing the ball in 
between the keeper and his left post.

The Barnsley manager, Paul Heckingbottom, made three changes in the following 
10 minutes and one of those, Adam Hammill, nearly made the perfect entrance but 
he sent a low shot just wide of a post. Villa failed to clear a corner, and 
Winnall leapt the highest to head home in front of the home supporters.

Kodjia tested Davies moments later with a powerful effort sent across goal but 
he stood firm and held on to the shot.
 