
When Charles Aránguiz struck for goal midway through the second half 
everything seemed to lapse into slow-motion. It was Tottenham Hotspur’s 
misfortune the ball deflected first off Ben Davies and then off Kyle Walker to 
fall perfectly for Kevin Kampl. TheBayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> midfielder took one 
touch before he swept it low past Hugo Lloris from close-range.

This was no streaky Leverkusen success. They had a plan to stifle Tottenham 
which they executed to perfection and it was the Bundesliga team who had the 
best of the limited crop of chances. Not for the first time in recent weeks 
Tottenham failed to click in an attacking sense and it was difficult to 
remember Bernd Leno being truly extended in the Leverkusen goal.

Eric Dier rattled the crossbar with an 83rd minute free-kick, when Leno was 
beaten, but there would be no bail out for Tottenham. They had been dismal in 
the first half and not too much better in the second. So many of their players 
picked the worst possible moment to give their worst performances of the season 
and it was a reflection of the frustration that there were boos from the crowd 
at full-time.

Tottenham had slipped to a 2-1 defeat here against Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-wembley-monaco-champions-league>
 in their opening Champions League Group E tie but at least on that occasion, 
they had played with a bit of drive. This time they could not free themselves 
from the shackles of Leverkusen’s pressing and with Monaco beating CSKA Moscow, 
their hopes of reaching the knock-out rounds hang by a thread.

A crowd of 85,512 – a record for an English club’s home game – watched 
Tottenham’s goal drought continue; they have scored only three times in six 
matches in all competitions and if Wembley continued to feel a long way from 
home, it was certainly a terrible way to prepare for Sunday’s derby at Arsenal.

Leverkusen pressed high and hard from the first whistle and no Tottenham 
player seemed immune to their pressure, and that included Lloris, who struggled 
to play out from the back. Tottenham set the tone for the evening in the early 
running with a series of sloppy balls, whether as a result of their opponents’ 
hustling or otherwise, and for long spells it seemed as though there were dark 
shirts everywhere.

Roger Schmidt, the Leverkusen manager, got his tactics spot-on; Tottenham 
gasped for breath and by the midway point of the first half the home fans had 
grown edgy. They howled whenever one of their players misplaced a pass, which 
was often, and it was startling to see how poorly those in white looked after 
the ball when in possession.

Walker had a dismal game, in which he made a clutch of big errors while Ben 
Davies and Dier were also badly off-colour in defence. Tottenham had reason to 
be grateful to Jan Vertonghen – the centre-half was the only player to emerge 
with any credit.

Further forward, Moussa Sissoko had an evening to forget, Christian Eriksen 
and Dele Alli toiled, and Son Heung-min was anonymous.

The Wembley factor underscored the occasion. Mauricio Pochettino, the 
Tottenham manager, had spoken on Tuesday about how he had been lifted, as a 
visiting Argentina player in 2000, by the stadium’s reputation and it could be 
argued that those of Monaco and Leverkusen have felt the same way.

Then again everything is relative and it was Tottenham who had the backing of 
the huge crowd. Why could they not have been lifted even higher?

Pochettino had started with a 4-2-3-1 formation, with Son as the No9 and 
Vincent Janssen on the bench. But he changed after 30 minutes. He had to do 
something. He has talked of 4-1-4-1 as being his Plan B and he implemented it, 
taking off Mousa Dembélé, who had twisted an ankle, and sending on Janssen up 
front. Son moved wide.

Leverkusen had the first half’s only clear chance on 43 minutes after Walker 
had taken a heavy touch and been robbed by Julian Brandt. The Leverkusen 
midfielder was stopped by Vertonghen’s tackle but when the ball broke for 
Javier Hernández, he looked odds-on to score. Vertonghen stretched again to 
divert the striker’s shot past the far post. Janssen flickered. He thought he 
had beaten Jonathan Tah only to be penalised for a foul on him which voided his 
subsequent shot.

Janssen also dragged beyond the far post early in the second half on the 
second phase of a Tottenham break. The first had seen Alli tumble over Omer 
Toprak’s outstretched leg inside the area. No penalty. Alli looked to have 
initiated the contact.

Walker burst forward but shot wide and after a Dier error another chance 
opened up for Leverkusen’s Hernández but once again his shot was blocked by 
Vertonghen. Hernández’s follow-up was saved by Lloris.

Tottenham almost snatched what would have been a precious point when Dier’s 
free-kick thumped against the woodwork and Janssen almost converted the 
rebound, only for Toprak to clear.

There was also the moment when Davies sent a low shot past the far post. 
Tottenham, though, did not do enough to merit reward.

Mauricio Pochettino ‘embarrassed’ by Tottenham Hotspur’s Wembley form
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/tottenham-manager-mauricio-pochettino-wembley-defeat> 