
Borussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> wrecked Bayern 
Munich’s party when they struck back for a 1-1 draw on Saturday, forcing the 
Bavarians to wait at least another week to clinch a fourth successive 
Bundesliga title.

Bayern, needing a win to wrap up the title, were made to pay for their 
complacency as they rotated their team and sat back after Thomas Müller had 
given them an early lead.

The 75,000-capacity Allianz Arena crowd, clearly believing the match was a 
formality after seeing their team win 14 of their previous 15 home league games 
this season, were stunned when André Hahn equalised midway through the second 
half.

Second-placed Borussia Dortmund closed the gap to five points by thrashing 
Wolfsburg 5-1, helped by two second-half goals from substitute Pierre-Emerick 
Aubameyang.

Bayern still remain firm favourites for the title, with their remaining games 
away to mid-table Ingolstadt and at home to relegated Hannover.

The Bayern coach Pep Guardiola made eight changes from the side which lost 1-0 
at Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/diego-simeone-saul-atletico-madrid-bayern-munich-pep-guardiola>
 in the Champions League on Wednesday with Philipp Lahm, Javi Martínez, David 
Alaba, Xabi Alonso, Arturo Vidal and Robert Lewandowski among the regulars left 
out.

Even so, Bayern took a sixth-minute lead when Müller met Joshua Kimmich’s 
corner with a low header from 10 yards which bounced past several players and 
went in off the foot of the post.

However, the hosts allowed Mönchengladbach to regain the initiative and there 
were even some whistles from the home crowd as Bayern’s defenders at one point 
passed the ball among themselves.

Fourth-placed Mönchengladbach, unbeaten in their past four games with Bayern, 
produced several scares and equalised when Hahn got between the Bayern defence 
to collect a pass from Lars Stindl, made space and drilled his shot between 
Manuel Neuer and his near post.

Bayern threw themselves into the attack without offering much of a threat in 
the closing minutes, while Mönchengladbach held on to end a run of four 
successive away defeats and move above Hertha Berlin in the table.
 