
Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> clinched 
their 25th Bundesliga title with one game of the season to spare thanks to a 
2-1 win at Ingolstadt.

Robert Lewandowski’s 28th and 29th goals of the season, the first coming from 
the penalty spot, put one hand on a fourth straight league title for the 
Bavarians. Moritz Hartmann made them wait to make sure as he pulled a goal back 
from the penalty spot, but there was to be no fairytale recovery as their 
illustrious neighbours took the points and the title.

Ingolstadt <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ingolstadt>, with their place in 
the Bundesliga next season already secure, were clearly out to enjoy the 
occasion in a game their coach, Ralph Hasenhüttl, had branded the “highlight of 
the season”. They chased, harried and hassled the Bayern defenders from the 
start, forcing Manuel Neuer to have more touches of the ball than he is 
accustomed to.

The first shot on goal came at the other end, though, with David Alaba’s 
free-kick just clearing the crossbar. A mistake in midfield allowed Douglas 
Costa to skip past two players and put Franck Ribery through on goal, and he 
went to ground inside the penalty area as he tried to touch the ball past 
Marvin Matip.

A penalty was awarded and Lewandowski stroked it in, thanking the regular 
penalty-taker Thomas Müller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/bayern-munich-atletico-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
 for allowing him to improve his chances of winning the top-scorer’s award this 
season.

Costa could and perhaps should have doubled Bayern’s lead midway through the 
first half when he beat the offside trap and was left with only Ramazan Ozcan 
to beat, but having rounded the last line of the Ingolstadt defence, he lost 
his balance slightly and placed his shot wide as he fell to the ground.

A weak Mathew Leckie shot was no problem for Neuer, who made amends for his 
mistake in giving away possession, before Hartmann placed his shot wide with 
only the Bayern and Germany No1 to beat.

Lewandowski then strengthened Bayern’s grip on the title and his own on the 
top-scorer’s award, turning Xabi Alonso’s through-ball into the far corner of 
Ozcan’s goal.

Leckie nearly pulled a goal back immediately with Neuer brave and alert near 
his right-hand post to deny the Australian, before Lewandowski became the third 
Bayern player to fail in a one-on-one with Ozcan, taking the ball a little wide 
after skipping past the goalkeeper and seeing the chance go to waste.

Ingolstadt were given a penalty five minutes before the break when Xabi Alonso 
fouled Hartmann, who picked himself up to fire past Neuer and convert his 
seventh penalty of the season, his 11th goal of the campaign.

Alaba and Costa both flashed shots wide of the right-hand post before Muller 
failed to beat Ozcan in another one-on-one situation.

Back at the other end, Hartmann’s shot went just inches wide of the post as 
Ingolstadt, against their fellow Bavarians, came close to levelling on the 
counterattack.

Lukas Hinterseer sent another shot wide but Pep Guardiola’s men held on for 
all three points which earned them a hat-trick of titles under the Spanish 
coach.
 