
Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> suffered 
their first defeat for three months when the Bundesliga leaders lost 2-1 at 
home to Mainz. The Colombian Jhon Córdoba snatched the winner in the 86th 
minute.

Pep Guardiola’s team gave a lacklustre display and Mainz, who are fifth in the 
table, went 1-0 up when Jairo Samperio arrived at the far post to hammer Giulio 
Donati’s cross past Manuel Neuer in the 26th minute.

Cristiano Ronaldo penalty helps Real Madrid to victory against Levante
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/02/levante-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
Bayern, who were last beaten by Borussia Mönchengladbach on 5 December, 
equalised with a 25-metre drive from Arjen Robben in the 64th minute. The 
winger was set up by Arturo Vidal and Robben controlled the ball before hitting 
a thunderous left-foot shot to score his first goal since November.

Bayern pushed for a second goal but Mainz hit them on the break when Daniel 
Brosinski found Julian Baumgartlinger and his cutback was converted from the 
edge of the area by Córdoba.

“The game was a clear indication that it’s not easy to win in the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>,” said the Bayern 
coach, Pep Guardiola. “Congratulations to Mainz for the victory. In the second 
half it wasn’t easy, with 10 players in their penalty area, but we had enough 
chances to win the game. We still have much work to do to defend our title.”

Bayern are on 62 points while Borussia Dortmund have 57 after they beat SV 
Darmstadt 2-0.

Adrian Ramos’ first-half header gave Dortmund a 38th-minute lead at Darmstadt, 
the striker flicking Gonzalo Castro’s fine curling ball past Christian 
Mathenia, before Erik Durm finished from close range after more good work by 
Castro.

“The victory gives us an enormous boost,” said the Dortmund coach, Thomas 
Tuchel. Dortmund play Bayern on Saturday.

Gladbach remained fourth on 39 points after outclassing Stuttgart 4-0 while 
Schalke 04 defeated Hamburg SV, who had Johan Djourou sent off in the 45th 
minute, 3-2.

Bayer Leverkusen lost 4-1 at home to Werder Bremen while relegation-threatened 
Hoffenheim sank Augsburg 2-1 with Mark Uth grabbing the 81st-minute winner.
 