
It was comforting to hear that Camber Sands would be enjoying lifeguard cover 
during the bank holiday weekend, butyour report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/26/lack-of-uk-law-requiring-lifeguards-on-all-beaches-means-varied-presence>
 (27 August) pointed to the patchy picture regarding lifeguard cover in general 
along Britain’s long coastline. In our experience the relevant authorities need 
do no more than look across the English Channel.

Like the UK, France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> has a long 
coastline with an abundance of beaches, but we experienced a very different 
approach to safety on our recent holiday on the coast near Boulogne and Le 
Touquet. At each resort there were teams of attentive lifeguards at all times 
in the daylight hours, actively monitoring the many thousands of holidaymakers. 
They had defined zones, guards at the water’s edge, boats patrolling just 
offshore and on-beach vehicles, with a rescue station at the top of the beach 
in every case.

Each time the tide came in, the lifeguards would order everyone out of the 
water. One guard explained that the tide comes in so fast, like a low tidal 
wave, that it is very dangerous, especially for children or weak swimmers. 
Every beach had full signage on display, in French and English, showing just 
what happens in such circumstances.

In short, we experienced well-organised and efficient lifeguard services on 
every beach, even those next to small villages and towns.
Patrick and Jenny Coffey
Heathfield, East Sussex

• We have just enjoyed a week at De Haan on the Belgian coast. Over a 
kilometre stretch of shore there were lifeguards positioned every 200 metres on 
raised chairs. In addition there were four lifeguards on foot patrol. There 
were two motorised dinghies patrolling the sea about 50 metres offshore, each 
with two lifeguards aboard.

According to a lifeguard on duty on Friday there are 16 lifeguards present 
throughout the day during July and August. The costs are met by the government 
budget. There have been no drownings in more than 30 years.

I can’t find figures for the numbers of holidaymakers on the beach at peak 
time, but based on my observation I estimate they total many thousands (but 
fewer than those reported at Camber Sands). The primary imperative of 
government is to protect its citizens, and it is clearBelgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium> takes this responsibility seriously.
Charles Groutage
Earl Shilton, Leicestershire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 