
I’m always pleased to see the January beauty collections, those welcome 
palate-cleansers after the rich, velvety, glittery textures and tones of party 
season. The industry invariably rings in the new year with natural-looking 
complexion products to restore glow and evenness after weeks of overindulgence 
and sleeplessness have left their mark. There’s a sense of clearing the decks, 
returning to basics – and yet, ironically, this is often when the most 
interesting formulas launch.

This month’s is a particularly good vintage. Smashbox is a brand I recommend 
often as a dependable choice for primer (its speciality: it makes more than a 
dozen, all of them good except Primer Oil, which I still don’t understand). Its 
newPhoto-Finish Foundation Primer Radiance with hyaluronic acid (£30, out this 
month) is the best yet. Ostensibly, it’s just the old luminising primer 
squirted into a posh jar (at least, that was my instinct), but in practice, 
it’s a much thicker, more moisturising and flattering formula that smooths 
skin, blurs and softens lines, subtly plumps up crépey-ness, and adds a glowy, 
peachy tone to any skin between white and latte coffee. It works wonderfully on 
its own with a little concealer spot-applied over blemishes and circles; or, if 
you prefer, as a lasting undercoat to a fuller base. It does, however, contain 
moisturising shea butter, so if you’re oilier of skin, you’d be wise to opt 
instead for Nars’ excellent newRadiance Primer (£27), part of a three-strong 
collection catering for all skin types. It has a wetter texture than the 
Smashbox, and consequently gives skin that lovely, dewy look that feels just 
right for this time of year. What I particularly love about it is that you can 
be quite careless and slapdash with makeup application over the top, and the 
formula doesn’t peel, bobble or streak, which is rare in the primer category.

Related: The 40 best beauty buys for all ages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/may/13/40-best-beauty-buys-all-ages-sali-hughes>

Also new is Nars’ first cover-up since the (still) brilliant Radiant Creamy 
Concealer a few years back:Soft Matte Complete Concealer (£23) sits alongside 
its predecessor and comes in the exact same shades for ease of selection. The 
name describes it perfectly – this covers everything, from the darkest circles 
to the reddest spot – but unlike so many full-coverage concealers, it isn’t the 
texture of greasepaint. The silken, comfy cream blends perfectly before melting 
into skin and staying there until bedtime. Full marks all round.
 