
A new pair of beavers has been released into a river in Devon to boost the 
genetic diversity of England’s only wild population of the mammals.

The male and female were set free on the river Otter as part of a five-year 
trial monitoring the impact of Eurasian beavers, a species hunted to extinction 
hundreds of years ago in the UK, on the surrounding landscape, wildlife and 
economy.

Beavers have been living wild on the river Otter for up to a decade but faced 
being re-homed in captivity after evidence emerged that they were successfully 
breeding.

Wild beavers seen in England for first time in centuries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/27/wild-beavers-england-devon-river>
Plans for a monitoring trial were put forward by Devon Wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trust, with the backing of 
local people, and were given the green light by government agency Natural 
England, subject to the adults being temporarily captured for disease testing.

Genetic screening of the captured adults - which were re-released last year – 
revealed they were all closely related, and a decision was taken to introduce a 
new pair to increase the gene pool and boost the number of breeding animals.

Devon Wildlife Trust’s Peter Burgess said the results had shown it was likely 
there was one mother potentially breeding with her offspring.

There were also concerns that with just two breeding pairs, if one or more of 
the females died, there would be a declining population.

For the release the new beavers, both around two years old, were carried in 
separate crates through a boggy field down to the riverbank, where the team of 
wildlife experts had constructed two lodges for them in a quiet spot under 
willow trees.

The crates were pushed up against the entrance to the lodges and the beavers 
were moved in with a bit of encouragement, before the team sealed up the 
manmade homes and retreated to watch what was going on inside via infrared 
cameras.

The female set about trying to dig her way out, while the male settled down 
with some apple and willow provided as food.

A little while later, after some concerns about what would happen if the 
female got out of her lodge and was able to corner the male in his, both were 
opened up and the beavers were left to explore their new habitat.

Burgess said the beavers, which had been bred in captivity in Devon, appeared 
to take to their new situation “perfectly well”.

“It’s the perfect site. It’s absolutely stunning from a wildlife perspective, 
it’s got everything the beaver needs: it’s quiet, out of the way, right on the 
edge of the river, they’ve got food. It’s a piece of the river Otter that’s 
ideal for the animals,” he said.

Wildlife experts back the return of beavers, which manage the landscape by 
coppicing trees and building dams, because of the benefits for flood 
prevention, water quality and wildlife, but farmers are among those who have 
raised concerns over their impact.

Beavers blamed for flash floods in Scotland may actually control problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/16/beavers-blamed-flash-floods-scotland-control-flooding-study>
Harry Barton, chief executive of Devon Wildlife Trust, described the release 
as a “fantastic next step” in the project.

“The result of this, we hope, is they thrive, they get on with each other and 
breed, and then in the longer term the progeny we hope this pair have will meet 
with their distant relatives downstream and there’s a next generation more 
genetically diverse.

“It’s very exciting,” he said.

If the male does not hit it off with the female, it is not a problem as they 
can head downstream on the river Otter, where they will encounter other members 
of the population of around 11 beavers, and potentially breed with them.
 