
Seven types of bees once found in abundance in Hawaii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii> have become the first bees to be 
added to the US federal list of endangered and threatened species.


 The listing decision, published on Friday in the Federal Register, classifies 
seven varieties of yellow-faced or masked bees as endangered, due to such 
factors as habitat loss, wildfires and the invasion of non-native plants and 
insects.

 The bees, so named for yellow-to-white facial markings, once crowded Hawaii 
and Maui but recent surveys found their populations have plunged in the same 
fashion as other types of wild bees – and some commercial ones – elsewhere in 
the United States, federal wildlife managers said.

Plan bee: Minnesota sets broad limits on chemicals blamed for bee decline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/27/plan-bee-minnesota-sets-broad-limits-on-chemicals-blamed-for-bee-decline>
 Pollinators like bees are crucial for the production of fruits, nuts and 
vegetables and they represent billions of dollars in value each year to the 
nation’s agricultural economy, officials said.

Placing yellow-faced bees under federal safeguards comes just over a week 
since the US Fish andWildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife>
 Service proposed adding the imperilled rusty patched bumble bee, a prized but 
vanishing pollinator once found in the upper midwest and north-eastern United 
States, to the endangered and threatened species list.

 One of several wild bee species seen declining over the past two decades, the 
rusty patched bumble bee is the first in the continental United States formally 
proposed for protections.

The listing of the Hawaii species followed years of study by the conservation 
group Xerces Society, state government officials and independent researchers. 
The Xerces Society said its goal was to protect nature’s pollinators and 
invertebrates, which play a vital role in the health of the overall ecosystem.

The non-profit organization was involved in the initial petitions to protect 
the bee species, said Sarina Jepson, director of endangered species and aquatic 
programs for the Portland, Oregon-based group.

Jepson said yellow-faced bees could be found elsewhere in the world, but these 
particular species were native only to Hawaii and pollinate plant species 
indigenous to the islands.

The bees faced a variety of threats including “feral pigs, invasive ants, loss 
of native habitat due to invasive plants, fire, as well as development, 
especially in some for the coastal areas”, Jepson told Associated Press.

The bees could be found in a wide variety of habitats in Hawaii, from coastal 
environments to high-elevation shrub lands, she said. The yellow-faced bees 
pollinated some of Hawaii’s endangered native plant species. While other bees 
could potentially pollinate those species, many could become extinct if these 
bees were to die off entirely.

Hawaii-based entomologist Karl Magnacca said the bees “tend to favor the more 
dominant trees and shrubs we have here”, he said. “People tend to focus on the 
rare plants, and those are important, that’s a big part of the diversity. But 
the other side is maintaining the common ones as common. (The bees) help 
maintain the structure of the whole forest.”

The bees were critical for maintaining the health of plants and other animals 
across the islands, said Gregory Koob, conservation and restoration team 
manager for the Fish and Wildlife Service in Honolulu.

“Those plants are not only food and nesting habitat for the bees, but they 
also provide habitat for other animals,” he said. “It’s the web of life.”

Reuters and Associated Press contributed to this report. 
 