
Fairytales are as rare in rugby league as meaningless field goals, Dave Tyrell 
tries and New South Wales State of Origin series wins. They don’t come often 
and if they do, they seldom last long.

After 50 long years of waiting for that maiden title, the Cronulla Sharks have 
found themselves just a month later embroiled in another controversy.Star 
fullback Ben Barba has been released from the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/ben-barba-released-by-cronulla-sharks-after-positive-drugs-test>
 after testing positive for cocaine so he can “address some significant 
personal issues”.

Ben Barba released by Cronulla Sharks after positive cocaine test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/ben-barba-released-by-cronulla-sharks-after-positive-drugs-test>
Barba’s 2016 season was seemingly one of redemption. After winning the 2012 
Dally M medal, Barba’s career was seemingly on a downward spiral, released from 
both Canterbury and Brisbane before enduring a painful first season with the 
Sharks where he started the majority of the season off the bench.

Heading into this year, he was locked in a three-way battle for the fullback 
position with Valentine Holmes and Jack Bird. He ended it with a premiership, a 
ninth-placed finish in the Dally M medal and 16 tries, playing in all 27 of the 
Sharks’ games.

Now his career is again at the crossroads. A second strike for testing 
positive to an illicit substance means an automatic ban of 12 games. He will be 
allowed back in the game with theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> 
unlikely to prevent a club registering a new contract; what Barba did was break 
the code of conduct but the crime does not deserve a punishment that 
permanently excommunicates him from the game.

Finding a new club willing to take Barba and his significant baggage is 
another matter entirely. It will be a business decision and one that does not 
come without risks.

Working in his favour is his undoubted talent and the fact the NRL is likely 
to start any suspension from round one next year. Against him is a long history 
of off-field trouble and the fact he will miss at least half of the 2017 
season, as well as the depth at the fullback position across the league.

Arguably only Canberra, South Sydney and St George Illawarra need help at the 
No1 position and all have custodians who are more than serviceable, the latter 
two having internationals, though they would prefer to play Greg Inglis and 
Josh Dugan respectively elsewhere.

While Cronulla will be devastated to lose such a sublime talent as Barba – and 
he really was a difference maker in what at times could be a fairly predictable 
attack – the club can stand tall for how it has handled the matter.

The broom was kept in the cupboard. There was no sweeping this under the rug. 
The Sharks had long been criticised for being an amateur club in a professional 
game. For many years they did not even have a chief executive. But after the 
Asada scandal exposed many failings, there is no doubt they have heeded the 
necessary lessons.

This Sharks administration will forever be remembered for bringing the club 
its first title. It should also be credited with lifting the standards to which 
the club is held and improving the processes with which the organisation 
operates.

There is no doubt the loss of Barba will significantly dent Cronulla’s hopes 
of becoming the first team in nearly a quarter of a century to win back-to-back 
titles. Valentine Holmes is an immense talent with a bright future. But like 
Latrell Mitchell at the Roosters, it doesn’t matter how talented a player may 
be, converting from wing to fullback comes only with time and plenty of hard 
lessons. Holmes’ game is also markedly different from Barba’s, the latter being 
far more a finisher than a creator.

Then there is the issue of finding a replacement for Holmes on the wing. Jacob 
Gagan is the natural replacement but he has not played first grade in two 
seasons and outside backs with only seven games under their belt by the age of 
24 typically don’t have a great deal of upside.

Winning a premiership is difficult. Winning consecutive titles is 
near-impossible. The Sharks earned their title primarily through two key 
elements: continuity of team and solidarity of culture. The release of Barba – 
combined with the retirement of Michael Ennis – means half of the spine will 
need to be replaced for the Sharks’ title defence. The protective nature with 
which players cared for Barba in 2016 was a significant cultural driver at the 
club.

While there is pain in losing Barba, Cronulla have made the right decision in 
granting Barba’s release. They are the premiers. And they stand for something.

For Barba, the hurt is no doubt more acute. His Sharks story has no happy 
ending. His future is again in limbo. His demons have again bested him. The 
game should not turn its back on him though.Rugby league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugbyleague> has always been a game of 
opportunity and Barba is not undeserving of another chance.
 