
Ben Barba has signed a one-year NRL deal to return to Cronulla, however he may 
not be able to begin training with the defendingNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> premiers for up to four months.


The Sharks confirmed on Wednesday they had signed their premiership-winning 
fullback, just over two months after they released him followinghis second 
positive test for illicit drugs within a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/ben-barba-released-by-cronulla-sharks-after-positive-drugs-test>
.


Related: Cronulla confirm Ben Barba is wanted back at club following stint in 
rehab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/cronulla-confirm-ben-barba-is-wanted-back-at-club-following-stint-in-rehab>

However his contract will have to be registered by the NRL, who will need to 
be convinced Barba has undergone enough steps to be rehabilitated to return to 
the game after being handed a 12-game ban at the end of last season that will 
rule him out until June.


“[Barba] has worked diligently on making his return to the NRL a reality and 
is continuing his well-being program,” the Sharks said in a statement. “Our 
club met with Barba and his management to discuss the new contract proposal for 
consideration by the NRL.”

Barba headed to Thailand for a four-week stint in a rehabilitation clinic 
following the ban, but his manager claimed at the time the stay was for an 
anxiety disorder, and not drug related.


Regardless of the outcome of the contract registration, it is understood he 
may be forced to wait until just before his anticipated June return date before 
he can train with the Cronulla again.


The 27-year-old would also be on his final drugs warning, with a third breach 
likely to lead to contract termination as per the NRL’s illicit drug policy.


Last year’s positive test was the latest part of a drama to engulf the 2012 
Dally M medallist, as his rollercoaster NRL ride has continued since he shot 
onto the scene as an exciting prospect with Canterbury in 2008.


He took the Bulldogs to the 2012 grand final on the back of 22 tries in 27 
matches, but was released at the end of the following year to Brisbane amidst 
reports of problems with his partner.


He returned to Sydney with Cronulla in 2015, and last year starred by scoring 
15 tries and setting up another 18 en route to the club’s maiden premiership. 
However his future was again thrown in jeopardy after he tested positive to 
cocaine during the grand final celebrations.

It is not expected Barba will be able to return for the Sharks until their 
round-14 clash with Melbourne at home, on 8 June.
 