
Rangers failed to exorcise the ghosts of 1967 here last night when they were 
taken to a third-round replay by BerwickRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, who languish at the bottom of 
the Second Division.

When Rangers lost 1-0 here in the Cup 35 years ago the BBC's afternoon sports 
report of the time at first refused to accept the 1-0 scoreline as fact. Some 
Celtic fans can remember precisely where they were when their Old Firm rivals 
were so humiliated.

Although Berwick <https://www.theguardian.com/football/berwick> now face a 
formidable task in the replay at Ibrox on Monday there is plenty of incentive 
for them in the shape of a home tie against Hibernian for the eventual winners.

As five of that '67 Berwick team, including the scorer Sammy Reid, watched 
from the rickety main stand history came close to repeating itself.

In many ways, indeed, this result was the equal of 35 years ago because the 
differential in terms of finance at the two clubs has grown to such an extent 
that a week's wages of any of Rangers' star players is more or less as much as 
the "Wee Rangers" take in gate money in a season.

Yet, finance was the furthest thing from the mind of Berwick's chairman Jamie 
Curle. After the initial celebrations died down he said: "I'm not interested in 
the money from this or the replay at Ibrox on Monday. Instead this has proved 
Berwick can put on a big event and the world was watching. It was excellent and 
who would think we are bottom of the Second Division?"

Inevitably the events of 1967 when two Rangers players, George McLean and Jim 
Forrest, never played for the club again, were a huge part in the build up to 
this match which was originally postponed because of weather 10 days ago and 
although such a fate is unlikely for the current team it was nevertheless a 
humiliating performance and result for Rangers.

The Rangers' manager Alex McLeish said: "It was very poor. We were pedestrian 
and lacked inspiration and incisiveness. The players are very disappointed 
because they know themselves it was so poor. I expected more and so did the 
fans."

In contrast to McLeish, his Berwick counterpart Paul Smith was in ebullient 
mood. "I think this is as big a result as the 1967 one," he said. "I told the 
players before the tie that I was fed up hearing about that game and how those 
players became legends and told them to become legends themselves. They've done 
that.

"Privately I feared losing seven or eight goals but instead I'm delighted with 
the players' efforts. I thought they were magnificent and thoroughly deserved 
the replay. We worked really hard and frustrated Rangers."

Their captain, and man of the match, Alan Neill added: "What a night. My son 
Morgyn was mascot and all this is beyond my wildest dreams.

"Now we'll go to Ibrox again hoping not to lose goals because the last thing 
we want to see is Rangers showboating."

There is precious little chance of that if the Premier League team play as 
they did last night because, apart from a Tore Andre Flo header straight at 
Willie McCulloch, a Stephen Hughes shot well held and a Tony Vidmar effort 
brilliantly blocked by the goal keeper, Rangers were bereft of ideas and 
therefore chances.

Even the introduction of Andrei Kanchelskis, Shota Arveladze and Ronald de 
Boer for Claudio Caniggia, Flo and Russell Latapy failed to raise Rangers from 
their stupor.
 