
A best man who swindled a groom and his friends out of almost £8,000, failed 
to book flights for a stag do and lied about having terminal cancer has been 
jailed for 20 months.

Martyn Galvin, 30, was sentenced on Thursday at Teesside crown court and 
ordered to repay the stolen funds.

Nobody actually enjoys stag and hen dos. Especially not the city of York | 
Joel Golby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/24/stag-hen-dos-york-anti-social-behaviour>
The stag party – the groom and 16 of his friends – only realised the deception 
when they got toNewcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> airport in 
August last year to find there were no flights or accommodation reserved in 
Prague. Galvin tried to blame the travel agent for getting the dates wrong.

The groom had asked Galvin – his closest friend – to be best man at his 
wedding before he had even proposed to his partner, prosecutor Jenny Haigh told 
the court.

He said Galvin, from Yarm in North Yorkshire, constantly distracted him from 
wedding plans with problems about payments for the stag dos in the Czech 
capital and a day at York races.

In a statement read out in court, the groom said: “When Martyn told me he had 
suspected cancer I was absolutely devastated for him and his family. I offered 
to take over the organising but he insisted, stating a groom should never have 
to organise his own stag do. How could I not feel guilty? I felt I had put too 
much on him.”

Galvin’s claim to have terminal bowel cancer was exposed as a lie. 

“I was told by his mum that he did not have any sort of cancer and he had not 
left the house all week. I was beyond devastated,” the groom said. “I could not 
believe that Martyn had done this to me.”

The victim said he now felt like he was known as “the groom whose best man 
screwed his friends and family over money, and I’m ashamed”.


He added: “For months he conned me and a lot of our friends into thinking he 
was seriously ill for the plain reason of money. At no point did he hesitate in 
his scheme. He had six months to organise a stag do but he didn’t. He just took 
the money he was asking people for.”

Despite the emotional turmoil that Galvin inflicted, the groom said he did not 
let the scam spoil his wedding.

“I picked a new best man and the wedding day was the proudest, happiest day of 
my life with no mention of the existence of Martyn or the stag do,” he said.

“Since he confessed what he had done, I’ve not seen Martyn and I never want to 
see him again.”

Judge Simon Bourne-Arton QC, the recorder of Middlesbrough, told Galvin that 
his scam was “perhaps one of the nastiest and meanest I’ve encountered in my 
time involved in criminal law”.

“The fraud involved a string of quite dreadful lies, lies to your best friend, 
a man who entrusted in you the task and the honour of being his best man,” he 
added.

Duncan McReddie, defending, said Galvin had a long-running gambling addiction. 
His client was truly remorseful and he and his family would compensate all the 
victims in full.

 