
All bird keepers, from poultry farmers to families with a few chickens, have 
been ordered to house their animals for a month to protect the UK from a 
virulent outbreak of avian flu on mainland Europe.

The government’s chief vet, Nigel Gibbens, has declared a “prevention zone” 
for England that requires commercial and individual bird keepers to keep their 
birds inside for 30 days or take steps to separate them from wild birds.

The order, which was texted to poultry farmers on Tuesday, comes after a type 
of highly pathogenic avian flu, H5N8, was found in dead wild birds and some 
farm birds across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/190000-ducks-destroyed-at-six-dutch-farms-after-bird-flu-outbreak>
.

“The risk that we are trying to prevent is to our British poultry flock … to 
make sure these birds are protected against disease,” Gibbens told BBC Radio 
4’s Today programme.

He added: “Everybody should do what they can. Pet bird keepers should do their 
best and take sensible measures to separate them from wild birds, while looking 
after their welfare. I don’t want people putting them in a box in the dark and 
keeping them there for weeks on end.”

Similar restrictions have been imposed in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/bird-flu-hits-french-foie-gras-industry-at-busiest-time-of-year>
 after the detection of bird flu in farms in the south-west of the country and 
in wild ducks in the north.

The Food Standards Agency said bird flu “does not pose a food safety risk for 
UK consumers”.

A spokeswoman added: “On the basis of current scientific evidence, our advice 
is that bird flu does not pose a food safety risk for UK consumers.

“The risk of getting bird flu through the food chain is very low. Some strains 
of avian influenza can pass to humans, but this is very rare. It usually 
requires close contact between the human and infected live birds. Properly 
cooked chicken and turkey and poultry products, including eggs, are safe to 
eat.”

The H5N8 strain of bird flu has not been detected on British farms. Gibbens 
said that if it was, all the birds in the infected flock would have to be 
slaughtered under disease control requirements.

Gibbens also urged farmers to take extra measures such as disinfecting 
clothing and equipment and making sure feed and water was not accessible to 
wild birds, to prevent infection.

He said: “I ought to emphasise that this disease does get into house birds. So 
the other important thing for farmers to do is increase and maintain their 
bio-security so disease isn’t carried into houses where birds are housed.”

Public Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England (PHE) said 
the threat to humans from the bird flu strain remained very low.

Gibbens said the 30-day order may have to be extended. He said: “We will see 
how this threat of disease develops during the year. Migration has not yet 
quite finished; it is possible that disease may circulate in our domestic wild 
birds as well. We will keep this under review, look at whether it is being 
effective, look at how well it is being complied with and then take a 
considered view after 30 days.”

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said it had 
increased its surveillance for the disease. In a statement, Gibbens added: 
“While no cases have been found in the UK, and PHE advises the public health 
threat is low, we are closely monitoring the situation across Europe and have 
scaled up surveillance in response to the heightened risk.”

Poultry keepers are being advised to be vigilant for signs of bird flu and to 
call their vet promptly if they have any concerns.

Members of the public are being asked to report cases of dead wild waterfowl 
such as swans, geese, ducks and gulls, or five or more dead birds of other 
species to Defra.


Mark Gorton, director of a free-range turkey and chicken producer in Norfolk, 
said the order to keep birds inside was sensible, and it was fortunate the 
situation had not occurred earlier in the run-up to Christmas.


“Most of the Christmas turkeys are done,” he said. “They’re safely packed and 
in the cold stores, ready for Christmas dinners. It could have been worse if it 
happened two or three weeks ago, and in this sense Christmas dinner is still 
safe.”


Gorton’s business, Traditional Norfolk Poultry, has between 500,000 and a 
million birds at this time of year at small farms across East Anglia.


He said the free-range birds had houses they could shelter in, and they would 
be kept in these full-time until the order was lifted.


This posed no welfare issues for the birds, and the houses were “very light 
and airy” with lots of windows, said Gorton.


Avian flu: a brief guide

What is it?

Avian influenza, also known as bird flu, is a contagious viral disease in 
animals, caused by a virus loosely related to human influenza. Some strains of 
the disease have been passed to humans but this is very rare, and usually only 
occurs after very close contact with infected birds or animals. While all bird 
species and, less commonly, pigs are thought to be susceptible, domestic 
poultry flocks are especially vulnerable to infection. Outbreaks can rapidly 
result in epidemics among bird populations.

How does it spread?


World Health Organisation scientists believe it is likely the virus is carried 
by migrating birds. Others, such as the Royal Society for the Protection ofBirds
 <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/birds> and Birdlife International, 
argue there is strong evidence to suggest the poultry trade plays a large role 
in the spread of bird flu. The H5N8 strain has not been detected on British 
farms. Gibbens said if it were, all the birds in the infected flock would have 
to be slaughtered under disease control requirements.

Is my food safe?


The Food Standards Agency said: “On the basis of current scientific evidence, 
our advice is that bird flu does not pose a food safety risk for UK consumers.

“The risk of getting bird flu through the food chain is very low. Some strains 
of avian influenza can pass to humans, but this is very rare. Properly cooked 
chicken and turkey and poultry products, including eggs, are safe to eat.”

Will turkey supplies be affected?


Mark Gorton, director of a company that produces free-range turkeys and 
chickens in Norfolk, said most turkeys for Christmas had already been 
slaughtered and frozen. “They’re safely packed and in the cold stores, ready 
for Christmas dinners,” he said.
 