
As I walked out into the garden I could see the bird, wings pressed against 
the glass panes of our greenhouse, beak open, in sheer terror. It was a young 
male sparrowhawk, which had fallen victim to its ability to fly fast and low – 
straight through the open greenhouse door.

I made calming sounds as I approached, as if I were trying to reassure a 
frightened child. My hands safely around its shivering body, I lifted it to 
safety. My children and I spent a few seconds looking into its custard-yellow 
eye, as it stared unblinkingly back, before we let it go.

I was relieved to see it shoot off like a rocket, dipping over the hedge and 
out of sight. But like any unexpected meeting with a wild creature, it left us 
enthralled long after its departure.

A few minutes later, we had a second close encounter: this time a dead tawny 
owl, lying in the long grass on the corner of the road by our home, having been 
hit by a passing vehicle.

I carried it into the house to show the children, and was amused at the 
reaction of my eldest son, who having been brought up in the city rarely comes 
across dead birds. Whereas he jumped back in alarm, the youngsters gathered 
round to look, fascinated by this unexpected sight.

Like all owls, the tawny has incredibly soft plumage, enabling it to hunt in 
virtual silence. I cleaned a splash of blood off its bill, wrapped the body in 
a padded bag and stowed it away in our freezer, ready for the attention of a 
local taxidermist.

Over the next few days I mentioned these two events to friends and colleagues, 
and was fascinated by their response. The owl's fate aroused great sadness, 
whereas they seemed indifferent – even hostile – towards the sparrowhawk.

Yet both birds hunt for a living. Indeed the only real differences are that 
the sparrowhawk kills small birds while the tawny owl preys on rodents; and 
that the sparrowhawk does his killing in public, on our back lawns, while the 
owl kills stealthily, under cover of darkness.

We may also feel sympathetic towards tawny owls because of their facial 
expression: rather quizzical, compared with the 'cruel gaze' of the 
sparrowhawk. Yet this merely reflects our own prejudices: the sparrowhawk is no 
more, or less, cruel than the owl. Both are predators who kill other creatures 
in order to live – just as small birds kill insects.

You might think that by now we would have learned not to judge these wild 
creatures by our own, highly inappropriate, moral standards. Yet a deep, 
atavistic hatred of raptors continues to thrive.

Personally, I was glad that the sparrowhawk survived, and sad that the owl 
died, which makes me just as guilty of imposing human emotions on these birds 
as anyone else. Perhaps so. But like many people, I can't help caring about the 
fate of wild creatures, especially when – like these two birds – they are my 
neighbours.
 