
Blackburn Rovers lost their star striker Jordan Rhodes to Middlesbrough, but 
that was the height of any upset suffered by the Lancashire club on a day when 
Oxford failed to repeat the heroics that earned them so many plaudits in the 
wake oftheir FA Cup third-round victory over Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/oxford-united-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>
.

A physical, energetic Rovers side ran out comfortable winners at the Kassam 
Stadium having never allowed their hosts to settle. It was an outcome that came 
as a surprise for many who considered the League Two side favourites despite 
the two divisions separating the sides. “I suppose it’s quite flattering to go 
into a game where some people might have seen us as favourites,” said their 
manager Michael Appleton. “But it’s ridiculous as well because of the number of 
league places between the two teams.”

They may have been purveyors of the most notable third-round shock in their 
defeat of Swansea but Oxford’s latest Cup adventure will not live long in the 
memory. There was no shame in this exit, but Appleton’s side failed to do 
themselves justice in a match that was over as a contest by the interval.

“In the first 25 minutes we played like a five-a-side team,” he said. “We 
didn’t earn the right to play and we were just a little bit naive.”

With his team mired in a wretched run of league form, this could have been an 
excruciating afternoon for the Rovers manager, Paul Lambert. The Scot made six 
changes, one of them forced by the departure from the team hotel of Rhodes to
complete a medical at Boro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/jordan-rhodes-blackburn-middlesbrough-agree-fee-transfer>
 and finalise a deal reported to be worth £13m. Signed from Charlton Athletic 
on Friday, his replacement Tony Watt was quick to step into the big 
metaphorical boots of his predecessor.

Things started fairly badly for Oxford and went quickly downhill. Johnny 
Mullins was fortunate to remain on the field after bringing down Simeon Jackson 
after just five minutes, but despite being swarmed by Rovers players demanding 
a red card, the referee, Andy Davies, deemed yellow sufficient. From the 
ensuing free-kick, Ben Marshall struck wide.

In the thick of the action, Jackson was later tripped by Joe Skarz as he 
advanced into the penalty area in pursuit of a through-ball from Watt. Davies 
pointed to the spot and Ben Marshall promptly slotted into the corner.

It was the first of two goals in a half dominated by Blackburn and the second 
came just before the interval when Watt fired home from 25 yards. His low, 
long-range drive inched past the outstretched fingers of Sam Slocombe from 
outside the penalty area.

Watt’s goal was the highlight of a game in which Blackburn’s defence was 
superb and allowed Kemar Roofe none of the freedom afforded to him by Swansea, 
and he cut an isolated figure as this match progressed. Oxford offered little 
going forward but could have gone ahead when Liam Sercombe’s well-struck 
diagonal effort forced a fine save from Jason Steele in the Blackburn goal.

Blackburn’s domination continued throughout and they should have extended 
their two-goal lead when, bearing down on goal from the right flank, Elliott 
Bennett unselfishly – and in hindsight perhaps foolishly – elected to square 
the ball for Watt when going for glory looked easier.

It was left to Marshall to put the game beyond Oxford and prompt a 76th minute 
mini-exodus from those anxious to beat the traffic with a beautifully struck 
free-kick that arced into the bottom left-hand corner.

For all their huffing and puffing, Oxford were unable to trouble a Blackburn 
defence that has not been renowned in recent weeks for the resolute stoutness 
on show here.
 