
The Blackpool owner, Owen Oyston, has told the Blackpool Supporters’ Trust 
that he is ending talks with them over their proposed takeover of theLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> club.

The BST had announced plans for a leveraged buyout of the Seasiders over the 
summer with a £16m package that would have seen Oyston, who has been in charge 
of affairs at Bloomfield Road since the 1980s, and his family retain several 
assets connected to the club.

Blackpool face points loss and fine if fans step up anti-Oyston protests | 
Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/13/blackpool-fans-protest-oyston>
The Blackpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> owner posted a 
series of public statements asking for clarification over numerous elements of 
BST’s bid and has now called time on their proposal after claiming they had not 
provided him with those assurances.

In a letter addressed to the trust posted on Blackpool’s official website, 
Oyston said: “I am very disappointed after giving you extended deadlines twice 
that you have failed to respond to the questions which, if you were serious, 
you would have dealt with responsibly and comprehensively.

“The proposal that you put to me which the press referred to as a £23m hostile 
bid and which you, both in your letter and publicly have stated is a £16m bid, 
is, as you have now admitted, no bid at all, but an invitation for me to give 
you all the assets and cash without you producing one penny of new money.

“In short, you are asking me to give you all the cash and assets and you have 
not even answered the basic questions I have to put to you.

“I believe that if you were left to run the club it would go to the wall 
because you do not have any money or the experience necessary to support the 
club in its moment of need.

“It would be irresponsible of me to simply hand this over to you as it is 
clear to any independent observer that you could not operate it successfully. 
From the many discussions I have had with large numbers of fans, it is clear 
that they have seen how I have been able to support the club through tough 
times and know I am in a position to do so in the future. They have implored me 
not to hand over the cash and assets to you.”

In July, BST had been asked by Oyston to explain 10 queries he had before he 
was able to “take your proposal seriously” and despite claims from the owner to 
the contrary, the trust have stressed those clarifications were provided in 
September.

In statements posted across some fans’ forums, they said: “We are 
disappointed, but not surprised, to read that Owen Oyston has finally closed 
the door on negotiating on BST’s bid.

“We will publish a detailed response over the weekend but right now we just 
wish to refute the spurious claim that we “failed to respond to the questions”.”
 