
Bright-eyed, fresh-faced and straight-backed, Corry Evans positively radiates 
health and fitness. Given his impending schedule, such vitality seems not so 
much a good thing as an absolute necessity.

Evans, who is 25, is not the type to slump or mooch but even he leans, albeit 
momentarily, against a wall when someone reminds him of the itinerary ahead. 
Nine games in 28 days for Blackburn Rovers – starting with Sunday afternoon’s 
FA Cupfifth round tie at home to West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/09/west-ham-v-liverpool-fa-cup-fourth-round-replay-live>
 – will be followed by a couple of friendlies with Northern Ireland. So that’s 
11 matches in 37 days, not to mention the small matter of his second child 
being due in two weeks’ time.

“Paternity leave? Yeah, that would be nice,” he laughs. “If I’m lucky I’ll get 
a couple of days off.” Yet for a man about to be hit by a whirlwind, Evans is 
remarkably upbeat.

He may be a little anxious about his three-year-old daughter’s reaction to a 
new sibling – “she’s very clingy at the moment” – but having left Manchester 
United without making a competitive first-team appearance, he can see the 
upside of playing twice a week.

After years on the Old Trafford margins, the younger brother of West Brom and 
former Manchester United defender Jonny rather likes being in demand. He is 
keen to test himself against West Ham and remains confident Paul Lambert’s side 
can start climbing the Championship table.

Then comes a trip to France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/northern-ireland-greece-euro-2016-qualifier-report>
 and this summer’s European Championship with Northern Ireland. Poland, Ukraine 
and Germany lie in wait at the group stage and, as a son of Belfast, Evans is 
“very excited”.

First up though are West Ham and a chance to remind people that the 1995 
Premier League winners have not quite fallen off the edge of the world. “The FA 
Cup’s a way of putting this club back on the map,” says Evans. “I’ve been 
talking to my brother and he tells me West Ham are very strong but we’re 
looking forward to it.”

After a few years dominated by debt and controversy, Venky’s, Blackburn’s 
Indian owners, have acknowledged mistakes and things seem to be stabilising at 
Ewood Park. A transfer embargo imposed for breaches of financial fair play 
regulations has been lifted, the team appears refreshed by Lambert’s coaching 
and Jordi Gomez and Danny Graham arrived from Sunderland in January.

The only downside is that the need to balance the books involved a side 
currently 18th in the Championship – eight points above the relegation zone –
selling their star striker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/01/middlesbrough-jordan-rhodes-transfer-blackburn>
, Jordan Rhodes to Middlesbrough for £11m.

“This club’s had a very bad press over the last few years in terms of the 
owners and the financial restraints we’ve been under,” says Evans. “But last 
year we still managed totake Liverpool to an FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/08/blackburn-rovers-liverpool-fa-cup-match-report>
 quarter-final replay. Promotion’s the major aim next season. For a club this 
size, with these facilities and this history, it’s very important to get back 
into the Premier League.”

As he speaks Evans gestures to the impressive buildings which comprise 
Brockhall, Blackburn’s magnificently appointed Ribble Valley training base. 
Outside lies one of England’s best kept secrets, the stunning Pennine landscape 
which helped inspire JRR Tolkien’sLord of the Rings trilogy.

The Ribble air certainly seems to be doing Lambert a power of good, with 
Blackburn’s manager looking a good decade younger and a whole lot sunnier than 
during a turbulent, increasingly morose, periodin charge of Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/11/aston-villa-paul-lambert-sacked-manager>
. Like his new club, the Scot could be described as undergoing a form of rehab. 
How he would relish reviving memories of his once stellar coaching reputation 
by outwitting Slaven Bilic on Sunday.

Blackburn give new manager Paul Lambert perfect start at Preston
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/preston-north-end-blackburn-rovers-championship-match-report>
“Paul Lambert’s been really good,” says Evans.

“On his first day [in November] he told us what he expects – which is hard 
work. His training’s very intense. It’s taken a while for the lads to get used 
to it but we’re definitely starting to play the way he wants now – on the front 
foot and pressing high up the pitch. It’s enjoyable. I think it’s a great way 
to play.”

The only shame is that Rhodes is no longer around. “Jordan was great for 
Blackburn,” says Evans. “His goals helped us massively over the last two or 
three years. He’s a great lad and a great professional but he’s gone. We’ve got 
to move on now, prove we can spread the goals around the team and still push up 
the table.”

His habit of looking you straight in the eye while answering questions 
possibly reflects well on the Old Trafford academy. “They looked at developing 
you as a person as well as a footballer,” says a player once dubbed the “new 
Claude Makélélé” during his youth team days. “They kept you grounded.”

With the closest Evans coming to a first-team game for United being a solitary 
Premier League outing as an unused substitute at Hull – [who he would 
subsequently sign for] – leaving was hard but essential.

“I made my senior international debut [in a defeat to Italy in Pisa in June 
2009] for Northern Ireland without ever having played a first-team game which 
was quite strange,” he says. “You reach a stage where you need to play in front 
of proper crowds. Hull was great for me.”

He spent two years at the KC Stadium, leaving for Blackburn in August 2013. 
Back then France 2016 was a distant dream.

“It’s only really starting to sink in now it’s getting close,” he says. “Just 
after we qualified it didn’t seem real. My immediate family’s all in Manchester 
now but I was born in Belfast and my wife’s from there too, so I know what it 
means to Northern Ireland. It’s given the whole country a massive lift.

“I’m really excited about France and I do think we can surprise people. In the 
past our underdog status has always played very well for us;we’ve beaten teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/sep/08/match.sport3> like Spain and 
England.

“If we can get off to a good start against Poland, then we’ve got Ukraine and, 
finally Germany. I’m looking forward to playing Germany. It won’t be easy but … 
if we stay disciplined and keep playing to our strengths who knows. Michael 
O’Neill, our manager has us very well organised, he goes into every detail.

“When you watch European Championships and World Cups on television it’s 
something you fantasise about being part of, so playing against some of the 
world’s best players is a dream for me. But I do think Northern Ireland can go 
to France, do well and impress a lot of people around the world.”

He rooms with his brother on international duty. “We’re close,” he says. “We 
live two minutes’ walk away from each other in Manchester. It’s nice. We’ve got 
the sort of relationship where we can ask each other for advice. It’s really 
good – and it means we swap lots of bits of football information.” On Sunday 
Jonny will be in the Ewood stands watching him attempt to put his latest 
debrief into practice. “We believe we can get to the quarter-finals again,” 
says Evans. “But this club should be playing teams like West Ham every week.”
 