
An own goal by Jordan Pickford and a penalty from from prize asset Jordan 
Rhodes gave Blackburn their second win in 12 away games, despite Joe Garner 
pulling Preston back into the game and providing a frantic finish for Preston’s 
biggest crowd of the season.

Paul Lambert, back in the saddle as Blackburn’s manager, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/15/blackburn-rovers-paul-lambert-new-manager>
 admitted he had missed the game after this win gave his Ewood Park career the 
best possible start. Lambert, who took a nine-month sabbatical from football’s 
hurly-burly after leaving Villa Park,took over from the sacked Gary Bowyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/10/bowyer-blackburn-sack> last 
weekend with an initial remit to lift Blackburn out of trouble.

“It was strange after nine months out,” said Lambert, who spent the time 
studying other coaches’ methods in Spain and Germany as well as embarking on a 
70-miles-a-week cycling regime and a healthier diet.

“For the first time in 40 years I was enjoying my life,” he said. “But I’m 
back in the hot seat, the madness, now, with that adrenalin rush … and it’s 
great.

“I couldn’t praise the players enough. It’s not going to be a quick fix and 
there will be times when our performance doesn’t get a result, but the signs 
are there. They have a desire and a work ethic. If we can get people in to help 
them, we will do it.”

Lambert declared himself impressed by the 5,500-strong travelling Blackburn 
support, starved of success for so long, who instantly took their new manager 
to their hearts. Not least because he has promised them high-tempo 
entertainment in the bid to regain Premier League status.

His side made a fair fist of their first shot at pleasing Lambert and managed 
a goal that ended Preston’s hopes of setting a newclub record, having equalled 
the one first set in 1901 with six clean sheets.

However, the first goal that Simon Grayson’s side had conceded since October 3 
was rather fortuitous as Corry Evans, driving forward, hit a shot that cannoned 
back off a post with Pickford beaten. When Shane Duffy followed up with a shot 
that was intercepted on the line by Bailey Wright, the clearance hit the 
scrambling goalkeeper and trickled over the line.

They all count and the Blackburn fans celebrated as if it were a goal 
fashioned by the gods. And to be fair, Blackburn had gone close earlier when 
Duffy saw his powerful header from a Craig Conway corner zip past the far post, 
and only a superb tackle by Paul Huntington had halted Jordan Rhodes as he bore 
down on Pickford’s goal.

Preston threatened more often, but Adam Reach’s fine wing play was not matched 
by crosses that failed to find a team-mate, and skipper Paul Gallagher’s best 
effort from just outside the box needed two attempts from Jason Steel to 
complete the save.

Preston went close to an equaliser just before the break when Duffy downed 
Garner on the edge of the penalty area but Daniel Johnson’s free kick sped just 
the wrong side of Steele’s far post to Blackburn’s relief.

Blackburn soon consolidated their lead. After 51 minutes Huntington brought 
down substitute Chris Taylor as he shaped to shoot and Mike Dean had no 
hesitation in pointing to the penalty spot. Rhodes, the coolest of penalty 
takers and a former charge of Grayson’s at Huddersfield, steered the spot kick 
home to take his record against Preston to four goals in four games.

Garner, born in Blackburn but a lifelong Preston supporter, pulled one back on 
66 minutes with a low drive inside Steele’s right post – his first league goal 
this season for the striker who topped last season’s League One scoring charts.

It was not enough, however, and their fightback brought no more than Wright’s 
late dismissal for two yellow cards.

“The least we deserved was a point,” Grayson said. “But when we needed that 
extra bit of guile, we didn’t have it. You have to use your head in the heat of 
a derby. We’re disappointed, but the players had a right go.”
 