
The Government will be attacked by one of its closest union allies for 
sacrificing manufacturing jobs in the north of England for the sake of 
tempering growth in the South, and for its obsession with boosting high-tech, 
high-risk businesses.

Sir Ken Jackson, head of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, 
will tell a conference on manufacturing on Tuesday - which will be attended by 
Trade and Industry Secretary Stephen Byers - that jobs outside the south of 
England have been sacrificed in order to cool the boom in the housing market. 
The country is becoming more divided under Labour., he will add

He will point to figures showing that 160,000 jobs were lost in manufacturing 
last year and that 125,000 of these were in the North and the Midlands. Jackson 
will add that he is sceptical about the effects of interest rate rises on 
stemming the growth in house-price inflation, and urge the Government to use 
fiscal policy - possibly including rises in stamp duty - to alter the balance.

Jackson will also say that the Government should look beyond encouraging 
high-tech companies through measures such as those introduced in last week's 
Pre-Budget Report, and focus more on industry.

Jackson told The Observer: 'There is a growing divide between industry in the 
South and the rest of the country. Interest rates are knocking confidence in 
the Midlands and the North, but they don't seem to be controlling house-price 
inflation.

The Government needs to do much more to ensure that we have a manufacturing 
future in those regions.' The AEEU is commissioning research into the issue.

Further criticism of last week's pre-Budget statement came from Trades Union 
Congress leader John Monks.

The Chancellor announced share option schemes for all employees, allowing them 
£3,000 of tax-free shares if held for five years. Under the scheme, a further 
£1,500 can be bought from pre-tax income and a further £3,000 can be awarded by 
employers.

Monks says these measures - which will cost £400 million a year - are 
effectively penalising public sector workers, who cannot own shares. 'The 
Pre-Budget Report seems to have focused on giving to the private sector and 
neglecting the public sector,' he said.

His concerns were backed by economist Martin Weale of the National Institute 
for Economic and Social Research. 'You are giving tax incentives of up to 
£4,400 a year to private sector workers, which are not available to the public 
sector. That seems unfair.'
 