
Tony Blair today reassured the CBI that there would be no "irresponsible 
spending spree" by the government in the run up to the next general election.

The prime minister, addressing the CBI annual conference in Birmingham, told 
business leaders that the government would not take risks with the economy.

"There will be no risks taken by this government with this new stability. No 
irresponsible pre-election spending sprees. No irresponsible switches of 
policy," he said. "Gordon Brown is the Iron Chancellor and his iron grip is 
here to stay."

His speech comes as the Bank of England feels the pressure to head off 
inflation by increasing interest rates, in the wake of figures showing house 
prices rising at their fastest since 1988. The Halifax house price index, 
published this morning, showed an increase of 2.8% during October.

Mr Blair added: "We have managed to live through this part of the economic 
cycle without recession, with the lowest inflation and borrowing for many 
years, with the lowest unemployment for 20 years and we are not going to throw 
it away."

On Europe, the prime minister attacked the "virulent anti-Europeanism" of the 
Tory right and warned that Conservative proposals for a new opt-out would lead 
to Britain pulling out of the EU altogether.

"They are unable to name a single country that would support this proposal and 
it would require unanimous support by all 15 members," he said. "If they failed 
to get that support, we would have to leave the EU, as of course many of the 
supporters of this proposal would like us to do. That would be a disaster for 
Britain."

Mr Blair backed chancellor Gordon Brown's comments in his speech yesterday to 
the conference that joining the euro would depend upon meeting the government's 
five economic tests.

"It is the right position for Britain. It keeps our options open. It resolves 
all the issues of principle. It correctly identifies the crucial test as the 
national economic interest," he said.

"In principle, a successful single currency within a single European market 
would be of benefit to Britain - in terms of trade, transparency of costs and 
current stability.

"But in practice, we can only sensibly join a successful single currency if it 
is in the best economic interests of Britain to do so.

"We will judge that on the basis of the five tests we have set out and if they 
are met, we will put that judgment to the people in a referendum. The position 
of principle is clear. And so are the economic conditions."
 