
Fifa's president has asked the French football authorities to suspend the 
licence of Michael Essien's agent after learning of the two-year suspended 
sentence he received for the misappropriation of funds that were to be used to 
finance a terrorist enterprise, a spokesman forSepp Blatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sepp-blatter> confirmed yesterday.

Fabien Piveteau, the Monaco-based representative of Essien, remains a licensed 
agent accredited by the French Football Federation despite having been 
convicted in May for being an accessory to the diversion of funds during the 
Chelsea midfielder's move from the Corsican clubBastia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bastia> to Lyon in 2003. The court found 
that Piveteau had taken a commission from the transfer intended as a payment 
"destined to be used, in whole or in part, with a view to permit the commission 
of acts of terrorism, independently of the eventual occurrence of these acts."

Piveteau and his business partner Günter Albert, who received an 18-month 
suspended sentence for being an accessory to the diversion of funds and for 
receiving and concealing goods coming from a criminal act, swiftly lodged an 
appeal against their convictions. The FFF has chosen to defer any action until 
after the appeal is heard. This allowed Piveteau to negotiate personal terms in 
the midfielder's club-record £24.4m transfer to Chelsea three months after the 
trial.

Christophe Drouvroy, the FFF's deputy legal director, said that the governing 
body will take no action against Piveteau until the appeals process has run its 
course. However, should the appeal court uphold the decision of the Paris high 
court and "definitively condemn" Piveteau, it would be obliged to act. "French 
law forbids that someone may hold a licence as a players' agent if he is 
definitively condemned; ipso facto, he would be stripped of his licence," he 
said.

Essien's 2003 transfer initially became the subject of investigations by the 
French fraud squad as part of an inquiry into the alleged terrorist activities 
of a Corsican separatist, Charles Pieri.

"The FFF could [suspend him]," the Fifa president told the Guardian. "They 
could suspend this agent until the moment when the [appeal] decision is finally 
taken."

Court documents seen by the Guardian record a series of actions that permitted 
funds to be taken out of the Sporting Club de Bastia and paid to two of its 
employees, Gérard Luiggi and Noël Geronimi. There is no suggestion of any 
wrongdoing on the part of Essien.

Due to the financial difficulties the Corsican club was beset with in 2003, at 
a meeting on June 17 that year directors determined to raise €7m in revenues, 
prompting the sale of the midfielder. "It was with the intervention of the 
company GMA, by Günter Albert, and of the player's agent and GMA employee 
Fabien Piveteau, that the transfer of Michael Essien from Bastia to Lyon was 
achieved," said a report by the leading French examining magistrate Philippe 
Courroye, who investigated the case.

The court found that, ahead of the contracted schedule of payments on their 
commission, GMA received €137,200 from Bastia on August 12; 15 days later 
€103,000 in €500 notes was placed in envelopes and, at a meeting that Piveteau 
attended, handed by Albert to Luiggi, a Bastia employee who had close links 
with Pieri.

Although Albert, a fellow Fifa agent who is based in Monaco, knew nothing of 
the connection, Piveteau admitted to the examining magistrate to being aware of 
Pieri's "heavy terrorist past", though Piveteau's lawyer Karim Beylouni has 
stated to the Guardian that his client knew nothing of Luiggi's nationalist 
links.

The lawyer maintains that Piveteau did not become aware of Pieri's history 
until two months after the payments had been made at a meeting in which it 
became clear that the money had not gone to those to whom he intended; these 
being two players, including one who formed a part-exchange element of Essien's 
transfer. "Fabien has nothing to do with terrorism," said Beylouni. "He was 
forced to pay the money."

Beylouni remarked that the defence of duress is disregarded by French law in 
the consideration of charges of financing terrorism. The court verdict further 
alleges that Piveteau, a practising agent since May 2001, contravened Fifa 
players' agents regulations and the code of professional conduct in 2003 by 
apparently acting for both the selling and purchasing clubs in Essien's 2003 
transfer.

Having signed an agreement with Bastia to effect Essien's transfer away from 
the club on May 15, 2003, GMA agreed a second mandate with Lyon, the purchasing 
club, 10 days later.

"GMA and Piveteau were therefore signatories to two mandates of two different 
clubs for the same transfer, and that contravenes [regulations]," said the 
court verdict. "Piveteau did not contest it in the hearing."

Article 14d of Fifa's players' agents regulations dictates that: "A licensed 
players' agent is required to represent only one party when negotiating a 
transfer." However, Piveteau and Albert are said to have repaid the second 
commission to Lyon, annulling the contract after admitting that signing the 
mandate had been a mistake.

Agent at the centre of a storm

Born in Cholet, an old textile town in the Loire region of France on October 
28 1963, Fabien Piveteau began his football career as a goalkeeper withAngers. 
At 24, he was picked up byNice, where he played 44 matches before moving to Le 
Havre. The highlight of his career came with a move to Monaco in 1995 - the 
season following Wenger's departure - for whom he played 34 matches that season 
and three the following before he headed forBastia. At the Corsican club he 
took his career tally to 229 matches in the French First Division before 
retiring in 1997. In 2001 he took the step to become a players' agent.
 