
Kristen Stewart and Brendan Gleeson have been lined up to star in a new film 
about the famous 18th-century flight of Bonnie Prince Charlie, reportsthe 
Scotsman 
<http://www.scotsman.com/what-s-on/film/epic-battle-to-star-in-bonnie-prince-charlie-film-1-3739571>
.

Titled The Great Getaway, the historical epic will shoot this June in Dumfries 
and Galloway. Scenes depicting the battle of Culloden, which saw the Jacobite 
pretender defeated by the Duke of Cumberland, are tipped to be the most 
extensive of their kind ever shot inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. More than 500 extras will be 
involved.

Screenwriter Robbie Moffat told the Scotsman the new film would not be 
“anti-English in any way”, marking it out from Mel Gibson’s famously patriotic 
Braveheart. The 1995 Oscar-winning drama depicted the 13th century battles of 
Scottish hero William Wallace against the English but was in fact shot in 
Ireland.

“Even the bad guys are Scottish,” said Moffat of his film. “It was Scot 
against Scot. There will be no anti-English feeling or sentiment in the film. 
This film is more about being British – it was a civil war.

“It was about either being British or Jacobean. There’s a lot of politics 
going on in the film. The British empire started with Culloden and it was the 
battle that in the end united Britain.”

Bruce Willis, Kristen Stewart and Jesse Eisenberg star in new Woody Allen film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/10/bruce-willis-kristen-stewart-jesse-eisenberg-new-woody-allen-film>
Added Moffat: “The fight scene will be the biggest ever shot in Scotland. It 
will be spectacular. The prince is very much a spoilt brat initially who knows 
nothing about Scottish culture until after he goes native.”

Stewart, best known for the Twilight films, has been approached for the role 
of Flora MacDonald. MacDonald was a member of a family of Hebridean Jacobite 
sympathisers who helped Bonnie Prince Charlie, aka Charles Edward Stuart, 
during his flight to Skye. Gleeson, who appeared in Braveheart, will take an 
unspecified role – and there will also be a part for Scottish actor and 
film-maker Peter Mullan, best known for Tyrannosaur, Neds and War Horse.

Stuart has been depicted on film dozens of times, but the best known films to 
focus on his battles in Scotland and England are 1923’s Bonnie Prince Charlie, 
featuring Ivor Novello in the title role, and a similarly-titled 1948 movie 
with David Niven in the lead. Moffat dismissed the latter effort, an infamous 
box-office bomb, as “too sweeping in the story and more about romance”, adding: 
“This will help correct some of the myths.”

The Great Getaway has not yet cast the roles of Charlie or Cumberland, but a 
number of “Hollywood A-Listers” are said to be in talks. Scenes will also be 
shot in South Uist in the Outer Hebrides and Skye, the route followed by the 
fleeing prince and his companions in 1746.
 