 If one thing defined the nascent world of 1960s' music in Britain, it was that 
you only had to be in the right place at the right time. Those were the days 
when everyone knew someone who was in a band - and if they didn't, they had a 
friend who did - and when there was no wall of fierce publicists, or even 
tougher bodyguards, to keep the hoi polloi at bay.
It was in this youthful mêlée, when you could become historically important by 
accident, that the name of Bob Wooler, who has died aged 76 after a long 
illness, became inextricably linked with the Beatles, the Cavern and the 
Liverpool music scene.

It was Wooler who, as DJ at the Cavern Club, got the Beatles their first 
residency there in 1961, and introduced the group on stage when they returned 
after their first hit singles in August 1963; his voice was captured on the 
only live footage of the group ever shot at the club, performing Some Other 
Guy. Later, he was instrumental in introducing them to their future manager, 
Brian Epstein.

When John Lennon was murdered in 1980, the Guardian's Stanley Reynolds noted 
that Wooler was the first person to call him up, and to give him an ideal, 
off-the-cuff remark about Lennon's character, describing him as the "Ernest 
Hemingway of rock".

Just as nobody had a clue that some teenagers who were at art school together 
would turn into one of the most impossibly famous groups in the world, so 
Wooler's beginnings in a working-class Liverpool family gave no clue to a 
future in which his name would incessantly pop up in references to what became 
tagged "the Liverpool sound".

As a teenager, he worked as a railway clerk at the city's Garston docks. His 
earliest foray into music came in the mid-1950s, when he combined his job with 
a short-lived career managing the Kingstrums, a local skiffle group formed by a 
couple of his fellow railway workers. Although the group lasted only six 
months, Wooler began to write songs for them - one was recorded by the 
Merseyside country 'n' western band Bill Brady and the Ranchers on the 
Liverpool Goes Country album. In 1963, his I Know provided the B-side to Billy 
J Kramer and the Dakotas recording of the Lennon/McCartney composition, I'll 
Keep You Satisfied.

By the start of the 1960s, Wooler was acting as compere and DJ around 
Liverpool clubs and dance halls, including the Holyoake dance hall near Penny 
Lane - mainly, he said, because local bands were having to amble on stage 
without any proper introduction, which he felt was "terrible". Around the same 
time, he met club owner Allan Williams, who ran the Jacaranda and the Blue 
Angel, and was a small time promoter. When Williams opened a new club, the Top 
Ten, he convinced Wooler to give up his day job and become the resident DJ. Six 
days later, the club was burned down.

Wooler decided against returning to the railways and took up a residency at 
the Cavern, already home to Liverpool's music cognescenti - girls like Cilla 
Black, who worked in the cloakroom, with their miniskirts and bobbed hair, and 
their factory-worker boyfriends.

Wooler had, it appears, accidently bumped into George Harrison and Paul 
McCartney at a bus stop opposite the Holyoake in the mid-1950s, and offered 
them a date at the club - which they had declined because they had no drummer. 
He met up with them again after their first Hamburg trip in 1960, getting them 
a date for £6 at Litherland town hall.

In February 1961, and by now working at the Cavern, Wooler got the Beatles 
their first date at the club, before they became the resident band and and went 
on to play regularly there for more than two years. By 1961, he was also 
regularly contributing a column to the local pop paper, Mersey Beat, writing, 
of the Beatles, that "I don't think anything like them will happen again".

Already friendly with other local groups, like Gerry and the Pacemakers and 
the Swinging Blue Jeans, Wooler also knew most of the local entrepreneurs, 
including Epstein, who had made his money from his family's furniture business. 
When the Beatles went to meet Epstein for the first time, with a view to him 
becoming their manager, Lennon asked Wooler to go along.

Such informality was common at the time, although these casual friendships 
could be fractured as easily as they were made; some months later, Lennon and 
Wooler had a fight at McCartney's 2lst birthday party when the DJ joked about a 
holiday to Spain that Lennon had just taken with Epstein.

By the end of the era, Wooler had retired from being a DJ, and was booking 
bands for an agency. Later, he joined up with Allan Williams again - this time 
to stage annual Beatles conventions in Liverpool. Wooler, who recovered from a 
heart attack in the mid-80s, was divorced from his wife Beryl Adams, Brian 
Epstein's secretary, whom he had married in the mid-1960s.

· Robert 'Bob' Wooler, disc jockey, born January 19 1932; died February 8 2002
 