
Daniele Portanova still had to show up to work every day. Handed a four-month 
suspension this summer for 'omessa denuncia' – the failure to report attempted 
match-fixing – Portanova nevertheless continued to train with his team-mates. 
He still ran when they ran, stretched when they stretched, and chased 
Alessandro Diamanti's shadow in defensive drills. Portanova continued to 
perform all of his typical duties, except for the only one that really matters.

"It was undoubtedly a strange sensation," said the Bologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> defender on Wednesday. "You 
train as usual during the week, but you don't get the adrenaline you are used 
to."

A 33-year-old journeyman with eight clubs on his resumé, Portanova had 
appeared in more than 400 games as a professional and served as Bologna's club 
captain prior to his suspension. Yet the prospect of returning to action on 
Sunday, against one of those former employers –Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> – made him as nervous as he had 
felt prior to his first appearance for Fermana, in what was then Serie C1, back 
in 1998.

"I am so emotional; it feels like this is my first day again," he said as the 
team prepared for their trip to Naples. "I have been waiting for this moment 
and now it has arrived. It is like I have gone back to my professional debut."

Some spot this would have been for a defender truly making their bow. Napoli's 
attack, led by Edinson Cavani, had scored 19 goals in their previous eight 
games at the Stadio San Paolo. They arrived at this game with the added 
incentive of knowing that a victory would move them up to second in theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> table, after 
Internazionale had lost to Lazio the day before.

Bologna, by contrast, were struggling at the wrong end of the table. Through 
16 games they had collected only 15 points – and only three of those on their 
travels. Portanova's absence had been felt, but this team would not have 
expected drastically different results with him present. Bologna's sights were 
set first and foremost on maintaining top-flight status.

On Sunday, though, they had their hosts troubled from the outset. The manager 
Stefano Pioli's decision to modify the Christmas tree formation used in recent 
games into a 4-2-3-1 was a resounding success, Bologna suffocating Napoli in 
midfield, keeping the ball away from Cavani and his forward partner Lorenzo 
Insigne.

After 10 minutes, Bologna took the lead, Manolo Gabbiadini bundling home a 
cross from Nicolò Cherubin. Alberto Gilardino had the ball in the net for them 
again less than a quarter of an hour later, only for his header to be wrongly 
disallowed for offside.

At that stage Napoli were reeling, yet there was a sense of inevitability 
about their equaliser just after half-time. Federico Agliardi attempted to palm 
away a near-post shot but instead pushed it straight into the path of the 
onrushing Alessandro Gamberini.

Pioli had altered his team's shape, withdrawing Tiberio Guarente and 
introducing Archimede Morleo, and somewhere along the way, attacking impetus 
was lost.

In the 70th minute, Napoli took the lead, through Cavani's close-range header. 
Now the script seemed set: this was to be another come-from-behind victory for 
a team whyo have built a reputation for scoring late goals under Walter 
Mazzarri. But that was before Panagiotis Kone intervened. A second-half 
replacement for René Krhin,Kone's volleyed equaliser from a horizontal position 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/goal-of-the-season-contender-panagiotis-kone-bologna-v-napoli/>
 will go down as one of the goals as the season.

Less than five minutes remained when Kone struck, and yet his goal did not 
represent the culmination of the drama. That would arrive just a few moments 
later, when Portanova himself arrived with the winner, timing his run into the 
box perfectly to meet an Alessandro Diamanti free-kick from the left.

"This goal repaid me for a cruel page in the history of football, written at 
my expense," said Portanova afterwards. He maintained his innocence throughout 
the process, stating that he did not even understand what he was being asked 
whentwo associates of the former Bari defender Andrea Masiello allegedly 
approached him for help fixing a game between that team and Bologna on the 
final day of the 2010-11 season 
<http://www.gazzetta.it/Calcio/Speciali/2011/04-2012-Primo_Piano/scommesse-nuovo-terremoto-arrestato-masiello-20-indagati-91802976666.shtml>
. Bari won the game 4-0.

The verdict delivered by the Italian Football Federation's disciplinary 
committee did not find Portanova guilty of agreeing to throw the match but only 
of failing to report that conversation. "Omessa denuncia is a delicate thing," 
he observed at his press conference last week. "This had never happened to me 
before, I was a bit drunk too. I paid a dear price for that meeting. The ban 
only lasted four months but for me it was a lifetime."

Yet where Bologna were strengthened on Sunday by Portanova's return, Napoli's 
preparations had been overshadowed by impending charges against two of their 
own players. Last week the federation's prosecutor, Stefano Palazzi, requested 
that Paolo Cannavaro and Gianluca Grava each be suspended for nine months for 
their alleged failure to report an attempted fix of a game against Sampdoria in 
May 2010. Palazzi also requested that Napoli be docked one point.

The disciplinary committee is expected to deliver a verdict on Monday. Should 
it find the players guilty, it does not necessarily have to accept Palazzi's 
suggested punishments.It has been widely anticipated in the Italian press that 
the players would instead be handed six-month bans, and Napoli given a 
two-point penalty 
<http://www.repubblica.it/rubriche/spycalcio/2012/12/13/news/calcioscommese-48660423>
. Any ruling would be subject to appeal, and both Cannavaro and Grava have 
maintained their innocence.

Mazzarri asked only that people reserve judgment until due process is 
complete. "There are trials going on in the papers every day," he said when 
asked if his players' performance had been affected. "The team has been 
subjected to a bombardment and I don't know what's going on in the lads' heads. 
I would like these trials to be conducted in the proper chambers."

Much as the impending verdict will be on his mind, Mazzarri is aware that he 
must also resolve the problems that saw his team throw away an 85th-minute lead 
at home to a team lingering near the bottom of the table, even with Cannavaro 
available to perform his usual duties.

Talking points

• Parma celebrated their 99th birthday on Sunday with an emphatic 4-1 win over 
Cagliari. Kevin-Prince Boateng celebrated Milan's 113th by postinga video of 
himself as a dancing elf on Twitter 
<http://twitter.yfrog.com/2mwmebiugogchahdoprzaisaz>.

• Milan had an identical 4-1 victory to savour. They have now won four 
straight and sit only six points outside the Champions League places. Antonio 
Nocerino, scorer of the game's opening goal, dedicated his strike to the 
victims of Friday's school shooting in Connecticut. "My thoughts are 
exclusively with them," he said.

• David Pizarro had a personal tragedy on his mind as he returned to the field 
for the first time since the death of his sister. The midfielder was greeted at 
the Stadio Artemio Franchi by a pair of Spanish-language banners prepared by 
the home support, which read: "Pek we are with you, in a heart-felt embrace". 
Pizarro scored Fiorentina's second goal from the penalty spot as they too 
triumphed 4-1, over Siena. He pointed to the sky in celebration, before falling 
to his knees. "He is a great player and an even greater man," said Fiorentina's 
manager Vincenzo Montella.

• Siena responded to defeat by sacking their manager Serse Cosmi. The Robur 
are rooted to the bottom of the table, though that is somewhat misleading as an 
indicator of Cosmi's performance. Were it not for a six-point penalty handed 
down as a result of the summer match-fixing investigations, they would be 14th.

• Zdenek Zeman refused to speak to the press after Roma's run of five 
consecutive wins ended with a 1-0 defeat to Chievo. The general manager, Franco 
Baldini, suggested that Zeman had been unhappy with certain refereeing 
decisions. There was a suspicion of offside aboutSergio Pellissier's 
87th-minute winner 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/gvideos/sergio-pellissier-chievo-v-roma/>, though 
under heavy fog you could hardly blame the officials for being uncertain.

• Juve's win over Atalanta, combined with defeats for Inter and Napoli, sealed 
theBianconeri's status as Winter Champions. But Antonio Conte played down 
newspaper reports that the team would attempt to sign Didier Drogba in the 
January transfer window. "There will be no top player in January," he said.

Results: Catania 3-1 Sampdoria, Chievo 1-0 Roma, Fiorentina 4-1 Siena, Genoa 
1-1 Torino, Juventus 3-0 Atalanta, Lazio 1-0 Internazionale, Milan 4-1 Pescara, 
Napoli 2-3 Bologna, Parma 4-1 Cagliari, Udinese 1-1 Palermo.

• The latest Serie A standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=13>
 