
From this week the Guardian publishes its editorial code on its website for 
all to see, and perhaps, as a colleague said, for some of you "to beat us 
with". It is the first newspaper in Britain to do this and it joins a select 
group of media organisations, mostly newspapers, around the world prepared to 
declare the standards to which they aspire and by which they are prepared to be 
judged.

It is not a code of conduct that requires the raising of the right hand and 
the swearing of an oath of allegiance. It is not a set of restrictions that 
will hamper the pursuit of vigorous or investigative journalism. It is a set of 
guidelines that covers both professional practice and personal behaviour where 
the latter involves, or might be considered to involve a conflict of interest. 
It is intended to reinforce the paper's commitment to openness and 
accountability.

It represents, if you like, an attempt to set down what the Guardian thinks 
you, its readers, expect of its staff journalists and the freelances who write 
for it. It incorporates a good many points that you have raised in your 
complaints and comments to me and my colleagues over the past few years. It is 
in part, therefore, a code that, imperfect and incomplete though we shall 
almost certainly discover it to be, expresses the paper's relationship with its 
readers.

To begin at the beginning, let me quote from the preamble to the code. It 
starts, in fact, with a quotation from the Guardian's most famous editor, CP 
Scott: "A newspaper's primary office is the gathering of news. At the peril of 
its soul it must see that the supply is not tainted." (The whole of the article 
that Scott wrote to mark the centenary of the Guardian in 1921 is given as an 
appendix to the code. This is the article in which he says, "Comment is free, 
but facts are sacred.")

The voice of the present editor may be recognised in what follows: "The most 
important currency of the Guardian is trust... The purpose of this code is, 
above all, to protect and foster the bond of trust between the paper and its 
readers, and therefore to protect the integrity of the paper and of the 
editorial content it carries."

It continues with a sentence that represents the resolution of discussions 
with the journalists' union: "As a set of guidelines, this will not form part 
of a journalist's contract of employment, nor will it form part, for either 
editorial management or journalists, of disciplinary, promotional or 
recruitment procedures." This reflects anxieties over provisions, to some 
extent amended, which it was felt would inhibit extramural, particularly 
political, activities of the paper's journalists. It means that the code as it 
is now worded relies on commitment not by edict but by the power of its 
contents to persuade reasonable minds. That seems to me to be fair enough.

As the preamble says: "...by observing the code, journalists working for the 
Guardian will be protecting not only the paper but also the independence, 
standing and reputation of themselves and their colleagues. It is important 
that freelances working for the Guardian also abide by these guidelines while 
on assignment for the paper."

What is written into the terms of employment for Guardian journalists is a 
requirement to adhere to the code of conduct of the press complaints 
commission, the PCC, the full text of which is also attached to the Guardian 
code as an appendix. Why, you may wonder, if you have the PCC code (there is 
also a National Union of Journalists' code), do you need another? Perusal of 
the Guardian's code, which uses asterisks to refer readers to relevant sections 
of the PCC code, will quickly demonstrate that the Guardian code is much more 
wide-ranging and specific to its own practice.

We can look more closely at its contents next week when many of you will have 
read it. If you do not have access to our website and would like a copy then 
write to me at the address below.

The editor of the Guardian sees the formulation and publication of the code as 
a natural development after introducing the role of readers' editor: "You are 
saying that your relationship with readers matters and that you are committed 
to accountability and transparency." On outside activities, he said it was 
intended to alert journalists at least to the possibility of conflicts of 
interest that might cause the paper's transparency to be questioned.

The code would have the practical purpose of providing in one place the 
Guardian's statement of policy on a wide variety of matters, for example on 
errors, invective, plagiarism, race, freebies and the declaration of sources. 
More detailed discussion next week.

· Readers may contact the office of the readers' editor by telephoning 0845 
451 9589 between 11am and 5pm Monday to Friday (all calls are charged at local 
rate). Mail to: Readers' editor, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London 
N1 9GU. Fax: 020-7239 9897.
 Email: reader@theguardian.com <mailto:reader@theguardian.com>

• This article was amended on 14 October 2010 to update the contact details 
for the readers' editor.
 