
Borussia Dortmund’s coach, Thomas Tuchel, appeared to throw in the towel in 
the Bundesliga title race after his side drew 2-2 atSchalke in the Ruhr derby 
on Sunday, leavingBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> seven points clear.

A gem from Shinja Kagawa and an unusual goal from Matthias Ginter put Dortmund 
ahead twice but the home side hit back through Leroy Sane and a Klaas-Jan 
Huntelaar penalty.

Football transfer rumours: Arsenal to splash £24m on Granit Xhaka?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/football-transfer-rumours-arsenal-to-splash-24m-on-granit-xhaka>
With only five matches to play Bayern are closing in on a fourth successive 
title after their 3-1 win atStuttgart on Saturday.

Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke>, who restored some 
pride after the previous weekend’s 3-0 defeat at Ingolstadt, are seventh with 
45 points, behind Borussia Mönchengladbach and Mainz on goal difference.

However, their chances of qualifying for the Champions League were dented when 
Bayer Leverkusen won 2-0 at Cologne to go three points ahead in fourth, which 
gets a place in the play-off round.

“It is a very realistic scenario that Bayern will become champions. I don’t 
know if the big comeback is really still on,” Tuchel told Sky Sport 
Deutschland. “Of course we were playing our 48th competitive match of the 
season and we are close to our physical limit.”

Tuchel made eight changes to the line-up that drew 1-1 with Liverpool in the 
Europa League as he rotated his side with Thursday’s second leg at Anfield in 
mind.

There was little excitement in the first half but the game sprang into life 
after the break. Dortmund struck first in the 49th minute when Moritz Leitner 
backheeled the ball into the path of Kagawa and the Japanese midfielder dinked 
the ball over Ralf Faehrmann from the edge of the area.

Sane levelled two minutes later, firing home the rebound after Roman Buerki 
parried the ball invitingly into his path, but the game quickly took another 
twist.

Henrik Mkhitaryan’s free-kick hit a Schalke defender and looped into the area, 
the home defence was wrong-footed and Ginter, in between two defenders, was 
left unchallenged to head in the ball.

Huntelaar levelled again when the Dutchman won and converted a penalty in the 
65th minute after he was shoved over by Sokratis Papastathopoulos. Both teams 
then had chances to win the game in a frantic finale. “We were twice in the 
lead and gave the goals away a little too easily. Then we had three chances to 
win the game. But I have no complaints,” said Tuchel.

Julian Brandt and Javier Hernández scored in a five-minute spell just before 
half-time for Leverkusen at Cologne and there was a stormy end as Leonardo 
Bittencourt for the home side and Wendell for the visitors were both sent off 
in stoppage time.
 