
Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>, 
last season’s Bundesliga runners-up, slumped to a 1-0 home defeat by 10-man 
Augsburg on Wednesday to continue their spectacular implosion and remain firmly 
anchored to the foot of the table.

The 2011 and 2012 Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> champions completely 
lacked ideas in front of a sell-out 80,000 crowd and were easily outmuscled by 
the European hopefuls Augsburg, for whom Raúl Bobadilla scored in the 50th 
minute for his club’s first ever victory over Dortmund.

Augsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg>, who had Christoph 
Janker sent off midway through the second half, shut out Dortmund in the last 
half hour and climbed into fourth place on 33 points courtesy of a third 
successive league win.

Dortmund, who take on Juventus in the Champions League last 16 this month, are 
18th on 16 points after their 11th league loss this season.

The goalkeeper Roman Weidenfeller and defender Mats Hummels went straight to 
speak to their furious fans, while an embarrassed Jürgen Klopp faced the media. 
“We can be accused of anything tonight and it is all justified,” the coach 
said. “Battling also means having the courage to take the right decision. We 
were missing that tonight.”

Dortmund showed attacking spirit in the first half, with Marco Reus scraping a 
post, but failed to intimidate the visitors.

The Argentinian Bobadilla then scored from close range after four Dortmund 
players failed to stop a charging Halil Altintop in the 50th minute.

Augsburg kept pressing for a second goal but held back after Janker was sent 
off for bringing down Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang outside the area with only the 
former Arsenal goalkeeper Alex Manninger to beat.

Dortmund failed to make the extra man count and did not carve out a single 
chance until the final minute when Ciro Immobile’s close-range header was saved 
by Manninger. “If one is in this position after 19 games then it would be 
unacceptable not to have understanding for the fans’ reactions,” Hummels said.
 