
As if the Revierderby wasn’t claustrophobic enough, Saturday night at the 
Signal Iduna Park only served to squash the warring neighbours closer together. 
Nothing at all could separateBorussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> and Schalke 04 after 90 
draining, goalless minutes, and in the table, too, the Royal Blues (12th and 
rising) and the Black and Yellows (sixth and falling) were firmly put on a 
mid-table collision close, having spent the opening weeks of the season at 
opposite ends, a million miles from each other.

Tim Wiese goes from Bundesliga to WWE: ‘I’ve got trash-talking in my blood’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/tim-wiese-ive-got-trash-talking-in-my-blood-wwe>
The new-found proximity left one side much happier than the other. “I leave 
with a point and a good mood,” said the S04 captain, Benedikt Höwedes. Their 
manager Markus Weinzierl “felt good because we are happy with the draw. We are 
about to turn this thing around.” The sporting director Christian Heidel’s 
contentment could not be sullied either, unlike theSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> team bus. “They threw eggs at 
us, it was a special welcome but fun,” the 53-year-old sporting director smiled 
after his first derby.

Schalke’s awful start to the campaign is slowly being forgotten as a run of 
seven games without defeat in all competition has given the Weinzierl reboot 
more time to kick in properly. With a bit of luck, the visitors could have 
capitalised on Borussia’s dozy first-half performance; a third minute move 
involving concerted gegenpressing, a chipped (!) Höwedes pass and snazzy 
one-touch geometrics offered glimpses of a huge qualitative leap forward. 
Schalke, who have been the Cliff Barnes to Dortmund’s JR Ewing in this saga for 
so long, at last feel that they are “on the right path” (Weinzierl), one that 
leads to a bit more equivalence.

On the other side of the Ruhrpott divide, the draw was greeted with pure 
disdain, however. “It feels like shit,” said a dejected Mario Götze after an 
infusion of energy and urgency in the second half had failed to make the end 
product less toilet. “We were mega harmless before the break,” BVB sporting 
director Michael Zorc remarked angrily. “We need to go back to concentrating on 
our strengths and the simple things,” centre-back Matthias Ginter thought. 
Weinzierl’s 3-5-2-cum-5-3-2 system left the hosts little time and space to 
build up momentum, with the impasse culminating in a somewhat embarrassing 
stat: for the first time since the start of data collection, BVB didn’t 
register a single shot in the first 45.

Robert Lewandowski scores twice as Bayern Munich ease past Augsburg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/augsburg-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
Der Tagesspiegel diagnosed an “emotional deficit” that, combined with a lack 
of ideas in possession, had some observers longing for the more helter-skelter 
approach seen under Jürgen Klopp. A lot of rotation, inexperience and injuries 
have been blamed for the lack of domestic progress as well.

Whatever the reasons, the “Revolution 09” as Ruhr Nachrichten reporter (and 
secret twin brother of Mats Hummels 
<https://twitter.com/matthias_aus_do/status/686114966001299456>) Matthias 
Dersch called Dortmund’s rebuilding process after the departure of captain 
Hummels, Ilkay Gundogan and Henrikh Mkhitaryan this summer, has run out of 
steam in a dread October yielding three draws and one defeat in four Bundesliga 
games. An eight point gap behind Carlo Ancelotti’s Bavarian monocrats has put 
any secret dreams of a Commandante Tuchel-led coup d’etat on ice, for the time 
being at least.

The return of Raphaël Guerreiro and André Schürrle will increase the 
43-year-old’s options for the next few games and decrease the workload of some 
of the possibly over-worked youngsters, so the crisis should be short-lived. 
And Dortmund, as Thomas Tuchel reminded his interlocutors, could have just as 
easily edged the derby, too, by taking one or two of their decent opportunities 
after the break.

How a German football club inspired fans in Yorkshire to unite and help 
refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/oct/27/yorkshire-st-pauli-germany-football-club-refugees-leeds>
“A bit of luck was missing,” he said, philosophically. The slight sense of 
impatience that permeates the club hints at a potentially bigger problem for 
him, however. Tuchel, a disciple of Pep Guardiola, is coming up against a 
resistance that the Spaniard described as “counter-cultural” during his time in 
Germany, namely the idea that football should be all-action, all the time, 
providing non-stop entertainment. That’s how they like it in Dortmund, in 
particular.

Tuchel’s ultimate aim is almost the opposite though: total control over the 
opposition. Wearing down deep-lying teams with seemingly aimless passes in the 
first half, only to kill them in the second as they tire, is a tried-and-tested 
strategy from Guardiola’s playbook that supporters and most sections of the 
media in Dortmund are yet to appreciate. Maybe they never fully will.

Results and talking points

• After the first half of the first of the season, the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> has rarely been more 
Bundesliga-esque. Yes, Bayern are the inevitable leaders, even with their hands 
in their pockets and Ancelotti treating the league as a amuse-bouche in between 
Champions League feasts. The second 3-1 win over Augsburg in the space of three 
days was so comfortable that Arjen Robben and Robert Lewandowski had a chance 
to strike up a most unlikely football bromance, providing and scoring all three 
goals between them. “We’re going for dinner tonight,” said Robben with a 
naughty glint in his eye. “Maybe we’ll spend the night, too.”

• But just below the champions, newly-promoted RB Leipzig – whose sponsors 
(and in no-way-actual-owners) are also purveyors of the finest football columns 
by yours truly – are a close second, refusing to let up. A patient 2-0 win at 
anti-possessionistas Darmstadt made it nine games unbeaten for Ralph 
Hasenhüttl’s men. Süddeutsche Zeitung felt reminded of TSG Hoffenheim’s 
stunning first half of the season in 2008-09 under Ralf Rangnick (today RB’s 
sporting director), both in terms of Leipzig’s playing-style as well as the 
wall of rejection and animosity that they continue to meet.

• The original public enemies No1 meanwhile, are, too, yo-bum-rushing-the-show 
under Julian Nägelsmann, much to the horror of the traditionalists. His 
Hoffenheim beat Hertha 1-0 to stay ahead of 1. FC Köln (3-0 over Hamburg, 
thanks to an Anthony Modeste hat-trick) in third place.

• That’s Leipzig, Hoffenheim and Köln in the Champions League places, while 
Dortmund, Leverkusen and Gladbach struggle to keep pace, Hamburg (18th, no goal 
in seven games) are completely beyond any hope, jokes* or pity, hell-bent on 
the path to Bundesliga 2, and Wolfsburg are a shambles on and off the pitch. 
“It’s the most entertaining league in years,” wrote Spiegel Online. “It’s far 
more interesting to observe the management at Köln or Leipzig dealing with 
these unexpected situations rather than to read the 50th Mario Götze story or 
Klaus Allofs’ 60th excuse.”

*Der Postillon, Germany’s answer to The Onion, made a good effort, though, 
revealingBayern’s very scary Halloween costume 
<http://www.der-postillon.com/2016/10/aaaaaaah-es-vau.html>.

Results Gladbach 0-0 Frankfurt, Mainz 2-0 Ingolstadt, Wolfsburg 1-2 
Leverkusen, Bremen 1-3 Freiburg, Darmstadt 0-2 Leipzig, Dortmund 0-0 Schalke 
04, Augsburg 1-3 Bayern, Hoffenheim 1-0 Hertha, Köln 3-0 Hamburger SV.
 