
Bournemouth’s fairytale rise from near-extinction to the near-certainty of a 
place in next season’s Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/28/eddie-howe-bournemouth-chapter-legacy>
 has been causing most of the excitement this week, partly because no one can 
actually agree whether it counts as a fairytale or not.

On the one hand Eddie Howe’s remarkable rise through the ranks to lead his 
boyhood club to the promised land is clearly the stuff of legend as is the 
foresight and public spirit of the consortium which, with scant funds, kept the 
club going for long enough to attract serious investment in 2011. On the other 
hand there are those who argue fairy godmothers should not be multimillionaire 
Russian businessmen and that the Cherries have escaped the Championshipon the 
back of Maxim Demin’s money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-conn-inside-sport-blog/2014/jan/24/bournemouth-fa-cup-liverpool-demin-russian-invisible-man>
 rather than the footballing ability of Howe and his players.

One can see both sides of this story, though it is certainly not all Grimm. 
Bournemouth have not exactly been throwing their money around in recent 
seasons, even if the (actually quite inspired) loan deal for Kenwyne Jones 
works out as extraordinarily expensive per minute of football played. The 
club’s biggest signing is Callum Wilson at £3m, worth more now after scoring 20 
goals this season but more of a good spot than a luxury item having been picked 
up from League One Coventry. Other clubs in the promotion race have spent 
similar amount on players and Bournemouth were able to raise a broadly similar 
sum through the sale of Lewis Grabban to Norwich. The Cherries might have a 
rich owner but so do Queens Park Rangers, and there is no comparison in the 
spending levels between the two clubs. Although Howe has profited from a 
certain amount of financial stability no one could seriously argueBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> have bought their way to 
success.

The big question is what happens to the fairytale next season? Can a Dorset 
club with a ground that holds 12,000 survive among the big bad wolves of the 
Premier League? What should the strategy be? Batten down the hatches and try to 
escape with dignity and a couple of seasons’ worth of parachute payments, spend 
big in the hope of staying up for a while or attempt something in between?

Were Bournemouth to look at the bottom three of the Premier League at the 
moment they might judge thatQPR’s high-spending, high-risk policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/02/qpr-football-league-ffp-negotiations>
 has not really worked and neither has changing manager so often. Yet Burnley’s 
solid, sensible, let’s-stick-together approach has hardly paid dividends 
either. It would appear you can only get so far with team spirit and do-or-die 
determination.

Burnley have rarely been disgraced at any time this season. They have given 
most opponents a run for their money, yet look like going back down to possibly 
reform for another try under the same manager, minus Danny Ings – who for all 
his Premier League admirers has found goals difficult to come by. QPR look like 
joining them and if they do end up in the Championship perhaps there ought to 
be more emphasis on putting together a team for the long term, one that can not 
only achieve promotion but arrive in the Premier League as if they intend to 
stay there.

That is most promoted team’s goal, naturally, though it is easier to plan for 
the long term if you can take the club’s finances and a degree of support and 
stability for granted. Leicester have actually executed a survival plan quite 
well this season. They have kept the same manager, maintained a strong squad of 
players and posted one or two notable results. It is only because they have 
left it so late in the season to climb the table that people have been 
surprised. Leicester are a decent-sized club after all with significant 
backing, a long tradition and players of Premier League quality. They won the 
Championship last season with a massive 102 points, nine ahead of Burnley, yet 
took six months or more to properly find their feet in the Premier League and 
even now are not certain to survive.

But Leicester are a big-city club with a degree of experience. The best models 
for Bournemouth to look at from recent years, in terms of small-town Premier 
League virgins finding themselves blinking in the sudden spotlight, are 
Blackpool, Oldham and Wigan. Blackpool because when they were promoted via the 
playoffs in 2010, Brett Ormerod, then in his second spell with the club, 
described the feeling of earning Premier League status as “like finding 
yourself on the moon without a space suit”. That is a good analogy for anyone 
in Bournemouth’s position to remember even if Blackpool subsequently soured all 
the feelgood factor surrounding promotion by starving the manager and the team 
of funds andsuffering double relegation as a consequence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/25/blackpool-wigan-championship-relegation>
.

A far better example to study is Oldham Athletic under Joe Royle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/aug/30/oldham-athletic-rob-smyth>
, who were never actually promoted to the Premier League but found themselves 
in it when the divisions were rebranded in 1992 after winning the old Second 
Division title a year earlier. Though initially playing at a Boundary Park with 
an even smaller capacity than Bournemouth’s home, Oldham thrived for a few 
seasons in the Premier League – many will remember how they came within a 
last-gasp Mark Hughes semi-final volley of sabotaging Manchester United’s first 
league and cup double in 1994 – mainly through Royle’s adroit management and 
eye for a player. Oldham had excelled in the second tier, using players such as 
Paul Warhurst, Earl Barrett and Denis Irwin who moved on to bigger clubs.

By the time of the 1994 Cup semi Irwin was lining up for United and Royle was 
referring to Alex Ferguson as a robber for stumping up only around £600,000 for 
him. Royle had picked up the Irishman on a free from Leeds four years earlier 
but forOldham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> that was the name 
of the game. They did not really expect to hang around at the highest level all 
that long but while they were up they could certainly make a go of it and turn 
a profit on players.

That was broadly the approach Paul Jewell used when taking Wigan up in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/may/09/match.wiganathletic>. No one 
gave them a prayer in the Premier League, everyone predicted instant and 
ignominious failure, yet in that first season the Latics hit the ground 
running. They gave José Mourinho’s Chelsea a scare in their first Premier 
League game, then proceeded to pick up enough points to be quite comfortable by 
Christmas. In the seven seasons of Premier League football that followed Wigan 
became synonymous with late runs and last-minute escapes, but their first 
season up was a dream, apart from the result in the Carling Cup final against 
Manchester United. And look at the number of Wigan players, either from the 
promotion season or the first couple of Premier League campaigns, who moved 
onwards and upwards.

Leighton Baines, Pascal Chimbonda, Jimmy Bullard, Arjen de Zeeuw, Antonio 
Valencia, Jason Roberts and others. Even Emile Heskey got a leg up but he was 
the exception rather than the rule. Very few of the others were established 
Premier League performers when they joined Wigan though they went on to be.

That seems to be the way to do it. You need to cast your net a little wider 
than Burnley have done but there is no need to throw masses of money at the 
problem. Wigan, like Bournemouth, had a generous benefactor, though throwing 
masses of money at anything is not in Dave Whelan’s character. He was willing 
to sanction spending on the right players, by the right manager, always with a 
long-term view. Easier to say than to put into practice, but there is a safe 
middle ground for small clubs to seek out.

• This article was amended after initially being launched with an incorrect 
photograph
 