
As back pages cliches go, “boxing is dying” has staying power. The Los Angeles 
Times might have been the first to read the sport its last rites when it 
declared in 1913 that “professional boxing is dying a natural death”. But new 
television deals, record pay-per-view numbers and ridiculous earnings suggests 
those reports may have been, well, greatly exaggerated.

Yet, especially in America, “boxing is dying” still gets trotted out 
<http://espn.go.com/boxing/story/_/id/9630673/floyd-mayweather-last-great-prizefighter-espn-magazine>
 at fairly regular intervals by sport’s chattering classes. I suppose it’s a 
much better sound bite than “boxing is undergoing major geographic and 
structural change”.

If you need proof of the seismic shift taking place in the world of pugilism, 
look no further than Filipino superstar Manny Pacquiao’s fight with American 
Brandon Rios in Macau on Saturday.

Pacquiao, a welterweight dervish and congressman in his home country, has long 
been a favourite of fans the world over, but he hasn’t fought in Asia in seven 
years. It never made commercial sense until now.

But Macau was always the frontrunner to host Pacquiao’s comeback fight after 
he was knocked out by Juan Manuel Marquez. “Pacman’s” tax  
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kellyphillipserb/2013/02/12/pacquiao-balks-at-vegas-fight-claims-taxes-are-too-high/>
problems in the United States had something to do with it, but so did boxing’s 
increasing popularity in the far east.

“You can’t be considered a major sport unless you translate that sport to 
China and all the Asian markets,” said Pacquiao’s promoter, Bob Arum, at the 
fight’s New York press conference. Of course the 83-year-old promoter is also 
following the money – last year Macau generated $36bn in gambling revenue, six 
times as much as Las Vegas.

The Olympics also tell the tale of boxing’s shifting centre of gravity. The 
US, which has won more boxing medals than any other country, had no podium 
finishes in London and earned a single bronze in Beijing. China, where boxing 
was banned until the 1970s, won two gold medals in 2008 and one in 2012.

Flyweight Zou Shiming, who won gold in both the most recent Games, as well as 
a bronze in Athens, was quickly snaffled up by Arum’s Top Rank Promotions. That 
probably has little to do with the 32-year-old’s potential as a professional 
(which is, frankly, limited) and everything to do with his hero status and 
moneymaking potential in the world’s second biggest economy.

“With the great success of Zou Shiming, the eyes of 1.3 billion Chinese are 
again focused on boxing,” said Arum in Beijing. And the Chinese flyweight will 
be fighting on Saturday’s undercard to attract as many of those 1.3bn eyeballs 
as possible. Top Rank also signed the Japanese gold medallist Ryoto Murata in 
June.

Others are also trying to get a slice of the action. Hatton Promotions, headed 
by the British former junior welterweight world championRicky Hatton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton>, established an outpost in Hong 
Kong last year. It has produced cards featuring fighters from as far afield as 
Nepal, Thailand and Australia.

Boxing has always been a global sport. Like football, it needs little 
equipment and is easy to understand. In many ways it favours the 
socio-economically disadvantaged. Champions have emerged from the most unlikely 
places; just askManny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao>.

With its “Clash in Cotai” tag, Pacquiao v Rios mauy seem like a flashback to 
the 1970s, when famous fights such as “The Thrilla In Manila” and “The Rumble 
In The Jungle” had boxers travelling far afield. But in the 20th century the US 
was still undeniably the sport’s home. Saturday is the start of something very 
different. Welcome to boxing’s Asian century.
 