
Rangers avoided the most spectacular collapse since the end days of the Soviet 
Union to take the Scottish Cup back to Ibrox. Having led 2-0 at half time 
through Kris Boyd and DaMarcus Beasley, Walter Smith's side had to rely on the 
completion of Boyd's double after being brought back to equality by aQueen of 
the South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> team seemingly 
incapable of surrender.

The First Division team, having beaten Aberdeen 4-3 in the semi-finals, sensed 
the miracle for a while after Steve Tosh and their captain, Jim Thomson, had 
scored early in the second half.

That first goal from Boyd, unsurprisingly, had a deadening effect on opponents 
whose sprightliness had been a feature of much of the opening half an hour. 
Idle for the four weeks since they completed their Scottish Football League 
schedule, the Queen of the South players seemed to have spent the time 
straining at the leash. By the time Beasley doubled the advantage, however, the 
Ibrox side had asserted themselves in the manner to be expected.

The energy and commitment the Dumfries players brought to the event cannot be 
said to have been especially threatening, but it was sufficiently effective to 
giveRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> fans cause to wonder 
if a bad week was about to get worse. Their apprehension was dispelled by the 
two first-half goals, but returned even more ominously during eight 
extraordinary minutes at the start of the second half.

Having passed the first 20 minutes apparently trying to refocus after the 
disappointment of failing to lift the Premier League title less than 48 hours 
before, the Rangers players thereafter seemed to have put an end to the Queens 
supporters' fantasies, emphasising the difference in status between the clubs 
with an imposing, authoritative exhibition of power and conviction. It was not 
until after Boyd scored that Queens brought their first and only genuinely 
menacing moment of the first half, when Neil Alexander in the Rangers goal won 
the race to make a block at Tosh's feet.

Beasley had already squandered a golden opportunity before the lead was 
established. Boyd broke free through the inside-left channel and, having drawn 
opponents towards him, cut the ball back to the unmarked American. From just 12 
yards, Beasley curled his left-foot shot wide of Jamie MacDonald's right post.

It was an attempt that would be made to look even worse by Boyd's goal. Barry 
Ferguson took a short free-kick 25 yards out and played the ball short to Boyd, 
who sent a thundering drive high to the left of MacDonald.

Beasley's goal was much less spectacular and owed much to the uncertain 
defending of Jim Thomson. His attempt to intercept Carlos Cuellar's header 
across the area was slow and cumbersome, allowing the ball to run to Beasley. 
He slid the ball through the legs of MacDonald and over the line from eight 
yards.

In the circumstances, even the Queens fans would have forgiven anyone whose 
conversation dwelled not on Rangers' prospects of winning the trophy, but on 
their margin of victory. That the favourites should be brought back to equality 
so soon after the interval was attributable partly to their own slovenliness in 
defence and partly to their opponents' expert conversion of their chances.

When Sean O'Connor broke into the area on the right, there was a notable 
sluggishness about the Rangers defenders' efforts to fill up the goalmouth and, 
when the cutback came, the ball seemed simply to bounce off the waist of Tosh 
and into the net from six yards.

Robert Harris had already shown himself to be a master deliverer of alarming 
crosses from set pieces by the time he took the free-kick on the right from 
which Jim Thomson, rising above all others on the edge of the six-yard box, put 
a bullet header past Alexander.

Clearly shaken to the point of incoherence by the shock of Queens' revival, 
Rangers seemed incapable of contriving the opportunity from open play that 
would take the Cup to Ibrox. So it proved, Boyd scoring the winner with a 
header from Beasley's corner on the right, the ball hurtling straight over 
MacDonald's head.
 