
There has long been a belief that Leigh, Bradford or even both could challenge 
for promotion to Super League this season. Given how the sport is collectively 
going into an unknown withits new league structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jan/09/super-league-20-season-fresh-approach>
 no one knows what to expect when the qualifiers roll around next month.

But if any of Super League’s bottom four were watching this battle between the 
Championship’s two heavyweights, they will have realised Leigh and Bradford are 
capable of upsetting the odds when they meet in the middle eight to decide who 
takes the four places in Super League for 2016.

They have come from different paths to reach this point; Leigh are the great 
entertainers who have become the dominant force outside Super League in the 
last two years while Bradford are the fallen giants. Nine years ago they were 
champions of the world, yet now find themselves looking to get back into Super 
League at the first attempt after relegation last year.

However, the rugby they both produced served as a stark reminder that the 
Super League teams will not have it their own way. Rightly they could not be 
split; six tries and six goals each made for plenty of points and plenty of 
entertainment – and a point that moves Leigh closer to confirming top spot 
before the split.

“We got away with a draw today,” said their coach, Paul Rowley. “We’re not 
jumping through hoops as we looked a bit flat. But it was a great advert for 
Championship rugby and I think some of our Super League neighbours would have 
looked on quite enviously at what both teams produced.”

It is hard to argue with Rowley; the biggest attendance of the season in the 
Championship by some distance helped to boost the growing sense of expectation.

“They’re two clubs that should be in Super League when you look at this sort 
of crowd,” said the Bradford coach, James Lowes. “They’ve [Leigh] a great 
travelling support and the turnout from Bradford fans is fantastic. They come 
in plenty of numbers and so did they today, so credit to both sets of 
supporters. Our effort there was fantastic.”

No side held a lead greater than eight points at any point of the match, 
illustrating how closely matched these two sides are. Bradford led 20-12 at the 
break after tries for Jay Pitts and two for Omari Caro on his home debut but 
Leigh roared back after the restart to take the lead.

Tries for Greg Worthington and the prolific Ryan Brierley turned 20-12 into 
24-20 in favour of Leigh, sparking a half of tit-for-tat rugby; Danny Addy then 
restored Bradford’s lead with a well-worked solo try before Leigh hit back 
again when Jonny Pownall scored his second of the afternoon.

The home side, without their first-choice half-backs Lee Gaskell and Jake 
Mullaney, kept toiling away and when Ryan Shaw converted Matty Blythe’s try to 
make it 32-30 the home side held the advantage again.

However, Pownall completed his hat-trick by intercepting an Addy pass before 
Caro completed his own hat-trick to make it 36-36. Leigh tried to snatch it 
late on but Martyn Ridyard’s drop-goal attempt was charged down. A draw was 
undoubtedly the fair result. As far as whetting the appetite for the qualifiers 
goes, this was some marker.

Bradford Shaw; Williams, Blythe, Henry, Caro; Purtell, Addy; Clough, O’Brien, 
Sidlow, Olbison, Pitts, Walker.

Interchange Walshaw, Lauaki, Crossley, Mendeika.

Tries Pitts, Caro 3, Addy, Blythe. Goals Shaw 6.

Leigh McNally; Pownall, Worthington, Armstrong, Higson; Ridyard, Brierley; 
Moimoi, Beswick, Hock, Dixon, Goulden, Emmitt.

Interchange Barlow, Spencer, Hopkins, Higham

Tries Hock, Pownall 3, Worthington, Brierley. Goals Ridyard 6.

Referee J Child. Attendance 9,181
 