
The owners of a revived Bradford will have to provide personal guarantees that 
the team will fulfil their fixtures over the next three years. The Rugby 
Football League, which has set a deadline of noon on Monday to receive offers 
to set up a new club, took the unusual step of making public its demands and 
the process owners will have to go through to meet them.

After witnessing Bradford Bulls go into administration three times in five 
years,the most recent one with dire consequences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-go-into-liquidation>
, the governing body appears keen to ensure the owners have sufficient funds to 
guarantee the club’s future, at least in the medium term.

The document, which the RFL has sent to around 10 interested parties, calls 
for bidders to submit a three-year budget forecast along with proof of 
supporting funds by their deadline.

The RFL also wants to know if buyers are willing to show goodwill by honouring 
1,000 season tickets bought by Bulls fans before the club went bust and pay off 
around £50,000 in debts to local creditors.

The RFL has said it would be willing to restore Bradford’s membership if 
suitable owners are found and allow a team to continue in the Championship in 
2017 with a 12-point deduction and a reduced funding of £150,000, compared with 
the £275,000 the club were due.

It is thought the league will use the remaining £125,000 to help relieve any 
hardship suffered by the players, who were owed their December wages when the 
administrators put the club into liquidation.

Related: Bradford Bulls’ fate was down to years of mismanagement of a 
trailblazing club | Aaron Bower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/bradford-bulls-rugby-league-liquidation-rfl-championship>

Among the RFL’s demands are:

• A business plan to ideally include a three-year budget forecast and proof of 
funds.

• Details of the experience the individuals have in running rugby league clubs 
and/or other sporting clubs.

• Proposals relating to the recruitment of players and coaching staff in order 
to be ready to start the 2017 season on time and whether the squad will be full 
or part time.

• Completed fit and proper person forms for each proposed influential person.

• Confirmation the directors or shareholders of the new company are prepared 
to provide personal guarantees the club will complete its fixtures in 2017, 
2018 and 2019.

• Any further assurances such as the provision of a financial bond repayable 
to the club over the next three years.

The former New Zealand RL chairman Andrew Chalmers and the London businessman 
Richard Lamb, who both fronted bids for the old club that were rejected by the 
administrators, are among those interested in forming a new club.

Rohan Smith has indicated his willingness to stay on as the coach but the 
breakup of the team continued on Thursday with the back-row forward Alex Mellor 
joining Huddersfield and the former Hull KR centre Kris Welham signing for 
Salford.

They took the number of departures from Bradford to four in the 48 hours since 
the club went into liquidation, rendering all the players free agents.

Jason Walton has moved to Featherstone and Tom Olbison has signed for the 
Super League club Widnes. James Clare and Adam Sidlow are also thought to have 
lined up moves.

Clubs have been given special dispensation on their salary cap to sign players 
from Bradford, who may well have to look to the loan market to build a team for 
their opening Championship match at Hull KR on 5 February if the club are 
reformed.

One player keen to stay on is the former Great Britain stand-off Leon Pryce, 
who rejoined his hometown club in the close season after spells at St Helens, 
Catalans Dragons and Hull.

Pryce told his former Bulls team-mate Robbie Hunter-Paul on his radio show: 
“Absolutely I’d still like to be involved. I’m a Bradford lad and I still live 
locally. We need to redevelop this club. We need aBradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls>.”
 