
Those who feared the inaugural Qualifiers would be a Super League-dominated 
washout probably have a lot to thankBradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> for.

Championship sides have tried and failed to beat Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> opposition on seven occasions 
so far in this mini-league to determine the remaining spots in the top flight 
in 2016 – but Bradford made it eighth time lucky with the most significant 
result of the weekend in the Super 8s.

After a heavy loss to Wakefield left many fearing Bradford’s chances of 
promotion back to the top tier at the first attempt had gone, they emphatically 
reminded everyone that they are still a force to be reckoned with, and in the 
process gave the Super 8s a huge boost by showing the second tier can compete 
with its wealthier counterpart.

It will be a particularly sour defeat for Salford – unbeaten in the Qualifiers 
before this – given how the win was spearheaded by Bradford’s former Red Devil 
Jake Mullaney. Released by Salford midway through last year and picked up by 
the Bulls for 2015, the Australian showed his former employers what they let go 
by tormenting them all afternoon with two tries and a well-taken drop goal.

“We can’t dwell on this moving forward, but we obviously played really well,” 
said Bradford’s coach, James Lowes. “It’s all about winning and I truly believe 
in this bunch of players, and when they play as you’ve seen today we’re a 
force.”

As for Salford acting head coach, Ian Watson, did not mince his words after a 
performance in which they were second best in every aspect of the game.

“It’s completely embarrassing really, for everyone associated with the club,” 
he said. “It’s an embarrassment for all of us because we expected better. They 
get a couple of wins and then fall in love with themselves and forget what’s 
got them there – hard work. Coming away to Bradford is always a tough challenge 
– and we didn’t respond to it.”

Bradford stormed into a 10-0 lead they would never surrender after tries from 
Dale Ferguson and another former Salford man in Danny Williams, before Mullaney 
made his first telling contribution by rac home from 50 metres to extend the 
advantage. He slotted over a drop goal on the hooter shortly after Rangi Chase 
had reduced the deficit, then ghosted in three minutes into the second half to 
put the Bulls in complete control. Salford had no answer to their attacking 
guile – this without key half-back Lee Gaskell too – and after Mullaney was 
withdrawn as a precaution due to injury, further tries from the impressive 
Danny Addy, James Clare and Adrian Purtell put the Bulls out of sight.

Salford had the final say in matters when Iain Thornley registered a 
consolation but by then, Bradford’s job was done. Their promotion bid is back 
on track – and in some style.

Bradford Clare; Caro, Nielsen, Purtell, Williams; Addy, Mullaney; Clough, 
O’Brien, Sidlow, Ferguson, Olbison, Pitts.Interchange Blythe, Mellor, Lauaki, 
Crossley.

Tries Ferguson, Williams, Mullaney 2, Addy, Clare, Purtell. Goals Addy 6 Drop 
goal Mullaney

Salford Evalds; Jones-Bishop, Sa’u, Thornley, Johnson; Chase, Dobson; Taylor, 
Tomkins, Tasi, Griffin, Hauraki, Morley.Interchange Lee, Forster, Paterson, 
Krasniqi

Tries Chase, Thornley Goal Dobson

Referee R Hicks Attendance 6,593
 