
Bradford have launched an appeal against the Rugby League Football's 
imposition of a six-point deduction for going into administration.

The Bulls say they have already received the go-ahead from the RFL to fight 
the penalty, which has condemned Francis Cummins' team to bottom spot in the
Super League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>, and are waiting 
for a hearing to be arranged.

It is almost seven weeks since the RFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> 
announced the sanction but less than three weeks since Bradford were taken over 
by the Leeds-based businessman Marc Green.

A statement issued by the club said: "Bradford Bulls can today announce their 
right of appeal against the club's points deduction has been granted by the 
sport's governing body. The notice of intention to appeal was lodged with the 
Rugby Football League by former administrator David Wilson, however the appeal 
could not proceed until the ownership of the club was resolved.

"Following consultation with legal representatives, the new board have 
confirmed their intention to proceed with the appeal process and are now 
awaiting a hearing date.Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> will be making no further 
comment on the matter at this time."

Bradford are entering into uncharted territory in seeking to overturn their 
points deduction. Wakefield and Crusaders accepted their punishment after being 
docked four points in 2011 for breaching the RFL's insolvency regulations and 
Bradford similarly accepted their fate after losing six points two years ago.

This time the return of relegation from Super League means there is much more 
at stake and Bradford clearly feel they have nothing to lose after being handed 
the maximum penalty.

The RFL board of directors has some discretion where clubs agree to pay off 
some of their debt and in this case Green is one of the major creditors, having 
made a loan of around £150,000 to the club last September.

The RFL also revealed that Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs was owed almost 
£170,000 when the old company went into administration on 31 January.

The RFL's decision to dock the club six points and place the club in special 
measures on 25 February prompted a walkout by the consortium given the go-ahead 
by the administrator to take over the running of the Bulls, with then chairman 
Mark Moore claiming the move made "relegation almost a certainty".

That did not deter a host of budding new owners – including Mandy Koukash, the 
wife of Salford chairman Marwan – and Green emerged from a fresh round of 
bidding as the new buyer on 26 March.

Bradford won two of their first three Super League matches to claw back four 
of the points but have lost their last five to remain on minus two, with the 
bottom two clubs dropping down to the Championship at the end of the season to 
make way for a 12-team competition.
 