
The identity of the two sides competing in the inaugural million pound game in 
the Qualifiers has become a lot clearer. Leigh Centurions have been the 
Championship trailblazers for the last two years, losing two league games 
during that period, but they have struggled to maintain that form and are now 
in danger of playing Championship rugby next season after a fifth defeat in six 
games.

As for Bradford, the other full-time heavyweight from the second tier, the 
formerSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> champions 
have moved a huge step closer towards promotion at the first attempt – and 
their hopes of doing so automatically remain alive after producing a superb 
80-minute effort.

Such are the plentiful permutations of the Qualifiers six rounds into the 
seven-week competition, anywhere between an automatic promotion spot and a 
place in the million pound game looks like awaiting Bradford when the 
competition finishes next Sunday. That they had suffered two bruising defeats 
and were without Lee Gaskell makes this win all the more impressive.

“They’ve done themselves proud,” said the Bradford coach, James Lowes. “We 
were in a low spot afterlast week’s loss to Hull KR, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/12/hull-kr-bradford-the-qualifiers-match-report>
 and it’s been a tough week – but they’ve applied themselves very well indeed.”

Keighley’s Lewis Graham given four-year ban after drug offence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/keighley-lewis-graham-ban-nandrolone>
Leigh must now regroup, but such is the new structure introduced by the 
RFL,they will almost certainly have another shot in The Qualifiers in 2016. 
“That’s us done regarding Super League now I think,” said their coach, Paul 
Rowley. “The important bit is we approach the last week well. It’d be easy to 
switch off and throw in the towel. The performance needs to do us justice next 
week.”

A purple patch from Leigh just before half-time had given them hope, with 
tries from Adam Higson and Gregg McNally making it 10-10 after Bradford had led 
with tries from Jake Mullaney and Danny Williams, but Bradford asserted control 
of the contest after the break.

Mullaney’s magnificent pass out wide found Williams for his second, before 
Bradford’s game-management came to the fore as they sought to close the game 
out. Danny Addy kicked two penalties either side of a Matty Blythe try. 
Although Bob Beswick dummied his way over with six minutes left, Bradford 
finished the scoring when Blythe raced home for his second.
 