
Virgin founder Richard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson> is following in the 
footsteps of Donald Trump by appearing in a reality TV show for US network Fox 
in which he will groom a bunch of budding entrepreneurs.

The series, which has the working title Branson's Big Adventure, will feature 
the flamboyant businessman taking a group of young contestants on a world tour.

During their trip the wannabe entrepreneurs will be set tasks to complete and 
relive some of Mr Branson's most famous business and personal adventures.

The Virgin boss has become famous as much for his round the world trips in hot 
air balloons and attempts to set speed records crossing oceans in fast boats as 
for his business empire, which includes music, airline and mobile phone 
interests.

At the end of each 60-minute episode in the six-part series, one of the 
contestants will be eliminated and left behind on the airport tarmac as Mr 
Branson and the remaining participants jet off to their next destination.

Rival US TV network NBC is already enjoying ratings success with a similar 
reality concept, The Apprentice, in which a group of wannabe billionaires 
compete to win a job working for Donald Trump's business empire.

But Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox> executives insisted Branson's 
Big Adventure would be a different type of reality show.

"This isn't about selling a glass of lemonade," the Fox head of reality 
programming, Mike Darnell, told Variety, referring to one of the tasks set for 
contestants in The Apprentice.

"In six weeks these people will experience challenges and adventures beyond 
their wildest imagination. It's not about business acumen. It's really about 
finding someone to follow in his footsteps," he added.

"It's about judgment and morality and loyalty tests that don't have anything 
to do with how many sweaters you can sell. And Richard will be extraordinarily 
involved, more so than you've seen in other shows."

Mr Branson will be an executive producer on the show, which is being made by 
US independent producer Rebel Entertainment Partners.
 