
David Pocock <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-pocock> is a courageous 
man. Twice during the final minutes of the Waratahs’ match against the Brumbies 
in Sydney on Sunday the flanker complained that the Waratahs forward Jacques 
Potgieter had called two Brumbies players “faggot” – and twice the referee 
claimed he had not heard the insult.

“You heard that sir ... you can’t say that, there could be gay players out 
there,” Pocock interjected in the 72nd minute of play. “That’s fine, but after 
that, their captain said, ‘That’s rugby’. That’s not right.”

Indeed it’s not right, and late last night following a SANZAR investigation 
Potgieter admitted to his comments, apologised and expressed remorse. “I’m very 
sorry for any offence caused by what I said on the field during a heated 
encounter,” the South African said. “It was an offhand remark made without 
thought for the hurt it could cause to those around me.” Potgieter was fined 
$20,000 – with $10,000 suspended – by the Australian Rugby Union for using the 
homophobic slurs.

Contrite Waratahs forward Jacques Potgieter fined for homophobic slur
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/23/waratahs-jacques-potgieter-fined-homophobic-slur>
Pocock should be commended for having the guts to take a stand on this issue 
and hold his own code to account over its stated support of eradicating 
homophobia. Pocock has been a vocal supporter of gay marriage and he and his 
partner Emma have pledged not to be legally married themselves until the law is 
changed to include all couples. He has been an activist on other fronts as 
well. In November last year hechained himself to a digger for 10 hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/30/former-wallabies-captain-david-pocock-chain-digger-coal-protest>
 as part of a blockade against Whitehaven’s Maules Creek coal mine. For that he 
received a formal warning from the ARU. Clearly Pocock is an activist for what 
he believes in, but his actions on Sunday prove that he is interested in more 
than just symbolism and feel good PR.

It’s one thing for the ARU to support events such as the Bingham Cup, the 
so-called Gay Rugby World Cup, to sign onto clauses such as anti-homophobia and 
inclusion framework, and to encourage players to march in the Mardi Gras 
parade. But it’s quite another to take concrete action to stamp out homophobia 
when it rears its ugly head mid-match. At the weekend Pocock stepped up when 
match official Craig Joubert failed to act.

Sadly, none is this is overly surprising on one level. By any estimates there 
must be plenty of highly conflicted and deeply repressed Australian sports 
people placing their career above their own open sexual freedom. Comment 
columns of mainstream news sites reveal prevailing attitudes that such language 
is just part of the game. Here’s a typical reader response from aFox Sports 
forum 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/rugby/super-rugby/david-pocock-alleges-homophobic-slurs-made-during-brumbies-derby-clash-with-waratahs/story-e6frf4qu-1227273656952#social-comments>
 on Monday night: “harden up mate, did the name calling hurt your feelings so 
bad that it made the brumbies lose the game? Coaches take note. if u want to 
beat the brumbies call them names and theyll [sic] be too busy crying about it 
and forget about playing rugby.”

But this outcome has shown that “hardening up” has nothing to do with it. Such 
comments flung about like dirt on sports field are surely a contributing factor 
as to why there is not a single player inSuper Rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-rugby>, the NRL, AFL or A-League brave 
enough to step forward as gay in 2015. These are the kind of casual insults 
that cut deep and inflict real damage.

Waratahs' Israel Folau adamant that homophobia is not an issue in rugby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/23/waratahs-israel-folau-homophobia-not-an-issue>
At a press conference on Monday, Waratahs player Israel Folau denied 
homophobia exists at the club – indeed in the game of rugby union as a whole – 
adding that he’s “a religious guy”. It’s unclear why he felt it necessary to 
refer to his religion at that point – but just to be clear, religious beliefs 
should not be used as a defence against bigotry in Australia in 2015.


Pocock has since indicated he doesn’t want this to become a “witch hunt”. “We 
want to be inclusive for people watching and people playing,” he said.

A number of leading sports and social commentators including Peter FitzSimons 
and Tim Wilson immediately took to Twitter to congratulate Pocock on taking a 
principled stand. Potgieter at least had the decency to own up to his comments 
and make a considered and convincing response. Full credit to him for that.

What Pocock has propagated here is something deeper – cultural change. That 
will only happen when people are willing to stand up mid-match and call out 
inappropriate behaviour as and when it happens. Such ideological warriors are 
essential on the sports field because they can provide a bridge between the 
changing political demographic that no longer buys into misogynistic, 
homophobic or racist attributes formally associated with a different era of 
macho culture. Just because we play sport doesn’t mean we’re obnoxious bigots.

In 2000 Cathy Freeman held the flag for Indigenous people at the Sydney 
Olympics; could Pocock and others hold it just as high against bigotry and for 
environmental action? In this political climate the more people like Freeman 
and Pocock willing to step and put themselves on the line for their beliefs the 
better. That’s what cultural change looks like.
 