
When I first discovered I had breast cancer, I felt shocked and afraid. I 
thought maybe there had been a mistake. I was 52, and didn’t have any symptoms: 
there were no lumps, just what I thought was a cyst under my armpit. I’d gone 
to hospital to get it checked, and had a mammogram and biopsy.

A week later I received several calls from the doctor, which I didn’t respond 
to until a voicemail asked me to come in. This was over the holiday period, and 
I went with a family member who herself had gone through a recent diagnosis and 
treatment for breast cancer and understood the process. That’s when they told 
me I had stage two cancer. I remember thinking that this couldn’t be right. I’m 
healthy and fit, and play a lot of sports.

I believe black women are less likely to go for screenings because the 
prevention work is not targeted at us

As a black woman, breast cancer wasn’t something I had received much 
information about. No one in my family had had it, and I don’t remember 
learning about it in school. When you pick up a breast cancer leaflet you tend 
to see a white woman staring back at you. I never saw it as an issue that 
specifically affected me.

But, of course, it does. In fact, new analysis shows that black women in 
England are twice as likely to be diagnosed with advanced breast cancer as 
white women <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-37991460>. This is for many 
reasons, including possible differences in tumour biology, low awareness of 
symptoms and screening, and barriers to seeking help. In my community here in 
Leeds I know two women who have lost their lives to breast cancer, one of them 
only 49 years old.

I believe black women are less likely to go for screenings because the 
prevention work is not targeted at us. It would be great if larger charities 
made sure that their messaging reached women of colour.

There are charities working with black communities already, such as Black 
Health Initiative <http://www.blackhealthinitiative.org/> (BHI), but we need 
help spreading the message. BHI has a national cancer programme –BME Cancer 
<http://www.blackhealthinitiative.org/projects/bme-cancer-voice/> – which 
launched in the House of Commons in 2014 and addresses the disparities within 
cancer among diverse communities. This kind of outreach and awareness cannot be 
time-limited; we need to keep going until it’s clear everyone is getting the 
message. After all, many from these communities support the national cancer 
fundraising drives, such asStand Up To Cancer 
<https://www.standuptocancer.org.uk/>, Macmillian’s Coffee Mornings 
<http://coffee.macmillan.org.uk/> and Race For Life 
<http://raceforlife.cancerresearchuk.org/index.html>. Let’s be deliberately 
inclusive rather than accidentally exclusive when it comes to tackling 
inequalities. We have enough evidence to show it’s time for action.

Breast cancer drug approved for NHS use after price cut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/breast-cancer-drug-perjeta-approved-for-nhs-use-after-price-cut>
My journey taught me to be more open and talk more. I had a mastectomy, 
reconstructive surgery, chemotherapy and three weeks of radio therapy. My 
treatment involves being on a drug for five years. I also have a mammogram 
every year. On being diagnosed, I felt a tinge of sadness, not knowing who to 
tell. But then I found some great support here in Leeds among other black 
women. It helped me get through some difficult days. It’s so comforting knowing 
that you’re not alone and that someone else is going through the same journey 
as you. We are able to share stories and talk, hold each other’s hands and 
raise awareness.

Only last week someone approached me, as they had to go for a mammogram and 
didn’t know what was going to happen. I gave them just a brief description of 
my experience, as I didn’t want to instil fear in them, but it was good to be 
candid and open. I hope I helped reassure them.

I just wish there was more awareness nationally. If the government, charities 
and those who hold the financial pot through fundraising do not recognise a 
need for inclusion when it comes to breast cancer awareness, then black women 
will continue to die at a higher rate. It’s as simple as that.
 