
A breast cancer drug that costs £90,000 a year per patient has been turned 
down for use by theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> on financial 
grounds, triggering an outcry from patients groups who say it prolongs the 
lives of people seriously ill with the disease.


Kadcyla, made by Roche Pharmaceuticals, was rejected by the National Institute 
forHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Care Excellence. It 
has the highest price tag ever for a cancer medicine and was turned down 
because its benefits did not justify its cost, Nice said.

Prof Carole Longson, director of the centre for health technology evaluation 
at Nice, said: “We know that people with cancer place great importance on drugs 
that can increase their life expectancy. For that reason we apply as much 
flexibility as we can when we look at new life-extending treatments.

“But the reality is that the price of trastuzumab emtansine [the generic name 
for Kadcyla] is currently too high in relation to the benefits it gives for it 
to be recommended for routine commissioning in the NHS, even taking into 
account the end-of-life criteria and the patient access scheme.”

The charity Breast Cancer Now 
<http://breastcancernow.org/?gclid=CLeLh_nOltECFfgV0wodgvsN5A> launched a 
petition against what it called a disastrous decision and “a huge setback for 
the treatment of advanced breast cancer”, whileBreast Cancer Care 
<https://www.breastcancercare.org.uk/> said the decision was unacceptable.

“Kadcyla can give people [on average] nine months longer to be there for the 
moments that matter – the first day at school, a wedding, a family birthday – 
with far fewer enduring severe side-effects like sickness and diarrhoea than 
with many other drugs,” BreastCancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Care said.

Nice, which evaluates drugs for use in the NHS in England, originally turned 
down Kadcyla, but patients were able to get it anyway via the cancer drugs 
fund, a pot of money put aside for such circumstances by the coalition 
government.

However, the CDF massively overspent and is now under the control of Nice, 
which is re-examining the value for money of all the drugs it has been paying 
for.

Nice has now said in draft guidance that the price is too high even after a 
discount offered by Roche. The company had offered to foot the bill for any 
patients who needed to stay on the drug beyond 14 months.

About 1,200 patients could benefit from Kadcyla if it were to be funded by the 
NHS in England. Roche submitted data to Nice to show that the drug could give 
women on average nine months longer than the standard treatment currently 
available – a considerable amount of extra time for women suffering from a 
particularly aggressive type of breast cancer, Her2+, which often affects 
younger women.


Nice said it was not a final decision. It will be hoping that Roche brings 
down the price. However, it has not done so in Scotland, where the cancer drugs 
fund does not apply and women can only get Kadcyla in exceptional circumstances.

Breast cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/breast-cancer> charities 
will campaign against the draft Nice decision in the hope of bringing about a 
U-turn when the assessment committee meets to make its final decision in 
February. The Breast Cancer Now petition calls on Sir Andrew Dillon, the chief 
executive of Nice, and Richard Erwin, general manager at Roche Products, to 
urgently return to the negotiating table.

Delyth Morgan, the chief executive of Breast Cancer Now, said: “This 
disastrous decision is a huge setback for the treatment of advanced breast 
cancer. Kadcyla offers significant and precious extra time for women with 
incurable cancer in great need of hope, and we mustn’t let it slip away.

“Nice and Roche’s inability to find a compromise is seeing secondary breast 
cancer patients left abandoned. Responsibility lies on both sides, and such 
reckless brinkmanship is unfortunately about to rip away one of the best breast 
cancer drugs in years from patients in desperate need of a lifeline.”

The charity argued that Nice had not compared Kadcyla with the appropriate 
alternative treatment when making its calculations of cost-effectiveness. “This 
outcome also speaks volumes about a drug appraisal system that is just not 
working for metastatic breast cancer patients. This targeted drug is available 
in many other countries, including France, Germany, Australia and Canada, and 
it is nowhere near good enough that women in England will be denied such an 
effective option,” Lady Morgan said.

Danni Manzi, of Breast Cancer Care, said: “While we understand the pressure 
around budgets, it is ultimately patients who suffer. We urge Nice, NHS England 
and Roche to work together to make Kadcyla available in England. Until then, 
these women cannot be certain they will get the drugs they need. They deserve 
better than this second-rate care.”
 