
In these pages a few months ago, Joe Queenan saluted the mighty Irish actor 
Brendan Gleeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brendan-gleeson>, unsung hero 
of countless historical blockbusters. If only, suggested Queenan, Gleeson was 
allowed to be the leader rather than the trusty lieutenant, "things would have 
turned out a whole lot better for everyone". The 55-year-old Gleeson, who was 
once told by a Hollywood agent that he was "too old and too ugly", brings to 
the screen a salty authenticity absent from your Orlando Blooms. Built like a 
tank, and with twinkling eyes set in a doughy face, he is one of the world's 
finest character actors – a man capable of investing the most fleeting cameo 
part with instant vitality.

Revered directors such as Steven Spielberg (in AI: Artificial Intelligence), 
Martin Scorsese (Gangs of New York) and Danny Boyle (28 Days Later) have 
all called upon him to help flesh out their distinctive visions; last week he 
popped up inGreen Zone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/green-zone> as a gruff 
CIA operative, and stole the show. His latest character study can be seen in 
Perrier's Bounty, a breakneck black comedy that plies a Tarantinoesque line in 
blase violence. Gleeson plays Perrier, a softly-spoken crime boss hounding the 
hero (Cillian Murphy); Perrier frets over intolerance, but doesn't think twice 
about dispatching a man at point-blank range. Despite appearing in only a 
handful of scenes, Gleeson's beautifully calibrated performance provides a 
thrilling highpoint. As usual.

"It's interesting going between small parts and then bigger roles where you 
carry the film," Gleeson tells me. Sure enough, he is a fine leading man, as he 
proved in The General and In Bruges, but it is as a miniaturist that he is 
arguably most prized. "If the writing is good, and if the people involved have 
integrity, then you'll do it, even if it's only five minutes on screen. A cameo 
role will often allow you to go bigger, because you have a small amount of 
screen time. I try not to ham it up, but if there's a requirement for you to 
make an immediate impact then it means you can really take a run at it, whereas 
you can't always go at it hammer-and-tongs if you're playing the lead."

Gleeson insists that many screenplays can be judged by their peripheral 
characters. "It's vital that those parts are written with some thoroughness. 
Look at the Coen brothers. All their minor characters are as interesting as 
their protagonists. If the smaller characters are well-written, the whole world 
of the film becomes enriched. It's not the size of the thing, but the detail."

Not that character actors don't yearn occasionally for a larger slice of pie. 
Years of dropping by to fill in the margins of a movie have left Gleeson 
sounding a little weary of the lot of the odd-job man. "I think every character 
actor at some stage likes to carry a film. It can be extremely liberating to 
just come in for a scene or two and do your thing. But I find it frustrating if 
I'm just doing little bits here and there for too long. Sometimes I do stop and 
say, 'OK, I'm gonna hold out now until I get something a bit more substantial 
that I can sink my teeth into.'"

The distinction between character actor and conventional leading man isn't 
always rigid. Nicolas Cage oscillates between the two. Johnny Depp's Captain 
Jack Sparrow bore the unmistakable eccentricity of character work. And, in 
films like Burn After Reading and Inglourious Basterds, Brad Pitt has harked 
back to his vanity-free early roles (Kalifornia, Twelve Monkeys, True Romance). 
But Gleeson is the real deal: he's part of a noble tradition of jobbing actors 
who have toiled quietly at their trade, destined to be known not by name but by 
face, and even then only vaguely. That's how he likes it. "I don't want to get 
in a situation where I'm being recognised," he says with a shudder. "That would 
mean your cover's blown."

Perrier's Bounty is released 26 March.
 