
You worked with Martin McDonagh on In Bruges, and now you're working with his 
brother John Michael, also a writer-director, onThe Guard. Both films are 
violent, gleefully obscene and packed with movie references; both feature 
amoral Irishmen in the leads. What sets the brothers' work apart?

There is a similar palate in terms of humour, but their sensibilities are very 
different. You can't imagine one brother's character in the other's world. With 
Martin, you never hate anyone, even if his characters do the most appalling 
things, whereas John cares less whether you love his characters or not.

How would you describe The Guard?

It's a comedy, I think. People are calling it a "comedy-thriller" but I'm not 
sure about the thriller end of it. It's not a question of whether my character 
[Sergeant Gerry Boyle] will catch the baddie, it's more a question of: will he 
bother?

At one point, Don Cheadle's fish-out-of-water FBI agent wonders if Boyle is 
really dumb or really smart (though the language he uses is considerably more 
colourful). What's your view?

I think it's pretty obvious. The last really dumb person I've found reading 
Russian novels was a long way back. Boyle deliberately gives the impression of 
being dumb so that people underestimate him and leave him alone.

A New Yorker critic charged Martin McDonagh with racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/mar/14/martin-mcdonagh-race-row-broadway>
 in his latest play,A Behanding in Spokane. There are a lot of racist lines in 
The Guard, too – most of them spoken by your character. Did any of it make you 
uneasy?

I thought that New Yorker accusation was very unfair and off the mark. I can 
kind of understand the argument, and I think it had more to do with the 
production than the actual writing, but I know it's not true. WithThe Guard, if 
I thought Gerry Boyle was fundamentally racist I wouldn't do it, unless it was 
going to explore what was wrong with it. But with Boyle it's a ploy: he throws 
as many bombs as he can, hoping to flush people out and see their true colours.

You recently got a green light to direct your first film, an adaptation of 
Flann O'Brien's 1939 novelAt Swim-Two-Birds. How long has that been in 
the works?

Seven years. The rights came up in 2004 and I just grabbed them, not knowing 
what I was going to do with them. It's one of my favourite books. I read it at 
17 or 18, and to have a book that reflects all the maelstrom and confusion of 
being a teenager was such a glory back then – and it still feels relevant now. 
We're set to shoot in the spring, but I'm not counting my chickens yet.

How do you film a supposedly unfilmable book?

A friend of mine said: "Yeah, but the book was unwriteable," so that sorts 
that one out. It's going to be kind ofWizard of Oz-ish, in the sense that the 
people who populate the real world also populate the [main character's] 
imaginary world. Almost every actor will have two personas. I think film is 
uniquely suited to this, because you can change worlds in a second. The trick 
will be maintaining the madness and anarchy of the book while making sure a 
cinema audience can still follow it.

Of all the directors you've worked with, who has impressed you the most?

I worked with Steven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> on AI and his level of 
preparation was extraordinary. He told me there was a time at the beginning 
when he was a bit more spontaneous and went over budget and it absolutely 
wrecked his head. When you look at the power and assuredness of his movies, it 
makes sense that he works out so much in advance. It's never going to be that 
way for me though. I wouldn't even try to aspire to that: it's just a different 
way of working.

You've been called "the Irish Gérard Depardieu". Does that sit well with you?

When that first came up I was hugely flattered. How could you not be? 
Depardieu is a force of nature with a great canon of films. But I don't know 
what it means exactly. At this point, it's possibly more to do with corpulence 
than the body of work. What I like about Depardieu is that he embraces all of 
humanity. Maybe the fact that he's prepared to get a little bit corpulent has 
something to do with that. I can understand why people want to look at nice 
faces on film, but cinema has got to embrace humanity in all different shapes 
and forms. You can't just choose nice teeth and a beautiful figure.

Has appearing in three Harry Potter films impacted on your private life?

Not overly, because as unconventional as my looks are, they're not quite as 
unconventional as Mad-Eye Moody's, so I've kind of gotten away with murder. 
Robbie Coltrane told me I should forget about walking through airports again, 
but to be honest it's a bad idea to tell your 10-year-old to talk to me, 
because the poor child makes no connection with Mad-Eye Moody and he's looking 
at me saying: "Why am I being asked to talk to a stranger?"

You have four sons of your own. Were they excited when you got the part?

They were the reason I did it. They all roared when they heard. "Dad's going 
to be Mad-Eye Moody. Wa-hey!" After that, it was never not going to happen.

Two of your sons, Brian and Domhnall, have become actors. What advice do you 
give them?

Make your own work. Hire a room, round up 30 people, at lunchtime or whatever, 
and put on a play. Being at other people's behest is the worst part of this 
job, so my advice would be to actually practise your craft: just do it.

What's next?

John Martin McDonagh has written a script called Calvary about a good priest 
in an atmosphere where the priesthood is reviled. We cooked it up one night, 
just talking. It must be really difficult now to be a good priest, given how 
you've been let down by everything around you. I am interested in good people 
as well as bad. Not purely good – that would be really dull – but I like the 
notion of mixing great and terrible figures with ordinary men.

The Guard opens in cinemas on Friday
 