
Bears and bluebells are reported to have come out in Scandinavia, as if winter 
is over, but the Bees in Middlesex never stopped for it. Brentford, having 
risen to the top ofLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> on 29 December, 
extended the run of wins that took them there to eight with a 2-0 defeat of 
Port Vale, lying eighth, at Griffin Park. They have not lost in 14 league games 
since 12 October.

In the middle of it all, early last month, they changed manager, though 
Soccerbase still has Uwe Rösler in charge. Mark Warburton, formerly director of 
football, stepped in when the German was coaxed to Wigan and, "with a few 
tweaks here and there", has supervised the last six wins. It is his first job 
as manager, aged 51. He got no closer to playing league football than a 
Leicester City apprentice, though he has generally been involved in the game 
and was behind the NextGen under-19 club cup competition, established in 2011.

The quiet transition, noted also in the loss of their chairman, Greg Dyke, to 
the Football Association last year, is in keeping with a club who can barely 
make themselves heard against the traffic of the M4 and the presence of three 
senior clubs within eight miles, especially Chelsea's daily headline-seeking 
habit, though Fulham and QPR are more serious rivals. QPR almost took over 
Griffin Park in the 1960s and would have put them out of business.

Now Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford>, after a spell 
in the saving hands of a supporters' trust, then the ownership of a rich fan, 
Matthew Benham, proclaim the virtues of structure and stability and are a 
rubber stamp (from Boris Johnson and the Secretary of State) away from moving 
to a 20,000-seat stadium even nearer the M4. Saturday's 8,327 crowd pushed the 
average over 7,000, just over half capacity, and was urged at half-time to be 
ready for campaign action. Meanwhile in the programme Mark Devlin, chief 
executive, hailed Griffin Park's "wonderful atmosphere".

For all this they seem to know where they want to go and to have the means and 
mood to get there. The squad were almost all brought in by Warbs, as he signs 
himself, and on Saturday they overcame the absence to injury of three mainstays 
in their 4-1-4-1. Kevin O'Connor fell easily into central defence beside Tony 
Craig while Alan McCormack, stand-in defensive one, was outstandingly 
everywhere.

After a sloppy opening they ran fast and threatening in attack, especially 
favouring the pass slipped one side of a defender as a parallel runner went the 
other. The middle four was lopsided, with Clayton Donaldson wide and well up on 
the right while Alan Judge on the left, a shrewd new loan from Blackburn, 
interchanged with Sam Saunders, the division's December player of the month 
alongside Warburton, who got the manager's award. Saunders is 30 and, after 
five years as a night electrician on the Underground playing non-league, is a 
livewire making up for lost time.

Warburton, welcoming extension to the loans of George Saville (Chelsea 
midfielder) and Marcello Trotta (Fulham striker), saw it as testament to the 
"level of care and attention being afforded them". The striker Trotta struck 
first after half an hour and Will Grigg eased nerves with the second late on – 
a breakaway launched by McCormack near his own line, enjoying good "advantage" 
when Donaldson was fouled, and converted from Jake Bidwell's cross. Trotta owes 
Brentford a bit, having in the final match last April hit the bar with an 
added-time penalty that would have given them automatic promotion. Warburton 
senses "the balance and consistency" to achieve it this time and, even if the 
bears have no berries in autumn, the Bees may need that new home after all for 
possible derbies with QPR and Fulham.
 