
There's apocalypse in the air the day I go to Dublin. In the driving wind and 
rain, traffic seizes up, umbrellas crumble, and my map turns to pulp. Later, 
planes won't land and lights won't work. Thank heavens, then, forBrendan Gleeson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brendan-gleeson>, holed up in the basement 
of a hotel near parliament. He grips my hand and grins, massive and 
unflappable, as the courtyard outside the window seems to explode.

For all his smiling, though, it seems Gleeson isn't in the most reassuring 
mood: the apocalypse isn't just swirling around Dublin. "The whole world is in 
cataclysmic disillusionment," he says, pouring his fizzy water. "There's a 
sense of grieving going on for the loss of clarity over what's acceptable and 
what's not. People don't trust in the concept of goodness, or in the 
authorities defining it for us. Religion in general has been dismantled in 
western Europe. All systems – socialist or capitalist – are crashing."

The time is right, in other words, for Calvary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156217/calvary>, Gleeson's new film, 
premiered the night before for the home crowd 
<http://www.rte.ie/ten/news/2014/0214/504375-jdiff/>. "There seemed to be a 
pleasant sense of shock in the room," he says. "A pleasant whiff of trauma. The 
reaction tends to be muted – you don't get standing ovations. But you know it's 
working."

Calvary <https://www.theguardian.com/film/calvary> is the first film to face 
up to the sexual-abuse scandals that have so tainted the Catholic church 
lately. Its genius lies in doing this upside down – by querying the anger as 
much as channelling it. Gleeson plays Father James, a good priest in a 
west-coast town riven with sin and spite. In the first scene, he takes 
confession from a man who's known to him but anonymous to the audience. The man 
tells him he was repeatedly raped as a boy by a priest, who's since died. So 
next Sunday, he's going to murder blameless Father James as an enforced act of 
penance. "I'm going to kill you, Father," says the man, "because you've done 
nothing wrong."

The film is the second in what director John Michael McDonagh calls "the 
glorified suicide trilogy". This began with2011's The Guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142617/>, a brilliant comedy starring 
Gleeson as a Connemara cop with a fondness for class-A drugs and prostitutes, 
and will conclude with a film in which he plays a paraplegic who hates the 
able-bodied. Like The Guard, Calvary is tartly, tightly scripted; unlike it, 
it's a pious piece of work, a serious investigation of expiation.

Gleeson is in almost every scene, but less gabby and fiery than usual; he's 
the still centre around whom flashier names – Dylan Moran, Aiden Gillen, Chris 
O'Dowd – spark and spin. Their characters, says Gleeson, one of whom may be the 
one planning murder, "pour their own cynicism like a vial of poison into 
James's ear. They want to show him up as a hypocrite, if that's what he is. But 
at the back of it, there's this lingering hope he won't break."

Really? They seem pretty intent. No, says Gleeson firmly, adding that nobody 
wants to end up disillusioned. "I think they settle for it sometimes and they 
punish somebody who gives them an alternative – but they still want to be 
persuaded." So people just want a pound of flesh? A careful pause. "I think it 
would be acceptable for a pound of flesh to be extracted. But people are aware 
of what that costs, too. If you have a revolution, you need to be damn sure 
what you're replacing the old order with. Not just tearing things down without 
a viable rebuilding programme.

"What people are excited about is that this dilemma has been aired. I think 
it's what art should do: make you feel less alone – either in the quest for 
truth or in dealing with any pain you have. Everybody had a private reaction to 
it last night, but there was a communal catharsis. It's out there, which is a 
huge relief to everyone."

When he was 18, Gleeson went to France and was shocked by its secularism. 
"We'd come from a place where the church would be full for four or five masses 
on a Sunday morning to a place where nobody went. Well, maybe three or four 
elderly people." Now, he thinks, Ireland is playing catchup, and the time is 
nigh to start imagining a post-religion society.

The elephant in the room is Gleeson's own faith, which is off-limits today. He 
won't even give a verdict on the new Pope. Why not? "Anything I say at the 
moment will damage the film," he says. Should he come out as a practising 
Catholic, he thinks people will read the film as a defence of the church; if he 
says he's renounced religion, it'll be seen as an attack.

At first, this feels slightly confounding. So central is the theme to the 
film, all subsequent questions feel leading, intentionally or not. He was 
certainly raised devout, the son of Pat and the "hugely religious" Frank. He 
attended Catholic school in Dublin and taught maths until he was 34, then quit 
to act full-time. His wife of 32 years, Mary, is a welfare officer; they have 
four sons, two of whom have followed him into acting. Every opinion he ventures 
– about suicide, society, on-set behaviour – suggests a liberal socialism 
rooted in scripture and reconciled to reality. He fairly bleeds reason and 
wisdom.

Do people ever treat him like a priest? "No! Yes! I can't say," he laughs. Yet 
there is something of the perfect preacher about Gleeson. Today, he's clad 
totally in black, clergy-style, layer upon layer of linen from his ankles to 
his collar. A faint dog-collar effect is lent by that all-white chin, the rest 
of his rusty beard creeping over his cheeks like a delightful kind of lichen. 
He's projected guts and commitment in a career peppered with leaders of all 
stripes, from Michael Collins toWinston Churchill 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pfSqp-755KE>, from Martin Cahill to King 
Menelaus <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pLKZ0Adi70c>, and from Monk the 
sheriff inGangs of New York <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aAWIZFqE6L4> to 
rock-lobbing Hamish inBraveheart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yBK7OMRpOHs>. 
His characters often die, but even the really criminal, like the In Bruges 
hitman Ken, tend to do so as martyrs. And, for all his foibles,Mad-Eye Moody 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2htMZ3Vmc8w> from Harry Potter is a man you'd 
follow, too.

Now aged 59, he's devoted thought to pastoral matters. When working on a film, 
he says, "it's incredible how much more creative it is when people operate 
properly at the top. It's a better way to work than power-playing, when people 
are slightly less talented and a lot more challenged."

I ask how his passion project is going: an adaptation of Flann O'Brien's At 
Swim Two Birds. It was due to shoot in 2011, but has hit more roadbumps than a 
milkfloat. Gleeson wants to direct from his own script, currently on its 14th 
draft; Colin Farrell, Michael Fassbender, Gabriel Byrne and Cillian Murphy have 
all been linked to star. You can see the disappointment it hasn't yet happened 
on his face; but when he speaks about it, it's all in terms of not letting 
someone else down, of accommodation and compromise.

It's this keen sense of responsibility that helps explain his keeping schtum 
about his own beliefs. His "duty of care" is to the movie; he doesn't want to 
abuse his position of power – or, at least, of publicity. "What I voice, I 
voice though my art, if that's not too vainglorious a word. But I don't think 
it is. That is my contribution. I don't think it's helpful for me to be a 
public spokesperson, to sound off without being part of the solution."

But he did break that vow once, in 2006, when he "went mad" on Ireland's The 
Late Late Show <http://www.rte.ie/tv/footer_latelate/20060317.html> and railed 
against what he considered the poor state of healthcare in the country. The 
outburst was prompted by the last months of his mother-in-law, who was dying in 
a cancer ward when nurses pushed a coffin past the bottom of her bed. "It's 
like how not to do something."

He contrasts this with the "gift of a beautiful death" given to his own 
parents, both of whom died in hospices. "The boundless care the nuns gave 
my mother. She said she hadn't been creamed so much since she was a baby." He 
smiles, remembering her dry skin. "The horror of a death without dignity has so 
much implications for the people who are left behind.

"I hope I'm worthy in my dying. I hope I can maintain myself – that I wouldn't 
become pathetic and needy, and the worst part of myself come out in adversity. 
But I'm not afraid of it. It'd be such a silly thing to do! To ruin the life 
you have by fearing its ending."

Even the most personal of Gleeson's speeches can sound like a rallying cry. He 
stands and shakes my hand again, then sends me off into the hurricane, a 
general steeling his soldiers, a man to place your faith in.

• Calvary is out on Friday.

• This article was amended on 9 April 2014 because a reference to Brendan 
Gleeson's character in The Guard liking Russian literature was incorrectly 
introduced during the subediting process.
 