
Priti Patel has said revealing Britain’s negotiation position during talks with
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> leaders over the 
country’s departure from the bloc would be akin to revealing her hand in a 
high-stakes game of poker.

The international development secretary, who was a prominent leave campaigner 
and is said to be among the ministers on Theresa May’s Brexit committee, said a 
debate in the House of Commons over the terms of UK’s departure would give the 
game away to Brussels.

“If I were to sit down and play poker with you this morning, I’m not going to 
show you my cards before we even start playing the game,” she told BBC1’s 
Andrew Marr Show.

Her comments came in the wake of an attempt by a powerful cross-party group of 
MPs to force a parliamentary vote on whether the government should reveal its 
plans for the UK’s future outside the EU before negotiations begin, spearheaded 
by former party leaders Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg and including shadow Brexit 
secretary Keir Starmer, former Tory minister Nick Herbert and leave-backing 
Conservative MP Stephen Phillips.

The MPs have called for the government to set out its negotiating position 
before the House before article 50 is triggered.

Patel said MPs would not be denied a say in the Brexit process, including 
voting on the “great repeal bill” that would transpose EU law on to the British 
statute book after UK leaves the EU, giving the government the opportunity to 
examine laws separately and repeal legislation over time if desired.

“We look at everything that happens in parliament and obviously the debates 
that are taking place now and the debates that people are alluding to as well,” 
Patel said. “We will work with all colleagues. This isn’t about a ‘them or us’ 
mentality whatsoever; we are listening to colleagues, respectfully.”

Clegg told the same programme on Sunday that MPs were not attempting to 
subvert the referendum vote. “When John Major had to go to the rest ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and negotiate the Maastricht 
treaty, he first put in effect something very similar to a white paper to the 
House of Commons and said ‘these are my objectives, this is the way I want to 
try and approach these talks, will you give me your backing or not?’” he said.

“And incidentally it’s also exactly the same approach that Theresa May took 
under the coalition government when she negotiated the new deal on police and 
judicial cooperation in the EU. So the precedent is there and it’s a very good 
precedent because it gives the government of the day much greater authority if 
it’s negotiating with other governments with the backing of its parliament.”

Clegg said if the proposal was voted down, May would have to “go back and 
improve her negotiating stance” and said that may entail article 50 being 
delayed beyond the end of March deadline set by May.

“Yes, and by the way that would be a very good thing anyway because I think 
Theresa May has made already a fundamental tactical error by saying, frankly 
just to throw red meat to her backbenchers, that she’s going to trigger article 
50 in March of next year because she’s already, in doing so, lost about a 
quarter of her negotiating timetable because as anybody in Europe – and I speak 
to many politicians across Europe – will tell you, nothing is going to 
meaningfully happen until the end of next year after the German elections.”

Greg Hands, minister of state for international trade, said the UK government 
was still working out its position on crucial details, including whether the UK 
would need to pay EU budget contributions in exchange for favourable trading 
conditions.


“It’s difficult, at this stage ... we’ve said we want to make sure that we 
know in advance before we trigger article 50 all of the pros and cons. The 
prime minister has been clear we need to get the best possible deal for the 
UK,” he told ITV’s Peston on Sunday. “We’ve got time to be able to get the 
right answers to those questions.”
 