
In a time of austerity and strained budgets, it has never been more essential 
for the NHS to get partnerships and collaboration right. Every day, clinical 
teams save lives – and if the NHS is to survive and thrive, it must draw on 
this collective strength. Yet collaboration can be patchy among the higher 
echelons of the NHS, with many potential partners complaining of the health 
service’s seeming inability to work effectively and courteously with others.

Would the NHS be in a different place if health leaders had, over the past 20 
years, facilitated collaboration in the same way they had done for competition? 
That was one of the questions from the floor at a seminar hosted by the 
Guardian and supported by business solutions and technology company Brother.

In front of an audience of invited healthcare professionals, an expert panel, 
chaired by the Guardian’s public services editor David Brindle, discussed and 
debated the gaps in healthcare provision in the UK, as well as if – and how – 
they could be solved by more effective partnerships. Could the health, social 
care and voluntary sectors work more closely together, how might this be 
achieved and what would it mean for patients?

Fragmentation means duplication and duplication costs money; we can’t afford 
that
David Hare 
“We too often dish out lazy cliches about different sectors and different 
parts of the system, whether it be the private sector describing the public 
sector as inefficient or the public sector [describing the private sector] as 
ethically questionable,” said David Hare, chief executive ofNHS Partners Network
 <http://www.nhsconfed.org/networks/nhs-partners-network>, which represents 
independent sector providers of NHS clinical services. “For the patients, some 
of those divides are false. Even within the NHS we’ve had divides between 
primary care and secondary care, physical health and mental health. The future 
has to look at how to integrate and bring all that together for the service 
user. If you have that fragmentation, you have an element of duplication; 
duplication costs money and we can’t afford that in the current climate. We 
have to work our way through this.”

Integration, or joined-up working, has long been the buzzword of choice among 
professionals in both health and social care. But years of talking have brought 
few benefits for the social care and voluntary sectors, which continue to be 
the “poor relations” of the NHS, according to Grainne Siggins, policy lead at 
theAssociation of Directors of Adult Social Services 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/home> (Adass) and director of adult social services 
for the London borough of Newham. “There are different cultures across health 
and care and we shouldn’t underestimate the impact of that in terms of trying 
to work collaboratively and as partners across a whole system,” she said. Asked 
if the picture was improving, she replied that it wasn’t, adding: “You’ve only 
got to look at the approach to sustainability and transformation plans 
[five-year plans for the future of health and care services in local areas] to 
see that equality wasn’t important in that partnership.”

Linda turned up at A&E twice a day. A dedicated team now stops that
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/28/sunderland-health-partnership-cut-hospital-admissions>
There are chinks of light in the gloom, however – areas where improved 
collaboration is beginning to happen. Take Manchester, where powers and 
responsibilities for health and social care, among others, have been devolved 
from national government. John Patterson, a GP and clinical director of ofHope 
Citadel Healthcare <http://www.hopecitadel.org.uk/>, says people now understand 
that wellbeing is about a range of factors, including health, housing, friends 
and diet and that healthcare and social care must reflect that. “A housing 
officer with 30 years of experience can’t be replaced by an app,” he said. “We 
need to find out how to get that experience and compassion into the health 
system. How do we get the experience of a community matron into the social care 
system? The thing I love most about Manchester is that here we’re trying to do 
that with and through people.”

Another positive associated with “Devo Manc”, he added, is that people are 
brave enough to try new things. “We were one of the first organisations in the 
country to get double-badged workers. We had a care navigator that had a 
council badge and an NHS badge – somebody who would walk between worlds, find 
the sickest people and help them the most.”

It’s not so much an austerity issue as about doing the right thing for people
Anu Singh 
Anu Singh, director of patient and public participation at NHS England 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/>, pointed out that the challenge she faces is that 
people see partnerships as an accounting trick or something that is about 
saving money. Instead, she said, people needed to realise that traditional 
models of healthcare hadn’t worked and hadn’t met the needs in the community. 
“We’re trying to work differently with localities because we know that if we 
don’t get housing right – if we don’t have people helping with social isolation 
– this will add to the pressure on care and things will continue to spiral out 
of control,” she said. “It’s not so much an austerity issue as about doing the 
right thing for people.”

She recalled how one GP had told her that when a patient came to him in the 
past with mental health problems, they would prescribe prozac; now, they can 
help that patient get a job. She believes this example highlights how the NHS 
can work differently and more effectively. “As always with health, you have 
innovators and policy people trying to pull strings in different directions,” 
she said. “People know we’ve not quite got it right so far – I don’t think all 
the parts have come together before – but the time is now.”

This was a point that Dr Mahiben Maruthappu 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/publications/blogs/mahiben-maruthappu/>, a 
London-based doctor and social entrepreneur, agreed with. He said that the 
challenges were social, demographic and economic – and that the frontline and 
national decision-making bodies were not aligned. “I think the vision in the 
Five Year Forward View still stands – we need a radical upgrade in prevention, 
better integration of services, and to overcome fractures between primary and 
secondary services.”

He also explained how technology could save cash while enforcing a better 
quality of service by being “an enabler” of healthcare that can support 
doctors, nurses and patients. “We always ask how the health and care system can 
be more sustainable – if we allow patients to identify and manage their 
conditions better, that’s going to relieve a tremendous amount of pressure.”

Can a digital revolution save the NHS?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/03/can-digital-revolution-save-nhs>
The panellists agreed that the patient or service user must be at the centre 
of all decisions and Singh admitted that patients could get “pushed around 
clinical pathways” in the current system. “If the health service is going to be 
more sustainable, we need to shift that paradigm,” she said.

A question from an audience member about whether there was too much focus on 
external partnerships and not enough on bringing a “highly disillusioned” 
workforce into decisions then prompted the panel to discuss healthcare staff.

Singh said she learned the difference between how those on the frontline and 
policymakers think when she was trying to introduce a scheme to help clinicians 
empower patients: “What seemed obvious to the policymakers seemed alien to a 
lot of the clinicians we were talking to.” Talking initially to those involved 
in care, to see if they had a solution, is key, she said.

Maruthappu, a doctor himself, pointed out that clinicians work in partnership 
every day – in multidisciplinary teams made up of doctors, nurses, occupational 
therapists, physiotherapists and more. He suggested that the model be amplified 
and replicated higher up.

Siggins, meanwhile, highlighted the importance of getting clinicians involved 
in social care. Now that local authorities have taken over responsibility for 
commissioning a range of public health services, GPs need to be involved in 
conversations, she said: “It’s our job to support GPs so we can support people 
coming into the system.”

All panellists recognised that the current work climate is a difficult one for 
everyone – but will this strain drive people working in the health, social and 
voluntary sectors apart? Hare acknowledged the danger, but pointed out that 
this has only made collaboration more necessary. “We’ve got no alternative. 
We’re going to have to do things differently. There isn’t going to be a magic 
pot of money.”

Maruthappu agreed: “Healthcare is a team sport and we need to embrace that far 
better than we do at the moment.”

At the table

 * David Brindle (chair), public services editor, the Guardian

 * Dr Mahiben Maruthappu, co-founder, NHS Innovation Accelerator

 * Anu Singh, director of patient and public voice and insight, NHS England

 * David Hare, chief executive, NHS Partners Network

 * Grainne Siggins, policy lead, Adass, and director of adult social services, 
London borough of Newham

 * Dr John Patterson, co-founder, Focused Care scheme
 