
Brighton & Hove Albion battled through the mud to see off a spirited effort 
from hostsPort Vale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale> and seal 
their place in round five of the FA Cup with a 3-1 victory.

Promotion-chasing Brighton, with Tuesday's trip to Burnley in mind, made seven 
changes to the team beaten at Derby last weekend. The surface water caused by a 
pre-match thunderstorm will also have been to Vale's liking, with the sodden 
pitch another leveller.

Much of the early play was understandably bogged down in midfield and a couple 
of long range efforts by Brighton's Jon Obika and Rohan Ince proved harmless.

Andrea Orlandi went closer when his shot on the turn veered just wide of Chris 
Neal's right-hand post with the visitors gradually turning the screw.

Neal then had to get down smartly to keep out Solly March's powerful shot 
before Brighton broke the deadlock in the 27th minute.

Orlandi delivered an outswinging corner from the left and Ince cushioned a 
classy left-foot finish high inside Neal's left-hand post from 12 yards.

The goal roused Vale into action and Tom Pope almost got on the end of 
Jennison Myrie-Williams' cross before the centre-back Chris Robertson headed a 
36th minute equaliser.

Chris Lines delivered a quality corner from the right and Robertson timed his 
run to perfection to bury a 12-yard header low inside Peter Brezovan's 
right-hand post.

Vale grew in confidence as an entertaining cup tie came to the boil, but were 
rocked back on their heels when Brighton regained the lead in fortunate fashion 
two minutes before the interval. Orlandi rolled a short right-wing corner 
towards March and the midfielder's intended right-foot cross looped over 
everyone and the ball dropped inside the stranded Neal's right-hand post.

Micky Adams, who had two spells in charge at Brighton, replaced left-back Rob 
Taylor with Adam Yates at half-time. But the visitors went for the jugular as 
Neal saved well from March before Orlandi had a goalbound shot charged down.

Jake Forster-Caskey's fierce drive then forced an even better stop from Neal 
with Vale working hard just to stay in the tie.

Kemy Agustien was next to go close for Brighton when his 64th minute shot 
crashed against the overworked Vale goalkeeper's right-hand post.

Adams brought on the strikers Ben Williamson and Jordan Hugill to chase the 
game, but the visitors countered with a deserved third goal 12 minutes from 
time.

Ince's first time ball sent Obika sprinting clear of the Vale defence and the 
striker on loan from Tottenham Hotspur rounded Neal and rolled a left foot shot 
into an empty net from 12 yards.

Battling Vale refused to lie down as Hugill and the former Brighton midfielder 
Doug Loft were denied close to goal, but the visitors stayed strong to see out 
the tie.
 