
With 2017 now in full swing, voluntary sector trustees up and down the country 
will be thinking about what their board could do better, and what they, as an 
individual trustee, can do differently.

Here are five resolutions to help make 2017’s board your best yet:

Challenge

This may seems obvious. But we know that too many boards are merely 
rubber-stamping the decisions of their executives without suitable scrutiny and 
challenge.

The voluntary sector has witnessed the press rail against it in 2016 and 
high-profile cases have thrust to centre stage the fact that too many charities 
still have poor governance. As a trustee, challenging decisions is one of your 
primary roles.

Do a skills audit

Getting the right skills on your board is vital for good governance, to ensure 
the team can fulfil its primary commitment – to challenge.

The five major risks all charity board members need to think about
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/sep/01/the-five-major-risks-all-charity-board-members-need-to-think-about>
Having the right brains around the table to navigate your charity through its 
challenges and opportunities over the coming year is critical and a skills 
audit will help you identify the gaps. When scoping the landscape, remind 
yourself of who is due to step down and when. You don’t want to end up without 
finance expertise because your forgot your treasurer was due to stand down in 
the next year. Essentially, you need to analyse the strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities and threats to the skills on your board.


 Evaluate your board

Trustees should not be afraid to evaluate each other and themselves to ensure 
their board is fit for purpose. It sets a powerful precedent when boards hold 
the mirror up to themselves to evaluate their effectiveness.

This means a top-to-tail review of the people, processes, papers, timetabling, 
committee use and executive involvement. And on an individual level this is 
also a good time to consider your own contribution to the board.

Are you just coasting? Perhaps it’s time for you to lend your skills elsewhere 
and allow your seat around the table to be filled by someone else who can 
contribute in a different way. Knowing when to step down from a board is 
critical to that board’s survival. Lame duck trustees are a nuisance.

Commit to diversity

Diversity and having the right skills mix go hand in hand. More diverse 
decision-making is better decision-making. When you have completed your board 
evaluation you may notice there are parts of the process that are preventing 
participation from those you are trying to attract. As a sector we champion 
diversity – but our boards do not show that in practice.

Ensure your own staff are also trustees

Ensure you encourage staff at your organisation to put themselves forward to 
be trustees at other organisations. When the fundraising crisis hit, the 
relationship between boards and fundraisers was, rightfully, called into 
question. One of the easiest fixes of this was to encourage fundraisers to join 
boards.

Charity chief executives should be on the board of trustees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/apr/19/charity-chief-executives-board-trustees>
We ask businesses to release staff to be trustees but less often release our 
staff to be trustees, even though it provides great professional development 
and their own opportunity to “give back”.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 