
Bristol have one foot back in the Premiership after a convincing 28-13 win 
over Doncaster at Castle Park in the first leg of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> play-off final.

Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> were trailing 13-11 
at the interval and overcame the loss of Tom Varndell to a yellow card to 
produce a strong second-half display and take a comfortable lead back to Ashton 
Gate for next Wednesday’s second leg.

David Lemi, Ross McMillan and Ben Glynn scored tries for Bristol, Callum 
Sheedy kicking two conversions and adding three penalties.

Will Hurrell scored Doncaster’s try with Dec Cusack kicking two penalties and 
a conversion.

Doncaster made a lively start and had the first chance for points when the 
visitors were penalised at the first scrum. Cusack stepped up and made no 
mistake with his kick to give the hosts a third-minute lead.

However, the home side fumbled the restart, enabling Bristol to gain a 
platform in the opposition half where they remained for the next 12 minutes.

They placed the Knights under considerable pressure but some ferocious 
tackling kept Bristol at bay and a misdirected lineout throw from McMillan 
allowed Doncaster to temporarily relieve the pressure before a Sheedy penalty 
drew the visitors level.

After 22 minutes, and against the run of play, Doncaster scored the opening 
try of the game. A driving lineout put the Bristol defence on the back foot and 
allowed Michael Heaney to send Hurrell in under the posts.

Sheedy replied with a second penalty after Doncaster were penalised for 
illegally halting an impressive 30-metre drive but the visitors soon suffered a 
blow when Varndell was yellow carded for foolishly taking Heaney out in the air.

It mattered little as Bristol continued to dominate the half and deservedly 
took the lead when strong runs from Marco Mama and Jack Lam created the 
opportunity for Lemi to squeeze in at the corner. Sheedy missed the conversion 
before a Cusack penalty put 13-11 up at the break.

Lemi was injured after being tackled in the air by Andy Bulumakau five minutes 
after half-time and the Bristol captain was replaced by Matthew Morgan moments 
before McMillan burst away from a lineout to score the away side’s second try.

Minutes later, Bristol had their third when Will Cliff tore through a huge gap 
in the home line-out to put in Glynn. Sheehy kicked a third penalty in the 
final quarter as Bristol emphasised their superiority on the night to make them 
firm favourites to return to the Premiership for the first time since 2009.
 