
Darrell Clarke had intended to celebrate Bristol Rovers’ place in the 
Conference play-off final with a quiet bite to eat in Portishead with Steve 
Yates, the club’s coach, and their partners, but best-laid plans sometimes get 
shelved. Euphoric after seeing off Forest Green Rovers in the semi-final, 
Clarke stopped the taxi at the Queen Vic on Gloucester Road, around the corner 
from the Memorial Stadium, pushed open the door of a pub packed withBristol 
Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> fans and started 
singing “Wembley”.

“The place just erupted, it was great,” the Rovers manager says, smiling. “It 
was spur of the moment. Me and Steve thought we’d just pop in because we knew 
the hardcore supporters were going to be in there, and we ended up being in 
there for 45 minutes. I did a speech and a singsong – after the year we’ve had, 
it was the right time to enjoy it.”

Alongside Yates, a former Rovers player, Clarke went through a rendition of 
“Goodnight, Irene”, the club’s anthem, and “We are going up”, all of which was 
recorded on a mobile phone and, as ever these days, quickly found its way on to 
social media. While Rovers fans lapped it up,Grimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> Town supporters seized on the 
footage as evidence that their opponents in Sunday’s play-off final think 
victory is a foregone conclusion.

The reality could not be further from the truth. “I certainly wasn’t being 
disrespectful to anybody and I certainly don’t regret it,” Clarke says. “It is 
not something that I do regularly, it was a one-off, but that is me wearing my 
heart on my sleeve. I was enjoying the moment with my supporters, and we 
haven’t had many of those moments to enjoy.”

It is a fair point. Those raucous scenes in the Queen Vic came 12 months to 
the day since Rovers, in the words of their chairman, Nick Higgs, hit “rock 
bottom”. Needing a point at home against Mansfield to be sure of staying in 
League Two, Rovers lost 1-0, other results went against them and they were 
relegated on goal difference, ending a 94-year stay in the Football League. 
They had spent less than an hour in the bottom two all season.

Clarke, who, five weeks earlier, had stepped up from his role as assistant 
manager to John Ward to take charge of the team, was in tears at the final 
whistle and he has never watched his desperate post-match interview, when he 
has one hand propping up his head and looks and sounds like a broken man. “I 
was gutted,” he says. “Gutted for the supporters.”

Taking Rovers to within 90 minutes of an immediate return to the Football 
League – Carlisle were the last club to achieve that feat, 10 years ago – has 
been far from straightforward and it says much for Clarke’s single-mindedness 
that he has got to this point.

An ebullient character, Clarke describes the past 12 months as a form of 
mental torture. The 37-year-old shipped out 20 players in the summer, cut the 
£1.7m wage bill by £800,000 and lost three members of his backroom staff. He 
had a huge rebuilding job on his hands, in terms of personnel and morale, yet 
he also knew that the only thing Rovers supporters would tolerate this season 
was the team winning.

The first three matches reinforced that view. “We drew against Grimsby, then 
we lost at Barnet, and then we lost at Altrincham, and on the Monday morning 
there were 100 posters around the training pitch: ‘Sack the management, sack 
the players.’ It was all Sellotaped on the crossbars and the gate as you walked 
in. I didn’t show the players that, I just picked them all up and got on with 
it.”

An ambitious young manager who led Salisbury City to two promotions in three 
years before joining Rovers at the start of last season, Clarke talks about how 
he created a siege mentality in the dressing room to turn things around at the 
Memorial Stadium. It worked as his team lost one of their last 28 league games, 
only to finish one point behind Barnet, the Conference champions. 

The supporters have come onside. Rovers’ average attendance was 6,630 and 
Clarke points out that the 11,085 crowd for their final home league game of the 
season, against Alfreton Town, was higher than Bournemouth attracted on the 
night they beat Bolton Wanderers to all but clinch promotion to the Premier 
League. As many as 30,000 Rovers fans are expected to travel to Wembley.

While regaining Football League status feels like the be-all and end-all for 
Rovers, ahugely significant story is also taking place off the field. This 
month a High Court judge is expected to settle a long-running dispute between 
Rovers and Sainsbury’s in relation to the Memorial Stadium. Sainsbury’s has 
threatened to pull out of a plan to build a supermarket on the site, scuppering 
Rovers’ hopes of moving to a 21,700-seat new home near the University of the 
West of England campus in Stoke Gifford.

If the judge finds in favour of the club, who claim Sainsbury’s is 
contractually obliged to purchase the site, the supermarket could be forced to 
go ahead with the original plans or pay up to £30m in damages. “It certainly 
could be a telling week for us on and off the pitch,” Clarke says. “But I’ve 
got enough going through my head without having to worry about that. The 
players and everyone else have distanced themselves from it because we can’t 
control it.”

While Clarke has been able to shut his mind off from the stadium trials and 
tribulations – a constant theme at a club that has lived a nomadic existence 
ever since leaving their old ground at Eastville in 1986 – ignoring events 
across the city at Ashton Gate has proved more difficult.Bristol City triumphed 
at Wembley in the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/22/bristol-city-walsall-johnstones-paint-trophy-match-report>
andwon promotion to the Championship as League One champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/14/football-league-championship-bristol-city-promotion-bournemouth-shrewsbury-town>
. “That obviously puts more pressure on us,” Clarke says.

It is now all about delivering at Wembley. “I know Bristol Rovers have had big 
games in the past, but we’ve talked about how long it can take clubs to get out 
of the Conference, how the funding gets cut for academies, the budgets that get 
cut, so for me this has to be one of the biggest games in the club’s history,” 
Clarke says. “Because if we can go up, the club can really kick on. The 
potential here is massive with the support.”
 