
Darrell Clarke ended the season in tears last May having seen his Bristol 
Rovers side lose their league status for the first time in 94 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/03/league-two-bristol-rovers-wycombe-northampton>
. This time round his campaign climaxed with a 60-yard sprint across the 
Wembley turf to celebrate their return at the first time of asking thanks to a 
penalty shootout victory over Grimsby. “Showed a yard of pace this year, didn’t 
I?” he said. “Nearly pulled a hamstring.”

In immediately bouncing back into League Two Rovers became the first side 
since Carlisle United 10 years ago to do so. “I was hurting last summer,” said 
Clarke, whose side had missed out on automatic promotion by a point after 
recovering from a slow start to non-league life.

“It was difficult to deal with. It affected me badly, I don’t mind saying. 
There were some dark, dark nights. The disappointment was massive. To rebuild a 
club that had hit rock bottom is fantastic.”

They got over the line the hard way here, falling behind to Grimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> after only 100 seconds, somehow 
surviving Town’s blistering start without further damage to the scoreline – or 
their numbers after the goalkeeper Will Puddy handled outside the area – 
equalising before the half hour and then grinding their way to penalties from 
half-time onwards.

The Bristol Rovers manager then opted to do a Louis van Gaal for the shootout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/06/louis-van-gaal-tim-krul-holland-costa-rica-world-cup>
, replacing Puddy with the experienced Steve Mildenhall in the final seconds of 
extra-time. “It was spur of the moment,” he said. “I just thought: ‘You know 
what? I’m going to do it.” But there was no need for any repeat of Tim Krul’s 
World Cup heroics for Holland against Costa Rica. Jon-Paul Pittman blazed 
Grimsby’s third penalty over the bar and Rovers’ Lee Mansell held his nerve in 
front of a Conference record crowd of 47,029 to slot home the final kick.

“It’s an extremely cruel way to lose,” said the Mariners manager Paul Hurst. 
“You could not meet a nicer guy than Jon-Paul Pittman. He apologised when we 
went into the dressing room but he hasn’t got anything to apologise for.”

It could all have been very different. Grimsby were ahead inside two minutes, 
Lenell John-Lewis forcing the ball over the line from close range. Given that 
Rovers began a high court battle with Sainsbury’s last week over a £30m deal to 
redevelop their Memorial Stadium it seemed quite apt that their day looked set 
to be ruined by a striker nicknamed “The Shop”.

Then came controversy, with Puddy making an ill-judged charge from his area 
and stopping Ollie Palmer’s effort with a hand. The referee, Ross Joyce, 
generously produced only a yellow card when a red seemed appropriate. “I felt 
like he wanted to keep 11 v 11 on the pitch,” said Hurst. “But a sending off is 
a sending off. You have to be brave and make that decision.”

Clarke concurred – “Luckily for us, and it makes a pleasant change, the 
football gods were smiling on us” – and his side made the most of the reprieve 
by getting back on level terms on the half hour. A corner sparked a scramble 
from which Ellis Harrison thrashed the ball home from close range.

By half-time it could have been 10 against nine and 4-3 rather than 11 v 11 
and 1-1. Ten minutes before the interval the Rovers striker Matty Taylor 
streaked through after an horrendous error from Shaun Pearson and went down in 
the box under James McKeown’s challenge. There appeared to have been the 
lightest of touches from the goalkeeper but Joyce opted to book the striker 
rather than award the penalty and produce a red. Even then it might have been 
Taylor’s second booking after he had escaped unpunished from an earlier fracas.

It was just as well that 120 minutes worth of action had been crammed into a 
hugely entertaining first 45 – tension triumphed over technique from then 
onwards. Rovers, who settled into the contest after their equaliser, shaded the 
second period while Grimsby perhaps had the better of extra-time but in truth 
penalties looked likely from the hour mark onwards.

In extra time both midfields left their forwards to attack on their own, 
unwilling or, more likely by that stage, unable to get up in support and the 
most intriguing moment of the added 30 minutes came just before the final 
whistle when Rovers made their goalkeeper switch. In the end, though, 
Mildenhall was not required to be the hero. Pittman launched the ball over the 
bar and Mansell sent Rovers back up.

Man of the match Chris Lines (Bristol Rovers)
 