
The stresses of fighting Premiership relegation are well documented but people 
forget the flipside of the equation. Welcome to theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> play-offs and an 
end‑of‑season format so cruel it could have been devised by the Marquis de 
Sade. Imagine labouring hard for nine months to be promoted, finishing top of 
the table by 16 points and then in effect having to start again from scratch? 
To say Andy Robinson, Bristol’s director of rugby, looks faintly tense is akin 
to calling Isambard Kingdom Brunel a vaguely useful engineer.

London Irish lose relegation loophole as Championship clubs meet criteria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/28/bristol-yorkshire-carnegie-doncaster-london-irish-premiership-championship>
The tightness of Robinson’s jaw at a hailstorm-lashed Ashton Gate is 
understandable. As a coach he may have won a World Cup with England and 
conquered Europe with Bath but bridging the gorge between the Championship and 
the Premiership has been a nightmarish lottery. Two years agoBristol were 
outplayed in the two‑leg play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/04/london-welsh-beat-bristol-promotion-premiership>
 by London Welsh; last season they were agonisinglypipped in the closing 
seconds by Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/27/worcester-bristol-championship-play-off-final-second-leg>
. The patience of the club’s owner, Steve Lansdown – worth £1.4bn according to 
the latest Sunday Times Rich List – would be stretched by a third successive 
failure.

Hence the reason no club employee is permitted to look beyond Sunday’s 
semi-final first leg at Bedford, notwithstanding a free ticket offer to loyal 
patrons shouldBristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> make the 
final. The impressive, towering new main stand at Ashton Gate has not been 
built as a backdrop to fixtures with Ealing Trailfinders. “I don’t know any 
other sport where you don’t end up getting promoted from the second tier if you 
finish top,” mutters the long-suffering Robinson. “That’s why it brings the 
pressures it does. The important thing is to recognise the last 22 games have 
been a stepping stone to get to this moment. It’s been a long season but we 
knew the rules before we started.”

One hundred and 80 miles away in Doncaster there is plenty of sympathy for 
Bristol’s situation. Clive Griffiths, the much-travelled former Wales defence 
coach, will be delighted if his Knights team earn a crack at the big time by 
beating Yorkshire Carnegie in a less‑than-neighbourly semi‑final shootout but 
acknowledges the perversity of the system. “It is weird,” he says. “Call me a 
traditionalist but Bristol have been 20 points ahead of their nearest rivals at 
times.”

For all involved there are other uncomfortable issues, too. Many fine old 
clubs, such as Moseley and Plymouth Albion, are struggling to stay afloat 
financially and are increasingly calling for help; as London Welsh’s fate last 
season illustrated, promotion is not always helpful, either. So what, exactly, 
does the Rugby Football Union want the Championship to be? A thriving feeder 
league or a downtrodden collection of semi-pro clubs with no ambition? “How 
much do the RFU want the Championship to be a vibrant competition that provides 
better players?” asks Griffiths. “Please don’t tell me there’s not enough 
resources in the RFU to give these boys a bit of a leg-up.”

Exacerbating the problem is the scheduling of the final play-offs; whoever is 
promoted can plan for thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> only after the second leg on 25 
May. “London Welsh didn’t know until the end of May two years ago they were 
going to get promoted and then it was a mad dash to get players on board,” 
Griffiths says. “You can’t do it in six weeks. Even for our team to get where 
they are now has taken us three years.”

His personal preference would be for a calculated rejig: extending the top 
three divisions to 14 sides apiece, the Premiership included, with one up, one 
down promotion and relegation. “You’d still have your promotion and relegation 
but [the gap] wouldn’t be so acute,” Griffiths says.

“The vast majority of the clubs in National One don’t want to be in the 
Championship. They just haven’t got the resources, the grounds or the spectator 
base. Then there are Championship clubs who currently haven’t got the resources 
to play in the Premiership. For clubs further down the food chain it’s a huge 
problem.”

Despite the new money set to flow into English club rugby’s coffers via the 
projected new eight-year £220m deal with the RFU, such an expansion would 
require some elite turkeys to vote for a less lucrative Christmas. Some 
Championship insiders reckon it would take only an extra £250,000 per club per 
annum on top of their existing £500,000 RFU funding to soothe the current 
widespread pain but, for some, it may already be too late. If London Irish’s 
professionals drop down next season – they will finish bottom of the table if 
they lose to Harlequins on Sunday – they will find themselves playing against 
promoted Richmond, who intend to operate as a largely amateur side. Surely it 
is time the Championship was cherished more, not least for its part in 
developing players such as George Kruis, Maro Itoje and Henry Slade, all of 
whom featured as dual-registered players in the second tier. “For a lot of 
sides the Championship is very hard ... we’ve got to look at how it can be 
helped,” Robinson says.

Rob Andrew to leave role as RFU’s director of professional rugby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/rob-andrew-leave-rfu-end-of-season>
His Bristol squad can only pray that they advance unscathed through this 
annual minefield. Robinson and his head of performance, Mark Bennett, have 
tailored their fitness regime accordingly and staged a warm-weather camp in 
Portugal to make absolutely sure. Given Bedford accept they do not meet the 
promotion criteria and their captain, Nick Fenton-Wells, will not feature in 
the semi-final because he is moving to Bristol this summer, the likelihood of 
another high-profile stumble has been further diminished.

At Doncaster’s Castle Park, nevertheless, they live in hope, following 
confirmation they will satisfy Premiership ground criteria at the nearby 
Keepmoat Stadium should they storm the play-offs. “Let’s be honest, all the 
pressure is on Yorkshire and Bristol with the investment they’ve put in,” 
Griffiths says, chuckling. “These words could be rammed down my throat but 
we’re not a team that chokes. I wouldn’t say we’re rabbits in the headlamps. 
You’ve just got to have your heart on fire and your head in the fridge. The 
players are excited and there’s a sense of anticipation.

“We’re still a work in progress but we’re somewhere this club has never been 
before. No matter what happens, everyone in Doncaster can feel proud of the 
players’ efforts.” No sign of underdog tension there, which is what makes the 
Championship play-offs such exquisite torture.
 