
The Japanese government’s letter setting out its Brexit demands is deeply 
troubling to the UK since it is clear Japanese companies wantTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to negotiate a deal that 
leaves Britain not just in the EU customs union, and single market, but also 
retains a free flow of workers between the EU and the UK.

The British government could not possibly accede to these demands if May’s 
mantra thatBrexit means Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/22/brexit-means-brexit-when-is-big-question>
 is to mean anything. Yet the Japanese requests – set out in a 15-page memo – 
are likely to become the benchmark by which many countries with strong economic 
ties to the UK will judge the outcome of the talks.

Above all, the Japanese memo underlines that the UK is not only negotiating 
bilaterally with the EU commission and council of ministers, but with many 
other foreign firms that have invested in the UK, each of which is quite 
capable of upping sticks in the next phase of their investment cycle.

Japan's Brexit demands range from possible to fanciful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/japan-brexit-demands-range-from-possible-to-fanciful>
The fear for Downing Street is that other non-EU countries – under internal 
pressure from their business communities – will now follow the Japanese example 
and publicly set out the parameters of an acceptable deal from the point of 
view of their UK-based companies. China, for instance, is not known for its 
diplomatic subtlety when commercial interests are at stake. Other countries in 
east Asia may also make their views known.

Moreover, there is little downside for Brussels if during the talks third 
parties such asJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> warn the UK that 
unless it is flexible over the single market, consequences will follow.

The additional difficulty for May is timing. Her government is still far from 
united in its demands and is playing a long game by remaining studiously vague 
about the deal she is targeting. Bland reassurance has been May’s strategic 
goal so far.

The Japanese demands blow that strategy apart by being very specific. It says: 
“What Japanese businesses inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> most wish to avoid is the 
situation in which they are unable to discern clearly the way the negotiations 
are going, only grasping the whole picture at the last minute. It is imperative 
that the outcome is free of unpleasant surprises and reducing the risks 
emanating from uncertainty.”

In effect Japan is trying to force the UK to show its hand, something five 
House of Lords EU select committees will also start to seek to achieve this 
week when they begin a coordinated grilling of ministers and experts across the 
whole Brexit field.

Nor can the UK government easily dismiss the report’s status. A working group 
chaired by Koichi Hagiuda, deputy chief cabinet secretary and a former aide to 
the prime minister,Shinzo Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, 
compiled the 15-page set of demands.

Hagiuda served Abe from 2013 to 2015 as the special adviser to the president 
of the Liberal Democratic party and, as such, intimately represents the 
thinking of the Japanese government and business.

G20: is it time to go back to the future, before globalisation?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/04/g20-is-it-time-to-go-back-to-the-future-before-globalisation>
The Japanese insist they are not telling a sovereign power how to negotiate, 
but just defending Japanese interests. Japanese firms, after all, employ about 
140,000 workers in the UK, with Nomura bank, manufacturing corporation Hitachi 
and carmakers Honda, Nissan and Toyota all having large bases in the country.

Nevertheless the UK government was ill-prepared for the intervention. Although 
the report was published in Japan on Friday and sent to Downing Street in 
advance of publication, its contents seem to have come as a shock on Sunday to 
a government expecting such lobbying to be conducted in private. May is likely 
to discuss the report at a meeting with Abe on Monday.

The warning in the covering letter to the UK government could not be clearer. 
It says: “Japanese businesses with their European headquarters in the UK may 
decide to transfer their head-office function to continental Europe if EU laws 
cease to be applicable in the UK after its withdrawal.”

In particular, the document emphasises Japanese firms fear for their future 
potential to export from Britain to third countries because of trade privileges 
within the EU single market around “rules of origin”.

“Brexit would make such products unable to meet the rules of origin as EU 
products, which means that Japanese companies operating in the EU would not be 
able to enjoy the benefit of the free trade areas concluded by the EU,” the 
report says.

It also calls on the UK to “maintain access to workers who are nationals of 
the UK or the EU,” saying the European labour market could suffer great turmoil 
if EU nationals could not freely travel between the UK and continental Europe.

Japanese banks will move their European HQs out of London if the Brexit 
negotiations fail to secure thefinancial services passport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/london-city-eu-passport-brexit>
 to operate in the EU, the report says. “If Japanese financial institutions are 
unable to maintain the single passport obtained in the UK, they would face 
difficulties in their business operations in the EU and might have to acquire 
corporate status within the EU anew and obtain the passport again, or to 
relocate their operations from the UK to existing establishments in the EU,” it 
says.

None of these demands are totally new, but to see them spelled out in such an 
ambitious way by such an important investor in the UK underlines the economic 
interests at stake. If those interests continue to be threatened, do not expect 
the normal diplomatic niceties to apply. This letter may well be the first of 
many warning shots.
 