
Thousands of members of the Royal British Legion have quit and almost 100 
branches closed after the organisation announced plans to integrate its 
independent women’s section.

The chair of the RBL’s women’s section, Marilyn Humphry, dismissed growing 
concerns about sexism after 5,065 female members quit and 97 branches closed 
since October, when the organisation opened membership renewal for the first 
time since the announcement in December 2015.

Hazel Kingswood, an RBL women’s section member in Norfolk since 1982, told the 
Mail Online 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3741979/Sexism-row-Royal-British-Legion-10-000-women-resign.html>
 volunteers were being treated in a “pre-suffragette manner”.

But Humphry said it was “totally inaccurate” that female fundraisers would 
lose their independence. She said: “This is all being sensationalised and I 
don’t understand why.

British Legion row over women's section risks revolt by poppy sellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/15/british-legion-row-over-womens-section-risks-revolt-by-poppy-sellers>
“As far as the central committee is concerned, we are very happy with the 
negotiations that have taken place and we look forward to working more closely 
with the RBL. We have complete control of our money as we did in the past.”

The legion plans to fully integrate the women’s section by 1 October next 
year. But Humphry stressed that the unit would retain its national status and 
its standards and administer its own schemes and money.

As of the end of September, 616 women’s section branches were in operation, 
Humphry said. They have until 31 December to renew their membership 
subscriptions, and she said 519 had done so.

Total membership numbers would be impossible to provide until after the 
deadline for renewing subscriptions had passed, she said. A circular on the 
website showed there were approximately 29,500 members in December 2015.

She said: “This really is a storm in a teacup. I would say some of the members 
have overreacted … all this talk of suffragettes … My hope and intent is that 
the women’s section will be consolidated within the family of the Royal British 
Legion.”

She said the section was working hard to change members’ minds and she knew of 
branches in Wiltshire and Norfolk that were considering reopening.

The women’s section was formed as a separate body to the RBL in 1921 to 
safeguard the interests of the widows, wives and children of men who served in 
the first world war.

A spokesman for the legion said: “As set out in proposals earlier this year, 
it remains vitally important to integrate the Royal British Legion women’s 
section into the main body of the organisation to comply with charity 
regulation and governance arrangements.”

A joint team representing both groups was formed in June and “will work 
together to identify potential issues brought about by the change”, he said.

It is understood that at the legion’s annual conference in May plans will be 
discussed over whether to bring women’s section affiliation fees of £8.50 into 
line with its £17 fee for individuals.
 