
He wept as he announced John F Kennedy's assassination, shouted encouragement 
when the Apollo astronauts lifted off for the moon and was the nightly conduit 
of information on America's Vietnam war nightmare for families across the 
nation.

Walter Cronkite, the veteran US newsreader described as "the most trusted man 
in America", has died at his home in New York at the age of 92 from brain 
disease.

He was the face of CBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/cbs> News from 1962 
to 1981, when stories ranged from the Kennedy assassination to Watergate and 
the Iranian hostage crisis.

An experienced journalist who had already covered the second world War in 
Europe, he joining CBS as a television correspondent in 1950. His stirring 
reports on everything from the Kennedy assassination to the Apollo space 
programme and the Vietnam war often had as much impact as the events themselves.

It was the veteran broadcaster who interrupted a live CBS-TV broadcast of the 
soap opera As the World Turns to read the bulletins from Dallas when Kennedy 
was shot in November 1963.

In a 1968 documentary, made after the Tet offensive in Vietnam, he declared 
that the time had come for America to negotiate with North Vietnam "not as 
victors but as an honourable people". A startled President Lyndon Johnson said 
to his press secretary: "If I've lost Cronkite I've lost middle America" and a 
news magazine wrote that it was as if Lincoln himself had ambled down from his 
memorial and joined an anti-war demonstration.

Every night for nearly 20 years, Americans tuned in to hear the day's major 
events as reported by Cronkite, whose avuncular manner made his show the 
top-rated news programme from 1969 until he retired in 1981.

His demeanor inspired the nickname "Uncle Walter" and when he signed off his 
newscasts by saying, "And that's the way it is," few doubted him.

The vice president of CBS, Linda Mason, said that Kronkite died after a long 
illness, with his family by his side.

The family had issued a statement some weeks ago that Cronkite had been 
suffering from cerebrovascular disease and was not expected to recover.
 