
A despicably late tackle by Marvin Golden took Hull's brightest prospect 
Richard Horne out of this game, but it did not stop the home side reclaiming 
second place in the Super League.

On the evidence so far, these two sides should be thanked for making this the 
most competitive season in the league's short history. Hull, who enjoyed a 
brief spell at the table's summit last week until results elsewhere went 
against them, and London, the conquerors of Wigan, were certainly competitive 
with each other in last night's bruising meeting.

Horne was the biggest casualty. The versatile young centre departed with 
bruised kidneys following Golden's crunching tackle, well after the 18-year-old 
had touched down for the game's opening try.

Golden soon followed Horne to the sidelines, victim of an uncompromising Tony 
Smith tackle, but the Broncos drew level when Dennis Moran reclaimed his own 
kick and sent Nigel Roy over. They were quickly six points behind again, 
however, aftersloppily allowing Hull's re-start to bounce into the path of Deon 
Bird.

Brett Warton's penalty just after half-time kept London involved, but by then 
Hull were in the ascendancy and they scored a crucial try soon after, Bird 
swooping for another opportunistic effort. Crowther's brilliant touchline 
conversion gave Hull a 10-point cushion.

This was always a bad-tempered game, despite the attractive veneer, and it 
erupted five minutes later. As the Hull substitute Paul King's decisive drop 
goal sailed over, London's Justin Dooley was assaulting Steve Prescott. Dooley 
was lucky only to be sin-binned, Prescott just as unlucky to join him.

A fiery final quarter was made all the more frantic by a late Broncos try from 
Michael Gillett. "We just needed an ounce of luck," said his coach Tony Rae. 
Rae's opposite number, Shaun McRae, was happier. "There are more than just a 
top four clubs now," he beamed. "And that's good for the game."

 Hull : Prescott; Raynor, Horne, Bird, Crowther; Cooke, T Smith; Broadbent, 
Jackson, Craven, Felsch, Grimaldi, J Smith. Substitutes : Campbell, Fletcher, 
King, Carvell.

 London Broncos: Barnett; Warton, Martin, Roy, Golden; Tollett, Moran; 
Mestrov, Hetherington, Cram, Toshack, Retchless, Dymock. Substitutes : Millard, 
Gillett, Dooley, Clarke.

 Referee: S Ganson (St Helens).
 