
The mental pressure of fighting is unlike that in any other sport. Anyone who 
has put on a pair of gloves and climbed into a ring knows it. To call yourself 
a fighter is to go somewhere exciting, dark and dangerous.

It is not just the prospect of pain, injury or even death that necessarily 
crowds a fighter's head with dread. It is his sense of self-worth, doubts about 
his ability, not to mention that of the stranger standing in the other corner, 
niggling questions about his own preparation and fitness, and, most draining of 
all, the weight of expectation.

The worry about pleasing others – family, friends, managers, promoters, 
television executives and the media – can crush a fighter. It can take away all 
his skill and ambition, sap the strength from his body and muddle his thinking. 
What might once have been a belief in victory can curdle into resignation that 
he has little chance of winning and is going to be made to look inadequate – in 
public, maybe even on television. The fear of losing can consume a fighter, 
even if that fear is unfounded.

Few fighters in this country carried the weight of national craving for 
success with more dignity than Frank Bruno. Three times he gave it all in 
challenges for the world heavyweight title and three times he came up short. 
But he kept going. He believed that one night, when it all came together, he 
could deliver what people wanted. And he did it. Just once. Against Oliver 
McCall at Wembley in 1995. He cried tears of relief and joy in the ring.

Within six months, though, Mike Tyson had ripped the title from his unsure 
grasp and Bruno walked away from the sport that had been his life since he was 
introduced to it as a tearaway teenager.

What happened after that was the very public degradation of a proud man, who 
had to endure not only the erosion of his dignity but the cruel exposure of it 
in the tabloid newspapers with whom he had scripted his fairytale rise to the 
top. In the months and years that followed, Bruno had to find another sort of 
courage, the courage needed to admit he was mentally ill.

This week, Bruno, who has bipolar disorder, lent his name to the launch of 
Levelling the Playing Field, a report that focuses on the mental health 
experiences of five prominent athletes. The others are Marcus Trescothick, Tony 
Adams, Dame Kelly Holmes and Ronnie O'Sullivan.

An anti-stigma organisation called Time To Change wants people to think about 
these issues ahead of World Mental Health Day tomorrow and maybe reconsider 
attitudes. Time To Change says only one in four parents would be happy to let 
their child be coached by someone with a mental health problem. That is the 
same proportion of people in this country who actually experience mental health 
problems.

So ... think about it.

And, next time you see a fighter struggling in the ring – or maybe not coping 
so brilliantly away from it – think about the unique pressures he is going 
through.

Inside the boardroom

If you want to know how boxing deals are done you could do worse that listen 
to Lou DiBella in the lead-up to the first night of the Super Six series on 
Saturday week, when Carl Froch fights the American Andre Dirrell in Nottingham, 
and Arthur Abraham entertains Jermain Taylor in Germany.

Along with Froch's Mick Hennessy and the managers of the other fighters in the 
Showtime tournament, DiBella gathered in a hotel to save the deal. Dan Goossen, 
who looks after Andre Ward, was holding out for special consideration for his 
fighter, because he doesn't like to travel. The fighter told everyone he was 
having all his fights at home – which sort of undermined the concept of a 
travelling circus.

DiBella, the manager of Abraham's opponent, Taylor, objected to his fighter 
having to go to Denmark for the second fight, against the favourite, Mikkel 
Kessler. DiBella, a lawyer, tried to squeeze something extra out of it. 
"Abraham to Kessler?" he said. "That's fuckin' unbelievable. You saying he's 
got to go from Germany to Denmark? That's a non-starter unless ..."

It was an everyday squabble, but it was looking as if the ambitious project 
might founder, or at least be compromised, by the oldest sticking point in the 
business: money.

They cut a deal. They always do – and DiBella reminded them why this 
potentially revolutionary tournament is important: "Boxing is a sport, if we 
don't start thinking like this more often, thinking out of the box, they're 
gonna put us in a box and bury us."

And that's the truth.

You can watch the lead-up drama in a documentary called Fight Time 360 on 
Primetime, the one-off channel created to cover Froch-Dirrell.
 