
BT <https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> is to stop using Indian call 
centres for frontline customer services after its customers told the company 
they prefer to talk to UK-based workers.

Since 2003 the telecoms giant which has more than 10 million customers in the 
UK has used call centres in Bangalore and Delhi to supplement its UK operations.

Currently half of BT’s customer calls are dealt with at centres in the UK. But 
after “listening to its customers” the company has pledged that more than 80% 
of calls will be answered in the UK by the end of 2016, and that it will go 
further in years to come.

BT said it has already created more than 1,000 new UK jobs to meet this 
commitment, and plans to create “hundreds of other customer call centre 
positions in the UK over the next year”. The company has 20 contact centres in 
the UK, from Wales and Cornwall to the Midlands and Scotland.

BT said it would continue to outsource back-office work and functions that do 
not involve taking customers’ calls offshore. However, the move will be seen as 
an admission that the cost-cutting measure has largely backfired.

Telecoms customers have long complained of poor customer service with staff 
unable to sort out basic problems.

John Petter, chief executive of BT Consumer, said: “Our customers have told us 
that they would prefer to speak to a contact centre in the UK when they call us.

 “When we launched BT Mobile earlier this year we located customer service in 
the UK and our customers have valued that. We think doing this for our other 
products is one way in which we can boost the service that we offer customers. 
Our offshore partners have provided a good level of service, however we believe 
that now is the right time to commit more investment to the UK and that this is 
something customers will appreciate.”

He said BT has also invested in new systems to assist its advisers and improve 
customer services.

Last week the consumer group Which? reported that not being able to ring a 
call centre based in the UK was the nation’s biggest customer service bugbear. 
Nearly half of those surveyed by the organisation said they were irritated by 
call centres not being based in the UK.
 