
 THERE WAS NOT  much between Bradford and St Helens at Twickenham last 
Saturday, but they have been a world apart in the way they have responded to 
their contrasting experiences in the Challenge Cup final.

The Saints players were given three days off to celebrate their win, and on 
the evidence of their 70-point thrashing at Leeds on Friday night, they 
celebrated hard.

Bradford, in contrast, were straight back in action to put 50 points on 
Warrington on Wednesday, and last night they showed great resilience to hold 
off a thrillingCastleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> 
fightback and move two points clear at the top of the Super League table.

Three times in the second half the Bulls appeared to have made the game safe, 
at 14-2, 22-8 and 24-16. But with Danny Orr outstanding, the Tigers would not 
let them relax and in the end only a desperate cover tackle by Tevita Vaikona 
on Darren Rogers two minutes from time denied them a famous victory.

Bradford were missing three more members of their Twickenham team - Scott 
Naylor, Daniel Gartner and Paul Deacon - as a result of their midweek 
exertions. However the signing of Graham Mackay, a veteran Australian who has 
spent the winter playing rugby union for Leeds, has helped them paper over the 
cracks.

Mackay had scored one try and made another in a brief substitute appearance 
against the Wolves, and here it was his lovely flicked pass in a tackle which 
allowed Henry Paul to open the scoring for Bradford with a 12th-minute try.

The stand-off could not convert, ending his record-breaking run of 35 
consecutive successful kicks. But he was soon embarking on another with two 
penalties to give the Bulls an 8-0 lead. The second followed a dazzling 
Bradford move as they spun the ball across their own posts, and that came in 
response to some slick Castleford handling in a 60-metre foray.

But the Tigers, who were again missing their major Australian signing Mitch 
Healey because of his dodgy hamstring and lost Aaron Raper with a shoulder 
injury early on when he went low on Bradford's 19st prop Paul Anderson - big 
mistake - could not get on board until first-half injury time, when Anderson 
felled Orr as he chased his own kick. Castleford's young stand-off dusted 
himself down to kick the goal, and reduce the arrears to 8-2.

Within four minutes of the restart, strong running by Mackay and his fellow 
centre Lee Gilmour set up the position for Robbie Paul to expose some slack 
defence close to their own line, and Henry Paul's conversion took them 14-2 
ahead.

Cas responded well, with Mark Lennon sending Orr sliding beside the padded 
post. But they conceded possession, then a penalty, straight from the kick-off, 
allowing Henry Paul to kick two more points for the Bulls.

James Lowes then broke the Paul family's monopoly on Bradford points by 
battling over from acting-half.

Even when Cas came again with a well-worked try for Jon Wells and two 
beautifully-struck Orr goals to cut the gap to 22-16, Henry Paul's sixth goal 
re-established an eight-point cushion. But a terrific break by Jason Flowers 
sent Richard Gay sprinting over for Castleford's third try, and in the end only 
Vaikona's tackle got Bradford home.

 Castleford Tigers: Gay; Wells, Mather, Eagar, Rogers; Orr, Lennon; Sykes, 
Raper, Handford, Shaw, Fritz, Harland. Substitutes used: Sampson, Flowers, 
Tonks, Smith.

 Bradford Bulls: Withers; Vaikona, Mackay, Gilmour, Pryce; H Paul, R Paul; 
Vagana, Lowes, McDermott, Radford, Peacock, Forshaw. Substitutes used: 
Anderson, Fielden, Parker, Sykes.

 Referee:  S Cummings (Widnes).
 