
Sean Dyche praised Burnley’s match-winner, Andre Gray, after the striker took 
his goals tally to 22 for the season. Gray’s opportunism enabled Burnley to 
increase their unbeaten run to 19 games and return to second place in the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> behind 
Middlesbrough, who visit Turf Moor on Tuesday.

Gray, a £6m buy from Brentford, has proved vital for Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> as he demonstrated against a 
Birmingham side who have fallen off the play-off pace in recent games.

Dyche said: “Gray’s goalscoring record is super. He deserved to score another 
against Birmingham. He is a constant threat. I was a centre-half and there is 
nothing worse than marking a player and keeping him quiet and he then scores.”

Dyche was also praised George Boyd’s performance. “Boyd was excellent. He 
scored a goal and created the winner for Gray. He was tireless in his work and 
his quality was outstanding while the response of the team after they equalised 
was to be admired.

The Burnley manager added: “There is a great belief among the players and 
there is certainly energy and desire. We are in a good place for a  reason. I 
was very pleased with the way we played.”

They had to battle hard for this success. Boyd gave Burnley a 31st-minute lead 
when he capitalised on a blocked clearance by Birmingham’s Maikel Kieftenbeld 
only for Jacques Maghoma to deservedly equalise 10 minutes into the second half 
before Gray, who had been effectively policed out of the game by Ryan Shotton, 
struck in the 76th minute.

Birmingham, who have lost four of their last five home games, also had the 
misfortune to have the Arsenal loanee Jon Toral sent off for a second booking 
two minutes from  time.

It was hardly the ending they deserved as they often matched Burnley for 
commitment and effort with Maghoma and David Cotterill producing outstanding 
performances that could have earned a point.

Birmingham’s manager, Gary Rowett, said: “It was frustrating because we were 
fantastic. It was a really strong performance at a difficult point of the 
season against an excellent Burnley side. I think if you look at the 
Championship it is a game of small margins. Jacques Maghoma had his face kicked 
off in the penalty box after four minutes. It was a blatant penalty but the 
referee said he didn’t see it.

“Make mistakes against Burnley they punish you. They are a tough side to play 
against. Probably they are going to be promoted but I thought we were the 
better team. They manage to get results in games they do not play well in but 
that is a skill in itself. You have to take your hat off to them.” 

Middlesbrough stay top after Jordan Rhodes double sinks Bolton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/bolton-wanderers-middlesbrough-championship-match-report> 