
Burton secured promotion to the Championship with a goalless draw against 
relegated Doncaster, despite Walsall’s best efforts to snatch the second 
automatic spot from the Brewers.

Nigel Clough’s side got the point they needed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/league-one-preview-blackpool-drop-burton-promotion>
 at the Keepmoat Stadium in a result that also ended Doncaster’s fight against 
relegation from League One.

Walsall needed Burton to lose while securing a three-goal swing to make their 
goal difference better than that of their rivals. The Saddlers did their bit by 
winning 5-0 at Port Vale, but Burton’s draw rendered the outcome academic.

Nonetheless, Anthony Forde’s double together with goals from Paul Downing, Tom 
Bradshaw and Sam Mantom underlined Walsall’s good form going into the play-offs.

Wigan Athletic were confirmed as champions despite a 4-1 home defeat against 
Barnsley, who secured their place in the play-offs as a result. Will Grigg put 
Wigan ahead, but two goals from Sam Winnall, the first a penalty, and further 
strikes from Conor Hourihane and Josh Brownhill, gave Barnsley the final 
play-off spot, thwarting Scunthorpe’s challenge.

Joining them in the play-offs are Millwall and Bradford, who beat Gillingham 
and Chesterfield respectively.

A penalty from Lee Gregory in the eighth minute of stoppage time earned 10-man 
Millwall a 2-1 win. The visitors had taken the lead through Aiden O’Brien 
before they had Mahlon Romeo sent off with four minutes remaining. John Egan 
equalised for Gillingham two minutes into added time before Gregory’s late 
winner enabled Millwall to secure fourth spot ahead of Bradford.

The Bantams defeated 10-man Chesterfield 2-0, making light of the dismissal of 
Sam Hird with goals from Lee Evans and Billy Clarke.

Barnsley’s win meant Scunthorpe’s 2-0 victory at Sheffield United was not 
enough to lift them into the play-offs. Scunthorpe, who secured the win with 
goals from Tom Hopper and Paddy Madden, missed out on goal difference.

At the other end of the table, Blackpool were relegated to League Two just 
five years after being in the Premier League. Having spent the 2010-11 season 
in the top flight, they will now kick off next season in the fourth tier of 
English football following a 5-1 defeat at Peterborough.

Jacob Blyth had given Blackpool hope with an early opener but Jon Taylor’s 
hat-trick, scored in 12 second-half minutes, proved decisive. Peterborough’s 
other goals came from a Marcus Maddison penalty and Shaquile Coulthirst.

Doncaster joined Blackpool in League Two on Sunday, although the results of 
both were made irrelevant by Fleetwood’s 2-0 win over Crewe, which came 
courtesy of goals from Bobby Grant and Devante Cole.

Shrewsbury also survived, despite a 3-0 defeat at Swindon, who won courtesy of 
a Nicky Ajose double and a strike from Jordan Young.

Ryan Lowe’s stoppage-time penalty earned Bury a 3-2 win against Southend. 
Lowe, who is leaving the Shakers for pastures new, scored twice for the home 
side, who also profited from an Adam Barrett own goal. Franck Moussa and David 
Mooney scored for the visitors.

Romain Vincelot and Adam Armstrong scored as Coventry won 2-0 at Oldham, while 
Rochdale beat Colchester 2-1 as Nathaniel Mendez-Laing and Calvin Andrew found 
the target. Joe Edwards scored for Colchester.
 