 Labour in Wales will today claim to be the 'natural party of business', 
offering companies the chance of seats on committees of the proposed Welsh 
assembly and improved decision-making on grants and planning.
Ron Davies, Welsh Secretary, and Peter Hain, Welsh Office minister, will 
unveil in Cardiff a business manifesto for the proposed 60-seat assembly, 
asserting that the 'new and dynamic relationship between business and 
government (inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> ) will be a model 
for the rest of Britain to learn from'.

 The launch of the manifesto, 'Positive Partnership', follows extensive wooing 
of business leaders, and organisations like the Confederation of British 
Industry and Institute of Directors, by both ministers and is designed to allay 
fears that the assembly will be a costly, bureaucratic talking-shop.

 The Government hopes, in the run-up to the September 18 Welsh referendum , a 
week after the Scots poll, that business will see the assembly as a guarantor 
of economic growth. 'Without an assembly Wales will lose out on jobs and 
investment,' an insider said.

 Ministers contrast the response to the assembly from business in Wales with 
the hostility in Scotland, where firms like the Bank of Scotland and bodies 
like the CBI are at the fore of the campaign against tax-raising powers for the 
Scottish Parliament.

 They also point out that this approach is a volte-face from the CBI's role in 
torpedoing the Callaghan government's devolution plans nearly 20 years ago.

 'Compared with 1979, it's night and day. In 1979, the CBI and other 
businesses led the charge for a no vote in the devolution referendum . Now they 
are basically neutral and some are very positive, seeing lots of opportunities 
in the proposals,' Mr Hain said.

 It is understood that today's manifesto will propose that business 
representatives be co-opted on to the industrial and economic committees of the 
assembly - a central demand of the CBI Wales , which earlier this week demanded 
to be consulted on all business-related legislation.

 The Government is likely to propose the creation of four regional committees 
in the assembly, which would meet with existing regional economic fora on which 
business, local authorities and training councils sit.

 Its manifesto is likely to pledge more efficient decision-making on corporate 
grants and planning procedures - what one senior source called 'fast-track 
decisions made in which no bureaucratic obstacles will be erected'.
 