
I read about the butterfly decline noticed by people all around the country, 
described by Patrick Barkham (Record low UK butterfly count is ‘a shock and 
mystery’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/10/record-low-number-of-uk-butterflies-a-shock-and-a-mystery>
, 10 October). I don’t find it so much of a mystery, having spent the summer 
planning for and walking from the Royal Botanical Gardens in Edinburgh on what 
we calleda Bee Line <https://makeabeeline.org/>.

This initiative was triggered by a visit in September 2014 to our former farm 
on the edge of Salisbury Plain. When we moved there in the late 1940s, there 
were permanent pastures, hedges and ancient drove roads lined with wayfarers’ 
trees and carpeted with wildflowers – orchids, harebells, trefoils – and abuzz 
with bees, butterflies, dragonflies and pollinators of all kinds. Now, 60 years 
on, it is a silent landscape; no cows, chickens, sheep, or even farm workers, 
just contractors, and of course no birds, butterflies, bees or flying insects. 
Between 30 August and 6 September we followed our Bee Line, walking some 80km 
from Edinburgh to our home along small roads, footpaths, cycle tracks, disused 
railway lines, through open moorland. We saw few butterflies, moths or bees and 
even noted a lack of midges.

The decline could be caused by a number of factors, such as weather conditions 
earlier in the year, but is exacerbated by the same things that are also 
damaging the bee populations.

Agribusiness and its associated practices: monoculture, weedkillers, 
neonicotinoids, fungicides, molluscicides, and farming practices including 
pre-spraying of grain crops before harvesting and removal of hedges. Local 
authority and homeowners’ obsession with frequent flat strimming and clearing 
edges of roadways, motorways, roundabouts. Loss of brownfield sites to 
development and the associated loss of a rich mix of plants and invertebrates. 
Treatment of garden bedding plants and seeds, currentlybeing researched by 
Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.foe.co.uk/living/articles/are-bee-friendly-plants-poisoning-our-bees>
.

On our Bee Line walk and while doing planning walks, the only place that was 
buzzing with both bees and butterflies was the disused railway line pathway 
between Broughton and Biggar, which is edged with bee and butterfly friendly 
plants. Even golf courses, which are extensive green spaces, can be managed 
intensively with little room to share with wildlife. On the moorland, which is 
managed for sheep and grouse, we saw just a few bees and moths enjoying 
heather, thyme yarrow and harebells.
Meg Beresford
Wiston, South Lanarkshire

• The decline in butterfly numbers comes as no surprise to me at all. The one 
place in my parish where the range and number of butterfly species was high (or 
at least what might be considered normal) was a stretch of roadside verge 
specially seeded by the local authority with wildflower mixture. This attracted 
large numbers of gatekeepers, coppers and blues in particular this summer. 
The decline in not only butterflies and other insects but birds and wildflowers 
too is no doubt due to the fashion for “gardening” the countryside. That is, 
unnecessary and untimely mowing in particular and the planting out of what were 
wild spaces so that they essentially become extensions of urban parks and 
gardens.

These areas may look neat and tidy, but it’s playing havoc with biodiversity. 
Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> desperately needs 
what some perceive as untidy spaces or scrub. Habitat destruction by removing 
cover for protection, feeding, finding mates and breeding, not to mention 
overwintering, is more than decimating our wildlife.
Graham Stocks
Quorn, Leicestershire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 