
As Wayne Rooney embraced Callum Smith in the bowels of the Echo Arena after 
the finest two minutes and 45 seconds of the fighter’s glittering career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/07/callum-smith-rocky-fielding-british-super-middleweight>
, it was obvious that the new British super-middleweight champion is 
comfortable taking centre stage. The lights are about to get much brighter.

The England and Manchester United football captain, although still an 
Evertonian deep down, is a close friend of the four fighting Smith brothers, 
all Reds, who headed for Anfield on Sunday after celebrating the youngest 
sibling’s victory.

Smith’s devastating three-knockdown stoppage of the previously unbeaten Rocky 
Fielding – with whom he used to spar as an amateur at the Rotunda club – puts 
him within a win or two of a world title shot, which should arrive next summer, 
probably against the WBC champion, Badou Jack, or the WBA title-holder, Fedor 
Chudinov.

There is the tantalising possibility that he could first fight George Groves, 
whodropped a split decision against Jack in Las Vegas in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/12/george-groves-loses-third-world-title-fight-this-time-to-badou-jack>
, although the Londoner, who has challenged unsuccessfully three times for a 
world title, might balk at being cast as a stepping-stone opponent for Smith.

Saturday night’s fight, in front of 10,500 fans evenly divided in their 
loyalty, was easy to make but, for the promoter Eddie Hearn, not so easy to 
watch. “It’s never nice to see one of your fighters lose, especially like 
that,” he said. “They both did very well, financially and with their profile, 
the fight, the occasion. Rocky can come again, 100%, but Callum showed that 
he’s a level above. I honestly think he’s already one of the best 
super-middleweights in the world. I think he beats Badou Jack, he beats 
Chudinov. It’s such a great division.

Sport picture of the day: trading blows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2015/nov/07/sport-picture-of-the-day-trading-blows>
“We pushed Callum hard at the WBC convention, just finished, and they could 
make him mandatory challenger next. If not, they will 100% nominate him for a 
final eliminator.

“But that doesn’t have to be the route he takes. He’s got a great platform 
now. The head of Sky Sports, Barney Francis, texted me after the fight and said 
‘Wow!’ That’s kind of what the whole nation thought. His progression has been 
perfect. Everything is mapped out for him. He can be a really big star.”

He added: “I’d love him to fight George Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/george-groves> next. I’ve wanted that for a 
long time. I think you’ll see Groves out in January, but I think Callum needs 
to box around February. It was a quick fight but a long fight. I know Callum 
will want to enjoy himself – and it’s a difficult time: do you train over 
Christmas or do you wait and box in March? Callum is the fourth Smith brother 
to win a British title, which I don’t think will be appreciated how it should 
be. It’s a phenomenal achievement.”

The new champion said: “I imagined it could have gone a lot of different ways 
but I said to my brother Liam that, with the atmosphere, the crowd and as soon 
as a big punch lands it would catch fire and it could be over quick. But I was 
as surprised as everyone else. I like to think I’m a good finisher and, as soon 
as I knew he was hurt, I wasn’t going to let him off the hook. Fair play, he 
came back and had a go but I knew I only needed another shot to do it.

“I don’t believe I’ll defend it three times [to keep the Lonsdale belt], might 
not even defend it once. But I felt I needed to win this title. It was a goal I 
set myself. My goal now is to become a world champion next year.

“I’ve had this [trailing his older brothers towards titles] since I started 
boxing. We were all national [amateur] champions. Paul and Stephen have won 
[professional] belts and now Liam has a world title. We just keep setting the 
bar higher and higher. I wouldn’t have it any other way. It makes me a better 
fighter.

“The atmosphere was unbelievable. On the ring-walk, I waited and made sure I 
soaked it all up. I’m very thankful people have paid their hard-earned money to 
come out and watch me. Although it was only one round, I like to think they 
went home happy. It was exciting while it lasted. I didn’t feel any pressure. I 
was calm from the changing room onwards.”

On other contenders he said: “I was impressed with Jack against [Anthony] 
Dirrell, and again against Groves. He’s got a game plan, does the basics well. 
He’s hard, a good fighter – so are DeGale, so is Chudinov. They’re experienced, 
they know how to win. There aren’t any easy fights there – I wouldn’t expect to 
become a world champion – but I think I can win a world title next year.”

His trainer Joe Gallagher said: “We are so blessed in this country with so 
many top-class super-middleweights. I think it’s James DeGale then Callum 
Smith. I’d love the George Groves fight. I don’t think they’ll take it; George 
has had his chance, but it’s all about Callum now, the second-best 
super-middleweight in this country, behind a former Olympic gold medallist and 
a very talented fighter.

“One or two more fights, and Callum will be ready to do Jack. It’s a fight I 
really like. I’d like to have him out at the beginning of the year and, if his 
second fight is for the title, there we go. He’s a professional just under 
three years. What he’s achieved is unbelievable. He’s taken world boxing by 
storm. There’s lads who’ve won Olympic gold medals who haven’t done what he’s 
done in that time.”

“There should be something at the BBC Sports Personality of the Year awards 
this year for the Smiths – Team Smith or a recognition of them as a team.

It would happen if there were four Smith brothers playing for Liverpool – or 
in cricket, rugby, tennis or netball [which would be an odd first]. I know 
Eddie’s on the phone to the Guinness Book of Records on Monday.”
 