
Celtic still lead Aberdeen at the top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> by a point after 
their 2-1 win over Partick Thistle in their lunchtime fixture at Firhill, as 
Leigh Griffiths once again got on the scoresheet. The Celtic striker scored his 
35th goal of the season seconds before the interval, then the midfielder Callum 
McGregor added a second in the 54th minute.

The visitors were cruising until the Partick midfielder Sean Welsh pulled a 
goal back from the spot in the 84th minute but they saw out the final moments.
Aberdeen’s later home win by the same margin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/12/aberdeen-kilmarnock-scottish-premiership-match-report>
, against Kilmarnock, denies the champions any breathing space, though they do 
have a game in hand.

The victory comes as some respite for the Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager Ronny Deila whose future 
has been subject to speculation in recent weeks following draws in the league 
against Hamilton and Dundee. Deila believed Celtic’s win against the Jags could 
have been more comfortable, saying: “We should have killed the game. We had a 
lot of chances and that is a positive thing. We know we have good finishers in 
the team but today we were not so effective as we normally are. I am just happy 
for three points and the performance was good as well.”

Thistle were awarded a penalty for the first time in 69 games, dating back to 
September 2014, when Kris Doolan missed the spot-kick in a 3-1 win over 
Inverness.

Asked about his reaction to the decision the home manager Alan Archibald said: 
“Shocked, stunned. I was very surprised to see the penalty, we haven’t had one 
in a year and a half.”

Certainly the Celtic fans who made the short journey to Maryhill could have 
little to complain about although they could have done with a few more goals 
from their side.

The first of many attempts on the Thistle goal in the first-half came in the 
eighth minute when McGregor set up Griffiths with a cross but the striker’s 
diving header was parried by Thistle goalkeeper Tomas Cerny, before he gathered.

Moments later McGregor fed Kris Commons, who played in the stretching Gary 
Mackay-Steven but the wide-man could not get enough of a touch on the ball and 
it slid past the far post.

Cerny then made saves from Commons and Griffiths with Commons, McGregor, 
returning midfielder Nir Bitton and defender Mikael Lustig missing the target 
with efforts while defender Erik Sviatchenko had a header cleared away from the 
line by Welsh.

It was not all about defending for the home side, however, as defender Liam 
Lindsay drew a fine save from Celtic goalkeeper Craig Gordon with a thunderous 
drive and a great run by Kris Doolan which took him past Celtic defender 
Charlie Mulgrew and deep into the Celtic box was ended when his toe-poke was 
saved by Gordon.

It looked like Partick <https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> would 
hear the half-time whistle unscathed but in the 44th minute, from 12 yards out, 
Griffiths pulled a Mackay-Steven cross from the byeline out of the air, turned 
and fired low past Cerny, despite the best efforts of the keeper to keep it out.

It took only nine minutes of the second-half for Celtic to effectively secure 
the points.

McGregor took advantage of a hug gap in the Partick defence to drive into the 
penalty area, turn inside Thistle defender Danny Seaborne and drive past Cerny 
into the far corner of the net.

Partick tried to fight back but there was no real conviction or belief.

Colin Kazim-Richards replaced Commons to add a more physical aspect to the 
Celtic attack but in the 73rd minute, after Cerny blocked Griffiths’ drive with 
his legs, the substitute scuffed the rebound wide to the jeers of the home fans 
behind the goal.

The tempo dipped in the final stages but Mackay-Steven and Kazim-Richards 
missed the targets with efforts before the over-worked Cerny saved a lazy shot 
from Bitton.

Six minutes from the end Thistle were handed a lifeline when Sviatchenko 
tugged at Steven Lawless in the box and after referee Stephen Finnie pointed to 
the spot, Welsh drove in the penalty to set up a fraught ending but the Celtic 
defence held firm for a well-deserved win.
 