
Melbourne captain Cameron Smith is pleased long-time nemesis and rival skipper 
Paul Gallen will get a shot at an elusive premiership for Cronulla in theNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> grand final.

The State of Origin skippers will renew hostilities for the sixth time this 
year after the Storm booked their spot in Sunday’s deciderwith a tense 
preliminary final win over Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/nrl-storm-beat-canberra-raiders-in-tight-game-in-melbourne>
.

Smith has claimed victory in three of the five meetings between the pair this 
year, two of them with Queensland in the Maroons’ triumph, and the third in a 
round 26 wipeout in Melbourne.

Cronulla dump Premiers North Queensland out of NRL finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/cronulla-dump-north-queensland-out-nrl-finals>
He also has a supreme advantage in grand finals, featuring in five for three 
wins, while Gallen will be making his first appearance on the first Sunday in 
October.

But Smith couldn’t be happier for his interstate counterpart.

“I always enjoy playing against Gal. I see him a bit because we play in the 
middle,” he said.

“I’m pleased for Gal. He has waited a long time for this. He works hard every 
time he pulls on the jersey. He has given a lot to the Cronulla club over many 
years.”

Smith wasn’t as effusive in his appraisal of Gallen and the NSW team after 
game three, when the Maroons star was left unimpressed with the Blues snubbing 
his victory speech in Sydney.

The Sharks captain later defended his snub by explaining that he was 
farewelling Blues fans.

“It’s something our team wouldn’t do,” Smith said at the time.

“We didn’t walk away (when the Blues won in 2014). We made a point of staying 
there for Paul’s speech and him lifting the shield and congratulating their 
victory.”

Smith has won 27 of the 40 games played against Gallen at either Origin or 
club level, however hasn’t lost to the back-rower in a Sharks jumper in nine 
games, dating back to 2008.

Smith also says it will be nothing new for the Storm to go into a grand final 
with the crowd against them, with next Sunday’s title decider to take place at 
ANZ Stadium in Sydney.

“I don’t think we’ve played a final in Sydney when anyone’s been going for 
us,” Smith said.


“That’s sport and that’s part of the game and we’ve done it all year.


“We’ve played 13 games away this year and we haven’t had too many people there 
supporting us but I’m sure we’ll have some purple in the crowd.


“At the end of the day, the crowd isn’t going to have an influence on the 
game, for us it’s there to be won and we can control what we do.”


Melbourne coach Craig Bellamy watched the Sharks roll North Queensland 32-20 
to win through to the grand final, taking note of playmaker James Maloney, who 
scored two tries and kicked six from seven goals.


But Bellamy said he wouldn’t take too much from the Sharks’ performance 
against the Cowboys, preferring to concentrate on their own meeting in round 26 
when the Storm beat Cronulla to win the minor premiership.


“We played them only a couple of weeks ago, so we will probably go back to 
what we saw there, and our games before that, as far as what we’re going to go 
with for a game plan,” Bellamy said.


“You know they’ve got real quality – Jim Maloney was outstanding – and they’ve 
got a tough pack of forwards and some really quick, strong outside backs, so 
they’ve got a really good balance.”
 