
Congratulations to Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> on his magnificent victory 
in Labour’s leadership battle. Contrary to what his detractors are saying it 
shows 100% that Jeremy can win elections, if he’s given the chance.

Now the media and Labour’s right will maintain that the new membership are 
silly young people who can’t be trusted and have nothing to do with the wider 
electorate.

Jeremy Corbyn sweeps to victory increasing his mandate as Labour leader – as 
it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/24/labour-leadership-election-result-jeremy-corbyn-owen-smith-appeals-for-unity-politics-live>
But they have everything to do with the wider electorate. Any time that the 
membership had grown so quickly,Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has been on course to win the 
general election.

It’s the party’s right that unnecessarily threw the spanner in the works with 
this contrived coup and leadership challenge. Before that, Labour was catching 
up with the Tories in the polls. What damage they’ve done. If Labour MPs can 
say nothing positive about Jeremy’s re-election then I beg them to at least not 
stand in the way and to give him a chance.
Mark Holt
Liverpool

• Your editorial (24 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/the-guardian-view-on-the-labour-leadership-wanted-tolerance-and-compromise>
) seeks “tolerance and compromise” within the Labour party, yet during this 
past year there has been no evidence of either. So, after 41 years membership 
of the party, including as a branch chair, council candidate and campaigner, I 
have resigned. This is due to both the hopelessly incompetent leadership and 
the direction of the party. I can no longer associate with a narrow sect locked 
into the mid 20th century, preoccupied by words not deeds, and insulated by 
those with a facile ideology. The Labour party under this leadership has become 
intolerant of dissent, insouciant of the role of opposition, utterly 
disrespectful of elected Labour parliamentarians and councillors and completely 
disregards the need to win power across the country. Its supporters indulge in 
the politics of adolescence and of nostalgic gesturing, and demonstrate a 
wholly ineffective policy grasp for current times. I hope that in the near 
future there will be a social democratic party of competence and the 
credibility to govern this country.
Dr Clive Sellick
Norwich

The Guardian view on the Labour leadership: wanted – tolerance and compromise 
| Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/the-guardian-view-on-the-labour-leadership-wanted-tolerance-and-compromise>
• Your editorial makes the standard case that Labour needs to win “support in 
the centre”. But where is this “centre”? In the same issue Matthew Engel 
chronicles the huge rise in London property prices, a massive redistribution of 
wealth in favour of the rich as against the majority of non-property owners, 
the young and the poor, who were dissatisfied enough to vote for Brexit. Labour 
could unite and win under the slogan “The rich should pay their share”, on a 
programme starting with a reform of council tax to make it fully progressive, 
and examining ways of taxing land and financial assets more effectively – plus 
a determined crackdown on tax havens and avoidance (“making companies pay their 
share”). This would not only save our public services and fund council housing 
– it would divert resources from financial assets and positional goods into 
consumer demand, hence productive investment, productivity and growth.
Alan Bailey
London

How Labour becomes relevant and future-facing once again | Chuka Umunna
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/the-need-to-be-relevant-is-now>
• I have never been a member of a political party. The only pressure group I 
am part of is the Musicians’ Union. This more out of sentiment than fee or work 
protection. I did once attended a local Labour party constituency meeting but 
nearly fell asleep. However, I have always voted, and always voted Labour. 
This, despite my horror of Labour’s complicity in the Iraq war and its 
refinement of “Tina” (there is no alternatve), in which the excesses of a 
rampant capitalist economy were ameliorated only by parking people surplus to 
the new order on benefits (which the Tories were then only too happy to 
dismantle).

I voted for the least worst option. This is the dilemma of most voters. It is 
tragic and dishonest of Labour MPs to claim they represent those who cast votes 
their way. How the will of the people is determined has perplexed political 
thinkers. And many voters are ceasing to vote at all. However, disengagement 
from the process – as we saw at the last election – means leaving power in the 
hands of elite groups with the persuasive power money can buy.

The Labour party is now the largest political party in Europe. If the debate 
for the soul of the party and its policies is not conducted therein, from where 
should it come? The current call from some sitting Labour MPs to claim their 
mandate arises from an unnamed, unknown group of people who placed an X against 
their name is arrogant, disingenuous and deeply undemocratic.
Edwin Prevost
Harlow, Essex 

• As a historian of the Labour party, I was dismayed but not surprised to hear 
so many calls for unity in the aftermath of Jeremy Corbyn’s re-election – even 
from his opponents among Labour MPs, commentators and academics. But unity is 
not a good in itself and to call for it is little more than tribalism. 
Moderates should not unite with people who back Britain’s enemies abroad and 
who pursue a style of politics at home that is little more than malice in the 
guise of virtue. To fixate on unity is a reflection of the same cultural 
problems that have landed Labour in its current mess: a historical, 
pathological, and increasingly pathetic fixation with betrayal.

Country should come before party; but, for some, being Labour is such a part 
of their identity that they are willing to go along with almost anything to 
sustain it. In pondering what to do next, they might reflect on the great 
figures from Labour history who put their country first: Attlee, Bevin, 
Callaghan – and, yes, Ramsay MacDonald.
Dr Robert Crowcroft
University of Edinburgh

• It’s remarkable that opponents of Jeremy Corbyn still do not seem to 
understand the sources of his appeal. Let me suggest two reasons. The first is 
that many voting for him have experienced, through employment in the public 
sector, the gradual creep of privatisation and the imposition of forms of 
management illiterate in the understanding of contexts such as education or 
health care.

Second, considerable sections of the work force (the “left behind”) have seen 
their jobs stripped of benefits and security and – through an over-emphasis on 
academic credentialism – stripped of any respect. The fantasy of social 
mobility through competition and selective forms of education consistently 
marginalises this group.

All these changes have been legitimated as modernisation, while challenges to 
them are written off as old Labour. There is nothing – as many people voting 
for Corbyn have said loudly – modern about greater inequality, or old-fashioned 
about principles of fairness and equality. Many people take the view that 
neoliberal economics can never deliver anything except to the rich and 
powerful, and that a politics of minor adjustments is not a sufficient 
challenge.
Mary Evans
Patrixbourne, Kent

• So the great leader now wants unity in the Labour party. Just checking, is 
this the same Jermyn Corbyn who voted 428 times against Labour governments?
Don Macdonald
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 