
Around a long table in an upstairs room in Tullycarnet primary school, a dozen 
mothers sit crocheting brightly coloured squares of various sizes. Some are 
heavily pregnant, some already have children: three babies between the ages of 
seven weeks and one year old are being fed or entertained in the room; more 
babies and toddlers are downstairs in a small creche, singing along to nursery 
rhymes with play workers in a soft play corner. Tullycarnet in east Belfast is 
a deprived area dotted with 1970s council housing blocks. A foreboding 
anti-drugs mural adorns a four-storey wall next to the doctors surgery, a few 
steps from the school.

Nikki (not her real name), a young mum with two children, says she enjoys 
coming to the service with her one-year-old daughter “to get some time to bond 
together, just us two”. Her older son has cerebral palsy and autism and 
requires a lot of care. She mentions that she’s been given a voucher through a 
scheme linked to the service, to buy a supportive mattress to ease the pain her 
son’s spasms cause him.

East Belfast Family Connections, run with Barnardos in Tullycarnet, is the 
kind of integrated health and social service Northern Ireland often excels at. 
As well as emotional support, workers signpost services, liaise with health 
visitors and doctors on behalf of the women. But despite the concerted efforts 
to link up all aspects of health, education and social care inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, the infant mortality rate in 
the country remains among the highest in Europe.

Northern Ireland devolution could be derailed by row over welfare reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/09/northern-ireland-devolution-could-be-derailed-by-welfare-reforms>
The UK performs poorly on the child mortality rate as a whole: five children 
(aged between one and 19) a day die in the UK and 1,951 more children die every 
year than in the best performing country, Sweden. In 2012 more than 3,000 
babies died before their first birthday.

But Northern Ireland in particular has a far higher incidence of infant 
mortality – in 2012, the last year with recorded statistics, there were 106 
stillbirths and 90 infant deaths for 24,496 births. The only European countries 
that have higher rates are Romania and Malta. A recent report,Why Children Die 
<http://www.ncb.org.uk/media/1130496/rcpch_ncb_may_2014_-_why_children_die__part_a.pdf>
, by the Royal College of Paediatric and Child Health and the National 
Children’s Board in Northern Ireland offers some insight into why infant deaths 
remain unnecessarily high, and proposes policy changes to help combat child 
mortality.

Although some of the reasons for high infant mortality can be put down to the 
fact that terminations are illegal, even the lack of abortions and higher teen 
pregnancy rate do not explain why the numbers are so much higher than in the 
rest of the UK. “Some of our infant mortality can be explained by the fact that 
we don’t have any terminations, so we have more children born with 
life-limiting conditions, says Julie-Ann Mahey, a consultant paediatrician in 
Belfast and one of the authors of the report. “But still poverty is a huge 
issue in Northern Ireland and crosses all sectarian divides. ”

“More than one in five of our children lives in poverty. That has wide-ranging 
effects throughout the whole course of a child’s life. So the mothers are much 
more likely to smoke, have lower birth-weight babies, have pre-term births.” In 
the last five years household incomes, poverty rates and the labour market have 
all worsened in Northern Ireland, at far higher rates than the rest of the 
United Kingdom. Research by theJoseph Rowntree Foundation 
<http://www.jrf.org.uk/publications/monitoring-poverty-and-social-exclusion-northern-ireland-2014>
 found that the unemployment rate amongst working-age residents doubled in the 
five years after the recession, while poverty in 16 to 29-year olds rose eight 
percentage points to 26%.

Risk factors for infant mortality include maternal smoking, teenage pregnancy 
and poverty, but these rarely exist in silos, intersecting instead with 
multiple risk factors that increase in line with deprivation and poverty. 
Paediatric health experts point out infant deaths can be avoided through 
reducing incidence of premature birth and low birth weight, risk factors which 
disproportionately affect the poorest and youngest mothers.

One of the most effective ways of decreasing the risk is through early 
intervention programmes and targeted support. The East Belfast service runs a 
“baby club” for new mothers, mixing social support with information workshops 
on health and parenting, and more intensive outreach in parents’ homes.

Nicola Hannigan, an early years family support worker in the service, visits 
homes and carries out risk assessments, pointing out potential dangers in 
homes, providing safety equipment, and checking how the babies are sleeping. 
One problem area highlighted in the report was the lack of knowledge on safe 
sleeping: many new parents weren’t clear on potential dangers, from 
overheating, setting babies down in the wrong position, or sharing beds with 
babies after a drink or two. “It’s positive help,” Hannigan says. “It’s not all 
‘don’t do this’, it’s about trying new things.”

The service helps between 250 and 300 parents at any one time. There is a 
creche, parenting lessons that culminate in a certificate, one-on-one 
counselling sessions where parents can ask for advice, or talk about what’s 
worrying them, and information workshops on nutrition, health and child 
bonding. “Families don’t come in neat little boxes,” team leader Judith Searle 
says during a crochet workshop, explaining why the service is so wide-ranging 
and individual. The hope is to support mothers and families to make positive 
choices that lower risks for babies from conception onwards. Mothers are 
usually referred for their first birth, but stay until their children are 
toddlers, carrying the greater confidence in their parenting capabilities on to 
future pregnancies. Many don’t have support networks, or close friends with 
children and can feel isolated.

Northern Ireland also has a medical staff shortage with 672 vacancies 
remaining unfilled in the health visitor, nursing and midwifery sectors due to 
a large number of retirements and pinched budgets. This means health visitors 
are overworked and forced to focus on mothers known to be at risk, leaving many 
other new mums feeling unsupported.

Living in poverty makes things very complicated. Health problems escalate, you 
miss appointments and it gets too much
Clare Humphrey, family centre manager 
Smoking during pregnancy remains one of the biggest risks for premature birth 
and low birth weight. Research in 2012 found 16% of mothers in Northern Ireland 
smoked during pregnancy compared to12.7% in England and Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2013/nov/27/pregnant-smokers-how-many-are-there>
, with 37% of pregnant women under the age of 20 and 29% of mothers in areas of 
deprivation continuing to smoke after conception. Early intervention and 
smoking cessation services for young mothers, especially in areas of high 
poverty are vital in reducing infant deaths.

Breastfeeding is also an important factor in lowering death rates, especially 
incidences of sudden infant death syndrome. Despite breastfeeding rates 
doubling in the past 20 years in Northern Ireland, the rate still remains lower 
than the rest of the UK. At birth,64% of mothers in Northern Ireland breastfeed 
<http://www.dhsspsni.gov.uk/bfs-appendixc-a>, compared with 81% across the 
whole of the UK. Partly, this is due to the push to discharge mothers within 
six hours of giving birth: helping mothers get back home to comfort and privacy 
has many advantages, but for many women breastfeeding is difficult without some 
help and guidance.

“If it’s your first baby and you’ve never breastfed, it’s not easy to do. 
People instinctively think it’s natural and it just happens, but actually it’s 
hard work,” Mahey explains. “You have to know, you have to be educated, and 
someone has to help you get it right.” The poorer you are, the less likely you 
are to breastfeed, and breastfeeding also has a generational factor: if your 
mother and grandmother breastfed, you are more likely to do so. The social 
support is crucial in raising breastfeeding rates, and finding a balance 
between encouraging mothers’ independence and delivering targeted support 
remains difficult.

“Living in poverty makes things very complicated,” Claire Humphrey, the family 
centre manager explains. “Everything piles up.Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> problems escalate, you miss 
appointments, and it all gets too much.” One mother who visits the centre has 
three children under the age of three, one in a wheelchair, the other two in a 
twin buggy, making it almost impossible for her to leave the house as she can’t 
afford taxis. The service has seen a notable rise in food poverty, and now 
distributes three or four food parcels to families who are visibly relieved 
that they don’t have to choose between paying bills and feeding their children.

The entrenched poverty in Northern Ireland continues to exacerbate the rate of 
avoidable infant deaths, yet, worryingly, the vast majority of the welfare cuts 
rolled out across Great Britain have yet to hit Northern Ireland, due to an
ongoing deadlock in Stormont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/09/northern-ireland-devolution-could-be-derailed-by-welfare-reforms>
. Experts fear forging ahead with cuts and austerity could make the problem 
worse. “Poverty and continued inequality of access to crucial services across 
NI means that some children have a much better start in life than others,” says 
Celine McStravick, director of the National Children’s Bureau NI.

Early help is needed to avert crisis

The fact that more than 3,000 babies die every year is a tragedy. It’s a 
particularly prevalent problem in Northern Ireland. So it is shocking to 
realise that more could have been done to tackle well known and avoidable risk 
factors. A key way of doing this is helping parents earlier before the worst 
happens.

Making sure new and expectant parents receive help early with issues like safe 
parenting, maternal health and wellbeing, and housing problems improves their 
lives and contributes to keeping babies healthy.

This is often best achieved by providing warm and supportive relationships 
with parents in a welcoming environment, where staff and parents can be honest 
about risks to babies’ health. Building up support networks is especially 
important for isolated or young parents who might otherwise struggle to get 
advice. We need a commitment from national government to act earlier to prevent 
infant mortality. Waiting until families are already in crisis with issues like 
child health, parenting and mental health places a heavy toll on them. It is 
also much more expensive to provide emergency interventions instead of 
preventative ones.

This is why Action for Children has long advocated for a shift in public 
spending towards early help. Recently we have beencampaigning  
<http://www.actionforchildren.org.uk/campaigns/a-stitch-in-time>in partnership 
with Barnardo’s, the Children’s Society and the NSPCC to put this at the top of 
the political agenda in the build-up to the general election. Giving every 
child the best start in life is an imperative for any government. Doing more 
for families before they reach crisis point would mean that more babies not 
only survive, but thrive and grow up healthy. Whoever forms the next government 
needs to commit to this cause.

Kate Mulley is director of policy and campaigns at Action for Children

• This article was amended on 25 March 2015. An earlier version misspelled 
Tullycarnet as Tullycarnott
 