
Canelo Álvarez has fractured his right thumb, scrapping plans for a big 
December fight in New York City.

The WBO light middleweight champion sustained the injury in the second round 
of his knockout victory over Liam Smith on Saturday night. Golden Boy 
Promotions said Álvarez visited a specialist in his home city of Guadalajara, 
and, after undergoing X-rays and a CT scan, was diagnosed with an avulsion 
fracture of the right thumb.

Álvarez-Golovkin is the new mega-fight, but we’ll have to be patient | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/19/canelo-alvarez-gennady-golovkin-fight-boxing>
Álvarez stopped Smith in the ninth round on Saturday night before 51,240 fans 
at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas. Álvarez said after the fight that he hurt 
his right thumb in the second round, but he still produced three knockdowns, 
including one with his right hand.

“Canelo does not need surgery and the prognosis is excellent,” Golden Boy 
Promotions said in a statement on Monday. “Canelo’s hand will be immobilized 
for the next six weeks, and he will be unable to fight again in 2016. This does 
nothing to Canelo’s plans to move up and take on the best in the middleweight 
division next year.”

After Saturday’s fight, Álvarez said: “After I got hurt I probably used my 
left hand a little more and went to the body a little bit more but going to the 
body was part of the game plan. I’ve always said you have to be prepared for 
anything in that ring and that’s what I was. I was prepared for anything.”

Oscar De La Hoya, Álvarez’s promoter, had eyed a 10 December fight at Madison 
Square Garden, with the likes of David Lemieux, Billy Joe Saunders and Curtis 
Stevens mentioned as possible opponents. But Álvarez will now either seek a 
fight in early 2017 or just wait for his scheduled Cinco de Mayo weekend fight 
in May.

Canelo Álvarez out-punches brave Liam Smith as Golovkin showdown looms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/canelo-alvarez-liam-smith-fight-golovkin>
Álvarez’s management said it does not alter their plans for a potential 
showdown between Álvarez and unified middleweight titleholder Gennady Golovkin 
– boxing’s biggest fight – in September 2017.

“If he comes off the rest and feels he wants to do a couple fights before 
[Gennady] Golovkin, we could have a fight in January or February, but he can’t 
fight in December,” Golden Boy president Eric Gomez said. “It’s up to him as 
he’s looking forward to September [2017]. September will be the Golovkin fight.”
 