
The first weekend of May and the second weekend of September represent the 
most important dates on the boxing calendar, the traditional stomping grounds 
of the sport’s biggest star. Most recently that’s beenFloyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>, whose last 10 fights have 
taken place exclusively on the Saturdays of Cinco de Mayo or Mexican 
Independence Day weekend.

No longer – not after Canelo Alvarez’s decisive, career-best win over Miguel 
Cotto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/canelo-alvarez-takes-middleweight-title-after-epic-against-miguel-cotto>
 on the Las Vegas strip. The ink had hardly dried on the scorecards late 
Saturday night when Oscar De La Hoya announced Canelo’s next two fights would 
take place in May and September of next year. The symbolism was obvious. By 
planting the flag on the dates reserved for boxing’s top draw, De La Hoya only 
formalized what his prized moneymaker had just shown: that Canelo is the new 
face of the sport.

Canelo Alvarez takes middleweight title with decisive win over Miguel Cotto
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/canelo-alvarez-takes-middleweight-title-after-epic-against-miguel-cotto>
“The bottom line is: we have the guy,” De La Hoya said. “We have the guy for 
many years to come.”

The Golden Boy Promotions founder had attempted a coup last year when he 
announced Canelo would fight on 2 May after signing a multi-fight deal to 
return to HBO. Only when Mayweather chose that date for his much-anticipated 
fight with Manny Pacquiao did De La Hoya blink, moving backCanelo’s fight with 
James Kirkland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/09/canelo-alvarez-v-james-kirkland-live>
 at Houston’s Minute Maid Park one week.

Yet it’s hard to imagine any fight causing De La Hoya and Canelo to back down 
now, not even the bandied-about rematch between Mayweather and Pacquiao. With 
an amiable personality, good looks and a crowd-pleasing style that have 
endeared him to fans the world over, Canelo is too big to fail. And he’s only 
25.

Mayweather routinely tabbed opponents of Mexican or Puerto Rican heritage for 
his May and September outings, among them Canelo, Cotto, Juan Manuel Marquez, 
Victor Ortiz and Robert Guerrero, leveraging the enormous Hispanic fanbase that 
represents the industry’s engine room into a vast personal fortune. Yet not 
since De La Hoya himself fought Mayweather nearly a decade ago, the event that 
made Floyd a household name, has a fighter of Mexican descent represented the 
A-side of a Cinco de Mayo promotion. That drought will end on 7 May.

Now that Canelo holds the WBC and lineal middleweight titles, the obvious 
choice for his first turn as a top draw on the sport’s biggest stage is Gennady 
Golovkin, the division’s consensus alpha dog who holds the WBA and IBF belts 
followinglast month’s eight-round obliteration of David Lemieux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/gennady-golovkin-stops-david-lemieux-in-eighth-to-unify-middleweight-titles>
 at Madison Square Garden. The Kazakh fighter known as Triple G has torn 
through the middleweight division with a rare blend of patience, technique and 
weapons-grade power in both hands, fighting up to four times a year in a 
concentrated effort to build his value as an attraction. The Lemieux stoppage 
represented his 21st consecutive knockout, a streak dating back to when he was 
fighting eight-rounders during George W Bush’s administration.

For years it seemed Golovkin, whose nominal title of boxing’s most feared and 
avoided fighter offers no remunerative value, wastoo good to get a big fight. 
He’s thus found a godsend in Canelo, a big name who’s built his brand on a 
willingness to take on all comers. “I’m ready,” Canelo said through a 
translator. “I have respect for [Golovkin] but I’m not afraid of anybody. I’ll 
fight anybody, anytime.”

Both Canelo and De La Hoya made it clear on Saturday they will call the shots 
in the negotiations with Golovkin, whose pay-per-view debut against Lemieux 
attracted a relatively modest 150,000 purchases. Saturday’s bout, widely 
expected to generate at least six times that buy rate, was contested at a 
catchweight of 155lbs, five below the division limit, while Golovkin has never 
fought below 158½. There’s no question who holds the cards here.

It’s been a stunning reversal for De La Hoya. The last time Canelo was on this 
stage, coming up short in a 2013 blockbuster against Mayweather, De La Hoya 
wasn’t even in attendance, having checked himself into rehab for drug and 
alcohol addiction the Tuesday before the fight. Earlier this year, the majority 
of his Golden Boy promotional stable departed en masse for Al Haymon’s Premier
Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Champions series. Two of the 
biggest names that remained, Lucas Matthysse and Lemieux, have suffered 
devastating knockout losses in recent months.

Now De La Hoya controls the fighter who is poised to be the face of boxing for 
the next decade. In a sport where so much can take place in so brief a period 
of time, the Golden Boy, at least for now, appears to be back on top.
 