
The hype was justified. Saul ‘Canelo’ Álvarez has been trumpeted all this week 
as the most dangerous man in boxing. Mr Box Office himself. As the last of a 
succession of fearsome bodyshots rocketed into Liam Smith, the brave but 
ultimately beaten WBO light middleweight champion, a bumper crowd of over 
51,000 at the home of the Dallas Cowboys saw what they came for.

Canelo Álvarez stops Liam Smith for WBO light middleweight title – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/17/canelo-alvarez-liam-smith-fight-live>
The stats showed Álvarez connected with 113 of 220 power punches while only 68 
earned his opponent any success. The marks on Smith’s body and the blood 
cascading down his face from a cut, however, told its own, sorry story.

“Liam Smith was a resilient fighter, he has tough, has a lot of heart,” 
admitted Álvarez. “He thinks before he attacks, I could tell in the way he 
blocked in the way he approached me. I was actually only using my left hand for 
the most part, making sure left hand was connecting with power.

“I hurt my right hand in the second round when I hit him in the head. The body 
shot, was what I focused on, making sure I worked his body down, and that is 
what secured the victory today.”

The roars of approval were still lingering in the air when Gennady Golovkin, 
the recognized champion at middleweight, was mentioned afterward. When that 
bout happens, if it happens, it will be quite something.

“I fear no one, I am the best fighter right now,” said Álvarez. “We offered 
Golovkin the money to fight twice. He didn’t accept.”

True or not, Canelo’s class cannot be doubted. This was Smith’s third defense 
of the title he won against John Thompson in October 2015. Jimmy Kelly from 
Manchester was stopped two months later before a crunching second knockout took 
care of Pedrag Radosevic earlier this year.

Taking on Álvarez, however, was a totally different proposition, a huge step 
up in class. The Mexican has stood toe-to-toe with the likes of Floyd 
Mayweather, Miguel Cotto and Shane Mosley. Canelo has world class experience. 
Smith didn’t - but he certainly does now.

“If I would have waited a little longer and gotten more experience I would 
have been able to fight a guy like that better,” said Smith, who suffered his 
first defeat in 24 paying fights. “I am very disappointed. Canelo was too good 
today, I needed better timing, my timing was off tonight.”

 For the excellent 26-year-old two-division world champion, this was all about 
reinforcing his stature of one of the finest operators on earth. The Latino 
fight fans came out in force. This space-age, superb stadium was fizzling with 
excitement. Mexican music greeted every break between rounds. Loud roars boomed 
when images of Álvarez going through his final preparations before stepping out 
for the 50th fight of his professional career appeared on the gigantic TV 
screens here.

Smith, looking out at the packed stadium, knew this was his moment in the sun. 
He couldn’t stop smiling. It didn’t last. The opening exchanges proved Smith 
wasn’t daunted yet Canelo’s jab ensured the Mexican earned an early foothold. 
More of the same followed in the second, Álvarez’s power was at times fearsome 
yet the Englishman absorbed everything which came his way.

Relentless with shots to the body and uppercuts, Álvarez stalked Smith though 
the champion deserved credit. He finally managed to make inroads with some 
strong work of his own, arguably winning the fourth. Canelo, and the Mexican 
hordes, knew they were in for a battle.

The fifth saw fireworks. Smith was enjoying success when pushing his opponent 
back and in the final seconds, a crunching hook rocked the man everyone had 
come to see. Smith’s right eye began to show the effects of Álvarez’s power. 
Blood rolled down his face as tempers boiled.

Referee Luis Pabón warned the Liverpool fighter for throwing shots after the 
bell, and just over a minute into round seven, an overhand right sent him to 
the canvas. The 28-year-old recovered though as round eight stretched before 
him, only a stoppage would see his title retained.

Another relentless, crushing body shot which followed an uppercut forced Smith 
onto his knees. The Englishman was brave, he just could not match the power 
which was coming his way with alacrity and brute force. When Canelo struck 
again in the ninth with a left hook to Smith’s body, there was nothing more to 
add.
 