
The rebranding of the Football League to the English Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> from next season is 
“insulting” to Welsh clubs, according to the chairman of the Cardiff City 
Supporters’ Trust.

The governing body announced the changes on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/goodbye-football-league-hello-english-football-league-rebranding-announced>
, which will come into effect for the start of the 2016-17 campaign, after 
undergoing a comprehensive corporate and competition rebranding.

However, two of the Football League’s current 72 members are based in Wales.

Tim Hartley believes the rebrand will do little to benefit the clubs in the 
three divisions. “It’s a little bit insulting that both Welsh clubs and 
potentially many more from lower down the football pyramid will be classed as 
English,” Hartley told Press Association Sport.

“The rebranding is factually incorrect and completely unnecessary. Newport and 
Cardiff City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cardiffcity> are both in the 
Football League.

“The rebranding will make a lot of money for companies making logos and headed 
paper but will do nothing for teams playing in the three divisions. What’s the 
point?

“The Football League had status, we knew what it meant, why mess with a brand 
that clearly works?”

Both Cardiff and Newport have yet to comment publicly on the decision, though 
both are likely to be seeking assurances that their value to the organisation 
is highlighted.

Hartley has also been seeking assurances from Cardiff after the Football 
League revealed the change comes after extensive research, which included 
interviews and focus groups with clubs, stakeholders, commercial partners and 
more than 18,000 football supporters.

“I have contacted the club asking whether they were party to this decision,” 
Hartley added. “This was the first we had heard of it. It underlines once again 
the need for formal, structured consultation between fans, their clubs and the 
football authorities.”
 