
For English football's new home the exhilaration arrived a day late but it was 
undoubtedly worth the wait. Morecambe andExeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> produced a refreshingly 
open match in contrast to Wembley's disppointing first FA Cup final between the 
two teams acknowleded to be the best in the country.

This morning Morecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe>, the 
Lancashire club from a town with a population exactly half the size of this 
arena, will wake up to the prospect of League football for the first time in 
their 87-year existence. It was Wembley that had played host to the finest hour 
in Morecambe's history before yesterday - a 2-1 victory over Dartford to lift 
the FA Trophy in 1974 - but escaping the Nationwide Conference eclipsed any of 
their previous achievements. It was just reward for a side who has spent 11 
seasons in this division and missed out on promotion via the play-offs twice in 
the past four years.

Sammy McIlroy, who scored on his last trip to Wembley with Manchester United 
in the 1979 Cup final but ended up on the losing side as Arsenal won 3-2, 
becomes the first manager to lift two teams out of the Conference following his 
success with Macclesfield Town in 1997. "I feel a bit better today than when I 
lost with United, that's for sure," said the Northern Irishman, whose team will 
join Dagenham & Redbridge in League Two next season.

Exeter's inability to hold on to a well-deserved lead kept them in non-league 
football. In 2003 they were relegated from the old Third Division after more 
than 80 years in the Football League and, after overturning a 2-0 semi-final 
deficit - they were 1-0 down in the second leg having lost the first - to beat 
Oxford United in the semi-finals, they arrived as favourites and backed by 
nearly 30,000 fans.

Paul Tisdale's squad had visited Wembley beforehand to get a feel for the 
place and they appeared comfortable in their surroundings from as early as the 
eighth minute when Jon Challiner collected Rob Edwards' pass before crossing 
for an unmarked Lee Phillips to head the opening goal. Phillips, a former 
England rugby youth international, was causing Morecambe no end of problems and 
almost doubled the lead after 22 minutes. It was perhaps no coincidence, 
therefore, that after he was forced off with a muscular injury on 36 minutes 
Exeter began to wilt.

Their goalkeeper, Paul Jones, was forced to make a string of fine saves, most 
notably from Garry Thompson and Danny Carlton, before Exeter's captain, Chris 
Todd, scythed down Carlton in the area. Jones denied Wayne Curtis with a 
spectacular double save from the penalty spot but an equaliser was inevitable.

The Trophy final eight days earlier provided similar drama, Stevenage coming 
from two goals behind to beat Kidderminster, and the desire of both sides to 
play for victory, and not merely to contain, was most refreshing.

When Billy Jones failed to clear Jim Bentley's long pass and Thompson rifled a 
shot in off the underside of the crossbar there was little surprise. To their 
credit Exeter, on their first-ever match at Wembley, took the game to Morecambe 
in the second half but left themselves prone to being caught on the 
counter-attack.

Extra-time looked likely until, with only eight minutes remaining, Carlton 
beat two Exeter defenders to power a sumptuous drive past Jones from 25 yards. 
"It's a tough feeling but we've ridden a great few roads to get here and we've 
enjoyed our ride," said Tisdale. "The higher the stakes become the tougher it 
is when you fall and that's how it feels today. It was a great day out for our 
supporters but that's where it ends because the feeling is rotten."

McIlroy's jubilation at the finish was uncontrolled, the 52-year-old leaping 
on to the pitch before tumbling embarrassingly to the ground. "When the ball 
hit the net, it was such a magnificent goal that I wanted to celebrate with the 
players," McIlroy said. "I didn't have the right footwear on and I needed some 
long studs.

"It was a brilliant feeling - one of the best I have had in my time in the 
game. This was a great advert for the Conference."

Man of the match Danny Carlton (Morecambe)
 