
George Groves <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/george-groves> was booed as 
he entered the ring here on Saturday night, the capacity crowd in Manchester 
viewing him as a cocky upstart not worthy of sharing a ring with Carl Froch. 
But by the end there were cheers for the 25-year-old following a gutsy and at 
times lethal display, with the jeers instead directed towards the referee, 
Howard Foster, for stopping this contest midway through the ninth round.

By that stage Groves' legs had started to wobble, the young fighter feeling 
the effects of a sharp Froch right to his temple. Then came a flurry of body 
shots from the champion and, soon after, the intervention of the man in the 
middle. But few here felt that was the right decision and tempers flared so 
badly that members of the fighters' respective camps nearly came to blows 
themselves inside the ring.

As they spat fury at each other, Groves took in the acclaim of those in 
attendance while Froch had the look of a relieved man. The veteran knew he had 
held onto his WBA and IBF super-middleweight titles by the skin of his teeth. 
Had it not been for the intervention of Foster, who was a busy, and frankly 
annoying, presence throughout this thrilling contest, this could well have 
proved the end for the 36-year-old.

Indeed the end appeared to have come for Froch as the first round came to a 
close, when he was floored by an overhand right by Groves and had to take a 
standing eight count from the referee.

Such was the ferocity of the shot that Froch later claimed to be suffering 
from severe pain in his jaw. From ringside he certainly looked uncomfortable 
for the remaining eight, pulsating rounds.

Last week, and amid the hotter-than-normal trash talk that marked the build up 
to this contest, Groves outlined exactly how he would dismantle Froch, claiming 
he would take the fight to the centre of the ring at the beginning of round one 
and lay a couple of exploratory rights on Froch, do the same in the second 
round, and then march forward and look to push the champion back from the third 
onwards.

He was almost as good as his word, charging towards his more illustrious 
opponent straight after the first bell and hunting him down on the front foot. 
It was a bold move by a classic counter-puncher and it appeared to catch Froch 
off guard, literally. Having set the man from Nottingham up with a left, Groves 
delivered the shot which had the champion on his backside and everyone up on 
their feet.

Groves remained on the front foot in the second - as he said he would - and, 
again to plan, pushed Froch onto the ropes in the third, keeping him at 
distance with his jab. Froch, in fairness, did come back and forced Groves onto 
the ropes with a flurry of body shots.

There was more of the same in the fourth and fifth before a stunning sixth 
round in which both fighters traded blows, Groves again going for the head 
while Froch maintained an assault on the body.

The fight continued in the same fashion in the seventh and eighth but the 
gripping action was sadly interrupted all too often by Foster. He was to 
intervene again, to the fury of most here, in the ninth.

"It was never a stoppage," said Groves of the decision. Froch, meanwhile, 
claimed it was a "fair stoppage" and said he had a new-found respect for the 
man he vowed to "flatten" on the eve of this fight between two men who 
genuinely appeared to loath each other. Groves himself said he has "always 
respected Froch and hopes he respected me now."

The crowd certainly did and a first loss after 19 wins will not do Groves any 
harm. For Froch, this was a 32nd career victory. Just.

Another victor here was the super bantamweight Scott Quigg. The 25-year-old's 
first defence of his WBA title, against Yoandris Salinas last month, ended with 
a majority draw decision, hardly an impressive start to life as a champion for 
the fighter from Bury. Quigg was determined, then, to put on a more decisive 
showing here and he did just that, flooring Diego Silva twice, the second time 
– an overhand right – knocking the stuffing out of the Argentinian in the 
second round once and for all.

On what was an impressive undercard lineup, Stephen Smith also moved one step 
closer to a world title shot after overcoming the Argentinian Sergio Manuel 
Medina with an eighth-round knockout. Smith, one of four Liverpool-based boxing 
brothers, found Medina a durable opponent for most of their scrappy 
super-featherweight bout but eventually floored him with a sharp left to the 
ribs. The 28-year-old must now face the WBC silver champion Fernando Saucedo 
within 90 days and, should he record what would be a seventh straight victory, 
would then be in line for a world title fight next year.

Jamie McDonnell also won with a seventh-round stoppage of France's Bernard 
Inom in his first fight sincebeing stripped of his IBF bantamweight title 
<http://www.boxingnewsonline.net/latest/news/jamie-mcdonnell-stripped-of-his-ibf-bantamweight-title>
 by the governing body, while there was also a points win for Olympic gold 
medallist Luke Campbell in the lightweight's fourth contest since turning 
professional.

Manchester's Anthony Crolla, meanwhile, survived something of a scare in his 
lightweight bout with Stephen Foster Jr. This was Crolla's first outing since 
his "career best" victory over Gavin Rees in Bolton in June and, in front of a 
home crowd, the 27-year-old planned to put on a show. But Crolla struggled to 
make much of an impact against Foster Jr. However, an injury to the challenger 
sustained in the sixth meant he did not rise from this stool, handing Crolla 
the 27th win of his career.

Far more impressive was Andy Lee, who knocked his Hungarian opponent Ferenc 
Hafner down twice before a final knockdown in the second round saw the referee 
stop the contest and hand the Irish middleweight the 31st victory of his career 
and 22nd by stoppage. With David Haye's mentor Adam Booth in his corner, Lee is 
now targeting a clash with Matthew Macklin next year.
 