
The man they once called Pretty Boy sinks his bruised hands into an iron 
bucket filled with ice. In a stifling gym behind a grimy side-street in 
downtown Las Vegas,Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> Jr bows his head as the 
cold eases the hurt in his knuckles and joints. As the world's best boxer, 
Mayweather's fists have dazzled every one of his opponents while compiling a 
perfect 41-0 record that stretches across 15 years.

After an intense afternoon of sparring, the only sound that can be heard is 
the soft crunch of ice as Mayweather looks up with a curious smile. In the mood 
to be as charming as he is compelling, the fighter shows me his glistening 
hands. They look surprisingly small.

"Yeah," Mayweather says. "These are very small hands."

They still earn him millions every time he fights. This Saturday, at the MGM 
Grand in Vegas, surrounded by glitzy high-rollers, Mayweather will serve up a 
timely reminder of why his nickname these days is "Money". Pay-per-view figures 
for his WBC world title welterweight bout against Victor Ortiz, who is 10 years 
younger at the age of 24, will ensure Mayweather racks up another 
multimillion-dollar purse.

He will seem a long way then from the sickly hookers and junkies who limp down 
the street a block beyond the boxing gym he owns. Mayweather finds refuge here 
from his trouble in real life. His most obvious problems are listed in the 
unresolved charges of assault, battery and coercion laid by various people, 
from the estranged mother of his children, to different security guards who 
claim to have been punched by Mayweather. He is also embroiled in an epic war 
with his father, Floyd Sr, which erupted again last month on HBO as the two men 
fought bitterly and crudely in this very gym.

The scars of their relationship run deep – and can be traced back to the 
moment when Floyd Sr, then a professional boxer, held up baby Floyd as his 
shield when he was shot in the late 1970s. Years later Big Floyd ended up in 
jail, after being busted for cocaine-dealing, and he had to allow his brother, 
Roger, to become Pretty Boy's trainer. The wounds have never healed.

Mayweather Jr now has different matters in mind. "I'm going back to business 
with these hands," he says, returning them to the ice-bucket. "They let me live 
my life."

A few hours earlier, "Money" Mayweather says, he had won a big bet. "A hundred 
thousand dollars," he murmurs with husky drama. "But I once won a million 
dollars on a bet. Yeah, I've lost a few big ones. Once I lost two hundred 
thousand dollars. It's my money. I can do what I want with it. But you can tell 
by my boxing record what I'm more used to doing."

We are jammed together on chairs so close, nose to nose, that it is hard to 
stop sweating – even if Mayweather has more of an excuse after a riveting 
display of his training regime over the preceding 90 minutes. His iron 
discipline contrasts with the chaos that threatens to engulf him outside boxing.

Mayweather has been accused of many crimes and lapses in decency but few 
fighters can match his dedication. Even when out of the ring, as he has been 
the past 16 months, he is never much over his fighting weight. And he is rarely 
far from the gym – no matter how many court orders are heaped upon him. Such 
impressive commitment has flowered out of a desolate place inside him.

"Exactly," he says quietly. "You know, as a young child, I lay in my bedroom 
and I swore to myself then: 'I'm not going to smoke and I'm not going to 
drink.' And I said I'm not going to just say that when I'm a kid. I'm going to 
stick to that as an adult. I kept that in mind my whole life."

His mother was ravaged by drug addiction; and her plight hardened his resolve. 
"My mother, you know, had a difficult time. She drank. She smoked. She was on 
drugs. Of course my dad was a drug dealer. A hustler. You know my background. 
But it's not so abnormal. Most young black people go through that same life."

Mayweather's eyes glaze briefly. "I would lie in bed, and I was nine years 
old, and say to myself: 'I want to be the richest man in the world.' I've come 
a long way from there. Yeah, I'm loud. But I'm backing it up. I'm still hungry, 
dedicated. I'm one of those very strong individuals."

Mayweather denies the allegations against him, insisting that the legal cases 
are motivated by vengeance or greed. "My mentality is the same – always. It 
comes with the territory. All kinds of things have been said and I just believe 
what will be, will be. If I'm guilty, come get me. If I'm innocent, it all 
melts away. I know the truth and I'm not worried. You have ups and down but I 
got the right lady in my life now [his fiancee Shantel Jackson]. When we're 
alone she talks to me about certain things and only wants the best for me. Some 
people are just right for you."

Waiting for Ortiz, his dangerous opponent, does not seem to unsettle 
Mayweather. "Boxing is real easy," he says. "Life is much harder. That's why 
there's a difference between being talented and being God-gifted. That's one of 
the gifts God gave me: to be the best. I feel a responsibility to live up to 
this gift. I ain't got nothing against other legendary champions before me. But 
I'm the king of my era."

There is another king of the ring right now. Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> is a real-life governor in 
the Philippines as well as the only fighter who cuts as riveting a figure as 
Mayweather. Pacquiao appears his opposite in many ways – he is humble and 
beloved, softly spoken and self-sacrificing. He is also a real fighter, a 
threshing-machine in the ring, while Mayweather is an artist, a defensive 
master whose boxing skills bear comparison with some of the greatest names in 
this battered old business. Mayweather, however, needs to fight Pacquiao in a 
showdown that would test him like no other.

It would be the richest fight in boxing history but negotiations have broken 
down repeatedly – partly because of Mayweather's insistence that Pacquiao 
should be subjected to random drugs testing. Both men have risen through the 
weight divisions but Mayweather argues that Pacquiao's extraordinary climb 
needs closer scrutiny. Last month they reached another impasse, with Pacquiao's 
lawyers asking a Nevada court to "issue a default judgment" after efforts to 
subject Mayweather to charges of defamation failed.

Mayweather, meanwhile, has avoided a supposed 20 dates to appear in court 
against Pacquiao. Money smiles his sweetest smile. "I don't worry about that 
kind of stuff. That's why I pay my lawyers so much."

His trainer, uncle Roger, escalated tensions by claiming that Britain's Amir 
Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan>, who trains alongside 
Pacquiao while emerging as a seriously credible opponent for Mayweather, must 
be on "the same juice". Khan has vehemently denied the allegations and 
considers them to be nonsense. Does Mayweather Jr share his uncle's highly 
dubious view of Khan? "It's not my place to speak because you know how fighters 
are these days. They get the lawyers into court real quick. They go crying to 
the courtroom. But you know what? My courtroom is that ring."

Will he ever settle his differences with Pacquiao in a fistic courtroom? "I 
couldn't care less," Mayweather sighs. "I already know I'm the best."

I think Mayweather would beat Pacquiao, in a fascinating contest, but some 
venerable experts disagree. "They're wrong," Mayweather says, pointing to 
Pacquiao's record. "With three losses and two draws he'll never be in my 
league. He's just a fighter who has been unbeaten for six years. I've been 
unbeaten 15 years."

It still seems difficult to believe Mayweather and Pacquiao, who both spend or 
give away money as fast as they make it, will not eventually fight. Ortiz, an 
aggressive southpaw who pressurises his opponents, is also cast in the Pacquiao 
mould and could offer Mayweather the perfect preparation for his defining 
contest.

"They say I have problems with southpaws," Mayweather grins. "Well, the last 
time I checked I was 41 and 0. So it's obvious I'm doing something right. I 
make good fighters and even great future Hall of Fame guys look ordinary. But 
if I beat a guy that is 10 years younger than me, they'll say, 'Floyd, you had 
too much experience.' If I beat a guy around my age they'll say he's over the 
hill. I never get my just due."

He would get deserved credit if he fought Pacquiao or, failing that, Khan. The 
British fighter has the look of a man on the verge of a considerable challenge. 
"Every time I fight someone they say they're going to challenge me. But if Amir 
Khan wants to fight me he has to get past Jesse Vargas [the light-welterweight 
with a 16-0 record]. If he fights Vargas would I give him a shot? Absolutely."

Mayweather against Khan should happen – partly because the American is so 
smitten with Britain and thrilled that Saturday's fight will be screened in 
this country on Primetime. He is almost endearing when describing his British 
fans as the world's boxing connoisseurs. "I am blessed to be embraced by them."

His love of Britain extends to the three Rolls-Royce cars he owns. He has 
driven his cream Rolls to the gym today and, as the sun sinks across Vegas, 
Mayweather walks to the car in the company of three bodyguards so huge we are 
dwarfed by their shadows. After showing me around his car, he reflects again: 
"I still think of that nine-year-old kid," Mayweather says, remembering his 
boyhood. "Lying on my bed. My mom strung out in trouble. A whole lot of trouble 
going on with my dad. But I pulled myself out of that place. I found dedication 
and discipline as a fighter. I'm proud of that."

What would he say if his son announced that he also wished to become a 
fighter, and follow in the cracked family path of Little Floyd and Big Floyd? 
Mayweather shakes his head. "It won't ever happen. My kids come from a totally 
different background. They know nothing about poverty. They know nothing about 
hardship. And that makes me happy. I'm glad they haven't seen the things I did. 
I'm glad they don't live the same life I did."

Mayweather offers his hand, stressing with a light laugh that I can squeeze as 
hard as I like. "My hands are fine," he says, the ice having eased the hurt in 
fists he will shut tight again on Saturday night.

A few minutes later, the man called Money opens the blackened window to his 
cream Rolls. He flashes a winning smile and lifts his hand in farewell. The 
Rolls slowly picks up speed, heading towards Mayweather's mansion and away from 
the strip joints and lonely junkies staring at him on the corner adjoining his 
gym.

"There's Money," one of them suddenly shouts. "There's Pretty Boy, living the 
life … "

• Mayweather v Ortiz is live on Primetime on Sunday 18 September from 2am UK 
time
 