
Most cities are strapped for cash – in rich countries, as well as poor ones. 
Many investments in infrastructure, public facilities and city development have 
to wait, even when they are well worth their costs.

A mounting backlog of public investment can lead to poor transport, 
congestion, a degraded water supply and, apart from those practicalities, an 
unattractive and deteriorating city environment. In fact, some cities end up in 
a vicious cycle where dilapidation induces employers to move elsewhere.


With limits to how much money can be raised through local taxes, many cities 
invite the private sector to help finance vital infrastructure investments. 
While this may give access to immediate financing, it does not always lower 
total costs in the long run. Asking the private sector to fund an investment 
always comes with a price tag. The private sector only helps out when it can 
either make a profit and/or is supported by a government guarantee to raise the 
necessary finance at the same cheap rate available to the public sector.

So why should governments guarantee a loan to a private business to help build 
public assets, only for the private business to pocket the profit?

The answer may be that the government lacks the organisation and skills to 
design and run such a project. Also, the debt would most likely be hidden on 
the government balance sheet and therefore avoid criticism for increasing debt 
and fiscal risk that could jeopardise a future political career, as well as 
public wealth.

Most cities have poor knowledge of what assets they own and which might 
generate an income if managed properly

But there is a better answer. Surprisingly, most cities neglect what should be 
their first port of call – the huge potential of putting the resources and 
capabilities they already own to better use.

What seems to be mostly forgotten is that all local authorities own a vast 
number of assets that could generate a return if properly managed.

These city assets are a bit like owning a car or a spare room before the 
arrival of Uber and Airbnb. Cars and spare rooms were just a cost, and at worst 
a financial risk, until they were turned into productive assets that could 
generate income. With tools like Uber or Airbnb, there is no need to sell the 
car or sell the house for having too many rooms in order to afford a vital 
investment. It would be enough to manage these assets properly and make a 
decent return.

 Most cities have poor knowledge of what assets they own and which might 
generate an income if managed properly. The lack of a proper inventory, 
valuation systems and accounting standards ultimately lead to poor asset 
management. City authorities that make use of public real estate and other 
assets are often faced with restrictive regulation and dysfunctional incentives 
that encourage waste and low-value use.

The modern version of Airbnb and Uber for public finance is the urban wealth 
fund. This is simply a government-owned holding company at arms-length’s from 
short-term political influence. It can engage the relevant professionals that 
make it possible for local government to manage investment projects in the same 
way as any private sector partner. More importantly, when entering into joint 
ventures with the relevant private groups, it would be as equals.


With such professional capacity, an urban wealth fund would be much better at 
specifying what precise requirements are needed – improving the odds against 
projects becoming unnecessarily large or leaving too much profit to the private 
sector, which has often been the case in the past.

Related: Public-private partnerships are risky, but can pay off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2017/jan/03/public-private-partnerships-risks-jobs-trump>

Several cities have already made strides in terms of new partnerships. They 
include:

 * Copenhagen Port & City Company 
<http://www.byoghavn.dk/english/about/about2-uk.aspx>, one of the largest 
developments in Europe, which is a 520-hectare urban redevelopment in the 
city’s harbour area as well as on the land of a former military base. It will 
provide more than 30,000 new homes, office space as well as parks, recreation 
areas, cultural facilities and a new university for 20,000 students. The 
dividend from the development company is helping to fund extension of the metro.

 * Hamburg Hafen City <http://www.hafencity.com/en/home.html>, where an urban 
regeneration company will turn old port warehouses into a new city centre 
neighbourhood providing 7,000 homes, office spaces and cultural and educational 
facilities. 
 * London & Continental Railways <http://www.lcrhq.co.uk/about-lcr/>, which is 
owned by the UK government. It has helped develop several different holdings 
including the area around Kings Cross railway station and the Stratford station 
area around the Olympic village. 
 * Hong Kong, whose corporation has funded the city’s entire railway network 
by developing real estate. 
 Using this approach to manage commercial assets owned by government makes the 
whole debate about privatisation and ownership almost superfluous as long as 
the yield from the fund helps to fund the greater good in society.




Our calculations indicate that many cities could double their public 
investments if they made better use of their wealth – making every penny in 
yield from better management of assets count as a penny saved in debt and taxes.

Dag Detter and Stefan Fölster are the authors of the forthcoming book, The 
Public Wealth of Cities (Brookings)

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 