
Cassius Marcellus Clay, by his own admission the greatest man in the history 
of the human race, could not have surprised the world more if last night God 
had parted the skies and ridden down on a thunderbolt to present him in person 
with the title of heavyweight champion of the world.

At five past eleven last night, he (Cassius, not God) stood before the 
cowering Press with his long, long arms raised in a great V, like Moses or 
Hitler. Below him, in every sense of the word, were at least forty-six boxing 
experts.

They had been culled from Tokio, Zurich, Stockholm, San Francisco, and 
Glasgow, among other sophisticated places, and forty-three of them were ready 
to form a club, if it would have helped, to stop the fight before it began, so 
that Liston the Invincible might not have a capital charge on his hands, so 
that Cassius Clay, the insufferable young blabbermouth from Louisville, 
Kentucky, might be safely returned to the Blue Grass country and put out to 
pasture with the other mindless colts.

There was little enmity and no pride of knowledge in this expert group. They 
had come a long way to report an obscenity: the deliberate mismatching of a 
twenty-two-year-old grasshopper with an armadillo, of a butterfly with an 
elephant, of a maniacal youngster with a brutal pro. It had all been done for 
vast amounts of money. It would be over in one round or two, three at the most. 
So that up to a minute or so before the two appeared, the forty-three consoled 
each other with forlorn little jokes: "The Miami Beach police department will 
take Cassius into protective custody at the sound of the bell."

Now he stood over them, his eyes flaring like gas jets, and foam at his mouth. 
"Hypocrites!" he yelled. "Whatcha gonna say now? Huh? Huh? It won't last one 
round. He'll be out in two. You know somep'n? Nobody but a fool would wanna 
fight me. I'm too fast. Liston's a powerful man, and I just chopped him up. He 
couldn't even hurt me. He was so bad he had to go to the hospital, and I'm 
still pretty. How about that, huh? Whatcha gonna say now? What about you 
newspaper men? Let's hear it: Who's the greatest?"

Through the tumult of seconds trotting and trainers and the jostle of sweating 
men in shirt sleeves, some of the reporters snickered very quietly and a few 
clapped. Cassius roared and jutted his immaculate chin towards them. "Huh? 
Let's really hear it: Who's the greatest? All you writers. I'll give you one 
more chance. Who's the greatest?" Mr. Squeers never got a more heartfelt 
response from petrified pupils. "You are, you are Cassius," the experts 
chanted. How had this humiliation and this impossible triumph come about? 
Granted that the rules exist to be violated by the latest genius, that experts 
can be fooled by an alarming or novel style, by a Cezanne or a Stravinsky, but 
there was no proof till last night that Clay could box at all, in any style 
conservative or outrageous. They had watched him pounded by hack sparring 
partners. Even a punching-bag had floored him. They agreed with the cool 
judgment of Joe Louis: "He just can't be that bad." It turned out he couldn't 
and wasn't.

The writers who had seen him in his last half-dozen bouts were bewildered to 
confess that they were seeing an entirely new man, a clever dancing boxer who 
weaved through zig-zag feints while the lumbering giant delivered hooks and 
upper cuts and jabs to the empty air, where Clay should have been.

It began in the first round, which all the wise money said was to be the last. 
Clay stood a head above the burrowing Liston and rarely bothered to keep his 
gloves higher than his hips, a bit of nonchalance that sent his admirers into 
frenzies of solitude at one and two thousand miles, screaming in the blackness 
of theatres in Toronto and Chicago: "Keep your guard up, stay away from him, 
get your hands up, Cassius. Cassius, he'll murder you."

Amazingly, there was never any premonition of murder, except in the sixth 
round, when Liston was stumbling around like a blinded ox and Clay kept 
measuring him, with his left arm extended, for little whirlwinds of artillery 
to his broken head and neck. From the first round to this sixth and last, 
Cassius seemed to be able to decide at will when he would hold Liston's head 
for easy contemplation, like Yorick's skull, and then chastise it with these 
double-fisted tattoos.

When the champion sat bent and brooding in his corner and failed to come out 
at the bell for the seventh round, and Cassius stood there and went into a 
Morris dance, it was very plain that the champ had been put away. It was, his 
doctor explained, because he had put his shoulder out of joint in the first 
round. A trainer said it was in the fifth. It took a team of doctors and X-rays 
to confirm to-day that Liston had indeed suffered a shoulder injury.

There is the morning after, no place to go for consolation or the retrieve of 
one's dignity. Even Cassius's account of the fight is exactly correct. A 
powerful man was "chopped up" by a faster man. It was, said Cassius, in a burst 
of telepathy, "Sugar Ray Robinson and Jake La Motta over again - I watched the 
movie of that fight over and over for eight months. That's what I've been 
doing. I'm too quick for any heavyweight alive." It was also Sugar Ray and 
Randy Turpin all over again: quicksilver against concrete, Mercury v. the 
Dragon, a live contemptuous picador planting the flags at will in the neck of a 
tottering old bull.

There was no escape from Cassius's needling. He even offered a child's advice 
to men who had been weighing odds before he was born: "You newspaper men made 
it tough on Liston. Don't ever make a seven-to-one favourite. Just let me go in 
even money." Yes, Cassius, yes sir, Massa Clay, anything you say, Massa, you're 
the boss and no mistake.
 