
Jy Hitchcox scored a hat-trick as Castleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> piled more misery on the 
basement side Huddersfield by edging a thriller at The Jungle.

The Tigers went into the match without a host of key players but they dug deep 
to inflict an eighth defeat of the season on last season’s play-off 
semi-finalists Huddersfield.

Catalans Dragons’ winning run continues with defeat of wilting Widnes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/02/catalans-dragons-widnes-vikings-super-league-match-report>
Mike McMeeken scored two tries for the hosts in a man-of-the-match performance 
while Greg Minikin and Jake Webster each scored once. The Giants winger 
Jermaine McGillvary crossed for a treble on his 200th career appearance, Leroy 
Cudjoe scored twice and Sam Rapira also went over but Huddersfield were left to 
reflect on yet anotherSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> loss.

The young half-back Tom Holmes, on his full debut, thought he had given 
Castleford the perfect start after pouncing on a dropped ball by Ukuma Ta’ai 
and going 60 metres but the referee, Phil Bentham, ruled there were two 
knock-ons.

Instead it was Huddersfield who took the lead in scrappy fashion as Danny 
Brough’s grubber kick ricocheted back to him and Michael Lawrence’s pass found 
Cudjoe via the floor for a simple try.

The Giants targeted Castleford’s left edge again soon after and the Tigers 
were grateful for McGillvary spilling the ball over the line.

Huddersfield had enjoyed the better of the opening exchanges but Castleford 
were back level when Luke Gale’s pinpoint cross-field kick was plucked out of 
the air and touched down by McMeeken.

The back-rower then turned provider just before the half-hour mark with a neat 
offload to put Minikin over in the corner.

The Tigers were growing in confidence and looked as if they had crossed for a 
third unanswered try through Hitchcox only for play to be pulled back for a 
forward pass by Jake Webster.

Huddersfield drew level courtesy of McGillvary’s try from Cudjoe’s pass but 
Castleford edged ahead again on the half-time hooter as Hitchcox raced over in 
the corner after collecting Webster’s offload.

Brough endured a difficult opening 40 minutes with ball in hand but he is 
always a threat on the last tackle and it was his brilliant cross-field kick 
that allowed McGillvary to touch down in the corner for his second. Brough made 
no mistake with his conversion to make it 18-16 to Huddersfield but the home 
side were back in front when McMeeken took Holmes’ delayed pass to crash over.

While both sides were enjoying themselves in attack they were struggling in 
defence, something Cudjoe underlined by taking advantage of weak defence to 
stroll over.

Brough was again on target with the boot to restore Huddersfield’s lead, which 
became an eight-point advantage when the stand-off converted Rapira’s powerful 
effort.

The pattern of the match suggested Castleford were not out of it and they 
scored the crucial next try through Hitchcox from Gale’s long pass.

Huddersfield’s confidence began to wobble, befitting a side short on 
confidence and they were left chasing the game again after Webster ran over the 
top of Ryan Brierley before diving over to score.

The Giants appeared to be out of it when Hitchcox crossed in the corner for 
his hat-trick but McGillvary did likewise a minute later to set up a rousing 
finish. Huddersfield piled pressure on Castleford in the closing stages but the 
home side held on to avenge three defeats against these opponents in 2015.
 