
The Castleford captain, Luke Gale, is hopeful that a good Easter showing can 
catapult him into the thinking of the new England coach, Wayne Bennett, for 
this year’sFour Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>.

After impressing in 2015, Gale was unlucky not to get a chance for England in 
the Test series against New Zealand. He was selected for the squad by Steve 
McNamara, but failed to play a game. After Bennett’s appointment last month 
Gale is confident that performances such as the one he producedagainst Leeds on 
Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/castleford-leeds-super-league-match-report>
can help him secure an England start.

“It’s mad how one game can change things, as I was getting abuse for my 
performances last week, and now people are mentioning the word England to me 
again all of a sudden,” he says.

“There’s a lot of good half-backs in this country and the competition is 
fierce. However, there’s a new coach in charge now, and hopefully I’m turning 
his head and making him see what I can do.

“It’s a clean slate for everyone you’d hope with him. It was disappointing to 
just miss out last year after being in the squad, but if I can keep turning in 
good performances, I might catch his eye eventually. It’s still a dream to get 
that England cap. That hasn’t changed and it never will.”

In the 18-14 win over Leeds, Gale laid the platform for Castleford to end 
their three-game losing run inSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>, and the busy Easter period 
continues for them with a daunting game at Catalans on Monday afternoon. The 
journey to Perpignan means the Tigers will have had almost no break between 
their two fixtures. At least they will have a longer rest than most for their 
next game, which is at home against Huddersfield, surprisingly bottom of the 
table with one win from seven, on Sunday.

“It’s going to be tough with all the travelling,” he says. “Easter is always 
tough to deal with, but when you’ve got a trip to France to throw into the mix, 
it makes things even harder. There’ll be no time spent relaxing. It’s just a 
case of trying to back up the good work we’ve done against Leeds.

“We identified this as a big period. Our form hasn’t been great lately, but 
the chance to get three quick wins is the opportunity you get presented with at 
Easter and if you put some form together you can rocket back up the table in no 
time.”

As stand-in captain of the club after the season-ending injury to Michael 
Shenton, Gale paid tribute to his side for responding to their poor run. “There 
was a fair bit of soul-searching from the boys, so I’m delighted, as captain, 
to get the result against Leeds,” he says.

“I’m proud of the way we responded because training hasn’t been an easy place 
to be lately. We’ve been asking a lot of questions of ourselves, mentally more 
than physically, but we’ve been brutally honest with each other and we never 
gave in.”
 