
Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> have received the 
full support of the Rugby Football League as they begin potentially 
groundbreaking legal proceedings over the future of Denny Solomona.

The winger, who was Super League’s top try-scorer in 2016, failed to report 
for pre‑season training with the Tigers this month having been linked with a 
move to the rugby union club Sale. Castleford have stated on a number of 
occasions that the 23-year-old, who scored 40 tries last season, is not for 
sale and have rejected three bids for him in recent months.

However, with Solomona now absent without consent and a cross-code switch to 
rugby union increasing in probability, Castleford have enlisted the help of 
Nick Randall QC – whose clients include Wayne Rooney – and a leading 
Leeds-based sports lawyer, Richard Cramer, to begin to build their case.

NRL stars Taumalolo and Holmes to trial for NFL spots in Los Angeles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/nrl-stars-taumalolo-and-holmes-to-trial-for-nfl-spots-in-los-angeles>
It is understood the RFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> sees the case 
as hugely significant for the future of the sport while Castleford are hoping 
to resolve the matter before it potentially reaches the high court.

Sale would not comment when approached by the Guardian and the Tigers have 
been instructed by their legal team not to say anything until the matter is 
resolved. It is understood that Castleford and the RFL should learn within the 
next week whether they have enough evidence to build a case.

Sources close to the RFL have also confirmed that Solomona’s agent is under 
investigation by the game’s governing body. The Guardian called the agent for a 
response but has been unable to make contact.

The Castleford chief executive, Steve Gill, insisted last month that Solomona 
was not for sale. “Denny’s got a two‑year contract with the club,” he said.

“We’ve rebuffed three approaches for him, two from rugby union and one from 
league and nothing has changed from that. Our stance is that he’s not for sale 
and we expect Denny back in on 7 November for the start of pre-season training 
with the first-team squad.”
 