
It may not be Super League’s biggest derby but lately games between Leeds and 
Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> always seem to have 
the feel of a big occasion. Throw in a capacity crowd, the first game of the 
exciting Easter period, and a dramatic finish to boot, and you have all the 
ingredients of another enthralling chapter in their rivalry.

These sides have rarely served up poor games in recent years, especially since 
the former Leeds coach Daryl Powell assumed control at Castleford, and with 
this one played under the lights at their famous old Wheldon Road ground, it 
always promised to be something special.

For Castleford this was as much a chance to get one over their local rivals as 
it was about answering some of their critics. Although the season is still 
embryonic, three defeats in a row had led some to question whether the Tigers 
were top-four candidates this year.

A victory over a Leeds side who have only two wins from their first seven 
games does not completely silence those doubters, but given their significant 
problems with injuries this was a match to cherish for Powell’s men – 
especially after their 56-12 defeat at Warrington.

“That was probably the biggest win since I’ve been at the club, just because 
of where we’re at,” Powell said. “We’ve been in a really tough place and before 
the game I asked the players individually to do something special and they 
certainly delivered that.”

Leeds were admittedly without some key men, including their captain Danny 
McGuire, but this still seemed like another step backwards for the reigning 
champions, who remain two points off the foot of the table in what is becoming 
an increasingly worrying start to the season with a fifth defeat already.

Warrington’s Chris Sandow exorcises demons to stun Leeds in curtain-raiser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/04/leeds-rhinos-warrington-wolves-super-league-match-report>
“I thought we were off at the start,” said the Leeds coach, Brian McDermott. 
“After that I thought we gave it a real go. I don’t have too much of an issue 
with the loss but I’m encouraged we gave it some guts.”

As he has been for the past 12 months, Castleford’s best player was the 
half-back Luke Gale, whose reputation was enhanced again. He played a key role 
in all three of their tries, the first two of which put them into a 12-0 lead. 
It was his pass which allowed Andy Lynch to dive over, and then the 
scrum-half’s instinctive break freed Denny Solomona, who set up Jake Webster 
for the first of his two tries.

Leeds led at the interval thanks to a purple patch that resulted in three 
tries in 14 minutes: although there was certainly an element of controversy to 
the final one.

Joel Moon’s try was backed up by Kallum Watkins finishing off Carl Ablett’s 
charging run but Liam Sutcliffe hooked the second conversion attempt wide – 
something that would prove crucial. It meant Leeds trailed 12-10 but they been 
ahead at the interval thanks to a Tom Briscoe try that looked like it came from 
a forward pass.

St Helens’ Shannon McDonnell ready for another bruising Wigan derby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/st-helens-shannon-mcdonnell-braced-for-another-bruising-wigan-derby>
Sutcliffe again missed the conversion, and how Castleford made him and Leeds 
pay for his inaccuracy. In a second half largely built around drama and defence 
– with Zak Hardaker’s outstanding last-ditch tackle on Solomona the highlight – 
the home side came up with the telling play eight minutes from time, when Gale 
sent Webster crashing over to complete another memorable match for the Tigers 
and their fans.

Castleford Solomona; Monaghan, Crooks, Webster, Hitchcox; Hampshire, Gale; 
Lynch, Milner, Boyle, Millington, McMeeken, Massey.Interchange McShane, 
Springer, Maher, Minikin.

Tries Lynch, Webster 2. Goals Gale 3.

Leeds Hardaker; Briscoe, Watkins, Moon, Handley; Sutcliffe, Burrow; Galloway, 
Falloon, Cuthbertson, Ablett, Ferres, Jones-Buchanan.Interchange Lilley, 
Mullally, Walters, Keinhorst.

Tries Moon, Watkins, Briscoe. Goals Sutcliffe.

Referee J Child. Attendance 11,426.

Widnes Vikings and another unlikely sporting fairytale | Aaron Bower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/widnes-vikings-super-league-rugby-leicester-city> 