
Given how the Super 8s was beginning to look like a non-event several weeks 
ago, this was arguably the most telling of a string of results over the past 
fortnight which could yet set up an intriguing second half of theSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> season.

The chasm this year between the top four and the rest has often been as wide 
as six points, leading many to fear that there would be a worrying amount of 
essentially meaningless games over the next few months.

However, with this their fourth defeat in a row, Catalans Dragons’ alarming 
drop‑off in form has brought them closer and closer into view of the quartet 
behind them before the split.

Rangi Chase determined to repay faith in second spell at Castleford Tigers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/rangi-chase-honoured-castleford-catalans-rugby-league>
There have been plenty of occasions this year where the Dragons have looked 
like genuine contenders for the Super League Grand Final in October, but the 
past month or so has been more reminiscent of the Catalans side who have so 
often underachieved in the past – and they were once again way below par here.

In the immediate term, this result appears to have more of a bearing on 
Catalans than it does for Castleford, who at least killed off any lingering 
doubts over their participation in the Super 8s with the victory. Yet although 
it is St Helens who seem to benefit most from this – they are now two points 
adrift of the fourth-placed Dragons –Castleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> are only seven points short of 
the four with 18 points left to play for this year.

It will take an unlikely run of form to make the semi-finals from this point 
but if the Tigers perform like they did here for the rest of the season it 
would be hard to completely rule it out.

“You can never say never about the top four,” said Daryl Powell, the 
Castleford coach. “It’s a tough ask, of course, but in the eight you’re all 
playing each other, all taking points off each other and we’ll keep giving it a 
real go.

“We were a little bit scratchy at times but we’ve got to be happy we’ve been 
able to get the two points that releases a bit of pressure on us and gives us 
an opportunity to kick on for the rest of the season.”

With as many as 12 first-team players out injured, it was widely expected 
Powell would hand a debut to Rangi Chase after he returned last week to his 
former club on a deal until the end of the season.

Instead, Powell’s biggest talking point was the inclusion of the Wigan loanee 
Ryan Hampshire, a half-back by trade, on the wing. Hampshire has fallen out of 
favour at Castleford of late, but with two well-taken tries in the first half 
here he has undoubtedly played himself in contention for a longer run in the 
side over the coming weeks.

“I got a text from him this week saying he’d play anywhere he needed to for 
the team,” Powell said. “I thought it was a great effort from him.” His tries, 
either side of a Justin Horo score, put Castleford 8-6 in front: a lead they 
would not surrender for the rest of the game.

Further tries from Frankie Mariano and Paul McShane – the former the pick of 
the afternoon as the forward raced 40 metres to the line, showing the pace of 
an outside back – put the hosts 20-6 in front at the break, and that lead 
rarely looked in trouble throughout the whole of the second half.

Fouad Yaha’s score six minutes after the restart would only restore the 
deficit back to 14 after Luke Dorn’s try two minutes earlier, and Dorn’s second 
alongside a superb effort from Oliver Holmes put the Tigers in complete control.

Late tries from Rémi Casty and Julian Bousquet at least added a touch more 
respectability to the scoreline for the Dragons but their season is now in 
danger of declining at a rate of knots.

“There’s some obvious concern about our form,” said Laurent Frayssinous, the 
Catalans coach. “It’s up to me to find a solution because at the moment, we 
simply can’t win games.”

Castleford Dorn; Hampshire, Crooks, Minikin, Solomona; McShane, Gale; Tickle, 
Milner, Patrick, Holmes, Moors, Massey.Interchange Millington, Mariano, Cook, 
Springer.

Tries Hampshire 2, Mariano, McShane, Dorn 2, Holmes. Goals Gale 5.

Catalans Dragons Escaré; Broughton, Gigot, Duport, Yaha; Bosc, Myler; Maria, 
Da Costa, Casty, Taylor, Horo, Garcia.Interchange Bousquet, Pélissier, Mounis, 
Navarrete.

Tries Horo, Yaha, Casty, Bousquet. Goals Bosc 4.

Referee M Woodhead (RFL). Attendance 5,886.
 