
Shooter Catherine Skinner has continued Australia’s blistering start to the 
Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> with gold in 
the women’s trap event on day two of action in Rio.

Skinner hit 12 of 15 targets in the gold medal contest against New Zealand’s 
Natalie Rooney, coming back from an early deficit to claim a third gold medal 
of the Games for Australia so far.

Mack Horton speaks out after golden swim as unrest poisons Rio pool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/mack-horton-speaks-out-gold-medal-rio-2016>
The Victorian, who had earlier scraped into the semi-finals, secured a 12-11 
victory, despite missing her first shot in the final.

“I’ve been there before where I have fallen to pieces, so it’s all a learning 
curve and thankfully it’s paid off – I’ve got the medal,” said Skinner, who had 
showed strong form coming into the Games, placing fifth in the Rio test event.


“I just tried to remember to breathe. It was such a big shock [to win] and the 
realisation of it still hasn’t hit.”

Skinner becomes the first Australian to win gold in a shooting event since 
Suzanne Balogh in Athens 12 years ago.


Australia picked up their first two golds on the opening night in Rio when 
Mack Horton and the women’s 4x100m freestyle relay team won in the swimming 
pool.

Midway through day two, Australia still topped the medal table after Maddison 
Keeney and Anabelle Smith added another to the tally with bronze in the 
synchronised 3m springboard diving event.

The pair came third behind winners China’s Shi Tingmao and Wu Minxia and 
silver medallists Tania Cagnotto and Francesca Dallape of Italy.

In rugby sevens, Australia’s women continued their charge towards a medal, 
reaching the semi-finals with a 24-0 win over Spain at Deodoro Stadium.

The comprehensive victory for the reigning world champions followed a surprise 
12-12 draw with the US earlier in the day in their final group match. Tim 
Walsh’s side next face Canada in the semi-finals.

“Today we grinded out wins which is what good teams need to do,” Walsh said. 
“In any tournament the quarter-final’s always the big one, but now we’re 
playing for a medal. And we’re not happy with a bronze or a silver.”

There was less success in the canoe slalom, with world No4 Lucien Delfour 
crashing out of the K1 in controversial circumstances in Sunday. Delfour 
disputed the call to penalise him 50 points for missing a gate but his appeal 
was turned down.

Countryman Ian Borrows earned a spot in the semis with a penalty-free heat.


Liz Cambage again led the women’s basketball team to victory as the Opals 
brought up their second win in Group A, a tight 61-56 victory over Turkey. 
Cambage top scored with 22 points and grabbed a game-high 11 rebounds before 
quickly turning her focus to the upcoming match against France.

 “We grinded out the whole game,” she said. “We get to rest up tomorrow and 
then we take on France. I’m a little bit haunted by London. We lost a game in 
overtime to France. I might have a little bit of a chip on my shoulder coming 
into this game. Every game’s tough; there are no easy games. We can’t just 
relax. It’s the best of the best here.”

Australia’s gold medal favourite men’s hockey team crashed to a 1-0 loss 
against 11th-ranked Spain in one of the upsets of the Games so far. The 
Kookaburras were undone by a 7th minute goal from Alex Casasayas, who put away 
a cross from Marc Salles. For an extended period of this encounter Spain played 
with nine men after receiving a pair of green cards, but the underwhelming 
Australians failed to capitalise. Having just scraped past New Zealand in their 
first game, the Kookaburras will need to bounce back quickly against Belgium on 
Tuesday.

Samantha Stosur made a winning start in the women’s singles at the tennis, 
overcoming a slow start to down Latvia’s Jelena Ostapenko. But Daria Gavrilova 
had the misfortune to come up against world No1 Serena Williams in the opening 
round and was dealt a 6-4, 6-2 defeat.

 * Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
 