
German investigators believe Anis Amri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/police-raid-flats-in-search-for-berlin-truck-attack-suspect-anis-amri>
 is still in hiding in Berlin, as CCTV footage appears to show the suspect in 
Monday night’struck attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-a-graphical-guide-to-what-we-know-so-far>
 on a Christmas market seeking refuge at a mosque in the Moabit district of the 
German capital.

The newspaper Tagesspiegel reported on Friday that a witness had seen the 
24-year-old Tunisian flee the scene of the attack with severe cuts to his face. 
Police believe his injuries make Amri too easily recognisable to risk 
travelling outside the capital.

Sadness and defiance mark the reopening of Breitscheidplatz market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/sadness-and-defiance-mark-the-reopening-of-breitscheidplatz-market>
CCTV footage released by the broadcaster RBB appears to show Amri outside a 
mosque in Moabit on the night after the attack, as well as a few days earlier, 
on 14 and 15 December.

The mosque on Perleberger Strasse is connected to the Fussilet 33 association, 
which has in the past been under police surveillance because of alleged 
attempts to recruit new members for Islamic State. The mosque was raided by 
police on Thursday but no arrests were made.

The mosque on Perleberger Strasse is a 15-minute walk from the site of 
Thyssenkrupp, where Polish truck driver Łukasz Urban was due to drop off his 
cargo on Monday.

The surveillance footage obtained by RBB suggests Amri had not slipped off the 
security services’ radar as previously assumed, but in fact was able to prepare 
Monday’s attacks under the noses of investigators.

On Thursday night, the German federal prosecutor said Amri’s fingerprints had 
been found on the outside of the Polish-registered articulated truck, on the 
driver’s door and on the vertical support beam in the vehicle’s window area. 
Germany’s interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, said it was “highly probable” 
that Amri had carried out the attack.

In Tunisia, two of Amri’s brothers, Walid and Abdelkader, said they believed 
he may have been radicalised by radical Islamists while he spent almost four 
years behind bars in Italy.


“He doesn’t represent us or our family,” Abdelkader told Sky News Arabia. “He 
went into prison with one mentality and when he came out he had a totally 
different mentality.”

Italian authorities said Amri had been a problematic inmate. The justice 
ministry said he had repeatedly been admonished and transferred among Sicilian 
prisons for bad conduct. Prison records say he bullied inmates and tried to 
spark insurrections.

In all, Amri was held in six different prisons on Sicily, serving three and a 
half years for starting a fire at a refugee centre and making threats, among 
other charges. But Italy apparently recorded no signs that Amri was becoming 
radicalised.


Amri had reached Italy in 2011, along with tens of thousands of other 
Tunisians men who arrived by boat during the Arab spring.


The suspected involvement of a migrant – one of more than a million allowed 
intoGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> in the past two years – 
in the attack has intensified political pressure on Angela Merkel, who plans to 
seek a fourth term as chancellor in elections next year.

Armin Schuster, of her Christian Democratic party, told the broadcaster NDR: 
“We need to send the signal: only set off for Germany if you have a reason for 
asylum.”
 