
Neil Lennon has more cause than most to fret about this week's international 
fixtures. A consequence of Celtic's multi-national squad is that, on occasions 
such as the coming days, a batch of players depart to represent their country. 
Already, Efe Ambrose is featuring for Nigeria at the African Cup of Nations.

For Lennon, the spectre of the Champions League last 16, first-leg match 
against Juventus on 12 February means he will view this particular schedule of 
fixtures with trepidation. It already seems certain that Celtic will field a 
shadow team for Saturday's trip to Inverness, aside from the goalkeeper Fraser 
Forster who again missed out atRaith Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/raith> because of a neck problem.

"Is it a worry to have so many players away on international duty? Yes," 
Lennon conceded. "Of all the weeks to have international games – I don't know 
who decides or puts these dates in place. We have got the biggest game in four 
or five years at the club coming and we have players all over the world.

"It's a concern. We've got at least seven or eight players away but I will 
make changes for Inverness next weekend. I'll keep the big boys thriving for 
the Juventus game."

Four of Celtic's squad – Kris Commons, James Forrest, Charlie Mulgrew and 
Scott Brown – are in Gordon Strachan's first Scotland party, for the meeting 
with Estonia in Aberdeen. "I have spoken to Gordon about the Scottish players 
and he understands my situation," Lennon added. "I have every trust in Gordon 
to deal with that properly.

"I haven't asked him not to play anyone. James could do with some game-time, 
Kris might need a wee run-out. Scott and Charlie have played all season. I'll 
leave that up to Gordon. I'm not going to pick his team for him."

There was, however, no cause for Celtic anxiety here as they eased into the 
quarter-finals of theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>. Commons earned and scored 
the opening goal with a penalty, which was disputed by the penalised Simon 
Mensing. "He went down too easily and I know that for a fact," Mensing said. 
"I'm really disappointed with it. There was minimal contact but Commons is 
clever."

The visitors scored two late counter-atacking goals through Forrest and 
Mulgrew. Forrest's intervention was especially notable, on what marked his 
latest return from injury. "James is a wonderful talent," added Lennon. "One of 
the best Scottish players the country has produced for a long time.

"He's been training great and we've been desperate to get him in – but the 
physios have been holding him back. He got a few minutes today and we hope he 
will get some game-time with Scotland this week.

"We hope he will play at Inverness next week and we can get him ready for 
Juventus – which we have tried to do with the whole squad.

"Basically since after the winter break we have had this huge game looming on 
the horizon and we've tried to keep the squad healthy."

Man of the match Charlie Mulgrew (Celtic)
 