
Celtic won themselves a fourth-round trip to St Johnstone or Dunfermline after 
this routine victory at a cold and frostyStranraer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stranraer> last night, the Premier League 
leaders quickly taking the initiative and defiantly holding it throughout.

Martin O'Neill's side, back on competitive duty after their winter break, 
created two openings inside two minutes. Ramon Vega's cross was headed goalward 
by Henrik Larsson but Mark McGeown was down low to his left to turn the ball 
around the post. And from the resulting corner Vega fired Bobby Petta's cross 
over the bar from six yards.

Stranraer were under intense pressure from the start and the referee Stuart 
Dougal added to it when he awardedCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> a free-kick after deciding that 
Keith Knox had brought down Petta. Neil Lennon angled the ball to the far post 
and Vega again got on the end of it but headed over.

However, the Celtic defence was opened in the 15th minute and Stranraer could 
have taken a sensational lead. Ian Harty played Paul Walker clean through and 
he cut inside Joos Valgaeren before unleashing a right-foot effort which Robert 
Douglas saved low to his right.

Celtic, however, were always in control and took the lead in the 23th minute. 
Lennon's cross was headed goalward by Vega and, though it was destined for the 
back of the net, the Belgium international Valgaeren made sure with a header at 
the back post.

McGeown was being kept busy and in the 28th minute he prevented a second when 
he saved Larsson's header from Lennon's cross. And three minutes before the 
interval the visitors again went within inches after Paul Blair was booked for 
sending the impressive Petta sprawling. Lennon floated in the free-kick and 
Larsson watched his close-range volley rebound from the bar.

Stranraer's hopes of making a name for themselves were shattered in the 51st 
minute when Celtic produced a classy move to double their lead. Chris Sutton 
played the ball inside to Larsson, who squared the ball for Jackie McNamara to 
blast home a right-foot shot.

They scored another four minutes later. Petta's dangerous cross was fired into 
his own net by Knox, who was sporting a bandaged head after a collision with 
Vega.

Shortly after the hour O'Neill sent on Lubo Moravcik and Paul Lambert, for 
whom it was a first appearance in Scotland since being injured in November. 
McNamara looked certain to score his second goal of the game after an 
inch-perfect through-ball from Moravcik but McGeown was quickly off his line to 
deny him.

Stranraer did find the net in the 84th minute when Harty took advantage of 
some sloppy defending on the Celtic left, but within a minute Moravcik restored 
the three-goal margin when his shot squeezed under McGeown's body and over the 
line.

 Fourth-round draw: Berwick or Hearts v Dundee or Falkirk; Motherwell v Dundee 
United; Queen of the South or Airdrie v Peterhead; St Johnstone or Dunfermline 
v Celtic; Stirling Albion v Hibernian; Inverness Caledonian Thistle v 
Kilmarnock; Ross County v Rangers; Livingston v Aberdeen.
 