
Celtic's lead in the Scottish Premier League is such that not even complacency 
represents a danger to them. They are in the midst of the longest title-winning 
party in history.

That margin over Rangers, whose troubles are an apparently continued cause for 
celebration among the Celtic support, now stands at 20 points. Lennon's team 
have equalled the 13-game winning streak in all competitions last achieved by 
Martin O'Neill'sCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> side of 
2003-4.

"I couldn't ask for any more from the players. I am very proud of them," said 
the manager Neil Lennon. "I have told them not to spoil this run, not to let it 
get away. Something like this might only happen once in your career."

Dunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> Athletic have 
more negative matters to concern themselves with. They arrived in Glasgow as 
the favourites for relegation and left boosted only by the fact their nearest 
rivals, Hibernian, lost by the odd goal in seven at Motherwell.

"Celtic were the better side," conceded their manager Jim McIntyre. "I'm not 
going to say on the balance of chances made that we deserved something from the 
game, because we didn't."

The size of Celtic's squad renders rotation a perfectly reasonable concept, 
their championship advantage aside. Lennon duly freshened his team up here. Yet 
Dunfermline could have handed Celtic an early shock. Only poor control from 
Liam Buchanan meant the forward did not, as should have been the case, hand his 
team-mate Kyle Hutton a glorious opportunity to open the scoring.

Celtic's response was immediate. Gary Hooper latched on to an Anthony Stokes 
pass but the forward was denied, when clean through on goal, by an excellent 
save from Chris Smith.

Their opening goal arrived in more spectacular circumstances. Charlie Mulgrew 
has not only proved a defensive revelation for Lennon this season, he has 
chipped in with important goals. Few of them have been routine: a fierce 
30-yard shot which flew past Smith was the latest of them. Kris Commons passed 
up two chances to double that lead before the break.

Stokes and Hooper seemed to use the start of the second half to conduct a 
competition as to who could miss the most glaring opportunity. The former 
screwed wide from six yards, with his strike partner blazing wildly over the 
bar from a similar range. Scott Brown was more accurate, but Smith smartly 
saved the Celtic captain's effort after 66 minutes.

Hooper at least atoned for his earlier profligacy by setting up Celtic's 
second goal. The forward sent over a cross from the right flank which eluded 
everyone except the substitute James Forrest at the back post. The young winger 
could not miss, and he did not.
 