
Celtic’s lead at the top of the Premiership was cut to four points after a 
goalless draw withDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> at 
Parkhead where the home side was booed off.

The Dundee manager, Paul Hartley, with one eye on the William Hill Scottish 
Cup quarter-final tie with Rangers at Ibrox on Saturday, started with his 
captain, Gary Harkins, top scorer, Kane Hemmings, and Greg Stewart on the bench 
and enjoyed a comfortable night against the lacklustre Hoops.

The visiting defender Kostadin Gadzhalov missed a sitter with his head late in 
the game which would have given the Taysiders all three points. With Aberdeen 
beating Dundee United 1-0 at Tannadice, the title race is back on.

In the five changes the Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> 
manager, Ronny Deila, made, the goalkeeper Craig Gordon returned and the 
18-year-old attacker Patrick Roberts made his first start since signing an 
18-month loan deal from Manchester City.

Roberts showed his promise as early as the third minute when he drifted past 
Kevin Holt and Gadzhalov only to see his drive blocked by Julen Etxabeguren.

Dundee looked comfortable as the match unfolded although the Celtic striker 
Leigh Griffiths had three unsuccessful attempts on goal. Scott Bain made a save 
from a Charlie Mulgrew free-kick on the half-hour following a trip by the 
Dundee defender Paul McGinn on Armstrong.

In the 36th minute, after making a save, the Dundee keeper miskicked 
completely at the edge of his box attempting to clear a Michael Lustig pass. 
This left Griffiths looking to tap into the unguarded goal but Paul McGinn came 
to rescue with a saving tackle. The home side were booed off at half-time.

The winger James Forrest, who has rejected a new contract offer, replaced 
Stuart Armstrong for the start of the second half but there was no discernible 
improvement. Gordon had to make a save from Craig Wighton’s shot on the turn 
from 12 yards as the Dees became emboldened.

In the 80th minute Kris Commons replaced Mikael Lustig for Deila’s last throw 
of the dice but it was Gadzhalov who somehow missed the goal from six yards 
from a Stewart corner. Dundee’s Harkins then slashed wide in the fourth of four 
added minutes before the final whistle brought jeers raining down on the home 
side.
 