
Scott Brown and Kris Commons each scored two goals as Celtic won 5-2 against 
Aberdeen at Celtic Park but Dundee United's draw at Inverness means the Dons 
have claimed a European place next season and a top-three finish, although
Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> closed the gap to 
one point in the race for second.

Adam Matthews twice teed-up Brown in the first half, either side of giving 
Niall McGinn an easy equaliser, and Anthony Stokes put Celtic further in front 
early in the second half.Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> played their part in an 
entertaining game and Shaleum Logan soon pulled them back into it with an 
excellent solo goal. But the Dons were denied a penalty when Jonny Hayes fell 
under the challenge of Efe Ambrose and Commons took his goal count for the 
season to 30 with two goals.

Motherwell moved six points clear of Dundee United in the race for third place 
in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> after a 2-1 win 
over St Johnstone at Fir Park. Lionel Ainsworth gave Motherwell the lead early 
on before Dave MacKay headed Saints level midway through the first half. 
Stephen McManus got the decisive goal in controversial circumstances before 
half-time, his headed effort adjudged to have crossed the line before being 
punched clear by defender Steven Anderson. The win sees Motherwell all but 
secure third place with just two games left.

Gregg Wylde's superb 79th-minute strike gave St Mirren their third victory in 
four games as he sealed a 1-0 win overRoss County. Saints are now closer to a 
ninth consecutive season in the top flight.

Dundee United's hopes of finishing third remain alive after they came from 
behind to draw 1-1 withInverness. United are six points behind Motherwell with 
two games to go, but do have a better goal difference. United fell behind to 
Ryan Christie's early opener for Caley Thistle, yet they picked up in the 
second half, with Farid El Alagui's strike earning them a deserved point.

Dundee beat Dumbarton 2-1 at Dens Park to win the Championship title and earn 
promotion to the Scottish Premiership despite second-placedHamilton beating 
Morton 10-2 and levelling the goal difference with Dundee. A Dumbarton 
equaliser would have taken Accies up, but Dundee held on.Rangers ended their 
League One season undefeated with a 1-1 draw atDunfermline.
 