
Borussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> arrived in 
Glasgow depleted but left with three points. Celtic’s hopes of even a Europa 
League place beyond Christmas were thereby dealt a severe blow, the most 
jarring thing for Brendan Rodgers perhaps the vast gulf between the supposedly 
disjointed Bundesliga team and their hitherto buoyant hosts.

Curiously, in a game where one team’s overall dominance was so pronounced, 
there was a fall guy. Kolo Touré was horribly culpable for both of 
Mönchengladbach’s goals, with Rodgers forced to defend the former Liverpool 
player thereafter. “Nobody will be more disappointed than Kolo,” theCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager said. “Tonight will hurt 
him. But he is a warrior, he is mentally tough and he will recover.”

Barcelona v Manchester City: Champions League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/19/barcelona-v-manchester-city-champions-league-live>
Touré himself remarked that, despite being 35, he had made the errors of a 
16-year-old. “In this kind of competition you can’t afford to make those kind 
of mistakes,” he admitted.

Celtic lacked creativity, purpose and, ultimately, were error-strewn in 
defence. How Mönchengladbach gleefully took advantage, insucceeding where 
Manchester City could not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/28/celtic-v-manchester-city-champions-league-live>
. Rodgers can only hope for a brisk turnaround by the time this pair meet in 
Germany on November 1, otherwise bottom place in Group C almost inevitably 
awaits.

“The better team won, we have no complaints,” Rodgers said. “The disappointing 
thing is that we gifted them two goals. But we are building something here; 
sometimes we will meet teams who are better than us.”

Rodgers was otherwise left to reflect on exactly what inroads Celtic can 
legitimately make in this competition without spending vast sums. “There are 
still elements we need to compete consistently at this level,” he said.

The visitors, backed by a wonderfully boisterous support, opened by far the 
brighter team. That match flow was never to alter. The pick of three attacks 
within the first five minutes saw André Hahn sent marauding through on goal, 
only a fine Toure challenge denying the striker.

Mönchengladbach’s promise was all the more worthy of credit given the 
makeshift nature of their team and stuttering domestic form. Craig Gordon was 
soon required to halt the Germans, as he did with a fine low stop to deny 
Ibrahima Traoré and with acrobatics to bat away a Jonas Hofmann attempt.

With 45 minutes played, Celtic were toiling to impose themselves. Solace could 
be taken only from the fact Mönchengladbach had not endorsed their superiority 
with a goal. This did a disservice to André Schubert’s team, who were slick and 
brilliantly accurate with passes when in Celtic territory. The half-time 
scoreline could have been even less reflective of play had Scott Sinclair not 
spurned a glorious chance two minutes before the break. Tom Rogic created the 
opportunity with a terrific, angled pass.

The interval did not stem Mönchengladbach’s confidence. Tobias Strobl curled 
narrowly wide of Gordon’s left hand post, eight minutes after the restart.

Home resistance was not long in being breached. Touré, when trying to shepherd 
the ball out of play, had his pocket picked by Hahn. From the subsequent 
cut‑back, Lars Stindl lashed the ball through Gordon’s legs and into the net. 
For all Toure was casual, nobody could dispute Mönchengladbach’s value for 
their lead. It was almost doubled instantly, Erik Sviatchenko this time saving 
Celtic as Hahn prepared to shoot for goal.

Touré was again culpable in easily conceding possession, this time to the 
impressive Hahn, as the German club added merited gloss. The 26-year-old had 
two defenders in pursuit but could not be caught before firing high past 
Gordon, via the underside of the crossbar.

Mönchengladbach had been strong enough without Celtic playing such a key part 
in their own downfall. The German club saw out the closing stages with blissful 
ease.
 