
Scott Brown scored the only goal of the game as Celtic beat Dundee 1-0 to 
stretch their unbeaten run in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> to seven matches.

The former Scotland international found the net from close range two minutes 
into the second half after the striker Moussa Dembélé initially saw his shot 
blocked. Brown’s second goal of the season condemnedDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> to their third straight league 
defeat.

The win keeps Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> clear at 
the top of the table while Dundee continue to struggle, having not won in the 
league since the opening day of the season. Looking to amend that poor run of 
form, the Dundee manager Paul Hartley made four changes with Danny Williams, 
Cammy Kerr, Kevin Gomis and Yordi Teijsse coming into the side.

Brendan Rodgers’s side, who earned a 3-3 draw against Manchester City on 
Wednesday, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 almost doubled their lead at Dens Park later on through Dembélé although the 
former Fulham forward was thwarted by the Dundee goalkeeper Scott Bain, who 
ensured a nervous finish, with Dundee midfielder Nick Ross squandering two late 
free-kicks.

Celtic end Manchester City’s winning run with thrilling Champions League draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
Bain made his first save of the afternoon from the Celtic forward Scott 
Sinclair in the eighth minute when he threw himself to his left to push a 
curling shot from 20 yards past the post, before clutching Tom Rogic’s corner 
with confidence.

There followed a penalty appeal when the Dundee full-back Kerr, booked earlier 
for a foul on Rogic, tackled the Celtic centre-back Erik Sviatchenko in the 
home side’s penalty area but the referee, Andrew Dallas, was unimpressed.

The visitors’ grip on the game was firm. Bain pulled a 25-yard free-kick from 
Rogic out of the air at his top left corner in the 22nd minute and then made a 
good save at point-blank range from Sinclair, although Dallas blew for offside.

Three minutes from the break, in a rare Dundee foray, a cross from Fassal El 
Bakhtaoui was headed over at the near post by Teijsse but in added time Bain 
thwarted Sinclair again before Dembélé lofted the ball over.

It was Brown who showed how it should be done just after the break when, after 
getting the ball after initially setting up Dembélé in the penalty area, he 
curled the ball with his left foot into the far corner.

Celtic kept pushing for a second and in the 68th minute Sinclair had another 
effort, this time a low drive saved by Bain. Leigh Griffiths and Patrick 
Roberts had come on for Rogic and James Forrest respectively, adding fresh legs 
to a Celtic side looking fatigued, but while the second goal did not arrive, 
Dundee failed to test Craig Gordon at the other end.

Celtic have not been beaten in the league since May and Rodgers’s men remain 
top of the division after recording back-to-back victories, while Dundee remain 
on six points.

Despite the loss the Dundee manager, Paul Hartley, saw improvement in his team 
from last weeks 3-1 defeat at Inverness. “I was pleased with the reaction from 
the players from last week,” Hartley told BBC Scotland. “They did have a lot of 
possession but they never really cut us open. If we keep performing like that 
we’ll be fine.”

Meanwhile Rodgers emphasised the importance of collecting three points to the 
BBC post-match. “A great game to win that. We had to rest when we had 
possession and we only needed one goal and then we defended well. We’ve showed 
in the last week what a good team we are. ”

Rodgers chose to single out his captain for praise. “If you are looking for a 
midfielder he has everything that you want,” he said of Brown. “He is very 
inspiring for his team-mates. He has shown in the last week what a top player 
he is. I looked at him on Wednesday night. This is a guy who was playing 
against some of the top midfield players in the world in one of the top teams 
in Europe and he dominated the midfield.

“His ability to pass the ball is something we talked to him and the team on, 
about looking after the ball because whether British or Scottish players, you 
can play football, you are not just runners and Scott is a wonderful 
demonstration of that. He is highly gifted technically. He is a wonderful 
captain for me.”
 