
Celtic took full advantage of Rangers' defeat to St Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/24/rangers-st-mirren-match-report>
 on Saturday afternoon, claiming a hard-earned 2-1 win overKilmarnock. Georgios 
Samaras leapt to head a looping Cha Du-ri cross past the keeper Cammy Bell from 
six yards after an evenly matched first half and doubled the Hoops' lead in the 
52nd minute, swerving his way into the box before slamming a low drive past 
Bell. The Killie substitute Danny Racchi fired in a long-range consolation goal 
with three minutes remaining and Victor Wanyama had to block Gary Harkins's 
effort, but Celtic go into Wednesday's game with hopes of topping the table 
come Hogmanay.

Hearts again defied their off-field troubles by moving within six points of 
third-placedMotherwell with a 2-0 win at Tynecastle. Ian Black, who has been 
working as a painter and decorator recently due to Hearts' money problems, 
netted from the edge of the area after 17 minutes and Stephen Elliott tapped in 
a second after 28 minutes following a good David Templeton run, though theHearts
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> full-back Jamie Hamill went off 
on a stretcher midway through the second half.

Jon Daly scored twice as Dundee United came from behind to beat Hibernian 3-1 
at Tannadice. The on-loan Wolves forward Leigh Griffiths gave the hosts a 
first-half lead but Johnny Russell equalised just before the hour mark 
following good work by Gary Mackay-Steven and Stuart Armstrong. Daly headed 
home Paul Dixon's enticing cross in the 76th minute and then slotted home a 
late third.

St Johnstone eased to a 3-0 win at Dunfermline on a nightmare day for the home 
goalkeeper Chris Smith, who punched Liam Craig's corner into his own goal 
before fumbling Marcus Haber's shot straight to Francisco Sandaza, who tapped 
home Saints' second. Sandaza then set up Craig, who left Smith helpless as he 
lofted home the third.

Roman Golobart's first career goal helped Inverness Caledonian Thistle to a 
2-1 home win overAberdeen. The Spanish defender's close-range header on 64 
minutes was followed by Gregory Tade's strike through a crowded area five 
minutes later to double the lead before the substitute Rory Fallon pulled one 
back in the 76th minute.
 