
The Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> midfielder Tom Rogic 
has backed plans to take the club to the United States for a Premiership game 
as it could give Scotland a much-needed boost.

It emerged on Monday that Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> 
are investigating plans that would see them give up a home match against the 
Scottish champions and instead stage it in America.

Reports claim both clubs have held early talks on the proposals, with Boston 
and Philadelphia mentioned as possible Stateside venues.

While they would need the backing of the Scottish Professional Football League 
before playing a match overseas, Rogic believes it would generate fresh 
interest in the game north of the border.

“It’s a good opportunity to expand the game and broadcast Scottish football on 
a world stage,” the Australia international said. “Celtic obviously has a 
massive fan base and it would be fantastic to give some fans over there the 
chance to see us play and hopefully perform.

“There would be a bit of travel involved but we have a few international boys 
that are used to that. You don’t think too much about that, though. The first 
thought is that it would be a positive idea.

“Growing up in Australia I knew about the Old Firm and definitely knew about 
the size of this club, but I guess you could call these plans an innovative way 
to promote the game a little bit more on the world stage.”

Rogic was left out of Australia’s 2018 World Cup qualifier – a 4-0 win away to 
Bangladesh – after suffering tightness in his thigh but Ronny Deila will have 
been pleased to see his playmaker declare himself fit to face Ajax in 
Thursday’s Europa League match at Parkhead.

Celtic must beat their Dutch opponents and then Fenerbahce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/05/celtic-molde-europa-league-match-report>
 in Turkey if they are to avoid slipping out of the tournament.

Deila’s plans have been hit by suspensions to the midfield duo Nir Bitton and 
Stefan Johansen, while he has serious injury concerns for Kris Commons and the 
captain Scott Brown.

“They are important players for us so any team that loses key players could 
possibly feel it,” he said. “But at the same time we have a good squad and 
there is competition for places, so I’m sure whoever plays will be ready.”

Scott Allan, signed from Hibernian earlier this season, could be one of the 
players to benefit if Commons and Brown fail to recover in time, while Rogic 
may be forced to drop into a deeper role to cover for Bitton.
 