
“I held on as long as I could.” Sergio Álvarez Conde was talking about the 
moment, but this was more than a moment. He’d held on, all right: longer, much 
longer, than it looked. It was the 88th minute of the Galician derby, Celta de 
Vigo versus Deportivo de La Coruña, and it was coming up to midnight on Tuesday 
night. Sergio stood on the goalline at Balaídos, staring at the ball on the 
penalty spot, mentally going over his study notes. Behind it stood Haris 
Medunjanin. Celta led 2-1. They had been two minutes from a huge victory, one 
they needed, but now it seemed they were about to be denied. Sergio waited. He 
didn’t go early, he didn’t move. He held on. And then, suddenly, he flew left 
and pushed the penalty past the post.

Balaídos erupted and the chants began. “Sergio! Sergio!” Celta’s players 
embraced and the man they call the Cat of Catoira clenched his fists and 
screamed. At last. This was a new experience for all of them. This was the 
first Galician derby in 18 months and the last time they had played, Mario 
Bermejo memorably declared that Celtahad gone to bed with children and woken up 
covered in piss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/mar/18/celta-vigo-deportivo-la-coruna-mallo-aspas>
. Celta had not beaten Deportivo in seven years and not one of their players on 
Tuesday had ever beaten them.

Relegation for both sides had brought the derby to the Second Division but 
mostly kept them apart and when they did meet Celta could not win. For 14 of 
the starters across the two teams on Tuesday night, this was the first time 
they had even played in a derby. Sergio was one of them. Which would not be 
particularly significant, except that Sergio has been at Celta for 15 years. 
Here he was, the unanimous hero of the biggest game of the year and yet this 
was only his 30th league game for the club and most of those have been as cover 
for injured team-mates. He is 28.

There were occasional cup games, sure, but when it came to the league, 
opportunities have always been limited until now. Sergio made his debut on the 
last day of the season in 2010-11. The season after, injury allowed him 19 
games in the Second Division but still they did not make him first choice. He 
played twice the year after that and just three times last season. When, after 
Tuesday’s game, victory as secure as his new-found status, he said, “I’ve been 
here a long time”, it was no exaggeration. When he called it a “dream I’ve had 
since I was a kid”, that was no exaggeration either.

Born in Catoira, 60 kilometres north of Vigo, a Celta fan and gallego speaker, 
Sergio joined the club at the age of 13 and played at every level. Well, almost 
every level. At 5ft 10in, originally told that he was too small – to which he 
responded “I’ll have to jump higher, then” – he was captain of Celta B but the 
first team mostly resisted. Pinto, Quintana, Esteban, Notario, Falcón, Varas, 
Yoel … all of them played ahead of him; he watched new goalkeepers come and go 
while he waited. He was told to look for another club but didn’t want to: he’d 
enjoy playing in the second team instead. At least it washis team.

Now Sergio has made more saves than any other goalkeeper in the First 
Division. On Saturday, he rescued his team against Atlético Madrid, helping 
clinch a 2-2 draw, despite Atlético’s onslaught; on Tuesday night, he played 
only his tenth First Division game for Celta, 15 years later, one of five 
Galicians who started Galicia’s derby, and he rescued them again. “Sergio 
Reigns in the Derby” ran the headline in AS. “Sergio is the king of Galicia,” 
said El Faro. “Sergio starts a party at Balaídos” said El País.

It wasn’t a great night for a party, in truth. Some took to calling it the 
clásico but playing on a Tuesday night, Week 5 wedged in between Week 4 and 
Week 6 with no buffer, 10 days of games in a row, denied it the buildup that 
sets a derby apart, while a 10 o’clock kick-off prevented lots of fans from 
going and even denied it a match report in some of the morning papers. And even 
the Galician versions of the country’s sports dailies led instead on Cristiano 
Ronaldo. The Deportivo fans who travelled the 160km numbered in the high 
hundreds, and around 6,000 seats sat empty. Given the circumstances, both were 
considered good figures.

Yet it was still a party, still a Galician derby: intense and noisy, and with 
a dramatic ending, the 24,000 there shouting and singing their heads off, 
players stuck on fast-forward, nerves frayed and hearts racing, both managers 
admitting that at times it all happened too quickly for their own good. For 
everyone else, it had been pretty good fun. “A great derby, yes sir,” declared 
AS. “Long Live the Derby!” cheered Marca. On the Deportivo bench was Víctor 
Fernández, the man who has taken charge of more First Division games for Celta 
that anyone else. “It was an extraordinarily intense and exciting derby,” he 
said. “But derbies are games you have to win. Sergio was their hero.”

“I’m delighted to see the fans celebrating. Now we can say that we own 
Galicia,” said Celta’s manager, Eduardo Berizzo, who played under Fernández at 
Balaídos. “It wasn’t easy. And the last-minute penalty gave it a special drama, 
made forclásicos.” Asked if it was even harder to watch a derby than play in 
it, he replied, puffing out his cheeks: “I wouldn’t recommend it to anyone.”

This was a victory Celta needed. Celta have been the better team in Galicia 
for a while now, but a derby victory was necessary to reinforce that sensation. 
Last season they stood alone in the First Division and although Deportivo went 
straight back up for the second time in three seasons, the days of Super Depor 
are long gone and so has all the money. They’re not even Pretty Good Depor now. 
Celta are still in administration but will soon be out the other side, their 
debt cleared; Deportivo have only recently embarked on a recovery plan of their 
own under a new president, Augusto César Lendoiro having departed aquarter of a 
century and many, many meals later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/jan/28/depor-valencia-once-were-warriors>
, and the outcome remains uncertain.

They had arrived heading in different directions. Celta were two points off 
the Champions League places; Deportivo were two points off the relegation zone. 
Celta had just drawn against the league champions, Atlético, and came into the 
match unbeaten; Deportivo had just been battered 8-2 by Real Madrid.

It was only three minutes before Depor were behind again. Nolito scored a 
lovely goal, cutting in from the left to score, running off kissing the badge. 
Depor could not escape; Celta were all over them, not letting them settle. 
There was something familiar about it. The new coach Berizzo, already a manager 
in waiting when he was a player at the club, worked with Marcelo Bielsa and his 
hand can be seen in much of the work they do. The pressure that Celta applied 
last season with Luis Enrique has, if anything, increased. They’re quick and 
aggressive, keen to take possession high and go for the throat.

This was the fifth time they had taken the lead this season in five games. 
Keeping it is a different matter, though. “We were a bit tired by the end,” 
Berizzo admitted. It is a familiar experience; they led against Córdoba, 
Atlético and Real Sociedad but drew all three matches. Something similar 
happened here, or threatened to.

“The second half was ours,” Fernández insisted. That was an exaggeration – his 
Depor team had only three shots on target all game and none between scoring in 
the 55th minute and getting the penalty in the 88th – but Celta were indeed 
pushed back. When the touchline reporter put it to Sergio that Celta had been 
clearly superior afterwards, he admitted: “I don’t know about that. I thought 
it was pretty even.”

Depor got the equaliser, scored by Isaac Cuenca. And although Celta took the 
lead again 20 minutes later when Joaquín Larrivey, outstanding all game, 
thumped in a header and, although he had another chance to make it 3-1, Depor 
came at them. With every passing minute, Sidnei became less a centre-back and 
more a playmaker, driving Depor on from deep, piling forward like a one-man 
stampede until a penalty was won for a handball by Rafael Cabral. The clock 
said 88 minutes and Medunjanin picked up the ball to take the penalty. In front 
of him, Sergio stood waiting.

Talking points

• Real Madrid have now scored 18 goals in a week. A Beatles week, admittedly 
<https://twitter.com/baldypaul/status/514502708477558784>. But still. Five 
against Basel, eight against Depor and now five more against Elche. Madrid 
rotated, leaving out Benzema, Modric and Casillas but still blew Elche apart, 
despite going one down on a night marked by a surreal performance from the 
referee Clos Gómez but marked, above all, and yet again, by Cristiano Ronaldo. 
He got four of Madrid’s five goals, taking his total to eight in eight days. 
This was his 21st league hat-trick, just one off the all-time record, held by 
Telmo Zarra and Alfredo Di Stéfano. Bonkers.

Week four results, from Monday night: Getafe 0-3 Valencia.

Week five results: Real Madrid 5-1 Elche, Celta 2-1 Deportivo

Wednesday: Almería-Atlético, Eibar-Villarreal, Rayo-Athletic, Sevilla-Real 
Sociedad, Granada-Levante, Málaga-Barcelona.

Thursday: Espanyol-Getafe, Valencia-Córdoba.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Barcelona 4 11 12 
2 Valencia 4 8 10 
3 Sevilla 4 5 10 
4 Real Madrid 5 9 9 
5 Celta Vigo 5 3 9 
6 Atletico Madrid 4 2 8 
7 Granada 4 2 8 
8 Villarreal 4 3 7 
9 Eibar 4 1 6 
10 Almeria 4 0 5 
11 Malaga 4 -2 5 
12 Real Sociedad 4 0 4 
13 Deportivo La Coruna 5 -7 4 
14 Elche 5 -8 4 
15 Athletic Bilbao 4 -1 3 
16 Getafe 4 -6 3 
17 Rayo Vallecano 4 -3 2 
18 Espanyol 4 -3 2 
19 Cordoba 4 -4 2 
20 Levante 4 -10 1  