
A group of people seeking to change the way their disability is viewed and 
reported is those who have Tourette syndrome. An aspect of the coverage of what 
is an inherited neurological disorder is the association of the condition with 
swearing.

An online review, published last December, of a comedy show by the duo 
Cassetteboy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/06/cassetteboy-vs-dj-rubbish-review-new-cross-inn-london>
 described their mashup of The Apprentice as showing Alan Sugar “barking 
‘bloody!’ like a Tourette’s sufferer”. Matthew Pountney, co-founder of the 
websiteTouretteshero <http://www.touretteshero.com/>, which aims to celebrate 
and share the creativity and humour of the disorder in an accessible way, 
complained in an email that the line “like a Tourette’s sufferer” should have 
no place in the Guardian.

He wrote: “This is something, as Touretteshero, we do our very best to avoid 
as it reinforces a lot of the stereotypes about Tourette’s that we work hard to 
avoid. In anything relating to what we do, we ask that ‘sufferer’ be replaced 
by ‘person with Tourette’s’. This would be preferable in this instance, but it 
still doesn’t get away from associating Tourette’s with swearing (to make a 
joke).”

Only 10% of the 300,000 or so people who have Tourette syndrome in the UK have 
coprolalia, the technical term for swearing tics,according to the charity 
Tourettes Action <http://www.tourettes-action.org.uk/19-symptoms-of-ts.html>. 
Jessica Thom, the other Touretteshero co-founder, haspreviously written in the 
Guardian in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/09/david-cameron-tourettes-ed-balls>
 about Tourette syndrome being used as a “cheap joke” when it was used by David 
Cameron in an interview. He said that sitting opposite Ed Balls, the then 
shadow chancellor, during prime minister’s questions is“like having someone 
with Tourette’s sitting opposite you” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jan/08/david-cameron-apologises-tourettes-remark>
.

Thom wrote: “For lots of people, Cameron’s casual use of a disability to 
insult another politician will be shocking. For many other people it won’t, 
either because they think Tourette’s is a fair target for jokes because of the 
common misconception that everyone with Tourette’s swears; or perhaps it’s 
because they’re familiar with the government’s abhorrent attitude to disabled 
people.”

As my colleague Rory Foster pointed out in an email to Pountney: “While our 
style guide entry on Tourette syndrome says only that that is what we should 
call it (not Tourette’s syndrome or anything else), in general we do try to 
avoid phrases like ‘suffers from’ in order to avoid stigmatising those with a 
particular condition, disorder etc. For example, our style guide entry on 
disabled people says ‘We aim to use positive language about disability, 
avoiding outdated terms that stereotype or stigmatise. Terms to avoid, with 
acceptable alternatives in brackets, include victim of, suffering from, 
afflicted by…’.”

In guidance notes for journalists written by the team at Touretteshero, Thom 
says that she was diagnosed with Tourette syndrome in 2006. The notes go on to 
say: “Although some aspects of the condition are challenging, Jess does not 
describe herself as a ‘Tourette’s sufferer’ under any circumstances. Instead 
she likes to be referred to as a ‘person with Tourette’s’ or as simply as 
‘having Tourette’s’. She is ‘brave’ for all sorts of reasons, but not because 
she is disabled … Only 10% of people with Tourette’s have coprolalia, the 
technical term for obscene tics. Jess is one of them, but for her such tics 
make up a tiny proportion of what she says involuntarily. Jess considers these 
tics to be part of her condition and as such views any attempts to remove them 
as editing out her disability. However, Jess understands that under some 
circumstances this cannot be avoided.”

I have been planning to write this particular column for some weeks, but other 
subjects forced their way to the front. However, I was prompted to remedy my 
tardy behaviour after Pountney spotted another lapse – arguably a worse one, 
although in fairness the phrase in question is not considered offensive in the 
US, wherethe article containing it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/09/kanye-west-twitter-rant-bill-cosby-innocent>
 was written. The piece, published on 10 February, briefly included the line 
“considering his reputation for spazzing out like a puppy…” in reference to 
Kanye West – until it was spotted by an editor and deleted.

Pountney said he was extremely concerned to see it, adding that “this has made 
me wonder exactly how robust your style guide actually is”. The Guardian’s 
style guide covers a lot of ground and is being constantly updated, but as we 
publish 250,000 words a day some things get through. I apologise for these 
errors, and I am sure colleagues will take note.
 