
The four-time European champions Ajax were the most high-profile casualty in 
theChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
playoffs on Wednesday as they were condemned to the Europa League by a 5-2 
aggregate defeat by FC Rostov.

The Eredvisie runners-up, who last lifted the trophy in 1995, travelled to 
Russia level at 1-1 but fell behind to an opener from the Iran international 
Sardar Azmoun.

Fabian Delph’s header helps Manchester City push past Steaua Bucharest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/manchester-city-steaua-bucharest-champions-league-match-report>
Aleksandr Yerokhin’s goal helped Rostov to take control before Christian Noboa 
and Dmitry Poloz put Dmitri Kirichenko’s team out of sight.

There was still time for the Ajax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> 
captain, Davy Klaassen, to pull one back from the penalty spot after Fedor 
Kudryashov was dismissed for bringing down the substitute Kasper Dolberg but 
the hosts were convincing winners.

Raffael and Thorgan Hazard both scored hat-tricks as Borussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> eased into the 
Champions League group stage with an 8-2 aggregate victory against the Swiss 
side Young Boys.

The Bundesliga club, leading 3-1 from the first leg in Bern, never looked in 
danger of exiting the competition as Hazard’s opener and two quick-fire goals 
from the Brazilian Raffael gave them a 3-0 advantage at the break. Hazard 
tapped home Raffael’s centre to extend the lead before the latter completed his 
treble from close range.

An unstoppable free-kick from the French forward Yoric Ravet pulled one back 
for the visitors but Hazard had the final say as the Belgian turned in a pass 
from the substitute Julian Korb.

A dramatic extra-time winner from El Arabi Hilal Soudani ensured Dinamo 
Zagreb’s place in Europe’s top competition at the expense of the Austrian club 
Red Bull Salzburg.

Salzburg looked to be heading through after the Austria international 
Valentino Lazaro lashed them into a 2-1 aggregate lead with a spectacular 
strike off the woodwork.

Junior Fernandes had other ideas, though, and the Chilean forward silenced the 
home crowd by finishing at the back post in the 87th minute after good work by 
the substitute Gordon Schildenfeld to force an additional 30 minutes.

Soudani then settled the tie five minutes into extra-time, the Algerian 
forward nodding home at the second attempt after his initial effort was kept 
out by the Salzburg goalkeeper Alexander Walke.

In the night’s other play-off clash, FC Copenhagen needed a late goal to edge 
past the Cypriot club Apoel Nicosia.

The Paraguayan Federico Santander scored four minutes from time to cancel out 
Pieros Sotiriou’s 69th-minute opener and send the Danish champions through 2-1 
on aggregate.

Champions League draw

Pot 1: Real Madrid (holders), Barcelona, Leicester City, Bayern Munich, 
Juventus, Benfica, PSG, CSKA Moscow

Pot 2: Atlético Madrid, Borussia Dortmund, Arsenal, Manchester City, Sevilla, 
Porto, Napoli, Bayer Leverkusen

Pot 3: FC Basel, Tottenham Hotspur, Dynamo Kiev, Lyon, PSV Eindhoven, Sporting 
CP, Club Brugge, Borussia Mönchengladbach

Pot 4: Celtic, AS Monaco, Besiktas, Legia Warsaw, Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dinamozagreb>, Ludogorets Razgrad, FC 
Copenhagen, Rostov
 