
The champions, Leeds, beat fellow strugglers Huddersfield 20-16 to earn their 
first victory of theSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>
 season and keep the Giants pointless.

The injury-hit sides went into the Headingley Carnegie meeting occupying the 
bottom two places in the table and the game was true to the form book.

The Rhinos lacked direction in the continued absence of Danny McGuire and 
following the retirement of Kevin Sinfield while Huddersfield were grateful for 
the return from injury of their inspirational captain, Danny Brough.

Leeds dug deep to get their campaign up and running with the help of a 
nerveless goal-kicking display by their young half-back, Jordan Lilley.

Joel Moon gave Leeds a 10th-minute lead after good work by Ryan Hall but the 
winger’s mistake handed Jermaine McGillvary a try after Brough had pulled the 
Giants level.

Liam Sutcliffe scored following a period of Leeds pressure only for another 
error by Hall to give Michael Lawrence the opportunity to put Huddersfield back 
ahead.

Jimmy Keinhorst, a half-time replacement for the injured Moon, scored the 
decisive try eight minutes from time and a Lilley penalty made sure of the 
points for the Rhinos.

“That was disappointing, the performance wasn’t good,” said the Rhinos’ head 
coach, Brian McDermott. “I didn’t think the half-backs did anything special 
although ultimately Jordan Lilley’s kicking and Liam Sutcliffe’s try probably 
got us the game.

“But it shouldn’t have been that hard. It was two committed teams who were 
almost trying too hard at times.”

Widnes recovered from a sluggish start to move back to the top of Super League 
with a 30-16 victory against a depletedHull KR.

Widnes were behind 12-10 until six minutes before the break but had too much 
pace for Rovers, who are still without a win this season.

Widnes rallied to lead 22-12 at half-time but were never in total command. Joe 
Mellor and Corey Thompson each crossed twice for the Vikings, with their other 
try coming from Rhys Hanbury who added five goals.

“We scored some fantastic tries and we worked really hard,” said the Widnes 
coach, Denis Betts. “It was a good win in difficult conditions but there is 
still much more in us.”

After the match Rovers announced James Webster’s return to the club as interim 
coach for the remainder of the season, taking over from the caretaker, Willie 
Poching.

Wigan made it four wins from four in Super League as they came out of a 
tough-looking clash atHull FC with a 26-25 victory.

The Warriors have yet to hit top form in spite of that run but, with a 
well-stocked treatment room, their coach, Shaun Wane, will not worry how the 
points are coming.

These two came on a night when the Warriors squandered a 14-point lead and 
trailed by four going into the final eight minutes, with a flying finish from 
Josh Charnley and two Matty Smith drop goals bailing them out.

Smith’s second drop goal came with 105 seconds left and just after Marc Sneyd 
had cancelled out his first.

Wane will doubtless be pleased with his side’s mettle if not their game 
management but, had Hull attacked throughout as they did for 10 second-half 
minutes, they would have won themselves.

Castleford were left counting the cost of a first Super League defeat of the 
season after losing three key players to injury as they went down 28-22 atSt 
Helens.

The stand-off Ben Roberts went off with a foot injury after 23 minutes which 
left the Tigers a playmaker short and they also lost the forwards Grant 
Millington (hyper-extended elbow) and Junior Moors (displaced hand fracture) in 
the second half.

“There are a lot of injuries around in Super League at the moment and we’ve 
picked up three which could be really costly,” said their coach, Daryl Powell. 
“They are key players for us.

“Obviously it’s very difficult when you lose a half-back who is on top of his 
game. We had just scored a try and I thought we were on top at that point. We 
were down to one sub for the last 30 minutes which is tough.”
 