
Derby claimed a 3-1 win at Blackpool to move into third place – 11 points 
behind Burnley – after QPR's defeat at Blackburn saw them slip to fourth.

Steve McClaren's side fell behind at Bloomfield Road to a first-minute goal by 
David Goodwillie but the score was quickly cancelled out by Chris Martin in the 
third minute, with Patrick Bamford and Craig Bryson making sure of the Derby 
win well before half-time.

In the second half Blackpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> 
barely threatened a fightback and the home fans soon turned their anger on the 
chairman Karl Oyston, clashing with stewards after congregating in front of the 
stand where the owner was sitting.

But despite the protests Barry Ferguson, the caretaker manager, remains 
confident that the Tangerines can reverse the slide. "The players know they 
must improve. The players are good enough and I don't need to go screaming and 
shouting. I would like to think we have enough to stay up," he said.

"I heard the protests and what the fans were singing, and I'm not going to kid 
anyone. I can't tell the fans what to do or what to chant. It's not a great 
help to the players. But they pay their money and feel they have right to say 
what they want.

"I've seen inside the club what's being spent and it's not what people are 
making out. The budget is a good enough budget to compete in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. For the first 15 or 16 
seconds it was a good start, but after that it was the same old, same old. We 
conceded three goals and after the early goal it's really frustrating."

McClaren, for his part, admitted that his Derby side now have one foot in the 
play-offs after what turned out to be a comfortable victory. "We needed a 
response after Saturday's defeat to Middlesbrough and after going so quickly to 
a goal down here," he said. "There was a real focus and determination and it 
was a big win. Psychologically it was a huge. We're in the business-end of the 
season now we're in a good and strong position.

"We've got one foot in the door in terms of the play-offs and Saturday at home 
to Huddersfield becomes another big game. We need to get over the line. 
Performance is the key thing. And that was excellent. We were in total control 
of the first half and then it was grit and determination after half-time. We 
had real energy and there was good balance about the side."

QPR, meanwhile, were beaten 2-0 at Blackburn where Rudy Gestede and Tommy 
Spurr scored for Rovers, who are now four points adrift of the play-off places.

Leicester, promoted without kicking a ball on Saturday, looked to have taken 
their foot off the gas as they suffered a 4-1 home defeat to the play-off 
huntingBrighton. A Jose Ulloa double and goals for Stephen Ward and Jesse 
Lingard had put them 4-0 up before Gary Taylor-Fletcher slotted an 89th-minute 
consolation.

Wigan, meanwhile, made eight changes with Saturday's semi-final with Arsenal 
in mind and lost momentum in their play-off push as they fell to a 1-0 defeat to
Millwall, Carlos Edwards' 22nd-minute score proving to be their undoing.

"I'm delighted," said Millwall's manager Ian Holloway. "Whether they had half 
an eye on the FA Cup semi-final I don't know, but you can't argue with the way 
we played.

"We moved the ball around well in the first half and we scored a great goal. 
The second half was different – we were up against it and we got a little bit 
nervous.

"But we hung in there and the last two games have given me a little bit of 
hope and pride for the future."

On the back of Saturday's 2-1 victory at another play-off chasing side, 
Nottingham Forest, it gives the Lions renewed hope of avoiding the drop heading 
into the last five matches. "It's fantastic for us to win back-to-back games, 
and I think we deserved them if you watched both games," Holloway added.

"We had to hang in there because it's a tremendous squad here at Wigan. We 
just tried to get in their ribs and get a few tackles in. But I actually 
thought we played really well once we did win the ball, and just about deserved 
it.

"I don't really care whether we did or we didn't deserve it, because we need a 
miracle and I need to persuade my lads that we can do it. It's a tough ask, but 
we're a tough club."

Wigan's manager, Uwe Rösler said: Full credit to Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall>, they played virtually the same 
team that won at Nottingham Forest at the weekend. We had fresh legs in there, 
players who wanted to prove a point, and were given the opportunity to prove a 
point."

The long-awaited return of Shaun Maloney was the biggets plus for Wigan, with 
the Scotland man coming through the 90 minutes to put himself in contention for 
a Wembley spot against Arsenal.

"Shaun definitely proved a point tonight," Rosler added. "I thought he was our 
most creative player, and I was amazed that he could play for 90 minutes after 
such a long time out."

Reading, who are also in the hunt for a top-six finish, also stuttered as they 
were beaten 3-1 atBournemouth. The Cherries, who beat QPR 2-1 last time out, 
claimed victory with two first-half goals for Matt Ritchie and one from Yann 
Kermorgant, with Hal Robson-Kanu's 75th-minute goal scant consolation for the 
Royals.

Their eye-catching victory, which saw silky one-touch football coupled with a 
high pressing game, was their fifth in succession and left a sold-out Dean 
Court dreaming of the most unlikely of play-off spots. "I can believe we are 
here as I've seen how hard the lads have worked," Eddie Howe, the manager, said.

"We didn't expect it but why not seize the moment and see where we can go? I 
know people will talk about the play-offs and I'm not stupid, I can see how 
many points we have and where we are in the league but it is in Reading's 
hands. If they win their five games, they are in it.

"We've always believed we have really good players and now we have the goals 
to justify me saying that. It was an incredibly hard-working performance and 
probably the quickest game we've played in this year.

"I was absolutely delighted with how hard our players worked. We pressed as 
well as we have this season and the lads are shattered in there."

Leeds' torrid form continued as they fell to a 3-0 defeat by Watford which 
left them eight points above the relegation zone. Almen Abdi headed Watford to 
a ninth-minute lead before Ikechi Anya doubled their advantage before 
half-time, with Troy Deeney making sure of the result in the 67th minute.

Yeovil remain bottom after falling to a 3-2 defeat at Charlton, where goals 
for Joel Grant and Kieffer Moore were not enough as scores from Astrit 
Ajdarevic, Dorian Dervite and Marvin Sordell saw the Addicks claim victory.

Gary Johnson, the Yeovil manager, said: "The fat lady is not quite singing 
yet, but it's a poor result as far as our season is concerned because this was 
going to be a key game. It's not over just yet. We are still in it with five 
games left but we have given ourselves less of a chance because of the result.

"Mathematically, we are still in it and we have hope. We are going to have to 
win a few games now – half of them at least – and hope that the other teams 
fall away and do not get a result at all. It was a big game and I'm 
disappointed that we lost concentration at the start of both halves. We had 
some good chances, but so did they. The game could have gone either way."

This was the first time Charlton had scored three times under their new 
manager José Riga. "We have to go a step forward and that is what I told the 
players before the game," he said. "We've had some clean sheets before now, but 
we don't have to struggle with the idea that we cannot score goals. Now we have 
to do both – get clean sheets and score goals."

This win - as well as Millwall's victory at Wigan - has brought five teams to 
within four points of each other as the scrap to avoid moving into League One 
is firmly on. Riga added: "The result was the most important thing. The showed 
they are not just strong technically and physically, but mentally as well. Now 
the other teams above are concerned. The likes of Birmingham and Blackpool are 
now in it and we still have two games in hand."

Doncaster failed to move further clear of the relegation zone and are just 
four points clear after they were beaten 2-1 at home byBolton.

Neil Danns put Bolton ahead in the seventh minute and Joe Mason doubled the 
lead in the 15th, with Doncaster only hitting back once through David 
Cotterill's free-kick three minutes later.

Elsewhere, goals for Paul Anderson and Daryl Murphy saw Ipswich claim a 2-0 
win atHuddersfield while nine-man Middlesbrough held on to claim a 3-1 win over 
Birmingham.

Danny Graham and Jacob Butterfield had put Boro 2-0 up before Emyr Huws got 
one back for Birmingham in the 37th minute. Boro were reduced to nine men in 
five second-half minutes when Kenneth Omeruo and Ben Gibson were dismissed for 
second bookable offences late in the game, but Lee Tomlin scored for the home 
side in the penultimate minute.

Nottingham Forest salvaged a point despite finishing the game with 10 men as 
they drew 3-3 againstSheffield Wednesday. Chris Maguire put the Owls ahead from 
the penalty spot in the 15th minute after he was fouled by Danny Collins, but 
Forest hit back through Jamie Mackie's header before Lewis Buxton put Wednesday 
back in front on the stroke of half-time.

Joe Mattock extended the visitors' lead but Marcus Tudgay claimed Forest's 
second in the 77th minute before Collins was sent off three minutes later for 
his second bookable offence. Despite being a man down, Jamie Paterson grabbed 
the equaliser for the home side with three minutes left on the clock.
 