
Blackburn Rovers 2-0 Ipswich Town

Gary Bowyer struggled to find more superlatives to describe Jordan Rhodes 
after his goal set Blackburn on the way to a 2-0 win over Ipswich which keeps 
their play-off hopes alive. "I thought it was outstanding. A through ball from 
Rudy Gestede and he's come up with a fantastic finish. I find it difficult to 
find more words to say about him other than 'phenomenal' and 'outstanding'. As 
a team we've just got to keep going."Mick McCarthy said it will now be 
difficult for his side to reach the top six. "I think we were equally as good 
or bad as the opposition up until that goal went in – it wasn't a great game. 
But it's an £8m striker's goal, and good touch from Gestede."

Blackpool 1-2 Yeovil Town

Gary Johnson is happy to fight relegation without his top scorer Ishmael 
Miller after the strikers he picked, James Hayter and Tom Lawrence, both scored 
to see off Blackpool. Miller is understood to have breached club discipline 
during his loan from Nottingham Forest. Johnson said: "I'm not sure Miller has 
returned to Forest yet but he's left our club. We've agreed we would part 
company and go into these next few games with people that I think are going to 
score goals and work very hard."Blackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> caretaker Barry Ferguson said: 
"I'll put it down as a bad day at the office. It's hurting because I know those 
boys inside out and that's not the way they want to play."

Middlesbrough 1-0 Derby County

Steve McClaren's Riverside return did not go to script as the former 
Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> manager 
watched his Derby side beaten 1-0. McClaren led Boro to their best ever spell 
with a Carling Cup win in 2004 and a run to the Uefa Cup final two years later, 
and was given a warm reception – but went home empty-handed. "The reception was 
nice but that was a long time ago and I'm more concerned with today and that 
wasn't us today. We were below-par and that's been very rare. We played at a 
low tempo, and lacked urgency."Aitor Karanka was happy with a second successive 
win. "I'm delighted. We played very well against a good side who are trying to 
get into the play-offs."

And the rest

Ryan McLaughlin came close to earning 10-man Barnsley a vital win over 
play-off contendersBrighton, but his header hit the bar and the game ended 0-0. 
■Bournemouth spoiled Harry Redknapp's return to the south coast club where he 
started his career – a 2-1 win leavingQPR 10 points behind Burnley in second. ■ 
Charltonwere beaten 1-0 at home by Reading, increasing their relegation fears. ■
Birminghammoved level on points with Doncaster as they came back from a goal 
down to secure a vital 3-1 win. ■Bolton are now unbeaten in five away games 
after beatingHuddersfield 1-0. ■ And Burnley equalised with four minutes of 
normal time remaining atWatford – a 1-1 draw moving them a point closer to 
securing automatic promotion.
 