
Channel 4 has agreed to cover the next Summer and Winter Paralympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> following its well received 
coverage from Rio.

A letter of intent signed with the International Paralympic Committee covers 
the 2018 Winter Paralympics in PyeongChang in South Korea, and the summer Games 
in Tokyo two years later, as well as the London 2017 Para Athletics 
Championships.

The letter sets out the principles of the deal, with a full agreement expected 
in coming weeks.

Record number of Paralympics TV staff are disabled, says C4
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/record-number-of-paralympics-staff-are-disabled-says-c4>
The channel fielded an unprecedented team of disabled talent on screen and 
behind the camera to cover Rio, including Breaking Bad actor RJ Mitte.

Though viewing figures were down on the record numbers who tuned into the 
Paralympics in London, they saw a smaller dip than the Olympics coverage on the 
BBC.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> chief executive David 
Abrahams said the channel’s commitment to the Paralympics reflected its public 
service remit.

“I’m incredibly proud that our coverage and marketing of the Games has both 
helped change public perceptions of people with impairments and encouraged 
broadcasters around the world to show Paralympic sport.

IPC president Sir Philip Craven said the channel had “set an international 
benchmark” for Paralmypics coverage.

He added: “Whether it is producing international award winning TV 
advertisements promoting Paralympic sport, recruiting on and off screen talent 
with an impairment or delivering Bafta award winning coverage, Channel 4 fully 
understands that its coverage is not only enthralling audiences but changing 
attitudes towards people with an impairment.”

“Channel 4 has built a reputation on innovating and bringing a new approach to 
Para sport coverage which many other broadcasters around the world are now 
following. By extending our long-term partnership for a further four years 
covering London 2017, PyeongChang 2018 and Tokyo 2020 we can work together to 
build on the great work and achievements of the last four years.”
 