
A charity that provides young black and ethnic minority people with paid 
training opportunities in creative and media companies, including the BBC and 
ITV, is facing closure after the government withdrew more than £2m of funding 
for the scheme.

The programme by diversity charity Creative Access was funded by the 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (Bis) until June this year, when 
responsibility for the apprenticeship and internship agenda was moved into the 
Department for Education under Theresa May’s new government.

Bis provided approximately 30% of the charity’s funding, including about 
£300,000 a year for staff overheads at Creative Access and a further £1.8m for 
grants to cover up to 40% of the cost of employing an intern. But despite 
earlier assurances that funding would continue, Creative Access was last week 
informed the DfE would no longer continue to fund its work because it was 
focusing on apprenticeships.

The news came days after it emerged that the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, 
blocked the appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/05/black-woman-althea-efunshile-channel-4-rejected-ex-arts-council>
 of the former deputy chief executive of Arts Council England, Althea 
Efunshile, a black woman, to the board of Channel 4, prompting further 
criticism of the government’s commitment to diversity.


Creative Access chief executive Josie Dobrin said the decision to scrap the 
charity’s funding was “a sad reflection of government priorities”.

“Obviously we’re very upset because we’re not entirely sure what the future 
holds for us,” Dobrin said. “There is a need for the wider apprenticeship 
agenda, and I do support that, but the creative industries is one of Britain’s 
biggest exports, and there’s a real economic need for it to thrive and 
represent audiences, it’s not just about philanthropy.


“How can you create an advertising campaign, put on a play in a theatre, 
create news content, if the people that are creating all that content are from 
the same background? You need to be able to represent all your audiences. Over 
40% of London and over 25% of all under-25 year olds are from a BME background. 
It’s not about putting people front of screen or front of stage, it’s about 
driving the creative economy.”

Founded in 2012 by Dobrin and talent agent Michael Foster, Creative Access has 
placed 700 interns across television, films, publishing, PR and media, 
including newspapers such as the Sun, the Financial Times and the Daily Mail. 
It contributes up to half the cost of the wages of each internship and recruits 
through student unions, university career services and job centres.

“We’ve acted as a catalyst for change within the creative industries over the 
last few years, and there have been initiatives which have sprung from this,” 
Dobrin said. “But there’s still a lot of work to be done. The government is 
really missing a trick if they jump ship now.”

Cutting funds for Creative Access spells disaster for diversity in the media | 
Charlie Brinkhurst-Cuff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/funding-cuts-creative-access-disaster-diversity-media>
Foster, who has represented a host of celebrities including Chris Evans, Sacha 
Baron Cohen and Billie Piper,was inspired to found the charity by the 
experience of his own company, The Rights House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/11/celebrity-agent-cash-ethnic-minorities>
. When the literary agency advertised eight internships, it had 300 people 
applying, but not one of them was black or Asian as far as he could tell.

He told Broadcast 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/bame-charity-funding-slashed/5112115.article>
 that the charity was at risk of closure because it was carrying a £635,000 
debt after continuing to run the scheme in anticipation of government funding.

In a letter to the minister for apprenticeships and skills, Robert Halfon, 
Foster said he believed the decision would have “a serious, unfair, and 
disproportionate effect on the ability of Bame young people, both graduates and 
apprenticeships, to gain employment in media”, and questioned whether pulling 
the funding contravened the Equality Act 2010.

Foster is yet to hear back from Halfon, but the response from supporters has 
been “completely overwhelming,” Dobrin said. A former intern has sincestarted a 
petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/save-diversity-charity-creative-access-from-being-closed>
 calling on the prime minister to save the charity.

“For so many people, we’ve given them a foot into the creative industries 
which they wouldn’t have got otherwise,” she said.


“One of the main ways of recruiting historically has been through word of 
mouth, and it doesn’t help that 85% of the creative industries are small to 
medium businesses. Second of all, there is a history of people recruiting in 
their own image. By that I mean, if you’re a middle class white male, you’re 
more likely to recruit somebody else like you. Plus, the fact that you have to 
be able to do unpaid internships, move to London, and significantly, the lack 
of role models, puts a lot of young people off. It can be quite intimidating to 
walk into an office where the whole room looks completely different to you.”

More than 70% of the young people Creative Access works with are eligible for 
free school meals or are first generation university students, Dobrin said.


“All they need is to be given a platform where they can prove on a 
meritocratic basis that they’re good,” she said. “We don’t offer jobs, we offer 
internships, and only the people that are the best will get jobs at the end of 
it. As it happens, over 90% of the young people we work with go on to get full 
time work at the end of their internships.”


In the future, Creative Access is looking at different options and is hopeful 
that the creative industries will lend its support, Dobrin said.

A DfE spokesperson said: “Government money should be allocated on a fair and 
competitive basis, offering the best value for money for the taxpayer. While 
Creative Access is doing important work, we need to ensure that funding is 
focused on making the most difference to the people who need support.

 “That’s why we have committed to increasing the proportion of black and 
ethnic minority apprenticeship starts by 20% by 2020. We’re giving extra money 
to employers who take on 16-18 year olds, care leavers and apprentices with 
disabilities and we’ve established National Colleges for Creative and Cultural 
Industries and Digital Skills.

 “We are determined to build an apprenticeships and skills nation by 
transforming technical education, creating millions of quality apprenticeships, 
meeting the needs of our economy and helping those from disadvantaged 
backgrounds get on to the ladder of opportunity.”

On Monday, a diversity report by the Arts Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/number-of-minority-arts-workers-must-improve-arts-council-england>
 found that while the proportion of BME people in the arts and museum workforce 
was going up – 17% of the workforce in England’s 663 national portfolio 
organisations is BME compared with 15% of the population as a whole – BME staff 
were still underrepresented in top jobs. Ten percent of artistic directors, 8% 
of chief executives, and 9% of chairs of boards are black or minority ethnic.

The report followed a separate theatre diversity report commissioned by Andrew 
Lloyd Webber whichwarned that theatre risked being sidelined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/01/andrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre>
 unless it better tackled the diversity issue.
 