
The shambolic collapse of Oldham Athletic’s effort to sign Ched Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/08/ched-evans-signing-called-off-oldham>
, who is out on licence halfway through a five-year prison sentence for rape, 
finally arrived accompanied by Evans’s first words of apology to what he called 
“the woman concerned” since he and a friend had sex with her at the Rhyl 
Premier Inn in 2011.

The statement by the 26-year-old former Manchester City, Sheffield United and 
Wales striker was first delivered within one from the players’ union, the 
Professional Footballers’ Association, which had supportedOldham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> giving Evans a contract in spite 
of huge public and political opposition.

Later a statement was released in Evans’s name on the website funded by his 
girlfriend Natasha Massey’s father, Karl, which is itself the subject of an 
investigation by the attorney general for possible criminal identification of 
the rape victim and contempt of court. The other content of the website 
remained visible, including derogatory references to the victim which were not 
heard in court, and CCTV footage of her arrival at the hotel, which the 
victim’s father has complained makes her identifiable, in breach of her right 
to lifelong anonymity having suffered a sex crime. Her father said on 28 
December that she had been forced to change her identity five times after 
continually being named and hounded on social media, and had been unable to be 
with her family at Christmas.

Evans said in his statement that those using social media “in an abusive and 
vindictive way towards this woman are not my supporters and I condemn their 
actions”. However, this ran alongside links to the CCTV footage which invites 
people to “Judge for yourself” if the victim looked too drunk to consent to sex 
with Evans, which a jury found her to have been, and other content which 
continues to vilify her.

Evans said that he himself had withdrawn from signing for Oldham after 
sponsors promised to end their association with the club due to “mob rule 
tactics”. He and the club, in their own statement, said they would have faced 
“significant financial pressure” and Evans said there was a threat of funding 
being withdrawn for building the new north stand at Boundary Park. “It would 
mean workers would lose their jobs and others would be put at risk – that 
simply would not be fair,” he said.

However, one local sponsor, ZenOffice, a supply company, told the Guardian it 
had promised to withdraw because its customers and staff overwhelmingly did not 
want to be associated with the club if they signed Evans. Bruce Davie, the 
company’s sales director, said it sponsored Oldham Athletic because it believed 
the club shared its “values” as a business rooted in family and the local 
community, and signing Evans, while still serving his sentence for rape, would 
contravene those values.

The League One club themselves, who have been unable to cope with the media 
furore and opposition – including from the sponsors – confirmed the deal had 
collapsed less than 24 hours after the owner and chairman, Simon Corney, had 
spoken for the first time, saying he intended to sign Evans. However, following 
Corney’s assertion that it was 80% likely to happen, it was the Labour leader 
of Oldham council, Jim McMahon, who made the first firm announcement that the 
deal was off.

McMahon revealed that it was not only the sponsors Verlin Rainwater Solutions, 
Mecca Bingo, Nando’s and ZenOffice which had expressed objections, but the 
council had also disapproved too. In the frenzied debate about whether or not 
footballers are role models, which followed the news of Oldham’s intent to sign 
Evans on Sunday, the town’s council maintains that the club is a community 
organisation and the players have “ambassadorial” roles, visiting schools and 
hospitals and being involved in social programmes.

The council is thought to have been alarmed at the opprobrium which would heap 
on a Pennine town with tough social and economic challenges should it suddenly 
become notorious for its football club signing Evans. “I’ve always believed in 
rehabilitation,” McMahon said in a statement, “but felt that both club and 
player should have allowed Mr Evans’s appeal to run its course before agreeing 
a contract. As it stands Mr Evans has been found guilty in a court of law and 
has not yet completed his sentence.”

Corney, who lives in New York, was reported to have threatened to quit as 
chairman, although club sources were understood not to be taking that threat 
overly seriously. After Sheffield United and Hartlepool abandoned plans for 
Evans following a similar outcry, Corney had felt Oldham could sign a bargain 
striker who is legally free to work.

Oldham signed another striker, Lee Hughes, in 2007 after his release from 
prison while serving a six-year sentence for causing death by dangerous 
driving, and believed they could withstand the opposition. That included an 
online petition which gathered thousands of signatures, Labour’s shadow sports 
minister, Clive Efford, calling for the Football Association to intervene, and 
a huge media and social-media debate.

Oldham, however, referred only to a “barrage of abuse”, and claimed there had 
been “vile and abusive threats, some including death threats”, made to fans, 
sponsors and staff “whilst this process has been in the public domain”.

Greater Manchester police told the Guardian it had called the club and 
sponsors as the opposition mounted during the week and been told there were no 
serious threats, only a couple of instances of “low-level Twitter abuse”, by 
the time the deal collapsed.

After his conviction in April 2012 and his release from prison last October, 
Evans had expressed no remorse, insteadonly apologising that the rape was “an 
act of infidelity” to his girlfriend. The website funded by Massey maintains 
Evans’s innocence in a way which contests the jury’s verdict, vilifies the 
victim, who was 19 at the time, and contained no apology until now.

Evans does not contest the facts of what he did; he went to the Premier Inn 
after receiving a text from a friend and former colleague at Manchester City’s 
academy, Clayton McDonald, to the effect: “I’ve got a bird.” The prosecution 
argued that Evans booked the room solely to take girls to, and that the pair 
were “on the lookout for any girl who was a suitable target”. Evans denied 
that, saying in his defence the room was for McDonald and another friend to 
stay in.

On arriving in the room, Evans found McDonald, who had bumped into the girl at 
3am in a kebab shop when she was drunk, having sex with her. Both Evans and 
McDonald agreed that his response to seeing the girl for the first time was 
that she was asked if Evans could “join in” and he did.

Evans claims she consented; she said she had no memory at all of that part of 
the evening. The alcohol expert who gave evidence on Evans’s behalf when he 
lost an application for leave to appeal, agreed that the victim may have had no 
memory of the events, while arguing she can still have been capable at the time 
to have consented to having sex with Evans.

McDonald left the hotel room, telling the night porter to look out for the 
girl, because she was “sick”. After Evans finished having sex with her – his 
brother and friend were outside trying to film events on their mobile phones – 
she went to sleep. Evans left the hotel by the fire escape and went to his 
parents’ house in Rhyl – none of his party slept in the room.

The young woman woke up the next morning on her own, naked, having lost her 
bag and telephone, with no other possessions. She went to the police, who 
mounted the investigation for rape. The jury acquitted McDonald while 
convicting Evans.

Evans’s statement still contained no apology for what he actually did, and 
instead was expressed impersonally. “Whilst I continue to maintain my 
innocence, I wish to make it clear that I wholeheartedly apologise for the 
effect that that night in Rhyl has had on many people, especially the woman 
concerned.”

He was refused leave to appeal by the lord chief justice, Igor Judge, in 
November 2012, and the conviction is now being examined by the Criminal Cases 
Review Commission. His solicitor, Shaun Draycott, said he feels “some 
confidence we will be successful”.

Until that review is concluded and whether or not it is successful, Ched Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans> has a great deal more to do 
before he can find acceptance again as a professional footballer, even when a 
club wants to sign him and believes it can withstand the opprobrium he trails 
with him.
 