
Hull City’s Steve Bruce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/steve-bruce>, 
has disclosed that he was one of the Premier League managers who contacted 
Oldham to give his support to their moves to sign convicted rapist Ched Evans.

Oldham pulled out of a deal on Thursday after a storm of opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/08/ched-evans-signing-called-off-oldham>
 but Bruce said that he believed Evans should have been given a second chance. 
The League One club’s chairman, Simon Corney, had said three Premier League 
managers had offered him their support and Bruce confirmed he was one of those.

“I have to be honest and say yes,” said Bruce. “I’ve known Simon for a lot of 
years now. He’d looked at the case too. He was of the opinion to give the kid a 
chance. I can only say on behalf of myself, I know I might be upsetting people 
but there is a question of the rape and how he’s been convicted by a jury. When 
you look at the evidence, it is there for appeal.”

Evans was refused leave to appeal but his case is now going before the 
Criminal Cases Review Commission. Bruce added: “I’m a big believer that if you 
have done your time everyone deserves a second chance, we have seen footballers 
involved with accidents and being given a second chance.

“It’s a very difficult situation for everyone concerned. It’s a pity they 
could not have the appeal and get it over and done with. It has divided 
opinion, of course, and when you look at the case in detail and, I don’t think 
most people have really, because they have just seenChed Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans> as a convicted rapist, when 
you do look at the case and look at the evidence then certainly Ched has got a 
case.

“For me the appeal can’t come quick enough for Ched. It must be a frustrating 
and difficult time for him and I think the events of the appeal, for me, will 
see Ched be allowed to play football again.”

The CCRC is an independent public body that reviews possible miscarriages of 
justice in the criminal courts of England, Wales and Northern Ireland and 
refers cases to the appeal courts.
 