
A “true friend and supporter” of Ched Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans> made abusive comments about 
the convicted rapist’s victim and posted a link to a website that unlawfully 
names her, the Guardian can reveal.

Ciaran Goggins’ picture was posted in a gallery of photographs on the website 
set up by Evans’s family and friends to maintain the former Manchester City, 
Sheffield United and Wales striker’s innocence followinghis conviction in April 
2012 and five-year prison sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/20/ched-evans-found-guilty-rape>
. Evans served half that term and, having been released on licence, is now 
looking to return to football. Goggins tweeted during last week’s furore over
Oldham Athletic’s ultimately cancelled effort to sign Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/08/ched-evans-signing-called-off-oldham>
: “I am proud to be the only non-blood relative on #justiceforched site.”

From the same Twitter account, using the Oldham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> Athletic initials, @oafc4 – which 
has since become another of many accounts which Goggins has had suspended – he 
tweeted the link to a website which on 22 December named Evans’s rape victim. 
As a victim of a sex offence the woman, who was 19 at the time, is legally 
entitled to lifelong anonymity, but she has been repeatedly named on social 
media. Her father has said she has been forced to change identity five times 
and is now living “on the run”.

The Evans website displayed a picture of Goggins, tagged “a True Friend and 
Supporter” at an Amnesty International conference, wearing a T-shirt picturing 
a smiling Evans and the logo “Ched Evans is innocent”. It was on the website 
within a gallery of photographs showing Evans as a family man, with babies, a 
dog, climbing a mountain, and playing football.

The website took down the picture of Goggins last Wednesday, 8 January. A day 
later, after the collapse of the proposed Oldham deal,Evans posted a statement 
on the website with his first words of contrition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/08/ched-evans-apologises-rape-victim-oldham>
 to the victim and first condemnation of the online abuse that has been aimed 
at her ever since his conviction in April 2012.

“It has been claimed that those using social media in an abusive and 
vindictive way towards this woman are supporters of mine,” the statement said. 
“I wish to make it clear that these people are not my supporters and I condemn 
their actions entirely.”

The website itself, which since 2012 has set out a partial account of Evans’s 
trial and is itself abusive of the victim, is currently under investigation by 
the Attorney General, whose office is considering whether it is in contempt of 
court.

In 2012 Goggins was one of 19 people arrested and questioned by North Wales 
police on suspicion of naming Evans’s victim on social media. Ten were 
subsequently charged and convicted, including Gemma Thomas, Evans’ cousin. No 
charges were brought against Goggins, who is resident in Ireland. He told the 
Guardian that he was questioned for 72 hours, his ex-girlfriend’s computer and 
his UK and Ireland mobile phones were seized and searched, but he was released 
without charge.

In November 2014 Goggins contributed to two online discussions about Evans’s 
proposed, then cancelled, return for Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/20/ched-evans-training-offer-withdrawn-sheffield-united>
, making derogatory comments and allegations about Evans’s victim. Throughout 
this time his picture was up on the Ched Evans website as “a True Friend and 
Supporter.”

Asked by the Guardian about these comments, Goggins stood by them, and always 
wrote the word “victim” in quotation marks. He contributes widely on social 
media alleging that a significant number of rape claims made by women are 
false. In November, Goggins sent abusive tweets to “Jean Hatchet”, the feminist 
campaigner who started the petitions against Evans being signed bySheffield 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> and Oldham.

His Twitter accounts have repeatedly been suspended, including @oafc4, which 
results in all the tweets being deleted. His most recent, @bhafc6, was 
suspended on Wednesday. Goggins said he did not know why Twitter is doing this. 
The company did not respond to a request for it to explain. Goggins says that 
he is not the author of the blog naming the victim, adding that it is not an 
offence to link to a website, only to a specific reference on it.

Ched Evans website referred to CPS over alleged identification of rape victim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/16/ched-evans-website-investigation-identification-rape-victim>
The Guardian asked those responsible for the Ched Evans website about the 
nature of their “true” friendship with Goggins and his support. They said he 
was a “vocal” supporter of Evans’s claim to have been wrongly convicted, and 
they only “very recently” became aware of his social media comments.

“Up until we were aware of his derogatory comments last week, we viewed him as 
a conscientious supporter of Ched,” a spokesperson said. “When we understood 
some of the tweets were totally unreasonable and unpalatable his image was 
removed from the site.

“To be clear we have now cut all communication with Ciaran Goggins or anyone 
who purports to be Ciaran Goggins and will not interact with anyone who uses 
social media to attack anyone.”

Amnesty International Ireland disowned the picture of Goggins, saying that he 
did attend their 2013 annual conference, but his photograph in front of the 
Amnesty logo was taken without its “knowledge, permission or endorsement”. The 
organisation said if it had known it was being used on the Ched Evans website 
it would have “sought its withdrawal” because it has “no interest or 
involvement” in his case.

Goggins told the Guardian that when the photograph was taken of him, all the 
walls had Amnesty images as a backdrop. He declined to comment on the Evans 
website taking down his picture, but maintained he is “a fully committed 
supporter” of the “Justice for Ched” campaign, and that in 2013 the Evans 
website had emailed him, calling him a “hero”. Evans’s supporters running the 
website did not respond to a question asking what Goggins had done to merit 
being called a hero.

Evans was convicted of rape in April 2012, having gone to the Premier Inn in 
Rhyl after receiving a text from his friend, Clayton McDonald, to the effect: 
“I’ve got a bird.” Evans persuaded the hotel night porter to let him into the 
room; when he went in McDonald and the girl were having sex, and she was asked 
if Evans could “join in”. Evans said, and still maintains, she consented; the 
woman said from the beginning she was drunk and had no memory of that part of 
the night.

Evans left after he had sex with her, by the fire exit. He and McDonald went 
to sleep at Evans’s family home, leaving the young woman in the hotel room that 
he had booked. She had lost her bag and mobile phone and said she woke up not 
knowing how she had got there.

Evans was refused leave to appeal against his conviction on the basis that the 
judge’s summing up was correct, then lost an appeal against that decision on 6 
November 2012. He is currently out on licence having been released from prison 
in October. His solicitor, Shaun Draycott, has applied to the Criminal Cases 
Review Commission with evidence not heard in the trial, which he argues gives 
Evans a strong chance of having his conviction overturned. The CCRC is expected 
to decide by the autumn whether the evidence is sufficient to suggest the jury 
might have reached a different verdict, and justify referring the conviction to 
the Court of Appeal.

Oldham decided last week not to sign Evans following sponsors’ pledges to end 
their association with the club, and opposition from Oldham council. After 
that, Evans issued his statement, which included an apology for “the effect 
that that night in Rhyl has had on many people, especially the woman concerned”.

Asked if his condemnation of social media attacks on the young woman included 
those by Thomas and Goggins, the Evans website replied: “Ched does not in any 
way support the negative use of social media by anyone whether they claim to be 
his friends or supporters or not.”

The Attorney General’s investigation of the website follows complaints by the 
victim’s father, including that CCTV footage asking the public to “judge for 
yourself” if the victim was drunk is insufficiently blurred and makes her 
identifiable. In its account of the facts, the website makes derogatory 
allegations against the victim that were not heard in court.

Asked about this, and whether Evans’ own website is “abusive and vindictive” 
towards the woman, those responsible replied: “Ched’s website was designed by 
family and friends as a method to educate the public in the facts of this case 
which largely were not reported in the media and some which were not even heard 
in court. The website has since its construction been checked over to ensure it 
is legal and ethical.”
 