
The morning after the sordid and repeatedly shameful saga of Oldham Athletic’s 
eagerness to snap up a bargain Ched Evans, there was not much sense that 
football’s establishment, all men, were resolving to learn some proper lessons. 
Gordon Taylor, chief executive of the Professional Footballers’ Association, a 
progressive voice on many causes over the years, was instead mired in 
embarrassmentfor his jarring reference to the Hillsborough families’ suffering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/08/gordon-taylor-ched-evans-hillsborough-pfa>
 to emphasise a point that Evans’s conviction could be overturned.

Taylor, who acted as the union representative supporting Evans’s keenness to 
play again, should have been reflecting on the outrage that prospect had been 
causing – including, clearly, to so many women. The PFA has not made clear this 
week its abhorrence of Evans’s and his footballer friend Clayton McDonald’s 
disgraceful conduct towards Evans’s then 19-year-old victim, on what Evans 
referred to, in his first semi-apology, as “that night in Rhyl”.

That young woman, whom Evans, right, and McDonald abandoned alone, naked and 
without possessions in a Premier Inn hotel room they had booked for themselves, 
is now, according to her father, living “life on the run”, having been serially 
hounded and unlawfully named on social media. Evans’s website, funded by his 
girlfriend’s father, Karl Massey, continues to vilify the victim and is under 
investigation by the Attorney General for whether it unlawfully identifies the 
woman. In a week of debate, few football men remembered to mention her plight.

Gordon Taylor apologises for Ched Evans-Hillsborough comparison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/09/gordon-taylor-apologises-ched-evans-hillsborough-comparison>
Hull City’s manager, Steve Bruce, has become the latest to assume the position 
of a juror assessing evidence he never heard, to suggest the verdict might have 
been wrong. If Evans’s conviction is ultimately quashed by the Court of Appeal 
after its examination by the Criminal Cases Review Commission, it will not be 
on the basis that the jury got it wrong. Evans’s case must now be based on new 
evidence uncovered since, or which his lawyers may claim the prosecution did 
not disclose, or which was not heard in court. Even were he to succeed – the 
current success rate at the CCRC is 7% of reviewed cases – Evans does not 
dispute his actual behaviour that night, including the request to the girl the 
first moment he ever saw her that he “join in” with McDonald having sex with 
her.

The players’ union runs courses to advise young footballers about handling the 
public adulation and scrutiny, but here, where it went so horribly wrong, the 
PFA’s sense of duty has seemed only a rush to get their player a job once he is 
out of prison on licence.

Greg Dyke, the Football Association chairman, finally broke his silence, to 
clarify that the FA had no rules on the matter. That was accompanied by a vague 
promise that the FA will “consider and discuss the prospect for future 
guidelines or codes of conduct.”

The Football League also has its four independent directors considering “the 
implications for football’s reputation of clubs employing players following 
their release from prison”. Yet they started it only two months ago after 
Sheffield United finally capitulated to public pressure and did not usher Evans 
straight back into their shirt. He was convicted in April 2012, yet the league 
never thought to review the implications then, which reinforces the impression 
they thought it was fine for him to play for one of their clubs again the 
minute he was out.

Oldham Athletic’s grudging statement attempted to pin the blame on alleged 
“vile and abusive threats, some including death threats” through the week, 
prompting Greater Manchester police to make it “explicitly clear” none have 
been reported to them. Evans even claimedOldham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> sponsors promised to withdraw due 
to “mob rule” pressure , when in fact they wanted nothing to do with the rape 
conviction he carries with him.

Oldham fan's view: 'Why I am relieved we are not signing Ched Evans'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/09/oldham-fans-view-why-i-am-relieved-we-are-not-signing-ched-evans>
Oldham’s board, Evans, Taylor, Dyke, the league’s board and its four 
independent directors – with the exception of one woman, Debbie Jevans – are 
all men. In the polarised debate on social media this week, the general 
impression coalesced that the majority of women appeared to be appalled by 
football’s preparedness to have Evans claiming the cheers of fans again. Those 
emphasising his legal right to work above any objections seemed mostly to be 
men. There were almost no women claiming that what Evans had done was not all 
that bad, presuming to question the verdict or vilifying the victim, as some 
men repeatedly were.

That has left a disturbing after-taste to this vile affair: the feeling that 
men, football men particularly, are not fully understanding the abhorrence and 
fear women have of sexual abuse and exploitation, not quite as appalled by 
Evans’s conduct, as we should be. And football wants it both ways – clubs are 
community organisations and players role models when there is marketing to be 
done, but when justifying a contract for Evans, he is just a man plying a 
trade, and the game is just a business.

This sorry affair should be giving the national sport a great deal to think 
about. The men conducting these reviews should show some backbone, some 
semblance that they actually care, and get on with it.
 