
Chelsea, owned by Roman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, have become the first 
fully professional football club in England to be accredited employers paying a 
living wage to all their staff. Supporter-owned FC United of Manchester became 
the first football club in Britain to be an accredited living wage employer in 
October and Hearts, in Scotland, signed up to the initiative this week.

Luton Town, of League Two, also committed this week to gaining the 
accreditation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/10/luton-town-living-wage-minimum-pay>
, which requires employers to pay a living wage to all staff, including those 
working for companies contracted to supply services. That is a high proportion 
of football clubs’ workers because most matchday staff, including stewards and 
people working in stadium catering operations, are employed by service 
companies.

The UK living wage of £7.85 per hour, £9.15 per hour in London, is assessed by 
Loughborough University’s Centre for Research in Social Policy, for the 
campaign body Citizens UK, as the minimum needed for people to provide for 
themselves and a family. The legal minimum wage set by the government is 
substantially lower: £6.50 per hour for adults, £5.13 for 18-20-year-olds and 
£3.79 per hour for those under-18, with no London weighting.

Gillian Owen, of Citizens UK, said Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have worked through all 
contracts, including for workers in the hotel at Stamford Bridge, and reached a 
firm commitment that all staff will be paid the living wage, by 2017 if current 
contracts are in force until then.

“We believe football clubs are beacon employers with a history rooted in their 
communities, which still do brilliant community work, but they are sustaining 
this low pay, which is really tough,” Owen said. Citizens UK believes football 
clubs paying only minimum wages to workers is particularly unjust given the 
multimillion-pound salaries paid to individual players.

A group of Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> supporters delivered a 
letter to the club addressed to the chairman, Khaldoon Al Mubarak, calling on 
the club to become an accredited living wage employer. The letter, which 
congratulates City on this week’s opening of the new academy and its investment 
on and off the pitch and in the local community, argues that paying all staff a 
living wage would “complete the excellent work the club is doing”.

Christopher Fabby, one of the supporters who delivered the letter, said 
football clubs could set an example to other employers, not to seek profits 
partly due to low wages. “Paying the living wage would fit perfectly with the 
good work City are doing,” Fabby said. “We asked them to give that commitment, 
and set a date for it.”

City are committed to paying employed staff the living wage, but Owen said 
that in the modern economy, contracted out workers most commonly suffer low 
pay. City say they are pressing contract companies to pay their staff a living 
wage, but the club has not yet insisted on this or been through the 
accreditation process.

None of the other 18 Premier League club are understood to have committed even 
to paying their own employed staff the living wage.
 