
Chelsea’s frantic late attempts to add to their defensive ranks have prompted 
a surprise move for Papy Djilobodji fromNantes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nantes> in a cut-price £2.7m deal, with 
the Senegalese likely to prove a stopgap signing before the pursuit of John 
Stones is renewed in future transfer windows.

Djilobodji, who had been tracked by the champions’ recruitment department over 
the past two years, underwent a medical at Cobham on Monday and is expected to 
sign a four-year contract at Stamford Bridge. The centre-half had entered the 
final 12 months of his deal at Nantes and, having made clear his desire to 
leave this summer, had been training with the development squad at the French 
club over recent weeks.

The 26-year-old, who can also play in defensive midfield, had initially 
agitated for a switch to Celta Vigo, and the Turkish club Trabzonspor and 
Celtic have also bid for his services. However,Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> trumped the Scottish champions’ 
offer, believed to have been worth around £1.9m, as they moved to secure the 
player over the weekend.

José Mourinho tells Chelsea players medals should motivate them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/30/jose-mourinho-chelsea-changes>
While Djilobodji has impressed in his five-year stay in Ligue 1, the transfer 
does constitute a surprise given José Mourinho’s assertion in the immediate 
aftermath ofSaturday’s 2-1 home defeat to Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/chelsea-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 that he hoped the result would not prompt any knee-jerk purchases before 
Tuesday’s deadline. The manager made the point that he had submitted a list of 
targets to the board on 21 April, before last season’s title had been claimed, 
and that this was not the time to earmark new targets.

Yet Chelsea’s current back line has creaked this season, conceding nine times 
in four Premier League matches. As a result the club had fired off a number of 
inquiries as to players’ availability in the last few days, once it became 
clear that their long-standing pursuit of Everton’s Stones – four bids were 
submitted for the England international – was unlikely to come to fruition.

They sounded out Zenit St Petersburg over the Argentina defender Ezequiel 
Garay, Monaco regarding Aymen Abdennour – the Tunisian subsequently joined 
Valencia – Paris Saint-Germain over the Brazilian Marquinhos and Roma for the 
Greek Kostas Manolas. Similarly it became clear that any deal for Athletic 
Bilbao’s French defender Aymeric Laporte would prove expensive to complete 
given that the 21-year-old has a £37m release clause in his contract.

Djilobodji, in contrast, represented a cheaper option for the moment and, 
while the Senegalese has been offered a long contract, there would be scope to 
revisit other targets either in January or next summer.

Chelsea have continued to loan out personnel from their vast senior and 
development squads, with Victor Moses expected to join West Ham United, 
Tottenham Hotspur or West Bromwich Albion for the season – having signed a 
contract extension at his parent club – and Jérémie Boga to return to his 
native France with Rennes on a similar arrangement.

Nathaniel Chalobah will spend the campaign in Italy with Napoli while Lucas 
Piazón has joined Reading in the Championship, taking the number of loanees to 
32.
 