
For a long time it must have been quite a lot of fun being a Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> Town fan. Between 1992-93 and 
1998-99 the Robins finished (deep breath) 2nd, 2nd, 2nd, 3rd, 2nd, 2nd and 1st, 
that final title bursting them out of non-league football for the first time in 
the summer of 1999. Then after a couple of seasons' consolidation, in 2002, 
having missed out on automatic promotion on the final day, they beat Rushden & 
Diamonds, their old non-league foes, in the play-off final at the Millennium 
Stadium. Dr Martens League to the third tier had taken only six years.

Then the waters got a little choppier for the good ship CTFC. Steve Cotterill, 
the managerial mastermind behind the Robins' rise, departed for his ill-starred 
spell at Stoke City before the following season. Relegation followed, as did a 
couple of mid-table finishes in the bottom tier, but another surprise play-off 
success,this time against Grimsby <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQOKJZUCCFs>, 
under John Ward in 2006, again confounded the critics.

But once more the upward momentum could not last. Cotterill did not pay a 
transfer fee in his three years in the Football League at Whaddon Road. Ward 
achieved promotion with a weekly player wage bill of £13,000 (roughly the same 
amount earned on a weekly basis by one of Carlos Tevez's nostrils). That lack 
of resources was bound to catch up with the club at some stage, and so it 
proved.

Since those joyous scenes in Cardiff, Cheltenham have finished 17th, 19th and 
23rd in League One, then 22nd (keeping their league status intact by four 
points) and last season 17th (with five points the buffer) inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> – 60 league wins in 
five seasons must have made those halcyon days of the late 1990s seem like a 
half-remembered dream.

The second half of the 2010-11 campaign, though, was nothing but a nightmare – 
the club were eighth after 23 games and had been bobbing in out of the 
play-offs for most of the season. Over the final 23 games they were the 
second-worst side in the division, picking up only 18 points – the same as 
hapless Stockport County – and the final nine games saw them score only seven 
goals and win just once. It was understandable then that the bookies (and, 
ahem, a few pre-season previews 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/football-league-blog/2011/aug/03/league-two-2011-12-season-preview>
) had Cheltenham as favourites, 3-1 favourites in some cases, for the drop.

All of which makes their start to this campaign all the more remarkable. Two 
late goals against Plymouth on Saturday gave Town their fifth win in six 
matches so after 16 games the Robins are perching perkily in fifth, level on 
points with third-placed Morecambe and within shouting distance of the top two. 
So what has changed? The Cheltenham manager, Mark Yates, captain when the club 
won promotion under Cotterill, puts it down to smart squad-building and a 
financial push just big enough to make a difference.

"We sat down as a group and identified that we were too short in numbers and 
probably didn't have enough quality last year," he says. "We identified that as 
a staff and then we went to the board and put the case forward for a little bit 
more money, which the board were very good about finding and putting on my 
budget. And that little bit extra has given us probably more players than we 
thought. I kept asking, for not-ridiculous amounts, and the answer was 'yes' a 
few times."

Goals haven't exactly come in a torrent at Whaddon Road – of League Two's top 
10 only Shrewsbury have scored fewer than Cheltenham's 23 – but considering the 
club loses goalscorers like a fashionista loses last season's threads, finding 
the net has not been the problem it might have been. The departure of Wes 
Thomas to Crawley in the summer – "I've heard the package he's on and he 
wouldn't get that at a lot of clubs in League One, it's staggering," said the 
Cheltenham chairman, Paul Baker, after the move – was the seventh time in nine 
seasons that the Robins have lost their leading scorer at the end of the 
campaign. Yates, though, has tried to turn Thomas's departure into a positive.

"Deep down I probably knew last November that Wes wouldn't be here any 
longer," said Yates. "But I also said toward the end of last season that we'll 
be a better team without him. That wasn't a slight on Wes because he was 
brilliant for us – and we were good for him too. We gave him a platform, we 
gave him a chance that maybe nobody else had given him.

"But I felt that there were other players out there, that we could adapt our 
style a little bit. Wes wasn't a lone striker, or one of the three strikers I 
would've said, he's a goalscorer who likes to play with another striker and I 
thought we might change our style a little bit, not in terms of playing good 
football but in the set-up and formation that we use, and so far that has been 
the case."

Crawley have since made a £170,000 profit on Thomas by loaning him out to 
League One Bournemouth. Money talks just as loudly further down the pyramid as 
it does at the very top of the game. Only the numbers change. Despite the 
loosening of the purse strings at Whaddon Road, bigger budgets exist elsewhere 
in the division, but Cheltenham are focused on their own issues, rather than 
allowing envious eyes to stray elsewhere.

"You can't think that," says Yates, who is nearing two years in the job. 
"Sometimes if you're in your office talking to your staff you might say you 
wish you had the budget that so and so have got or that this team is alleged to 
have. But there's no point in doing that. I'm a realist – of course, I want to 
be as successful as I can be where I am and to do that I think you've got to be 
realistic, say this is what we've got, and do everything you can with it."

The current mood, then, is one of cautious optimism. "I'm not one of these who 
shouts from the rooftops: 'We're going to do this, we're going to do that.' You 
only say that when you've done it and we've not done anything yet. There's 
going to be dips along the way I'm sure but I don't think anyone is going to 
run away with this league. It's going to be tough, it's going to be tight and 
if you can just hang on in there until Christmas and beyond, then anything can 
happen."
 