
Cheltenham Town withstood heavy first-half pressure before goals from Jermaine 
McGlashan and Marlon Pack confirmed their place in the League Two play-off 
final with a 2-1 win on Thursday night and a 4-1 aggregate victory overTorquay 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torquay-united>.

Trailing 2-0 from the first leg, Torquay came flying out of the blocks and the 
Town goalkeeper Scott Brown was forced into a series of impressive saves within 
the opening half hour. But McGlashan effectively settled the tie with a quarter 
of an hour remaining.

The Torquay substitute Taiwo Atieno levelled matters on the night before Pack 
rifled home a magnificent 87th minute free-kick from 30 yards.

Mark Yates's men travel to Wembley next Sunday to face Crewe.

McGlashan was narrowly off target with a rasping 30-yard drive in the early 
stages before his side were forced to withstand a first-half onslaught.

Brown was the outstanding performer of the opening 45 minutes, and he got his 
night's work underway by tipping a Eunan O'Kane effort over following some deft 
footwork from the Torquay midfielder.

The Gulls headed into the contest without top scorer Rene Howe due to a 
hamstring injury, but they were not short on attacking threat, ably 
demonstrated when Ryan Jarvis burst into the box and forced Brown to push 
behind with a superb low block.

From the resulting corner, the Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> defender Keith Lowe 
fortuitously cleared via the post as he looked to hack clear from his own 
goalmouth and Brian Saah fired the loose ball wide.

Brown's best moment came courtesy of another low stop in the 27th minute when 
Mark Ellis' first-time shot from Stevens' pass emerged cleanly from a crowd of 
bodies.

The Cheltenham striker James Spencer might have done better when he fired 
straight at the Torquay goalkeeper Robert Olejnik after the half hour, but it 
was at least an indication that Yates's men had weathered the storm.

There was drama a minute before the interval as the Torquay full-back Kevin 
Nicholson's sweetly struck free-kick rattled the crossbar with Brown rooted to 
the spot.

The visitors immediately sprung up the other end and Olejnik stood firm to 
deny Kaid Mohamed.

Cheltenham began the second half with greater purpose and Olejnik gathered at 
the second attempt when McGlashan looked to clip home from an acute angle at 
the end of a mazy run.

O'Kane's 54th minute header looped up off the Robins defender Alan Bennett to 
force Brown into another superb save, but it soon became clear that Torquay's 
early attacking verve had deserted them.

Mohamed hit a swerving shot over after a mazy run down the Torquay left by the 
Cheltenham full-back Sido Jombati before the decisive moment arrived in the 
74th minute.

Mohamed was allowed to ease infield after collecting Ben Burgess' pass and he 
played in McGlashan, who stabbed home via Olejnik's boot and the inside of the 
far post.

Atieno reduced the aggregate arrears when he was left unmarked to glance in a 
near-post header from O'Kane's 85th minute corner.

However, Pack applied the gloss in memorable fashion when he found the top 
corner after Saah fouled Jeff Goulding.
 