
Cheltenham racecourse has cancelled a group booking involving the MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> midfielder Samir Carruthers after 
he appeared to be pictured urinating into a pint glass at the Festival on 
Tuesday.

MK Dons have confirmed they will conduct an investigation after the former 
Arsenal and Aston Villa youth team player was seen enjoying the hospitality in 
the racecourse’s VIP section when he appeared to relieve himself in an empty 
pint glass.

Min loss spares bookies at Cheltenham but Festival suffers three fatalities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/cheltenham-festival-min-bookmakers-fatalities>
Bristol City’s Luke Ayling and the Northampton Town forward James Collins were 
also pictured laughing and joking about the incident, which was featured in 
several of Wednesday’s newspapers.


Cheltenham responded by cancelling Wednesday’s booking. A tweet from the 
course said: “In regards to images of inappropriate behaviour from yesterday, 
we have cancelled their booking for today.”

An MK Dons spokesman said on Tuesday night: “The club is aware of pictures 
circulating in the national media of one of its players at theCheltenham 
Festival <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival>. The club has 
commenced an internal investigation into the matter.”

Northampton have also launched an investigation into the conduct of their 
forward Collins, who is on loan from Shrewsbury Town. A statement from the 
League Two leaders said: “As a club we take any such claims extremely 
seriously, and we expect the highest standards of behaviour at all times.

“We are unable to comment further until this investigation has been completed.”

Collins’s parent club Shrewsbury have confirmed they will also be 
investigating the incident.

Bristol City have also responded with regards to Ayling. While there is no 
suggestion of any wrongdoing from the 24-year-old, the Championship club said 
in a statement: “We are aware of the disappointing images from the Cheltenham 
Festival that have been printed in various national newspapers this morning.

“We will be speaking to the players concerned and will take appropriate action 
where necessary.”

The racecourse said their behaviour “was unacceptable in general, let alone at 
the Cheltenham Festival” and that no further bookings will be accepted from 
Unique Sports Management, the management company which hired the box where the 
players were pictured.


 USM had booked a table in a hospitality marquee for racing at Cheltenham on 
Wednesday, but it was cancelled by the course on Tuesday evening.

 “We felt that we should take the necessary action and prevent them from 
taking the booking that they had with us for today,” Sophia Dale, Cheltenham’s 
communications manager, said on Wednesday. “We emailed them last night and told 
them that they wouldn’t be welcome to attend.”

 It is unclear whether any of the players were expecting to attend the track 
again today.

 “Incidents like this are almost unheard of,” Dale said. “We had nearly 68,000 
people here yesterday and that was a party of 20 to 30 people, and probably 
only two or three that were behaving inappropriately.

 “The hospitality team were aware of it because it had been reported by 
stewards in the area. They weren’t in a box [on Wednesday], they were in a 
hospitality facility and we just removed the table. We felt that it was 
important to show that that sort of behaviour is unacceptable in general, let 
alone at the Cheltenham Festival.”

 Unique Sports Management is run by Will Salthouse, a football agent who owns 
a share in the sprinter Moviesta with Harry Redknapp, the former Tottenham and 
West Ham manager. Moviesta won a Group Three race in Ireland last August, and 
finished third in the Group One Prix de l’Abbaye at Longchamp in October 2014.

 Unique Sports Management did not respond to a request for comment on 
Wednesday.
 