
Tuesday 29 November


Well, this second-line chemotherapy treatment is proving trickier than anyone 
expected. Although my blood levels – platelets, critical to blood clotting – 
and white cells, the ones that fight infection, do appear to return to normal 
between doses, every new chemo infusion really batters them. So today, I’m back 
at the Royal Marsden hospital for blood tests before what I hope will be more 
treatment on Thursday. And whoopee! Blood levels are all good. Mind you, after 
all the help they’ve been given – a platelet infusion and another string of 
self-injectable “growth factor” syringes to stimulate white blood-cell 
production in the bone marrow – they should be!

This being the third dose in the four-week cycle, I should be in line for my 
second visit to “club class” to get the extra drug ramucirumab the NHS won’t 
fund and which I have to pay privately for – you remember the £12,000-a-month 
job? But no. Consultant Dr Starling is still trying to get to the bottom of 
whether it’s the paclitaxel (that’s the standard chemotherapy drug theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> does pay for) that’s really attacking 
my internal systems, or what. So she recommends – given that we’re weeks away 
from the effects of the previous radiotherapy, there’s been no sign of the 
dreaded kidney stones and I’m not dehydrated – going for paclitaxel only to get 
the clearest view possible of its effects.

She also suggests a slightly lower dose than normal so as to reduce the risk 
of more serious side effects. What’s more, as this is the third dose in the 
cycle – it should have taken three weeks so far but it’s been more like six 
with all the extra recovery time added – next week should be a week off 
treatment, which should be a relief but in the circumstances doesn’t really 
feel like that. I’m left with a nagging worry – which I’m sure the medical team 
shares – about what we do next if I really can’t tolerate paclitaxel…

Saturday 3 December


I got a call a couple of weeks back from the chairman of my local rugby club – 
Harpenden – asking me whether I’d like to join him for the club’s Christmas 
lunch, which happily coincided with the England v Australia game. I said I had 
a very old friend visiting from Canada – but no problem, he was invited too. 
Then it was suggested that any money raised on the traditional raffle could go 
to any charity I’d care to nominate. I suggested MacmillanCancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Support and the Maggie’s drop-in 
centres and offered to say a few words of thanks to the assembled at some point.

Come the day, to be honest I was feeling OK but not great. A bit fatigued and 
feeling the cold – something I almost never used to do – not even running 
around those pitches refereeing rugby matches in the sleet and snow! But that 
was then. Now, many kilos lighter – which leads almost everyone I meet to tell 
me how well I’m looking! – I feel the cold intensely and, for reasons I hope 
are obvious, have an almost fatal attraction to padded chairs. Anyhow I arrive 
at the club – my Canadian friend is en route from Heathrow – to discover its 
not just a few words of thanks they want but that I’m the after-lunch guest 
speaker! And all I’ll say is that if you try Googling “cancer” and “jokes” you 
don’t get a great selection!

I did find a couple of cancer quips which, somewhat unexpectedly as I’d really 
no idea how a more light-hearted take on cancer would go down, produced huge 
waves of laughter, and although it was a rugby club Christmas lunch people 
seemed really keen to share the cancer story I told them – jokes and all. So 
much so that afterwards I was approached by lots of people talking about their 
experience of cancer or that of their families but also saying how much they’d 
enjoyed a good collective laugh about the subject – to go with the concern and 
the tears. What’s more they gave plenty, which will be passed on to the 
charities in due course.

Thursday 8 December


Back at hospital for blood tests and a chat – it’s the middle of my “week 
off”, remember. Well, it really couldn’t be much better. Blood pressure up and 
stable, no sign of wretched kidney stones and blood tests all good – actually 
excellent. So full speed ahead for treatment next week? Well, maybe not. Dr Dan 
the senior registrar produced a 32-page document about a clinical trial that I 
might be eligible for. It involves two immunotherapy drugs, nivolumab – of 
which more later – and another drug called “anti-LAG-3”. In a nutshell, cancers 
appear capable of escaping attack by your body’s own immune system by 
persuading (chemically, that is) key parts of the system to switch off. These 
drugs are designed to switch key elements of the system back on and therefore 
enable the immune system to attack the cancer.

And it would appear I am ideally suited to this trial, which is looking to 
recruit “gastric” participants. But here’s the thing. As Dr Dan readily 
acknowledges, the good blood results after the last lot of chemo might indicate 
that we’ve turned the corner and that the chemo isn’t perhaps as toxic as 
feared. Trouble is we’ll need at least one more cycle to know that for sure and 
it’s just as likely that the chemo remains fairly toxic and that in four weeks’ 
time the trial will have stopped recruiting and we’ll be left with reduced 
doses of chemo which might hold the cancer in check if we’re lucky. In other 
words, in chemo terms we might be left hobbling when we should be sprinting.

The trial, by contrast, sounds really interesting and even, dare I say it, 
exciting. So, decisions, decisions. And when you think about it – pretty big 
ones!

Saturday 10 December


Decided to go away to Devon and Dorset for the weekend to relax and ponder. 
Succumbed last night to glorious log fires and good food and, critically, two 
cocktails. Big mistake! As my liver has plenty of active cancer in it, it can 
produce an ache under my right ribs if provoked. And while a pint or a couple 
of glasses of wine seems to be OK – a negroni and an old-fashioned weren’t.

By late morning, news comes through that the Sunday Times writer AA Gill has 
died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/aa-gill-dies-weeks-after-revealing-he-had-cancer-in-restaurant-review-sunday-times>
. I knew him to say hello to but not well, but had felt a sort of kindred 
spirit – as we both had to come to terms with you know what. We’d also both had 
to deal with situations where the NHS wouldn’t fund drugs that might do us good 
– in his case the immunotherapy drug nivolumab. And although I knew his 
position was in many ways more difficult that mine, with more advanced spread 
of cancer to more difficult parts of the body, news of his passing came as a 
real shock. Actually it reduced me to tears.

Tuesday 13 December


Back at the Marsden: decision day on clinical trial. Blood tests all good. 
With one exception. All the usual suspects are fine but my albumin level is 
slightly low. Dr Starling says this could be a sign of poor nutrition or 
infection or a slightly misbehaving liver. But the critical point is that to 
get on to the nivolumab/anti-LAG-3 trial my albumin level had to be 28, whereas 
on Tuesday – the last time I could realistically be consented for the trial – 
my albumin was 26. So no trial. All more than slightly frustrating and, if I’m 
honest, disappointing.

But the rollercoaster moves on and another clinical trial is produced also 
involving nivolumab – the drug that might have helped AA Gill had he got it 
soon enough. What’s more, the rules of this trial mean I can have another round 
of chemo in the meantime. So suddenly we might be in a win/win situation? More 
chemo to keep control and check toxicity and a very promising new trial in the 
wings?

Decisions, decisions and all in a week! Oh, and happy Christmas – it’s one I 
shall treasure.
 