
Sometimes sport is at its most tense when it is at its most still – in those 
micro‑lulls before world title fights as the protagonists coil in their 
corners, awaiting the bell, and adrenaline and testosterone races through the 
crowd like white water; between the purse of a referee’s lips and the first 
step in a shootout; before the starter’s pistol shatters the hush of an Olympic 
100m final; and, yes, when the world chess champion is hunched over the board, 
brain scurrying back and forth through innumerable tunnels of calculation 
looking for a clear path to victory.

I can say that with some confidence having sat through most of the 11 games of 
the world chess championship between Magnus Carlsen and the challenger, Sergey 
Karjakin, in New York, including an epic 10th game which sprawled over six 
nervy and compelling hours until Carlsen finally found a way through the battle 
fog.

Afterwards both players looked shattered. Anyone still watching at 1.30am on 
Friday, UK time, would have known how they felt.

Magnus review – profile of the ‘Mozart of chess’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/27/magnus-review-carlsen-chess> 
The World Chess Federation claims that more than a billion viewers have tuned 
in on TV or online, which is obviously make-believe, taken from the IOC and 
Fifa school of wishful thinking. Even so, the TV figures for Carlsen’s last 
world championship match against the Indian Vishy Anand in 2014 (which included 
about half the population of Norway and between 80m and 100m people in India) 
were encouraging. They suggest that even in an era in which there are 
increasing laments about attention spans slipping; about the masses wanting 
instant gratification when watching sport and the consequences in terms of
plummeting Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/sky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off>
 and NFL viewing figures, there are still people who appreciate the thrill of 
the slow.

For years cooks and foodies stressed the joys of Slow Food. Watching Carlsen 
and Karjakin, and then rising early over the weekend to drift in and out of the
third Test between India and England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/england-india-day-two-third-test-match-report>
, provided a welcome reaffirmation of the virtues of Slow Sport, given time to 
breathe and mature.

I have watched most of the match on the website Chess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> 24, listening to the Russian 
super-grandmaster Peter Svidler whizz through almost mystical variations and 
complications with the strong German player Jan Gustafsson.

Svidler is a huge cricket fan and their discussions frequently veer into 
tangents, such as whether Pokemon Go is a secret surveillance tool for the CIA. 
He might have learned a trick or two from Test Match Special. Of course there 
are those who maintain that chess is not a sport, which seems an increasingly 
odd stance in an era where button-bashing eSports are on the march and when 
curling, lawn bowls and darts – also more tests of skill and nerve than Vo2 max 
– are given a free ride.

It also ignores the unique psychological strains chess places on its players. 
A witness to the 1951 world championship match between Mikhail Botvinnik and 
David Bronstein, for instance, noted that at the end of each game “Bronstein, 
and to a lesser extent Botvinnik, was likely to be wreathed in beads of sweat. 
Such was their toil.” During the Moscow Marathon between Anatoly Karpov and 
Garry Kasparov, over five months and 48 games, Karpov lost 10kg in weight.

Botvinnik – a non-smoker – used to prepare for some events by encouraging his 
training partner to smoke heavily while they played so that he would get 
acclimatised to facing smokers, while he would go skating to improve his 
stamina.

The preparation has stepped up a notch or two since, with this week’s 
Athletics Weekly noting approvingly how Carlsen takes regular 30-60 minute runs 
on an incline treadmill, yoga and playing football to ready himself for tough 
tournaments, while Karjakin has punishing training sessions with the former US 
Open tennis semi-finalist Anna Chakvetadze.

World Chess Championship: political intrigue lurks as battle reaches midway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/world-chess-championship-magnus-carlsen-sergey-karjakin>
He needs to, for Carlsen treats each match as an interrogation. Even when the 
game looks bone dry, and the opponent appears to have answered every question 
fluently, the Norwegian usually finds ways to make him question his position 
and himself.

And in an era of intense opening computer preparation Carlsen takes a 
different approach – heading wherever possible to virgin territory rather than 
theoretical novelty on move 38. He wants to make it an exam not a memory test. 
As Frederic Friedel, co-founder of the Chessbase chess software company, 
explains, his play is “like a tennis player turning up toWimbledon 
<https://twitter.com/> with an ancient wooden racket and winning”.

So far, though, the nerveless and cheery Karjakin has coped admirably. But the 
pressure is mounting. Game 11 on Saturday night was drawn, which means the 
match could well be decided in Monday night’s final classical game. If this 
game is drawn, play will switch to rapid-play or blitz games which is a bit 
like deciding who wins a drawn Test series by playing a one-day or Twenty20 
match.

Incidentally after game 11 Carlsen was asked the time-worn question, “What is 
chess: a sport, a game, science or art?” He smiled and gave a response as sharp 
as his suits. “Chess is definitely a sport more than anything else,” he said. 
“Of course the work I have done at home has something to do with science but 
I’m afraid to find art you’d have to go elsewhere since it becomes mostly about 
the finding the right result.”

Winning is everything, see. Spoken like a true sports person.
 