
Chibundu Onuzo was born in Nigeria in 1991 and is currently studying for a PhD 
at Kings College London. Her first novel was 2012’sThe Spider King’s Daughter, 
which she began writing aged 17. Her follow-up is the powerfulWelcome to Lagos.

How did it feel having your first novel published aged 21?
There’s an Igbo proverb: “Whenever a person wakes up is his own morning.” It 
was a brilliant, miraculous experience – but also really overwhelming​, which 
meant m​y second book​,Welcome to Lagos, was difficult to write. In my first 
novel there are only two main characters ​but ​this time I decided I wanted to 
write an ensemble novel but didn’t know how, so I went through lots of drafts 
trying out viewpoints – I think the beauty of it is working it out yourself.

What was the inspiration behind your second novel?
I was going to write a novel about a teenager moving to England, which would 
have been incredibly autobiographical because I moved to England aged 14 – but 
I wouldn’t have been able to write it with detachment and humour. I do want to 
write about that one day. Then I had a dream about two soldiers. The impetus, 
the seed of the idea was that dream. I’d also just read Amitav Ghosh’sSea of 
Poppies <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sea-of-poppies.html> and I really 
liked the ensemble cast.

In the acknowledgments you thank “Lagos, city of my birth, my dreams, my 
frustrations, my imagination”…
I started writing in primary school but Lagos wasn’t a place where I set my 
fiction until I moved to England. When I went to Lagos to visit I began to 
question things and not just passively move through the city. I began to wonder 
a lot more. InAmericanah <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/americanah.html> [by 
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie] there’s this idea that life is happening outside and 
then you get into the great outside and realise that life was happening in 
Lagos. I really love Lagos. At the same time, it is not a place you can 
romanticise – even from afar.

Tell me about your research process...
What happens in the book is a version of a real event – the Odi massacre​ in 
1999​. Interviews were very important to get the range of perspectives, from a 
woman who works for a charity with former militants in the Niger Delta to 
someone who’d interacted with politicians. I visit Lagos a lot – my parents and 
brother live there. I refresh my sense of Lagos as often as possible.

My mum bought us the books she read as a child as she had a very colonial 
education

You powerfully explore faith in this novel…
Christianity is a big part of my life. One of my favourite CS Lewis books is 
Surprised By Joy <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/surprised-by-joy.html>. In 
my first year of university I was exploring and questioning my faith, and I 
wanted to capture that rumination in this novel. Faith isn’t often explored in 
literary fiction from the inside although Marilynne Robinson’sHome and Gilead 
are brilliant.

How did you become interested in the theme of social divides?
I knew from a young age about injustice and was aware of that aspect of 
Nigeria. There’s a baseline of opportunity that is not there for so many 
people. We went to a church where we had friends from across the social 
spectrum and we would go to each other’s houses and see that not everyone lived 
as ​we did. When we go back to the village where my father is from, I can see 
where he springs from – the roads are still not tarred, there isn’t good access 
to healthcare and running water. They started off in a hut and that hut is 
still in the family compound – so there’s no need for any airs and graces.

Tell me about your literary influences.
My dad was the oral storyteller and my mum bought us the books she read as a 
child, as she had a very colonial education –David Copperfield and Rebecca and 
Little Women. During the school lunch break, I felt transported to 19th-century 
England. I really feel that theParis Review was like my creative writing 
master. It gave so much good advice – some of my favourites are Toni Morrison’s 
and John Steinbeck’s interviews. I went through a phase where I would read one 
interview a day. I felt mentored by all these writers.

Are you still a voracious reader?
Yes. I’ve just started The Goldfinch 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/goldfinch-2.html>​ by Donna Tartt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/oct/13/donna-tartt-quiet-american-profile>
. Libraries are so miraculous. It’s really sad that they’re closing libraries; 
it’s cutting off people’s opportunities. I know what it is to come from a 
culture where books are a luxury. In the library I was a member of in Nigeria 
you could only borrow one book at a time. Here, I discovered you could borrow 
10 books at a time – riches! Wealth beyond measure! Books are expensive in 
Nigeria. So reading is an expensive habit. I became aware at an early age of 
the power of books.

• Welcome to Lagos by Chibundu Onuzo is published by Faber (£12.99). To order 
a copy for £10.65 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/welcome-to-lagos.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99
 