
The appearance of Queen of the South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> in the Scottish Cup 
final this afternoon may represent simply the latest in a long recent line of 
romanticised knockout episodes to many but Gordon Chisholm has a more serious 
agenda.

Few managers can claim to have guided two different clubs to Scottish 
football's showpiece in four seasons, particularly given that neither was 
especially powerful at the time and one was from the First Division. Chisholm, 
sacked by Dundee United in 2005 after a final defeat by a Celtic team including 
such illustrious names as Craig Bellamy, Chris Sutton and Henrik Larsson, 
returns to Hampden this afternoon. First Division Queens may be the embodiment 
of an underdog against the relative might ofRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, yet their manager has points to 
prove.

"There was just so much pressure at United at that particular time," recalled 
Chisholm, who had only narrowly steered the Tangerines from relegation. "I 
didn't have the job on a full-time basis and had been working to try and keep 
the team in the Premier League. Then from nowhere the final was upon us; it 
came so quickly. All throughout this week I've been much more relaxed than I 
was before that final. I want to enjoy it."

Chisholm's aim when he stepped down to Scottish football's second tier, 
following unemployment and his most harrowing time in the game, was simple: "I 
wanted to prove I could do the job." The evidence is impressive as Queens, far 
from the biggest spenders in the league and utilising a first-team squad of 
only 19, finished fourth in this season's First Division. On their route to the 
final they have disposed of Dundee, who came second, and Premier League 
Aberdeen, beaten 4-3 in an epic semi-final.

"One of the things I'll say to the boys before the game is to think about the 
semi-final," Chisholm said. "We didn't go there and freeze last time so there's 
no reason why we should this time. It's a bigger occasion with a full house but 
I think our players have the character. I don't think I have boys who will 
buckle. If they were going to do that, then I think it would have happened in 
the semi-final when Aberdeen kept pegging us back. Instead they showed great 
character and spirit and I'll be expecting exactly the same thing from them on 
Saturday."

By chance the man Chisholm replaced both on a temporary basis at United three 
years ago and then permanently in Dumfries last summer was Ian McCall, a Queens 
supporter from his youth and someone who will don a blue and white scarf to 
cheer them on this afternoon, despite his current position as manager of 
Partick Thistle. McCall will be joined by 16,000 followers of the First 
Division club on Glasgow's south side, the sight of a capacity Hampden proving 
timely with theScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> 
lacking a sponsor.

The chairman, David Rae, a successful local farmer who has ploughed much of 
the wealth he earned from his agricultural career into Queens, will be honoured 
by supporters who will don frizzy, grey wigs for their day out. Dumfries, which 
last celebrated success when Queens won a somewhat low-key Second Division and 
Challenge Cup double in 2002, has been decked out in blue and white for the 
last fortnight.

A provincial club who have regularly returned reasonable crowds despite seldom 
grabbing the limelight - this is the first national final of Queens' 89-year 
history and they have progressed to the last four of the Scottish Cup on only 
one other occasion - the Doonhamers are even guaranteed Uefa Cup football next 
season. It may take a lot, therefore, to coax Chisholm towards seemingly bigger 
things.

"If I could go and do something here - with the resources we have - it would 
be a remarkable achievement. I still have ambitions of going to the top level; 
I think everybody feels that way. I must admit, though, that I've enjoyed the 
spell I've had here; I couldn't say that before [at Dundee United]. We've been 
up near the top of the First Division and had this cup run and I've loved it. 
There will be Europe to play in, so I still feel I've got a lot to do here."

Perhaps with his own hardships in mind Chisholm is lavish in his praise for 
the man who will sit in the opposing dug-out this afternoon. Walter Smith, 
after all, has recovered from the brink of a possible and enforced retirement 
four years ago to reinvigorate both his own and Rangers' prospects.

"I've been a great admirer of Walter for a long time," Chisholm said. "I've 
met him a few times and he's a very likeable man. He has done great things at 
Rangers, for them to get to this season's Uefa Cup final was absolutely 
first-class.

"I remember years ago he came down to one of the coaching courses I was on and 
gave a lecture. I sat there thinking how humble he was considering what he'd 
achieved in the game. He was so down to earth, talking to everyone on the same 
level. For what he's done, you'd think he would carry some arrogance but 
nothing could be further from the truth."

And the message for his own players? "Don't come off the park with any 
regrets. Go and enjoy the day but make sure you show we're not just there to 
make up the numbers. We're there to compete, so go out and do it.

"Every supporter is there for the day out but we're there to do business. Play 
football and win the cup; that's the attitude we'll have."
 