
Queen of the South's manager, Gordon Chisholm, faces an unlikely dilemma 
before he can plan in earnest for theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final. Queens, of the First 
Division, booked a maiden final appearance in their 89-year history with an 
epic 4-3 victory over Premier League Aberdeen at Hampden Park on Saturday. 
Chisholm later revealed that the majority of his first-team squad's contracts 
are due to expire before May 24, the date of Scottish football's showpiece, 
meaning he will have to enter into swift negotiations.

"It was a massive win for us, we have made history," said Chisholm, who also 
guided Dundee United to the final in 2005.

"This is our first year as a full-time club and most of my players are out of 
contract before the final, so we'll have to have a chat with them. My chairman 
[Davie Rae] has been aQueen of the South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> supporter all his days 
and, when I saw the joy on his face, it summed everything up for me."

Jim Thomson, the Queens captain, turns 37 on May 24 but his current contract 
ends nine days earlier. "Surely I'll have a decent bargaining hand now," joked 
the defender.

The Dumfries side, who featured on live television for the first time, are now 
facing the prospect of Uefa Cup football next season and could become the first 
team since East Fife in 1938 to lift the Scottish Cup while outside the 
country's top division.

In what was one of the most remarkable matches ever witnessed at Hampden, 
Queens led on three separate occasions through Steve Tosh, Paul Burns and Sean 
O'Connor. Andrew Considine, twice, and Barry Nicholson hauledAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> level each time but John 
Stewart, one of three former Dons players in the Queens line-up, won the 
encounter with half an hour to play. Chisholm's team, 350-1 outsiders with 
bookmakers to lift the Scottish Cup when the tournament started, are now as 
short as 7-2.

This was, however, a second disastrous domestic semi-final defeat this season 
for Jimmy Calderwood's Aberdeen.

Shambolic defending was ultimately their undoing, with the manager adamant 
that he will, like Chisholm, consider the futures of some players but with an 
altogether different agenda in mind.

"This is one of the worst occasions I've ever been involved in and I hope the 
players feel the same," said Calderwood. "Performances like that give me food 
for thought."

Man of the match Steve Tosh (Queen of the South)
 