
Chris Brown’s promoter has denied defrauding an influential Philippine 
religious sect in a case that almost derailed his world tour, according to 
lawyers for the American hip-hop star’s business partner.


Brown was left in limbo at a hotel room in Manila for three days last month as 
the immigration bureau stopped him leaving the country over a concert row with 
the Iglesia ni Cristo (Church of Christ).

His Canadian promoter, Michael Pio Roda, was arrested. He denies he and Brown 
received $1m (about £645,000) for a 31 December concert hosted by the sect last 
year in which the singer was a no-show, his lawyers said in a statement.

“To hold Mr Pio Roda accountable for the entire $1m … is not only without 
legal or factual basis but is a travesty of justice and a continued violation 
of human rights,” they said.

Chris Brown posts video rant while trapped in Philippines over fraud claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/23/chris-brown-posts-video-rant-while-trapped-in-philippines-over-claim>
The Iglesia-linked local concert producer Maligaya Development Corp, has asked 
the justice department to file criminal fraud charges against Brown and Pio 
Roda for failing to show up at the concert even though they had been advanced 
their million-dollar fee.

Philippine prosecutors are studying the fraud complaint to determine if 
criminal charges will be filed in court.

Brown did not attend the show due to a lost passport.

The tattooed and gold-toothed star performed at another concert in Manila last 
month, but was stranded in his hotel due to the fraud complaint.

During his forced stay in Manila, he posted bizarre videos where he 
breakdanced and got down on his knees, begging the authorities to allow him to 
leave and resume his world tour.

Despite eventually being allowed to leave the country, the fraud complaint 
hearings against him will proceed, authorities said.

A spokesman for the Iglesia was unavailable on Friday, while a Maligaya 
official declined comment when contacted by AFP.


Pio Roda’s lawyers said he received just $45,000 from Maligaya. He and Brown 
received another $578,750 in advance from another company involved in Brown’s 
show, J Williams Management, the statement said.

However, there was already agreement between the parties that this would be 
repaid under a “compromise” signed last month before Brown’s Manila concert, it 
added.

“Mr Pio Roda’s Gestapo-like arrest and detention beginning 23 July 2015 and 
the filing of a one-million-dollar criminal complaint is a shocking 
development, if not a reflection of bad faith in breach of the terms of the 
compromise agreement,” it said.
 