
To begin a column by referencing The OC, a teen TV show that ended nine years 
ago, probably dates me only marginally less than the fact that the album I 
listened to most this year, Spotify tells me, was Pure R&B 90s. The cutting 
bleeding edge, that’s what you come here for, folks.

The OC, a show that is discussed these days with baffling infrequency, brought 
a lot of good into my life. First, it resolved the question of what happened to 
Jim Robinson from Neighbours (AKA the actor Alan Dale) after his too-early 
heart attack on the Ramsay Street kitchen floor, and the answer was, somewhat 
unexpectedly, he became a mean multimillionaire in California. Did anyone tell 
his mother-in-law, Helen Daniels, about this? Or was she too busy running her 
chauffeur service, Home James, to listen? But it also gave nomenclature to a 
rarely articulated and yet annual event in my life. Chrismukkah 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0663865/>, undoubtedly The OC’s greatest (only) 
legacy.

Chrismukkah is the portmanteau coined by the show’s character Seth Cohen to 
refer to the celebration of bothChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> and Hanukah. But the show 
fudges the issue by saying Sethhad to do this because his father is Jewish and 
his mother a Wasp. The truth is, a lot of Jews – in fact, nearly every Jew I 
know – does it just because they want to. Hey, we might say our prayers in 
Hebrew instead of Latin but we want to eat chocolate Santas for 10 days 
straight, too, OK?

Another TV show nodded to this. In Seinfeld 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0098904/>, George Costanza’s father creates 
Festivus, “A festivus for the rest of us!” For Festivus, the Costanzas have an 
undecorated aluminium pole instead of a Christmas tree; but a lot of Jews love 
the actual Christmas paraphernalia, trees and all, because, dammit, it’s so 
pretty and cheering and a lot of it is really, really tasty (not the tree). 
Given how guilty we feel anyway, this is not an easy thing to admit.

I have always lived a Chrismukkah life. I am fully Jewish – nothing ish about 
it – and yet, every December, after eight nights of lighting candles and saying 
prayers, my parents would go buy a Christmas tree while my sister and I wrote 
wishlists for Santa. And for years I thought this was totally normal (though I 
knew enough not to mention it at Hebrew school).

AA Gill’s fearless journalism was an inspiration – so why didn’t I tell him 
that?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/17/aa-gill-fearless-journalism-inspiration-hadley-freeman>
In my 20s, a Jewish boyfriend(ish) and I stopped off at my parents’ house one 
December evening. He looked around my parents’ living room, my mother’s 
Christmas village (don’t ask) in one corner, the tree in another, the handmade 
stockings for all four of us hanging from the mantelpiece, and he then looked 
at me as if I’d just admitted I was an undercover MI5 agent and had a 
heretofore unmentioned husband and four children stashed up in Manchester.

“Look,” I said, “Christmas involves family, an outrageous number of calories, 
the deification of a baby boy and the secular worship of a fat man with 
out-of-control facial hair: there are few holidaysmore Jewish than Christmas.” 
My mother appeared in the doorway: “Are you two staying for dinner? We’re 
having pork chops.”

The loss, I think we can all agree, was his.

And for a moment, I did feel like a bad Jew. Is this what I went to Hebrew 
school for, to celebrate Jesus’ birthday? But I know myself very well and one 
truth I have long accepted is that I’m greedy: I want the (vaguely religious) 
little Jewish holiday that sets me apartand the (largely secular) global one 
that lets me join the party.

Anyway, today is a proper Chrismukkah, because for only the fifth time in 100 
years the first night of Hanukah begins tonight, on Christmas Eve. Something to 
do with the quirks of the lunar and Gregorian calendars (I’d explain this in 
greater detail but I used up my wordcount on the Helen Daniels joke). For us 
Chrismukkah Jews, this is, to be honest, a bit of a kick in the pants: we 
usually get to drag out our celebrations (and demands for presents) for a month 
– like the Queen’s birthday, only with more dreidels. But this year Christians 
and Jews (the properly observant ones, not the lightweight Chrismukkah ones) 
are all lighting their candles together, which, let’s face it, is an 
unexpectedly hopeful way to end a year defined otherwise entirely by divisions. 
And let me tell you, eating chocolate coins and chocolate Santas in one sitting 
is not just possible – it’s recommended. Happy Chrismukkah.
 