
Chris Yarran has left Richmond <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> 
without playing a game for his new AFL club. The Tigers announced on Tuesday 
they had released the defender from his contract, effective immediately, so he 
can deal with personal issues.

The news comes a day after the utility had joined the Tigers at an open 
training session. “Chris has found it difficult to meet the demands ofAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> football given his personal issues,” 
Tigers football manager Neil Balme said.

Essendon settle with 18 players over lost earnings from AFL doping bans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/essendon-settle-with-18-players-over-lost-earnings-from-afl-doping-bans>
“Ultimately it was agreed with Chris, and his management, that stepping away 
from the game is in the best interest of his long-term health and wellbeing.”

Carlton originally recruited Yarran with pick No6 in the 2006 draft and he 
played 119 games for the Blues. At his peak, Yarran became a damaging half-back 
and finished fourth in Carlton’s 2014 best and fairest.

They traded Yarran after last season for pick 19, with the Tigers bullish 
about what he could add to their defence. But it soon became clear there were 
problems, with Yarran lacking fitness when he arrived at Richmond for 
pre-season training.

He was soon struggling with a calf injury and Yarran stepped away from the 
game midway through this season to deal with personal issues. Still, he hired a 
personal coach and tried to rebuild his fitness over the last few weeks, 
holding out of hope of playing in the AFL for Richmond.

Yarran also did not play any VFL matches this season. He trained with 
Richmond’s rehab group a fortnight ago as the Tigers started pre-season 
training.

“I am extremely grateful for the support Richmond has given me over the past 
year,” Yarran said in the club statement. “I am deeply disappointed my ongoing 
health issues have not allowed me to repay the club and its supporters.”

It is unclear whether he will eventually try to make a football comeback.
 