
American hip-hop star Chris Brown took to swearing and break-dancing as he 
ranted on Thursday about being stranded in thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> over a row with an influential 
sect.


The 26-year-old was stopped from leaving the Philippine capital on Wednesday, 
a day after performing at a Manila concert, amid a fraud complaint filed 
against him by the indigenous Christian group Iglesia ni Cristo (Church of 
Christ).

“Can somebody please tell me what the fuck is going on? I don’t know. I’m 
reading headline after headline. What the fuck? What the fuck is going on?,” 
the pierced and tattooed singer said in a video post on his official Instagram 
account that later appeared to have been taken down.

Chris Brown prevented from leaving Manila by fraud allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/chris-brown-prevented-from-leaving-manila-fraud-allegations>
The country’s justice department said the row erupted after Brown failed to 
show up for a scheduled New Year’s Eve concert at an Iglesia-owned indoor arena 
on Manila’s northern outskirts on December 31 last year.

The immigration bureau said Brown must prove there was no ground to charge him 
with fraud before he is allowed to leave the country. State prosecutors are 
studying the Iglesia complaint.

The video appeared to have been taken in a hotel room, with soda cans and 
snacks scattered on tables. His companions were sprawled on couches, wrapped in 
white blankets.

In a second video post, Brown raised both hands in the air and said: “I didn’t 
do nothing”. He then break-danced in front of a giant flat screen television 
that was showing computer games.

Brown was smiling and appeared playful in both videos, posted in the early 
hours of Thursday.

The Grammy Award-winning singer has not left the Philippines, contrary to a US 
media report that he has left for Hong Kong, Bureau of Immigration spokeswoman 
Elaine Tan told AFP.

One Direction members ordered to pay $5,000 drug bond in Philippines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/one-direction-members-ordered-to-pay-5000-drug-bond-ahead-of-philippine-gig>
Manila airport authorities said his private jet sat at a hangar on Thursday.

Press reports said he is holed up in a Manila hotel two days after his Tuesday 
concert at another Manila venue.

Calls and emails to the Iglesia ni Cristo and to Brown’s spokeswoman and 
concert promoters Thursday seeking comment on the case were unanswered.

Fans cheered and jeered the singer on his Instagram posts.

“Pay your debts, estafa (fraud) boy,” Erwin John Antonio Capili 
(threetothehead7) commented.

“You might as well go to Palawan, while you’re still here. Enjoy the beaches 
we have,” Rach Mapa (rachelismbebe) said, referring to a tourist island famous 
for white sand beaches and dive spots.

The Brown saga was just the latest run-in by foreign entertainers against 
conservative religious groups in the devoutly Catholic Philippines, a former 
Spanish and American colony.

In March, two members of British boy band One Direction, who were known to 
have smoked marijuana, each paid a 200,000 peso ($4,500) bond before they could 
perform in Manila.

In 2012, flamboyant American pop singer Lady Gaga drew the ire of conservative 
Catholics for alleged blasphemous imagery, prompting strict censors’ monitoring 
of her show.

In June 2009, Brown pleaded guilty to assaulting pop star Rihanna, who 
suffered facial injuries and was forced to cancel an appearance at that year’s 
Grammy Awards.

Brown was sentenced to five years’ probation, a year-long domestic violence 
program and 180 days of community labor.

His probation was finally lifted in March this year.
 