
Paulton Rovers, the lowest-ranked first-round team, were on the receiving end 
of the biggest defeat as they crashed 7-0 at home toNorwich. However, while the 
League One side, helped by four goals from Chris Martin, clearly enjoyed 
themselves in front of the television cameras, it was a rather different story 
for a number of other Football League teams – notably Crewe,Hartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool>, Shrewsbury, Grimsby and 
Yeovil, who were knocked out byYork, Kettering, Staines, Bath and Oxford United 
respectively.York beat Crewe 3-2 after trailing 2-1 with just four minutes to 
go. Then Richard Pacquette – remember him for the goal that put Havant and 
Waterlooville ahead in the fourth round at Liverpool in 2008? – brought York 
level and Richard Brooks hit his second goal from the edge of the penalty area 
to send the Minstermen into the next round.

Kettering claimed the biggest scalp with their 1-0 win at Hartlepool . 
Ironically, Kettering's manager, Mark Cooper, is a former Hartlepool player and 
he was Tamworth's manager when they put Hartlepool out of the competition in 
2005. The player who did it yesterday was Moses Ashikodi. A striker whose 
previous clubs have included West Ham and Rangers, he got the goal with a 
header from a Nicky Eaden corner.

Bath City won 2-0 at Grimsby while Staines won 1-0 at Shrewsbury. The Staines 
hero was Ali Chaaban. Looked upon by Staines fans as the local footballing 
equivalent of Ali G – they refer to him as Ali C – the Lebanese forward brushed 
aside two Shrewsbury challenges before finding the net with a rasping shot.

Yeovil, one of the most famous of all giant-killers in their non-League days, 
fell 1-0 atOxford United .through a lobbed goal by Jack Midson, who was 
involved in Histon's memorable Cup run last season. ,

Other notable performances by non-League teams included that of Luton in 
drawing 3-3 againstRochdale at Kenilworth Road. You had to feel sorry for them 
because they were leading 3-1 with three minutes remaining, only for two 
close-range strikes from Joe Thompson to make it all-square again.Gateshead, 
having allowedBrentford to come from behind to establish a 2-1 lead, managed to 
force a replay with a Peter Winn volley in the third minute of injury time.
Stevenage also left it late, with a Charlie Griffin header in stoppage time 
giving them a 1-1 draw againstPort Vale.

Lincoln City were pegged back to 1-1 by AFC Telford early in the second half 
but regrouped to win 3-1, whileNorthampton were also made to work hard before 
Luke Guttridge's two goals helped them to see offFleetwood Town 2-1.

The most thrilling tie was at Wycombe where Brighton, having led 1-0 and 3-2 
and trailed 2-1 and 4-3, ended up with a 4-4 draw. The star of the show, which 
also produced two sendings-off and three penalties, was Brighton's Glenn 
Murray. Recalled to the starting line-up in place of Liam Dickinson, Murrray 
scored two goals – including the fourth from a spot-kick seven minutes from the 
end – and also played a big part in their two others.
 