
Mark Hughes' prospects of marking his first season in charge at Eastlands with 
a Uefa Cup challenge have received a boost afterManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> were handed a relatively 
modest test in the second qualifying round in this afternoon's draw in Nyon. 
City, who made the hat by virtue of their exemplary disciplinary record, will 
face Danish Superliga side FC Midtjylland for a place in the first round draw 
on August 29.

Aston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>, who forced 
their way into contention by defeating Odense BK in the Intertoto Cup last 
weekend, will likewise be eyeing further progress after drawing Icelandic side 
Hafnarfjordur. City and Villa will begin their respective campaigns at home on 
August 14, with the second legs to follow on August 28.

Queen of the South's reward for their dramatic run to last season's Scottish 
Cup final is a clash with another Danish side, Nordsjalland. Gordon Chisholm, 
theQueen of the South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> 
manager, conceded that he knows little about Nordsjalland, but promised to make 
the most of the club's first ever foray into European competition.

"I don't know much about them but I will try to get over there before the 
first leg to see them," said Chisholm. "The standard of football over there is 
quite high but we were never going to get an easy draw. It's not often you get 
the chance to play in Europe so we are going to make the most of it and enjoy 
it. The younger boys at the club can only benefit, it's a different type of 
football and so it will be a great experience. And I am going to enjoy it as I 
enjoyed the Scottish Cup final last season."

St Patrick's Athletic, who beat Latvian side JFK Olimps Riga in the first 
qualifying round, will fly the flag for Ireland against seasoned European 
campaigners Elfsborg, of Sweden.

Uefa Cup second qualifying round draw

Siroki Brijeg v Besiktas
Zrinjski v Braga
Lokomotiv Sofia v Borac
Vojvodina v Hapoel Tel-Aviv
Aris Salonika v NK Slaven Koprivnica
Litex Lovech v Hapoel Kiryat Shmona
Deportivo La Coruna v Hajduk Split
APOEL Nicosia v Crvena Zvezda
Vllaznia v Napoli
Maccabi Netanya v Cherno More
Omonia Nicosia v AEK Athens
Liepajas Metalurgs v Vaslui
FC Zurich v Sturm Graz
VfB Stuttgart v Gyor
Lech Poznan v Grasshoppers
Slovan Liberec v MSK Zilina
FC WIT Georgia v Austria Magna
Young Boys v Debrecen
Legia Warsaw v FC Moscow
Dnipro v Bellinzona
Interblock Ljubljana v Hertha Berlin
FK Suduva v SV Red Bull Salzburg
Djurgardens IF v Rosenborg
Queen of South v FC Nordsjaelland
Gent v Kalmar FF
Man City v FC Midtjylland
FC Honka v Viking FK
FC Haka v Brondby
Stabaek v Rennes
FC Copenhagen v Lillestrom
F Elfsborg v St Patraicks
Aston Villa v FH Hafnarfjordur 
 