
Ricky Hatton will put his new career as a promoter ahead of his love of 
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> if their 
FA Cup semi-final against neighbours United clashes with Amir Khan's world 
title defence next month.

The Football Association has still to announce whether the all-Manchester 
semi-final at Wembley will be played on Saturday April 16 – when Khan will 
defend his WBA super lightweight title against Paul McCloskey – or the 
following day.

"I'd be heartbroken if they clashed," said Hatton at a press conference in 
Manchester's Lowry Hotel to announce the details of the undercard. "Manchester 
City don't too often get the chance to go to Wembley. But my loyalty is to my 
fighters – if it came to a choice between the Manchester derby and the show, 
the show would come first, because I want Hatton Promotions to be a massive 
success.

"But Manchester City are also in Europe, so we could have a game in that on 
the Thursday. I'm hoping that will mean City's [semi-final] being pushed to the 
Sunday, so I can see Amir defend his title on the Saturday and then see us 
whoop them lot."

Hatton said he is relishing his new role as a promoter. "I always said after 
you become a champion, the next best thing is to make a champion," he added. "I 
still dream of a comeback every morning when I open my eyes. But the one thing 
that is a consolation if I never fight again is seeing my fighters."

Khan is currently in the Philippines with his trainer Freddie Roach, sparring 
with five fighters including Manny Pacquiao. Hatton visited the camp at Roach's 
Wild Card gym in Los Angeles before they moved on, and said: "What's not to 
like about this young man? He's gone across to the other side of the world to 
improve. When the likes of Pacquiao and [Floyd] Mayweather pass the torch on as 
the best pound-for-pound fighter, Amir is in prime position to grab that."

Hatton is confident that Khan's homecoming will attract a 19,500 capacity to 
the MEN Arena, with more than 12,000 tickets already sold. "It's going to be a 
simple case of 'If you snooze, you lose'," he said, showing that he seems to be 
picking up the promoting game pretty quickly. "It's going to be a fantastic 
night of boxing."
 