
The Prince of Wales has launched an attack on climate change sceptics, 
describing them as the "headless chicken brigade" and accusing "powerful groups 
of deniers" of engaging in intimidation.

Charles, who has long campaigned to raise awareness of global warming and has 
hit out at sceptics in the past, unleashed his latest salvo during an awards 
ceremony at Buckingham Palace for green entrepreneurs.

"It is baffling, I must say, that in our modern world we have such blind trust 
in science and technology that we all accept what science tells us about 
everything - until, that is, it comes to climate science," the prince said in a 
speech on Thursday evening.

"All of a sudden, and with a barrage of sheer intimidation, we are told by 
powerful groups of deniers that the scientists are wrong and we must abandon 
all our faith in so much overwhelming scientific evidence.

"So, thank goodness for our young entrepreneurs here this evening, who have 
the far-sightedness and confidence in what they know is happening to ignore the 
headless chicken brigade and do something practical to help."

Charles made his comments as the inaugural Prince of Wales Young 
Sustainability Entrepreneur Prize was awarded to Gamal Albinsaid, who founded 
the Indonesian social enterprise Garbage Clinical Insurance, which helps the 
poor gain access to health services and education through the collection and 
recycling of rubbish.

The prince told the audience of sustainability experts, entrepreneurs, 
business leaders, and policymakers: "As you may possibly have noticed from time 
to time, I have tended to make a habit of sticking my head above the parapet 
and generally getting it shot off for pointing out what has always been 
blindingly obvious to me.

"Perhaps it has been too uncomfortable for those with vested interests to 
acknowledge, but we have spent the best part of the past century 
enthusiastically testing the world to utter destruction; not looking closely 
enough at the long-term impact our actions will have."

Charles has previously said world leaders must "face down a storm of 
opposition from all sides" in order to tackle climate change, last year 
describing those who questioned the need to act as "the incorporated society of 
syndicated sceptics and the international association of corporate lobbyists".

He was criticised at the time by the Global Warming Policy Foundation, a 
climate-sceptic thinktank set up by former Conservative chancellor Nigel 
Lawson, which accused him of engaging in "apocalyptic rhetoric".
 