
Since my family will be having a vast Christmas dinner with a raft of 
Australian fly-in guests spreading through several rooms, I have made it known, 
in my position as patriarch, that I favour a simple solution to the question of 
which big bird to feature, goose or turkey. Magisterially, I suggested that 
there should be both.

Thus I dodged the question that stumped Theresa May, who was airborne when 
some pain in the arse of a reporter tried to frame her as a plutocatfor 
favouring goose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/pms-christmas-poirot-goose-and-church-before-presents>
. Either the same pain in the arse of a reporter or a different one also tried 
to frame her forspending too much money on a pair of leather trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
. She dodged that question by implying, surely correctly, that her trousers 
were good for the leather industry, for British couture, and indeed for almost 
every living entity in Britain, except perhaps the animals from which the 
leather was peeled.

Anything to stave off the dumb reporters until the day arrives when Fleet 
Street finally twigs that Theresa is the biggest fashion asset to Britain since 
the first years of the Queen’s reign. When the penny drops, the smart reporters 
will be put on the case and Theresa will find that the quality of questioning 
she must face will go up by a mile.

I haven’t been studying the future president Trump’s schedule, but it’s a fair 
bet that he will turn up at No 10 before May turns up at the White House. 
Should the second eventuality prove to be the case, the president would be able 
to stave off awkwardness at the state dinner by giving the cue for another 
medley from Tony Bennett. But if the president is at No 10, he will be almost 
alone with her and face to face with what I am certain is his chief 
psychological problem. Like any other man who drivels about women when he is 
alone with a man, when alone with a woman, he has no clue what to say.

Clive James: Does David Attenborough say, 'Thank Christ it's the snow leopards 
again'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/03/clive-james-on-planet-earth-two>
Hence Trump’s frequent verbal atrocities. They are all boasts and, like all 
boasts, they spring from an aching wish. My own guess is that Theresa, having 
sussed in advance that her interlocutor is a blithering saddo, will put him 
at his ease with an extravagant compliment about his non-existent personal 
magnetism. “That thing on your head is divine,” she will be already saying 
during the soup course. “So elegant, yet so masculine. How do you keep it in 
place? Surely only the strongest industrial adhesive can contain something so 
powerfully virile?” By that time, she will be breathing in his ear and he 
eating out of her hand. Cue violins.
 