
Watching the excellent Netflix series The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-crown>, I have heard so many 
actors call each other “Your excellency” that I have begun to hanker for an 
earlier time when, in conversation, almost everybody was given a job 
description by everybody else. I can imagine being called “Your medium 
importance” by a restaurant doorman, and calling someone else “Your vanishing 
significance”. They all knew where they were.

Instead of having to interpret someone’s social significance from a pewter 
lapel button, you found out straight away that he was the holder of the Queen’s 
dancing master’s velvet gloves or tea-maker in ordinary to the mayor of 
Pitlochry. Everyone would bow at the correct angle to everybody else. The fact 
that no one would be doing anything but bowing would be a minor issue.

Japan used to be like that. For centuries after a special language for the 
royal family ceased to be convenient, the emperor and his relatives spoke a 
tongue that no one else could easily interpret. When Japan surrendered in 1945, 
he broadcast a speech that might as well have been a Martian telephone order 
for room service. Luckily, the listening Americans figured it out before they 
bombarded Tokyo with a 1,000-tonne order of tea and toast.

What adds poignancy to the story is that the emperor was surrounded by 
intelligence officers who realised it was high time to send precisely the right 
signal, so the imperial forces would know the moment had come to stop fighting. 
It was just that none of them knew how to tell him so.

Clive James: ‘Trump’s boasts spring from an aching wish’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/24/clive-james-on-donald-trump-meeting-theresa-may>
Nevertheless, it would be handy if we all spoke a language sufficiently 
stuffed with honorific tags and phrases that we all knew where we stood. 
Recently, I have been unable to get out much due to my fragile health. Instead, 
people were led before my chair. Some were of abbreviated stature. It would 
have helped if they had been coached to say, “Merry Christmas, your venerable 
great-uncleness”, or something similarly specific. Instead, the really tiny 
ones tended to spit cake.

But somehow we all got through it, and I haven’t been as happy since the year 
I got my Hornby “O” gauge clockwork train set. The second world war was only 
just over, and it was a huge feat of organisation to adapt Britain’s shadow 
factories from making Avro Lancasters to making wind-up tin train sets that ran 
in a circle. Out in the antipodes, we watched the trains clatter around in 
their restricted orbits and had no idea the postwar international toy market 
would very soon be dominated by guess who? The Japanese and the Germans. Defeat 
gave them time to think.
 