
All 16 NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> clubs have reportedly 
issued a no-confidence vote in ARL commission chairman John Grant and called 
for him to be sacked.

The chairmen of all clubs have sent a letter to NRL headquarters asking for 
Grant’s head, according to News Corp Australia.

They have called for an emergency meeting for a vote on his future amid 
growing frustration over a failure to come to an agreement on club funding.

NRL and clubs fail to reach funding deal as chairmen walk out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/nrl-and-clubs-fail-to-reach-funding-deal-as-chairmen-walk-out>
Earlier NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg defended Grant and hosed down talk 
of a move by clubs to oust him.

Tension has risen between the clubs and Grant over the failure to secure their 
funding agreement, with four club chairmen walking out of a meeting with him 
Greenberg at Rugby League Central on Wednesday.

The walkout came after the NRL pulled the club funding agreement from the 
table, arguing that until the collective bargaining agreement and salary cap 
were agreed upon, it was pointless negotiating that deal.

While it would require 75 per cent of clubs and the QRL and NSWRL to affect 
change to the commission board, it’s been suggested Grant’s departure could act 
as a circuit breaker for the growing rift.

But Greenberg had no doubt Grant should remain in charge.

“John’s a good man who works hard and always puts the game first,” Greenberg 
said on Thursday.

“And he’s continued to do that as the chairman. I have absolute faith in that.”

Club bosses are frustrated that they couldn’t reach an agreement nearly 12 
months after signing a memorandum of understanding over funding and they’re 
concerned they won’t receive as much of the new $1.8 billion television deal as 
they thought.

Last December, the clubs and governing bodies reached an in-principle 
agreement that from 2018 club funding would equate to 130 per cent of the 
salary cap but that deal was never finalised.

Explaining the delay, Greenberg also said the commission and NRL had to be 
mindful of the welfare of the game overall, including looking after bush and 
grassroots level football amid concerns about a drop in participation numbers.

“We’ve got some concerns about where we’re heading,” Greenberg said.

“We’re not the only sport concerned about participation trends.

“What that means is we’ve got to think very carefully about our strategy and 
how we apply funds whether it’s in regional areas in the bush or in the city 
areas.”

There will be another meeting between Grant and the clubs next week.

Rugby League Players Association chairman Clint Newton said he wasn’t yet 
concerned that the salary cap for the 2018 season hadn’t been set even though 
it was proving difficult for some players to negotiate contracts.

“It’s difficult but at the end of the day we don’t want to be rushed into a 
position that’s not going to provide the players the best possible outcome,” 
Newton said.

“As long as that takes, we’re prepared to be at the table.”



 