
Simon Jenkins says “Our libraries are in trouble … 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/libraries-dying-books-internet>
” (22 December) and suggests the solution is to make them places of “human 
congregation” run by town councils and other neighbourhood groups. Our local 
library is already a place where many groups meet and a variety of services are 
provided. It also performs a public good in providing computers and internet 
access for those who cannot afford their own – many more people than you would 
think.

Our county council has resisted pressures to close its libraries but they are 
always potentially soft targets in an era of competing demands and central 
government cutbacks. Our library has raised its footfall by increasing the 
range of services it provides. As friends of the library we support it but in 
no way do we provide any substitute for the work of the public servants who 
deliver the service.

Simon Jenkins’ suggestion will only lead to an even greater patchwork of 
provision. The answer is to keep up the pressure on county and city councils to 
meet their obligations under the 1964 Museums and PublicLibraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> Act. And if “luvvie marches” add 
to that pressure, I’m all for them.
Carol Quinn
Chair, Friends of Chepstow Library

• Simon Jenkins’ comment that his local library was “near empty” while people 
were busy buying books at the adjacent Waterstones may be reflective of a 
well-off area. My local library in Tower Hamlets, a relatively deprived 
inner-city area in east London, is very well used, including by pensioners who 
sit reading the newspapers and chatting in the cafe throughout the day, 
students in the computer areas and young Bangladeshi mothers with their small 
children after school. It is a thriving area and a huge asset to the community.
Angela Smith
London

• Simon Jenkins joins the ranks of those who assert that, despite the evidence 
of bookshops’ popularity, public libraries should set books aside. Surveys of 
readers always put books as far and away the main reason that they use a public 
library. Readers, however, are increasingly dismayed at stock which is not only 
shrinking but of a low calibre.

Librarians have become demoralised by their crucial work of book selection 
being farmed out to book wholesalers. These operate upon a spurious local 
“demographic” rather than meeting the needs of those who borrow books. What 
would Mr Jenkins say of a business that took such deliberate steps to alienate 
its users? Books should be the continual beating heart of a library.
Christopher Hawtree
Hove, East Sussex 

• Simon Jenkins suggests that a library’s strengths lay with its readers, “in 
their desire to congregate, share with each other, hear writers and experience 
books in the context of their community”. He could have been writing about my 
local library in Market Drayton. It is always “buzzing” with children’s reading 
and singing groups, talks with local writers, drop-in sessions for people 
researching their family histories, and even people borrowing books! But, guess 
what? This wonderful local facility, so much a part of many people’s lives, is 
under threat because of Shropshire county council’s funding cuts. Sad times.
Graham Russell
Market Drayton, Shropshire

• I live opposite a red phone box that has been converted into a community 
book exchange run within the village. Every day 15-20 people visit and drop off 
and collect books and enthusiastic villagers clean it each week. Once every 
three weeks, the county library service van rumbles into the same layby. One or 
two people visit it, usually coming by car. This seems to me to sum up the 
library service as it is today, so eloquently described by Simon Jenkins. 
Libraries, the library service and the councils who run them must grasp the new 
reality that they should be run for and by their local communities.
Ruth James
Brinkworth, Wiltshire

• If you want a local library run by, probably unskilled, volunteers and 
holding a lendable book stock in the hundreds or low thousands then Simon 
Jenkins’ promotion of running consecrated churches as all embracing communal 
centres is your way forward.

If, however, you want a library with lendable book stocks in the tens of 
thousands which are regularly updated, operates a national inter-library loans 
system, free access to digital information formats and all managed by paid 
professionals, then what we currently have and are rapidly letting slip through 
our fingers is what you need.

A “renaissance” misses the point. Libraries should not be subject to the dire 
hacking-back they’ve suffered by being an easy savings-target for local 
authorities hell bent on carrying out the dogmatic austerity-cutbacks of recent 
central governments.
Gary Bennett
Exeter

• Every year people contact our charity as a result of a New Year resolution 
to do something positive, learn new skills and meet new people. With our 
training and support, they become volunteer reading helpers in local primary 
schools, working with children who are struggling with their reading. These 
volunteers really do transform lives by building pupils’ confidence and helping 
them reach their full potential.

Every year we need more of these inspiring people to use their resolutions to 
make this difference. Last year alone over 200,000 children left primary school 
unable to read to the expected level. So if you’re considering a new challenge 
for the year ahead, become a Beanstalk reading helper. Visit 
www.beanstalkcharity.org.uk <http://www.beanstalkcharity.org.uk/> or call 020 
7729 4087 for more information.
Ginny Lunn
Chief executive, Beanstalk, the literacy charity 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 