
While technology has had a huge impact on job hunting, one aspect has remained 
unchanged: the job interview. And one of the stalwarts of the interviewer’s 
toolbox is the competency question.

A competency can be either a skill or behaviour. You will be able to spot a 
competency question because they usually start with: “Tell me about a time when 
…” or “Give me an example of when you have demonstrated …”

How to answer competency questions

There is a classic approach for answering these types of questions known as 
the Star technique, and if you master it you will be giving the interviewers a 
well-structured answer that makes it easy to assess you against the person 
specification. It is also beneficial to you – it gives you a structure to shape 
your answer around. This can prevent you from waffling or going off on a 
tangent. Here’s how to use it:

Situation This gives context to your answer so it might include where you were 
working at the time, what your role was and any brief background information.

Task You need to communicate what you were trying to do or achieve in the 
example.

Action Describe what actions you took to manage the task in that particular 
situation.

Result Show how you made a difference, added value or had an impact on the 
bottom line. The outcome can be quantifiable or anecdotal.

Remember, it is impossible to have a successful interview without proper 
preparation, so putting in the time to prepare some Star examples is more 
likely to win you the job.

Here are some typical competency based questions, with example answers using 
the Star technique:

Q: Describe a time when you have had to work as a team to solve a problem

A: When I worked at ... as a ..., there was a particular time when we had to 
work together to solve a specific problem which was ... My role within the team 
was ... and as a result I could see that for us to be successful we needed to 
do ... I had to negotiate with ... and persuade them that this was a good idea 
by showing the benefits to the team and the impact on the problem. We managed 
to deliver the project on time, and I also calculated we saved/improved ... 
too. Our manager fed back that this was really innovative approach to problem 
solving by the team.

For this question the interviewers are looking for two competencies: working 
as part of a team towards a shared goal, and problem solving. Your example must 
contain both elements. Think about what your role was in the team. Were you the 
leader, the morale booster, the motivator, the ideas person or the timekeeper? 
All roles are valuable so don’t feel you have to change your style, but do 
think about the job and how it fits in the team. Make sure your example conveys 
how your role affected the team’s success, and how you contributed towards 
solving the problem.

Q: Give an example of the most difficult decision you’ve had to make

A: In my current role at ... I recently had to manage/work with a new staff 
member. After ... weeks in the role I could see they were struggling with some 
aspects of the role, and people were noticing that their performance was not 
consistent, which impacted on the team’s work. They were still on probation, 
and I was tasked with deciding whether to extend their probation. The decision 
was difficult because ... so I gathered as much information as I could 
including ..., and I spoke to my manager. I concluded that the staff member had 
not had enough support at key times because ... and extended their probation 
with a support plan. They responded well and now a year later they are one of 
the best performers on the team.

The interviewers want to understand how you approach decisions – do you gather 
facts and information, look at precedents, use instinct and intuition, do you 
involve others and when do you get support. They are also interested in why a 
decision is difficult for you, so you need to structure your answer to show 
both elements.

Q: Tell me about a time you demonstrated initiative

Using the Star technique to shine at job interviews: a how-to guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/star-technique-competency-based-interview>
A: When I managed ... project at ... I inherited a number of processes, some 
of which were well established and effective and some where I could see they 
created more work for my team. I initiated a team meeting to focus on one 
process that I felt was holding us back because ... At the meeting we 
brainstormed ideas to improve the process and agreed a way forward. I then 
organised a sub team to pilot the changes and report back. When I was happy the 
process worked, we rolled it out. The difference it made to the success of the 
project included ..., which was evidenced by ...

Think of an example that shows you taking an innovative approach to something 
at work or in a society, whether this is creating a new product, improving a 
system or process, or acting swiftly to capitalise on the situation.


Q: Give an example of when you have demonstrated effective communication skills

A: My manager asked me to present a controversial proposal to senior 
management on ... I knew there would be resistance from ... because of a 
potential overlap with their team. I arranged to meet them before the proposal 
to listen to their concerns and to explain how things could work. In the 
presentation I showed how I had accommodated their concerns while retaining the 
focus of the project, by ... The proposal was accepted and the feedback was 
very positive.

Communication skills are very broad so you need to think about which skills 
the interviewers are particularly interested in: influencing, negotiating, 
writing, presenting – and choose an example accordingly.

If you want to shine in your next interview then practice the Star technique, 
using these examples to shape and fine-tune your personal experience. It is a 
methodical approach that once mastered, enables you to give a seamless 
performance that can take you one step closer to being offered the job.


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 