
If his promoter is to be believed, Conor McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/conor-mcgregor> won’t fight again until the 
dog days of summer 2017. Yet that news hasn’t, and seemingly won’t, stop the 
man from making headlines.

Conor McGregor gains boxing licence but Mayweather fight remains unlikely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/conor-mcgregor-boxing-licence-floyd-mayweather>
As the 28-year-old Irish icon expands his reach beyond the unfriendly confines 
of the Octagon, McGregor’s ability to create stories when he’s out of 
competition is yet another aspect of the mixed martial arts game in which he 
dominates his peers.

Since his last fight, McGregor has fronted an assortment of reports. In 
addition to the regular bits that relate directly to fighting in the UFC 
(challengers’ complaints about his status and wanting a piece of him; a feud 
over his belts; taking 10 months off from competition ahead of the birth of his 
first child) it was revealed that he will petition a Nevada court regarding the 
$150,000 fine handed down by the state’s athletic commission as punishment for 
his bottle-throwing dustup with Nate Diaz ahead ofUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 202. Also, he received a boxing license 
from the state of California that re-energized talk about an improbable matchup 
against Floyd Mayweather. Oh, and McGregor will appear on the seventh season of 
Game of Thrones.

“Conor’s the best at when he’s not fighting, he’s not out doing PR, he’s not 
getting ready for anything, to keep the media talking,” UFC president Dana 
White told ESPN this week. “He’s very good at that.”

The UFC regularly builds to major events that are all but forgotten a few days 
later. The fleeting attention span of fans and media along with a robust 
schedule of fights has led to this unfortunate phenomena. The build is there. 
The payoff, too. But the chance to bask in the aftermath is generally removed 
as the sport presses on to the next thing.

For a variety of reasons, when “The Notorious” one is involved, this isn’t the 
way things play out. The circumstances are different because McGregor is 
different.

At her peak perhaps only Ronda Rousey generated a similar deluge of media, but 
she’s hardly been interested in courting coverage after dropping the UFC 135lb 
belt a year ago. As champion, she spoke of avoiding headlines because she was 
simply happier that way. By blaming the press for her own shortcomings in the 
wake of her loss to Holly Holm and skipping all but the most fawning talk show 
interviews, Rousey has fallen well behind McGregor when it comes to being MMA’s 
top attention-grabber in 2016.

Recently, the UFC ramped up its promotional campaign for Rousey’s return to 
the cage on 30 December. Her return is an important event that is expected to 
draw considerable attention outside the confines of MMA’s niche press and 
diehard fan base, however it has yet to burst through the McGregor bubble.

Almost a month after it went down, hardly anyone is discussing UFC 205, the 
massively successful debut of professionalMMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> at Madison Square Garden. Mostly 
everyone, though, is talking about UFC 205’s star of stars, and not necessarily 
for what McGregor did when he engineered history against Eddie Alvarez on 12 
November.

McGregor has made it a habit to ramp up clicks, social media impressions and 
the interest of sports best known pundits. Becoming the first UFC fighter to 
hold title belts in two weight classes at the same time understandably 
increased the intensity of the spotlight on McGregor. The key here is unlike 
Rousey, McGregor handles scrutiny and plaudits just the same. Even during 
downturns, such as his stoppage loss to Nate Diaz in March, McGregor deftly 
uses the media to his advantage.

So far there hasn’t been a situation McGregor couldn’t spin his way. Passing 
on a rematch with all-time featherweight great Jose Aldo, whom he knocked out 
in 13 seconds late last year to win the undisputed featherweight belt, was 
frustrating to some, but largely shrugged off by the public. The same could be 
said of his pushback regarding media duties that caused UFC 200 to occur 
without him. Not even the UFC’s decision to relieve McGregor of his 
self-designated “champ champ” cachet led to serious lumps regarding his 
reputation.

See, as it happens, even if McGregor wanted out of the public eye it would not 
be possible for us to simply move on as another UFC pay-per-view comes 
careening our direction. That’s because UFC 206, taking place this Saturday in 
Toronto, had nothing to do with the Dubliner until it did.

Atop the card at the Air Canada Centre is an interim title fight in the 
featherweight division – the Matryoshka doll of UFC weight classes, what with 
the creation of interim title upon interim title over the last 18 months – 
after UFC followed through on what it said it would do and effectively removed 
one of McGregor’s two titles from his possession.

“Look, I let Conor fight [Nate] Diaz and then I let him fight Diaz again,” 
White told Yahoo Sports after news of the move broke at the beginning of 
December. “Then there was the whole 155lb thing I let him do. But at the end of 
the day, him doing that tied up the [featherweight] division for a year. 
There’s a logjam there and a lot of guys were [angry].

“This was my way to fix the logjam. I wanted Aldo to fight Holloway for the 
belt, but he needed more time. So I looked at it and I said, well, it makes 
sense to make Aldo the champion and then have Holloway and Pettis fight for the 
interim title, and when Jose’s ready, barring any crazy injuries, the winner 
can fight him.”

To hammer home the point McGregor is no longer featured among the top 15 
featherweights of UFC’s far too easily manipulated rankings. According to the 
promotion, Aldo again is champion at 145lbs. And the winner between Max 
Holloway and Anthony Pettis will carry an interim champion tag after they fight 
in the main event 10 December.

It’s as if McGregor’s featherweight run was all a dream.

“You can’t take away the accomplishment,” UFC president Dana White told Fox 
Sports 1 this week. “He accomplished that. He won two belts at the same time, 
he held them both at the same time. Nobody’s ever done that. He’s the only one 
to ever do that in UFC history. Nobody beat him. He vacated (the title).”

Vacated. Relinquished. Stripped. Frame it how you want, White repeatedly 
claimed that the UFC allowed McGregor to fight for two title belts but would 
only let him carry on with just one.

“I’ll say to the UFC, and I love the company, but you’re fooling nobody,” 
McGregor said last week during a public question and answer session in Northern 
Ireland. “Best of luck to them, but I still got those belts. Someone has to 
take those belts off me physically, not online. Not through a keyboard. The 
keyboard warriors are trying to take belts; you’ve got to take those belts 
physically.”

McGregor said it would take an army to remove the belts from his care; all it 
really took was a press release. This made headlines, of course.
 