
Prof Louise Chappell was handed a hard hat when she stepped on to a building 
site. She was there to research why women have made so little headway in the 
construction industry.

The hat was pink.

“The site manager ran down to find this one pink [hat],” Chappell says. “I was 
on a site with over 2,000 workers and I was the only person that day in a pink 
hat.”

It is not as if women would not stand out on their own. The construction 
industry is the most male-dominated sector in Australia and it appears to be 
getting more gender-segregated. In 2016 women make up only 12% of the 
workforce, down from 17% 10 years ago.

Men dominate senior technical operational roles, while women tend to be in 
more junior support roles, human resources and marketing.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> also leave the construction 
sector almost 39% faster than their male colleagues.

Chappell was part of a team of academics from the University of New South 
Wales who releasedtheir findings 
<http://newsroom.unsw.edu.au/news/art-architecture-design/demolishing-gender-inequality-construction-sector>
 on the industry in December. Other researchers who worked on the Construction 
Industry: Demolishing Gender Structures report include Abigail Powell and 
Martin Loosemore.

Could automation make life worse for women?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/08/could-automation-make-life-worse-for-women>
Chappell, a professor of politics, noticed straight away that her colleague, 
research associate Adam Rogan, was treated very differently (the researchers 
worked in male-female pairs, shadowing workers, specifically to look for 
differences).

“Adam was usually quickly given a nickname and invited to join in the banter 
occurring around the site, sometimes including discussions around pornography – 
something that female researchers never came across,” Chappell says.

“By contrast, as females, we tended to remain outsiders, never given nicknames 
– or at least not to our faces – and often had men apologising to us for their 
swearing or what they saw as their bad behaviour.

“We thought we were kept at a distance but, as much as we tried to stay in the 
background, we actually felt like we stood out. And sometimes this was done 
intentionally,” she says, referring to the hat.

The research finds that women’s careers are being stymied by rigid work 
practices, long hours and an expectation of total availability, lack of 
flexible parental leave (in practice), tolerance of sexism and accepted 
informal recruitment processes that favour men.

Some of the stories from women in the industry include having to negotiate 
with a man who had adorned his hat with a drawing of breasts, being filmed in 
the shower and having to change phone numbers to escape harassment.

The main recommendations of the report are to:

 * Stop rewarding and promoting excessive hours and “shaming” those who don’t 
comply.

 * Demonstrate no tolerance for sexism – sexist drawings, wording, behaviour – 
in the workplace and on site.

 * Change the narrative. Recognise, recruit and celebrate agile and diverse 
career pathways and career breaks.

 * Make recruitment/promotion processes and criteria more transparent. 
The chief investigator on the report, Natalie Galea, says the researchers saw 
there was no room for caring or social roles outside of work. Women often had 
to make a choice between having a career or a family, while it was assumed men 
could do both.

Workplace bullying: why management backlash is behind Australia's steep rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/05/workplace-bulling-why-management-backlash-is-behind-australias-steep-rise>
Pregnancy is seen as such a career-ending move that the disadvantage even 
extends to workmates. When one woman announced she was pregnant, her colleague 
on the same project responded with disappointment: “Now I am dead to them.”

But the industry does not accommodate men’s needs either, says Galea, a 
research associate at UNSW Built Environment. “For many of the men we 
interviewed, avoiding divorce is a critical issue. For both men and women, 
rigid work practices undermined work-life balance and wellbeing.

“One man I interviewed, a seasoned construction professional, reported that 
his stress was so great he had a panic attack in the mornings on the way to 
work.”

Adds Chappell: “One of the findings of this research is how tough the life is 
for men. The work practices don’t work for anyone. So changing the industry for 
women is going to benefit men, hugely.”

Long hours (12- to 16-hour days, six days a week) are expected whether there 
is work to be done or not. People are forgoing time with their families and 
friends for no good reason.

Chappell says the industry needs to change for both genders – and that may 
forestall the backlash that comes when women are seen to be given “special 
treatment”.

Some employers are experimenting with change. LendLease, for instance, has 
leadership and mentoring courses for women, a parental return-to-work program 
and a “wellbeing day” once a quarter that is offered on a use-it-or-lose-it 
basis.

Multiplex has implemented some job sharing so that employees get three 
Saturdays off a month and a lieu day to be taken up during the month.

The Australian Rail Track Corporation, finding it hard to attract new hires, 
obtained an exemption from the NSW Anti-Discrimination Board to have a 
recruitment drive specifically for women at its depot at Muswellbrook, in the 
Upper Hunter region. About 200 women applied for the six vacancies and nine 
were hired.
 