
Even Melbourne star Cooper Cronk admits that rugby league would be the winner 
if Cronulla end their premiership drought in Sunday’sNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> grand final. The Storm halfback 
conceded that the Sharks’ pursuit of the elusive trophy is the storyline of the 
week, but embraced his team’s role as fairytale squashers.

“We’re from interstate and Cronulla haven’t been there for a long period of 
time, so they’ll have the majority of the sport (behind them), which is great,” 
Cronk said on Monday. “Rugby league needs to be the winner in this scenario.”

“But hopefully Melbourne Storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/melbourne-storm> and the people in the 
purple jerseys can finish the game with a smile on their face knowing that 
we’ve played really well and got the result that we all wanted.”

While the Storm have two official titles in their 19-year existence, 
long-suffering Sharks have yet to witness their club lift the Provan-Summons 
trophy since their inception in 1967. However Storm captain Cameron Smith 
doesn’t expect the pressure to squeeze the life out of their opposition during 
the long build-up to the decider at ANZ Stadium.

“They’ll be fine. If it was going to affect them, it would’ve affected them 
through the first few finals to start with,” Smith said. “They’ve got great 
leaders in their club in (Michael) Ennis and (Paul Gallen). Wade Graham’s there 
as well, Andrew Fifita, and they’ve got exciting young players who play a 
confident style of footy.”

Cameron Smith pleased rival Paul Gallen gets NRL grand final shot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/smith-pleased-rival-gallen-gets-nrl-final-shot>
“I don’t think there’s going to be any pressure on those guys at all. They’ll 
just go out and play like they’ve played all year.”

Cronk also conceded that the Sharks were the best team they had played in a 
season where they split their two matches, including the Storm’s minor 
premiership-clinching win in round 26. “You can try and dissect and analyse 
those games as much as possible, but it’ll come down to whoever executes their 
game plan the best on Sunday,” he said.

Meanwhile, grand final veteran James Maloney knows that the lead-in to the NRL 
decider is as important as the game itself and it is something he has impressed 
upon his Cronulla teammates. Maloney will play his third grand final in six 
seasons across three clubs when he runs out onto ANZ Stadium on Sunday.

The star playmaker lost his first decider with the Warriors in 2011, before 
enjoying success with the Sydney Roosters in 2013. As Cronulla chase their 
maiden premiership, Sharks players will have to deal with the hype, the 
hysteria and the history of a club that has consistently struggled when it has 
mattered most.

Maloney said that was something the title-less Warriors struggled with in 
2011, but something the Roosters handled better two years later. “I do compare 
what happened in 2011 to 2013,” Maloney said. “I have spoken to a few guys 
around the club about that. About things that I thought we didn’t handle 
probably as well as we could have at the Warriors, such as expectation. You 
want to enjoy it but focus on the footy.

“Obviously I have different memories from the two years and (there were) 
different results. So hopefully I have learnt from that and we can make sure we 
put ourselves in a position where we hit Sunday in the best possible shape to 
play the best 80 minutes of our year.”


The Warriors consistently struggled to find their rhythm in the 2011 grand 
final loss to Manly. But in 2013, Maloney starred for the Roosters in setting 
up the match-winning try and kicking five clutch goals from five attempts in a 
performance he was unlucky not be awarded with the Clive Churchill Medal for.

This year’s decider will be chiefly a battle between Cronulla’s attractive 
attacking style and the Storm’s suffocating defence. But Maloney said the 
Sharks’ composure in attack depends on how well they defend.

“You need to make sure when you’re on the back foot and things are going 
against you that you hold your line and you don’t concede points,” Maloney 
said. “That allows you a bit of time and it keeps you composed with your attack 
because you’re building on what you’re doing. As soon as you start leaking some 
points the game changes and you’ve got to find something else to depend on.

“If you defend well it gives you composure in your attack. We’ve got plenty of 
strike here, it’s just about making sure we complete. I thought we completed 
better than we have in a long time against the Cowboys. We’ll have to do that 
and more this week.”



 