
A refugee support group in a small Cornwall town hopes to welcome two Syrian 
families after raising thousands of pounds.

Bude Welcomes Refugees, a 30-person group based in the north Cornwall seaside 
resort, wants to be one of the earliest adopters of thecommunity sponsorship 
scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/archbishop-of-canterbury-syrian-family-refugee-sponsorship-scheme>
 to resettle refugee families.

The initiative enables community organisations, including charities, faith 
groups, churches and businesses, to take on the role of supporting resettled 
refugees in the UK.

The group has applied for charity status and presented its plan to Cornwall 
council for approval, which is required to secure Home Office clearance.

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
Richie Heard has been volunteering in an old RNLI lifeboat to save migrants 
and refugees attempting thecrossing from Turkey to Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/migrants-turkey-sail-greece-new-rules-izmir-syrians>
. He said the initiative showed “just how much love this part of the country 
has to give”.

The lifeguard, 32, who lives in Hartland, Devon, said: “I think it’s great, I 
think it’s lovely, and the fact that it’s coming to Bude ... There are so many 
people I know that would love to come out and jump on that boat, and do what I 
do and help in such a dramatic way, I feel very lucky to have the skills and 
the opportunity to do it.

“But it’s given a lot of people here a great way to directly help these 
refugees who are coming across. I know so many people that have just dropped 
what they’re doing and started to raise money for these two families. And 
people here just absolutely can’t do enough to help. I haven’t heard anyone 
cast a negative opinion on this scheme that’s running.

“There’s obviously going to be one or two people with a snide comment, but I 
think that’s born of ignorance. I think if you put most of these people in 
front of that Syrian family and asked them to judge again, they’d soon change 
their opinion.”

The group has raised more than £12,600 for the first of the two families it 
hopes to offer homes to, which will cover the cost of interpreters, English 
lessons and top-up fees for local authority rates paid for private 
accommodation.

All organisations hoping to take part in the government scheme must be either 
registered charities or community interest companies, and have the consent of 
the local authority in which they wish to operate and a comprehensive plan for 
resettlement.

Sponsors under the scheme provide housing for the refugee family, as well as 
helping them integrate into life in the UK and access medical and social 
services, arrange English language tuition and support them towards employment 
and self-sufficiency.
 