
A local authority in north Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> has 
told parents they must show their children’s birth certificates if they want 
binmen to collect dirty nappies.

Waste <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/waste> management teams at 
Anglesey council have introduced the rules in an effort to cut waste, meet 
recycling targets and avoid fines from the Welsh government.

They are asking parents to prove their child is three or under if they want 
nappies to be taken away, and say they have “evidence that most children are 
potty trained between ages of two and three”.

But some families say the rules do not take account of different rates of 
child development or that some disabled children may need nappies beyond a 
certain age.

Anglesey council has a service where parents can set up fortnightly nappy 
collections. Those who cannot prove their child is under three will be asked to 
put nappies with their household waste, which is collected every three weeks.

Ian Cheney, whose five-year-old daughter Olivia has Down’s syndrome, said the 
new rules were “ludicrous” and accused the local authority of discrimination.

Cheney, who lives in Amlwch with his wife Heather said: “They are using a 
blanket rule for all families which is just so frustrating.

“There are so many families with disabled children who need this service so 
that are homes aren’t full of nappies and then also the fact that they are 
assuming that all children will be out of nappies by the age of three. The 
rules are not realistic.

Cheney, a former careworker, added: “I automatically assumed that Livy would 
be eligible for the council service because of her disability.

“She has some health issues related to her Down’s syndrome, including holes in 
her heart and some difficulty walking. At the moment, with fortnightly 
collections, it’s a struggle but we usually make it. But we have no hope of 
being able to cope for three weeks.

“The council obviously knows it is hard for families to cope with three-weekly 
collections, which is why they’ve brought in this fortnightly nappy service.

“But Livy is obviously bigger than a toddler so her nappies are also taking up 
more space. I’d have thought that disabled children who still need to wear 
nappies would be automatically eligible.”

Steph Roberts, from the village of Gwalchmai on Anglesey, said: “I think it’s 
disgraceful that they’ve placed an age limit on the service.

“I have a three year old who’s currently being potty trained and I know I’m 
not the only one in the same situation.”

A council spokesman said they had evidence to suggest that most children are 
potty trained between the ages of two and three, so wants to make people prove 
their child’s age if they want to receive the service.


He added: “It has therefore been agreed to offer this service up until a 
child’s third birthday.

“Requesting a copy of a child’s birth certificate will allow us to monitor the 
number of children benefiting from the service and their respective ages.

“It should be noted that this service will only be provided to the home 
address of the child and does not extend to any nursery, creche or child 
minding service they may attend.”

 The council has organised drop-in sessions to explain the changes at a local 
leisure centre and at a library.
 