
Councils will share £48m in extra funding to help them expand homelessness 
provision for single men and women, but local government leaders have said the 
money may not be enough.

The funding, announced on Tuesday by the local government minister Marcus 
Jones, is intended to help councils meet the costs of measures to be introduced 
under thehomelessness reduction bill.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/28/homelessness-reforms-funding-councils-local-authorities>

The private member’s bill is intended to end discrimination against single men 
and women, who currently have no right to immediate help with housing 
assistance if they become homeless, while families are guaranteed support.

The Conservative MP Bob Blackman has won government backing for his bill, 
which will oblige councils to prevent the homelessness of anyone, regardless of 
their status, within 56 days.

Other MPs including the Tory former housing minister Mark Prisk and Labour’s 
housing spokesman, John Healey, have said local authorities will need 
substantial extra funding to fulfil the new legal commitments.

The Local Government Association said placements in temporary accommodation 
had risen by 40% in the last four years and homelessness services faced a 
funding gap of £192m by the end of the decade. The Association of Housing 
Advice Services, a non-profit organisation, estimates London’s 32 boroughs 
alone will face a combined bill of £161m to implement the new duties.

The LGA’s chair, Gary Porter, said the true costs of the legislation were 
difficult to predict. “It is impossible to know how many people will come 
forward to access the new duties, what the impact of the bill will be on 
different groups over time, and therefore the funding councils need to deliver 
duties that reduce homelessness,” he said.

“We ask that the government commit to reviewing the bill’s impact two years 
after implementation, to assess its actual impact and to ensure that councils 
are being fully equipped and funded to deliver the bill’s ambitions.”

The communities secretary, Sajid Javid, said the government would continue to 
work with local councils and the LGA to test the methodology behind the 
estimated costs of the bill.

“I’m committed to preventing homelessness and this new £48m backing for Bob 
Blackman’s homelessness reduction bill will allow councils to make real changes 
in the way they help vulnerable people,” he said.

Jones said the extra £48m over the course of the spending review would allow 
councils to “hit the ground running” when the bill passes through parliament.

Welcoming the funding, Blackman said: “This funding package is a strong 
demonstration that the government is serious about helping people at risk of 
homelessness and I very much welcome this commitment.

“Should my bill succeed, there will inevitably a transitional period as 
councils begin to manage their new duties and I believe this support will give 
them the best possible headstart to improve outcomes long-term.”

Roger Harding, Shelter’s director of policy and campaigns, said councils 
needed long-term guarantees not a short-term boost. “Extra money is essential 
to help local councils adapt to providing new and expanded services for 
homeless people and it’s welcome that the government has gone some way to 
recognise this,” he said.

“But short-term funding isn’t enough to address the scale of homelessness in 
this country. These funds on their own will not significantly reduce 
homelessness. To help councils deal with this crisis in the long-term the 
government must commit to building homes that people on lower incomes can 
actually afford to live in.”

Andy Slaughter, Labour’s shadow housing minister, also called for a more 
comprehensive funding package. “Today’s statement offers funding which runs out 
after two years and raises concerns that Ministers will not honour the promise 
made in the House of Commons that ‘the Government will fund the additional 
costs of the Bill,’” he said.

“Particularly worrying is that the funding falls to zero within two years. 
There is no evidence provided by the Government that savings will offset costs 
by this time.

“Labour will continue to work to make this cross-party Bill a success, but it 
is up to the Government to demonstrate that their commitment to fund the full 
costs of this legislation is more than just hot air.”
 