
Clinics offering women contraception are closing or reducing their opening 
hours in the wake of heavy Whitehall cuts to local councils’ public health 
budgets, new research has revealed.

One and a half million women of reproductive age live in parts of England 
where councils have restricted contraception services or are considering doing 
so, according to data obtained under freedom of information by the Advisory 
Group on Contraception.

The findings have prompted warnings from sexual health experts that paring 
back such services could lead to an increase in unintended pregnancies and 
abortions. One in four councils have already reduced their contraception 
service or may do so, the new findings show.

The morning-after pill is safe. So why is it so difficult to access?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2016/nov/30/the-morning-after-pill-is-safe-so-why-is-it-so-difficult-to-access>
“Councils are between a rock and a hard place when faced with cuts to public 
health budgets, but it’s a false economy to restrict women’s access to 
contraception,” said Natika Halil, the chief executive of the Family Planning 
Association, which is a member of the AGC.

She cited research showing that every pound spent on contraception saved £11 
in averted health costs, for example from women going on to have a baby or a 
termination.

“Making it harder for women to choose the right contraception for them will 
mean more unplanned pregnancies and more abortions,” she said.

Four sites offering contraception services have closed or will close during 
2016-17 in Dorset and several clinics have stopped operating in Wandsworth in 
south London.

Responses from 140 of England’s 152 councils to the freedom of information 
requests showed that a lunchtime school drop-in service in south 
Gloucestershire has been ended, a sexual health worker in Wokingham in 
Berkshire lost their job when a condom distribution service was brought 
in-house by the council and a young people’s service in Bexley, south London, 
ceased being a standalone service but is now being provided in a local GP’s 
surgery.

Dr Anne Connolly, a GP in Bradford who sits on the AGC, said: “It’s hugely 
concerning to see that, in many parts of the country, contraceptive services 
are being cut, meaning that women can’t access the most reliable types of 
contraception. Without close scrutiny, I’m worried this trend will only 
continue and that women will bear the consequences.”

A male pill matters because both partners can share the side-effects | Deborah 
Orr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/28/sex-shared-responsibility-why-not-contraception-male-pill>
Among the 140 councils which responded, 20 (14%) confirmed that at least one 
site had shut in 2015-16 or would do so this year, while another 18 (13%) said 
that clinics could be closed this year. The AGC is made up of health charities 
such as the FPA, doctors, the Local Government Association and the Faculty of 
Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare, which represents specialists.

Councils in England have been obliged by law since the coalition government’s 
NHS shakeup in 2013 to provide open access to sexual health services, including 
for contraception.

NHS England commissions some contraceptive services under its contract with 
GPs. The AGC also found that fewer councils now have contracts with local 
family doctors to provide the long-acting forms of contraception that women are 
now often encouraged to use.

However, councils have had to reduce the public health services they offer 
since the Treasury cut £200m from their budgets for this year and it intends to 
take another £600m by 2020-21, just under 10% of the planned total.

Simon Stevens, the chief executive of NHS England, has warned several times 
that cuts to public health will inevitably lead to higher long-term costs for 
the NHS. Last year, he said he was “crystal clear that any further cuts in 
public health and social care would impose extra costs on the NHS over and 
above the minimum funding requirement [the £8bn extra by 2020-21 that then 
chancellor George Osborne promised last year to give the NHS]”.

Theresa May denies that £10bn NHS funding pledge is misleading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/theresa-may-denies-that-10bn-nhs-funding-pledge-is-misleading>
The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said 
councils were best at deciding what public health services they provided for 
their residents.

“Local areas are best placed to decide how to provide the sexual health 
services their communities need. Good progress is being made, for example 
teenage pregnancy is down 30% in England since 2011, the lowest for 40 years”, 
a spokesman said.

“Over the next five years, we will invest more than £16bn in local government 
public health services, in addition to what the NHS will continue to spend on 
vaccinations, screening and other preventative interventions.”

• This article was amended on 13 December 2016. An earlier version said a 
sexual health clinic operating at Leighton hospital in Crewe, Cheshire, was 
shut down last year. It has been relocated to a nearby site.
 