
It is not unusual for rugby league to take a revolutionary approach but even 
the most ardent fan must have been taken aback by the destinations for theFour 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>. As always, there is a 
significant nod to tradition and the game’s heartlands – Huddersfield, Hull and 
Cumbria will see action over the next month – but there is a distinctly 
expansionist feel to a tournament when success for England could bring welcome 
publicity to a sport that has struggled to break through into the mainstream.

Coventry, London and Liverpool, where the final will be played on 20 November, 
will host games and the man who headed the decision-making process insists 
there is a long-term, pragmatic view to putting fixtures in areas where rugby 
league has little, or even no, presence.

“We’re trying to host the World Cup in 2021 so we want to have more 
international presence elsewhere,” says Jon Dutton, the RFL’s tournament 
director. “We had some key objectives for this tournament. They included 
playing the final at an iconic venue, having a double-header at a new venue and 
playing another game in London.”

The double-header will take place in the second week of the tournament at 
Coventry’s Ricoh Arena. “It’s a new venue and the people behind it were really 
proactive,” Dutton says. “It’s handy geographically for fans from the north and 
the south and we’re confident it will deliver something really special.”

Wasps’ move to Coventry two years ago initially appeared to be a blockade for 
the development of the 13-man sport in the city, but the man who created the 
only professional club in the Midlands says it is quite the opposite. “As soon 
as Wasps moved in we’ve been very close to them – they’ve been fantastic,” says 
Alan Robinson, the chief executive of Coventry Bears, who play in League 1, the 
sport’s third tier.

“They were catalysts for the ‘city of rugby’ initiative we’ve got in Coventry. 
We played a game against Keighley at the Ricoh this year and it was wonderful. 
Wasps were keen to bring Magic Weekend to the Ricoh next year too. I can’t pay 
them enough credit.

“Some people said they’d be a threat but both clubs have ended up having 
crossover fans. They played a big part in getting this double-header across the 
line and I’m hoping it attracts even more new fans. If just 10 or 20 sign up, 
it’s been a success.”

England’s match against Australia at London Stadium (West Ham’s home) follows 
last year’s successful trip to the capital, where almost 45,000 watched the 
hosts beat New Zealand.

Developing rugby league in London has been an age-old problem, but Dutton is 
hopeful that showcasing one of sport’s biggest rivalries – he describes ticket 
sales for the game as “OK” – will be a lure for the general public as the match 
nears.

“We knew last year that we attracted a great audience from London and the 
south-east. This is a chance to go one better,” he says. “It’s England against 
Australia. We’re hopeful that the two names alone will be a pull for people to 
come and watch some elite sport.”

In many ways Anfield is the most intriguing venue. There have been flirtations 
in Liverpool in the past, including the defunct Liverpool City RLFC, the 1991 
World Club Challenge between Wigan and Penrith and the decision by St Helens to 
take a league fixture there in 1997.

For a city handily placed on the M62, Liverpool is a peculiar omission from 
the sport’s geographical reach. Dutton acknowledges there is a conscious effort 
to ensure the final is the start of an uprising once again and the RFL is 
quietly confident of a sellout irrespective of whether England reach the final.

“We feel we can establish a presence in Liverpool,” Dutton says. “It’s baby 
steps to begin with, but Liverpool have been excellent; they’ve been blown away 
by the reaction.

“The final being at such a great venue represents a wonderful chance for the 
sport to grow. With Widnes and St Helens nearby too, we’ve got an opportunity 
to tap into the local area and it all starts with the Four Nations final.”
 