
Prosecutors have dropped the case against 13 footballers investigated over 
alleged match-fixing after considering the reliability of evidence from 
journalistMazher Mahmood <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mazher-mahmood>, 
known as the “Fake Sheikh”.

The Crown Prosecution Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> (CPS) said there 
was “insufficient evidence to provide a realistic prospect of conviction” in 
the case in light of the collapse of the Tulisa Contostavlos trial.

The former X Factor judge was cleared of brokering a cocaine deal in July last 
year following a newspaper sting orchestrated by theSun on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun-on-sunday> reporter.

Judge Alistair McCreath said there were “strong grounds” to believe Mahmood 
had lied in the witness box.

Contostavlos’s rapper friend Mike GLC - real name Michael Coombs - was also 
cleared after he pleaded guilty to supplying cocaine.

A CPS spokeswoman issued a statement saying:

“A file was passed to the CPS in July 2014 from the National Crime Agency 
(NCA) in relation to alleged football match-fixing in 2013. This case involved 
evidence in relation to 13 suspects.

The reliability of the evidence of one alleged witness in particular had to be 
very carefully considered in light of recent events in the trial of R - v - 
Contostavlos and Coombs.

This was not the only evidence that was considered and when all the evidence 
submitted by investigators was carefully reviewed in accordance with the Code 
for Crown Prosecutors it was decided that there was insufficient evidence to 
provide a realistic prospect of conviction.

We have informed the NCA of this decision and they have written to the 
suspects announcing that no further action will be taken”.

The 13 footballers were arrested as part of an investigation into alleged 
bribery and money laundering.

In April, seven players from Football League clubs based in the north west 
were arrested in connection with alleged spot-fixing and another six were 
re-arrested over the claims.

The original six suspects were arrested as part of the inquiry in December 
2013, prompted by information passed on by the Sun on Sunday.

The tabloid newspaper reported that an undercover investigator met an 
ex-Portsmouth player Sam Sodje, who allegedly said he could arrange for 
footballers to get themselves a yellow card in return for tens of thousands of 
pounds.

The newspaper had said that the player also claimed he could rig Premier 
League games and even said he was preparing to fix matches at next year’s World 
Cup in Brazil.

It was further claimed in the paper’s article that Oldham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> Athletic player Cristian Montano 
failed to get a yellow card in return for money in a match against 
Wolverhampton Wanderers and offered to take part in another rigging incident.


Blackburn striker D J Campbell was confirmed to be one of the six players who 
were arrested in December 2013.

Last month, the CPS said it was re-examining criminal convictions in 25 cases 
in which Mahmood had given evidence and had offered no evidence in three live 
cases where the undercover reporter was a prosecution witness.

Mahmood, the former News of the World investigations editor, was suspended by 
the Sun on Sunday after the collapse of the Contostavlos trial. A robust 
internal investigation has dragged on for months without resolution.

In September, several trials at London’s Southwark crown court were halted 
because they relied on evidence from Mahmood.

The CPS offered no evidence against Dr Majeed Ridha and pharmacist Murtaza 
Gulamhusein, who were accused of illegally supplying an abortion drug.

Drugs cases involving PR Leon “Starino” Anderson and co-defendant Ashley 
Gordon were dismissed after prosecutors said Mahmood’s evidence could not be 
relied upon.

Source: PA Media Lawyer <http://medialawyer.press.net/article.jsp?id=10292863>
 