
In those traditional rugby league strongholds of St Albans, Ipswich, 
Wolverhampton and Crawley the past week has been spent preparing for the start 
of the Summer Conference, a rare example of successful expansion within the 
British game.

Since its debut on a trial basis in 1997 this amateur competition for clubs 
from outside the game's heartlands has grown steadily to encompass 30 teams 
this season. But just as significant has been the respect it has gradually 
earned.

David Waite, then the future Great Britain coach, attended last year's grand 
final between Crawley and Rotherham and Lionel Hurst, the Cheltenham lawyer who 
was the driving force behind the competition, is now the chief executive of the 
London Broncos.

In addition two Hemel Hempstead players, Simon Tillyer and Jack Howieson, have 
been playing with the Sheffield Eagles following the trail blazed by the Oxford 
Cavaliers forward Darryl Griffin, now on the fringe of London's Super League 
squad.

There are six new clubs this season - with the Cardiff Demons joining a strong 
Central-South pool, and a new North-East section including teams from 
Bridlington, Durham, Newcastle-Gateshead, Sunderland and Teesside.

The competition also has a sponsor for the first time in the league website 
totalrl.com, and Les Dyl, the former Leeds centre who coaches the Bridlington 
Bulls, admits he has been pleasantly surprised by the increased profile his 
club has enjoyed since joining the conference. "The launch at Rugby School was 
a good occasion and I've already had Sky TV up here this week," he says.

Bridlington have been playing for 17 seasons, either in one of the Hull 
competitions or against teams from the north-east. "But moving in with the 
rugby union club and switching to summer has given us access to a new group of 
players, as well as a more regular fixture list," their player-secretary Peter 
Brumby explains.

That has been the story across the conference, with most teams based at rugby 
union clubs. From those roots, though, a number of clubs, of which Crawley are 
the most obvious example, have developed as primarily rugby league operations.

It has led to suggestions of a National Premier League and possibly even of 
merger with the amateur, winter National Conference competition or the 
semi-professionals of the Northern Ford Premiership - or possibly both.

The viability of a Premier League will be explored this season with the 
cross-conference games pairing teams according to record rather than a random 
draw. Rotherham will, therefore, travel to Crawley in a fortnight while today 
Hemel host Oxford and Newcastle go to Crewe.

But the pick of the opening round for anyone who can resist a trip to the 
seaside to watch Bridlington play Sunderland is the North London Skolars' visit 
to Crawley. That the south is regarded as the toughest group says it all about 
the conference's potential to change the general impression of rugby league.
 