
C ristiano Ronaldo struck the quickest hat-trick of his career on his way to 
netting five goals in one match for the first time, as Real Madrid drubbed 
second-from-bottom Granada 9-1 tomove within a point of La Liga leaders 
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball/table>.

Ronaldo’s five goals took his tally in La Liga this season to 36, four ahead 
of Lionel Messi, who will have a chance to reduce the deficit when Barça play 
Celta Vigo later on Sunday. The Portuguese forward has now scored three or more 
goals 24 times inLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, 
equalling the record set this season by Messi.

Ronaldo struck three times in eight minutes after Gareth Bale had fired Real 
ahead in the 25th minute. After failing to find the net in his previous nine 
outings, Bale netted his fifth in his last four appearances for club and 
country when he pounced on a defensive error, rounded goalkeeper Oier Olazábal 
and slotted the ball into the empty net.

Ronaldo clipped home his first of the game five minutes later, added a second 
after more poor defending in the 36th minute and a third in the 38th when Oier 
could only palm his fierce shot into the net.

Karim Benzema made it 5-0 at a corner seven minutes into the second half, 
Ronaldo nodded home his fourth two minutes later and Benzema grabbed his second 
a further two minutes after that as Real put a woeful Granada to the sword.

“Everything went to plan. My team are in good physical shape, the players are 
fresh and we showed that throughout the match,” said the Real manager Carlo 
Ancelotti. “We played with a good tempo and scored bags of goals. We come away 
from this happy but this is just one game and we have other important ones 
coming up.

“It’s simple mathematics. It’s better to win nine games 1-0 than one 9-1. But 
today we have to point out the good play, the team are back to playing as 
desired, just like they have played many times before. What mattered most was 
winning and playing well and we have achieved that.”

Robert Ibáñez pulled a goal back for the visitors in the 74th minute before 
Granada defender Diego Mainz put the ball into his own net seven minutes from 
time. Ronaldo scored his fifth, and Real’s ninth, with a last-minute header.

Ronaldo’s fifth goal completed Real Madrid’s largest La Liga victory since 
1967, and Granada’s heaviest ever La Liga defeat. It also marked the first time 
aReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> player had 
scored five goals in a game since Fernando Morientes in 2002.

“He [Ronaldo] has improved just as the team have,” added Ancelotti. “This is 
the first time he has scored five goals in a game and that is good news for 
everyone: for him, for the team and in terms of the upcoming fixtures”.

The crushing victory was just the tonic Real needed after a run of three 
defeats in four games in all competitions, including a 2-1 reverse at the Camp 
Nou on 22 March. Real’s next La Liga fixture comes on Wednesday night, away to 
local rivals Rayo Vallecano.
 