
Rafael Benítez praised Cristiano Ronaldo for carrying Real Madrid “on his 
back” after the forward scored twice in a scrappy win overReal Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> that helped ease the 
pressure on his manager.

Real Madrid 3-1 Real Sociedad: La Liga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/dec/30/real-madrid-v-real-sociedad-la-liga-live>
Ronaldo opened the scoring from the spot shortly before half-time having skied 
a penalty earlier in the half. Bruma levelled just after the break, but Ronaldo 
put the hosts back in front with an impressive swivelled volley to make it 57 
goals in 57 games in 2015. The Madrid substitute Lucas Vázquez sealed the 
points late on, arriving in the box to control a Gareth Bale cross and finish 
neatly.

“I have congratulated Cristiano and everyone else because they all united 
today,” said Benítez. “He took responsibility after missing the penalty and 
carried the team on his back.”

Madrid went into the game having scored 22 goals in their past three games 
after thrashing Getafe 4-1, Malmo 8-0 and Rayo Vallecano 10-2. Yet reports that 
Benítez’s job was at risk gathered pace over the Christmas period, and in his 
pre-game conference the former Liverpool and Chelsea managerdenounced the 
stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/rafa-benitez-real-madrid-campaign-against-him>
, talking of a “campaign” against him, the club and the president Florentino 
Pérez. After the latest victory Benítez rejected suggestions he could have lost 
his job had the Basques not been beaten.

“I don’t feel that’s the case, I’m now focusing on the next game,” he said. 
“Madrid controlled the game apart from for 10 minutes. We had chances but we 
didn’t take them and then the team reacted [to Sociedad’s equaliser] 
phenomenally. I can only congratulate the players as this means we can look 
forward.”

Benítez also insisted he was unmoved when fans in the Bernabéu booed his name 
when it was read out before kick-off and again when he brought off James 
Rodríguez for Mateo Kovacic. “It’s my responsibility to get the best out of the 
players we have on the bench, they all did a good job and their fresh legs 
helped us,” he said. “We’re happy when we win and that’s all we want, to win 
games and win trophies. We’re going in the right direction.”

Vázquez played down the significance of the booing. “The crowd have the right 
to applaud and to boo us,” said the 24-year-old. We just need to keep doing 
what we’re doing and keep winning games.” The Madrid director Emilio Butragueño 
reaffirmed the club’s belief in Benítez, insisting their faith in the Spaniard 
was “absolute”. But Eusebio Sacristán, the Sociedad coach, was left lamenting 
three penalty decisions which did not go his side’s way. “I don’t know if 
that’s down to coincidence or bad luck,” he said. “But it has happened before 
with this referee and it’s a real shame.”
 