
You can shoot the porch light out. Cronulla are premiers. A guttural roar and 
tears of joy swept through Homebush at full time on Sunday night, as both sides 
produced a spine-tingling finish that very nearly saw Melbourne win.

In front of a crowd of 83,625 at a feverish ANZ Stadium, Cronulla’s win was 
reward for a vibrant attacking display against a Melbourne defensive line that 
simply refused to break. Luke Lewis was named Clive Churchill medallist for an 
outstanding display of stinging defence and penetrating running on the edge. It 
was well deserved.

After a day of uninterrupted sunshine, dusk saw the first clouds emerge 
overhead just prior to kick-off. A beaming Paul Gallen and a stony-faced 
Cameron Smith led their charges into an ocean of blue, the electricity palpable 
as cries of “Sharkies!” reverberated around ANZ Stadium. Their support surely 
neared 90% of those in attendance, most there to lay to rest a 50-year 
premiership hoodoo, with serial winners, theMelbourne Storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/melbourne-storm>, standing in their way.

NRL grand final: Cronulla Sharks vs Melbourne Storm – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/oct/02/nrl-grand-final-cronulla-sharks-vs-melbourne-storm-in-pictures>
Following the customarily brutal physical exchanges early, it was the Sharks 
who emerged on top. They made all the early running, with Lewis and Andrew 
Fifita in particular finding space through Melbourne’s left channel. Whereas 
the Sharks were embracing the sizzling energy emanating through the stadium, 
Melbourne’s attack seemed limp.

A James Maloney penalty goal that resulted from a high shot on Cronulla 
halfback Chad Townsend was small reward for Cronulla’s sustained pressure, but 
it was an inside ball from Paul Gallen to Ben Barba that created the first try. 
It appeared a pre-planned move from the scrum-base, and as Barba scooted over 
the line, Cronulla fans started to dream.

Every half-break of theirs was cheered, every almost-mistake from Melbourne 
was howled. Yet despite dominating every facet of the contest, the Sharks 
weren’t able to muster any more points in the half. It never looks pretty, but 
that Melbourne entered the break only eight points behind was testament to 
their defensive resilience and pattern.

But where Melbourne lacked verve in attack, their defence, as ever, was 
unfailingly organised. Logic dictates that the more a line bends, the more 
likely it is to break. Melbourne’s defence defied logic.

The second half commenced where the first left off. The Sharks were first to 
the field and immediately had Melbourne on the back foot. And as with the first 
half, Melbourne’s line felt impregnable.

At this point, it seemed Melbourne might have no answer. Fifita and Prior were 
rampaging, Barba looked likely, and Gallen was, well, Gallen. Like flies on the 
Hawkesbury River, Michael Ennis led a team that swarmed all over chief 
playmaker Cooper Cronk. The Melbourne half was not granted, nor could he find, 
any time to create meaningful plays for his side.

Then, from nothing, Melbourne scored. After 50 minutes of a near-perfect 
display of variety, imagination and aggression in attack from Cronulla, Smith 
passed from dummy half to Jesse Bromwich, who crashed over. A strong follow-up 
set of six and it felt like the Storm had finally arrived at the contest.

With 20 minutes to go and two points in it, another innocuous Cronulla grubber 
failed to challenge the Storm, and the first murmurs of a collective groan rang 
through the stadium.

Those groans then actualised into fear when, with 15 minutes remaining, Will 
Chambers capitalised fully on a rare attacking overlap to inexplicably put 
Melbourne into the lead. The jammy one-nil felt a very real possibility as 
skipper Smith converted, leaving the Sharks a try down and with hearts firmly 
in mouths.

But the Sharks never stopped. This didn’t look like a side weighed down by a 
history of heartbreak. Their energy never relented and with that came reward. 
Andrew Fifita went over under the posts, and he’s probably provided the moment 
that Sharks fans will never tire of. His try was a study in elite-level 
Twister. It was a deserved prize for a night where he truly dominated his 
fancied front-row opposition. Here he charged at the line and scythed, writhed, 
and drew on whatever reserves of fast-twitch wriggle he possessed to carve out 
a sliver of room to slam the ball down. The Sharks were back in front by two.

At his threatening best for most of the night, a kick out on the full from 
Maloney would invite a half-chance for Melbourne. They marched down the field, 
where a well-directed cross-field kick from Cronk would secure a repeat set. 
However, in keeping with the new pendulum narrative of the match, a Melbourne 
knock-on earned the Sharks a welcome reprieve.

It wouldn’t last. Just as the Sharks fans rose to their feet to celebrate, 
Melbourne chanced their arm. They were twenty metres out and the siren had 
sounded. The ball swung from left to right and back again, Melbourne seemingly 
creating more overlaps than they had the whole evening.

Then, with the crowd on their feet pleading for a tackle, it came. The fans 
were already up – they didn’t bother with relief. It was immediate euphoria. 
For a team respected by so many, they could also lay claim to being the “good 
guy” tonight too. And not that Sharks fans will care, but the good guys won 
tonight.
 