
Despite not having tasted defeat to an English or Great Britain side for over 
a decade, Kangaroos prop Matt Scott admits the team are expecting the toughest 
match of theirFour Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> 
campaign on Sunday (0100 Monday AEDT).


With two Queensland greats in Mal Meninga and Wayne Bennett in opposite 
coaching boxes, this game has been eagerly anticipated ever since Meninga’s 
controversial comments about his former coach in a newspaper column earlier 
this month.


England can upset Australia in Four Nations, says Elliott Whitehead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/england-australia-four-nations-rugby-league-elliott-whitehead>
Bennett has been under fire from the English media following their team’s 
defeat to New Zealand two weeks ago followed by two taciturn post-match TV 
interviews conducted by the veteran coach.


Meninga’s side have had no such issues with the coach’s relaxed approach and 
two relatively comfortable wins over Scotland and New Zealand leading to a 
happy camp.


Scott, a veteran of three UK tours, believes Meninga’s experience gained from 
coaching 10 State of Origin series has been crucial in producing an environment 
geared around success.


“He’s a relaxed guy and was a relaxed player and with the Queensland side it 
was always about having fun,” Scott said. “Blokes getting on, but most 
importantly getting the job done, is crucial and that is what he did with the 
Maroons from 2006 and there are a lot similarities here.”

It’s in stark contrast to the approach of Tim Sheens, who stood down after 
seven years in charge having failed to win the 2015 Four Nations series.


“Sheensy was a little bit more intense in what we did,” Scott said. “It was a 
lot more video and structure whereas Mal has been a lot more focused on the 
feeling around the group, in the jersey and the feeling of what it means to 
play for Australia.”

Scott will be at the coalface in the starting front row at the Olympic Stadium 
against Sam Burgess, James Graham and Co and he admits being wary of the threat 
of an England side who have to win the game to avoiding exiting the tournament.


“It’s going to be physical and it going to be a real test for both packs,” he 
said. “I think they’ll be a lot better than they were against Scotland but it’s 
definitely a match both sides will have been looking forward to.”

Meninga has made two changes to his starting line-up with Cooper Cronk 
recalled after sitting out the win over the Kiwis along with Josh Dugan, who is 
preferred to Justin ONeill.


Cronk replaces Michael Morgan, and Shannon Boyd is replaced by Tyson Frizzel. 
However, Boyd is on stand-by to replace Sam Thaiday, should the veteran 
Queensland forward fail to recover from a knee injury.

Team: Darius Boyd, Valentine Holmes, Greg Inglis, Josh Dugan, Blake Ferguson, 
Johnathan Thurston, Cooper Cronk, Matt Scott, Cameron Smith, Aaron Woods, Boyd 
Cordner, Matt Gillett, Trent Merrin. Interchange: David Klemmer, Tyson Frizell, 
Michael Morgan, Sam Thaiday, Michael Morgan, Shannon Boyd, Justin O’Neill (two 
to be omitted).
 