
Cronulla have advanced to the NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> 
grand final with a 32-20 demolition of a listless North Queensland at Allianz 
Stadium.

The result sent the 36,717-strong crowd into raptures as the Sharks moved a 
step closer to claiming their first title in their 49-year history and ended 
the Cowboys’ hopes of winning back-to-back premierships.

Cronulla Sharks v North Queensland Cowboys: NRL preliminary final – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/23/cronulla-sharks-v-north-queensland-cowboys-nrl-preliminary-final-live>
They will meet the winner of Saturday’s clash between Canberra and Melbourne 
in Sunday week’s grand final at ANZ Stadium.

The Cowboys gave themselves a sniff of hope when fullback Lachlan Coote, who 
otherwise had a forgettable night and was again troubled under the high ball, 
crossed for a soft try four minutes after halftime to make it 14-6.

However, the Sharks picked themselves up off the canvas to advance to their 
fourth grand final – following their appearances in 1973, 1978 and the Super 
League decider in 1997.

The Cowboys were blown off the park by a Sharks first-half blitz. Looking 
fatigued after their 90-minute epic against Brisbane last week, they crumbled 
under a mountain of unforced errors.

When Chad Townsend crossed to make it 14-0 at the break, the Sharks had 
completed twice as many sets as the Cowboys (16/20 to 8/12), run for twice as 
many metres (791 to 390), and been tackled in their opposition’s red zone 23 
times compared to North Queensland’s eight.

Townsend bounced back from his shocker against Canberra a fortnight ago when 
he was hooked by coach Shane Flanagan, scoring one try, going close on another 
occasion and setting up another.

The Sharks twice managed to get over the line, through Andrew Fifita and 
Townsend, but were denied by the video referees before they finally converted 
their weight of possession into points via a James Maloney penalty goal in the 
17th minute.

And when they found space on the left side, Sosaia Feki crossed in the corner 
before a botched Kyle Feldt dropout gifted Maloney another two points.

Townsend’s 35th-minute four-pointer had big question marks on it, with the 
last pass from Maloney appearing to be forward, however referee Gerard Sutton 
was in line with the play.

Coote’s try shortly after halftime seemingly sparked the Sharks back to life 
as they piled on three tries in 14 minutes via Luke Lewis and a Maloney double.

The Cowboys scored three tries in the final 10 minutes via a Feldt double and 
Cohen Hess but it was of little consolation.
 