
The fairytale narrative is critical to NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> grand final day more than any other 
fixture. The reasons are not romantic. Most of us follow other teams, so we 
seek the quick fix of emotional attachment to one of the contenders.

Perhaps it’s naïve, as years of TV bellowing implores us to gamble our way to 
enjoyment, but this is one part of our sporting culture that remains intact; we 
crave a connection to a team, and hunt lustily for soft-spot traits. It could 
be underdog status, perceived moral superiority, a downtrodden region, or 
decades of injustice. Sometimes, basic scorn for the favourites will do.

But whereas the shoe fit perfectly for Cinderella, we need to use a crowbar 
for Cronulla. On paper they should be especially worthy of support: a Sydney 
club with half a century of its own history and a tribal supporter base 
shouldering their fair share of dignified pain, who arrive in the grand final 
as genuine underdogs against a team widely regarded as ruthless, dour 
automatons who win relentlessly. These facts alone should make Cronulla’s 
claims on the neutral fan irrefutable, but the concept of cheering on Paul 
Gallen and co feels strange to many.

Tribalism should probably preclude any reference to the other grand final 
happening in Melbourne over the weekend, but it’s hard to avoid comparison. The 
Western Bulldogs are a club whose community, like the Shire’s, have endured too 
many decades without an appearance in the biggest match of the year. Like the 
Sharks, part of their identity lay in the wandering in-between, repeatedly 
crawling back up off the canvas following the financial uppercuts that seem to 
come with being a non-glamour club. They too will battle an entity whose 
presence is, amongst other things, connected to corporate strategic interests. 
Unlike the Sharks though, the Bulldogs have enjoyed almost blanket national 
goodwill.

Why doesn’t that goodwill exist for the Sharks? Perhaps it’s because 
fairytales tend to necessitate a transcendence of some inherent weakness or 
injustice. Of course you need more points to win, but the real victory should 
be moral. For neutrals, words like “peptides” and “biochemists” are hard to 
shake. Bubblegate, FKL and most recently “The Shark Clap” don’t do many favours 
either. Some have suggested that these issues are exclusive to the players and 
administrators – transient figures who don’t best represent the heart of a club.

Win or lose on Sunday, Storm's Craig Bellamy is the greatest NRL coach ever | 
Nick Tedeschi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/win-or-lose-on-sunday-storms-craig-bellamy-is-the-greatest-nrl-coach-ever>
Cronulla’s reputation, however, isn’t solely built on poor player behaviour. 
Unlike their underdog cousins in the AFL, the Shire itself is globally 
notorious for its social insularity. Most fans are “locals”, and you’d be hard 
pressed to find people who follow the rugby league club on likability alone.

The Sharks aren’t completely irredeemable though. It’s possibly a moot 
hypothetical, but were their 2001 incarnation lining up on Sunday, they would 
sit comfortably as the people’s favourite. Names like Peachey, Campbell, 
Rogers, Stevens and Lang (John and Martin) evoke an era of aggressive football 
and nice guys. Saturday afternoons at Endeavour Field felt more innocent back 
then. They were a team that had fully emerged from the cult-Sharks years of 
Gavin Miller, Mitch Healey, ET and Elle MacPherson to offer something 
respectable, and very nearly likeable. 2001 was also the year Paul Gallen 
debuted.

It’s possible that part of our frustration stems from Cronulla’s opposition. 
That we are forced to grapple with the morality of supporting the Sharks speaks 
volumes about Melbourne. They are rugby league’s version of George Graham’s 
Arsenal, famous for consistently winning 1-0. (“14-12 to the Melbourne Storm”, 
sung to the tune of Pet Shop Boys’ “Go West”, doesn’t seem to have the same 
ring to it though).

Respect for the Storm’s football is as universal as respect gets in this code, 
but they’re about as fun as a monosyllabic reply from Phil Gould on Twitter. 
One suspects Melburnians are proud that their success is in keeping with their 
city’s sense of sporting superiority, but this game does not matter to decent 
number of people in any direction of the Yarra River.

 That’s why Cronulla is the compelling candidate on Sunday. For their 
community there is a lot riding on this encounter. Were the Sharks to win the 
grand final, it would not surprise to see cameras pan to reveal muscular, blond 
men in the crowd shedding sandy tears of joy. After six grand finals in 11 
years, it would however surprise to see Melbourne fans crying.

Both teams already enjoy immense respect from punters but to bastardise a 
favoured prefix of Roy and HG, “let’s face it”: neutrals are trying very hard 
this week, because both teams are pretty hard to like.
 