
Quietly, ingeniously and, of course, cryptically, the beloved – and sometimes 
feared – crossword setterAraucaria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/feb/15/araucaria-inventive-crossword-compiler>
 has used one of his own puzzles to announce that he is dying of cancer.

The Rev John Graham, who takes his pseudonym from the Latin for the monkey 
puzzle tree, told Guardian readers of his terminal illness in Friday's paper.

Above cryptic crossword No 25,842 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25842> sat a set of special 
instructions: "Araucaria," it said, "has 18 down of the 19, which is being 
treated with 13 15".

Those who solved the puzzle found the answer to 18 was cancer, to 19 
oesophagus, and to 13 15 palliative care. The solutions to some of the other 
clues were: Macmillan, nurse, stent, endoscopy, and sunset.

Speaking from his home in Cambridgeshire, Araucaria said this particular 
puzzle had not taken him very long, adding that a crossword had seemed the most 
fitting way to make the announcement.

"It seemed the natural thing to do somehow," he said. "It just seemed right."

That said, he has no plans to refer to his illness in future puzzles: "I 
should think this is a one-off because I don't really know what else there will 
be to say."

The 91-year-old said he was very pleased that his doctors had decided against 
surgery or chemotherapy – two prospects he had been dreading. Exactly how long 
he has left, however, remains something of a mystery. "There isn't a prognosis, 
really," he said. "They simply don't know how long it's going to take. I asked 
them last week how long I'd got, but nobody knows how long you've got! They 
said it won't be years and years, but it could be a large number of months."

Araucaria said he had been very touched by the reaction to the crossword, 
which first appeared in the puzzle magazine 1 Across. "People have been ringing 
and sending me cards," he said. "It's been very nice, but I can't reply to them 
all."

Worried, perhaps, that he had appeared immodest, he was quick to add: "I don't 
mean that I've been inundated with them but I've had a nice number."

For as long as he can, Araucaria intends to carry on conjuring up several 
puzzles a month – just as he has for more than half a century. After all, he 
pointed out: "I'm not actually doing much else." Three more puzzles are 
scheduled for the Guardian this month. "I can't stick at it for quite so long 
but it's going all right," he said. "Someone will have to tell me if the 
quality's going off, but I think it's all right so far."
 