
Otterden is one of the pair of setters who alternate at the New Statesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-statesman>. His style is playful and 
irreverent and, as we'll see, he has a natty line in long answers. Let's meet 
the setter.

Hello Otterden. When/where do you create your puzzles?

All I need is a small desk with a PC, a scanner/copier and a bookshelf. This 
is all actually in my bedroom at the back of my country cottage in west 
Gloucestershire.

When did you get the crossword bug?

I suppose it was very early indeed – starting at about seven years old with 
the picture crossword in the London Evening News. The next crosswords I 
remember doing were when I was a teenager in the 50s and the Times was sold at 
half price to students. Then followed marriage and kids and crosswords tended 
to take a back seat.

Later I discovered that the Guardian, with its more liberal setting policy, 
was my true crossword home, and have been solving there ever since. However, I 
never seem to have enough time to tackle much more than the Saturday prize 
puzzle, or indeed many appearing in any other media.

Which other setters do you admire?

In view of what I have just said I am bound to nominate Araucaria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/araucaria> as the tops: it was he that 
showed more than any other setter that there was a way to set crosswords with 
greater pragmatism and joy than adherence to the academic dogma of the likes of 
Ximenes and a few others (some still about). I also especially enjoy the 
irreverent Paul and many of his Guardian colleagues when they are not trying to 
betoo clever. 

What makes a successful clue?

Big question, but I suppose it all boils down to a clue being solvable and 
entertaining.

Solvability means that a clue, although presenting some sort of challenge to 
the readership being set for, should provide them with a fair chance of getting 
to the solution required. That this process should provide pleasure and fun 
along the way is also a very desirable characteristic of a good clue.

However, it is ideal if a clue can be contrived with an initially intriguing 
face reading which will give the solver satisfaction (or even raise a wry 
smile) when the penny drops. I would also say that an element in a clue's 
success, not necessarily attributable to its innate qualities, is how it fits 
into the balance of the crossword as a whole.

What makes an unsuccessful clue? 

Obviously a clue may fairly be labelled unsuccessful if it can't readily be 
solved because of misleading or over-complex construction.

The worst manifestation in my opinion is one where a solution may be fairly 
guessed at by the use of checking letters, but the way in which a setter has 
got there remains completely obscure. Right at the other end of the scale a bad 
clue may be one that is so banal that there is no scope for a solver to use his 
or her brain at all.

The New Statesman has a culture of games, competitions and mucking around with 
language. How does the crossword fit in to that?

Although the NS under its current editorship has in my view got its "fun" 
element more or less in balance, this was not always the case. Indeed, 10 years 
or so ago there was no weekly crossword available and the only time the 
magazine really let its hair down was at Christmas.

It was only by offering to compile a Christmas puzzle free of charge that I 
managed to get my nose round the door of setting. Naturally, I would say that a 
suitable crossword is an essential part of the fare that any magazine should 
provide its readers. Incidentally, when I finally got my regular crossword slot 
in 2010, I was also asked to compile a small weekly corner feature called The 
NS Word Puzzles.

Are you aware of any rightwing solvers coming to the NS for the puzzle and 
trying to ignore the politics?

It would be extremely flattering if this was the case, but I get no feedback 
at all. I suspect not, particularly as there are plenty of puzzles far better 
than mine in newspapers and journals on the right of the political spectrum.

Do you use assessors?

Yes, I have two. My colleague Anorak with whom I alternate looks over my 
efforts, as I do his. My other is my brother-in-law who has been an ardent 
Guardian solver for many years.

I find having two critics extremely useful as coming from two different 
viewpoints: I have even had one saying he really loved a particular clue and 
the other saying he hated it!

How did you choose your pseudonym?

My surname is Holt and my son suggested to me that as otters live in holts, 
Otterden would a suitably cryptic pseudonym.

What are the tools of your trade?

Basically a PC on which I have Crossword Compiler 
<http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html> installed. Obviously 
access to the internet is an essential tool for checking facts.

My array of books above my desk contains the usual dictionaries and 
references, of which the most thumbed seems to beChambers Crossword Directory 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550106209>
. I find this particularly useful for pointing up unorthodox definitions not 
revealed in the more conventional dictionaries. Some of these I find need to 
treated with care and a few of the anagram indicators it points to are a bit 
off-message, even to someone like me with liberal setting tendencies!

I suppose I should mention here that another reference I use frequently is one 
I wrote myself! This needs some explanation.

When I decided that I would try for some sort of retirement job in crossword 
setting, I quickly realised that there was a lot more to it than having a 
devious mind: there were rules and conventions to be understood and a way to be 
found around what were evidently quite polarised stances in the crossword 
business regarding style.

So, drawing on my previous experience in manual-writing on another subject, it 
seemed to me that if I compiled myself a faux manual as if it were written for 
others, the discipline in doing this from absolute scratch would help me get my 
thinking in order.

Somewhat arrogantly perhaps, this is what I did and I have kept the thing up 
to date ever since. If anyone out there wants to publish it, it is available, 
though I appreciate there is a limited potential readership!

You've written a fascinating piece about long answers for Crosswords Unclued 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2012/11/clueing-long-solutions-with-anagrams.html>
. Have you ever had to abandon a long answer because it just won't work 
properly?

Oh yes. A satisfactory clue for a long solution (say over 15 characters) can 
be very time-consuming if a series of linked wordplays is needed. I often ask 
whether in so doing I am attempting the exercise for my own satisfaction rather 
than for the enjoyment of the poor solver.

As I attempted to explain in the Crosswords Unclued article, I would rather go 
for a shorter cryptic clue if possible.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

Difficult to say in the case of puzzles as I think all depends on the reaction 
of solvers, not any assessment of my own. As for favourite clues, for me these 
are those which have ended up being fluent and concise, but clever enough to 
challenge the solver. One of mine I particularly liked is "Bank of Scotland 
provides support to the Euro (4)" (OK, it relies on false capitalisation!)

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

In truth I have never really conjured up a picture of a typical Otterden 
solver. I imagine a NS reader would be a fairly intelligent leftie with an 
interest in politics and the arts, and try to tailor some of my clues to 
reflect that … but that's about as far as it goes.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

I don't see any sign of decline in interest for cryptic crosswords and fondly 
imagine that publication is set to continue at least at its present level into 
the future.

Is setting art or craft?

Definitely not an art and those that believe that are being extraordinarily 
arrogant. Crossword setting is a technical skill, craft if you like, and no 
more.

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote?

No, not a clue.

Very funny. How do people respond if and when you tell them you're a crossword 
setter?

They are generally in awe as they imagine me to be some sort of intellectual 
egghead. Far from the truth of course, but good for the ego.

What have you done for a living besides writing crosswords?

Before I retired I was wholly in the world of town planning. First I was 
involved in the normal milieu of local government employment, but with a 
colleague took the risky step of setting up a weekly newspaper for town 
planners – with no experience of publishing or journalism! Somehow that worked 
and later on I went on to conceive and edit a five-volume loose-leaf practice 
manual for development controllers.

Is a propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to yourself or others?

Sometimes I find myself in company posing an anagram for a word in 
conversation or putting forward a bad pun, but that's as far as it goes.

Anything else to say?

I suppose I have been very fortunate to come late into crossword setting and 
without any track record to actually get published in a national weekly. I am 
very happy with my present fortnightly schedule which gives me the opportunity 
to mull. I'm in awe at the quality of puzzles produced by other professional 
setters with much more punishing schedules. However, I would dearly love to 
compile just one puzzle for the Guardian (anyone reading this?)

Nice try. Many thanks to Otterden for such a detailed response and a reminder 
that there is other fare beyond the weekday newspaper puzzles. The answer to 
"Bank of Scotland provides support to the Euro" is BRAE.
 