
A samurai in civvies, the figure of Mark Goodliffe compels the gaze as 
powerfully as his mind commands the stubbornest crossword clue.

If you have never watched someone complete a crossword, I urge you to do so. I 
urge you specifically to look upon the eight-time champion completing the three 
puzzles which make up the final of the Times National Crossword Championship.

To do so is to be mesmerised, blissfully. The non-Goodliffe components of the 
cosmos disappear, leaving two things: Goodliffe’s eyes and Goodliffe’s pen.

Nothing else budges. His untapping feet and chino-clad legs point parallel, 
straight ahead beneath the desk. The licking of a lip, the mouthing of some 
consonants to elicit an answer? Preposterous. Goodliffe needs no such crutches.

So your eyes are drawn first to his. While the rest of Goodliffe is as still 
and as silent as statuary, the pupils leap from clue to clue, riotous as midges 
in a Speyside summer.

And then there is that pen. It’s not a lucky pen; Goodliffe tells me he has 
made a conscious decision not to have superstitions. It might have been a 
pencil; “It’s not a decision that matters to me.”

It had, indeed, been a red pen at the qualifying stage, before the checkers 
told him that they prefer to keep that colour for themselves when going through 
the formality of checking his entries against the solutions.

This is a pen with a lot of work to do. What it certainly is not is a pen that 
leaves Goodliffe’s hand. It barely leaves the grid. As it writes each answer, 
its master is already at the next clue. Occasionally it hovers as much a 
half-inch above its next mission.

So devastating is his dominion that if you didn’t know that the inner workings 
were so outrageously creative, or hadn’t had the good luck to talk to this 
affable accountant, you would conclude that you were watching a part-cyborg.

Until … it happens.


Just as the serenity seems intransmutable, it erupts twice into immoderate 
drama.

First, there is what keener observers might identify as a smile. A mere 
soupçon, it turns out to have been prompted by this clue …

21ac Which involves getting a round in but hoping not to buy it? (7,8)

… and before it flickers back off, RUSSIAN ROULETTE has been inked in. 

More sensational than the Smile is the Pause. A real one. It can happen. It 
did happen, in 2014. I know; I was there.

Here is the clue that did it, from the same puzzle:

17d Old boring person who’s bound, on paper, to be smart (7)

Entire seconds pass. 

Then, harrowingly, even more. Such longueurs, Goodliffe later remarks, can be 
“extremely irritating”. Behold the havoc that can be unleashed by a word like 
SOIGNEE.

And then, after 22 minutes, you breathe again and realise that it’s over. A 
check, the raising of the arm. You recall then that there are other solvers in 
the room. Across the rows and down the columns of desks, those other entrants – 
the lickers and movers of lips – have only ever been racing for second place. 
Goodliffe is in battle with his past and future selves.

More than six minutes will pass before another arm is raised.

Goodliffe tends to arrive with a bag packed in preparation for the wait. He 
reaches discreetly into it, then relaxes with a crossword.
 