
Amid the excitement about England's Champions League successes, and with the 
focus remaining on Manchester United and Liverpool as they prepare to meet 
tomorrow in the Premier League, it seems nobody has noticed that this is 
probably the most important weekend of the season inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>.

The league's two best sides are playing each other, as are the two worst. And 
as the top eight, who have opened a bit of a gap over the rest of the division, 
scrap to decide which side will miss out on the play-offs, fifth hosts eighth 
and sixth visits seventh.

Win tomorrow and Brentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> 
will open a 10-point gap over their second-placed opponents, Wycombe, and can 
start planning their end-of-season open-top bus tour. Lose and the Chairboys 
will be four points behind with a game in hand. The home side have form very 
strongly on their side: they have won five of their past six home games, the 
visitors one of their past six away.

Wycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> led the division for 
much of the season, losing one of their first 24 games, and were comfortably on 
top at the end of January before being sunk by Brentford's surge. Having blown 
a hefty table-topping lead they know that the Bees have not yet secured the 
title, but their manager, Peter Taylor, says he doesn't care anyway. "I would 
take finishing third right now and Brentford winning the title," he said. "The 
most important thing is to finish above fourth place." They might not even 
finish the weekend above fourth place – lose tomorrow and they could drop to 
fifth.

"It's not quite win or bust," says their striker Matt Harrold, who will return 
to one of his former clubs tomorrow. "There's still 10 games to go and you can 
lose games in this league, everyone can beat anyone. I know it's a cliché, but 
it's been proved. It's true that if they win it would put them in a very strong 
position, but we're determined that isn't going to happen.

"We haven't got the results we maybe deserve recently, but no one's down or 
anything. We haven't been getting the rub of the green as much as at the start 
of the season, but everyone's determined to win tomorrow and finish the season 
well. They're in form at the moment but these things can't go on forever. 
Someone's got to stop them."

And as for Taylor's assertion that league titles don't matter, his players 
clearly aren't convinced. "We'd definitely like to win it," says Harrold. "It's 
good to say we were the best team in the league that season – as a player it's 
something you can look back on. But for the club it's not so important. This 
club should be playing in a higher division and that's all that matters."

It's a big weekend too for many of the teams just behind Wycombe, with 
Gillingham in fifth hosting eighth-placed Shrewsbury while seventh-placed 
Bradford visit Exeter, who are sixth. But in the other key game tomorrow 
relegation is at stake, when the division's worst sides, Grimsby andChester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chester>, meet at the Deva Stadium.

Thanks to Luton's points deduction neither is bottom of the table, but even if 
the Hatters can't catch them up there's still a relegation place to avoid, and 
they are currently the only two applicants – Bournemouth, one point ahead of 
Chester and theoretically involved, started the season on -17, have won five of 
their past eight and are upwardly mobile.

"It's probably the biggest game in the club's history," says Grimsby's 
19-year-old defender Ryan Bennett. "We have to look at it like that. We are 
going to prepare right, go over early and get the win. Everybody knows that it 
is the game that will probably determine what happens this season."

Grimsby <https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> spent yesterday 
training at Bellefield, the old training ground of Everton, one of manager Mike 
Newell's former clubs, hoping that a little Premier League polish might inspire 
them to a second win in 12 games that have featured seven defeats. How Chester 
must envy that kind of form. On Boxing Day they were a relatively comfortable 
17th, but they have not won in 15 games since, 11 of them lost, and are now one 
point above Chester having played a game more and with massively inferior goal 
difference.

"I honestly believe that whoever wins tomorrow's game will stay up," says the 
Chester manager, Mark Wright. "If we could win, the gap on Grimsby would be 
four points. If we could turn the corner it would be very important for us – 
the players know it and I know it. It's a massive game for us. A lot of the 
players have been feeling sorry for themselves, but there's no time for that, 
particularly in the position that we're in. It's a game we have to take to them 
and that we have to win."

There are 40 miles, three letters and 90 league places between Chester and 
Manchester, and only one is preparing to host a game that looks genuinely 
likely to decide anything.
 