
With the festive period fast approaching, many of us will be looking forward 
to a welcome break from the nine-to-five grind. Christmas is a great time to 
unwind and catch up with friends and family, but once the festivities are over 
it’s also provides a window of opportunity to reflect on your achievements and 
think about progressing your career in the new year. So, if you have some spare 
time during the holidays, why not invest in the advancement of your career by 
updating your CV and assessing your opportunities.

Assess the job market

Before you start working on your CV, it’s important to find out what the 
demands are in the job market. Industry trends can change very quickly, so it’s 
essential to do your research, especially if you have been with your employer 
for a long time and are slightly out of practice when it comes to job hunting. 
Start by browsing through plenty of relevant job adverts online and aim to find 
out which of your skills are most in demand, which companies are hiring and the 
amount of remuneration you should expect to receive. When you have collated 
this information, you will know exactly what skills and knowledge to include in 
your CV, as well as the types of organisations you will need to tailor it to.

Review your CV

Once you know the important candidate requirements for your desired roles, you 
need to review your CV and note down what it’s lacking. Compare your CV to the 
job adverts you’ve been looking at and note down where the gaps are. Determine 
where new skills and experience need to be added and also what older 
information may be removed now that it is less relevant to your next career 
move. Also consider the format and structure of your old CV. Does it look a bit 
dated? Could it made easier to read for potential employers? Take a look around 
the web for some CV examples and templates to make sure your new CV looks 
modern and professional.

Add your newest role

The first step to updating your CV is to add your latest role. When you’re 
caught up in finer details of your job, it can be difficult to describe it in 
writing. So take a step back and evaluate the role from an outsider’s 
perspective to ensure that you provide a coherent description that will be 
understood by recruiters and hiring managers. Start by providing an outline 
that explains your employer’s work, where you sit within the organisation, the 
overall goal of your role and how you contribute to the functioning of the 
company – this will ensure that readers have enough context to understand the 
details of your work.

The five most common CV problems – and how to fix them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/01/five-cv-problems-fix-employment-gap-lack-experience>
List your responsibilities in short sharp bullet points, remembering to 
include any newly learned skills or tools and always try to show the impact 
that your work has on your employer and stakeholders. Remember to add any 
impressive achievements – and back them up with facts and figures to quantify 
your value.

Re-write your CV profile

Your introductory profile, at the top of your CV, is often the first thing 
that a recruiter will see, so it’s important that it sells your newly gained 
talents and doesn’t reflect the candidate you were last year. It’s best to 
re-write your profile from scratch and target it strictly towards your new 
career ambitions. Omit some of the junior traits from your current CV and only 
include the most important candidate requirements for your new desired role. If 
you have recently taken on new responsibilities, then ensure these are clearly 
noted. Keep the profile brief and punchy to ensure it holds readers attention 
and tempts them to read your CV in full.

Beware of writing too much

Updating your CV with new roles can easily push it on to three or more pages. 
To keep your CV around the two-page mark, it’s crucial to cut some of your 
older roles. Your career history is important to employers so there is no need 
to cut dated roles out completely, but they don’t need to know every detail of 
roles that are five or 10 years old, so shorten them to brief summaries – 
giving readers just enough detail to understand your progression. You may also 
find that some responsibilities from your earlier jobs just aren’t relevant to 
your new career goals, so there should be plenty of content you can remove from 
your CV to make space for your current work.

Andrew Fennell is a recruiter and founder of CV writing service StandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/>


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 