
Tens of thousands of people in Fiji <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fiji> 
are living in evacuation centres after Cyclone Winston tore across the South 
Pacific country last week, the United Nations Children’s Fund has said.

The total number of people forced from their homes in the archipelago nation 
of more than 300 islands is expected to be much higher as many fled to 
relatives and are not included in the data.

Cyclone Winston, the worst storm recorded in the southern hemisphere, left 42 
people dead, according Fiji’s National Disaster Management Office. The 
category-five storm alsoleft many without water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/20/cyclone-winston-virgin-australia-and-jetstar-cancel-services-to-and-from-fiji>
 and it could be weeks before electricity is restored in some areas.

Australia has sent a military vessel, HMAS Canberra, which is expected to 
arrive in Fijian waters early this week. It is carrying three helicopters and 
60 tonnes of supplies, including water purification equipment and medicine.

There are fewer than a million people living in Fiji, spread out on islands 
thousands of square miles apart, making it difficult to asses the full damage 
of the cyclone. The severe tropical cyclone hit Fiji this month with winds 
gusts up to 325km/h and waves up to 12 metres high.

“There are still some pieces of the picture missing but we do know that 
approximately 7.2% (62,400) of Fiji’s population are in 875 evacuation centres, 
with many staying with relatives or in other places away from home,” Unicef New 
Zealand’s executive director, Vivien Maidaborn, said in a statement.

“One hundred and 34 schools have been destroyed, severely damaged or are being 
used as evacuation centres.”

Unicef spokeswoman Alice Clements said the official number of people sleeping 
in repurposed community halls, schools and churches had fallen on Monday to 
51,000 as many people were staying with friends or relatives.

“It is incredibly hard to estimate how many people in total were forced from 
their houses,” Clements said, adding that only people registered at evacuation 
centres had been counted.

Unicef said there were shortages in emergency supplies and further funding was 
needed to sustain and scale up the response.

Adi, 13, from Yaqeta village in the outer Yasawa Islands, said she saw her 
house collapse. “I grabbed my brother and we ran. I was so scared. We ran from 
house to house three times. Now I am heartbroken to see the house where I was 
born and raised in, in pieces,” she told Unicef.

Aid workers have warned that potential outbreaks of viruses carried by 
mosquitos could further devastate the nation, with dirty stagnant water 
remaining in many areas.
 