
“Klopp Is Coming Home” read the front page headline on the Augsburger 
Allgemeine but the celebrated return of the celebrated German coach was, well, 
nothing to celebrate. Liverpool’s tame goalless draw against anAugsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> side struggling in the 
Bundesliga will not linger in the memory as long as the potential knock-on 
effects for Jürgen Klopp.

Augsburg v Liverpool: Europa League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/18/augsburg-v-liverpool-europa-league-live>
There was more entertainment in the post-match press conference than on the 
pitch as Klopp was presented with a large pretzel by an Augsburg official, 
after the manager mentioned that he had missed the delicacy during his five 
months away. He slowly devoured the pretzel while taking his poor translator to 
task, in German and in English, for several misinterpretations that left the 
local media in hysterics. Klopp’s thoughts on an away draw in Europe, one that 
Augsburg appeared to savour after the final whistle, were also open to 
interpretation.

“A nil-nil away in the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> is okay,” said the 
Liverpool manager. “We had some great moments and some good play but there were 
other moments I am not happy with. I am not 100% satisfied and I want to change 
things in the second game. Doing the right thing at the right moment is 
important – we had a few good moments. In the second half we had three or four 
really good moves. My problem is that I think, with our quality, we should do 
better. But I have to be patient. Augsburg tactically were really good but we 
have our return match next week at Anfield.”

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> recovered from a 
dour first half to create inviting chances after the interval, limiting the 
home team’s threat in the process, but also survived a late scare when the 
substitute Ji Dong-won struck Simon Mignolet’s post with his first touch. The 
lack of an away goal was not Klopp’s only concern in Bavaria. His team face 
Manchester City in the Capital One Cup final three days after next week’s 
second leg and Augsburg will not be treated lightly.

Klopp said: “Will we play as strong a team in second leg? Yes, I think so. 
Maybe it’s a different team but we should not think too much about the final. I 
will not ignore it, of course, but this result doesn’t complicate my plans. How 
was it supposed be here, winning 5-0 and have a friendly game in the rematch?

“You have to respect German teams more. It is not possible to beat Augsburg 
5-0, and if we win 1-0 or 2-0 then nothing is decided. We have to be really 
concentrated in the return and show we want to go to the next round. If we want 
to save energy then we will lose on Thursday and on Sunday.”

Liverpool’s manager had labelled the tie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-champions-league-augsburg-europa-league>
“the biggest game in Augsburg’s history”, taking his cue from his opposite 
number, Markus Weinzierl, who claimed this was his club’s chance to announce 
themselves on the international stage. The pre-match talk bore no relation to 
what unfolded on the pitch, however, as unforced errors and careless 
distribution from both sides undermined the managerial hype.

Midtjylland strike back to humiliate Manchester United and Louis van Gaal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
A sloppy tone was set early when Mamadou Sakho directed a routine defensive 
clearance straight to Raúl Bobadilla unmarked on the edge of the area. His 
volley struck the ground before looping over Mignolet and on to the roof of 
Liverpool’s net, much to the Paraguay striker’s disgust. His night would not 
ignite. The forward suffered a hamstring injury and his replacement, Caiuby, 
created the clearest opening of the first half when releasing Alexander Esswein 
behind the Liverpool defence. Esswein cut back inside Kolo Touré but Mignolet 
was out quick to close the angles and block the shot.

Liverpool did have their moments before the interval without seriously 
troubling Marwin Hitz in the Augsburg goal. The visitors were far too static in 
the final third but as their movement improved in the second half so, 
predictably enough, did their threat. The spectacle improved considerably too. 
Daniel Sturridge should have given Klopp’s team the lead when James Milner and 
Roberto Firmino carved open the home defence and the former drilled an inviting 
pass across the face of goal. The striker opened his body to shoot but failed 
to get enough on the ball and miscued badly wide of the far post.

Augsburg were again exposed on their left when Sturridge released Nathaniel 
Clyne to the byline. The defender’s cross was destined for Philippe Coutinho, 
arriving at the near post, only for Paul Verhaegh, having tracked the 
Brazilian’s run, to make a vital interception. Liverpool went close for a third 
time when the Bundesliga side made a hash of clearing Alberto Moreno’s 
free-kick into the heart of their penalty area. Caiuby struck his clearance 
against Verhaegh and the ball rebounded into the grateful grasp of the 
goalkeeper Hitz on the line.

Moreno almost deceived the Augsburg keeper with a swerving shot from distance 
while the home side’s chances were limited, by contrast, in the second half. 
That said, Kostas Stafylidis and Ji almost spoiled Klopp’s homecoming and, in 
truth, the free pretzel was arguably his highlight.
 