
Danny Sculthorpe has been awarded a five-figure compensation fee for a 
training injury which led to Bradford cancelling a three-year contract without 
him ever pulling on their shirt.

Sculthorpe, 35, the younger brother of former St Helens and Great Britain 
forward Paul Sculthorpe, says he contemplated taking his own life after seeing 
his career ended prematurely and being “abandoned” but is now hoping his case 
will prompt clubs to take better care of their players.

Super League drive to raise awareness of mental health issues in the game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/27/super-league-psychological-problems>
The claim was lodged against the club’s former holding company, Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> Holdings Ltd, which is now 
dissolved, and was settled by its then insurance company. It has no relation 
to, or impact on, the current Bulls set-up.

“This case was never about the money for me, it was about Bradford admitting 
their mistakes,” said Sculthorpe. “As a club they let me down badly at a time 
when my career was going very well. They failed to devise a training regime for 
me to ensure my back condition was managed as it had been elsewhere and then 
when I was injured, they abandoned me completely.”

Sculthorpe, a prop forward who began his career at Rochdale, made 136 Super 
League appearances for Wigan, Castleford, Wakefield and Huddersfield before 
joining the Bulls in 2009 on a two-year contract with an option of a third 
season.

He had been on specifically-tailored training programmes at his previous clubs 
but he did not undergo a formal medical when joining Bradford, and despite 
warning both the club doctor and physiotherapist about his back problem, he was 
instructed to do ‘bent over rowing’, with 60kg barbells at one of his first 
sessions. It was then that Sculthorpe suffered a prolapsed disc.

“I was in hospital for eight weeks and nobody came to see me from Bradford,” 
he said. “Then they offered me a severance package and even asked that I sign a 
compromise agreement not to pursue litigation for any perceived negligence. It 
was basically an offer to be paid off and stay quiet.”

Sculthorpe, who earned up to £85,000 a year at his peak, attempted a brief 
comeback with Widnes but soon found himself struggling financially at home.

“I just felt like I had lost everything and that nobody cared,” he said. 
“After a couple of months, I couldn’t afford to pay the mortgage, and because 
Bradford were denying any responsibility for the injury, I had to try and find 
£3,000 for the physiotherapy I needed to give me any chance of getting back 
playing.

“At that time, all I could think about was how I was unable to support my 
family, that my career was over and that the only way out was suicide.”

Sculthorpe found help after opening up about his feelings with his parents and 
through support from the Rugby Football League.He now works for the State of 
Mind charity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/27/super-league-psychological-problems>
, which established a partnership with the game after it was rocked by the 
death of the Wigan and Great Britain hooker Terry Newton in 2010.

“I am glad I fought for this settlement, as hopefully it sends out a message 
to other clubs that they must look after players,” he said. “Too often players 
are just seen as a piece of meat.”
 