
Yeovil know their place. It was clear before a League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> ball was kicked in 
August and earnest. Only York were below them and on Saturday, as the teams met 
at Huish Park, Yeovil restored alphabetical order with a 1-0 win that lifted 
them off the bottom and, with Dagenham & Redbridge’s victory at Exeter, dumped 
York there instead. Now they can begin again in the second half.

It was Yeovil’s first league win in 17 games since September and their first 
at home since August. Two seasons ago they were in the Championship but last 
place there, when they won eight games and were seven points from safety, and 
again in League One, when they were nine points from 23rd place, amounted to 
free fall. They won seven matches in 2015. Defeat on Saturday would have left 
them five points adrift and staring at the fifth division they left in 2003. 
York have been there more recently, from 2004 to 2012. Desperate significance 
as much as sodden pitch defined the play.

Both clubs have new managers. York’s Jackie McNamara, late of Dundee United, 
ended a run of seven defeats, only five on his watch, with four points from two 
games either side of Christmas. Darren Way, caretaking from early December in 
place of Paul Sturrock, managed three draws in four league games for Yeovil 
after an FA Cup win that takes them to face Carlisle on Saturday. “It’s 
important we don’t become complacent,” he said on the strength of it, still in 
last place.

Way is green to the core, born in Plymouth, starting at Norwich and playing 
over 250 games for Yeovil before a car crash in which he was a passenger ended 
his playing career at 29 in 2008. His midfield energy and 5ft 6in earned him 
the moniker Weasel and the same commitment to the club in coaching roles has 
earned him his new position, confirmed on New Year’s Eve, which he assumes with 
Terry Skiverton, another club stalwart and team-mate in their ascent from the 
Conference, as assistant. Where there’s a Way there’s a will.

Yeovil Town appoint former midfielder Darren Way as permanent manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/31/yeovil-town-appoint-darren-way-manager>
“One thing I’ve tried to do is get the players closer to supporters,” he said, 
and it showed in the match taking place at all. Twenty volunteers helped cover 
the pitch against rain, which was then tipped off so the playing surface 
resembled an island. It was hardly a billiard table for the players but cannon 
to right of them, cannon to left of them, cannon in front of them volleyed and 
thundered and occasionally the cue ball ended up with a team-mate. The match 
pleaded for poise in possession and care in passing to put down markers but the 
latter were mostly in charge.

York’s Vadaine Oliver might have done better with a far-post header to Danny 
Galbraith’s early cross but Danny Ward and Jakub Sokolik were generally too 
assertive in Yeovil’s central defence to give him the scope that has made him 
the club’s leading scorer. Ward was on a short-term loan from Crawley but, at 
37, was pleased to accept Way’s offer of captaincy and a contract to June 2017.

The manager is now working to hold on to François Zoko, rightly man of the 
match and winner of the 40th-minute penalty when brought down by the luckless 
Luke Summerfield. “Fans have had a lot of pain lately,” said Matt Dolan, a 
latter-day Weasel, who converted it. An exciting late debut cameo from Tahvon 
Campbell, an 18-year-old striker newly on loan from West Brom, might have 
doubled the lead in added time but for Scott Flinders’ block, which matched one 
a minute earlier by Artur Krysiak from Kenny McEvoy. The game had come alive 
when it was almost dead.

McNamara said afterwards: “Our last pass wasn’t quite there [nor, for that 
matter, were many first ones on either side] but I have no worries going 
forward.” Going downward may be something else. “We’ve had a magical journey 
over the years and now a little bit of adversity and we’ve got to make sure it 
doesn’t get any worse,” Way said. His chairman, John Fry, admitted recently 
their troubles began in the Championship, where he could see no responsible 
financial way to take on the Premier League parachutists. Now they and York 
will simply be glad to land safely on dry land in May for League Two next 
season.
 