
The Dartford goalkeeper Jason Brown has criticised the anti-racism group Kick 
It Out for failing to follow through on their promise to support him after he 
was abused by aBristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> fan during a Conference 
game last October.

The former Blackburn, Aberdeen and Ipswich keeper, who has three caps for 
Wales, was verbally abused by the Rovers supporter John Wild, 43, for several 
minutes as he stood behind the goalin Dartford’s 1-0 loss at the Memorial 
Stadium on 7 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/08/bristol-rovers-action-fans-racially-abuse-jason-brown>
.

Wild, from Wotton-under-edge in Gloucestershire, was ordered to complete 12 
months’ community service and pay compensation to Brown after being found 
guilty in court on Tuesday. But despite hailing the decision as evidence of 
progress within the game, Brown hit out at anti-racism groupKick It Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kick-it-out> and accused them of doing 
nothing to help him after making initial contact.

“The disappointing thing is the way the FA, the PFA and Kick It Out lobbied it 
but did nothing about it,”he told Kent Online 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/dartford/sport/browns-abuser-found-guilty-34586/>. 
“I got the first phone call and they said: ‘We’ll support you, we totally 
understand you and we’ll put pressure on the police’ – but then nothing 
happened.

“These so-called campaigns like Kick It Out are meant to be dealing with this 
kind of thing – but are they? Are they really supporting minorities against 
discrimination?

“I knew they weren’t but a friend of mine said: ‘Give them the benefit of the 
doubt, they’re looking to change,’ – but they haven’t.”

But Kick It Out, who work within football to promote equality and encourage 
inclusive practices, has responded to Brown’s concerns following Wild’s 
conviction at Bristol magistrates court.

“We are pleased to see the investigation undertaken by Avon and Somerset 
police reach a satisfactory conclusion after Jason Brown was racially abused 
earlier this season,” read a Kick It Out statement, which said the organisation 
immediately informed the Football Association as soon as it was made aware of 
the incident.

“Paul Mortimer, Kick It Out’s professional players engagement manager, met 
Jason on Wednesday 8 October 2014, the day after the incident, to discuss the 
matter in full.

“Jason gave his account of the incident and Paul clearly outlined the 
processes we follow when an investigation is under way, which is consistent in 
every case of discrimination we are involved in, throughout the meeting.

“During the discussion, Paul offered the support of Kick It Out to Jason, as 
we do with every complainant we are in touch with, and they both agreed to a 
follow-up meeting.

“When Paul subsequently attempted to arrange a date, via phone calls and text 
message, to discuss with Jason how we could look to assist, Jason did not 
respond, nor did he to another inquiry from Kick It Out.”

Kick It Out said contact was maintained with the FA “to gain regular updates 
on the case” and, as the organisation has no formal investigative or regulatory 
powers, they work with the governing bodies on their processes and procedures, 
and liaise directly with the Police as and when required.

“We actively follow each complaint through to its conclusion, and if we are 
not satisfied with how a case is investigated, we will look to intervene,” the 
statement added.

“Paul’s role sees him working with players from all levels of football to 
offer them ongoing guidance and advice, and to ensure that we are tackling 
issues of discrimination effectively, as a collective, across the English game. 
We will continue to push for just outcomes for all those who may be abused, and 
for adequate sanctions of perpetrators.”
 