
The journalist and commentator Dave Lanning, who has died aged 78, covered 
sports as diverse as speedway (his first love), stock-car racing, motocross and 
arm wrestling, but was best known as a commentator on darts, often alongside 
his great friendSid Waddell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/sid-waddell>.

A major breakthrough for televised darts coverage came in 1972 when John 
Bromley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/06/guardianobituaries.frankkeating>, 
the head of ITV Sport, was persuaded by the News of the World to give the final 
of the newspaper’s darts championship airtime on World of Sport. “This really 
started things,” Lanning said in 2011. He was asked to commentate on this first 
“live” networked transmission of darts action. The News of the World 
championship, held at the Alexandra Palace, north London, had a live audience 
of more than 12,000 darts fans, and the TV coverage was a massive success, 
attracting an audience of 3 million.

Peter Jones, a director from Leeds who worked on the event, was so taken with 
the fervour and potential of televising darts that he persuaded Yorkshire 
Television to produce their own show. They called up Waddell, a producer on the 
regional news programme Calendar, to organise what became The Indoor League. An 
original, unusual and sometimes bizarre show, compered by the Yorkshire 
cricketerFred Trueman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jul/03/guardianobituaries.cricket>, The 
Indoor League brought together in competition experts in pub games including 
bar billiards, arm wrestling, table skittles, table football and darts. Lanning 
was engaged for the original darts and table skittles commentary and would 
later describe working on the show as “an outrageous blast of fun and 
spectacular characters”. The series ran from 1972 until 1977.

Lanning’s style was cool, insightful and extremely well-prepared, while 
Waddell’s was manic and packed with hyperbole. These two men (one from the 
south-west of England and the other a Geordie) complemented each other 
marvellously, managing to entertain viewers with their infectious enthusiasm 
for darts. Together they helped raise the profile of the “working man’s sport” 
into a national and international success.

Born in Poole, Dorset, Lanning was the second child of Catherine and Ernest 
Lanning. His father was a fitter and turner and both his parents had also been 
licensees for a short period after the second world war.

Dave was educated at Poole grammar school and on leaving became a reporter for 
the local newspaper, the Bournemouth Echo. He subsequently moved to London, 
where he worked for, among others, the Daily Sketch, the Daily Mail, TVTimes, 
the Sun,Darts <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darts> World magazine and the 
Mirror Group. He joined ITV Sport in 1965 and spent 27 years there. From 1990 
until 2011, he also commentated for Sky.

Asked about his finest moment in commentating, Lanning replied without 
hesitation that it was John Lowe’s first televised nine-darter (the perfect 
game of 501) in 1984. He also commentated on Phil “the Power” Taylor’s first 
nine-darter for Sky Sports in 2002, the first two nine-dart finishes in one 
match (Taylor v James Wade) in the Premier League final at Wembley in 2010 and 
(with Waddell) the first time darts was transmitted in 3D at the World 
Matchplay that same year.

Lanning travelled the world covering darts, and was inducted into the 
Professional Darts Corporation <http://www.pdc.tv>’s hall of fame in 2008 in 
recognition of his lifetime contribution. On his retirement in 2011, he said: 
“After 38 years, I felt that I’d had a pretty good run. It was becoming clear 
that my style of commentary did not fit entirely with the way the Sky producers 
wished to project the sport.”

He retired and returned to Poole, planning “to play a great deal of golf. I 
also enjoy walking on the local beaches, trying to grow orchids and 
bougainvilleas, spectating at cricket matches, writing a bit and, of course, 
watching my grandchildren blossom beautifully.”

When asked how the future of darts on TV could be secured, Lanning said: 
“Stick like glue to Sky. Try to find genuine championship-challenging 
contenders from the US, the far east and South Africa and make [the sports 
promoter] Barry Hearn minister of sport.”

He is survived by his wife, Leona, whom he married in 1959, by his daughter, 
Alyson, sons, Philip and Russell. and by seven grandchildren.

• David Ernest Lanning, sports commentator, born 24 March 1938; died 29 
October 2016
 