
David Moyes believes it is too early for Real Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> to target European 
qualification this season and says he is still looking to strengthen his squad 
before the transfer window closes at the end of the month.

Moyes took over at Real Sociedad in November 2014 after the Basque club made a 
shocking start to their 2014-15La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> campaign. The Scottish 
manager led them to a creditable 12th place finish in his first managerial role 
after his sacking by Manchester United in April 2014.

The former Everton and Manchester United manager is clearly anxious to take 
the San Sebastián club to the next level but their only real signing of note 
since the end of last term has been the Brazilian forward Jonathas from 
relegated Elche.

“I don’t think that right now we have to have Europe as a goal,” Moyes told a 
news conference before his side’s La Liga opener at Deportivo La Coruña on 
Saturday.

“Considering what we did last season, looking to Europe is a very big step. I 
hope we can do it but I don’t think we have to have that expectation from the 
start.”

Moyes said he was satisfied with the new players who have arrived but added 
that coaches always wanted more. He gave little away when asked about reports 
suggesting that the club may strike a deal to take their former midfielder 
Asier Illarramendi on loan from Real Madrid.

Illarramendi, 25, moved to the Bernabéu two years ago but has been unable to 
hold down a regular place in their starting line-up. “If a midfielder we 
believe can help us was available I am sure the president would be interested,” 
Moyes said.

“ I am happy with the midfielders we have and there is competition for all the 
positions, which means the players have to perform very well to win a place in 
the team.”

Moyes also said that he expects Pedro to be a success in the Premier League 
afterthe Spain forward completed his move to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/aug/21/pedro-barcelona-chelsea-video>
 this week. “I think it can take time for these players to settle, and they 
must be given the opportunity to do that,” he said. “I think Pedro coming into 
the Premier League will add to the quality that the league has got. It has a 
lot of great players, and Pedro is certainly one.”
 