
David Haye <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davidhayeboxing> will fight Tony 
Bellew in the heavyweight division on 4 March at the O2 Arena, it has been 
announced.

Bellew called out fellow Briton Haye last month after defending his WBC 
cruiserweight title against BJ Flores, a fight which he weighed in at 14st 
3lbs. David Haye, who fought Mark de Mori and Arnold Gjergjaj this year at 
weights over 16 stone – his first two fights since taking a three-and-a-half 
year hiatus from the sport. A press conference has been scheduled at the O2 
next Wednesday 30 November to promote the fight.

Tony Bellew retains cruiserweight title with third-round stoppage of BJ Flores
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/tony-bellew-retains-cruiserweight-stoppage-bj-flores>
“I think Tony Bellew will come in at 14st 9lbs, 14st 10lbs, and I think David 
will come in light, about 15st 7lbs,” said Eddie Hearn, who is promoting the 
fight alongside David Haye’s company Hayemaker Promotions. “So you’re probably 
talking about [a difference of] 10 pounds. Which in the heavyweight division is 
absolutely nothing.”

“This is a life-changing opportunity for Tony Bellew and he wants to knock 
this geezer out so, so bad,” continued Hearn. “Nothing is going to stop him 
taking this fight. I’ve written to the WBC, asking for a special event permit, 
to take this one Bellew fight out of the [cruiserweight] division, into 
heavyweight, and then come back and defend the cruiserweight title.

Haye has previously unified the cruiserweight division before, in 2008, and 
went on to become WBA world heavweight champion. “Even in his home town of 
Liverpool, I would be stopped in the street by people begging me to 
spectacularly send him into retirement,” claimed Haye. “Bellew is completely 
delusional if he thinks he can beat me. He still thinks he’s on the set of 
Creed and there will be some kind of Rocky-style happy ending. But come 4 March 
at the O2 in London I will bring reality crashing down on him.

“I’ve earned my credentials the hard way inside the ring, not on film sets. 
There will be no second takes, no stunt men taking the blows and no flashing 
lights on the red carpet, the only lights Bellew will see are the spotlights 
shining down on him when he wakes up from his nap on the canvas.”

“I’ve backed him into a corner, left him nowhere to go, and now I have what I 
want,” replied Bellew. “I’m not under any illusions, I know exactly what I am 
going up against, it’s big risk, big reward.

“I cop him with my best punch, he’s going to sleep. He cops me with his best 
punch, more than likely I am going to sleep too. I know what I am up against 
but the big factor for me is, I’m a very active fighter, I’ve had no breaks and 
I’ve got very little wear and tear on me.”
 