
David Moyes is on the verge of the sack as Real Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> manager as the Spanish club 
consider their options after a 2-0 defeat at second-bottom Las Palmas that left 
the side level on points with the final relegation place, but the decision has 
not yet been confirmed as the flight bringing the former Manchester United 
manager back to Spain was cancelled.

Neymar brilliance puts seal on Barcelona’s 3-0 win over Villarreal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/08/neymar-barcelona-villarreal-match-report>
Moyes is now expected to travel early on Monday morning from the UK, where he 
had spent the weekend since the defeat on Friday night, and will meet the 
club’s president, Jokin Aperribay, on his return. The favourite to replace him 
is Eusebio Sacristán.

Moyes had offers to return to the Premier League in the summer, and there had 
been interest from England more recently too, but he was determined to continue 
at Anoeta where his contract runs until the end of the season.

When Moyes took over last November, Real Sociedad were 16th, having won only 
twice in 11 games last season. Three days short of a year later the team in is 
virtually the same position, the improvement of the second half of last season 
long forgotten. They finished last season 12th, on 46 points, but now they are 
16th again and have won twice in 10 games. Those victories have been away to 
the bottom two, Levante and Granada, and they are yet to win at home.

Although Moyes would not agree, the belief in San Sebastián is that this is a 
squad that should be competing for Europe but the final European place is 10 
points off and defeat provoked fears that la Real could be dragged into a 
relegation battle instead, despite spending €16m on Asier Illarramendi and 
€7.6m on the striker Jonathas in the summer.

Sevilla v Real Madrid: La Liga – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/nov/08/sevilla-v-real-madrid-la-liga-live>
Although victory at Levante a fortnight ago had appeared to bring some 
tranquillity, the pressure has grown again and with Sevilla, Barcelona, 
Villarreal and Real Madrid still to play before the turn of the year there is 
little optimism that results will improve quickly.

The visit to Las Palmas was seen not only as a game that they must win to 
distance themselves from the relegation zone before those fixtures but also a 
test of the strength of the recent recovery and a gauge of the players’ support 
for their manager. One local newspaper described the performance as a “total 
disaster”.

Moyes has been in charge for la Real for 38 games, the equivalent of a full 
league season, during which time they have picked up 46 points, with 11 wins, 
13 draws and 13 defeats. Last season they finished 12th, 11 points clear of the 
relegation zone. Now only goal difference separates them from the bottom three.
 