
High fences, security cameras, razor wire and gatehouse vehicle checks: modern 
Premier League training grounds often seem more like military installations 
than offshoots of the entertainment industry. If some of the protection and 
privacy is necessary, many clubs embrace effective “lockdown mode” a little too 
enthusiastically andDavid Moyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> is suitably concerned about 
the resultant disconnect between players, supporters and reporters.

It explains why, this week, Sunderland’s manager threw open the doors of his 
club’s magnificently appointed, if slightly windy, training HQ and offered 
journalists rare “access all areas”. Managers in charge of struggling clubs – 
andSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> are bottom of 
the table, with no Premier League wins and only two points this season – 
traditionally adopt siege mentalities but defying convention, Moyes allowed his 
guests to watch an entire training session as he prepared for Saturday’s 
fixture at Stoke City.

The manager became happily accustomed to staging daily “open training” during 
his time coachingReal Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> in La Liga, and Jermain 
Defoe is similarly familiar with the concept. The former England striker 
certainly had no inhibitions about showing off his extraordinary finishing 
ability – crowned by one particularly acrobatic volley – to an enlarged 
audience.

“It made a difference, in a good way,” Defoe said. “It was good for the young 
lads, having people watch lifts players. They do it all the time in Canada and 
America, in MLS. When I played for Toronto, reporters talk to you in the 
changing room. You step out of the shower and there’s a couple of women there.”

That may be one step too far for Sunderland but a fully clothed Defoe duly 
seized an opportunity to challenge the north-east’s often deceptively 
unflattering image. Back in August Moyes – the club’s seventh manager in five 
years – was shocked when several leading British players including Joe Hart, 
Jack Wilshere and Ryan Mason rejected mooted moves to Wearside. Despite a 
recent history studded with near constant 11th-hour relegation escapes, he 
still cannot quite believe that Sunderland’s regular, fanatical, 40,000‑plus 
crowds, top‑drawer infrastructure and illustrious past counted for nothing.

“I’m a real London boy but I’ve loved living up here,” Defoe said. “I’ve 
enjoyed it and embraced it. It’s a nice area. The only difference is that’s 
it’s colder. Everything else is just an excuse and if you love football, you 
can’t make excuses.

“If you love playing football, if you want to play in front of amazing fans in 
a big stadium, at a club with fantastic training facilities then put some 
tracksuit bottoms on and come and play for Sunderland. Making excuses is a soft 
way out.”

Defoe concedes that he, too, once had “a different perception,” of the 
north-east. “But that was before Toronto,” he says. “Until then I thought it 
was too cold ‘up north’. Then I went to Canada. The cold there. Wow. After 
that, Sunderland’s tropical.”

The heat is already on Moyes, with many pundits forecasting relegation. “We 
know we have to improve but there’s a long way to go,” Defoe said. “It’s not a 
situation you want to be in but it’s nothing new to us; maybe other teams would 
panic more in our position. If the whole team sticks together we’ll be fine. If 
we win at Stoke, we’re up and running.” The 34-year-old is encouraged by the 
squad’s surprisingly resilient morale. “There’s some good characters here. The 
spirit’s always been good, the spirit’s not the problem.”

Quality is a different matter and his efforts to make Sunderland much more 
than the sum of their parts have sometimes reduced Defoe to on-pitch tears 
after scoring key goals. “It’s just the emotion of such important games,” the 
striker said.

“It’s because we needed the points so bad it was scary. We’ve got a good thing 
here, relegation would be a shame.

“I’ve always felt we have so much more to give, that we can improve and push 
on. Those times I’ve cried, it’s because it means so much for me to be here and 
scoring goals. It’s special here.”

Moyes is similarly frustrated by his enduring struggle to unlock Sunderland’s 
potential but Defoe points out that it is still only three months since he 
succeeded Sam Allardyce and improvements will inevitably be incremental.

Significantly, insiders say the Scot is their most “hands-on” manager in years 
and talk of his enthusiasm for breathing new life into this doziest of sleeping 
giants in much the same way that Rafael Benítez is revitalising Newcastle 
United.

Certainly watching Moyes work as the focal point of training – variously 
instructing Patrick van Aanholt to “track back’ at breakneck speed and shouting 
“love it” as 14 consecutive passes are registered during an exercise in close 
control under pressure – is to see vision and commitment shining through the 
October gloom. “It’s been difficult,” Defoe said. “But you can’t just come into 
a club and make it click overnight. There’s a new way of playing and it was 
always going to take time to build something. Hopefully the manager will get 
time.”
 