 The devolution referendum next week will be the last chance for Wales to give 
itself a powerful democratic voice, Welsh Secretary Ron Davies warned last 
night.
Speaking in The Guardian devolution debate in Cardiff, he said that Scotland 
would certainly have a parliament London would be getting its chance for 
regional government, and regional development agencies would be formed across 
England. OnlyWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> would be left out, if 
voters reject the current proposals.

 'If we don't grasp the opportunity, Wales could be, in two or three years 
time, the only part of the country ruled by dictat from London in the old way.'

 Nothing in the Government's proposal threatened the unity of the UK. Key 
national decisions would continue to be made in Westminster.

 The idea of devolving power to Cardiff was not new - there had been a 
secretary of state for Wales since 1964. What was now at issue was who should 
exercise that power: a secretary of state or elected representatives.

 'We want to trust the people. We want an assembly of elected representatives 
of the people to run our affairs,' he said. Attacking the previous Conservative 
government, Mr Davies said that former Welsh secretary, John Redwood, had 
followed his own policies and beliefs, ignoring those of the Welsh people.

 His successor, the Tory leader William Hague, had appointed 415 members of 
non-elected quangos.

 He accused the campaign for a No vote of trying to frighten voters with talk 
of the high cost of the assembly, and the danger of internal conflict between 
various parts of the Welsh population.

 But Jonathan Evans, the former Tory MP for Brecon and Radnor rejected the 
notion that the No campaign consisted only of Tories. He pointed out that 
several Labour MPs had voiced serious concern about the Government proposals.

 Mr Evans said Labour had promised a referendum on specific plans but instead 
had offered only vague ideas in its white paper.

 He predicted conflict between a new assembly and existing local government. 
He derided the Government's contention that an assembly would be 
self-financing, through the costs saved by curbing or abolishing quangos.

 Richard Livsey, the Liberal Democrat MP for Brecon and Radnor, accused Mr 
Evans, to loud applause from the 200-strong audience, of illustrating Tory 
tactics of spreading fear. He attacked the Conservative record over the last 18 
years, during which only one secretary of state for Wales had been a Welsh MP.

 He said that the new Jubilee Underground line in London would cost pounds 2.6 
billion, which would run the assembly for 200 years. Plaid Cymru's leader, 
Dafydd Wigley, made an impassioned plea to Welsh voters to show that they were 
not afraid to take responsibility for their future.

 The people of Wales needed an assembly to exercise democratic control of the 
Welsh Office, to replace the quango system and to strengthen the voice of Wales 
nationally, in Europe, and in the world.
 