
Shareholders are to win a legal right to block sky-high pay awards to company 
executives under radical plans for an assault on "fat cat" earnings drawn up by 
the government. Senior ministers, including the business secretary,Vince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>, are backing a move that 
would give shareholders an effective veto over pay deals they deem unacceptable.

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> confirmed 
the move and said he was determined to end the "merry-go-round" of super-rich 
bosses rubber-stamping each others' inflated deals and being rewarded for 
failure: "Let's empower the shareholders by having a straight, shareholder vote 
on top pay packages," he said. "The market for top people isn't working; it 
needs to be sorted out."

The move by ministers, which would require legislation, came to light as the 
main parties scrambled to occupy the high ground over executive pay, ahead of 
the politically charged bank bonus season. It reflects a growing consensus at 
Westminster that executive pay is out of control and has to be tackled, 
particularly at a time when many people are losing their jobs and those on 
modest earning are having their pay frozen.

In the past financial year, the directors of FTSE 100 companies have seen a 
49% increase in total earnings, taking average pay to £2.7m. Although bonuses 
will probably be down on last year, the hefty sums awarded will further 
highlight the growing chasm between rich and poor and fuel complaints that the 
government is too soft on the City.

Labour, whose leader, Ed Miliband, has called for a "fairer and better 
capitalism", challenged the government to back all the recommendations of the 
independent HighPay <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> Commission in order 
to increase transparency and accountability in the boardroom and the City. 
Currently shareholders have a right to vote on pay awards, but the vote is 
"advisory" and often takes place only after decisions have been made on 
executive pay. Under the plans being drawn up by cabinet ministers, the vote 
would, for the first time, have legal force, so that executives would be 
subject to the democratic will of shareholders over pay.

Cameron criticised boardroom cronies who helped each other "fill their boots" 
while the country was being forced to tighten its belt. "We've got to deal with 
the merry-go-round where there's too many cases of remuneration committee 
members sitting on each other's boards, patting each other's backs and handing 
out each other's pay rises," he said.

"We need to redefine the word 'fair'. We need to try to give people a sense 
that we have a vision at the end of this, of a fairer, better economy, a 
fairer, better society, where if you work hard and do the right thing you get 
rewarded."

Anger among shareholders and the public at soaring executive pay has been 
growing in recent years. Shareholder rebellions have become increasingly 
common. Advertising giant WPP's management received a stinging rebuke from 
investors last year, with 42% of shareholders voting against the remuneration 
report. Shareholder activists objected to the fact that Mark Read, the head of 
WPP Digital, received a pay rise of 31% to £425,000 in January.

Other reforms being considered by ministers include ending the "cosy cartel" 
that allows top executives to set each other's pay, by bringing outsiders on to 
remuneration committees, and introducing rules to force executives to take more 
of their pay in shares that cannot be cashed in for at least five years.

The High Pay Commission said executive remuneration was out of control. It 
cited the pay of the head of Barclays, which rose by nearly 5,000% in 30 years, 
a period in which average wages had risen only threefold. It made 12 
recommendations, including:

• Greater transparency in the calculation of executive pay, to end the "closed 
shop" on pay decisions.

• Putting employees and other "outsiders" on remuneration committees.

• Publishing the top 10 executive pay packages outside the boardroom in order 
to illustrate the sums earned by senior traders at investment banks.

• Forcing companies to publish a pay ratio between the highest paid executive 
and the company median.

• Requiring companies to publish a single total pay figure for boardroom 
members, including pension benefits.

Will Hutton, Observer columnist and author of an independent review of fair 
pay delivered to the government last March,called for companies and the public 
sector to publish annually the five-year trend of the ratio of top pay to 
median pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/07/bonus-culture-penalties-gravy-train?intcmp=239>
 and justify upward movement. "Citizens, workers and shareholders would have 
the ammunition to challenge undeserved top pay," he said.

Deborah Hargreaves, who chairs the commission and is a former business editor 
of theGuardian, said: "We urge the government to be bold in their reforms and 
not be put off by the strong possibility of a backlash from the business lobby. 
The public are right behind the campaign in this new era of austerity."

Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, said: "We have set three tests 
for the government to meet, based on the principles of transparency, 
accountability and fairness. Anything less than the full implementation of 
these measures by the prime minister will fall short of what is required to 
empower those who ultimately own our businesses."
 