
As Dean Richards can testify, sometimes in life you get what you deserve and 
theNewcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> side he has 
spent the past nine months fashioning into a respected force certainly did on 
Wednesday night. Promotion back to the Premiership was achieved at the first 
attempt at an emotionally fraught Kingston Park, but for the club's director of 
rugby the significance went deeper.

Richards's reputation lay in tatters after he was handed a three-year ban from 
rugby for his pivotal role in the Bloodgate scandal at Harlequins in 2009. But 
his players displayed the kind of resilience that characterised Richards's own 
playing career to grind out promotion after outscoring a gutsy Bedford outside 
by two tries to nil, with the trusty boot of Jimmy Gopperth, their departing 
fly-half, keeping the scoreboard ticking over with seven penalty goals.

Say what you like about Richards, and many have since that gory sequence of 
events which began with theHarlequins wing Tom Williams biting into a fake 
blood capsule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/20/harlequins-fined-heineken-cup>, 
but nobody can deny his impact at Newcastle. "I'm happy but I still think it's 
a rotten way to go up," said Richards, as he reiterated his disapproval for the 
convoluted play-off system. "It's as though we've been in purgatory for the 
past two months. It may suit sides who have no ambitions of going up but if you 
have everything in place then it doesn't seem quite right."

Appointed as the Falcons' director of rugby following the end of his 
three-year ban last August, Richards has stopped the rot and restored belief in 
this corner of the north-east. After Newcastle fell through the trapdoor 12 
months ago they survived a mini-exodus of players, recruited cleverly and have 
been virtually untouchable ever since, under Richards's guidance.

The uncompromising 49-year-old has breathed new life into a dying club, but 
naturally it will be done his way. Club insiders talk of a return to an 
old-fashioned rugby culture, with regular social gatherings between players, 
coaching and administration staff.

"I like a beer myself and that's one of the best things about being in the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union>," 
added Richards. "There is that social side to it and that's fine now, but 
things will need to change for next year in the Premiership. We're not going to 
make any predictions but we've signed some good players such as Andy Saull and 
Rory Clegg and we'll give it a good go."

Gopperth will now join Leinster, but his contribution to the Falcons during 
the past four seasons cannot be underestimated. His first penalty should have 
poured confidence into a Newcastle side who had won 18-9 at Bedford's 
Goldington Road ground seven days ago courtesy of six Gopperth penalties. But 
the visitors, to their credit, steadied themselves and fashioned a highly 
impressive response to lead 9-3 with three penalties from Jake Sharp.

The Falcons claimed the opening try in the 25th minute after some prodigious 
play from their forwards that culminated in Ryan Shortland, the wing, plunging 
over in the left corner. Gopperth's failure to convert was quickly seized upon 
when Bedford regained the lead with a fine drop-goal from the impressive Sharp.

That put the visitors 12-11 ahead at an eerily quiet Kingston Park, save for a 
small but noisy knot of Bedford followers. Gopperth and Sharp traded further 
penalties as Bedford took an 18-17 advantage into the break. That advantage was 
stretched by Sharp's sixth penalty soon after the resumption, but Alex Tait 
quickly burrowed over the line in the left corner after some excellent sniping 
from Gopperth.

That Gopperth's conversion attempt should rebound off a post merely added to 
the drama, but he added another penalty to give his side a little breathing 
space.

Newcastle Falcons: A Tait; N Cato, S Hufanga, A Powell, R Shortland; J 
Gopperth, R Lawson; G Shiells (J Golding, 50), R Vickers (M Thompson, 71), O 
Tomaszczyk (S Wilson, 71); C Del Fava, MacLeod, M Wilson, W Welch (captain), A 
Hogg.

Replacements not used: J Hudson, T Tu'ifua, C Pilgrim, W Luveniyali.

Bedford Blues: B Ransom; J Short, O Dodge (J Pritchard, 57), M Atkinson, J 
Bassett; J Sharp (I Vass, 66), D Veenendaal (L Baldwin, 57); R Reeves, S 
Spurling (N Cochrane, 50), D Seal, M Howard, P Tupai, G Gillanders, D Fox 
(captain), N Fenton-Wells (D Barrell, 56).

Replacements not used: P Boulton, B Gulliver

Referee: G Garner
 