
How can I restart my career and avoid discrimination now I am using a 
wheelchair?

I became disabled nearly five years ago, losing the use of my hands gradually 
over 12 months, with my general mobility becoming more impaired. I’m now 
transitioning into a wheelchair. Prior to this I’d been employed for seven 
years in middle management with the same employer, and was generally doing well 
in my career of 15 years. I had never had any issues or performance concerns 
and was considered a high achiever.

I was made redundant 14 months after becoming disabled, but with a good 
package I accepted this and moved on. I interview well and had a good CV. I was 
offered a new job quite quickly, but when I declared my disability the role 
disappeared. I decided after that to not declare my disabilities until I had my 
foot in the door, so to speak. I did just that, declaring my disability on day 
one of a new job and was made “redundant” 11 months later.

Evidence of discrimination was gathered and I was offered a payout. Cue the 
next job: same thing, same outcome. Now I’m 13 months into job four and in the 
same position. I know the signs and am manoeuvring before what I believe to be 
the inevitable happens.

I know that the law is on my side regarding discrimination, but taking a 
legal/official complaint route is distressing and unpleasant, and I’d hate to 
go through it again. I don’t want to be in a position where I have to keep on 
fighting.

How can I get off this merry-go-round? Now that I am a wheelchair user at 
least I don’t have the dilemma of whether or not to declare my disability. I 
don’t think my support needs are great: lightweight equipment (laptop, phone, 
etc), dictation software (£80), and wheelchair-accessible premises. Above 
everything, I need a manager who will support me, but how can I assess that in 
the job interview process?

What do I need to do differently to not just get a job but keep it? I don’t 
know how to get my career back on track.

Jeremy says

I’m very glad you no longer have to make that difficult decision as to whether 
or not to declare your disability on first contact. I’m pretty sure that, in 
most cases, it’s preferable for it to be known from the beginning, but now at 
least that decision is made for you.

I am slightly surprised you don’t mention any organisations that exist 
specifically to support people in your situation. I’ve identified several that 
would seem promising. You may, of course, have approached them but found they 
led nowhere – but if you haven’t, I strongly recommend that you conduct an 
online search and follow up on those sites that seem to suit you best.

Some organisations specialise in matchmaking would-be employees with employers 
who are actively seeking to take on disabled people. What this means, of 
course, is that you’re not in unspoken competition with non-disabled people, so 
there’s no question of discrimination coming into play, however unconscious. As 
I have no direct knowledge of any of these organisations, I’m afraid I can’t 
advise you or make specific recommendations, but do please look into them 
thoroughly.

Reading your letter again, I’m struck by how little you have to say about your 
own particular strengths and experience. I suspect that you may, entirely 
understandably, have become so preoccupied with what you need that you’ve 
neglected to make the case for what you can offer. In your 20 years’ work you 
must have acquired knowledge and specific skills that would be of particular 
value to potential employers. These can prove more attractive to recruiters – 
even if only a minority – than more general “transferable skills”.

Readers say 

• Apply for a role at a disability charity or a disabled person’s 
organisation. They are used to making adjustments and you’d not be judged. But 
I’d understand if you’d feel a little “ghetto-ised”. As a disabled person, it 
took me a long time to find an organisation and a role where I felt comfortable 
and supported, but they’re out there.bristolianlondoner

• Ask lots of questions at interview about the provisions they’d make. The 
attitude they take should give you a good idea as to what they’d be like as an 
employer.HorseshoeMan

• Apply for civil service jobs. All government departments have a robust 
anti-discrimination policy that starts at the application stage, with the 
guaranteed interview principle for candidates who pass the agreed competency 
standard.KateJRR

Commuting is driving me crazy – it’s the only fly in the ointment of my dream 
job

I am blessed in that I have landed my dream job. After costly and exhausting 
retraining, hundreds of hours of voluntary work, dozens of applications and 
interviews, and a lot of determination and sacrifice, I have a satisfying and 
challenging job in the charity sector that pays well and in which I feel valued.

The problem is the commute. On good days the drive is 1 hour 20 minutes each 
way, on bad days more than two hours – and it is becoming exhausting. Public 
transport isn’t really an option due to remote locations.

I find that my evenings are lost in a haze of tiredness, and I fear – know – I 
am becoming unpleasant to be around. I used to have hobbies (cooking, 
socialising, creative clubs, etc) but these are no longer viable. Weekends are 
invaluable but I am tired a lot of the time.

Is there anything I can do to alleviate this, or do I suck it up? I don’t want 
to appear ungrateful. Working from home isn’t really an option as I manage 
volunteers and need to have an office presence. I have considered staying in an 
Airbnb during the week but I would be sad not to see my family every evening.

Jeremy says

Driving yourself for four hours a day, and now much of it in the dark, is not 
only exhausting but also potentially dangerous. How about splitting your week? 
For example, spending Monday and Wednesday nights near your place of work and 
going home the other evenings. At the cost of two evenings away you would 
reduce your double commute from five days to just the one day, Friday – with 
the weekend to come.

I imagine your sympathetic employer would be anxious to help you, so if you 
could also negotiate the occasional Friday working from home, you’d eliminate 
the double commute and have an uninterrupted three days at home.

Readers say 

• I would find a cheapish B&B for two nights a week. Many smaller places would 
be glad of the regular business, and after a short time you tend to become a 
friend and be treated better than more casual customers.Alexandria

• Faced with a similar problem, I moved. I have walked or cycled to work for 
the past 35 years and been doing a job I enjoy and which wasn’t stressful. Work 
to live, don’t live to work.Derek23

• A motorbike cut my commuting time by well over 50% (legally too) and had the 
advantage of making me arrive in work with a smile on my face.DavGwyn

• Please don’t get a motorbike. I know how many motorcyclists have been killed 
on my local stretch of motorway during rush hour, which is slow-going but with 
sudden, lethal lane-changing. Airbnb a couple of nights.Sebnose

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 