
The brutal battle that ended with blood splattered across the street, a dozen 
injured andJimmy Romero pulled from the Manzanares river beaten and dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/30/deportivo-la-coruna-fan-critically-injured-atletico-madrid>
 began as planned early on Sunday morning. Members of the far-rightFrente 
Atlético had gathered at 8am, four hours before their team faced Deportivo de 
La Coruña at the Vicente Calderón. Half an hour later buses arrived from 
Galicia and the occupants, members of Depor’s ultrasRiazor Blues, got off and 
headed along the river towards the stadium, where theFrente waited. Shortly 
before 8.50am flares were set off and, amid the smoke, the charges began. Two 
hundred men ran towards each other carrying metal bars and knives.

The fighting was vicious and it continued up and down the Paseo Virgen del 
Puerto, alongside the river. It spilled onto roads alongside: Calle de San 
Rufo, Paseo de la Ermita del Santo and Avenida del Manzanares. Eventually the 
police began to arrive, and so did the ambulances. There were 21 arrests. 
Francisco Javier ‘Jimmy’ Romero Taboada became the 11th person to have died in 
football-related trouble in Spain since 1982. When he was dragged out of the 
water, where he’d been for almost half an hour, he had serious head injuries, 
his heart had stopped and he had hypothermia; he was “clinically dead”, one 
hospital source was quoted as saying.

Forty-three years old and a father of two, the youngest a little boy aged just 
four, Romero was officially pronounced dead at two o’clock, about the time that 
Deportivo de La Coruña’s fans were leaving the Calderón, escorted silently back 
to their buses by the police. Deportivo had lost 2-0, but few really cared. For 
many, this was the game that should never have been played.

Just before the start of the second half, the LFP had released a statement 
saying their “firm” intention was to suspend the game but that it had “not been 
possible”. They briefed that the decision was down to the Spanish Football 
Federation, the RFEF, who had to communicate that decision to the referee. The 
problem was, the LFP insisted, that they had not been able to get hold of 
anyone at the RFEF. It was a Sunday morning and they were not answering the 
phone.

Jorge Pérez, the RFEF’s spokesman, later claimed that he had been contacted 
just 11 minutes before the game was due to kick off and by then it was “too 
late” and “counter-productive”. Perhaps it had been decided that the match had 
to be played for reasons of safety, but no one from the police or the local 
authorities said anything.

A different reason was offered up by the league later – one that, while 
uncomfortable and deliberately insensitive, carried a kind of crude coherence. 
Javier Tebas, the league’s president, insisted that had it been a “normal fan” 
the game, and all games, would indeed have been cancelled. “This was two groups 
of delinquents that arranged to beat each other up; they’re not fans,” he said. 
Romero was not an innocent victim, Tebas was suggesting, not a man over whom 
football should shed a tear. In fact, one that it should not recognise.

Either way, the game went ahead, amid uncertainty and anxiety. The teams did 
not know what to do and did not have the authority to make a decision. Slowly, 
the news had filtered through to the players. Víctor Fernández, the Deportivo 
manager, talked of “confusion” and “contradictory reports”, from a “simple 
fight” to something “more serious” and then “someone dying”. The starters knew 
less than the substitutes, by now more focussed on their pre-match routine, 
even if a representative from the Deportivo board had travelled to the hospital 
and they knew someone was likely to die. One Depor player admitted it was hard 
to concentrate. The Atlético manager, Diego Simeone, later said that he didn’t 
know anything concrete until afterwards.

As for the fans, even those who did not know what had happened knew that 
something had happened. Heading out of the Metro onto the street before the 
game, you could tell that something wasn’t right. It was oddly quiet on the 
streets by the Calderón and quiet inside too. There was a stillness, the 
atmosphere was hushed. Those that didn’t know why soon found out: barely 300m 
away a fan had been seriously hurt. Some reports already talked of a death. 
During the game, the focus was on phones as much as the field. People awaited 
news. Another report came in: an Atlético supporters’ club in A Coruña had 
suffered a reprisal attack.
 Deportivo de la Coruña fans during the Primera Liga match against Atlético 
Madrid at the Vicente Calderón. Photograph: Guillermo Martinez/Demotix/Corbis 
When the Frente in the south stand began one chant early on, they were 
whistled by the fans around the stadium, sick of being associated with them. On 
this of all days. Usually so loud, this time theFrente mostly stood in silence 
and there were no banners or flags. The goals were cheered half-heartedly. An 
announcement was made late in the second half, telling Deportivo supporters to 
wait after the game, prompting chants of “Assassins! Assassins!” That drew 
whistles from home fans. Then one supporter approached the Depor fans and threw 
them his Atlético scarf, across the divide. A Depor fan threw a scarf back and 
there was applause.

All the while, details were still emerging and will continue to do so. Some 
may never emerge entirely, of course. The results of the autopsy are yet to 
come. It was hard to be sure what had gone on. How had this happened? And why 
had it not been prevented?

Videos made for horrifying viewing. Two fans are shown in the water. Initial 
reports had Romero thrown into the river but one video seems to suggest that he 
had found himself the other side of the barrier, tottering precariously above 
the water (it is not clear how he got there, or why), while above him, perhaps 
a dozen men lean over. None are trying to help him; it looks more like they are 
trying to force him in or at least prevent him from climbing out. Eventually, 
he falls into the water. As he does so, they run off. In one video, a man in 
the water, presumably Romero, shouts repeatedly for help.

Police sources suggested that this was an organised fight, agreed beforehand. 
“They had arranged this by WhatsApp,” said Cristina Cifuentes, in charge of the 
Madrid government. Two groups of hooligans who had prepared for it, groups of 
different political persuasions. A battle between the neonazis in theFrente 
Atléticoand the radical left-wingers of the Riazor Blues, even though it is a 
group that had announced its dissolution following the stabbing of one of its 
members in 2003. Yet Galician TV carried a series of messages from a Deportivo 
fan insisting that it had not been an arranged battle but an ambush; that the
Frentemay have planned this, but Depor’s supporters had not.

More details have emerged that support the hypothesis that this was an 
organised fight. Police sources suggested that other radical fans had been 
involved, from Rayo Vallecano and Alcorcón (on the side of theRiazor Blues) and 
Sporting Gijón (on the side of theFrente). Rayo’s Bukaneros issued a statement 
denying it and rejecting violence, but this morning police said that of those 
who were arrested, 12 were from theRiazor Blues, six from the Frente Atlético, 
two wereBukaneros and one was from Alcorcón. Deportivo’s president said that 
they were investigating how 288 tickets found their way to the group via 
supporters’ clubs and that police had been warned of their suspicions prior to 
the weekend. El Mundo reports that the police also knew that theFrente Atlético 
had arranged to meet at 8am for “breakfast” but did not act upon it.

The secretary of state for sport, Miguel Cardenal, said it appeared that the 
Riazor Blueshad hired a bus outside of the province of A Coruña as a way of 
avoiding detection, and had picked up members on route. There are also 
suggestions that a small group went ahead to check the coast was clear. This 
game was not declared “high risk”, meaning that there were around 200 police on 
duty, rather than a potential 1,500. It also meant that the police were not due 
to set up round the stadium until two hours before the game, 10am. That the 
fight started at 9am does not look coincidental.

Just over five hours later, 11 minutes after Romero was pronounced dead, the 
presidents of Deportivo and Atlético appeared in the press room at the 
Calderón, alongside the vice-president of the league.

“This happened a long way from football and a long way from the stadium,” said 
Enrique Cerezo, the Atlético president. “This is nothing to do with us.” There 
was no promise to investigate, no promise to act against theFrente Atlético, 
and no contrition. There was no sign of sadness. Instead there was a tone that 
was belligerent and challenging, bordering on arrogant, and inappropriate in 
the circumstances, an indecent haste to pass on responsibility. When the other 
two men had spoken and they prepared to leave, Cerezo leant into the microphone 
and warned journalists: “Let’s see if you treat this the right way, for what it 
is … nothing to do with us.”

But it is, on some levels at least. Nothing to do with you? Where do their 
tickets come from? Who pays for their travel? Who eulogises their support? The 
Deportivo president, Tino Fernández, admitted later: “We can’t say this is 
nothing to do with football because it is football, a bit.” Sometimes, more 
than a bit. Few clubs have done enough to help control violent fans, and nor 
has the Federation. Joan Laporta banned theBoixos Nois from the Camp Nou, even 
though it led to death threats. This summer, Real Madrid finally moved against 
theUltra Sur. Some have done nothing at all; some have protected them.

Atlético’s chief executive, Miguel-Ángel Gil Marín, who claimed to have taken 
season tickets off violent fans, insisted that you can always find one 
“delinquent” in a big group. There are “healthy people” among the 2,500-strong
Frente Atlético, he insisted. That is true and those who are innocent should 
not be held to be guilty, just as it is true that in the rush to act with an 
iron fist, the presumption of innocence too easily gets lost.

But a club can take responsibility for finding those who are responsible and 
for challenging the identity of the group and the club. It need not associate 
itself with them. “It is not my job to break up theFrente Atlético,” Gil Marín 
said; it could be his job to disassociate his club from elements of them, 
though, to deny them a platform. If football is being used as a vehicle, then 
it is worth asking if the vehicle can be taken from them.

If football’s authorities rushed to condemn what happened and to demand that 
it never happens again, most were less quick to help ensure that result, by 
asking how and why it happened this time. It is one thing to release a 
statement, another to act.

It is coming up to 17 years now since a member of the Frente Atlético stabbed 
the Real Sociedad supporter Aitor Zabaleta to death. It was not an arranged 
fight: Zabaleta was in the wrong place, an entirely innocent victim. The early 
evidence suggests that this was a very different case. Ricardo Guerra was 
sentenced for the killing of Zabaleta. His name is chanted from the south 
stand, still occupied by theFrente. Just as there are chants celebrating 
Zabaleta’s stabbing, and macabre warnings to Basque fans: “We came here to 
knife you.”

Diego Simeone insisted that this is about “society, not football”. He is half 
right: even if football is the vehicle, even if it is hard to control people if 
they really are determined to fight, even if their motives are often rooted in 
politics or wider society, football is part of that society and society is part 
of football. Even if football is not guilty, those that run, and those that 
associate themselves with, violent groups, do have some responsibility. Not 
culpability, but responsibility. On Sunday, many sought to wash their hands of 
it.

On Monday morning there was an emergency meeting of the anti-violence 
committee. Cerezo didn’t go. Nor did Ángel María Villar, the president of the 
Federation.

Week 13 results: Real Sociedad 3-0 Elche, Getafe 1-2 Athletic, Espanyol 2-1 
Levante, Málaga 1-2 Real Madrid, Celta 0-1 Eibar, Atlético 2-0 Deportivo, 
Córdoba 0-2 Villarreal, Sevilla 5-1 Granada, Valencia 0-1 Barcelona, Tonight: 
Almería-Rayo.

Talking points

• The clock showed 93 minutes and the score was 0-0 when Barcelona finally 
found a way through against Valencia. Leo Messi’s ball found Neymar, whose 
header hit Diego Alves in the face and Sergio Busquets scored the winner. As 
Barcelona’s players piled on in celebration, a bottle was thrown from the 
stands that hit Messi on the head. The punishment? Messi was booked. As for 
Luis Enrique, he breathed a huge sigh of relief. He had played Busquets and 
Mascherano in the middle with Xavi, and Barcelona struggled. Yes, they could 
have scored earlier: Luis Suárez had a goal wrongly ruled out for offside and 
passed up two more good opportunities. But they could have trailed too. 
Barcelona’s best players were probably Gerard Piqué and Claudio Bravo.

• A 2-1 victory over Málaga gave Real Madrid a 16th successive win – a new 
club record. For once there were no goals for Cristiano Ronaldo but there were 
two lovely assists, for Gareth Bale and Karim Benzema. The result takes them 
beyond a record set by Miguel Muñoz and José Mourinho, which is one of the 
reasons the players, most of whom could not stand the Portuguese by the end, 
were so desperate to break the record. And asked after the game what he thought 
about Mourinho’s remarks claiming that “he is no doctor” and shouldn’t be 
questioning the “injuries” suffered by Chelsea’s Spain players, Ramos replied 
deadpan: “Now’s not the time to talk about the Celta president.” His name, for 
those who don’t get it, is Mouriño.

• Pedro León is back at Getafe, having won a lengthy legal battle against the 
league’s organising body. His post-match press conference was conciliatory. 
Don’t look back in anger, we heard him say. (Not that his team won, mind you: 
Athletic Bilbao, for whom Beñat had perhaps his best game, took it 2-1).

• Want tasty finishing? Check out Vietto’s goal for Villarreal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZiCiO8nxkfY>.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Real Madrid 13 36 33 
2 Barcelona 13 25 31 
3 Atletico Madrid 13 13 29 
4 Sevilla 13 7 26 
5 Valencia 13 12 24 
6 Villarreal 13 5 21 
7 Malaga 13 2 21 
8 Celta Vigo 13 4 20 
9 Athletic Bilbao 13 -2 18 
10 Eibar 13 -5 16 
11 Espanyol 13 -3 14 
12 Getafe 13 -8 14 
13 Rayo Vallecano 12 -9 14 
14 Real Sociedad 13 -1 13 
15 Levante 13 -23 12 
16 Granada 13 -15 11 
17 Almeria 12 -5 10 
18 Deportivo La Coruna 13 -11 10 
19 Elche 13 -15 10 
20 Cordoba 13 -12 7  