
Populations of bees, butterflies and other species important for agricultural 
pollination are declining, posing potential risks to major world crops, a UN 
body on biodiversity said Friday.

“Many wild bees and butterflies have been declining in abundance, occurrence 
and diversity at local and regional scales in Northwest Europe and North 
America,” said an assessment by theIntergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) <http://www.ipbes.net/>. 

It said declines had also been detected elsewhere in the world and that 
possible causes include habitat loss, pesticides, pollution, invasive species, 
pathogens and climate change.

The report by the IPBES, which was established under UN auspices in 2012 to 
assess the state of ecosystems and biodiversity, stopped short of declaring a 
full-scale threat to food supplies.

But it stressed the importance of protecting pollinators to ensure stable 
fruit and vegetable output, amid concern over the challenge of feeding the 
world’s growing population in coming decades.

It said animal pollination is directly responsible for between 5-8% of global 
agricultural production by volume, amounting to between $235bn (£167bn) and 
$577bn worth of annual output.

In addition, more than three-quarters of the “leading types of global food 
crops” rely to some extent on animal pollination for yield and quality.

“Pollinator-dependent species encompass many fruit, vegetable, seed, nut and 
oil crops, which supply major proportions of micronutrients, vitamins, and 
minerals in the human diet,” the IPBES said.

Pollination is the transfer of pollen between the male and female parts of 
flowers to enable reproduction.

The assessment is the work of nearly 80 scientists from around the world and 
was released at an IPBES meeting in Kuala Lumpur.

It is the first report by the four-year-old group, which is considered the 
biodiversity equivalent of the UN-organised Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC).

In Europe, 9% of bee and butterfly species are threatened with extinction and 
populations are declining for 37% of bee species and 31% of butterfly species 
for which sufficient data is available, the IPBES said.

In some places in Europe more than 40% of bee species may be threatened, it 
added.

A “data gap” frustrates analysis of the situation in Latin America, Asia, and 
Africa, but the same drivers are suspected to be at work in those regions, it 
said.

Data is more solid for non-insect pollinators such as bats and birds, however, 
with the IPBES saying 16% of such species worldwide are threatened with 
extinction.

Some of the most important world food staples such as rice, wheat and other 
grains do not rely on animal pollination.

But vulnerable crops could include apples, mangoes, chocolate and many other 
commonly consumed foods, said Simon Potts, co-chair of the assessment.

“Pretty much nearly all your fruits and many of your vegetables are 
pollination-dependent,” said Potts, deputy director of the Centre for 
Agri-Environmental Research at Britain’s Reading University.

Possible policy options include better protection of natural environments and 
ecosystems, limiting the scope of intensive agriculture, and finding 
alternatives to pesticides, the IPBES said.

Greater attention to controlling pathogens among species and better regulation 
of managed populations of bees and other pollinators could also help, it added.

IPBES members stressed that the group does not make specific recommendations, 
but provides information for policy-makers.

The assessment said pollinator declines could lead to lower crop yields, 
raising prices for consumers and reducing agricultural profits.
 