
This match always seemed like the kind of game Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> needed to get back on its feet 
after last weekend’s World Club Series. The 3-0 whitewash inflicted by the NRL 
sides is a wound that is not yet fully healed, but you can often rely on Hull 
and Castleford to provide entertainment and drama aplenty. Whoever picked this 
fixture as one to show on TV immediately after that series deserves a huge pat 
on the back.

The season is only three weeks old but these two sides look like the pair most 
capable of breaking the monopoly of the established sides at the top of Super 
League. There is something aesthetically pleasing about watching two teams 
attack with vigour, creativity and freedom; those who choose the televised 
games may well be opting forCastleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> and Hull FC a fair bit more in 
the coming weeks.

Willie Poching eager for full-time Hull Kingston Rovers coach role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/hull-kingston-rovers-coach-willie-poching-caretaker-chris-chester-rugby-league>
The fact the game was not settled until the final play courtesy of Denny 
Solomona’s hat-trick try suggests that both these teams can expect to be right 
in the mix. Led by the outstanding Luke Gale, Castleford left the KC Stadium 
with their first win at Hull since 2011, and with their unbeaten start still 
intact. The Castleford coach, Daryl Powell, said this week that Hull’s start 
made them look seem title contenders in his eyes, but he refused to acknowledge 
that this win gives his side a similar appearance.

“It makes us potentially a very good side,” Powell admitted. “We can still 
improve in all sorts of ways, but in terms of confidence it’s a great victory. 
I think there’s a shed-load of improvement left in this team, but it shows the 
resilience of the group to win here – because they’ve started like a house on 
fire.”

Hull should still take plenty of positives from this most pulsating of 
encounters, not least the way they fought back from 18-6 down to level at 
18-all at the interval. On any other night the story would have been Jy 
Hitchcox, the former Featherstone winger handed a debut 20 minutes from 
kick-off due to an injury to the Castleford winger, Joel Monaghan.

His two tries coupled with Solomona’s first – all of which came from fine 
handling from the Tigers – put them in control at 18-6, but to their credit 
Hull fought back.

After Jordan Thompson briefly reduced the gap at 12-0, further tries from 
Steve Michaels and the first of a superb double for the full-back Jamie Shaul – 
a player who hardly deserved to be on the losing side – made it 18-18 and set 
things up for an equally exciting second half.

The opening 15 minutes were much more subdued than the action-packed first 40 
minutes, but the game came to life again when Castleford scored from a 
seemingly impossible position, something that is becoming one of their traits. 
Jake Webster managed to wriggle the ball free from his grasp to put Solomona in 
at the corner, with the wing providing a fine finish to put Castleford back in 
front.

Gale missed the conversion and that looked crucial when Shaul scored his 
second electrifying try of the evening, with Marc Sneyd converting to make it 
24-22. However, a penalty from Gale set up a thrilling finale, with the 
scrum-half’s drop goal on 74 minutes nudging Castleford in front again before, 
with Hull pressing, a Solomona interception right on the hooter sealed his 
hat-trick and a win that lays down a real marker to the rest of Super League.

“I thought their back three killed us,” said the Hull coach, Lee Radford. “I’m 
bitterly disappointed with the result. I’ve no qualms with losing to a team 
like that given how we performed – we didn’t deserve the two points.”

Radford may have cut a dejected figure given the result, but any lingering 
doubts over the quality of Super League – which seems as entertaining and 
competitive as ever – must surely be put to bed after yet another top-drawer 
clash.

Wigan defeated Salford 20-16 in Thursday night’s other Super League and stay 
top of the table by a point from Castleford.

Hull FC Shaul; Michaels, Logan, Tuimavave, Talanoa; Pryce, Sneyd; Taylor, 
Houghton, Watts, Minichiello, Manu, Thompson.Interchange Ellis, Bowden, 
Pritchard, Washbrook.

Tries Thompson, Michaels, Shaul 2. Goals Sneyd 4.

Castleford Dorn; Hitchcox, Crooks, Webster, Solomona; Roberts, Gale; Lynch, 
McShane, Millington, Holmes, McMeeken, Jewitt.Interchange Milner, Massey, Cook, 
Moors.

Tries Hitchcox 2, Solomona 3. Goals Gale 5. Drop goal Gale.

Referee R Hicks. Attendance 12,247.
 