
Denis Betts criticised his Widnes side for not being strong enough and lacking 
discipline after seeing them squander an 18-point lead to lose againstCastleford
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford>.

Widnes looked to be cruising at the Select Security Stadium after scoring 
three unanswered tries in the opening 20 minutes through Patrick Ah Van, 
Macgraff Leuluai and Corey Thompson.

However, Castleford staged a stunning fightback and with Denny Solomona 
leading the way with a hat-trick, they managed to claim the points and leave 
Betts far from impressed.

Robert Lui inspires Salford to victory over fading champions Leeds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/salford-leeds-super-league-match-report>
The Widnes coach said: “After the first five or 10 minutes we just went a 
little bit soft on ourselves. We were 12-0 up but I was still seeing things in 
us that weren’t strong. There was a bit of ill-discipline and areas of our game 
where we gave them field position too easily. They had nothing to lose and they 
came back. It was a massively disappointing day.

“We get 18 points up and Joe Mellor gets away down the sideline but 
effectively bombs a try. Defensively we were slack from the start. We just 
didn’t control the ruck right through to the end of their sets.”

In contrast to Betts, the Castleford head coach, Daryl Powell, was 
understandably delighted with his side’s performance and said their players 
were “buzzing” at the interval as they sensed the chance of a dramatic 
comeback. He said: “I don’t think we kicked the ball for half an hour and you 
know you’re going to be in trouble if that happens.

“Widnes were playing pretty sharp and putting us under pressure and we just 
needed to get a foothold in the game really and complete some sets. I’ve rarely 
seen a changing room as buzzing at half-time, with the players just talking 
about the game. They felt they had every chance of winning it, you could just 
sense it. We just needed to tidy our game up but at 18-0 it looked quite 
difficult to do.”

Ryan Boyle, Luke Gale and Paul McShane scored second-half tries for 
Castleford, with Gale kicking five conversions. Powell said: “There’s an 
immense amount of character in the team and the response today to being 18-0 
down showed great determination to come out the other side when you’re in a 
tough patch.

“Luke Gale’s execution near the line got us opportunities and we were good 
enough to take them. Denny Solomona’s finishing was again top quality and Jake 
Webster gave him some good opportunities with skill as well.”

Widnes Hanbury; Thompson, Dean, Bridge, Ah Van; Mellor, Brown; O’Carroll, 
Heremaia, Dudson, Sa, Houston, Leuluai.Interchange Brooks, Gerrard, White, 
Whitley.

Tries Ah Van, Leuluai, Thompson, White. Cons Bridge 4.

Castleford Hampshire; Monaghan, Minikin, Webster, Solomona; T Holmes, Gale; 
Lynch, Milner, Jewitt, Cook, McMeeken, Massey.

Interchange McShane, Maher, Boyle, Springer.

Tries Solomona 3, Boyle, Gale, McShane. Cons Gale 5.

Referee J Cobb
 