
Barcelona let a two-goal lead slip with late strikes at the Camp Nou from 
Lucas Pérez and Alex Bergantiños givingDeportivo La Coruña 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> a 2-2 draw in La 
Liga.

A Lionel Messi free-kick and a bullet strike from Ivan Rakitic put Barça 
comfortably in control but they eased up in the closing stages and Deportivo 
took advantage.

The Argentinian curled the ball into the top corner of the goal from 25 yards 
to break the resistance of well-organised Deportivo after 38 minutes.

Rakitic fired home from similar distance in the 62nd before in-form Lucas 
pulled a goal back for the visitors after 77 and Bergantiños equalised four 
minutes from the end.

It is the second successive draw in the league for Barça, who lead the table 
with 35 points from 15 games, while Deportivo, who have been a surprise this 
season, are in sixth on 23.

Barcelona 2-2 Deportivo: La Liga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/dec/12/barcelona-v-deportivo-la-liga-live>
Atlético Madrid, on 32 points, face Athletic Bilbao on Sunday when Real 
Madrid, in third with 30, have a tough match away to Villarreal.

“It is difficult to explain it,” Andrés Iniesta said. “We lost control when we 
needed to keep it and made it easy for the opposition at 2-0. These things 
happen and we will analyse it and try and make sure it doesn’t happen again.”

The injured Neymar was missing from Barça’s attacking trident and so the door 
opened for the youngster Sandro Ramírez.

Barça were up against a tactically strong Deportivo, who have one defeat in 12 
matches, and their plan was not to sit too deep but have players forward to 
take advantage of counterattacks.

Luis Suárez missed a chance early on, firing just wide after being set up by a 
Sandro header and generally Barça had plenty of the ball but found little space.

Lucas had a shot blocked from close range at the other end before a piece of 
Messi brilliance gave Barça the lead.

Barça continued to probe but it took another special effort from Rakitic to 
breach the Depor defence again. The Catalan side appeared on course for victory 
but they lost composure at the back allowing in Lucas for his 11th league goal, 
and then Bergantiños was given space to strike the ball home past Claudio Bravo.
 