
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> has spoken of how 
he considered killing himself following the end of his boxing career.

Although the former world champion, who won titles at light welterweight and 
welterweight, only confirmed his retirement in July, he now admits it had been 
made inevitable by the pummelling he received from Manny Pacquiao in Las Vegas 
during May 2009.

Hatton, with only one professional defeat at that point, was ruthlessly 
stopped in the second round and after his defeat gradually slipped into 
depression and a battle with drink and drugs that came to a head when he was 
the victim of a Sunday newspaper sting.

But having since officially ended his career and found success with his 
promoting business, Hatton now says state of mind had been so poor that he 
considered ending his own life.

Speaking to BBC Radio 5 Live, the 32-year-old said: "I was going deeper and 
deeper into depression. I was getting depressed, I was going out, having a few 
drinks and the worst thing you can do with depression is add alcohol to it.

"I needed something to get my backside into gear and pull my finger out. 
Sometimes you have to hit rock bottom to think: 'Blimey, Ricky, get a grip'.

"Depression is a serious thing and after my defeat [by] Manny Pacquiao I 
contemplated retirement and didn't cope with it very well. For someone in my 
position, taking drugs once is nothing short of disgraceful. The reason behind 
my actions and the way I was behaving wasn't a drink or drugs thing, it was 
depression. I was so down, I was crying and breaking out and contemplating 
suicide."

Hatton now believes being exposed in a newspaper was a blessing in disguise. 
Having struggled to deal with the manner of his defeat by Pacquiao, he 
struggled to deal with everyday life before eventually seeking help. "Half the 
things I was doing I didn't even read about in the paper. I can't even remember 
the night that it happened. That's what depression does to you," he said.

"I was having blackouts, days on end whether I was drinking or not when I 
couldn't remember what had happened in my life. I thank the News of the World 
because who knows where it could have ended up. A lot of people say: 'I've 
tried committing suicide.' But there's saying it and doing it and it was coming 
on a regular basis.

"Being a proud man and a warrior, to get splattered in two rounds like I did 
was really hard to come to terms with. When I tried to get back into training, 
I realised the hunger was gone and my career was over.

"Everything got on top of me and it was a really horrible time in my life. I'd 
go out, have a few drinks, start sulking and start feeling sorry for myself. I 
kept coming home and crying to my girlfriend saying: 'I want to end it, I don't 
want to live.' Depression is a very serious thing. People don't realise how 
deadly it can be."
 