
Derby’s automatic promotion hopes suffered another setback after they were 
held to a goalless draw by Preston. Although they had plenty of possession, 
Derby hardly created a clear chance and their winless run was stretched to six 
league games.

Paul Clement admitted he found the evening frustrating but insisted automatic 
promotion remains “achievable” even though his side have not won in the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> since Boxing 
Day. They are now five points behind second-placed Middlesbrough having played 
two games more

Derby started impressively, with Jeff Hendrick flashing a shot just wide 
inside the first minute. But Preston soaked up the pressure and almost took the 
lead when Paul Gallagher’s 25-yard shot forced Scott Carson into an acrobatic 
save.

Although they continued to dominate possession Derby created few clear 
openings and it was 80 minutes before the visiting goalkeeper, the debutant 
Anders Lindegaard, had to make a meaningful save when he beat out a Cyrus 
Christie cross-shot.

Adam Reach saw an effort blocked by Jason Shackell as Preston broke 
dangerously and Derby’s last chance to rescue another disappointing night came 
in the 87th minute when the substitute Craig Bryson fired narrowly wide from 
the edge of the area.

Clement however remains positive about automatic promotion. “It’s achievable,” 
he said. “There are 17 games still to go although we’ve got to start stringing 
some victories together if that’s going to happen.

“Of course I am concerned about the run, I would be silly to say I wasn’t, but 
I still have the belief that a victory is not far away. The message I gave to 
the players is that we’ve got to keep going. They gave all their effort and 
we’ve got to keep working hard on the training field, keep positive and keep 
the belief within us. There’s a long way to go and we’ve actually gone up a 
place.”

But Clement acknowledged his team had created little on the night, adding: “It 
was a frustrating evening although I commend the players – they gave everything 
from the first minute to the last, although we didn’t create anything clear-cut 
and I don’t think we had a shot on target.

“It was really challenging to break them down and if we had had that little 
bit of fortune in the first 10 or 15 minutes when we were dominant it would 
have been a different game.”

Simon Grayson was delighted Preston had carried out the plan they had worked 
on. “This is a difficult place to come because they have some good players,” 
the manager said. “Our players stuck to the game plan we spent four or five 
days working on and the effort the lads put in was unbelievable. Our keeper has 
not had a shot to save whereas theirs has had a few and we created a couple of 
good chances.”
 