
Derby County won at home for the first time since Boxing Day and victory over 
Blackburn Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> keeps them in 
the Championship promotion race.

An outstanding early goal from Jacob Butterfield settled a match lacking in 
real quality and, although Blackburn had plenty of possession, they created few 
clear chances until stoppage time when Jordi Gómez headed against the top of 
the bar.

Blackburn came into the game having failed to win any of their previous five 
league meetings with Derby and they were trailing after seven minutes when 
Butterfield turned on a headed clearance on the edge of the area to send a shot 
into the bottom left corner.

Championship roundup: Sam Vokes keeps Burnley up with the pace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/championship-roundup-burnley-middlesbrough-brighton>
It was an excellent finish from a player who has scored some spectacular goals 
this season but Blackburn responded well with Danny Graham, who had a loan 
spell at Derby in 2005, almost breaking clear six minutes later.

Derby’s first league win of 2016, at Brentford on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/brentford-derby-county-championship-match-report>
, had clearly restored confidence given the way they moved the ball around, 
with Jason Steele forced to scramble to hold a deflected shot from Johnny 
Russell, but Blackburn had a chance in the 21st minute when Ben Marshall got in 
on the right only to chip tamely into the hands of Scott Carson.

Graham had a great chance to equalise in the 32nd minute when he held off 
Richard Keogh before turning Jason Shackell but, from 10 yards out, he spooned 
the ball over the bar. It was a big let-off for Derby and they came close to 
increasing their lead in the 43rd minute when Cyrus Christie back-heeled the 
ball to Russell who whipped a shot from just inside the area past Steele’s 
right post.

Blackburn began the second half brightly but were let down by a lack of 
quality with their final ball. Derby, by contrast, created two chances in the 
space of a minute. First Russell was denied by a superb tackle from Shane Duffy 
before Chris Martin went through in the 60th minute only for Steele to save 
diving to his right.

Blackburn did find a telling pass when Darragh Lenihan played in Graham but 
the angle was tight and his shot was comfortably saved by Carson, who had a far 
more demanding stop to make in the 72nd minute when he clawed away a 25-yard 
free-kick from Marshall.

Derby were struggling to keep hold of the ball but Blackburn’s delivery 
remained disappointing until the fourth minute of added time when a corner 
bounced invitingly to Gómez at the back post but his header bounced off the bar 
and behind.
 