
Even the declaration of David Haye that he is finally willing to fight Vitali 
Klitschko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vitali-klitschko> could not steal 
the thunder of Dereck Chisora's brave losing effort over 12 don't blink round 
rounds in front of 13,000 of the champion's adoring German fans. The judges 
gave it to Klitschko 118-110, 118-110, 119-111 in the eighth defence of the 
title and that was about right.

The evening ended in chaos and shame when Chisora and Haye, as well as their 
handlers, engaged in an ugly brawl 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/feb/19/david-haye-dereck-chisora-brawl> 
that left Haye's trainer Adam Booth with blood running from a wound in his 
head. Chisora further disgraced himself when he claimed that Haye has "glassed 
him"and then made serious threats against him.

Earlier, the loser had been as hard on himself as he sometimes is on those who 
put faith in him when he said: "I was not proud of my performance and think I 
let my fans down, but he did nothing that surprised me, nor did he hurt me."

I gave the challenger three rounds and a share of two others but numbers could 
not tell the story of his heads-down grit-and-hook attacks, nor of his 
occasional success. His promoter, Frank Warren, immediately demanded a rematch 
— or a fight with Vitali's brother Wladimir.

If all the parties are roughly in the same negotiating zone, a fight against 
the younger brother might make sense, if only because there is virtually nobody 
else of ticket-selling pedigree for either of these fine champions left to 
fight.

At least he did better against Vitali than Haye did against Wladimir last 
July. Haye, who has been playing cat and mouse with the Klitschkos, later 
dropped a minor bombshell when he said: "I am ready to fight Vitali"

Ultimately, Chisora fought about as well as he is capable – whatever his 
self-critique –which was a good way short of what was needed to move the 
mountain in front of him. Klitschko? He did again what he has done 43 times in 
45 previous fights: won with all the mechanical efficiency of a fighter 
comfortable with his method. Having endured two cancellations against Wladimir, 
Chisora was kept waiting a further quarter of an hour last night when the 
Klitschko camp objected to his handlers wrapping his hands before they had 
arrived at his dressing room. A shouting match ensued and the fighters finally 
reached the ring at 11.20pm local time.

Chisora's trainer, Don Charles, then had to watch his man like a nightclub 
bouncer. Chisora applauded the champion when Michael Buffer went into his 
introduction but when the fighters came together in the centre of the ring, 
Chisora spat a mouthful of water in the face of Wladimir, who was with his 
brother's entourage. The younger Klitschko brother did not react.

When the boxing got going, Chisora made Klitschko – both taller and longer in 
the reach by six inches – miss with his left hook and right cross, and landed a 
few of his own roundhouse rights; he might even have won an interesting first 
round. In his eight fights since coming out of a four-year retirement in 2008, 
Klitschko has lost precisely four rounds, so Chisora was at least giving him a 
worthwhile argument. Could he sustain it? At 17st 3lb he was not only just a 
couple of pounds lighter than his opponent, but a mere pound heavier than his 
own lightest weight as a professional. So, he was in considerably better shape 
than when he lost to Tyson Fury over 12 rounds last July.

But the indiscipline he showed outside the ring in slapping Klitschko at the 
weigh-in surfaced in the ring as his boxing grew ragged and he began running 
into those long, chopping right hands.

As has been noted throughout his 16 years in boxing, Klitschko does nothing 
spectacularly and everything efficiently. He also hits as hard as any 
heavyweight since Mike Tyson – his 88.89 per cent knockout rate is the best in 
the history of his division – and the uppercut he drove into Chisora's chin in 
round three would have floored less willing opponents.

The challenger, his mouth swelling, had a better fourth; in the fifth he 
gloved up around his ears and waded into hook-throwing range and, while he is 
no Joe Frazier, he got through a few times. The first signs of vulnerability, 
such as they were, were painted in red around Klitschko's mouth.

For most of his career, Klitschko has been allowed to fight within himself. 
Not now. Not at 40 on creaking legs. He took the seventh but under sustained 
pressure, and buckled Chisora's legs with a pin-point right cross. A fight many 
had predicted would end early in the Ukrainian's favour was a genuine contest 
with five rounds left, and Chisora, able to absorb the heavy artillery, rattled 
the retreating ring mechanic in front of him, hooking around his drooping 
guard. But the eighth, Chisora's predicted finishing round, came and went.

Klitschko found some bounce in his legs as they headed for the finish line and 
he rocked the Londoner with several fight-finishers. But, while some have 
criticised his manners, nobody has ever doubted Chisora's heart.

He was reduced to wild swings now, as his tormentor unloaded with full force 
for the first time, seeking a stoppage win to go with 40 before. Del Boy, 
however, was not for folding. He would take his licks as long as he could 
remember what town he was in. And that went all the way to the end of a fight 
worthy of a world title. Indeed, if he fought more of the earlier rounds as he 
did the desperate 12th, which he took with smashing wide hooks. he would have 
got a lot closer on the scorecard. He gave Klitschko his toughest night since 
he lost to Lennox Lewis in 2003 and the champion's cornermen even came across 
to congratulate him on his performance. So did Klitschko – and the loser took 
it well.

British athletes have left their mark on Munich: the Olympic 400msilver 
medallist, Lillian Board, who died here at 22 from bowel cancer in 1970, has a 
pathway to the stadium named after her, and Bradford's Richard Dunne is 
remembered too — if only for his inept loss to Muhammad Ali in this hall in 
1976.

The likelihood of the good burghers naming a footpath after Dereck Chisora 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dereck-chisora> are slim, but Munich will 
not soon forget his visit.
 