
Deta Hedman knows better than most about the challenges of elite 
semi-professional sport. Hedman spent this week working her usual 14-hour 
shifts for Royal Mail, finishing at 4am, so that she could take time off for the
BDO World Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bdo-world-championship> at Lakeside in 
Frimley Green. In the next week she will do a bit of daylighting as one of the 
world’s best darts players and an analyst for Channel 4, who are showing the 
tournament for the first time.

BDO world championship is a faltering relic that’s worth clinging on to | Sean 
Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jan/04/bdo-world-championship-faltering-relic-worth-clinging-to-darts>
Hedman, 57, won the 100th tournament of her career in 2016, but the World 
Championship continues to elude her. She has lost three finals in the past five 
years, all in last-set deciders. “Everybody wants to win the world title,” she 
says. “It’s not on my CV. Been there three times, had it, and then it just 
popped away. What would it mean to be world champion? Ask me next Sunday. I 
can’t really think about it at the moment.”

For Hedman, there is not much time to think about anything. In an average 
week, she almost works an hour for every year of her life. “I do four days a 
week, 56 hours from Monday to Thursday. I finish at 4am on Friday morning, so I 
have the weekend to play darts. I’m probably the one who has the worst 
preparation for the worlds every year. It’s been so busy at work. It was a bit 
mad​ this week.”

It was not helped by the fact that her usual practice routine – during her 
lunch break at 1am – was constantly interrupted. “There were people in there 
who were not supposed to be in there. I asked them to leave but in the end I 
gave up. I had a bit of a practice over Christmas, and I’ll be doing a lot more 
over the next few days.”

Hedman, the No1 seed, will start against Casey Gallagher on Tuesday. The 
financial rewards are such that going professional has never really been an 
option, even for a great like Hedman; indeed she has twice taken a long 
sabbatical from darts to concentrate on her main job. This year, the ladies’ 
champion will receive £12,000, while the winner of the men’s tournament will 
earn £100,000.

Trina Gulliver takes 10th BDO world title with victory over Deta Hedman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/trina-gulliver-bdo-world-title-deta-hedman>
“It’s really quite poor isn’t it? It costs us exactly the same to travel to 
tournaments,” she says. “I don’t expect to have the same amount of money as the 
men, but it should be a minimum 25 grand. Sponsorship is the key for the 
ladies’ game. There are so many ladies’ products out there and if you could get 
two or three as sponsors it would make the money up.”

There is occasional talk of a combined men’s and women’s tournament, but 
Hedman is unsure. “On our day we can beat a lot of the men, but the top end of 
the men’s game is a lot stronger. We can take a few legs, but over a few sets 
it’s a different matter. Their focus is a lot better than ours. We have too 
much going on between our ears.”

She was the first woman to beat a man in a televised competition, when she 
defeated Aaron Turner and Norman Fletcher at the 2005 UK Open. “It was just 
another game really,” she says. “I was there to beat them just as they were 
there to beat me.”

By far Hedman’s greatest priority is to beat a lady in the final of the World 
Championship. Her three defeats have all been laced with frustration. In the 
first, againstAnastasia Dobromyslova  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/nov/20/small-talk-darts-anastasia-dobromyslova>
in 2012, she misheard the referee and went for the wrong double. “Once I did 
that I looked at the scoreboard and I thought, ‘Oh, you do​nut.’ I just 
couldn’t get it out of my head for the rest of the game.”

Two years later she lost 3-2 to Lisa Ashton after being 2-0 up. “As I’m a lady 
of an older age, I had a massive hot flush on the stage – I get them and I 
don’t know when they’re going to happen. It was a really, really bad one. By 
the time I came back round, she had the momentum and I started trying too hard. 
Andagainst Trina [Gulliver] last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/trina-gulliver-bdo-world-title-deta-hedman>
, God knows. That’s all I can say. I lost focus. I’m working on it, being able 
to hold my focus.”

Hedman says she will not retire even if she does win the world title. One 
thing is for sure: even if she joins darting royalty, she’ll be straight back 
to work for Royal Mail. “The ladies’ final is on Saturday and I’ll be here 
until Sunday for the men’s final. On Monday morning I’ll wake up, get the train 
home and be back into work in the afternoon. The lifestyle does take its toll 
but I love it; that’s where my motivation comes from.”
 