
If you are among the 750,000 Britons who will go skiing this year, you may 
well be experiencing the perennial dilemma: just what to wear, and how much to 
spend on it? For starters, the most important item of clothing you need is a 
good pair of ski pants - buy some that are durable and subtle in design, and 
they will last you for years. These Snow Pants by Dockers Equipment For Legs 
(see above) are just the thing.

 With thermal lining, breathable material and even an inbuilt tracking system 
- just in case you get stuck in an avalanche - perhaps the company's marketing 
manager, Hester Hettinga, is not exaggerating when she says that its Snow Pants 
are 'the only pant you will need on any part of the mountain - anywhere'. But 
at £185, think of them as an investment.

 Jackets, however, are not nearly so important to get right, as it's likely 
that you'll buy these much more often as trends change.

 It's a similar story with accessories. If your pants are suitably minimal, 
then each year you can change everything else to suit what you like at the 
time. The Fire And Ice hat and Henri Lloyd scarf, for instance, are so 
reasonably priced that, if by next year you prefer red instead of blue, you can 
always replace them.

 As for sunglasses, the Oakley Minute range is perfect for fashionable girls 
headed for snow- laden slopes this winter.

 The frames are smaller, so they fit snugly and stay on however many times you 
manage to fall over. They come in a range of excellent colours, such as powder 
blue, electric violet, metallic black and full-metal platinum.

 An added bonus is that they'll look just as good in summer.

 Once you're kitted out clothes-wise, it is important not to neglect your 
complexion. If it is cold, your skin can take a battering: the raw air and wind 
can easily dehydrate it, while the snow reflects harmful UV rays on to it. In 
other words, you will need to invest in a good sunscreen/moisturiser.

 Clinique claims to have come up with the ultimate. Weather Everything Cream 
is a shield for skin and lips, a sunscreen, moisturiser and anti-irritant, all 
rolled into one. If, however, you prefer a traditional sun block, you could try 
Piz Buin's Extreme. This has been devised especially for skiers, and has been 
tested by scientists in the Himalayas up to an altitude of 6,500m and at 
temperatures of -25C .

 Oh, and one last thing that you should certainly pack in your suitcase this 
year is Sun Formula Self Tanning spray from Marks & Spencer. That way, even if 
you are absolutely useless at skiing, you can hang around the slopes in your 
gear, cover your face with fake tan and look like a well-seasoned professional. 
One hopes.
 