
It is common for employers keen to promote a modern workplace culture to offer 
some degree of flexible working. This could be for parents who leave the office 
early to make the school run, those faced with lengthy commutes, or employees 
who simply wish to stay home – accessing emails from the coffee table rather 
than their desks.

The benefits are numerous. There is no morning commute, meaning diligent 
workers who choose not to spend extra time in bed can begin their working days 
earlier and finish later, and there are fewer office distractions.

Home workers said they felt isolated and unsupported

Early studies 
<https://hbr.org/2014/01/to-raise-productivity-let-more-employees-work-from-home>
 of the effectiveness of stay-at-home workers showed remote employees were more 
effective in their day-to-day roles than office-based staff. One reason was, 
quite simply, gratitude. Staff were so keen to prove the merit in home working 
that they consciously worked harder and longer, producing better results for 
their organisations.

But what happens when gratitude runs out? Today, 4.2 million UK employees work 
from home,according to the Trades Union Congress 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-issues/work-life-balance/four-million-people-are-now-homeworkers>
. Thanks to the promotion of a better work-life balance and increasingly 
connected technology it is no longer unreasonable for employees to ask for, or 
expect, a degree of flexibility.

My research – a study of more than 500 staff and managers 
<http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/3349/> on attitudes towards flexible working – 
attempted to discover whether these positive effects have waned.

The results revealed that after a prolonged period of remote working, 
employees no longer viewed working from home as a privilege and therefore 
behaved no differently to office-based staff, producing similar results. In 
fact, some employees began to harbour ill-feeling towards their employers as 
they felt they were not supported enough.

Working from home, although convenient, also brings added expense for 
employees. Greater use of lighting and heating pushes utility bills up – 
something office-based colleagues do not have to consider. Remote workers may 
also feel that home working brings significant savings for companies, which 
should be shared with them.

Aside from additional financial support, remote workers craved professional 
support as well. Home workers had less communication with office staff, limited 
face-to-face interactions and, over time, found it harder to integrate with 
staff at the office. Reduced engagement, limited communication and a lack of 
opportunities for knowledge sharing stunted their professional progression.

Working from home: the five golden rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/shortcuts/2013/feb/26/working-from-home-five-golden-rules>
The isolation faded company loyalties to the point where remote workers were 
almost free agents – a worrying prospect for any employer looking to retain top 
staff. Not only was it difficult to convince remote workers to come into the 
office, but the breakdown of relationships often caused employers to resent 
their remote employees, feeling that they were taking liberties and were not 
dedicated enough to the organisation.

Jeremy Tipper, director of consulting and innovation at Alexander Mann 
Solutions, has experienced this breakdown first-hand. “Encouraging flexible 
working in a manner that best suits employees’ lifestyles is the norm now for a 
vast number of businesses,” he says. “The majority of the workforce now goes so 
far as to expect access to more flexible options. However, it can be 
detrimental to the business if an employer or even other members of staff fall 
into the trap of viewing those making this choice as second-rate employees.”

Many companies lack the organisational structure to manage remote workers 
effectively – here are three tips to help them:

Manage expectations

Implementing flexible working without actively managing the arrangement is a 
huge problem for many companies. Some remote workers operate without 
instruction, little communication and no training. Companies should set 
flexible working policies at the beginning of the employment contract and 
review practices regularly with employees to ensure mutual understanding and 
satisfaction, and to foster wider organisational support.

Communicate better


Many home workers may prefer to have less contact with colleagues, but this 
can be detrimental to team cohesion and affect both company compliance and 
productivity. A communications strategy should be employed from the outset and 
followed. Regular catch-up meetings, Skype and video conferencing can help 
bridge the gap between home and office, and keep remote staff integral to the 
team.

Offer support

Better support for flexi workers can prevent ill will. Buy-in from all sides 
is essential for this. Establishing opportunities for employees to give 
feedback on working practices and suggest areas for improvement can give 
workers a sense of control over their roles. Tipper adds: “These individuals 
are just as valuable and it’s the responsibility of employers to ensure they 
feel like they are part of the business, even if they aren’t physically in the 
office.”

As flexible working increases, it is vital for employers to be better equipped 
to manage remote staff. If companies expect home workers to be more productive, 
or if workers expect greater levels of flexibility or support without 
reciprocation, either party – or both – could be left disappointed.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice

 