
The snow surprised us when we woke up in the hills above Ullswater. We weren’t 
very well prepared. With waterproof booties back in Manchester, bread bags had 
to double as shoeliners, one of us was missing a winter glove and only I had 
the slightly creepy luxury of a balaclava under my helmet.

At least I had the right bike. Though it’s set up for off-road cyclocross 
racing – the flattened top tube makes the carbon frame easier to lug over 
obstacles – theDolan CDX 
<http://www.dolan-bikes.com/dolan-cdx-shimano-105-5800-carbon-cyclo-cross-bike.html>
 lends itself to winter adventuring. Designed in Ormskirk by ex-pro Terry 
Dolan, who once made bikes for Olympic gold medallistChris Boardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/31/chris-boardman-when-i-got-into-cycling-i-was-something-of-a-weirdo>
, Dolans are known for being tough and reliable, like a Le Creuset casserole 
dish. The CDX isn’t afraid of a snowstorm, nor the sleet and sunshine that 
followed us as we rounded the rainbow-framed lake to buy beer and milk at 
Pooley Bridge. I was glad of the knobbly Continental tyres when we made our way 
gingerly down the hill from our holiday cottage. There was all sorts of debris 
in the road and if I’d been on my usual slicks I’d have ended up in the 
hawthorn waking up hibernating hedgehogs. The older I get, the more I prefer 
climbing to descending. I’m rarely more scared than when rattling downhill in 
midwinter, when most of the snow has turned to grubby mush but you can’t rule 
out black ice. I’m not sure I’d have dared if the CDX didn’t have disc brakes. 
Rim brakes are about as practical in the wet as suede boots in a Mancunian 
winter (autumn, spring, summer).

The gearing was perfectly adequate for the return leg. The compact Shimano 105 
groupset comes with a big 28 sprocket on the back, so while the 20% climb back 
up from Ullswater through Watermillock was hardly a breeze, at least I didn’t 
have to get off. It is a long slog in a blizzard, but as I rounded the final 
corner the skies cleared to a brilliant blue and the Lake District hills 
dazzled under their white blanket. It was a view of such beauty that the pain 
of the previous 15 minutes was erased, and I stopped cursing Warburtons for 
making such inefficient shoeliners.

My only real complaint about the Dolan is the sizing. At 5ft 4in, I am an inch 
taller than the average British woman, according to the Office for National 
Statistics. Even if that stat is skewed by shrinking older ladies, it doesn’t 
seem fair that the smallest CDX frame (52cm) is too big for me. Cyclocross, 
like all forms of bike racing, is still dominated by men, but don’t Dolan want 
women to buy their cross bikes?

Dolan CDX Shimano 105 5800 carbon cyclocross: in numbers

Price £1,199.99
Fork and seatpost Dolan carbon 
Groupset Shimano 105 5800
Disc brakes Avid BB7 – 140mm rotor
Wheels Mavic Aksium One Disc
Tyres Continental cyclocross 35mm
 