
Sometimes there are seasons where a finals series seems to pervert the course 
of justice. At other times, a finals series can confirm beyond any doubt the 
dominance of one particular team. This W-League season has been illustrative of 
the latter.Melbourne City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-city>
, the undefeated premiers of 2015-16, are deserved champions after defeating 
Sydney FC 4-1 at AAMI Park in Melbourne.


Goals to Jennifer Beattie, Kim Little, Beatrice Goad and Lisa de Vanna were 
too much for the visitors, whose only goal came from a Kyah Simon penalty in 
the 69th minute.

Two years after the City Football Group took over Melbourne Heart, City coach 
Joe Montemurro called his players a “special group” and said that this victory 
“breaks the shackles of what the organisation was previous to the City Group.” 
Sydney FC coach Daniel Barrett conceded that Melbourne City “have been best 
team all year and the best team today, so no arguments with the final result.”

David Squires on ... the W-League grand final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/jan/28/david-squires-on-the-w-league-grand-final>
The records from past seasons were thrown out — it didn’t matter that City are 
a club still in their first W-League season, or that Sydney FC were vying to 
become the first club to win threeW-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/w-league> championships. Since the first 
round, where City defeated Barrett’s side 6-0 in Sydney, everybody has expected 
the debutants to finish this season as champions.

In comparison to Sydney FC alone, the stats show a clear picture. During the 
regular season City finished 17 points clear of them on the ladder, won twice 
the amount of games, scored 23 more goals and conceded 17 less. To suggest that 
Sydney were merely “underdogs” going into this final is a significant 
understatement.


Last week’s semi-final against Brisbane Roar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/25/de-vanna-slots-winning-penalty-to-send-melbourne-city-into-w-league-final>
, however, showed that City are fallible. To their credit from the opening 
minutes Sydney took the game to their opponents, utilising the pace of winger 
Jasmine Spencer and the creativity of striker Kyah Simon and midfielders Teresa 
Polias, Leena Khamis and Nicola Bolger.

 Khamis won two free-kicks on the edge of City’s goalmouth within the first 10 
minutes. The second, in the eighth minute from centre-back Alanna Kennedy, 
seriously tested City’s goalkeeper Brianna Davey.

 In the 12th minute, a nudge on De Vanna by Princess Ibini in the penalty area 
caused the Matildas’ co-captain to hit the turf, but the cries for a penalty 
were half-hearted at best.

 For the first half-hour City had difficultly finding their rhythm. Although 
they had plenty of the ball, in the final third their passes, primarily from De 
Vanna and Little, just didn’t find their mark.

 However champion teams find many routes to goal, and in the air City always 
pose a threat through bean-pole striker Larissa Crummer and tall centre-backs 
Laura Alleway and Jennifer Beattie. Just after the 20 minute mark, Alleway had 
two consecutive headers which finished wide of the target.

 It was through a reliable Scottish connection that City hit the lead in the 
32nd minute. A floated cross from Little was met at the back post by fellow 
Scotland international Beattie, who headed the ball powerfully towards goal and 
forced a fine save from goalkeeper Michelle Betos. Beattie was on hand to tuck 
the ball home from the rebound.

 After the opening goal the tension eased considerably, and City took a more 
commanding hold of the match. Goad probably should have put City ahead before 
half-time, after De Vanna carved her way through midfield and delivered a 
through ball right into the danger zone. The young striker’s shot, however, was 
directed straight at Betos.

 Just after the break, Little caused a fair amount of trouble with three 
consecutive corners, each aimed straight at the head of Alleway. In the 52nd 
minute, Simon was yellow-carded for a frustrated foul on Beattie. After a quick 
conference between Jess Fishlock and Little on the edge of the penalty area, 
Little curled a perfect dead ball past Betos’ outstretched arms.

 In the 68th minute, Simon smartly converted a penalty, but there would be no 
late comeback and in the 79th minute Goad, who had missed two great chances, 
scored City’s third and decisive goal.

 Goad’s provider turned goalscorer in the final minute of added time: De Vanna 
picked up possession near the half-way line and hurtled away from Renee 
Ralston. Her classy finish, a chipped effort that sailed past Betos into the 
net, was a stunning end to a stunning season.

 Just before kick-off, the City faithful held aloft a banner which summed it 
up: “Untouchable, unstoppable, unforgettable.”
 