
I love Christmas – presents, mulled wine, family get-togethers – but even so, 
it’s a logistical nightmare. And every day it gets worse. There’s trees to 
decorate, last-minute presents to buy, chock-a-block shops to brave, office 
partiesto endure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/dec/05/introverts-guide-christmas-parties>
, and extra work to finish – topped off with the nagging feeling that you’ve 
forgotten something. Even if you’re one of the lucky ones whose job winds down 
in the run-up to yuletide, it’s still one of the busiest times of the year.

So, if you need a little extra help this winter, here’s our simple guide for 
how to strike a good work-life balance over the holidays.


Don’t try to do it alone

Christmas can feel like juggling a million things at once – family, work, and 
all the festive preparation. Tracey Eker, chief executive of Flexiworkforce, 
advises not trying to micromanage – and handing back control to other people in 
your life. “It’s not an easy thing to do, but sharing your work with others 
will make you feel lighter and so much more excited forChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> to arrive.”

It’s important to involve your wider family in the festive preparations, 
agrees Jessica Chivers, author and managing director of The Talent Keeper 
Specialists. “Discuss as a family what you’re prioritising this Christmas and 
what each person can do to make it happen. Remember, everyone will have a 
better time if you’re not overstretched.”

Another tip is to allow time for tasks to take up to 50% longer than you 
originally anticipate. “Put slack in your system by leaving gaps in your day 
rather than scheduling things back to back,” adds Chivers.

Above all, remember that the winter holidays are a time for family. “In all 
the busyness, we must never lose sight of that,” says Anton Dominique from the 
London School of Marketing. “We’ve all done it – had a sneaky peek at our work 
emails when we should be enjoying family time, but remember that spending time 
together is important.”

The way to a better work-life balance? Unions, not self-help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/oct/11/way-to-better-work-life-balance-unions-not-self-help>
Only take on something you’d be happy to do tomorrow

 Chivers advises only saying yes to something, a Christmas party for example, 
if you’d be happy to do tomorrow. “It’s easy to think something you’re not keen 
on doing now will be attractive nearer the time. But the truth is: it probably 
won’t.”

It’s also important to listen when you begin to feel like you are taking on 
too much. “When that little voice inside your head asks ‘am I taking on too 
much?’ that’s a definite warning you probably are. Use that to guide what else 
you take on.”


Get organised

In the weeks leading up to Christmas, draw up a realistic task list of 
everything that needs completing before you leave, and then set out to tick 
these off, says Dominique. “If there is too much work to do, either prioritise 
and delay what is non-essential or delegate some of your workload to others.”

 Chivers suggests using a week-to-view diary to write to-do lists for the 
future rather than splitting things into work or family sections. “Keeping both 
your work and home task lists in one place gives you a snapshot of what needs 
doing on any one week, which especially helpful during this busy time of year. 
It also helps you plan ahead by jotting things down as you think of them.”

Do nothing

If it’s still all getting too much – the wrapping, cooking and festivities – 
Tim Grimes, a writer and counsellor in stress reduction, advises “spending a 
brief time in a quiet setting each day, doing nothing”.

“By that I mean you spend a few minutes sitting or lying down, just relaxing. 
Taking a few of these mental breaks a day can make you more productive and it’s 
an easy way to improve work-life balance.”

Most importantly, make sure you switch off from work over Christmas. “Thanks 
to all the technology we have now, it is easy for the festive break to turn 
into another day at the office,” says Dominique. “Perhaps it’s even time to 
tell a little white lie and say the Wi-Fi is down. This will cut down on online 
surfing at home, and force everyone to use their time more effectively.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 