
Did Brexit shrink your pension? Markets went into meltdown last Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-markets-pound-shares-plummet-brexit-vote-carney>
 following the shock result, but early figures on its impact on UK pension 
funds make for remarkable reading. Rather than collapsing, many of the giant 
funds that contain the savings of millions of workers have barely changed, with 
many going up in value.

Aviva’s £39bn with-profits fund, the biggest single pension fund in the UK, 
went up slightly in value over the week. The second biggest pension fund, 
Standard Life’s £20bn Managed Pension, was up by 2.1%.

It’s a similar picture at the other big providers: Scottish Widows’ £8.1bn 
Balanced fund was up 4.3%, while Scottish Equitable’s £9.5bn Universal Balanced 
fund was up 3.7%. Some, such as Aviva’s Mixed Investment pension fund, showed a 
small fall on Friday and Monday, but subsequently recovered.

But how have pension funds not suffered? The answer is that what pension 
savers have lost from falls in share prices has been more than made up by gains 
from bonds and sterling.

The key message for retirees is to stay calm and avoid taking any unnecessary 
risks

John Blowers, head of Trustnet Direct, which compiled the figures for Guardian 
Money, says: “The weak pound means sterling-denominated assets are now cheaper 
for overseas investors, which is helping support equity prices, while many 
companies listed in London get a hefty share of their profits in a foreign 
currency. We can’t say this is the end of the referendum-driven volatility, but 
for now long-term investors should remember that it could have been a whole 
lot worse.”

The figures underline just how much the make-up of the average worker’s 
pension has changed from the 1970s and 80s, when the FTSE (or the then FT30) 
was a bellwether of the British economy.

Today the typical workplace pension fund has less than half of its money in 
FTSE-listed shares, and often much less. For example,Aviva’s £18.7bn Mixed 
Investment fund 
<https://www.trustnet.com/Factsheets/Factsheet.aspx?fundCode=NUBA1&univ=P>has 
only 30% of its cash invested in the London stock exchange, while 40% is in 
overseas shares – largely US and European stocks – and 15% is in bonds. The 
rest is in property, cash or near-cash equivalents.

Shares on Wall Street also fell as Brexit reverberated across the world. But 
this was more than offset for UK investors by the dramatic fall in sterling 
against the US dollar. Take, for example, shares in the world’s biggest stock 
market-quoted company, Apple.

On the day before Brexit, Apple was trading at $96.10 in New York, equal to 
£65.44 in sterling terms. By close of play on Monday it had sunk to $92.04, but 
in sterling terms it was worth more, at £67.17. This was because sterling 
plummeted from around $1.50 on the night of the vote to $1.35 after the result.
 Photograph: Guardian 
Annuities take a hit as rates fall following Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/27/annuities-hit-rates-fall-brexit> 
Bonds have also risen in value. The yield on British government bonds, called 
gilts, fell from 1.36% to below 1%, as investors scrambled for safe-haven 
assets. When the yield falls on a bond fund, the underlying capital value 
rises. So funds such as Vanguard’s UK Gilts have risen by 6% in the past week.

While Brexit may have had a less immediate impact on pension funds than many 
feared, the medium and longer-term outlook is uncertain. A fall in sterling has 
much more negative consequences. Not only do holidays become more expensive, 
but imports will be pricier too, and push up inflation.

Annuities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/27/annuities-hit-rates-fall-brexit> 
have taken a hit, with pension companies cutting the amount they will pay the 
newly retired. Just Retirement and Retirement Advantage both announced cuts to 
their annuity rates: the former’s are down by around 2%.

Annuities offer an income for life, bought at retirement with all or part of a 
person’s pension savings. But they are no longer compulsory, and many retiring 
workers will instead opt to leave their money invested and draw down an income 
when required.

Richard Parkin, head of pensions at Fidelity International, says: “As with 
many of the consequences of Brexit, it’s too early to say how pensions will be 
affected in the long term. The key message for retirees is to stay calm and 
avoid taking any unnecessary risks.

“Consider whether you really need to take cash from your retirement 
investments now. We sometimes see people taking cash from their pension savings 
at retirement just because they can. Many don’t realise that most pensions 
allow you to leave the money invested until you need it. If you do need cash 
now, smaller withdrawals over a longer time will often be less risky than 
taking a large withdrawal all at once.”

Workers with final salary pension schemes are largely untouched by market 
convulsions, as their employer is required to pay a portion of their former 
salary, usually uprated every year, irrespective of the stock market.

Brexit puts employers of these schemes under more pressure. Martin Jenkins, 
pensions partner at consultants Irwin Mitchell, says: “The fall in yields for 
10-year government bonds is bad news for defined benefit pensions. Scheme 
deficits will grow. We could see more seeking help from the Pension Protection 
Fund. Firms with defined benefits schemes will have to increase the amount 
invested to protect the level of benefits promised.”
 