 The word "trumpery" is defined by Chambers 20th century dictionary as "showy 
and worthless stuff; rubbish; ritual foolery". To trump, from the French 
tromper, is to deceive. This may seem a harsh (and unintentional) verdict on 
plans by the American billionaire property developer, Donald Trump, to run for 
the White House. But this etymological definition is uncannily appropriate, to 
use Hillary Clinton's favourite word.
Would-be presidents should not be judged by their names alone, as the former 
Republican vice-president, Dan Quayle, would fervently agree. But there are 
other possible objections to Mr Trump's candidacy. Like the Republican 
frontrunner, George W Bush, the Manhattan mogul appears to believe he can buy 
the presidency. "Fortunately I have plenty of money. That gives me one 
advantage over the others," Mr Trump said. In that modest way of his, he was 
referring to a personal fortune of $1.5bn. He went on (and Mr Trump does go on) 
to list other vote-winning qualities. "I don't drink. I never had drugs. I've 
never had a cigarette. I've never had a cup of coffee." But even 
gods-made-flesh have flaws, this naff Narcissus coyly admitted. His weakness 
was that "I do go out with the most beautiful women in the world". Yuk! As if 
America had not had its fill of will-o'-the-wisp White House womanisers.

It is tempting to say, indulgently, that Mr Trump's entry into the race on the 
independent Reform party ticket would enliven the US election. But in truth, 
the mere idea devalues the process. Like Warren Beatty, the former film star, 
and Arnold Schwarzenegger, the former Austrian robot, Mr Trump mistakes media 
celebrity for a platform. Big bucks (and big-heads) do not mean big ideas. Even 
that old-stager Ronald Reagan had the sense to win state office before 
targeting the top job. There are enough comedians inUS politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics> already without yet more 
trumpeted tommy-rot. Take wacky Pat Buchanan: now there is a funny guy.
 