
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has chosen a 
prominent critic of Obamacare as his secretary of health and human services, 
casting fresh doubt over the future of the Affordable Care Act.

Congressman Tom Price of Georgia, an orthopedic surgeon who has long been a 
leading congressional voice in opposition to Barack Obama’s healthcare reform 
legislation, was confirmed on Tuesday as the president-elect’s pick.

It came at the beginning of a day that vice-president-elect Mike Pence told 
reporters would produce “a number of very important announcements” concerning 
the presidential transition.

In addition, Indiana health policy consultant Seema Verma was chosen to become 
administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

“Chairman Price, a renowned physician, has earned a reputation for being a 
tireless problem solver and the go-to expert on healthcare policy, making him 
the ideal choice to serve in this capacity,” said Trump in a statement. “He is 
exceptionally qualified to shepherd our commitment to repeal and replace 
Obamacare and bring affordable and accessible healthcare to every American. I 
am proud to nominate him as secretary of health and human services.”


Price said he was “humbled by the incredible challenges that lay ahead and 
enthusiastic for the opportunity to be a part of solving them on behalf of the 
American people”.

He added: “There is much work to be done to ensure we have a healthcare system 
that works for patients, families, and doctors; that leads the world in the 
cure and prevention of illness; and that is based on sensible rules to protect 
the well-being of the country while embracing its innovative spirit.”

Conway warns of 'backlash' if Trump makes Romney secretary of state
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/mitt-romney-donald-trump-secretary-of-state-kellyanne-conway>
If confirmed by the Senate, Price is likely to play a key role in attempts by 
Trump to “repeal and replace” the Affordable Care Act, the 2010 legislation 
that has become a key issue of partisan contention.

The Georgia congressman had long been considered the favorite to serve as HHS 
secretary. An ally of Paul Ryan, Price replaced the current speaker as chair of 
the House budget committee in 2015.

Trump has long made repealing the Affordable Care Act a priority. However, 
after meeting with Obama earlier in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/barack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition>
, the president-electseemed to strike a more dovish tone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-appears-to-soften-stance-on-range-of-pledges>
 on the landmark legislation.

Trump told the Wall Street Journal that Obama recommend parts of the 
healthcare legislation that should be kept, and “I told him I will look at his 
suggestions, and out of respect, I will do that”. He added: “Either Obamacare 
will be amended, or repealed and replaced.”

Last week, Price said that whatever Republicans do to replace Obama’s 
healthcare law will bear a “significant resemblance” to a 2015 measure that was 
vetoed by the president. That bill would have gutted some of the health care 
law’s main features: Medicaid expansion, subsidies to help middle-class 
Americans buy private policies, the tax penalties for individuals who refused 
to get coverage and several taxes to support coverage expansion. The bill would 
have delayed implementation for two years.

Price insisted that Republicans can keep the protections for those with 
existing medical conditions without mandating that all individuals carry 
coverage or pay a penalty to support an expanded insurance pool. Price said 
Republicans want to address “the real cost drivers” of healthcare price spikes, 
which he said were not necessarily sicker patients, but a heavy regulatory 
burden, taxes and lawsuits against medical professionals.

Price, who was first elected in 2004, represents a prosperous suburban Atlanta 
district that has been traditionally Republican, and has won re-election 
easily. However, Trump only narrowly won the district by a 48%-47% margin in 
November, leaving open the possibility of a competitive special election if 
Price is confirmed.

The Associated Press contributed to this report


 