
Dora Bryan, who has died aged 91, started out as a dancing and singing 
actress, making her first professional appearance at the age of 12 in 
Manchester with the 23 other girls of the Eileen Rogan Drury Lane Babes in Jack 
and the Beanstalk. She excelled as the plain-speaking young woman from the 
north, and the presence this gave her brought a wide range of work on stage and 
screen in the decades following the second world war.

Her basic stage personality – bright, streetwise but unworldly – was squeezed 
into Restoration comedy, the Hello Dolly! lead in the West End (twice), JB 
Priestley's An Inspector Calls at the Chichester Festival theatre and Meg, the 
guesthouse keeper oblivious of the sexual and other power-play in Pinter's The 
Birthday Party at the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. In 2001 she contributed to the 
mayhem in an episode of Absolutely Fabulous, and she continued in TV comedy 
until 2005, as Ros Utterthwaite in Last of the Summer Wine.

Her most substantial film role came in A Taste of Honey (1961). But from the 
first, Bryan could make even makeweight characters come alive, as with the 
kindly streetwalker in the film of Graham Greene's The Fallen Idol (1948), who 
gives a lost boy a touch of needed feminine warmth and understanding. A part 
that could have set the teeth on edge was redeemed by the catchy humour of the 
acting.

She was born Dora May Broadbent in Southport, Lancashire, and brought up in a 
village near Oldham. Her father, Albert Broadbent, owned a small mill that went 
bankrupt, forcing him to sell bobbins from door to door, sometimes taking Dora 
with him. Her mother, Georgina (nee Hill) encouraged her to perform in public.

Dora saw her family background as happy, but was attracted by the potential 
extra attention that acting offered. The first live show she saw, Peter Pan, 
gave her the urge to play Peter. After seeing Ingrid Bergman in Intermezzo, she 
spoke with a Swedish accent until an adored elder brother told her not to be so 
silly.

Though she won a place at grammar school she did not take it up, preferring to 
join the Drury Lane Babes and then, on leaving school, went into pantomime at 
Glasgow. The following year she was in Mother Goose in London with Max Wall.

After the London Academy of Music and Manchester Repertory School, she joined 
Oldham Rep as an assistant stage manager. During the second world war she 
travelled to Italy with ENSA to entertain the troops.

She went to London to seek her stage fortune, and got her first big chance 
when she replaced a sick cast member in a London production of the celebrated 
thriller Gaslight. The Fallen Idol provided her first film role.

While in Emlyn Williams's play Accolade (1950), she entertained him offstage 
with some of her comedy routines: he invited her to one of his big parties, at 
which impresario Binkie Beaumont was present. She quickly became the star of 
The Lyric Revue. It took 14 curtains on the opening night and ran for two years.

By the time she was 37, Bryan had appeared in 28 films without ever having her 
name above the title. This improved after Shelagh Delaney's A Taste of Honey, 
in which she played the harridan mother, unsympathetic to the heroine's 
emotional injuries. Theatrical recognition had come earlier, when after the 
first night of a 1955 production of AP Herbert's The Water Gypsies, the billing 
outside was changed to "Dora Bryan in AP Herbert's The Water Gipsies".
 Dora Bryan in 2003. Photograph: Tim Rooke/Rex Features 
The previous year she had married Bill Lawton, and they went on to run a hotel 
in Brighton. She had to leave the cast of The Water Gipsies when she became 
pregnant, but the child died after being born prematurely – the first of two 
such misfortunes. She insisted on going ahead with a Granada TV series, 
believing work would be a healer, but had a nervous breakdown and did not work 
again for nine months until the comedy actor Ronald Shiner asked her to play 
his wife in The Love Birds at the Adelphi (1957).

For a time Bryan was prone to depressive interludes. By the end of the 1970s 
she was attending Alcoholics Anonymous and pledging herself to Christ at the 
behest of Cliff Richard, who starred with her in a Billy Graham film 
production. However, Bryan was a great survivor, and her later years were some 
of the most productive of her career. In 1996 she was appointed OBE.

In 1963 her single All I Want For Christmas Is a Beatle was voted Best Bad 
Record on Top of the Pops. She was delighted. In her 70s, she was proud that 
she could still do the splits.

Bill and her daughter, Georgina, predeceased her. She is survived by her sons, 
Daniel and William.

• Dora May Bryan, actor and singer, born 7 February 1923; died 23 July 2014
 