
The Dorchester’s leaked list of grooming rules for female staff could open up 
the luxury hotel to lawsuits filed by current and former employees, critics 
have said.

 A set of grooming demands was this week reported to have been emailed by 
hotel managers to employees after the five-star establishment received 
complaints about the general hygiene of its staff.

According to the leak, women were asked not to turn up for work with oily 
skin, bad breath or garish makeup. They were also encouraged to shave their 
legs, ensure their fingernails were manicured and avoid body odour.

Kiran Daurka, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said dress codes were lawful 
when they related directly to the requirements of a job, but could be 
challenged when they encouraged the objectification of staff.

“I would have concerns where a policy seemingly objectifies women by asking 
them to look a certain way which has no bearing on their ability to do a job,” 
she told the Guardian. “For example, hair removal is clearly about 
objectification and sexualisation, as there is some ideal of what a woman 
should look like.

“This may also unlawfully offend the religious or other beliefs of women whose 
belief system does not allow the removal of hair.

“A dress code that treats women less favourably than men is discriminatory. 
But even where a policy is applied to all, it may still particularly 
disadvantage women, and that disadvantage would need to be objectively 
justified.”

Do Google's 'unprofessional hair' results show it is racist?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/08/does-google-unprofessional-hair-results-prove-algorithms-racist->
An unnamed employee told the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3984458/Dorchester-hotel-triggers-complaints-list-rules-female-staff.html>
: “It’s disgusting. This list is like something out of the dark ages and 
downright offensive. It’s not as though you choose to have oily skin, and a lot 
of women, especially teenagers, cannot help it – no facial wash or moisturiser 
in the world can control that.

“The women are all pretty livid but worry that if they complain – or rebel and 
turn up to work with chipped, dirty nails and hairy legs, for example – they’ll 
be sacked on the spot.”

Philip Landau, an employment lawyer from Landau Law, said there were many 
reasons why an employer may want to have a dress code or appearance policy, 
such as to communicate a professional and corporate image. However, “an 
employer’s policy must not be discriminatory in respect of the protected 
characteristics in the 2010Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> Act for age, disability, gender 
reassignment, religion or belief, sex, or sexual orientation”, he said.

“Accordingly, any dress code or appearance policy should apply to both men and 
women equally. The codes do not have to be identical, as there will clearly be 
different requirements for male staff, but it does have to amount to similar 
standards. It is not clear what the equivalent grooming policy is for male 
staff at the Dorchester.

“A grooming policy should also be reasonable and proportionate in nature, with 
particular reference to the work that is being carried out. If it isn’t, and 
you are dismissed for failing to comply with the code, you may have a claim for 
direct discrimination on the grounds of sex if there has been a detriment for 
one gender over the other. You may also have a claim for unfair dismissal.”

Landau said employers needed to “tread carefully” in case they were seen to 
indirectly discriminate against an employee. The requirement not to display any 
excess body hair, including on the face, could discriminate against those with 
conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), of which one of the main 
symptoms is excess androgen – high levels of “male hormones” in the body.

“This may cause physical signs, such as excess facial or body hair, and 
therefore a blanket policy of no facial hair could amount to indirect 
discrimination on the grounds of disability and sex,” he said.


Ditch high heels to promote equality at work, Theresa May told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/13/ditch-high-heels-promote-equality-work-theresa-may-told>
Ewa Jasiewicz, a union organiser for hotel workers in London, said she 
believed the stipulations left workers open to discrimination, especially if 
they were transgender or gender fluid. “Gender is a protected characteristic 
under the Equality Act and this includes gender presentation and reassignment,” 
Jasiewicz said.

“Women workers at the Dorchester do not enjoy transparency on where their 
service charge goes and do not have fair tips or [a] living wage, but are 
expected to spend money on manicures? This beggars belief. This in my opinion 
is a form of paternalistic, sexist, gendered taxation on an already exploited 
and underpaid female workforce.”

The Unite regional officer Dave Turnbull said: “People of different ethnic 
backgrounds may not be able to comply with the requirements due to their skin 
or hair type.

“It is possible that there is an underlying race issue here, as we are often 
told by members that hotels do try to avoid having black people in 
front-of-house position and it could easily be interpreted that the Dorchester 
are trying to get female staff to conform to a certain type.

“Also there are religions where the removal of facial hair may not be 
acceptable. There may be disability issues linked to this as well, for example 
skin conditions or allergies to certain types of makeup.”


To apply these standards only to female staff would be clearly sexist, he 
said. “It treats women workers as if they are part of the product that is being 
sold by the hotel and can place staff at risk of sexual harassment and comments 
from customers who might view them as a commodity.”

Workers in the Dorchester and other hotels were on low basic pay and often 
reliant on variable elements, such as tips or service charges, to top up their 
earnings, Turnbull said. “The cost of makeup, beauty treatments and compliance 
with dress code requirements can be extremely expensive and is never factored 
in by an additional allowance of any sort. Again, this could easily place 
employers at risk of claims of sex discrimination, as male employees are not 
expected to shoulder the same expenses.”

An employee at another London hotel, who asked to remain anonymous, said she 
was subjected to similar rules. She told the Guardian her main issue was that 
female employees had to wear tight dresses, which was “unfair and impractical” 
for her waitressing job. It also opened her up to unwanted comments from 
colleagues and guests. “If I’m cleaning a table, male workers will say things 
like: ‘Oh, stay right there,’” she said.


While the rules do not stipulate that the waitress must remove any facial 
hair, the 24-year-old, employed by a boutique hotel frequented by wealthy 
clients, said she had to wear skin-coloured tights rather than black ones, 
which meant having to shave her legs regularly, and that there was an 
expectation to look attractive. “We’re told that we have to dress as if we’re 
on our first date,” she said.


Sam Smethers, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said it was 
completely unacceptable for any woman to be told what she should wear and how 
she should look. “Employers should concentrate on what enables people to do a 
good job and what drives productivity. This is 2016, not 1970; we need to see 
an end to this kind of objectification of women,” she said.

The Dorchester said the rules were not emailed to all staff, but were provided 
to job applicants. The hotel’s general manager, Roland Fasel, said: “The 
Dorchester has a proud community of employees who uphold world-leading 
hospitality standards, including grooming, in line with many other brands.

“All new applicants, both men and women, are sent a copy of our grooming 
standards in advance of interview.”
 