
Droughts, water scarcity and stricter environmental regulations cost 
businesses a reported $14bn (£11bn) this year, up from $2.6bn in 2015. Yet 
companies still aren’t doing enough to protect themselves from water risks, 
according to a new report.

Compiled by environmental non-profit CDP and released Tuesday at the climate 
summit in Marrakech, Morrocco, the report approached more than 1,200 of the 
largest listed companies around the world in sectors exposed to water risk. 
Just over 600 responded, meaning the $14bn figure is likely to be hugely 
underreported.

How can we better value water as global shortages start to threaten economies?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/13/water-global-shortages-gdp-agriculture-factories-textiles-investors>
The businesses, which included consumer goods giant Unilever and oil and gas 
company SuncorEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, were 
measured on a number of factors, such as their efforts to track their water use 
and goal-setting to save water.

Much of the increase in spending was related to Japanese power giant Tokyo 
Electric Power Company (Tepco), which spent $10bn over the past year to clean 
up groundwater pollution from its Daiichi nuclear power plant, damaged in the 
2011 tsunami.

More than a quarter of the companies said water-related issues, including 
floods and pollution, had affected their bottom line, typically due to higher 
operating costs and a disruption in production.

One of the companies, Anglo American Platinum, said it was spending millions 
of dollars on infrastructure at its Mogalakwena mine in South Africa to protect 
its water supply against shortages, including a $6m upgrade to a nearby sewage 
works.

“Every business in every sector needs water in some form or another,” said 
Morgan Gillespy, head of water at CDP. “Addressing water risks is vital for 
business continuity, protecting the bottom-line and to enable an effective 
response to climate change.”

Many businesses rely on water for their operations, but water supplies are at 
risk <https://www.epa.gov/climate-impacts/climate-impacts-water-resources> in 
many parts of the world due to pressure on resources, likely to be exacerbated 
by the effects of climate change. Although more companies than ever are making
climate change a priority 
<https://www.bsr.org/reports/BSR_GlobeScan_State_of_Sustainable_Business_Survey_2016.pdf>
 [pdf] in their sustainability efforts, they still aren’t moving quickly enough 
to tackle water risks, says the report.

Of the companies surveyed, around 60% said they tracked their water use, up 
only 3% from last year. Nearly half of the companies approached responded to 
the survey, up from 38% in 2015. Some sectors were more forthcoming than 
others. Almost three-quarters of IT companies responded, followed by the 
consumer staples industry, which includes food and beverage companies.

The energy sector lagged behind, with less than one-third of companies 
responding (just 32 out of 109 firms). It’s a trend that has remained 
consistent, write the report’s authors, who highlight energy giants Exxon 
Mobile, Chevron and Royal Dutch Shell as having “failed to disclose critical 
water information to their investor shareholders” via CDP for the last five 
years.

A spokeswoman for Chevron said the company reports on its water impacts 
through its website and corporate responsibilityreport 
<https://www.chevron.com/-/media/chevron/shared/documents/2015-corporate-responsibility-report.pdf>
, which she says “provide a clear description of how we identify and manage 
water risk.” Neither Shell nor Exxon had responded to the Guardian’s request 
for comment at the time of publication.

“For a long time, companies have regarded water as a free and plentiful 
resource,” said Gillespy. “This current understanding, especially in the energy 
sector, means that they don’t see water as a material concern.”

Of those energy companies that did respond to the survey, more than a third 
said they hadn’t examined how water risk could affect their business in the 
future. And yet energy companies, along with materials and utility firms, were 
hit the hardest financially from water-related issues.

Energy companies reported being liable in their last reporting period for $78m 
in fines and penalties for incidents such as spills and violating environmental 
regulations, more than any other industry and seven times the amount that they 
reported paying last year.

More than half of companies said they had set targets and goals to better 
manage their water supply. UK pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline reported 
it had met its target to cut the water used in its operations by 20% last year 
against 2010 levels.

Reducing their water use also led to energy savings, according to over 50% of 
companies. Food and beverage giant Nestlé cut water use by 1.7m cubic meters at 
the same time as reducing carbon emissions by 80,000 tons in 2015.

To make setting targets easier, CDP is teaming up with other non-profits and 
charities, including WWF and The Nature Conservancy, to develop a tool to help 
companies set water targets aligned with climate science and global efforts 
such as the Paris climate agreement.

 “Our goal is to enable companies to set targets that would, for example, 
allow them to make sustainable withdrawals from the river basins they operate 
in, rather than compete with other local users for that resource,” says 
Gillespy.

The CDP report also highlighted 24 brands that were leading the way in 
mitigating water risks, up from eight that made the list last year. L’Oréal and 
German chemical company BASF were among the new additions, joining six firms 
that made the list for the second year in a row, including Ford and consumer 
goods company Colgate Palmolive.
 