
The prospect of a cup final between Ross County and Raith Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/raith> as the denouement to this Scottish 
season may have appealed to old romantics and those who have long since tired 
of the Old Firm's domestic duopoly. It would, though, have left sponsors 
cursing a post-recession blow.

Dundee United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> rather 
smartly averted such an unlikely scenario, succeeding where Celtic so 
stunningly failed 24 hours earlier by seeing off the challenge of a team from 
Scotland's second tier.

County's defeat of Celtic means United will need little warning over the 
perils surrounding their return to Hampden Park on 15 May. Nonetheless, this 
impressively moulded team from Dundee can have confidence regarding what would 
be only their secondScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> triumph.

"After watching what Ross County did to Celtic I pointed out to the players 
that it showed exactly what could happen," said Peter Houston, the United 
manager.

"I wouldn't call this our best chance to win the trophy because I watched the 
way Ross County played in that game. One thing is for sure, we will give the 
respect but we have given ourselves a chance. We will have a real pop at it 
now."

So there was no pre-election boost for Gordon Brown. The prime minister had 
sent his best wishes to the Raith manager, John McGlynn, last week but was not 
in Glasgow to watch the team he has supported since his youth on their return 
to the spotlight.

Raith have endured a generally dismal time since winning the League Cup almost 
16 years ago – their main objective this season is to remain in the First 
Division – but at least the financial boost from this run will be welcome.

McGlynn could have taken heart from his team's opening; they were clearly the 
better side before David Goodwillie opened the scoring. United's physical 
strength and professionalism ended any prospect of a shock thereafter.

Goodwillie is developing into that all-too-rare species, a talented and 
composed young Scottish striker. His goal owed much to the creative brilliance 
of Danny Swanson but the 21-year-old still supplied a cool, angled finish.

In a match of precious few goalmouth incidents, the outstanding Andy Webster 
headed home a Craig Conway corner to settle matters. Fittingly, United's 
centenary season will culminate in a cup final.

Man of the match: Andy Webster (Dundee United)
 