
Dunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> Athletic have 
highlighted their concern about the likelihood of not receiving £80,000 worth 
of ticket money from Rangers, who entered administration on Tuesday.

In an illustration of the wider commercial aspect of Rangers' troubles, 
Dunfermline issued a statement pointing out monies due from last weekend's 
Scottish Premier League meeting between the clubs.Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> had sold tickets to their own 
supporters for the fixture at East End Park, on the basis they would forward 
that to the hosts.

Dunfermline said: "All of the board of DAFC would like to express their 
concern and shock that a giant football club such as Rangers FC has gone into 
administration. The impact of this will be felt throughout Scotland, the UK and 
Europe and the board and club would wish to convey their support to Rangers FC 
and hope that the club can find a way through this terrible time.

"However, the direct impact to DAFC is not insignificant: Rangers FC are due 
[to pay] DAFC in the region of £80,000 of gate receipts from Saturday's fixture 
which is obviously of extreme concern. This payment is no longer expected to be 
received by next Tuesday which would have been due to the club. This is a 
significant amount of money for a club such as DAFC to lose."

Dundee United are due a similar amount of ticket money from Rangers and 
another SPL club, Hearts, are yet to receive the full £1.5m balance on the 
transfer of Lee Wallace to Ibrox at the start of this season.

Rangers' administrators, Duff & Phelps, are expected to meet the media on 
Thursday. They are yet to fully decide or disclose what cost-cutting measures 
will be required in the immediate future, but issued an upbeat statement on 
Wednesday evening.

"Our first priority has been to ensure that the football club continues to 
function and this is being achieved with the help of staff, players and 
management at the club," said Duff & Phelps.

"In broad terms, supporters can be reassured that Rangers will continue as a 
football club and we hope to reach a stage as soon as possible where the club 
can emerge from administration."

With direct regard to £9m owed by Rangers to Her Majesty's Revenue and 
Customs, the statement added: "For clarity, the cost structure of the club and 
ongoing losses were such that the club had outstanding liabilities to HMRC. 
These were the subject of discussion and clearly HMRC wished to see them 
resolved as a matter of urgency.

"We are involved in dialogue with HMRC and will work with them constructively, 
as is the case with all other key stakeholders."
 