
WHILE outside attention throughout the Earth Summit has been on the 
bio-diversity convention, the real battleground is Agenda 21, the 40-chapter 
plan to clean up the planet and hasten sustainable development.

 UN sources yesterday said that more than 85 per cent of the negotiations were 
complete, many of them included in measures before the summit opened. 
Fundamental North-South issues of who pays for the clean-up, the transfer of 
technology to developing countries and forests may not be resolved until the 
last minute.

 Agenda 21 covers everything from the ways women, children and local councils 
can protect the environment to thorny issues about population and whether the 
North's over-consumption of resources is the cause of Third World poverty.

 There are chapters on waste management, atmosphere and land protection, 
institutional reform in the UN and how to monitor, assess and pressure 
countries to act responsibly.

 While Agenda 21 is not legally binding, it is vital. Nothing agreed will pass 
into international law but the debate is urgent and bitter because the document 
will force governments' pace of change and because it attacks individual 
countries' economic policies.

 When heads of state sign it later this week they will be admitting their 
countries' global commitments to future environmental and developmental 
strategies. Their eagerness in some cases for blandness is because admission of 
responsibility for environmental damage would commit them to paying for the 
solution.

 Third World countries have tended to think Agenda 21 favours the rich because 
it is soft on arms spending, transnational corporations and world debt. The 
developed countries believe Agenda 21 could turn into a huge demand for money. 
As the heads of state pack their bags for Rio , such fears are proving 
groundless.

 The crucial financial debate looks increasingly unlikely to be resolved in 
Rio . Maurice Strong, secretary general of the conference, costed environmental 
and developmental needs at Dollars 625 billion, ( pounds 347 million) of which 
Dollars 125 billion ( pounds 69.5 million) was needed immediately. He is 
unlikely to get promises of more than Dollars 10 billion, although that will 
rise after Rio .

 Developed countries have committed themselves to 'new and additional 
resources' for global environmental projects, to be channelled, to developing 
countries' displeasure, through the World Bank-dominated Global Environmental 
Facility.

 By not directly tackling fundamental issues such as aid, financial 
institutions, reform of the GATT and the Common Agricultural Policy, Agenda 21 
is weakly placed to achieve change. A consensus is building in Rio that the 
best to emerge from it will be a consciousness-raising set of principles on 
sustainable development.
 