
Capital of Jamaica destroyed

Population camping in the open 

The first news

New York, January 15.

Reports are current that Kingston, the capital of Jamaica, has been demolished 
by a violent earthquake, and that the disaster has been attended by great loss 
of life.

There is little at present to substantiate this beyond the fact that Kingston 
has been cut off from cable communication, and the Western Union Cable Company 
believe the cable has been severed by an earthquake.

The cable via Key West and Cuba, and also that via Bermuda, have failed to 
connect with Kingston since this morning. The greatest anxiety is being 
experienced here, and further news is awaited with impatience.

Kingston and surrounds

Kingston and suburbs at the last Census in 1891 contained a population of over 
48,000, of whom 46,000 were in the city itself. It is one of the largest cities 
in the British West Indies. It stands on the shore of the magnificent harbour 
which bears its name, and is laid out on the rectangular system on sloping 
ground. Behind the town at some short distance runs a chain of mountains of 
considerable height. The bay is landlocked, and forms a singularly fine and 
extensive harbour, with a length east to west of about twelve miles and a 
breadth varying from three to four miles. The harbour is protected from the sea 
by a spit of sand known as the Palisadoes, 71/2 miles long, at the extreme end 
of which is located Port Royal. Port Royal, though at one time it was the 
greater town of the two, decayed as Kingston rose, and is now little more than 
a fortified naval station.

A recent warning

On the night on November 13 an extremely sharp shock of earthquake was felt in 
the south and north of Jamaica. It was immediately followed by a second shock, 
the heaviest experienced in Kingston for many years. This, coming after the 
disasters of San Francisco and Valparaiso, led to the constitution on the 
island of insurance against earthquake. Messrs Head and Co., of London, had 
previously been in demand to insure crops in the West Indies against 
hurricanes. Some six weeks ago it was announced in Jamaica that the firm was 
prepared to insure against loss by earthquake. The premium was fixed at 10s. 
per cent. Whether many policies had been taken out cannot be stated.
 