
CRUCIAL agreements on how to finance programmes to safeguard the world's 
environment, while promoting third world development, looked close last night 
as the arrival of heads of state and governments at the Earth Summit in Rio de 
Janeiro gave negotiators only a few hours to solve outstanding differences.

 The most substantial document of the conference, Agenda 21, which maps out 
how the world should develop into the next century, relies for its timetable 
and implementation on ways of channelling money from the rich north to the 
developing nations.

 Knotty problems of how much money and how soon it can be paid, as well as the 
role of institutions such as the World Bank, have been holding up progress for 
days but everyone knew that without agreement by lunchtime today British summer 
time the summit could collapse.

 There are 170 countries still in the negotiations. More than 100 developing 
countries including India, Malaysia, and most of Africa, belong to the largest 
grouping, G77. For these talks China has thrown its weight behind G77.

 The north is divided between the United States, which stands alone at this 
summit , and the rest of developed world, which in this case sees Britain and 
Japan co-operating.

 After a mammoth 16 hours' negotiating session many of the outstanding issues 
had been resolved by last night, with the north accepting that a substantial 
sum should be donated immediately to get a new aid programme going but not 
naming a specific amount in the text. However, a footnote is being added which 
does mention the United Nations estimate that the total programme will cost 
Dollars 625 billion ( pounds 343.4 billion) a year of which Dollars 125 billion 
a year should be covered by aid from industrialised countries. Existing aid 
flow is Dollars 55 billion and no one expects another Dollars 70 billion in new 
money immediately. The target figure is to be Dollars 10 billion.

 The G77 group's dislike of the World Bank and its mega projects, which have 
on the bank's own admission often proved disastrous to the environment, finally 
forced the US to give way on how the new funds will be distributed. While some 
of the money will flow through the World Bank and a fund called the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF), a pilot scheme for backing projects which have 
international environment benefits, other new channels for aid will be opened.

 This means that regional banks like the European Bank, existing UN agencies, 
and direct transfer of funds from north to south between individual nations 
will all be part of the process.

 Another concern about US dominance over aid programmes is addressed by a 
paragraph which says the GEF activities should be both transparent and 
democratic.

 One thorny problem remains to be resolved by the politicians. The level of 
aid which the industrialised countries are supposed to contribute has long been 
fixed by the UN at 0.7 of gross domestic product, but in most industrialised 
countries is about half that. The UN calculates that if every country reached 
this target there would be enough money available to implement the ambitious 
Agenda 21 programme.

 Britain's overseas aid averages around 0.3 per cent and the US less although 
the Scandinavian countries are already at 0.7.

 The G77 countries have proposed that all countries should reach the 0.7 per 
cent by the year 2000. The industrialised world is divided between those who 
believe that this target should be reached by 2010 and those who believe the 
target should be reached 'as soon as possible'. Britain and Japan have proposed 
the wording 'as soon as can be'. The politicians have the offending paragraph 
in front of them with all the alternatives wordings in brackets in order to 
reach a compromise text.

 During yesterday's marathon session a single four-line paragraph took two 
hours of discussion before wording could be agreed and sometimes tempers frayed 
as progress seemed tortuous. But after 2 1/2 years of negotiations few now 
believe that heads of state will fail to do a deal.
 