
WORLD leaders here yesterday began signing the first international agreement 
to halt global warming, heralding it as the Earth Summit 's most important 
achievement.

 However, although countries signing the Convention on Climate Change will 
have to set targets to cut carbon dioxide emissions, the agreement falls short 
of legally binding them to commitments.

 The convention - which was weakened in negotiations to gain United States 
support - was described as an historic but modest first step, and a building 
block of a new world order by the UN Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

 He said: 'It is a pragmatic convention reflecting political and economic 
realities in the world today. It falls short of the initial hopes of 
negotiators. There are many scientists and experts who say the levels of 
commitment on the convention are not commensurate with the scale of the problem 
it addresses.'

 But referring to the Americans, he said that if they had a 'perfect 
convention' some key actors would have been missing. 'It is a modest first 
step. Its very modesty should be an incentive to governments to keep up the 
pressure to improve it.'

 Fernando Collor, the president of Brazil, was the first to sign the 
convention amid prolonged applause from delegates as he declared: 'This is a 
decisive first step we must take to bring a new and better international 
purpose.'

 There were still some scientific doubts about global warming but the 
convention was designed 'to prevent risks we have no right to take,' he said.

 It suffered limitations, but the mechanisms in it left the door open for 
improvements.

 The convention requires 50 countries to ratify it in their parliaments before 
coming into force, which is likely to take at least two years. John Major plans 
to sign it when he arrives at the summit next week.

 Outside the signing ceremony some countries were already inpatient to improve 
the convention. Austria, Switzerland and the Netherlands were circulating a 
document calling on like-minded countries to set up legally binding targets to 
stabilise carbon dioxide at 1990 levels by the year 2000.

 Despite doubts about the drafting, Germany and Italy supported the move and 
agreed with a further proposal that negotiations should begin immediately to 
reduce, not just stabilise, emissions. British officials thought the move 
premature and did not want to worry the Americans before they had even 
initialled the existing document.

 Some leaders were openly critical that the agreement was too weak. Among them 
was Bikenbau Paeniu, prime minister of the Pacific island of Tuvalu, who said 
his nation would disappear as sea levels rose unless urgent action was taken 
now.

 Pressure groups were also critical. Fiona Weir, for Friends of the Earth , 
said: 'Binding targets have been sacrificed to accommodate the US, the world's 
largest carbon polluter. Even under highly optimistic assumptions, the 
convention fails to avert potential catastrophic climate change.'

 Adam Markham, for the World Wide Fund for Nature, called for immediate action 
to curb carbon dioxide emissions without waiting for ratification of the 
convention. 'Signing it without immediate action is like putting the ignition 
key in a car with a flat battery. Now governments must do a jump start by 
injecting the spark of real commitment and urgency.'
 