
The Earth Summit - began two years ago as an attempt, largely by northern 
ecologically-aware countries, to identify and address what they saw as the 
global environmental crisis.

 But right from the start, rich nations' calls for sustainable development and 
ecological restraint were matched by developing countries' accusations of 
hypocrisy and attempts to control their development.

 Vested economic interests prevented any significant moves to address the 
underlying issues of environmental degradation and the UN's intended 
'fundamental shift of resources' from rich to poor never stood a chance.

 Issues: the winners 

 Biodiversity: Weak but legal agreement reached on protecting plants and 
species. The United States refuses to sign. Success will depend on how far 
developing countries are paid to protect their resources.

 Climate Change: Legally-binding treaty to avoid global warming now signed by 
110 countries but weakened by US which refused to allow timetables and targets. 
Most countries are politically committed to holding atmospheric emissions to 
1990 levels by the year 2,000. Scientists say that 60 per cent reductions are 
needed immediately.

 Desertification: Late agreement reached on the need for a future convention 
to protect arid lands. This was a sop to African countries who received little 
from the conference. A convention will eventually commit more world aid to 
affected countries.

 Agenda 21: The 800-page blueprint of action to lead development into 
environmentally sound areas was agreed and retains a series of admirable 
guidelines for governments to adopt at their own pace.

 Agenda 21 covers everything from population strategies to the disposal of 
hazardous waste, recycling and the role of unions and women in environment and 
development. Success depends on funding and political commitment.

 The proposals are not legally binding and are therefore easily avoided. 

 Free Trade: The Gatt (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) was the winner 
after all attempts to have trade put on the summit agenda were rebuffed and no 
direction was given by the summit to Gatt to address environmental issues.

 Multi-Nationals: Northern countries succeeded in erasing all mention in the 
texts of the environmental responsibilities of large industry. Self-regulation 
was preferred by governments despite much criticism from pressure groups.

 The losers 

 Aid: Most donor countries again fudged their long-standing UN commitment to 
raise Official Development Assistance (ODA) to 0.7 per cent of gross domestic 
product (GDP), preferring to work towards the figure 'as soon as possible.'

 Japan will contribute Dollars 7.7 billion over five years to world bodies and 
other countries for environmental assistance.

 Debt: No joint commitment by rich nations to reducing debt (current flow in 
interest payments from poor to rich countries stands at Dollars 50 billion a 
year.)

 Individual countries pledged to work to reduce debt burdens over various 
periods and with qualifications. Britain, not owed much, seeks 'further 
progress.'

 Forests: The world's first joint forest principles were saved only by 
avoiding all mention of a future convention which India, Malaysia and the G77 
developing countries had resisted throughout.

 Other underlying issues of enviromental degradation such as the role of the 
military, nuclear testing, the trade in radioactive waste and the consumption 
patterns of the rich were forced off the summit agenda by the US and other rich 
nations.

 Institutions: the winners 

 The World Bank emerged as the future manager of most of the three to four 
billion dollars a year that rich nations will pledge in time to the Global 
Enviromental Facility (GEF) for the enviromental projects that countries cannot 
address on their own. The bank in turn has pledged not to finance road building 
in virgin forests or construction of dams in the Amazon.

 The International Development Association, a World Bank affiliate, which 
lends or grants developing countries up to Dollars 6 billion a year will assume 
a greater role in the environment. It has had its funds increased by 15 per 
cent and will be boosted by an ' Earth Increment' fund. This is proposed to be 
about three to five billion dollars a year.

 Final figures will be decided later. 

 The fund is intended to kick start into action many of the Agenda 21 
principles of a shift to community-led development projects.

 A Sustainable Development Commission will be set up to monitor UN agencies' 
investment programmes and countries' adoption of Agenda 21 into national 
policies. The long term success of the summit will rest on the SDC's powers to 
exert pressure and act. It will report mainly to the Economic and Social 
Council of the UN (ECOSOC) that will have access to the UN General Assembly. 
Details will be finalised at the UN in September. How influential the SDC will 
be on other organisations like the IMF remains to be seen.

 The UN Development Programme is enhanced and will manage one third of the GEF.

 The losers 

 New powers for the World Bank and the SDC will hasten the demise of the two 
UN bodies traditionally most sympathetic to Third World concerns. The UN 
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the poor countries' response to 
GATT - has no real role now. The UN Centre on Transnational Corporations 
(UNCTC) the only world body to monitor multinational corporations which control 
up to 80 per cent of world trade and investment, was axed earlier this year by 
Boutros Boutros-Ghalli, the UN Secretary-General.

 Countries: the winners 

 Industrialised countries successfully defended the global economic status 
quo. Many developing nations maintain that Rio has boosted their dominance over 
the third world by adding the enviroment as another lever to control developing 
countries' resources. New money will be conditional on their preserving the 
enviroment.

 Brazil: Given a series of debt for nature swaps, credits and other sweeteners 
together with some additional grants.

 US: Successfully defended the right to consume one quarterof the world's 
resources.

 The losers 

 The 43 Least Developed Nations, together generating less then 4 per cent of 
world trade and dependant mostly on aid, receive the least from Rio .

 Indigenous Peoples: Changes in wording of documents maintained their rights 
as individuals but not as nations.

 NGOs 

 Rio was given added relevance by the participation of many peoples 
organisations. The role of NGOs (non government organistions) has been greatly 
enhanced especially in developing countries.

 While their influence in policy-making was ultimately slight, new links 
between northern and southern NGOs and the importance accorded to 'civil 
society' by the UN will ensure that all governments will be monitored closely.

 We're the leaders, we're not the followers. I believe we have the best 
environmental record in the world - President Bush

 We cannot separate man from nature, because he is nature itself, just like 
the water, the tree, the wind and the sea bottom. One day our children will 
turn to us and say: 'You knew this. What did you do?' - President Mitterrand

 It's now up to the rich nations to decide whether they want to die or not. We 
are poor and we're dying anyway - Fazlul Huq, author of Bangladesh's national 
report

 They talk, they talk and they talk about poverty and then they don't do 
anything. I don't really see why we are here - Ernest Rukangira, director, 
Rwanda National Environment Service
 