
AS THE Rio conference opened yesterday, it was becoming increasingly clear 
that what is at stake is not the environment or poverty but institutional 
change and, especially, money.

 In the game of diplomatic bridge now taking place in Rio , the North controls 
the bank. The South, dealt an appalling hand, with equity its only high card, 
has little leverage except in controlling the physical resources the North 
needs.

 So far the developed countries have limited the financial debate to specific 
issues. Rather than discuss a general transfer of funds from rich nations to 
poor, they have agreed to provide unquantified 'new and additional' money for 
the South, but on condition that it is all spent on the environment via the 
Global Environment Facility. This fund, administered by the World Bank, was set 
up in 1990 for high profile projects such as reafforestation and measures to 
combat climate change.

 The developing countries in turn have refused to countenance this, seeking to 
be able to develop despite the environment.

 Their position has been severely weakened in the last few weeks by increasing 
disarray within the G77 group of developing countries, many of which are now 
pulling in different directions. The richest - Brazil, India and Malaysia - 
want access to new technology, while the poorest simply want cash for urgent 
development to lift them off the bottom of the economic pile. Many are even now 
falling into line with the North's half-promises of better debt and aid terms 
if they accept that all new money will be spent as the North wants.

 Beneath this week's formal diplomatic niceties, the G77 countries have been 
trying to unify their position set out in the Beijing Declaration last year - 
that environment and development issues should not be separated as the North 
would like.

 Neither side, however, seems prepared to tackle the fundamental issue of 
poverty, which the armies of non-governmental groups are furiously trying to 
place on the Rio agenda. According to these groups, a tacit agreement has been 
reached that the Earth Summit should lead to a strengthening of institutions - 
such as the World Bank, the United Nations and governments - at the expense of 
people.

 The non-governmental organisations say that by not discussing issues like the 
responsibilities of multinational corporations, which control 80 per cent of 
the world's investment, or world trade, which is at the root of most 
environmental degradation, the conference at best will be a showcase for world 
leaders to proclaim their commitment to a more responsible world without fear 
of economic fall-out.

 For Maurice Strong, the summit 's secretary-general, success will be measured 
by how much new money is put into the developing world's pot. For the rich 
countries it will be how little they are forced to change their ways, and for 
the developing countries it will be what access they are given to northern 
technologies and markets. That there is little for the least developed 
countries is now not much in doubt.
 