
MANY of the original aims of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, which 
officially opens today, have already been lost in disagreements between the 
rich industrialised countries and the developing nations.

 New international laws which it was hoped would be signed remain statements 
of principle or have been so watered down that they will have little effect.

 Nevertheless, many of the thousands of civil servants and junior ministers 
who have spent months in preparatory meetings around the globe say that solid 
achievements are enshrined in the agreed texts to come before the 120 heads of 
state and government who will be present.

 The issues of environment, development and trade have been brought together 
and considered in a way never attempted before. The fact that the negotiations 
on what to do about the problems have often foundered on conflicting interests 
was predictable, but the participants say that at least everyone is beginning 
to identify the difficulties and be honest about them.

 The process that has brought about the opening of the largest conference the 
world has seen began in Stockholm in June, 1972, when the United Nations 
Conference on Human Environment put the issues on the international agenda for 
the first time.

 Despite progress in tackling some of the problems identified, it was clear to 
the United Nations 10 years later that the earth 's environment was 
deteriorating and global risks were becoming more acute.

 In 1983, a World Commission on Environment and Development was established. 
It concluded that the future of mankind was at risk if unsustainable growth and 
development continued. The trend of increasing destruction and depletion of 
resources by industrialised countries would be compounded if copied by the 
developing world as it struggled to improve its own living standards.

 The report, commonly called the Brundtland Report, after Norway's prime 
minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland, who chaired the commission, led to a decision 
by the UN in December, 1989 to hold the Rio conference this year, 20 years 
after the original one in Stockholm.

 As a result, an army of civil servants and scientists worldwide were detached 
from their normal duties to make the initiative a success and provide it with a 
series of agreements which, it was hoped, would change and for the better the 
way the world looked at the environment and development.

 It was agreed that in three areas international conventions would be created 
to tackle pressing problems.

 The first was to provide a framework for saving the earth 's forests from 
destruction, the second was to limit the release of polluting gases into the 
atmosphere to slow the process of global warming, and the third was a 
bio-diversity treaty intended to save plant and animal species from becoming 
extinct before they could be studied and their useful properties extracted for 
man's use.

 Well before Rio , attempts to complete a forest convention were abandoned 
amid complicated arguments about sustainable logging, compensation for the 
Third World for lack of income from felling, and the interference of the 
industrialised north in the affairs of the undeveloped south.

 After much negotiation, a convention on climate change has been provisionally 
agreed, but only after concessions were made to the world's biggest polluter, 
the United States, which its critics say has watered down the convention so 
much that it is almost meaningless.

 The third convention, on bio-diversity, is at present on the rocks after the 
United States pulled out of it on the eve of the conference over open-ended 
financial commitments for the industrialised north and over who would own the 
property rights to genetic discoveries in forest reserves.

 There remain two other big items on the agenda: the Rio Declaration, a 
statement of principles about the way the world should be run for the benefit 
of future generations, and a long and complicated document called Agenda 21.

 It is in this last document that much of the hope of the conference remains. 
It details many of the things that governments need to do to make the world a 
better place. It covers issues such as fairer distribution of the world's 
wealth, eliminating poverty, improving health, and making the welfare of the 
environment the first consideration in any development.

 Gaping holes are visible in this document too: for example, as a result of 
the Vatican's views, birth control only gets an oblique mention in the phrase 
'demographic trends'. As a result, one of the central questions of the debate - 
population control - is not addressed.

 The optimists, not the least of whom are the British, believe that the summit 
is a starting point on which to build. The pessimists, who include most of the 
thousands of delegates from environment organisations, say the summit shows 
there is no real political will to solve the problems.

 No one yet knows how the summit will turn out. There are 14 days for bitter 
words to be spoken and acrimony to break out, or a chance to lay the foundation 
of a better future.
 