
Lost in Showbiz likes to think of itself as a paragon of modesty and shy 
understatement. It would never seek to self-aggrandise by claiming that it 
exerts a vast influence over the world of celebrity, that the famous hang on 
its every word, looking to it for guidance much as they would a guru or oracle, 
regarding its pronouncements as wisdom, spun from the purest gold, there to be 
acted upon with alacrity.

But sometimes, it does wonder. Last week, Lost in Showbiz found itself forced 
to berate the world’s celebrities for their woefully inadequate response to the 
Ebola outbreak. It noted sorrowfully that, to date, hardly anyone from the 
glittering showbiz firmament had done or said anything idiotic. Apparently 
forgetting themselves – and the vital role they’re supposed to play in any 
crisis – they had chosen to make a sober black and white fundraising video. 
Clearly panicked and desperate, people had taken matters into their own hands 
and resorted to making idiotic things up, about R&B singerAkon performing in a 
giant plastic anti-Ebola bubble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/oct/09/ebola-crisis-worlds-celebrities-kim-kardashian-akon>
 etc.

Among the celebrities Lost in Showbiz called upon to act was R&B’s best-loved 
domestic abuser Chris Brown, a man who suggested the 2011 riots might be 
quelled if people listened to his recent collaboration with pop-house DJ Benny 
Benassi, Beautiful People. It’s delighted to report that no sooner were its 
admonishing words published than a suitably chastened Chris Brown took to 
Twitter and informed his 13.7 million followers that, in his considered 
opinion, the Ebola epidemic was, in fact, “a form of population control 
<https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/521556459696312321>”. No word, alas, as 
to whether he meant that it was the judgment of God upon an over-populated 
world or a crisis engineered by shadowy operatives of The Man – just the 
suggestion that “shit is getting crazy” – but let’s not pick nits here. Let us 
instead offer profound thanks that at least one celebrity has started doing 
their job properly, and hope that others follow his lead and buck their ideas 
up.

Indeed, the only drawback to the situation was that, 9,500 retweets later, 
Brown suggested he was going to “shut up”. Lost in Showbiz can only clasp its 
head in its hands. No, Chris Brown! Don’t shut up! At the moment, you’re our 
only hope! Indeed, at risk of abusing its position as your guru or oracle – its 
pronouncements of purest spun gold to be acted upon with alacrity – Lost in 
Showbiz commands you to say more stupid things! Have you any thoughts on the 
advance of Islamic State?
 