


Edgar Davids watched this match from the stands, the large letter F on the 
wall above his head indicating the block he was seated in and, perhaps, the 
first letter of the word that must have been most prominent in his thoughts as 
he watched his new team suffer an emphatic defeat that leaves them firmly 
embedded at the bottom ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>.

A season-high crowd of 3,229 trooped into Underhill to see if the man who has 
starred for teams such as Ajax, Juventus and Barcelona could stimulate an 
upswing in the performances of the most lowly league side in the land.

Barnet <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> remain without a win in 
any competition this season and have just three points from 12 league matches. 
Undaunted, Davids declared afterwards that he was relishing the "healthy 
adventure" ahead. A repeat of last season's escape from relegation on the final 
day of the season already looks like the height of the club's realistic 
ambitions this season.

Mark Robson, the man who had been in sole charge of the team since the start 
of the season until Davids was parachuted in as "joint head coach" on Thursday, 
was a picture of desolation after the game, decrying the second-half display as 
"the worst of the season so far". He was only a fraction more upbeat about his 
new working arrangement. "It is a little strange," he said of his tandem with 
the Dutchman, "but we'll try to make it as positive as we can."

Robson, who sat in the dugout while Davids watched from on high, picked the 
team for the visit of Plymouth but henceforth it will be a joint decision and 
that is when the relationship will be tested, especially as Davids says that 
within two weeks he could be fit enough to contend for a playing place too. "I 
hope we disagree on the team selection," Davids said. "Because then we will 
have to discuss things and that is how you get depth."

Barnet look like they could do with a fit Davids on the pitch. There was an 
alarming flimsiness to this display that contributed to them being two goals 
down within 11 minutes. The first blow was struck after barely 100 seconds, as 
a bout of sloppy defending concluded with Mark Byrne conceding a penalty for a 
challenge on Luke Young. "That was 200% a good block, never a foul," said 
Davids with reason. But Rhys Griffiths made no mistake from the spot. The 
second goal was similarly soft, Maxime Blanchard nodding an Alex MacDonald 
corner into the net with little resistance from the home team.

Then things got worse for Barnet as another highly rated Dutchman's debut 
turned sour. Collins John, the former Holland international who was signed last 
month but only received his international clearance this week, was expected to 
add some sharpness and experience to a young team that struggles to score. He 
barely had a touch of the ball before having to limp off with a thigh strain in 
the 20th minute. Barnet did battle back briefly, Dave Stephens pulling a goal 
back after a Barnet corner provoked panic in the Plymouth box. For the 
remainder of the first half Barnet tried to show the tidy passing style that 
the club is striving to cultivate, but the gulf between intention and ability 
often seemed gaping. Plymouth, who always looked stronger and more savvy, made 
it 3-1 just after the hour, Paris Cowan-Hall heading into the net from a 
MacDonald free-kick.

Barnet showed flashes of menace, most notably when a header from Krystian 
Pearce had to be cleared off the line by Young. But it was not exactly against 
the run of play when Plymouth made it 4-1, Young curling a splendid free-kick 
into the top corner from 20 yards.

"It was disappointing but there were great spells in terms of how we kept the 
ball and attacked. Not enough, but some. There is potential here," Davids said.
 