
Never mind the clocks; calendars were put back in Chesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> for Barnet's visit to the 
Proact Stadium. It is six seasons since Edgar Davids played for Tottenham. Now 
39, living a mile from Barnet and taken on by the club as 
joint-head-coach-cum-captain a fortnight before, he was playing his third match 
in nine days. The Bees had not won in 12 games this season and had reclaimed 
the basement of League Two as their own. Now, with a second win in an unbeaten 
run, they are in danger of finding the escape staircase before May.
The match was a microcosm of their normal season – backs to the wall and a 
late leap to safety. The match was in its 90th goalless minute when Andy Yiadom 
tricked two defenders on the left. Before he could misplace his pass – a 
consistent Barnet failing in attack – he was brought down and Mark Byrne put 
the penalty past Richard O'Donnell. It was the goalkeeper's first call to 
serious action.

By contrast Graham Stack had a golden spell in the 10 minutes before half-time 
when Chesterfield tried screwdriver rather than hammer and had Barnet 
squealing. Three times he tipped away shots and then sawBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> to the interval with a block of 
Jack Lester's header and a sharp drop as the striker came for the rebound. 
Stack started at Arsenal. Bob Wilson, his coach there and born in Chesterfield, 
would have loved the dive at the feet.

Mark Robson said of Barnet: "We rode our luck and dropped off a bit after 
half-time but the long balls didn't hurt us [Dave Stephens was a tower of 
headed clearances] and we helped each other well." Of Davids' arrival he said: 
"He has such knowledge and understanding and, being on the field, can organise 
our shape. Everyone is learning from him." There were Cruyff turns all over the 
pitch.

Davids has lasted the full 90 minutes in all three games, in which Barnet have 
yet to concede. Protective specs glinting in the Derbyshire sun, he played 
further forward than in his "Pitbull" age, mostly off the striker, Jake Hyde, 
in a 4‑4‑1‑1 system, quick as ever to spot the right pass but also to track 
back in need. Booked for a second-half challenge, he gave the referee a look 
that said: "If that's a yellow card, I'm a Dutchman." Maybe the official, Andy 
Davies, wanted his autograph.

Davids had expected to be facing Luis Boa Morte in a battle of would-be 
talismans and rematch of old London derbies, when the Portuguese was at Fulham, 
but the 35-year-old groin was strained at training on Friday. Old playmakers 
never lose it; they just have to find their level as the game gets ever faster. 
Davids tried and failed at Crystal Palace two years ago. Boa Morte, who joined 
Chesterfield this month, googled them before agreeing.

It could be tougher under Paul Cook, who took Accrington from eighth to 14th 
last season and was appointed on Thursday in place of John Sheridan, who left 
on gardening leave. Cook was said to be taking charge on Monday but, having 
come out to be introduced, he stayed there. "We went out with a whimper in the 
second half," he said. "Performances like that won't be accepted." In this old 
mining area the players will surely soon be asked to dig deeper. "We've got to 
try to put teams to the sword," Cook added. Barnet have two of them on their 
crest.

Proact, by the way, are "integrators and cloud enablers". There is room for 
integration but the clouds need dispersing.
 