
Edgar Davids has declared he joined Barnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> to help save English football, as 
well as to set off on his own managerial career.

The former Holland midfielder stunned the sport on Thursday night when he 
announced he had agreed to become joint head coach of the Football League's 
bottom club.

Bees fans were still pinching themselves on Friday afternoon when the 
39-year-old was officially unveiled as player-manager alongside Mark Robson, 
who has been the head coach at Underhill since the start of the season.

The Barnet chairman, Tony Kleanthous, approached Davids last month, inviting 
him to visit the club's training ground – which is on the former Tottenham 
midfielder's doorstep – and eventually offering him a job.

The former Ajax, Barcelona, Juventus, Milan and Internazionale midfielder 
Davids had previously been in charge of Sunday league team Brixton United and 
kept fit by playing street soccer since leaving Crystal Palace two years ago.

He said: "When I look at the English team and I see them play, I'm not a great 
fan. I know they have talent but it's not developing right now. It needs a lot 
of work.

"I played for Barcelona, for Ajax, where it's important to develop and 
integrate young talent. In this country, they need to think about that. Invest 
in youth. I played street soccer, that's where I started. If you look at South 
America, that's why they have technical players."

The Dutchman, who is currently studying for his A licence, claimed he had 
snubbed lucrative offers to play in the Middle East and Asia and said he had no 
problem starting his managerial career at the very bottom.

"Marco van Basten did it at an amateur level and there are a lot of coaches 
that started low," he said, revealing he had won two cups with Brixton, 
although he forgot what they were called.

"We will see if I have the capabilities of reaching the highest level. Do I 
want that? I saw [Pep] Guardiola and [Frank] Rijkaard when they started and saw 
them age with grey hair. I'm too good looking for that so want to stay here."

Despite admitting he had "always been an outsider", Davids insisted he could 
forge a working relationship with Robson, who has yet to taste victory, with 
Barnet already five points adrift at the foot of League Two.

Cynics will say the club will eventually sack Robson, leaving Davids in sole 
charge. Davids said: "We could have already done that. So why wait? I believe 
Mark and I can pull it off. We will have some fights but the bottom line is to 
fight to get results."

The director of football, Paul Fairclough, who insisted Barnet did not break 
the bank to sign Davids, added: "There are cynics in football. Ninety-nine per 
cent of football clubs would have sacked their head coach by now but we have 
faith in Mark and feel he is a perfect fit for the club. It's a job for life 
for Mark with his ability as he is a highly qualified technical coach."

Davids admitted he would also like to own a club one day but, for now, was 
focused on helping Barnet avoid relegation both on and off the pitch. He said 
of League Two: "I saw it's quite physical, but I'm not going to 
under-appreciate it or undervalue it. I have respect for every level of 
football."
 