
A decade ago, Edgar Davids was one of the biggest stars in world football, 
tigerishly patrolling the Juventus midfield and sharing the cover of the latest 
incarnation of the Fifa computer game with Ryan Giggs and Roberto Carlos. 
Chelsea had just tried to bring him to London, only to be told by the Juve 
president that "if Abramovich offered the moon we would still not sell him". On 
Sunday, he will turn out in the Conference as player-manager ofBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet>, in their televised game against 
Wrexham.

It is one of the least likely marriages in sport, between a team that has been 
in or below the fourth tier of English football for all but one year of their 
history and a man who played for some of the greatest clubs in Europe – first 
Ajax, where he won the Champions League in 1995, then Milan, Juve, 
Internazionale and Barcelona – before arriving in England in 2005, aged 32.

At the time, it was assumed his time at Tottenham would be a coda to a career 
of symphonic success, but instead of hanging up his boots, Davids hung on to 
them – even if, before his arrival at Barnet, he managed just six competitive 
games (all for Crystal Palace) in four years.

Having been won over by London life while at Spurs – "I love London. It is 
such a melting pot. Everything is here," he once said – Davids had settled in 
Hadley Wood, the heart of Hertfordshire's footballer belt, when the Barnet 
chairman, Tony Kleanthous, first called. If handing control of your team – and 
a place on it – to an unemployed 39-year-old with no professional coaching 
experience seems desperate, so was the position Barnet were in at the time: 11 
games played, none won, three drawn. A year ago on Saturday, Davids arrived.

"We'd heard a rumour about two weeks earlier – and then he just turned up," 
says Graham Stack, the former Arsenal goalkeeper. "When he first came, a lot of 
us were like, wow. He told us we had to call him "mister". It felt like I was 
back at school, but I think that's the Dutch alternative to "gaffer" or 
"coach". It's not him trying to be high and mighty, but we didn't realise that 
at the time. I think a few of the younger lads were a bit intimidated and a bit 
scared, but, as time has gone on, the lads have realised he's only trying to 
improve us as players."

Over the final 35 games of last season, Barnet earned 48 points, League Two's 
12th-best tally. But the damage had already been done and they were relegated 
on goal difference after losing three of their last four games. Over the 
summer, there were offers from clubs higher up the football pyramid, but Davids 
chose instead to help Barnet manage the move from the increasingly dilapidated 
Underhill to The Hive, their impressive new training and playing facility. He 
certainly didn't stay for the money – they're not paying him.

"I think he sees it as a period of self-development," Kleanthous says. "We've 
provided a platform where he can develop as a coach. We work around him and it 
gives him room to work on all his other commitments. Edgar's very much his own 
man. I pretty much just let him get on with it. He wants control over all the 
football stuff and he has that."

Davids's assistant is his childhood friend Ulrich Landvreugd. "I met him when 
we were 10 or 11 years old," Landvreugd says. "We were at first opponents. He 
was the best player in his team and I was the most talented player of my team. 
Then we played on the street together, and visited all the indoor halls, where 
we would play together, 2v2." They both joined the Ajax academy, one destined 
for international stardom, the other for a string of knee injuries and 
premature retirement. Davids became famous; Landvreugd became a coach. Many 
years later they are again on the same team.

"He is really a perfectionist," Landvreugd says. "If you do something wrong 
you have to do it again and again and again. Some trainers I've seen in the 
past, you do something and it doesn't go well they say, 'OK, next time better'. 
But, with Edgar, you have to do it again. He wants to make players better.

"He's teaching the players, but he's learning himself also. Last year he 
proved that he can make a team better, but when he had the possibility to go 
higher up he said, 'No, I'm not going yet'. He wants to learn every aspect as a 
manager and a coach. He's here for the experience. He didn't know if he really 
liked to be a manager, but he's still here, so I think he likes it very much."

It is a mutually beneficial arrangement: Davids gets to hone his managerial 
skills; Barnet get to bask, for free, in the reflected glory of their 
association with a genuine footballing superstar. A new sponsorship deal with 
Toshiba – which will be announced on Sunday – is evidence of the potential 
benefit.

"Brazil trained at our ground before they played England at Wembley," 
Kleanthous recalls. "I remember I was standing, talking to Edgar, as their 
coach pulled up, and you've got the Brazil team getting off the bus. The first 
one that comes up was Ronaldinho, and I was standing there, while Edgar Davids 
and Ronaldinho were having a chat about football, thinking, this is 
unbelievable. This is Barnet Football Club's training ground. It's just 
unbelievable."

Results this season have not been entirely enjoyable because, after an 
impressive start, Barnet have slipped to 11th, already 13 points behind the 
division's runaway leaders, Cambridge United. "Our target every year, in every 
division, is the play-offs," Kleanthous says. "We've failed miserably in the 
last few years, but that's the target."

Davids is unaccustomed to failure, but at Barnet his will to win is not always 
enough to guarantee it. "Trust me, he doesn't like losing," Stack says. "And 
that's one thing that I love about him really, because having won everything 
he's won, and achieved everything he's achieved, the fact he's come to Barnet 
in the Conference and still you see him after games totally lose the plot – to 
me, that's the sign of a winner and that's the sign of a leader. He just 
doesn't like getting beat."

Those who remember Davids being sent home from Euro 96 after telling Dutch 
radio that his side's coach, Guus Hiddink, should "take his head out of 
players' asses so he can see better" will not be surprised to hear that he can 
still dish out the occasional verbal volley. "He doesn't have a reputation as a 
pitbull for nothing – it's well deserved," says Kleanthous. "I'd say he's quite 
a confrontational man," deadpans Stack.

If Barnet represents the start of a new career in coaching, it will surely see 
the end of Davids's time as a player. He appears determined to say farewell to 
each position in person and has turned out for the club in attack, midfield, at 
left-back and, most recently, at centre-half. "He told me he played there in 
the Champions League, so, if he can say that, he can play there for me," says 
David Stephens, his partner in defence.

"He reads the game well," Stack says. "Sometimes he's overly keen to go and 
win the ball, so keen that he gives away some needless free-kicks, but when he 
makes mistakes he takes responsibility. I don't know how quick he was before, 
but you'd never in a million years put him down as a 40-year-old."

"He's the most all-round player, with the most technical abilities," says 
Landvreugd. "He's very, very important for the team. His personality on the 
pitch means, even if he's not playing well, he makes other players play 10% or 
20% better. You can still say he's one of the best players." And if he is not? 
"We're always open. You know, we're friends and I think, if you're friends, you 
have to say the truth always to each other."

The only apparent downside of Barnet's deal with Davids is a lack of security 
about the future. "Edgar does what Edgar does," Kleanthous says. "He could be 
here today, he could be gone tomorrow. The way I look at it is, we are 
fortunate to have someone of his pedigree available to help our growth. We've 
not said we'll do this for a year, or two. What we agreed together is that 
we'll just carry on as long as it suits us to carry on. At the moment, it's 
suited us both to carry on."
 