
Perhaps Edy Reja would have been better off asking for less time to put things 
right atLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio>. After leading the 
club to a first away win in four months for his first game in charge, Reja 
requested that he be given a month to settle in before people started to make 
judgments about his impact. A week later, his 100% record became a 50% one.

Reja still has a couple of weeks before his self-imposed judgment day, but 
even if it were brought forward the verdict would still most likely be a 
positive one. Perfection is long since off the agenda at Lazio, and there is no 
shame inlosing 3-1 away to a Palermo side 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LTcW1KdXEpY> who have not been beaten at Stadio 
Renzo Barbera in almost a year. The only objective set for Reja when he joined 
was to keep this side in Serie A, and with all but one of those beneath them 
losing, Lazio remain two points clear of the relegation places.

Besides, this was the week in which the new manager's PR offensive began in 
earnest. On Thursday he threw open the doors to the Formello training ground 
for the first time this year – inviting fans in to watch a friendly against the 
non-league side Nuova Tor Tre Teste. Close to 2,000 took up the offer and were 
treated to a 9-0 win. Less than two weeks ago, of course, a group roughly half 
that size had found their way into the same training ground, but on that 
occasion doors had to be kicked open and the entertainment consisted largely of 
setting off firecrackers and protesting against the club's directors.

But if Reja has instituted an open-door policy with fans he has also extended 
it to his players – asking them for their suggestions of what could be done to 
help reverse the slide. "In fact they even chose the formation from among those 
I proposed," declared Reja last week, though the fact that they plumped for his 
preferred 3‑5-2 does beg the question of how many options were actually put 
forward.

Most crucially, his arrival paved the way for the return of Cristian Ledesma, 
the Argentinian midfielder who had been frozen out by the president, Claudio 
Lotito, and whose attempt to have his contract rescinded was rejected by a 
tribunal last month. Ledesma is reported to have wept when handed his 
first-team shirt for the previous weekend's 2-0 win over Parma, his first 
appearance of the season, but many of theBiancocelesti's fans may also have 
shed tears of joy.

According to goal.com 
<http://www.goal.com/en/news/1717/editorial/2010/02/19/1797947/goal-lazio-with-cristian-ledesma-back-lazio-are-a-team-again>
, Lazio have averaged 1.61 points per game with Ledesma in the side since he 
joined in 2006. Without him that figure drops to 1.15 per game. A composed 
presence in the middle of the park, his vision and ability to pick a pass have 
long been at the heart of Lazio's best attacking manoeuvres and yesterday, in 
his second game back, he was the consensus pick among reporters as the losing 
team's man of the match.

But all is still not rosy in Reja's garden. There is a sense among many that 
most of the players brought in during January – notably the defenders Giuseppe 
Biava and André Dias – did not represent any real upgrade on those already 
within the squad, and the latter group had hardly excelled over the first half 
of the season. The attack has been abysmal. Although the January capture of 
Sergio Floccari has undoubtedly been a boost, Lazio have scored just 20 goals 
in 25 league games. Only Livorno, with 16, have fewer.

This despite boasting a forward who is apparently among the most sought-after 
talents in Europe. Just a few short months ago Mauro Zárate was being touted as 
the answer to all Diego Maradona's problems with Argentina, and as recently as 
January teams including Arsenal or Liverpool were being linked with bids in 
excess of £35m for the player, yet one of Reja's first acts in charge of the 
club was to drop him to the bench. Zárate eventually played the last half hour 
of the win over Parma and scored the second goal. That, though, was only his 
third of the season. In his 22nd appearance.

"Mauro is a great player, but he is a little like [Napoli's Ezequiel] Lavezzi: 
he rarely passes the ball. He needs to put himself at the service of the team," 
announced Reja on Radio Kiss Kiss last week, kicking off a back and forth with 
the player's older brother, who also happens to be his agent. "If Lazio feel 
that they do not need him, then that is very simple," sniffed Sergio Zárate. 
"We just need the coach to tell president Claudio Lotito and get him to rescind 
the contract."

Such words are not exactly surprising from Sergio, but only because he has 
shown an openly belligerent attitude towards the club from pretty much the 
moment Lazio completed the €20m signing of his brother last May. Between 
demanding better pay and ensuring that his brother is regularly linked with the 
biggest clubs in Europe – how real that interest from Arsenal and Liverpool 
ever was is open to speculation – Sergio has done a fine job of keeping Mauro's 
name in the papers but rather a worse one of winning him friends at Lazio.

Whether that has had a negative impact on Mauro's performances is, again, a 
matter for debate, but certainly the player has looked a shadow of the talent 
who scored 13 while on loan from Al-Sadd last season. The absences of Ledesma 
and Goran Pandev cannot have helped, but Zárate has too often looked 
uninterested and unwilling to put himself out for the team.

Reja must find a way of changing that. Yesterday he restored Zárate to the 
starting line-up but was rewarded with another limp display that will have done 
nothing to change his opinion of the player. Indeed, it was fitting that 
Lazio's only goal should come in the end from Aleksandar Kolarov, a wing-back 
who has now scored as many league goals as Zárate this season.

More has to be expected from a player who last season showed himself to be 
more than capable. Ledesma's recent past, after all, suggests that Reja is not 
the only one who should fear Lotito's judgment.

Talking points

• That win over Lazio moved Palermo to within a point of fourth place after 
Napoli drew 0-0 with last-placed Siena and Sampdoria were also held to a 
scoreless draw by nine-manInternazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale>. The Rosanero were fully 
deserving yesterday, never looking troubled after Abel Hernández's first-minute 
opener, even if the penalty award for the second looked questionable. Any 
Champions League ambitions, however, must still be tempered by their woeful 
away form. Of the 40 points Palermo have accrued so far, 31 have been at home.

• A seventh straight league win, this time 1-0 at home to Catania 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93k4tcUQgxk> secured through a Mirko Vucinic 
goal, moved Roma to within five points of Inter. Claudio Ranieri has been very 
firm all week in stating that the Europa League remains the Giallorossi's 
"primary objective", but that might just be because he's as bored as the rest 
of us with certain hacks' insistence of asking "are you now the anti-Inter?" at 
every opportunity.

• Milan, of course, are the other candidates for that dubious honour, and will 
leapfrog Roma if they can win their game in hand against Fiorentina on 
Wednesday. Yesterday night they got back to winning ways with a 2-0 triumph at 
Bari secured through volleyed goals, the first of which,from Marco Borriello, 
is well worth checking out <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWcF6Fnn_B0>.

• Few would have picked out Juventus as the saviours of Italian football a few 
weeks ago, but that is a little how it feels after their win over Ajax, the 
only victory for any of Serie A's four representatives in European competition 
last week. A 2-1 win overBologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> 
at the weekend means they have now won three games in a row and find themselves 
back in fourth as a result. There is still a long way to go for Alberto 
Zaccheroni's side, of course, but if nothing else Antonio Candreva, who got the 
second, looks to have been a savvy addition in January.

• I've steered clear of Inter as there will be plenty of discussion of Jose 
Mourinho's men elsewhere in these pages over the next day or so, but suffice to 
say they had a lively warm-up for Wednesday's meeting with Chelsea. Walter 
Samuel and Ivan Cordoba had both been sent off within the first 40 minutes of 
their 0‑0 draw with Samp, but it has to be said that while the visitors too 
were eventually reduced to 10 men, they rarely looked like conceding even when 
they were two men short.

Results: Atalanta 0-1 Chievo, Bari 0-2 Milan, Bologna 1-2 Juventus, Cagliari 
2-0 Parma, Fiorentina 2-1 Livorno, Genoa 3-0 Udinese, Inter 0-0 Sampdoria,
Palermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> 3-1 Lazio, Roma 1-0 
Catania, Siena 0-0 Napoli
 