
Aston Villa’s manager Roberto Di Matteo has called for his side to go back to 
basics after crashing out of the EFL Cup with a 3-1 defeat to League TwoLuton 
Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown>.

The Villa manager, who has now lost his first two competitive games since 
taking charge of the club, saw the hangover from relegation out of the Premier 
League continue as they were deservedly knocked out by the Hatters.

Villa dominated the opening 20 minutes, hitting the frame of the goal twice 
and taking the lead through Jordan Ayew’s 13th-minute goal. But Luton levelled 
nine minutes before the interval through Jake Gray before Cameron McGeehan put 
Luton ahead early in the second half and Jores Okore comically put through his 
own net in the 66th minute.

Stevenage’s Ben Kennedy puts Championship Ipswich out of EFL Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/stevenages-ben-kennedy-puts-championship-ipswich-out-of-efl-cup>
Di Matteo said: “We went deservedly ahead, and then let Luton back into the 
game as second half they dominated us and we looked disjointed as a team.

“It wasn’t a team performance, also difficult to explain from first half to 
second half how we changed so much.”

Villa are without a win in any competition since February 6 and Di Matteo 
admitted the team need to toughen up mentally.

The former Chelsea manager added: “Certainly there’s some fragility there, 
because after we conceded the equaliser you could see they were a little bit 
nervous, but I didn’t expect in the second half we would play like that.

“We have to work together as a team and try to get a win and grow their 
confidence. We let ourselves down and lose games, so we probably have to go 
back to basics, defend well, defend our box and take our chances. We did create 
chances but we need to make sure we don’t concede so easily.”

Luton manager Nathan Jones was thrilled with his players. He said: “I’m very, 
very proud, I thought they were excellent.

“We started very slowly but once we realised we could affect a football game 
againstAston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>, I 
thought we were excellent, especially second half.

“They showed they could competed first half but second half they showed a real 
desire to win a football match and I thought we were excellent.

“We had a little bit of fortune at times, they hit the woodwork, but it was 
slim margins.”

Luton Town were rewarded with a home tie against Leeds United, who defeated 
Fleetwood Town 5-4 on penalties.QPR, the night’s other victors from the spot 
when they defeated Swindon after a 2-2 draw, got a home game againstRochdale.

Burton Albion got themselves a plum draw for the second round of the League 
Cup, newly branded as theEFL Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup> 
from this season, when they were handed a home game againstLiverpool.

Albion, managed by an Anfield old boy Nigel Clough, defeated Bury 3-2 after 
extra time and started their first ever season in the Championship only on 
Saturday against another of his former clubs, Nottingham Forest, and lost it 
4-3.

Liverpool, eight times winners of the League Cup, the last of them in 2012 
under Kenny Dalglish, got to the final last year and lost it on penalties to 
Manchester City after a 1-1 draw.

Chelsea will host one of the Bristol clubs at Stamford Bridge – depending on 
the winner of the Bristol Rovers v Cardiff City game on Thursday, as the draw 
was seeded.Newcastle United will take on Cheltenham Town, who provided the 
upset of Tuesday with a 1-0 home win over Charlton.Everton will face Yeovil Town
 for the first time in a competitive fixture andSunderland get to face lowly 
Shrewsbury Town, which may provoke unhappy memories for the new manager David 
Moyes, who lost a third-round FA Cup tie against them with Everton 13 years ago.

Millwall face Nottingham Forest, Accrington play Burnley in a Lancashire derby 
and Norwich City, the 1985 winners when it was called the Milk Cup, will face 
Coventry City, Crystal Palace will host Blackpool and Watford will take on 
Gillingham at Vicarage Road.

Full draw: QPR v Rochdale

Scunthorpe v Cardiff/Bristol City

Watford v Gillingham

Peterborough v Swansea

Everton v Yeovil

Millwall v Nottm Forest

Sunderland v Shrewsbury

Luton v Leeds

Chelsea v Bristol Rovers/Bristol City

Burton v Liverpool

Blackburn v Crewe

Accrington v Burnley

Crystal Palace v Blackpool

Morecambe v Bournemouth

Preston v Oldham

Oxford v Brighton

Reading v MK Dons

Fulham v Middlesbrough

Newcastle v Cheltenham

Exeter v Hull

Derby v Carlisle

Northampton v West Brom

Wolves v Cambridge

Stevenage v Stoke

Norwich v Coventry

Ties to be played week commencing August 22
 