
El Nino, the cyclic Pacific heatwave that clocked up more than $100 billion of 
damage to the world in 1998, has not finished yet. More than 90 per cent of 
penguin chicks and seal pups to be born in the Antarctic spring could perish in 
the knock-on effects of a few months of higher ocean temperatures 5,000 miles 
away, Antarctic scientists warn.

The puzzling phenomenon of El Nino called 'The Child' by Peruvian fishermen 
because they notice it first near Christmas when the anchovy harvest fails 
disturbs ocean patterns and blocks the seasonal arrival of nutrients off coasts.

It means that plankton in polar waters have a smaller food supply, which in 
turn hits the krill and other small Antarctic surface-dwellers.

'In a bad year they die out in huge numbers. Two years later the penguins in 
South Georgia have a mass mortality of chicks,' says Lloyd Peck, of the British 
Antarctic Survey in Cambridge. Scientists at British research bases at South 
Georgia and other Antarctic sites have observed death rates among penguin 
chicks of 98 or 99 per cent after an El Nino.

Professor Peck said: 'What you find is that two or three years after an El 
Nino, you will be counting chicks getting close to fledging. And then over a 
two-week period they will all die. The parents just can't get enough food in 
for them.

'It happens in seals too. The fur seal pups don't make it.

'I've been on Signy Island two years after an El Nino and we have had one 
chick survive out of just over 1,000 we were monitoring. We only had five seal 
pups on Signy that year.'

El Nino formally known as the Southern Oscillation is a huge blister of 
unusually warm sea in the eastern Pacific which affects both ocean circulation 
and wind patterns, disrupting climate rhythms at huge distances.

The event that began at the end of 1997 has been blamed for lethal heatwaves 
in India and Texas, late monsoons, fires in the Indonesian rainforests, floods 
in Bangladesh and China, mudslides in California and harvest failures in Africa.

It has also been blamed for the 'bleaching' of coral reefs, for a dramatic 
rise in diseases such as malaria, cholera and dengue fever, for Hurricane Mitch 
which killed thousands in Central America, for an ice storm in the Southern US 
and even for plagues of rattlesnakes.

But it hasn't finished yet. The Antarctic is already under threat from 
intensive commercial fishing. The albatross which lives only in the southern 
ocean has been destroyed in huge numbers by fishermen's 'long lines' of 
thousands of baited hooks, and several whale species were brought to near 
extinction by commercial catchers in the first six decades of the century.

El Nino is a natural cycle, though it could become more frequent with 
human-triggered global warming.

Scavenging birds flourish after El Nino. Penguin and seal populations build up 
again. 'Even if there are bad El Ninos, there is still enough recruitment from 
the good years that the colony survives,' he said.

'The thing we have a real problem with for removing species are the 
long-liners. That's something outside the natural phenomenon. And it does look 
like we could lose albatross species.'
 