
For half an hour it appeared as if England were incapable of actually beating 
Scotland, let alone running up the points required to give themselves a 
fighting chance of making theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> final. Time will tell whether 
the 26-point margin of victory is enough but, if nothing else, this was at 
least a victory for Wayne Bennett’s side that keeps their hopes of progression 
alive.

Scotland were comfortably beaten 54-12 in Hull by Australia last week, but for 
most of the opening 40 minutes in Coventry, England looked anything like the 
side tipped by many to reach the final at Anfield.

Crucially though, they eventually found their rhythm – and, in the process, 
Bennett will have learned a few lessons as he looks to finalise his team for 
their must-win game against Australia in London. George Williams excelled at 
half-back and now looks the favourite to partner Gareth Widdop while Mark 
Percival and Liam Farrell also look to have done enough to be given a chance 
against the Kangaroos.

Bennett was unimpressed, telling the BBC: “We were bad, we weren’t good first 
20. We got closer to what I expect in the second half. I want them to play to 
their ability and they were a way off that. They have got a bit of thinking to 
do, they need to have a look at themselves.”

Scotland were 22-0 down to Australia after 15 minutes in their opening fixture 
but they were much more composed here and the better side by some distance.

England briefly threatened in the opening minutes but, as the influence of the 
Scotland captain, Danny Brough, grew on the game, the Bravehearts quickly got 
on top, taking a deserved lead when a wonderful pass from Brough created the 
space for Kane Linnett to dive over.

That should have been the catalyst for England to wake up; instead, they fell 
further behind. It was again their right side the Scots targeted, this time 
gaining success when the Warrington wing Matty Russell produced an incredible 
piece of individual play to touch down in the corner and double Scotland’s lead 
as the prospect of a major upset began to grow.

Even though Brough – the Dewsbury-born half-back who was constantly overlooked 
for the England side during Steve McNamara’s tenure – could not convert, his 
reaction to Russell’s try said it all: Scotland were not just in front, they 
were in control.

As half-time approached, England eventually managed to spring into life when 
Luke Gale’s delicate pass close to the line sent Elliott Whitehead charging 
over, with the scrum-half’s conversion narrowing the gap to two.

The balance of play begin to shift in England’s favour and the Gale-Whitehead 
partnership bore further fruit when the Castleford half-back teed up Whitehead 
for his and England’s second.

Whether England deserved the four-point lead opened up by Gale’s second 
conversion mattered little but having somehow forged an advantage at half-time 
their attention now had to turn to not just holding on but running up a 
comfortable margin of victory.

England’s fluidity drastically improved after half-time and Percival and Ryan 
Hall crossed for straightforward tries.

Brough was sent to the sin-bin just before the hour mark and that enabled 
England to run in tries through Jermaine McGillvary, Gale and Farrell which, 
come the conclusion of the group stage, could prove crucial if points 
difference comes into play.

Steve McCormack, the Scotland coach, told the BBC: “I am really proud we 
tested them. In the second half the sin bin didn’t help but I am really proud.”
 