
Massimo Maccarone couldn’t wait for Christmas. In fact he couldn’t even wait 
until the end of the game. There were more than 40 minutes left in Empoli’s 
final match of 2015, away to Bologna, when he stuck the ball in the net for the 
second time. He celebrated by sprinting over the sideline, swiping a beer out 
of the hands of an opposition fan andhelping himself to a swig 
<http://video.repubblica.it/edizione/bologna/maccarone-segna-e-si-fa-una-birra/222744/221982>
.

It was not an entirely spontaneous act. The spectator was part of a group 
watching the game with Maccarone’s old friend, Thomas Locatelli. That pair had 
played together at Siena in the mid-2000s and would sometimes drink together in 
their free time. Every now and then they would even hop in a car and make the 
two-and-a-half hour drive to Bologna - where Locatelli had spent the best years 
of his career - to visit one of their favourite pubs, The Old Bridge.

Internazionale’s Serie A lead cut to one point after defeat by Lazio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/internazionale-lazio-serie-a-roundup>
They intended to meet up after Saturday’s match, so why not get the party 
started a little early? Besides, what could be more festive than a Big Mac and 
a beer? “It was a symbolic and beautiful gesture,” proclaimed Maccarone 
afterwards. “They are Bologna fans but friendship goes beyond.”

A lovely sentiment, even if it is hard to believe that Locatelli and chums 
could have behaved so generously if this match had taken place two months 
earlier. Bologna were in dire straits by the end of October, with only six 
points from 10 games, but have since been revitalised bythe appointment of 
Roberto Donadoni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/07/bologna-roberto-donadoni-napoli>
. Despite Maccarone’s two goals condemning them to a 3-2 defeat on Saturday, 
they will finish the yearfive points clear of the relegation zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
6 AC Milan 17 3 28 
7 Sassuolo 16 4 27 
8 Empoli 17 1 27 
9 Atalanta 17 0 24 
10 Lazio 17 -6 23 
If that is a praise-worthy achievement, then it is high time that we also took 
notice ofEmpoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/empoli>. This was their 
fourth consecutive league win – the first time in club history that they have 
achieved such a run in the top flight. It propelled them up to seventh place, 
equal with their best-ever league finish.

Such feats become all the more noteworthy when you consider what this team 
lost over the summer. Maurizio Sarri, the manager who guided Empoli up toSerie A
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> and then kept them there 
last season, departed for Napoli. Worse, he took two of his best players with 
him. Mirko Valdifiori was the club’s joint-leading assist man in 2014-15, while 
Elseid Hysaj had emerged as one of the most talented young full-backs in the 
division.

That was not all. The centre-back Daniele Rugani, fresh from his first senior 
Italy call-up (albeit he never made it off the bench), had been purchased by 
Juventus during the winter transfer window before being loaned back to Empoli 
until the end of the campaign. Now he, too, would leave to join up with the
Bianconeri.

To compensate for such departures, Empoli relied mostly on loans and free 
signings. They made a single seven-figure purchase, paying €4m to acquire 
Riccardo Saponara from Milan. Although a wise investment in a player with bags 
of potential, even this felt like treading water in the immediate term. The 
22-year-oldtrequartista had already been with the club on loan for the second 
half of last season.

It did not look like a recipe for progress. But Empoli have moved from 
strength to strength. Saponara was electric through the first part of the 
season and when he picked up a ban that would keep him out for most of October, 
another creative talent emerged. Piotr Zielinski is even younger than his 
team-mate, but just as capable of unpicking a defence.

Now the pair are beginning to dovetail together, Saponara terrorising 
defenders with his runs while Zielinski seeks out the through-ball. Both of 
them benefit hugely from the hard work put in by Maccarone up front.

At 36, the striker knows what he is and what he isn’t. He might never have 
made good on Steve McClaren’s claim that he was “the Italian player most 
similar to [Alessandro] Del Piero”, but Maccarone has achieved a longevity and 
a consistent (if unspectacular) goalscoring productivity that many players 
would envy.

He remains a deceptively technical player, more subtle than his muscular 
approach to the game would have you believe. That contrast was visible in his 
goals against Bologna: the first a delicate touch to convert a super chipped 
pass from Zielinski, and the second a thumping header.

Both were equally valuable, sealing the three points just as his brace against 
Carpi had helped to do a week earlier. Before Maccarone could slip away to sup 
some more beer with Locatelli, he found himself fielding questions about 
whether Empoli might make it into Europe. “We cannot think about that until we 
have reached our objective for this season,” he said, “which remains safety 
from relegation.”

The notion that Empoli would even be mentioned in such a conversation might 
have seemed ludicrous at the start of the campaign. But theirs is hardly the 
only unlikely twist in what has been a gloriously unpredictable first act to 
this season.

Take Sassuolo, for example. Their wage bill is little more than a quarter that 
of Milan, and yet, if they had played, and won, their postponed match at home 
to Torino they would now be ahead of theRossoneri. As it is, they sit one point 
behind with a game in hand.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Inter Milan 17 12 36 
2 Fiorentina 17 18 35 
3 Napoli 17 18 35 
4 Juventus 17 14 33 
5 Roma 17 14 32 
Meanwhile, Serie A’s top five teams are separated by a total of four points. 
Few would have predicted that Inter would finish the year on top of the pile, 
but even fewer might have guessed that they would let the opportunity for a 
greater advantage slip bylosing at home to Lazio on Sunday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/internazionale-lazio-serie-a-roundup>
. TheBiancocelesti had collected a paltry two points from their previous seven 
league games.

We cannot even say Inter were unlucky. They fell behind to an exceptional 
strike from Antonio Candreva, but that arrived in the fifth minute and by 
half-time Roberto Mancini’s team had failed to put a single shot on target in 
response. Although Inter did equalise after the interval, they failed to press 
on and were punished when Candreva punctured them again, forcing the ball home 
after his initial penalty was saved.

If that was not ugly enough, Felipe Melo – the same player who had given away 
the spot-kick – made sure that the year would finish on an even lower note, 
planting a foot into the throat of Lucas Biglia and drawing a straight red card 
for his trouble.

“Sometimes you can win without playing well,” reflected a rueful Mancini at 
full-time. “But not while giving away gifts like we did. We dressed up like 
Santa Claus and then we ruined Christmas.”

Only for themselves, of course. The likes of Napoli, Fiorentina and Roma were 
delighted to be brought back to within touching distance of the top. All of 
Italian football, though, now has one eye on the Juventus team that closed out 
the year with a seventh consecutive league win. A team that now rests just 
three points away from first place.

As unpredictable as this season has been, there are plenty of people who 
already believe that they can foresee its inevitable conclusion.

 Talking points

• Juventus, to be fair, did not find life as straightforward as they wanted it 
to beaway to Carpi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/carpi-juventus-serie-a-report-mandzukic-pogba>
. After falling behind to a Marco Borriello goal, the champions rallied to lead 
3-1, only to then let the nerves back in as Leonardo Bonucci jabbed the ball 
into his own net in injury time. Moments later, Lorenzo Lollo had a chance to 
level the scores from three yards out but fluffed his lines. It was enough to 
make Massimiliano Allegri rip his jacket off in disgust 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/678572528961503233>. He had 
seen his team throw away two points at home to Frosinone in September, and for 
a moment feared history was about to repeat.

• If Juve’s defending toward the end of that Frosinone game was inexcusable, 
then what word can we possibly use todescribe their new Christmas song 
<https://www.facebook.com/528713460508794/videos/995653883814747/>?

• Among the most powerful images of the weekend was that of Alessandro 
Florenzi sprinting to embrace Rudi García after scoring Roma’s opening goal in 
their 2-0 win over Genoa, but the manager’s position remains under threat. The 
club’s owner, James Pallotta, denied reports that he had met with José Mourinho 
but told Il Messaggero that: “whatever decision I make can never be based on 
the result of a single match”. He is said to favour a change, and would find 
considerable support from fans who believe that the team has become too 
predictable under the Frenchman, but some club directors remain convinced that 
Garcia can turn things around. Complicating the picture further is the question 
of whether an adequate replacement could be found in the middle of the season. 
Luciano Spalletti seems a more likely option than Mourinho, but no doubt we 
will get a clearer picture in the coming days.

• Beyond the three points, there was at least one further bright spot for Roma 
on Sunday: a goal for the 18-year-old striker Sadiq Umar. TheGiallorossi were 
reported to have paid €500,000 to sign him on loan from Spezia in the summer, 
with a further €2.5m required to make the deal permanent. The sporting 
director, Walter Sabatini, declared at full-time that he was already worth 
twice that figure, which might be overstretching it, but after scoring 13 times 
in 10 games for Roma’s youth team he was already one to keep an eye on before 
this weekend.

• Analogy of the week belongs to Roberto Mancini. Asked how good Inter were 
this season, he described them as “a Fiat 500. But the latest model, the 
slightly bigger one.” When a subsequent interviewer asked him to frame Juventus 
in that context, he called them “a Mercedes station wagon”.

• Two more goals for Gonzalo Higuaín, who now has six (six!) more than anybody 
else in the division. Marek Hamsik got one, too, ending his longest ever Serie 
A drought (1,392 minutes) with a penalty that just barely sneaked over the line 
after crashing down off the crossbar.

• It probably won’t surprise you to know that Juventus collected the most 
points of any Serie A team in this calendar year. But my guess is that many 
would not realise that Fiorentina will finish up second inthose notional 
standings <https://mobile.twitter.com/OptaPaolo/status/678912434682376193>. The 
Viola finished out the year with a victory and anotherfine goal from Josip 
Ilicic <https://vine.co/v/iKnuAuAhdp9>.

• Vincenzo Montella finally has his first win as Sampdoria’s manager and, 
incredibly, Antonio Cassano played an important part, leading the line and 
setting up the first goal despite appearing to carry more than a few extra 
pounds around with him. That said, even Fantantonio in his pomp would have been 
proud of the finish that his 20-year-old team-mate Dávid Ivan came up withfor 
the winning goa 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x3isr1g_2-0-david-ivan-goal-italy-serie-a-20-12-2015-sampdoria-2-0-us-palermo_sport>
l. And besides, I’m not much one to talk when it comes to waistlines. I’m off 
to eat my panettone. Buon Natale a tutti. See you in the new year.

Results Atalanta 1-3 Napoli, Bologna 2-3 Empoli, Carpi 2-3 Juventus, 
Fiorentina 2-0 Chievo, Frosinone 2-4 Milan, Inter 1-2 Lazio, Roma 2-0 Genoa, 
Sampdoria 2-0 Palermo Torino 0-1 Udinese, Verona 1-1 Sassuolo
 