
Wayne Bennett will turn England into a side capable of winning the Four 
Nations virtually overnight, Cooper Cronk and Matt Gillett have warned their 
Kangaroos teammates.

Bennett will take the reins of England for the first time in the October 29 
clash against New Zealand at Huddersfield and the supercoach will have plenty 
of motivation after he was overlooked for the Australian coaching gig for Mal 
Meninga.

Seven-times premiership winning coach Bennett will have another match against 
Scotland in Coventry a week later to fine tune his side before taking on 
Australia as a head coach for the first time at London’s Olympic Stadium on 
November 13.

Stevie Ward hopes less is more after surprise England call before Four Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/england-rugby-league-four-nations-stevie-ward>
England have never won the Four Nations tournament, nor its predecessor the 
Tri Nations. But at home under Bennett, 2016 shapes as arguably their best 
chance.

“The one thing that Wayne Bennett does with all the football teams that he 
coaches is that he makes you play for your teammates,” Cronk told AAP.

“He makes you work hard and not let your teammates down.

“When you have that type of under-culture, all the skills can just find their 
way through.

“‘Super competitive’ are probably the words that come to mind when you think 
of Wayne Bennett coached teams and I’m sure England will be no different.”

Bennett turned the struggling Broncos into grand finalists in one season upon 
his return to Brisbane last year.

Star Broncos back-rower Gillett knows better than most what Bennett is capable 
of.

“He was pretty good at the Broncs in terms of turning things around quickly 
just by being simple,” Gillett said.

“He sat down with each player at the Broncos and I suppose he will do the same 
with England, sit each of them down and talk about what he wants them to buy 
into.

“If they all buy into what he has got to say and the direction he wants to go 
they will go a long way and they will be a true threat.”

In players such as Sam Burgess, James Graham and Gareth Widdop, Bennett has a 
number of NRL hardened players to lean on.

There has been talk Bennett has been busy attempting to entice players such as 
Brett and Josh Morris and Chris McQueen, who can qualify for England through 
their grandparents, to switch allegiance.

That will be confirmed, or otherwise later next week when the England squad is 
named.

Either way, Gillett believes the England will be tough to beat.

“The team that Wayne will choose will be competitive and he will make sure 
they do all the little things, all the tough plays right, which if you have a 
full team of that they are very hard to stop,” Gillett said.
 