
It was the ideal scenario for England at Stratford on Sunday. Australia had 
already qualified for the Four Nations final and England just needed to draw 
against them to join them in the final following the stunning and surprising 
lift they were given whenScotland held the Kiwis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/new-zealand-scotland-four-nations-match-report>
. What more could they have asked for? Ten years after Great Britain did it and 
21 years after England last did it, this was their chance to beat the Kangaroos.
But they were beaten, 36-18 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/13/england-v-australia-four-nations-live>
.

Australia simply too good as England are denied place in Four Nations final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/england-australia-four-nations-match-report>
Being cynical is tiresome and pessimism is tiring, but England supporters find 
it hard to be hopeful. Many of the 35,000 fans at the Olympic Stadium (stop 
with this “London Stadium” nonsense) were just waiting for England to shoot 
themselves in the foot or for the Kangaroos to wake up and cut loose. We got 
both, sadly.

The feeling of “here we go again” only kicked in seconds before half time, 
when Josh Hodgson committed the cardinal sin of missing touch with a penalty – 
the second such mistake in the half, following Gareth Widdop’s howler – and Sam 
Burgess was penalised for a careless challenge that gifted Australia two points 
after the hooter. It was another clutch moment against England. They should 
have been ahead; instead they were behind. That is not how you beat the Aussies.

When Greg Inglis showed subtlety to go with his Goliath to put Australia two 
scores ahead, the mood deflated. It was a great shame and another opportunity 
missed. The crowd were noticeably more into the game than they were at last 
year’s woeful borefest against the Kiwis, which must have had a detrimental 
effect on the attendance on a dry, sunny, relatively mild day in east London. 
They responded passionately to the tremendous goal-line defence and cheered 
every positive moment. There was even a surge of optimism when Jermaine 
McGillvary – a rare ray of light – put England ahead in the 25th minute. 
Despite there seemingly being thousands of spectators who were not league fans, 
the crowd were certainly knowledgeable, jeering when Johnathan Thurston 
cynically slowed the play.

And yet England flopped again. Since the RFL took big matches back to the 
capital in 2011, as many as 190,000 fans have seen England lose all four games. 
The RFL wanted the double-header to be in London and maybe that would have 
worked better. But losing every time you are on the biggest stage is not the 
way to build an audience.

As awkward as Donald Trump’s meeting with Barack Obama last week, England’s 
players trudged round on a lap of “honour”. Only a few hundred fans were still 
there to greet them and they were left to wonder when they would see the team 
again.

After the boom of the World Cup in 2013, the RFL didn’t schedule a single 
England home game for two years. There is nothing planned between now and 2018 
either. If England had won theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>, it seems unlikely there would 
have been a “homecoming” game to capitalise on that – as all of next year’s 
fixtures are almost certainly going to be Down Under. And, if the Lions tour in 
2018, who knows what England will get up to. What a funny old business.

Foreign quota

One of the main questions being debated in the media rooms at Stratford on 
Sunday was whether Wayne Bennett should now pick Australian-born players who 
are eligible for England. The consensus seemed to be that he should and it 
would be a surprise if he didn’t do that next May whenEngland play Samoa down 
under 
<http://www.sportinglife.com/rugby-league/live/match-reaction/45304/bennett-lays-out-manifesto>
.

Scotland’s Aussie-born NRL contingent certainly proved their worth. Euan 
Aitken topped off a fine tournament with that thrilling last-minute try at 
Workington; Lachlan Coote was arguably the difference between glory and defeat 
against New Zealand; Luke Douglas was an immense presence on the field and 
tremendous influence off it; and Kane Linnett was a quiet giant in defence and 
attack.

Scotland didn't beat England in the Four Nations but they earned massive 
respect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/nov/09/england-scotland-four-nations-rugby-league>
It was interesting to see how Scotland’s players from the Australian second 
tier fared in comparison to the Championship players. Despite only playing 
once, second-rowers Sheldon Powe-Hobbs (Northern Pride) and Tyler Cassel (Wests 
Tigers) are interested in full-time Championship gigs, while the gritty 
performance of Ipswich Jets prop Billy McConnachie against the Kiwis showed why 
Brisbane Broncos have the cement mixer from Mount Isa on dual contract terms.

Meanwhile, Scotland’s full-time Championship players excelled: Bradford trio 
Danny Addy, Ben Kavanagh and Dale Ferguson put in displays that must have made 
Bulls fans shake their heads in despair at where their team ended up; Ben 
Hellewell’s silky try against the Kiwis was not a familiar sight to London 
Broncos fans; and Liam Hood suggested he will thrive in Super League if he can 
get in the Leigh side in place of Mickey Higham or Eloi Pelissier. The Four 
Nations did wonders for them all.

Clubcall: Workington Town

Taking a Four Nations game to west Cumbria ruffled a few Kiwi feathers. New 
Zealand looked like they would rather be anywhere other than Derwent Park and 
it’s hard to see them testing the resurgent Aussies again at Anfield on Sunday.

Scotland make history in Four Nations draw with holders New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/new-zealand-scotland-four-nations-match-report>
They weren’t happy before, during or after Friday’s game. Some of the 
complaints were reasonable: yes, the pitch is small and surprisingly bumpy for 
a game at this level (even playing a role in the result as Martin Taupau 
disappeared down a rabbit hole when Euan Aitken headed towards him for the 
final try); the dressing rooms are small; and the lack of hot showers 
afterwards was regretful, forcing both teams to get back on their buses in 
their kit, still muddy and very cold.

But the game brought so many positives to west Cumbria at a time when rugby 
league in the area has hit an all-time low, and Workington embraced the return 
of big-name ruby league. The market stalls in Ivison Lane on Friday morning 
were adorned with Scottish and Kiwi flags, and there was a street party (of 
sorts) in Risman Place shopping parade. The streets in the town centre are 
named after league legends, which tells you everything you need to know about 
the status the sport has in the culture there. The soaked and frozen crowd 
roared with support when local hero Brett Phillips came off the bench an hour 
in, visibly lifting Scotland.

Town, relegated to the third tier, copped a lot of criticism from outsiders on 
the night, but how about the game helping them (and Whitehaven and Barrow) 
more? Wigan and Widnes both have relationships with west Cumbria and could take 
a Super League game there every year. Derwent Park is definitely more appealing 
in summer than on a cold winter night with the rain blowing in sideways, 
although seeing the snow on the top of the Lakes District’s peaks on a sunny 
afternoon was glorious. We should cherish having professional league in one of 
the most beautiful corners of Britain.

Goal-line drop-out

After all the wailing over Wayne Bennett’s treatment of the media – and, 
therefore, by proxy, the fans – England’s head coach was positively effusive 
after the game on Sunday. Well, he said quite a lot, if you could make out the 
mumbles. If you couldn’t hear them, you will have read the highlights:

 *  “I can understand what beats them. They think the opposition beat them, 
but they don’t.” 
 * “It’s our inability to maintain pressure and we just don’t execute well 
enough.” 
 * “Hitting the sideline is pretty important against anyone, let alone when 
you’re playing the best team in the world. You can’t do that.” 
 * “We need to play more against the Australians and the Kiwis than we do.” 
 * “This is all about the World Cup.”

Bennett believes England’s weakness is mental: that they lack the ability to 
deliver high-quality skills under immense pressure, as the Kangaroos do game 
after game. When Cameron Smith was asked about Cooper Cronk’s man of the match 
display (I actually voted for the winner, for once), he shrugged it off: “He’s 
a champion of our game and he just did what champion players do.”

England’s elite cannot be relied upon to do that and Bennett suggested the 
challenges are “insurmountable if they don’t have a change of attitude in the 
dressing room - the onus is on them. They’ve got to make those changes as I’ll 
only coach them for a couple of times in the year. Their [Super League] coaches 
suffer in the same way that I do but they get away with those behaviours and 
they wouldn’t in the NRL.” Mind you, he admitted Sam Burgess gives away far too 
many penalties in the NRL, too.

Fifth and last

The last month has underlined that, at 33, Scotland’s Danny Brough is still 
the best English-born half-back around. Bennett dismissed a suggestion on 
Sunday that he could have tried to lure Brough back to England. “I was told 
he’s with Scotland, so that’s that,” said the England coach.

England have no chance until the RFL rethinks the Super League calendar | 
Aaron Bower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/14/england-rugby-league-super-league-wayne-bennett-australia>
Harking back to something Bennett said to him at the tournament launch at 
Anfield, Brough was left with a wry grin on Sunday night. Suffice to say, the 
perfect retort would have been: “Neither will you, Wayno!”

Brough equalled Andrew Henderson’s record as the most-capped Scottish 
international on Friday night and presented match shirts to his team-mates at 
an emotional meeting on Thursday night. His performance against the Kiwis was 
again as strong and influential as any in the 10 campaigns he has played in 
(another record). Henderson’s loyalties were clear in his TV commentary. His 
reaction to the last-gasp try – “He’s over! He’s over! Euan Aitken’s over!” – 
and the equalising kick – “Yes, Broughie!”– said it all.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>

 