
A year ago Jazz Hervin attended Kick It Out’s estimable Raise Your Game 
conference looking to those within football for advice on how to progress her 
coaching career. Twelve months later, aged 20 and now coach of the development 
team at the Women’s Super League sideYeovil Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/yeoviltown> Ladies, she was back to 
deliver a workshop to peers who had collectively racked up centuries of 
experience in the game. Like most things, it did not seem to faze her.

In years to come, Hervin plans to return as the coach of the national side and 
could even become one of the first female managers to break through the glass 
ceiling and succeed in the men’s game.

If the launch of the WSL has not quite proved the big bang moment for women’s 
football in this country that some thought it might be, it has elevated it to a 
new level of professionalism, organisation and visibility. More importantly, 
behind the scenes it has facilitated the creation of the sort of coaching 
pathway the men’s game has long taken for granted.

Hervin, in the vanguard of a breed of young female coaches who have grown up 
with the game from a very young age, is combining her role at Yeovil with a 
sports management degree.

“Since last year, it has been very much about improving what I’m already 
doing. I’m at Yeovil now and that was probably the biggest change as well as 
starting my Uefa B licence,” she says, paying tribute to the contacts she made 
a year ago at theKick It Out <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kick-it-out> 
event, designed to offer routes into the game for those who may have 
traditionally been excluded.

“It was about improving what I already had and building on that to move 
forward. Yeovil is a great club to be at – great club, great people.”

Marieanne Spacey, the former Arsenal player who won 91 England caps before 
retiring in 2004, is the assistant coach to Mark Sampson with the national side 
as well as taking charge of the Under-23s and having a role at the Football 
Association in developing female coaches.

“We want to really encourage more girls into coaching,” Spacey says, recalling 
how she was the only female among a cohort of 40 when she took her Uefa badges. 
“The perception is that everyone wants to be a player but there are 
opportunities for coaching and we want to encourage that.

“There’s a much better pathway now for females to get involved in coaching and 
coach education than there has ever been. It’s like anything – you put the time 
in and you work hard and the rewards will come because the game is growing. 
There are so many good, young female coaches out there at the moment.”

Hervin played herself but on realising she was not going to make the grade at 
elite level turned her attention to coaching. Given her youth and her ambition, 
she is not gender-specific when it comes to her ultimate goals.

“I love working within the women’s game, purely because that’s what I know 
best because I’ve played,” she says. “But before I was at Yeovil I was head 
coach of a senior men’s team in a regional league. I loved that as well and 
that changed my whole perception in terms of what I want to do when I’m older. 
I’m not saying it has to be in the women’s game.”

For Spacey, the immediate priority is to develop more female coaches at all 
levels, with a particular focus on the WSL. Emma Hayes, the manager of the 
league leaders Chelsea Ladies, is the only female manager in the top flight of 
the WSL.

“Where we stand at the moment we’re certainly better off than we were 10 or 
even five years ago,” Spacey says. “We have the people within the development 
unit and the senior unit, we’re working with the coaches in the WSL clubs, 
we’re looking at how we can succession plan for players moving out of playing 
and into coach education.

“We want to continue to develop that and get better. But we’re doing 
everything we can to ensure we have a big influence of women’s coaches in the 
WSL. We want to grow that, Emma Hayes is there at the moment. We’d like to see 
more and it’s something we will aim to achieve in the next couple of years.”

Few would bet against Hervin being among them, whatever the obstacles that 
still exist for female coaches. “Like Marieanne said, it’s about the 
opportunities,” she says. “For Yeovil to give me the chance to work within a 
WSL setup at the age of 20 is something I think that young coaches need,” she 
says. “If we’re ready to do that and take that step then the opportunity needs 
to be there for us to do it.”

Spacey talks persuasively about her “cradle to grave” ambitions for women’s 
football. As with the men’s game, that means everything from increased 
opportunities for female coaches teaching girls in primary schools, to better 
career development for those working in centres of excellence and more chances 
at elite level. Back in the here and now, Spacey is preparing to head to Canada 
for an expanded World Cup that has proved controversial because it will be 
played on artificial surfaces but offers the women’s game the opportunity to 
make another decisive leap in popularity and profile.

“We’re really excited about the group of players we’ve got, the potential 
within the squad,” Spacey says. “We’ve got a group that will challenge us but 
that we have a great chance of getting out of. Then you’re into the last 16 and 
the quarter-finals and all the old cliches apply.

“This is a great gauge of where we’re at as an international squad but also 
where the game is and where it can go to next. It’s not a ‘wow’ moment. But it 
is part of the development and the progression of us becoming a real strong, 
positive, aspirational field for people to want to come into and work in, 
watch, play, whatever.”

In the short term, Hervin is targeting success at Yeovil and possible 
promotion to the top division but does not hide her ambition to one day coach 
the national side.

“Looking at this year, the main aim for me is to do a good job at Yeovil,” she 
says. “We’re aiming for the top three and, personally, to pass my Uefa B at the 
end of October. Long term, I want to work with the national side. You just need 
people to believe in you. I believe in myself.”
 