
The only wild beavers in England have been released back into their river home 
in Devon after being given a clean bill of health.

The beavers were temporarily captured for disease testing from the River 
Otter, where they have been living wild for at least three years and possibly 
up to a decade.

Evidence emerged last year that they had produced young, known as kits, and 
ministers said they intended to trap the beavers, test them for disease and 
rehome them in captivity.

The move was opposed by wildlife experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/25/wild-beavers-devon-uk-eu-habitats-directive>
 who put forward plans for a five-year trial monitoring them in the wild, with 
the support of local people. Government agency Natural Englandgave the scheme 
the go-ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/28/englands-beavers-allowed-stay-in-wild>
 subject to the mammals being found clear of disease.

Experts at Devon Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> 
Trust, which has been given a licence to monitor and manage the population, 
said they were “delighted and relieved” that the beavers were disease-free and 
were being returned to the river.

Five beavers – two adult pairs and one kit – had been temporarily homed in 
captivity in Devon with access to water and artificial lodges. Tests revealed 
they were free of bovine TB and a parasitic tapeworm that can cause serious 
harm in humans.

DNA tests also confirmed they were Eurasian beavers, a species found in the UK 
before being hunted to extinction several hundred years ago, rather than North 
American beavers.

As the beavers were released on to the river near Ottery St Mary, east Devon, 
Devon Wildlife Trust’s Peter Burgess said: “Today’s re-release means that these 
beavers are back where they belong, in the wild on the River Otter.

“We’re delighted and relieved that they’ve coped very well with a short period 
in captivity and have been given a clean bill of health.

“They’ve tested free of serious infectious diseases and we’re now looking 
forward to starting the next phase of our work: studying the long-term effects 
of these wild beavers on the local landscape, on local communities and local 
wildlife.”

The health and DNA tests were carried out by experts from the Royal Zoological 
Society of Scotland (RZSS), whose conservation projects manager Roisin 
Campbell-Palmer said: “As these beavers were of unknown origin it was important 
to establish they were the correct species and in good health.

“All individuals were Eurasian, in good body condition and free from parasites 
and disease of concern. There is no evidence that beavers are failing to 
survive and adapt to English landscapes.”

The return to the river signals the start of the River Otter Beaver Project, a 
partnership led by Devon Wildlife Trust and involving Clinton Devon Estates, 
Derek Gow Consultancy and the University of Exeter.

The project will measure the impact of the animals on the local landscape, 
economy, communities and wildlife, with information presented to Natural 
England at the trial’s end in 2020 for a decision on their future.

Wildlife groups back the return of the aquatic mammals, which manage the 
landscape by cutting down trees and damming rivers, for the benefit they can 
provide in preventing flooding, maintaining water quality and boosting other 
wildlife.

But farmers and anglers have raised concerns that they can damage the 
landscape and fish migration routes, and conservation efforts should be focused 
on the UK’s existing wildlife.

A five-year trial releasing beavers into the wild has been run in west 
Scotland, while a wild population established in Tayside, east Scotland, as a 
result of escaped or illegally released animals could total as many as 250 
animals.

The Welsh government’s conservation agency Natural Resources Wales is working 
with Wildlife Trusts Wales on the possibility of introducing beavers to Wales, 
with potential releases this year and next year.

Devon Wildlife Trust said the biggest challenge for the English scheme was 
funding the work, and urged nature lovers to donate to the project.
 