
Wayne Bennett has stuck to his promise of utilising players who have not 
played for a number of weeks after naming an England squad which includes six 
uncapped players for Saturday’s Test against France.

Bennett, who takes charge of England for the first time in their only warmup 
game before the Four Nations, had said he would aim to leave out the seven 
players who played in the Super League Grand Finalbetween Wigan and Warrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/warrington-wigan-super-league-grand-final-match-report>
 a fortnight ago. Only three of that contingent are included in his 19-man 
squad: Wigan’s Liam Farrell and the Warrington duo of Daryl Clark and Stefan 
Ratchford.

Bennett said that in all probability he will use a three-man interchange bench 
if possible to reduce the workload on those players whose seasons finished 
later than the rest, meaning all three are unlikely to play.

Sam Burgess says ‘I was cool when Wayne Bennett told me I’d be captain of 
England’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/sam-burgess-england-captain-four-nations-rugby-league>
“The guys from Warrington and Wigan probably won’t play – everyone else needs 
the games,” Bennett said. “They have had more games than probably everyone 
else, so another week won’t hurt them being out. I will sit one of them on the 
bench but will probably not play him if I don’t have to.”

The St Helens players Jonny Lomax and Mark Percival are included for the first 
time and are expected to start in a new-look backline. Castleford’s Luke Gale 
will also win his first cap at half-back, probably alongside the St George 
stand-off Gareth Widdop.

Hull’s Scott Taylor will also make his debut, with the other debutant, 
Ratchford, likely to miss out as Bennett opts to rest the 28-year-old. Leeds’ 
Stevie Ward, who was drafted into the 24-man squad this week after his 
club-mate Brett Ferres was ruled out because of injury, is the sixth potential 
debutant: he will likely start in the back row.

James Graham will captain the side in the absence of Sam Burgess – the first 
time Bennett’s new vice-captain will lead the side in six years. Burgess is 
serving a one-match suspension carried over from the conclusion of the NRL 
season, meaning he will be available for England’sFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> opener against New Zealand at 
Huddersfield on Saturday 29 October .

“The players have trained well all week and are looking forward to the trip to 
France,” Bennett said. “There’s plenty of competition for places in this squad 
and it’s good to see a few new faces in there possibly having a run out in 
Avignon.

“The week leading into this game has been good and the training facilities in 
London at the Honourable Artillery Company have been outstanding.

“France are a passionate team and will have plenty of support behind them. 
There’s talent in their side and some Super League experience so we know what 
to expect. As the away side, it’s the kind of environment I want my side to be 
challenged in.”

England squad v France

Brown (Widnes), G Burgess, T Burgess (both South Sydney), Clark (Warrington), 
Cooper (St George), Farrell (Wigan), Gale (Castleford), Graham (Canterbury), 
Hall (Leeds), Hodgson (Canberra), Lomax (St Helens), McGillvary (Huddersfield), 
Percival (St Helens), Ratchford (Warrington), Taylor (Hull FC), Ward, Watkins 
(both Leeds), Whitehead (Canberra), Widdop (St George)
 