
This was the opening group game for England and New Zealand but it was easily 
the most important and how the Kiwis’ celebrations at full-time showed it. 
Victory here and one win from the final two games would almost certainly be 
enough to progress to the final.

Defeat? The fearsome prospect of having to beat Australia in the group stage – 
as well as Scotland – to stand a chance of making it to Anfield. That is the 
daunting task that awaits Wayne Bennett and England after another case of so 
near yet so far.

Three years ago, as England seemed certain to qualify for the World Cup final, 
Shaun Johnson broke hearts with a last-gasp try that eliminated the hosts in 
spectacular fashion. Here, the deja vu was almost too painful to bear as once 
again Johnson proved to be the scourge of the English with another masterful 
performance, culminating in the decisive drop goal that went a long way to 
guiding the Kiwis to the final in three weeks’ time.

Sam Burgess insists England can still win Four Nations despite loss to Kiwis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/sam-burgess-england-four-nations-new-zealand>
For large parts of an absorbing Test, England appeared in control and seemed 
the better of the two sides. However, their inability to score points when it 
mattered proved to be their downfall – and they were made to pay as the fine 
margins of international rugby league were once again brutally exposed.

It has been two decades since England last defeated Australia in a competitive 
match and that record will now have to end for the hosts to make theFour Nations
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> final next month in Liverpool.

Not even the return of Sam Burgess to the national side could inspire England 
enough to get over the line. The captain showed promise in his first game back 
in an England shirt since his return to rugby league, but on another 
frustrating afternoon, and although the margins continue to remain fine, the 
results remain frustratingly the same.

The Bennett era had started routinely enough; some early indiscipline from the 
Kiwis afforded England two chances at goal they would not waste as two 
penalties from Gareth Widdop put the hosts into an early 4-0 lead.

Australia open Four Nations with comfortable victory over Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/australia-scotland-four-nations-match-report>
New Zealand looked somewhat fragile in the opening quarter with little end 
product and had some enterprising play from England paid off, the remainder of 
the first half, and indeed the game as a whole, could have been a different 
story. Ryan Hall found himself in space on the wing as England scrambled the 
ball left, but not far enough; Jermaine McGillvary was held up over the line 
before James Graham’s try was ruled out by the video referee for a double 
movement.

The fact they emerged from such a period of domination with those two 
penalties proved crucial, as it allowed New Zealand to mount a fightback. They 
hit back with a penalty of their own from Jordan Kahu on the half-hour and when 
Widdop’s kick-off sailed out on the full it immediately put pressure on the 
hosts again.

The pressure told five minutes from the interval when, having forced 
back-to-back sets on the England line, some slick handling from Johnson freed 
Jordan Rapana for an open run to the corner. Although Kahu missed the 
conversion, the Kiwis were well worth their two-point lead at the break.

Half-time appeared to come at an opportune moment for England but the visitors 
would extend their lead two minutes after the break when, with the hosts 
pressing, Johnson picked off a stray Widdop pass to race 80 yards and touch 
down.

With Kahu’s kick opening up a two-score lead, it felt like a telling moment: 
but the drama was only just beginning. Within six minutes England had made 
amends for that Johnson try as Elliott Whitehead put McGillvary over in the 
corner but New Zealand rallied again, extending their lead once more when 
Rapana evaded some sloppy defending to claim his second.

However, Kahu’s missed conversion gave England a glimmer of hope and when 
Widdop converted Hall’s magnificent touchline try – his 29th in 29 games for 
the national side – on the hour, the game was level at 16-16 with a thrilling 
final quarter in prospect.

It became increasingly apparent that a drop goal may well settle the contest, 
and the Kiwis wasted little time in going ahead again when Johnson kicked a 
one-pointer with 15 minutes remaining. England scrambled, fought and attempted 
to level – or even win – the match in the closing stages, but they had no 
answer.

Victory in Coventry next Saturday against Scotland is now essential but it is 
what lies beyond that will prove to be the greater challenge for England.
 