
England have won the right to stage the 2021 World Cup, the Rugby League 
International Federation has announced.

The Rugby Football League got the nod ahead of the United States, largely on 
the back of playing numbers and heavy government backing.

No automatic sin-bin for punching at Four Nations and next year's World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/no-automatic-sin-bin-for-punching-at-four-nations-and-next-years-world-cup>
“England staged an outstanding World Cup in 2013 and have clearly outlined 
their vision for the 2021 World Cup as a world-class event eclipsing the 
attendances, reach and legacy of 2013,” said the RLIF chief executive, David 
Collier. “The bid details that the Rugby League World Cup will be the highlight 
of the international sporting calendar in England that year and RLIF looks 
forward to a great tournament.”

The 16th edition of the World Cup will be the largest with 16 countries and 31 
matches. The RLIF has recommended that the United States be awarded the 2025 
World Cup, along with a separate international tournament to be staged in the 
period between 2021 and 2025.

The bid was submitted on behalf of both the USA and Canada by the Australian 
businessman Jason Moore, who runs the Sydney-based sports marketing and event 
management company Moore Sports International (MSI).

Moore had pledged to hand over £10m at the end of the first tournament to be 
held outside the game’s traditional areas and help lay down firm roots for the 
game in north America, which will host professional rugby league from next May 
when Toronto play in the Kingstone Press League 1 competition.

The RFL chief executive, Nigel Wood, who is chairman of the RLIF, and chairman 
Brian Barwick, a fellow RLIF board member, did not take part in the 
decision-making process.

Officials say bids were assessed against seven criteria and England scored 
heavily in its supporter base and government support, both in terms of the £25m 
government backing and its legacy, as well as in areas such as visas, security, 
international development and promotion.

Collier added: “The bid process was highly competitive and the board was very 
impressed by the MSI USA/Canada bid which was of the highest quality.

“The RLIF sees a great future for the sport in North America and has 
recommended that discussions with MSI are expedited to bring professional rugby 
league to North America as well as future international tournaments.

“Those discussions are being progressed with MSI USA/Canada and a report will 
be presented to Congress which will be held on 19 November this year.”

Barwick, the RFL chairman, said earlier this year that the success of hosting 
the 2013 competitionafforded England the opportunity to stage the event once 
more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/england-rugby-league-world-cup-2021>
 England’s bid to host the competition included a target of attracting one 
million spectators, double the number that attended games three years ago.

The next World Cup takes place in New Zealand, Australia and Papua New Guinea 
next year, with tickets going on sale earlier on Thursday.
 