
Ronald Koeman had an open goal against his former club but declined the chance 
to credit Everton’s late victory with the introduction of Enner Valencia. 
“Maybe the reason Everton were much better than Southampton in the last 30 
minutes was because they had one less day to recover,” said the manager who 
switched from St Mary’s to Goodison Park last summer. Honesty was the best 
policy;Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> were 
physically and mentally shattered by the time Romelu Lukaku brought their 
cheerless festive campaign to a close.

Valencia, the Ecuador international on a season-long loan from West Ham 
United, was a major factor in a third consecutive league defeat for Claude 
Puel’s side, opening the scoring 11 minutes after replacing Aaron Lennon and 
winning the penalty that enabled Leighton Baines to kill the contest shortly 
afterwards.

Lukaku’s vast second-half improvement also contributed to breaking the 
visitors and he sealed Everton’s victory with an emphatic finish in dying 
minutes, his 89th goal on his 200th appearance in English football. But there 
was no disguising the consequences of three games in six days on the visitors.

Southampton had the edge in the first half, Jay Rodriguez squandering a fine 
opportunity, and there was little between the teams until Koeman increased his 
attacking options with Valencia, and Lukaku thrived with the extra support as 
the weary, retreating visitors cracked.

“We started the season with many games,” Puel said. “We have played every 
three days, sometimes two, and we are 10th in the table with a programme like 
Real Madrid and Barcelona. Since Boxing Day we have played three games in five 
days and it is just not possible [three in six]. We tried to give a good 
answer, we did for 70 minutes, but we couldn’t give a good answer in the end. 
For a long time it was a balanced game. It is difficult to accept this result.”

Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton>, who are close to 
signing the Charlton Athletic teenager Ademola Lookman in a deal worth around 
£11m, gratefully accepted the chance to stretch tired legs. Ross Barkley, the 
impressive 18-year-old Tom Davies, Séamus Coleman and, most of all, Lukaku 
probed continually late on, stayed patient, and punished a Southampton side 
that featured six changes to the team beaten by West Bromwich Albion on New 
Year’s Eve and lost Cédric Soares within seconds of the kick-off when he 
careered into advertising hoardings and suffered a head injury. Puel must have 
been resigned to a long afternoon from that moment on.

Koeman started with Davies and the 19-year-old Dominic Calvert-Lewin in an 
attempt to freshen his options – the first time two teenagers have started a
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> game for 
anyone this season – but the striker’s full debut came to an unfortunate and 
abrupt halt when he suffered an ankle injury. The disruption and fatigue 
produced a sterile first half in which Southampton’s defensive organisation and 
intelligence on the counterattack held firm.

They should have led when Rodriguez collected Jordy Clasie’s ball with his 
back to goal, spun away from Davies, evaded Ashley Williams and, with only Joel 
Robles to beat, skied his shot high over the bar. A costly miss.

Unsurprisingly, Everton’s energy levels told as the game wore on, with 
Lukaku’s influence improving in tandem with his first touch. Coleman’s raids 
down the right offered an important outlet against a deep defence and they 
combined to telling effect for the breakthrough. Lukaku released the Irishman 
to the byline and also met the inviting cross that came back with a downward 
header. Fraser Forster saved with a foot, the rebound bounced off Lukaku’s 
thigh and dropped perfectly for Valencia to convert from close range his first 
club goal for 12 months.

Valencia was then up-ended by Maya Yoshida as he attempted to turn on a pass 
inside the penalty area. Southampton had no complaints as Baines, Everton’s 
captain for the day, sent their goalkeeper the wrong way from the spot. 
Everton’s final goal was reward for Lukaku’s second-half contribution and 
evidence of Southampton’s lethargy. José Fonte was easily dispossessed by 
Baines as he attempted to bring the ball out of defence and Davies pierced the 
visitors’ defence with a fine ball into the feet of the Belgium international. 
Forster had no chance as an unstoppable shot flew high into his net.

“We needed something different up front,” Koeman said on the introduction of 
Valencia. “That’s why we started with Dominic behind Romelu. I wasn’t happy 
with the support from the midfield for Romelu in recent weeks but then we lost 
Dominic and you need to change it.

“You either bring Enner straight in or wait until late in the game. He was one 
of the players who changed the game and created difficulties for Southampton. 
It’s good to have him, he can play different positions and gives me the 
possibility to change systems, but it’s still too early to make a final 
decision about his future.”

Liverpool drop two points as Jermain Defoe strikes twice from the spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/sunderland-liverpool-premier-league-match-report> 