
Essendon have thrown their support behind former AFL coach James Hird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/james-hird>, who was reportedly continuing 
to receive care on Friday at a facility after being being taken to hospital on 
Wednesday night with a “major” health scare.

Bombers chairman Lindsay Tanner said the club would continue to support Hird 
and his family. “On behalf of the entireEssendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> family our thoughts are with James 
Hird and his family,” Tanner said in a club statement.

James Hird, former Essendon coach, taken to hospital after ‘major’ health scare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/james-hird-former-essendon-coach-taken-to-hospital-after-major-health-scare>
“This is a personal and private matter and we ask the media to respect the 
privacy of James and his family. The club will continue to offer its support to 
James and the Hird family.”

The development has revived a troubled past that Essendon had hoped to leave 
behind this season with the return of players from their suspensions over the 
club’s supplements scandal during Hird’s tenure.

The Bombers trained for about two hours at their Tullamarine base on Friday, 
with senior players including captain Jobe Watson and his likely successor 
Dyson Heppell declining to comment on Hird’s situation.

Collingwood coach Nathan Buckley did not reference Hird directly but took to 
Twitter to urge the public against making personal attacks on sportspeople.

“The presumption that people who play sport well are bullet proof allows 
personal attacks hidden behind ‘public interest’,” Buckley tweeted. “Keep us 
honest and critically analyse professional efforts but allow clubs to manage 
and support people in their brilliance and foibles.”

Hird resigned as Essendon coach in August 2015 with his reputation irreparably 
damaged by the club’s supplements saga.

His tenure as coach was thrown into turmoil by the 2012 supplements program 
and subsequent Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority investigation, which led 
to 34 past and present Bombers being banned for the 2016 season.

Before the supplements saga, Hird had been one of Windy Hill’s most-treasured 
sons, playing 253 games for Essendon and winning the Brownlow medal in 1996.
 