
10.52pm GMT 

Key event

In fact, Beto got fingertips to turn that round, but the kick was so lame a 
pensioner could have bent down to guide that away from goal.Sevilla reach the 
last eight, after an evening in which this happened:

 * Anzhi Makhachkala 0-0 AZ Alkmaar (agg 0-1)

 * Benfica 2-2 Tottenham Hotspur (agg 5-3)

 * Fiorentina 0-1 Juventus (agg 1-2)

 * Napoli 2-2 FC Porto (agg 2-3)

 * Plzen 2-1 Lyon (agg 3-5)

 * Real Betis 0-2 Sevilla aet, 0-2 after 90 mins (agg 2-2, Sevilla win 4-3 on 
pens)

 * Salzburg 1-2 Basle (agg 1-2)

 * Valencia 1-0 Ludogorets (agg 4-0)

“I think we’ve all over-indulged a little tonight,” burps Simon McMahon. “In 
fact I feel sick.” Nighty night, everyone!

10.50pm GMT 

Oh no no no no no no no Nono! He takes a nonchalant swipe at the ball, and 
sends a pathetic effort rolling left of the target! Poor lad’s in tears, but 
that was appalling.Sevilla win 4-3 on penalties!

10.49pm GMT 

The fifth kicks: Rakitic strokes his into the right-hand side of the net. Now 
Nono has to score to keep his team in it! Can he? ...

10.48pm GMT 

The fourth kicks: Everyone’s firing them into the top right! Moreno puts his 
there, though not quite as impressively as what’s gone before. N’Diaye for 
Betis now... and his effort hammers onto the left-hand post and out! That 
sprung off the inside, it wasn’t the worst miss you’ll ever see. All square!
Sevilla 3-3 Betis.

10.47pm GMT 

The third kicks: Gameiro follows Castro’s lead, a thumper into the top right. 
Amaya, the Betis captain, fires one there too!Sevilla 2-3 Betis.

10.45pm GMT 

The second kicks: Coke is the real thing: he slots it to the right, Adan going 
the other way.Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> for Betis 
puts his into the top left. Another brilliant one!Sevilla 1-2 Betis.

10.44pm GMT 

The first kicks: Vitolo goes low right, and passes it straight at Adan! Weak 
and easy to save. Castro roofs an unstoppable one into the top right. As good a 
spot kick as you’ll ever see!Sevilla 0-1 Betis

10.42pm GMT 

The penalties, then! After an effing age - and, rather nicely, a lot of 
friendly and respectful handshakes between the two teams - it’s on! Sevilla 
will take the first kick.

10.38pm GMT 

EXTRA TIME, FULL TIME: Betis 0-2 Sevilla (agg 2-2)

Thou still unravished bride of quietness,
Thou foster child of silence and slow time,
Sylvan historian, who canst thus express
A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:
What leaf-fringed legend haunts about thy shape
Of deities or mortals, or of both,
In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?
What men or gods are these? What maidens loath?
What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?
What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstasy?

Penalties it is.

Updated at 10.41pm GMT

10.33pm GMT 

Not a lot happening. I could type up a little filler in an attempt to keep 
y’all interested ... but no. This is what it is. Think of it as art imitating 
art, like Ode on a Grecian Urn. You could call it Ode on Indolence, only Keats 
is ahead of us with that one, too.

10.23pm GMT 

And we’re off again! This is almost certainly going to go to penalties. That 
absurd stramash towards the end of the first period apart, fear has frozen 
these rivals.

10.20pm GMT 

EXTRA TIME, HALF TIME: Real Betis 0-2 Sevilla (agg 2-2)

It’s worth pointing out, I guess, if anyone’s still reading, which I very much 
doubt, that another goal for Sevilla will count as a third away goal, and put 
Betis in all sorts of bother.

10.19pm GMT 

How on earth have Sevilla failed to score here? A one-two down the inside-left 
channel releases Gameiro into the area. He’s only got Adan to beat, but batters 
his shot straight at the keeper, who parries. The ball balloons up for Bacca, 
who attempts to head home from a couple of yards, but can’t get enough purchase 
on the thing - allowing Adan to spring up and make another save! It’s Bacca’s 
last act of the day, because he’s managed to break himself in the process of 
missing that gilt-edged chance. To round off a hapless minute for Sevilla, the 
substitute Sampeiro, coming on for Bacca, is booked for taking to the pitch too 
early! What a circus.

10.14pm GMT 

FULL TIME: SV Red Bull Salzburg 1-2 Basle (agg 1-2)

It’s all over for Salzburg all right. Basle make it through to the quarters, 
joining Juventus,Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia>, 
Lyon, Alkmaar, Porto and Benfica. One place left. Who’s going to take it? Betis 
or Sevilla? There’s been bugger all happening in extra time at the Estadio 
Benito Villamarín, so we’re no nearer to knowing.

Updated at 10.20pm GMT

10.10pm GMT 

If it wasn’t already over in Salzburg, it is now. It’s ten men apiece, with 
the dullest sounding footballer of all time - Alan - getting his marching 
orders for a second bookable offence. The final insult of an injurious evening 
for Salzburg.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNGgbsABjObk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNGgbsABjObk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNGgbsABjObk&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNGgbsABjObk&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNGgbsABjObk>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNGgbsABjObk&media=>
close 
10.06pm GMT 

Extra time in Seville, then. In an ideal world, I’d continue the menu riff 
that’s run throughout this report: starter, main, pudding. But after over five 
hours of wall-to-wallEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> action, I’m too tired 
to think right now. Thankfully, Simon McMahon is on hand to do my riffing for 
me. “Think I’ll need a digestif after all that. Limoncello and coke?” Sounds 
just the ticket, Simon. Have you got a rolled-up £10 note? To slurp up the 
sticky booze, obviously.

10.01pm GMT 

And we’re still going in Salzburg, where even kidney-bothering quantities of 
taurine would be unlikely to assist the home side in their quest to reach the 
quarters. They’re still 2-1 down, requiring two goals in the last ten minutes 
of this delayed game to turn things round. They’ve been playing against ten men 
for almost the entire game, with little to show for it other than 
disappointment.

9.57pm GMT 

FULL TIME: Napoli 2-2 Porto (agg 2-3)

And that’s your lot in Italy, where Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> once again reach the latter stages 
of Europe’s secondary trophy.

Updated at 10.21pm GMT

9.56pm GMT 

FULL TIME: Real Betis 0-2 Sevilla (agg 2-2)

Another free kick for Betis, just to the left of the D! Sevilla hits the wall 
again, uselessly, and that is that. It’ll be extra time in Seville!

Updated at 10.21pm GMT

9.55pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Napoli 2-2 Porto (Zapata 90 +2)

Callejon springs the Porto defence down the right, enters the box, and fires 
into the centre, where Zapata can’t miss from six yards. There’s 120 seconds of 
added time left, but this is too little, too late. Erstwhile Chelsea gaffer 
Rafa Benitez won’t be winning two Europa Leagues on the bounce.

9.53pm GMT 

... batters an idiotic shot straight into the coupon of some poor bugger 
standing in the wall.What a clown. This’ll be extra time.

9.52pm GMT 

A last-minute chance for Betis, as Ruben Castro is bundled over as he makes 
for the Sevilla box.The free kick is 25 yards out, just to the left of the 
target. If this goes in, Betis have redeemed themselves at the death and will 
be in the quarters. The confusingly named Salvador Sevilla steps up, and ...

9.47pm GMT 

So here’s where we are at the business end of the evening:

 * Betis 0-2 Sevilla (agg 2-2)

 * Napoli 1-2 Porto (agg 1-3)

 * Salzburg 1-2 Basle (agg 1-2)

Still plenty of time to go in the final game, about 20 minutes or so thanks to 
that flare-based hold-up in the first half. The other matches are into their 
final five minutes.Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> are 
jiggered, Porto are through. But it’s all to play for in the Seville derby.

9.44pm GMT 

Well this suddenly got a lot more dramatic, didn’t it. I should probably have 
been more patient.

9.42pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Salzburg 1-2 Basle (Sauro 60)

And it’s looking all over for Salzburg, too, as ten-man Basle turn it round! 
Last year’s semi-finalists, conquerors of Spurs before being tonked by Chelsea, 
have one foot in the last eight again!

9.40pm GMT 

SUPERLATIVE GOAL!!! Napoli 1-2 Porto (Quaresma 76)

You have to search out this goal. Quaresma tiptoes his way past three 
challenges in double-quick time on the right-hand edge of the Napoli box. He 
then lifts an unstoppable riser into the top right! That’s Porto 3-1 up on 
aggregate, and the home side need four goals to progress. This is over!

9.38pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Betis 0-2 Sevilla (Bacca 75)

Moreno rips down the left and fires a low ball into the area. Bacca, meeting 
the ball first time in the middle of the area, sidefoots home, a proper 
ice-hockey slapshot. A brilliant finish! And this tie is all level, and going 
to extra time as things stand!

9.36pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Salzburg 1-1 Basle (Stocker 51)

Another sucker punch, this time in Salzburg! The home team are a man up, but 
they’re behind in the tie on away goals now! “Long shifts, talk of sand-wedges, 
‘leaderboard’ updates,” notes Simon McMahon. “Next you’ll be telling us that 
Adam Scott has gone round in 62 at Bay Hill.” He’s a step ahead, kids, a step 
ahead. Not a bad day for the reigning Masters champion, that. And there’s his 
green-jacketed predecessor Bubba Watson shooting 83 as well. I’ve already got 
Augusta Fever. You too? You too, huh.

Updated at 9.36pm GMT

9.34pm GMT 

And now Defour whacks a low shot onto the base of Napoli’s left-hand post! The 
home support have fallen into a silent funk, and no wonder: they’ve been the 
dominant side, but what a sucker punch that was!

9.33pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Napoli 1-1 Porto (Ghilas 69)

Good old precarious European football, and no mistake! Jackson Martinez is 
clattered in the centre circle by Behrami. It should be a free kick, but the 
referee waves play on, allowing Fernando to shuttle the ball down the inside 
right channel for Ghilas. The Algerian, only recently thrown on, smacks a 
confident low effort into the bottom right past the despairing arm of Reina! 
Napoli need to score twice now!

9.26pm GMT 

No goals since the 22nd minute at Salzburg. It’s not been the greatest night, 
has it? Mind you, this Napoli-Porto game is cooking nicely: while the hosts are 
in the ascendancy, and pushing to land the killer blow, a goal on the break for 
the Portuguese side will change everything. Good old precarious European 
football!

9.23pm GMT 

Napoli back on the front foot again. First Higuain springs the Porto back line 
down the inside right, his low shot bundled out of play on the right by two 
white-shirted defenders plus their keeper. Then Inler flashes a header from the 
corner straight at Fabiano. And finally Ghoulam flicks the ball down the left 
to free Mertens, whose hammer from a tight angle is parried clear by the 
keeper. Napoli well on top. Surely it’s only a matter of time?

9.21pm GMT 

Porto show upfield for the first time in a wee while, Carlos Eduardo meeting a 
left-wing free kick by flicking a header towards the bottom right.It flew just 
wide of the target, and Reina had that covered, though he moved across with the 
insouciance that sometimes sees him standing around impotently as balls flash 
into his net.

9.14pm GMT 

Insigne nearly scores from a tight angle on the left, but the ball’s battered 
out of play for a corner by the upstanding Fabiano.(Though it’s then pulled 
back for Pandev, who hilariously blazes over from six yards, the goal gaping.) 
Ghoulam tries to curl a shot into the top right, and he’s not far off at all. 
That would have been a spectacular strike.

9.11pm GMT 

Half-time in Salzburg, where this sort of stuff ...

... found its way onto the pitch, hence the delay of roughly 15 minutes. The 
home side lead 1-0, and are a man to the good, so they’re hot favourites to be 
going through this evening.

9.09pm GMT 

The first act of the second half in Naples, and Danilo slices an appalling 
clearance back out for a corner.That’s dealt with, but then Henrique bombs down 
the right and nearly finds Higuain in the centre with a low cross. Napoli are 
on the front foot from the off, picking up where the first half ended.

9.06pm GMT 

And we’re off again in Naples and Seville! And we’re still going in the first 
half at Salzburg, but to hell with that!A wonderful moment during ITV’s 
half-time analysis. Presenter Matt Smith points out that Napoli have fashioned 
four times as many chances despite only enjoying 33% possession. Gordon 
Strachan, experiencing patience-snapping boredom, responds with a tired sigh, 
hissing “Ach! Stats! Stats!” and instead proceeding to eulogise Napoli’s pretty 
play. Oh Gordon! How could you! It’s almost as if you’re saying sport should be 
enjoyed as an aesthetic and visceral treat, a bit of fun, rather than homework 
to be mapped out on Excel spreadsheets and studied with a haughty sniff!

8.56pm GMT 

Half-time entertainment:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dte9otprt2mk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dte9otprt2mk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dte9otprt2mk&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dte9otprt2mk&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dte9otprt2mk>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dte9otprt2mk&media=>
close 
8.53pm GMT 

The game’s restarted in Salzburg, but never mind that, it’s half time in both 
Naples and Seville.As things stand, the Napoli-Porto tie is going to extra 
time, whereasReal Betis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> would 
join Juventus, Alkmaar, Lyon and Valencia in the quarter-final pot. Salzburg 
are in there too, but that one’s running behind schedule now.

8.49pm GMT 

A lull. Lovely lull.

8.45pm GMT 

Napoli are fully on top. Insigne cuts inside from the left and ripples the 
side netting with a low fizzer. That was only an inch or two away from nestling 
in the bottom-left corner.

8.44pm GMT 

Higuain, to the right of the centre circle, rakes a high diagonal ball towards 
Mertens, breaking into the box.He meets the pass first time, blootering a low 
shot straight at Fabiano. It’s a decent effort, but a shame he didn’t connect 
properly, because that would have been a goal for the picture books.

8.42pm GMT 

The game between Salzburg and Basel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/basel> has been halted, with some clowns 
throwing missiles onto the pitch.For goodness sake. “Porto are rocking a little 
bit ‘cos Villas-Boas just snatched our goalkeeper’s coach,” reports Tiago 
Carreira. “For a man who used to profess his undying love for Porto he sure has 
a way to prove it.” He’s got a way with fans that’d put the ever-popular 
Michael Owen to shame.

8.39pm GMT 

And now Porto nearly score. A corner down the right. Jackson Martinez meets 
it, ten yards out, and heads towards the top left. Reina doesn’t have it 
covered, diving late, but the ball drifts just wide of the post.

8.38pm GMT 

Porto are putting the collective foot in tonight. Mangala nearly kicks 
Albiol’s foot clean off the end of his leg. Free kick, in the Porto D. Insigne 
hits the ball straight at the wall, but then benefits from a pinball ricochet 
which releases Mertens into the area down the left channel! He whipcracks a low 
shot goalwards, but Fabiano starjumps to smother.

8.31pm GMT 

GOAL!!! SV Red Bull Salzburg 1-0 Basel (Jonathan 22)

Next to nothing happens all evening, then three goals in three delicately 
poised ties, all at once. It was always going to happen like this. So here’s 
how we stand everywhere:

 * Betis 0-1 Sevilla (agg 2-1)

 * Napoli 1-0 Porto (agg 1-1)

 * Salzburg 1-0 Basel (agg 1-0)

It could be a long night.

It’s already been a long night.
 FC Salzburg's Jonathan celebrates opening the scoring. Photograph: 
HEINZ-PETER BADER/REUTERS 
Updated at 9.24pm GMT

8.29pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Betis 0-1 Sevilla (Reyes 20)

A brilliant finish by the former Arsenal star here! Gameiro romps down the 
left and slides a pass into the area. Reyes meets it first time, coming in from 
the right, and sends it back the other way, sidefooting it brilliantly into the 
bottom left! Sevilla have halved the deficit against their city rivals!
 Reyes gives thanks, etc. Photograph: Marcelo del Pozo/REUTERS 
Updated at 9.26pm GMT

8.27pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Napoli 1-0 Porto (Pandev 20)

Higuain, down the inside left channel, draws two defenders before rolling a 
little ball forward and into the area for Pandev, who chips a delicate 
first-time effort over the advancing Fabiano. We’re level in this tie at 1-1, 
and Napoli’s dander is up!
 Dink! Photograph: Franco Romano/NurPhoto/Corbis 
Updated at 9.27pm GMT

8.25pm GMT 

No goals yet in any of our three matches. Quaresma has clattered Mertens on 
the shin. No action from the referee, but that should have been a yellow, the 
Napoli man has a red criss-cross pattern all down his leg. He’s got a gingham 
shin!

8.23pm GMT 

Insigne sand-wedges a lovely ball down the inside-left channel. Higuain chases 
after it, and is clear in the area! But he’s tempted into scoring a stunner by 
the dropping ball, and attempts to loop it over the keeper with a first-time 
volley, instead of trapping and battering it home. What a chance spurned!

8.20pm GMT 

An early red card in the Salzburg-Basel game. Marek Suchy has been sent 
packing for play most foul. Meanwhile in Naples, Henrique chases after a 
Mertens header down the inside right, and flashes a gorgeous shot just wide of 
the left-hand post. Not sure Fabiano had that covered were it heading for the 
bottom-left corner. Stunning effort.

8.13pm GMT 

It’s a pretty open game, with Mertens, Pandev and Higuain all causing Porto 
early bother, while Quaresma has make a couple of inroads down the other end.
Napoli scream for a penalty as Ghoulam goes down under a challenge from 
Unidentified Porto Player - but the referee, the Premier League’s Martin 
Atkinson no less, isn’t having any of it. A decent enough decision.

8.09pm GMT 

A fairly scrappy start at the Stadio San Paolo, where there’s plenty of the 
old whistling going on whenever the white-shirted Porto get hold of the ball. 
Napoli, trailing by the single goal from the leg in Oporto, are of course in 
their powdery blue kit, which to the mind’s eye will always have Mars blazoned 
across the front of it, and Himself rushing about in it with much determination 
and not a little skill.

8.06pm GMT 

Right, we’re going to concentrate on the Napoli-Porto game, and you’ll like it 
too.But I will try my best to keep an eye on what’s going in the Seville derby, 
as the home side Betis attempt to keep a hold of their 2-0 first-leg lead.

8.00pm GMT 

Dessert

Napoli v FC Porto 
Napoli: Reina, Henrique, Fernandez, Albiol, Ghoulam, Mertens, Inler, Behrami, 
Insigne, Pandev, Higuain.
Subs: Colombo, Reveillere, Britos, Callejon, Hamsik, Dzemaili, Zapata. 
FC Porto: Fabiano, Danilo, Mangala, Reyes, Ricardo, Fernando, Varela, Carlos 
Eduardo, Defour, Quaresma, Martinez.
Subs: Kadu, Josue, Quintero, Ghilas, Herrera, Lica, Agu.

Referee: Martin Atkinson (England)

Real Betis v Sevilla 
Real Betis: Adan, Juanfran, Perquis, Amaya, Jordi, Juan Carlos, N’Diaye, 
Reyes, Leo Baptistao, Cedrick, Ruben Castro.
Subs: Sara, Paulao, Vadillo, Nono, Sevilla, Rodriguez, Jorge Molina. 
Sevilla: Beto, Diogo Figueiras, Fazio, Pareja, Moreno, Mbia, 
Rakitic, Reyes, Gameiro, Marin, Bacca. 
Subs: Javi Varas, Fernando Navarro, Jairo, Vitolo, Coke, Luismi, Carlos 
Fernandez.

Referee: Pedro Proenca (Portugal)

SV Red Bull Salzburg v Basle 
SV Red Bull Salzburg: Gulacsi, Klein, Rodnei, Andre Ramalho, Svento, Kampl, 
Leitgeb, Ilsanker, Mane, Jonathan, Alan.
Subs: Walke, Meilinger, Berisha, Schiemer, Hierlander, Zulj, Lazaro. 
Basle: Sommer, Arlind Ajeti, Suchy, Sauro, Philipp Degen, Frei, El-Nenny, 
David Degen, Sio, Stocker, Streller.
Subs: Vailati, Diaz, Adili, Xhaka, Embolo, Dunki, Albian Ajeti. 

Referee: Manuel Grafe (Germany) 

7.55pm GMT 

The other full times from the 6pm kick-offs ...

 * Valencia 1-0 Ludogorets (agg 4-0)

 * Plzen 2-1 Lyon (agg 3-5)

... and over here is where you’ll learn how Spurs went out of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/20/benfica-v-tottenham-live-europa-league-report>
, after a 2-2 draw which involved plenty of late drama.

7.53pm GMT 

FULL TIME: Fiorentina 0-1 Juventus (agg 1-2)

That brouhaha - a Howard Webb cock-up, who’d have thought? - was the last act 
of the match. Juve go through to the finals, a deserved victory against a side 
that, after a fast start, didn’t really do much.

7.52pm GMT 

A feisty end to the game, with Tevez chasing a loose ball into the Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> area and stands on the 
goalkeeper Neto’s head.Neto isn’t happy, and forceful enough in his arguments 
that he’s booked. As is Tevez - who really should see red, as the Juve striker 
definitely clanked his boot onto the keeper’s neep. There was no need for that, 
a deliberate move downwards that really didn’t have to happen that way.

7.49pm GMT 

Vidal, on the penalty spot, meeting a right-wing cross and facing an open 
goal, heads wide. What a ridiculously inept miss! Stefan Savić, prone to many 
an error in his time at Manchester City, still has a strain of haplessness in 
his game; that Juve move began when Asamoah stormed into acres of space, 
latching onto a lazy blind pass from the defender.

7.42pm GMT 

Alberto Aquilani latches onto a loose ball and sends a first-time daisycutter 
towards the bottom-right corner of the Juve goal.But he’s too far out, and it’s 
not hit with enough venom to trouble a keeper like Gianluigi Buffon. A real 
sense that this is over, the Comunale is in a rare old collective funk.

Updated at 7.43pm GMT

7.40pm GMT 

Stephan Lichtsteiner should have put Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> out of sight. He wins a pinball 
battle with Savic down the Juve right, and races clear towards the area. His 
low fizzer towards the bottom right is decent, but turned round the post by 
Neto, who should never have been given the chance of making a save. Time’s 
running out for Fiorentina, who have six minutes to find the goal that’d force 
extra time.

7.37pm GMT 

Is a preposterous comeback on for Tottenham? Have they really just hit Benfica 
with a double-whammy that leaves them searching for just the one goal to take 
the match, unbelievably, into extra time? Don’t ask me, I’m not scabbing,this 
is Simon Burnton’s patch! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/20/benfica-v-tottenham-live-europa-league-report>

7.34pm GMT 

Llorente fires a header straight at Neto from point-blank range. Then Pirlo 
nearly scores from the halfway line, but his cheeky effort is overcooked, 
flying over the bar to a soundtrack of affronted whistles from the home 
support. This is all Juve, with the home side visibly deflated after the 
Rodriguez sending off and its terrible implications.

7.32pm GMT 

A little bit of detail on the Makhachkala-Alkmaar game. AZ’s Nemanja Gudelj 
hit the post with a free kick on 33 minutes; AZ nearly scored with a 20-yard 
piledriver from Aron Johannsson - whose penalty decided the first leg - just 
after the break; and Anzhi’s Karlen Mkrtchyan saw red for a foul on Steven 
Berghuis in injury time. It ended 0-0, and the Dutch go through.

7.29pm GMT 

GOAL!!! WHAT A FREE KICK!!! Fiorentina 0-1 Juventus (Pirlo 71)

Pirlo, after a false start, takes a second run up and curls a stunning free 
kick into the top right at extreme pace! All of a sudden, this match has been 
turned on its head! And as things stand, Juve will be in the quarters! 
Incidentally, it appears Rodriguez was indeed shown a second yellow, hence the 
red, not that it makes much difference to the here and now.

7.27pm GMT 

RED CARD IN FLORENCE! Suddenly, with 21 minutes remaining, silence! The home 
captain Gonzalo Rodriguez, already in the book, is turned by Llorente on the 
edge of the Fiorentina D. Rodriguez sticks out a leg to cheesewire his man down 
- and that’s a straight red, never mind a second yellow! Fiorentina down to 
ten, and this is a free kick in a very dangerous position, especially as Pirlo 
will be the man taking it.

7.24pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Plzen 2-1 Lyon (Tecl 62)

... this! Two goals in 120 seconds, and the Czechs have turned this tie 
around. Bounced back, if you will. They’re still 5-3 behind on aggregate, 
though with nearly half an hour remaining, an astonishing and quite frankly 
unlikely comeback suddenly looks possible!

7.22pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Plzen 1-1 Lyon (Kolar 60)

First this. And then ...

7.21pm GMT 

A Pirlo corner from the right. On the edge of the six-yard box, Pogba attempts 
an overhead kick from quite a low height. He catches the ball well enough, but 
sends it well wide left from close range. Italy’s dominant team are getting a 
little bit desperate here, with 25 minutes to go.

7.18pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Valencia 1-0 Ludogorets (Alcacer 59)

The Spaniards go 4-0 up on aggregate. If this tie wasn’t over already, it is 
now.

7.17pm GMT 

Isla stands up a cross from the Juve right. It’s got the backpedalling 
Fiorentina defence all at sea, but Vidal somehow heads over from six yards. 
What a chance to take the lead for Juventus! They’re the better side here now.

7.16pm GMT 

Cuadrado sends a swerving shot towards Buffon after a rangy run down the right 
wing.It poses the Juve keeper quite a test, but he’s up to the job, parrying 
spectacularly. Meanwhile here’s a reader complaint from Mac Millings: “This is 
a family website, Scott, and no place to announce filth like, ‘That’s loosened 
the beads on my rusty abacus’.” Just as well I wasn’t furiously fingering the 
sticky buttons down the front of my Little Professor.
 Little Professor 
7.08pm GMT 

There are four games on the go at the moment. Here are the latest scores:

 * Benfica 1-0 Tottenham (agg 4-1)

 * Fiorentina 0-0 Juventus (agg 1-1)

 * Plzen 0-1 Lyon (agg 1-5)

 * Valencia 0-0 Ludogorets (agg 3-0)

Eagle-eyed readers will note that three of these ties are already as good as 
over. More please, Uefa!

7.04pm GMT 

Juve are on the front foot at the start of the second half, picking up pretty 
much where they left off.Tevez goes on a determined skitter down the 
inside-right channel, and sends a deflected shot spooning over the bar from a 
tight-ish angle. Nothing comes of the resulting set piece.

6.57pm GMT 

FULL TIME: Anzhi Makhachkala 0-0 AZ Alkmaar (agg 0-1)

So, something happened in Russia, but it was only Karlen Mkrtchyan of Anzhi 
Makhachkala <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anzhi-makhachkala> getting 
himself sent off for a professional foul right at the death. Dick Advocaat’s 
side are therefore the first into the hat for the quarter-final draw!
 Dick Advocaat in the Tea Room at the Kempinski hotel in St. Petersburg, where 
they serve, according to luxuryexperience.com, "lovely traditional large 
fruited scones with jam and cream, a tempting assortment of savory finger 
sandwiches including cheese and cherry tomato, cucumber and mint, tuna and 
olives, pecans and Philadelphia cream cheese, chicken curry and pineapple, and 
egg salad". 
Updated at 6.58pm GMT

6.52pm GMT 

AT LAST ... A GOAL!!! Plzen 0-1 Lyon (Gomis 45)

There’s one! On the stroke of half-time, too. Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> go in at the break 5-1 up on 
aggregate. That’s loosened the beads on my rusty abacus.

6.50pm GMT 

It’s half time in Florence! The score’s 0-0. It’s 0-0 in Valencia, too, though 
let’s face it, that tie’s already wrapped up. More please, Uefa!

6.46pm GMT 

Tevez whips a shot straight down Neto’s throat from 25 yards. That was fired 
with such force that, a yard either side, Juventus were celebrating the opening 
goal. A couple of phases later, and Caceres is attempting an ambitious shot 
from a tight angle on the right. His effort bothers the side netting, but 
nothing else.

6.41pm GMT 

There’s been a goal! But still there’s no opportunity for me to get out the 
orange text generator, because it’s come in the Benfica-Spurs game, andSimon 
Burnton is all over that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/20/benfica-v-tottenham-live-europa-league-report>
. I’ll not break NUJ regulations by duplicating his work for free over here, 
the man’s got to put bread on the table.

6.34pm GMT 

Bugger all, it would seem. It’s 0-0 in all five games being played right now.

6.32pm GMT 

Pogba is a fine player. How Manchester United could do with him these days. He 
lashes a low shot goalwards from 20 yards, though it’s straight at Neto. Still 
0-0 here, and as things stand, it’s Fiorentina heading into the quarter finals. 
Long way to go, of course. Here, what’s happening in the other games?

6.31pm GMT 

Pizarro, 25 yards out to the right of goal, chests the ball down and threads a 
lovely volley a millimetre or so wide of Juve’s left-hand post.Buffon wasn’t 
getting to that. So close. “I dread to think what Daniel Stauss (5.52pm) might 
do when he finds out that there’s a pork chop, black pudding and tattie scone 
underneath those fried eggs,” worries Simon McMahon. I know. Perhaps replace 
the black pudding with the mealy variety? There’s a bit of onion in mealy chud, 
he might be happier if we’ve added the continental taste of vegetable to the 
plate.

6.25pm GMT 

And another chance for Pogba! He hammers a downwards header from a right-wing 
cross straight at Neto from six yards. Fiorentina hack the loose ball clear, 
and it transpires Pogba had run offside anyway, but the Serie A champions are 
beginning to turn the screw here.

6.24pm GMT 

Juve were so close to opening the scoring. They’ve been slowly moving into the 
ascendency, and when Pogba, bombing along the left channel, chested down a 
looping pass and broke into the box, danger loomed for the home side. But with 
only Neto to beat, he flicked his shot straight across the face of goal and out 
on the right.

6.15pm GMT 

Juventus getting themselves back into this game, a little, Tevez guiding a 
lame effort wide right of the target.But the home side will be happy with the 
way they’ve started here. It’s up to Juve to force the issue, of course, having 
conceded the away goal in the first leg. The Old Lady is also second best 
aesthetically, despite the crisp and simple brilliance of her classic 
black-and-white-striped shirt. No shame in that, because Fiorentina’s colours 
are the prettiest in world football, aren’t they?
 Erstwhile purple lily Gabriel Batistuta 
6.06pm GMT 

Juventus are all over the shop here! Cuadrado is in acres of space down the 
right, and his low cross fizzes straight through the Juve six-yard box, begging 
to be tapped in. But there’s no violet shirt waiting to convert. What a ball 
that was!

6.04pm GMT 

All Fiorentina in the first couple of minutes, with Ilicic dragging a low shot 
wide right of Buffon’s goal, then Gomez spurning a wonderful chance as he races 
down the inside-left channel and screws a dismal effort across the face of goal 
and wide right, when it was surely easier to make it 1-0! The atmosphere at the 
Comunale is amazing, as you’d imagine it would be. Everyone’s high on art.

6.01pm GMT 

Right, finally we’ve got something to sink our teeth into, with the 6pm 
kick-offs about to start.I’ll be concentrating on the action in the Renaissance 
city of Florence, where home heroes Fiorentina face down hated rivals Juventus. 
This should be a cracking game: Juve were the better side for about 60 minutes 
of the first leg in Turin, before Fiorentina got their act together and bossed 
the latter stages. That game ended 1-1, and though Juve remain favourites to 
progress despite being held at home, they’ll be rather worried, given this was 
the scene of their only defeat in Serie A this season so far. Anyway, it’s on!

5.52pm GMT 

It’s half-time at the Anzhi-Arena, where it’s goalless between the home side 
Anzhi Makhachkala and visitors AZ Alkmaar.“Two fried eggs on top of a pile of 
french fries, with baked beans on the side and mystery brown sauce up top?” 
splutters difficult customer Daniel Stauss. “British ‘cuisine’ is almost 
entirely dare-based, isn’t it? I’m guessing that particular taste sensation has 
some sort of colloquial or possibly regional name, but I’ve been put so far off 
by that picture that I can’t be bothered to find it.” I’m not sure where you’re 
coming from here, Daniel. There’s nothing mysterious about that sauce. The clue 
is in the colour. It’s brown sauce! Mm, the delicious, spicy tang of brown.It’s 
the taste! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BxonfZQRdkU#t=35s> You’re not going 
to leave a tip, are you?

5.33pm GMT 

Breaking news from Russia! Apparently in the 12th minute of play, AZ won a 
corner. Steven Berghuis took it, but nothing much came of it. The ups and downs 
of live blogging, right here. “The main item of note in this match so far is 
that the pitch is a suspiciously luminous shade of green, which is making my 
eyes hurt,” reports the unfortunate but very dependable Philippa Booth. “I will 
keep you posted on any other critical developments.” We’ll be hearing from 
Philippa again at around 6.45pm GMT.

Updated at 5.35pm GMT

5.22pm GMT 

Mains

Fiorentina v Juventus

Fiorentina: Neto, Tomovic, Rodriguez, Savic, Cuadrado, Aquilani, Pizarro, 
Valero, Vargas, Ilicic, Gomez.
Subs: Rosati, Roncaglia, Bakic, Joaquin, Ambrosini, Pasqual, Matri.

Juventus: Buffon, Caceres, Bonucci, Chiellini, Isla, Vidal, Pirlo, Pogba, 
Asamoah, Llorente, Tevez.
Subs: Storari, Vucinic, Osvaldo, Padoin, Lichtsteiner, Mattiello, Romagna. 

Referee: Howard Webb (England)

Plzen v Lyon

Plzen: Bolek, Reznik, Prochazka, Cisovsky, Limbersky, Hrosovsky, Kolar, Duris, 
Petrzela, Rezek, Tecl.
Subs: Pavlik, Koncal, Horvath, Wagner, Kovarik, Bakos, Stipek. 

Lyon: Lopes, Bakary Kone, Bisevac, Dabo, Miguel Lopes, Gourcuff, Ferri, 
Gonalons, Tolisso, Gomis, Briand.
Subs: Vercoutre, Bedimo, Lacazette, Sarr, Malbranque, N’Jie, Mvuemba.

Referee: Szymon Marciniak (Poland) 


Valencia v Ludogorets

Valencia: Diego Alves, Joao Pereira, Victor Ruiz, Mathieu, 
Gaya, Javi Fuego, Michel, Vargas, Parejo, Cartabia, Alcacer.
Subs: Guaita, Romeu, Jonas, Bernat, Barragan, Portu, Ruiz.

Ludogorets: Vladislav Stoyanov, Junior Caicara, Terziev, Moti, Minev, 
Zlatinski, Dyakov, Misidjan, Marcelinho, Mihail Aleksandrov, Bezjak.
Subs: Cvorovich, Mantyla, Hernandez, Dani Abalo, Choco, Lumu, Michel Platini. 

Referee: Tasos Sidiropoulos (Greece)

Updated at 5.29pm GMT

5.02pm GMT 

And we’re off! And immediately this report is resembling a ...

... on account of the action from Makhachkala being broadcast in Russia, 
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Cambodia, 
Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Djibouti, 
Ecuador, Egypt, France, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Iran, Iraq, Italy, Jordan, 
Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lybia, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mauritania, Montenegro, 
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, Oman, Pakistan, Palestinian Territory, Panama, 
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, 
Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Thialand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, 
United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela and Yemen, 
but not in Little England. Bah!

So no action, other than goal alerts, for you. But stick around, because 
there’ll be plenty of stuff going on in the 6pm and 8pm kick-offs, if ITV or BT 
Sport can be bothered to broadcast any of them. I’m sure they will. You don’t 
want to fill up on bread before the main course anyway.

Updated at 5.28pm GMT

4.40pm GMT 

Starter

Anzhi Makhachkala v AZ Alkmaar

Anzhi Makhachkala: Kerzhakov, Grigalava, Epureanu, Agalarov, Gadzhibekov, 
Mkrtchyan, Sobolev, Aliyev, Bukharov, Burmistrov, Smolov.
Subs: Pomazan, Yeschenko, Angbwa, Serderov, Abdulavov, Dzhenetov. 

AZ Alkmaar: Alvarado, Johansson, Viergever, Reijnen, Poulsen, Wuytens, Gudelj, 
Elm, Berghuis, Johannsson, Beerens.
Subs: De Winter, Gorter, Gudmundsson, Henriksen, Ortiz, Hoedt, Avdic.

Referee: Craig Thomson (Scotland) 

Updated at 4.40pm GMT

2.52pm GMT 

On the menu tonight, ladies and gentlemen...

Your starter at 5pm GMT: Anzhi Makhachkala (0) v AZ Alkmaar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azalkmaar> (1).

The main course is served at 6pm: Fiorentina (1) v Juventus (1), Valencia (3) 
v Ludogorets (0), Plzen (1) v Lyon (4), and of course Benfica (3) v Tottenham 
Hotspur (1), which you canfollow in detail with Simon Burnton here in our 
time-honoured MBM format 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/20/benfica-v-tottenham-live-europa-league-report>
.

And finally at 8pm, time to stuff your saggy fat face with dessert: Salzburg 
(0) v Basel (0), Napoli (0) v Porto (1), and Betis (2) v Sevilla (0).

Consider this preamble an amuse-bouche, or perhaps a taint-free glass of 
room-temperature water to cleanse the palate. As for what represents the 
cheeseboard, coffee, petits fours, and digestifs, I don’t know. I might have a 
tin of lager on the train home, you’ll have to sort yourselves out.


Bon appétit!
 A smörgåsbord, pictured last Christmas 
Updated at 5.27pm GMT
 