
Andrea Pirlo kept Juventus on course for a home Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> final after a superb 
free-kick settled the last-16 battle with their Italian rivalsFiorentina to 
send the Serie A leaders into the quarter-finals.

Pirlo's dead-ball accuracy on 71 minutes, caressing the ball high into the far 
right of the net, handed Juve a 1-0 victory in Florence and a 2-1 aggregate 
success.

His strike came after Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> were reduced to 10 men two 
minutes earlier after Gonzalo Rodríguez was sent off for tripping Fernando 
Llorente just outside the box.

But Porto ended the hopes of another Serie A side, Napoli, after a 2-2 draw in 
Italy.Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, 1-0 down from the 
first leg, levelled the tie on aggregate when Goran Pandev scored in the 21st 
minute.

But the visitors turned the match around after the break, Nabil Ghilas making 
it 1-1 before Ricardo Quaresma scored a brilliant goal in the 76th minute, 
quick feet taking him away from a clutch of defenders and allowing him to fire 
a fierce shot into the top right corner.

Duvan Zapata equalised on the night for Napoli in injury-time, but it could 
not prevent a 3-2 aggregate loss.

Lyon eased through 5-3 against Viktoria Plzen despite a 2-1 second-leg defeat 
in the Czech Republic, while a second-half goal from Paco Alcácer earnedValencia
 a 1-0 win at home to Bulgaria'sLudogorets for a 4-0 aggregate win.

Dick Advocaat guided Zenit St Petersburg to the 2008 Uefa Cup title and his AZ 
Alkmaar side progressed to the last eight after a goalless draw in Ramenskoye 
withAnzhi Makhachkala.

Anzhi, bottom of the Russian Premier League with a solitary win in 21 games, 
lacked the firepower to overturn a 1-0 first-leg defeat and their frustrations 
boiled over in stoppage time when Karlen Mkrtchyan was shown a straight red for 
a poor challenge on Steven Berghuis.

Ten-man Basel ended the impressive campaign of Austria's Salzburg but their 
2-1 away win, after a goalless first leg, was marred by a first-half 
interruption of about 12 minutes after fans of the Swiss side threw objects on 
to the pitch.

Sevilla's 2-0 win away to Real Betis took the aggregate score between the two 
Spanish sides to 2-2. This resulted in a penalty shootout whichSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> won 4-3.
 