
His wife died, his son too, and then his father passed away. He got knocked 
down but he got up again. And again. And again. "I could," he said, "have shot 
myself or I could have carried on." So he carried on. He brought Sporting de 
Gijón back to the first division for the first time in a decade and kept them 
there for three seasons, somehow scrambling clear year after year. The axe 
hovered forever over his neck, glistening malevolently, but he took them toan 
improbable draw with Barcelona 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/feb/14/la-liga-sporting-blunt-barcelona>
 and a historic victory against Real Madrid, achieving what no coach had done 
in nine years and 151 games,beating José Mourinho in his own stadium 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/apr/04/jose-mourinho-madrid-la-liga>
 - the same José Mourinho with whomhe had a bust-up in the car park 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/nov/15/la-liga-manola-preciado-jose-mourinho>
.

He ditched medicine to be a player, only to be ditched by one club because he 
led a strike. His solidarity was symbolic. And if they didn't like Manolo 
Preciado then, they love him now: few men have connected so well with players 
and fans. Media, too. Loud, earthy, and likeable, Preciadois Sporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>. He smokes 40 a day and 
opened the local cider festival. He grew the greatest moustache known to 
mankind and every time he opens his mouth, the floor vibrates. His words are 
almost as coarse as his voice,joders and mothers that gave birth to us 
littering his speech. "We've got balls the size of General Espartero's horse," 
he said. That was some pair and Preciado has some pair. He is a survivor. "I 
asked Rafa Nadal and he taught me how to save a match ball," he announced this 
time last year. "I'm like El Cid: they had hammered the lid shut and buried me, 
but here I am."

For how much longer, though? Even Preciado might not survive this time. The 
league's longest serving manager, in the job since, 2006, is on the edge. The 
board was meeting on Monday morning to decide his fate. "I would," he says, 
"understand any decision the club takes. Football has seen hairs grow on my 
balls and I know how things are."

Preciado is ready. He has been ready for a long time. Sporting have been in 
worse positions before and, until now, he has always survived. So too have 
they. Although their finishes have been more than respectable – 14th, 15th and 
10th - in each of their three seasons in the first division, Sporting have 
spent time in the relegation zone. There have always been moments of doubt, 
there have often been moments of crisis. Back in December 2010, Preciado 
announced: "If I lose against Espanyol, maybe they will sack me. If I lose 
against Levante too, it's possible. And if I lose all of the next three games, 
I'll shoot myself in the head. But I'm not thinking of losing." He didn't lose 
and they didn't sack him. In January, he noted: "After 27 games with only two 
wins, I could have been sent home six months ago but one man decides round here 
and he must see something in me to keep me on."

That man was Manuel Vega-Arango, the club's president. The first time the 
Sporting Gijón coach was called into his office at Mareo was almost three years 
ago. Instead of getting the sack, the piece of paper Vega-Arango slid across 
the table was a new contract. Preciado signed it and carried on but the threat 
never quite went away. Nor, though, did Vega-Arango's support. The president – 
now in his second spell at the club - proudly reminds people that he has never 
sacked a coach.

During the Christmas break Vega-Arango again insisted that Preciado would 
stay. But this time it is different. Sporting Gijón were hammered 5-1 by Real 
Sociedad on Sunday. They conceded two goals in the first two minutes – David 
Zurutuza was on the pitch for five minutes, scored twice and had his face 
headed into next week by Gregory Arnolin. To put that into context, he had 
scored as many goals in two minutes against Sporting as he had in his previous 
53 games put together. Sporting were pathetic. They had, noted AS, "hit rock 
bottom". Well, not rock bottom exactly – that's Zaragoza – but nearly. This 
morning Sporting Gijón are 19th, three points from safety.

Sporting have survived worse and, in truth, five wins is not that bad. But 
this feels worse. They have been in the bottom three for 16 of the 21 weeks so 
far and for each of the last eight. They have lost six of their last eight 
games. It's not just about scores but sensations. A week ago, a Sporting 
supporters' club won €90,997 on the pools. One of the 15 results to come in for 
them was Sporting losing. Maybe it was just insurance betting – you don't want 
your team to lose just as you don't want your house to get broken into but if 
it does at least they give you some compensation. More likely, it was just 
realism. No one expects them to win now; recent performances have been dire. 
There is a mood of malaise.

It goes beyond the purely footballing, too. Preciado's relationship with the 
president and the board has deteriorated. The reality is that he survived the 
last cut because Sporting could not find a suitable replacement – and for 
"suitable", in part read "suitably cheap" – and Preciado knows that. One 
manager turned it down because he feared that he would be the man to take them 
down. In the end, they did not go down: Preciado kept them up. Largely because 
of the spirit of the team – especially at home, where players and fans have 
found a communion rare in Spain.

This season, though, there have been signs of cracks. This weekend, Sporting's 
fans were far from impressed with a desperately bad performance. Some have 
turned against Preciado, whose decisions this year have at times been baffling 
– this weekend he again changed his team round and again it failed. There is a 
sense of exhaustion about him now; some of the enthusiasm has gone – this 
situation is all too familiar, all too depressing and, although he never said 
so at the time, all too predictable. His warnings have not been heeded; his 
team has not been strengthened as he would like. Meanwhile, for the critics, 
even his witticisms don't seem so funny now, El Comercio calling him a "smoke 
seller": Preciado's words might be gravelly but they lack gravitas.

One of the reasons that Preciado has over-achieved is his relationship with 
the players. When Sporting were first promoted, Diego Castro had offers to go 
elsewhere. Preciado asked him what he was going to do, to which Castro replied: 
"If you're staying, I'm staying." The trouble is Castro has gone. And that is 
part of the point. This summer, Sporting lost Sastre, Andre Castro, José Ángel 
and Castro. He was their captain and their best player by miles – top scorer 
and top assist provider. Last season, Castro scored nine times. No one else got 
more than five. One director insisted that Castro was "not Di Stéfano". But as 
the Voz de Asturias put it: "in reality, in this team he was Pelé, Maradona and 
Cruyff rolled into one." Right now, the analysis is alarmingly simple: 
Sporting's team may not be good enough to stay up.

Changing the coach is no guarantee. The board know that. So do the players. 
"This is everyone's fault," said Mate Billic, while Alberto Rivera turned all 
Daily Telegraph to announce: "I don't like change." As for Luis Enrique, the 
former Barcelona and Sporting player, insisted on Monday morning: "Puxa 
Preciado! He has shown before that he is capable [of turning the situation 
around] before." Yes, before. This time, he may not be able to. This time, he 
may not even get the chance. This time they may finally sack him and if they 
do, he'll shrug, light up another fag and get on with it. Preciado will 
survive. He always does.

Talking points

• And so the league comes to a close, with 18 weeks to go. Exaggerated? 
Perhaps. But Real Madrid now have a seven-point lead over Barcelona at the top 
of the table and it is very hard to see that being overturned now. The Catalan 
papers are full of examples of similar leads being blown by Madrid before but 
that was another time and with other teams. Never before have the margins been 
so fine or the total number of points so high. Even if Barcelona were to win
every single game between now and the end of the season, Madrid would still 
need to drop seven points. That's just one point fewer than they have dropped 
in the season so far. Barcelona may well be better than Madrid but Madrid are 
better than everyone else. And they only have to play Barcelona once more.

Besides, it is Barcelona who look more likely to drop points over the next few 
weeks than Madrid. Rather than cutting the gap, logic suggests that the 
difference will grow greater still. Barcelona have now dropped points away in 
Villarreal, Valencia, Bilbao, Cornellá, Getafe, and San Sebastián, they have 
only 15 first-team players fit and available, a Copa del Rey semi-final to play 
against Valencia and there is a sluggishness about them. They have Osasuna and 
Atlético to come away in the next month, plus Valencia at home. Madrid face 
Getafe, Rayo and Betis away. The title is Madrid's to lose. The question is how 
will Madrid feel if they win the league losing twice to Barcelona? How about we 
let Mourinho answer that? Asked that very question, he replied: "I feel fine."

• Valencia ruined the pattern in another game as notable for smashed faces as 
smashed nets. Had they beaten Racing de Santander, Real Madrid would have been 
seven points ahead of Barcelona who would have been seven points ahead of 
Valencia, who would have been seven points ahead of Levante. An 87th minute 
equaliser ruined that, as Racing continue to get decent results but still not 
quite pull clear of trouble.

• "He wanted it, but well …" Well? Fernando Llorente smiled a sweet smile. 
Well, you know. And so it was that Alejandro Arribas – who had scored his first 
goal for Rayo in 50 games – went without the match ball. Instead, Llorente took 
it after scoring his firstLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> hat-trick in a 3-2 win. 
"They've got money worries and you go and take the ball off them," tutted one 
team-mate, scrawling his congratulations on the ball.

• Isco is going to be a great player but on Sunday he stood out for a truly 
dreadful challenge as Málaga beat Sevilla at the Rosaleda. It finished 2-1, 
keeping Málaga's hopes of a Champions League place intact – almost despite 
themselves. Sevilla, with a goal disallowed and booted about, slipped to 11th. 
They're getting a bit better; their results, on the other hand, are getting 
worse.

Results: Espanyol 1–0 Mallorca, Rayo 2–3 Athletic, Madrid 3–1 Zaragoza, 
Villarreal 0–0 Barcelona, Betis 1–2 Granada, Real Sociedad 5–1 Sporting, 
Levante 1–2 Getafe, Racing 2–2 Valencia, Málaga 2–1 Sevilla. Monday night: 
Osasuna-Atlético.

• Latest La Liga standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=29>
 