
Anything Liverpool can do this season, Everton, it seems, can do equally well, 
if not better. Having seen their local rivals dispose of lower-league 
opposition down in Bournemouth earlier in the day, Everton looked just as 
comfortable in easing past the challenge of League OneStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage>. With just one point between 
the fourth-placed Reds and sixth-placed Blues in the Premier League, Tuesday's 
Merseyside derby at Anfield could be one of the pivotal matches of the season.

Unfortunately for Roberto Martínez, however, Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> will go into the game with an 
already extensive injury list added to by the loss of the Costa Rican 
midfielder Bryan Oviedo, who suffered a double fracture of the leg early in the 
game. Even with Oviedo joining Seamus Coleman, Antolín Alcaraz, Ross Barkley, 
Steven Pienaar, Gerard Deulofeu, Darron Gibson and Arouna Koné on the 
sidelines, however, Martínez was prepared to acknowledge that an FA Cup triumph 
and a top-four finish remain possible.

"I'm excited, I think we have a strong enough squad to face the competitions," 
the Spaniard said. "If anything, being involved with theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> brings you extra competition for 
places."

It was true that whereas Liverpool were at close to full strength on the south 
coast, Martínez named a distinctly unfamiliar team. It included a first start 
of the season for Tony Hibbert at right-back, a debut for Aiden McGeady as part 
of an advanced three in midfield and Steven Naismith as a lone striker.

Before the game Martínez, rather ludicrously, had insisted that, as the home 
team, Stevenage had to be considered favourites, which conveniently ignored 
that Graham Westley's team are rock bottom of League One. There was also, the 
Stevenage manager had said, a chance that Everton would be "bewildered by the 
bizarre atmosphere" of the club's Lamex Stadium. Westley was probably not 
referring to the return to the commentary box of Andy Gray three years to the 
day after being sacked by Sky for "unacceptable and offensive behaviour", 
though the presence of the former Scotland striker may have prompted the 
weather gods to unleash a spectacular rainstorm an hour before kick-off.

That the pitch took it surprisingly well was to Everton's advantage, though it 
was Stevenage who nearly took the early lead. The match was probably safe after 
five minutes, by which time Stevenage's Lucas Akins had seen his goal-bound 
shot blocked by Everton's John Stones, before Steven Naismith put the visitors 
ahead. What a difference it might have made, the more so when barely a minute 
later Kevin Mirallas's shot was saved by Chris Day, but McGeady pulled the ball 
back across goal for Naismith to control and prod home from close range.

The second goal, finished by Naismith after an error by Stevenage centre-half 
Jon Ashton, ended the game as a competitive spectacle. Westley's players stuck 
to their task, but having been fortunate not to fall further behind when 
Mirallas's left-foot shot was saved by Day, the resulting corner was not 
properly cleared and John Heitinga – brought on for Phil Jagielka at half-time 
– headed Mirallas's overhead cross past Day for Everton's third.

From then on, for Everton, it was a matter of playing out time, while doing 
their best to avoid further injuries. François Zoko drove narrowly wide as 
Stevenage continued to seek consolation, but their supporters were heading out 
of the stadium long before Magaye Gueye scored Everton's fourth.

Westley was characteristically ungracious in defeat. "If we'd got a goal early 
it could have been different, but we didn't show enough mental strength," he 
said. "In all honesty, there was nothing they did that surprised us, but the 
goals we conceded were soft, there were errors leaving to every goal, and if 
you do that you're not going to win any game."
 