
It was a night when Everton barely offered the briefest sense they might be 
ripe for an upset. David Moyes packed his team with just about all of the usual 
cast, resisting any temptation to make wholesale changes, and their performance 
could probably be summed up by the reaction of theCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> supporters late-on, when the 
manager withdrew Leighton Baines and Leon Osman. On both occasions there was 
rich applause from the home stands in recognition of the pair's contribution to 
a straightforward victory.

Osman had scored the pick of the goals with some lovely footwork and 
anticipation early in the second half. Nikica Jelavic's seventh goal of the 
season, followed by a Baines penalty, had put Everton in control during the 
first half and by the end it was difficult to recall a single moment when they 
had given their opponents any real encouragement. Even when Russell Penn, 
Cheltenham's best player, invigorated their first sell-out crowd since 2006 by 
making it 3-1,Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> quickly 
put them back in their place.

Seamus Coleman clipped in a clever finish and the prize of a fourth-round tie 
at Sunderland or Bolton Wanderers was secure well before Marouane Fellaini 
completed the win in the final minutes.

Whaddon Road, as the locals still know it, provided a nice setting for a 
third-round tie under the floodlights, with its uneven pitch, the advertising 
hoardings for "Tony Mustoe's Carpets" and the row of trees that are visible 
behind the little terrace at one end of the pitch.

Yet Moyes had taken great care not to underestimate their opponents. Steven 
Pienaar was not among the travelling squad but otherwise it was a full-strength 
XI for the Premier League's fifth-placed side. Cheltenham, fourth in League 
Two, were quick to the ball and full of hard running but the gulf in talent was 
considerable.

"We did a really good job," Moyes said. "I wanted to play the strongest 
possible team. I was disappointed earlier in the season when we lost our League 
Cup tie against Leeds and some of the players I put in were not up to scratch. 
I wasn't going to make the same mistake again. It might have looked a bad 
decision if we'd picked up any injuries. But we're not involved in the Europa 
League or the League Cup so I think we should give it a go in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> and do the best we can."

They scored with their first meaningful attack, Jelavic following up after 
Fellaini's shot had come back off a post, and the prospect of a giantkilling 
was all but extinguished after 21 minutes when the referee, Kevin Friend, 
decided Alan Bennett had been climbing over Fellaini inside the penalty area, 
giving Baines the chance to score for a second successive match. In between, a 
curling free-kick from the left-back had brought a splendid save from the 
Cheltenham goalkeeper, Scott Brown, and Jelavic had fired a good chance wide 
from Fellaini's knockdown.

Everton had immediately set about getting the message across that they were 
not the kind of team lower-league opposition should consider vulnerable in such 
humble surroundings. But Billy Jones, the Cheltenham left-back, will have 
enjoyed the moment when he nutmegged Victor Anichebe in the first half and Penn 
deserved his goal, beating Tim Howard at the near post to continue Everton's 
biggest problem this season: keeping clean sheets.

Cheltenham, however, defended far too generously and Everton played with a 
sense of control as soon as they had taken the lead. There was never really a 
point when there was incessant pressure on the home goal, but there was also a 
strong suspicion the top-division side were playing within themselves.

Four minutes after the restart Anichebe's pass picked out Baines on the left 
and Cheltenham's right-back, Sido Jombati, was guilty of losing his man. 
Baines, such a terrific attacker in those positions, cut the ball into Osman's 
path and the midfielder had the presence of mind to delay his shot, slipping 
between two defenders with a change of direction and beating Brown with a 
left-foot shot.

It was a lovely goal, demonstrating the mix of skill and composure that has 
helped Osman break into the England team, and at that stage it might have been 
understandable if Cheltenham had gone into damage-limitation mode. Instead they 
surprised everyone, perhaps even themselves, by pulling one back within two 
minutes. Kaid Mohamed played the pass and Penn fired in a left-foot effort.

The problem for Cheltenham was that they looked susceptible just about every 
time their opponents attacked in numbers. Just before the hour Anichebe picked 
out Coleman running through from right-back and the defender clipped a shot 
over the oncoming Brown.

Anichebe, causing all sorts of problems, was also involved for the final goal, 
Fellaini putting it away on the half-volley to cap another impressive 
performance from the Belgian. "They showed a lot of respect for the FA Cup 
putting out that team," Mark Yates, the Cheltenham manager, reflected. "We can 
be proud of how we played but it's a big learning curve."
 