
Ronald Koeman has said he will not accept second-choice transfer options in 
the January window asEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> 
look to follow the signing of Ademola Lookman with a deal for Morgan 
Schneiderlin.

Everton made their first signing of the winter window on Thursday when the 
19-year-old arrived from Charlton Athletic for an initial £7.5m fee, 
potentially rising to £11m. Whereas the England Under-20 winger has been signed 
for his potential, Koeman has clear targets in mind to strengthen the first 
team this month, with Schneiderlin identified as a priority for central 
midfield. There remains interest in the midfielder’sManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> club-mate Memphis 
Depay.

Everton confirm signing of Ademola Lookman from Charlton Athletic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/everton-announce-signing-of-ademola-lookman-charlton-athletic>
United rejected Everton’s opening offer of £19m for Schneiderlin but 
negotiations will continue, with Koeman insisting he is not interested in 
backup options.

“We know what we want,” the Everton manager said. “We know the players we want 
and it is up to the board to make the deal and then, OK, if we don’t get that 
positive call from the board then I am focused on my job, which is to prepare 
the team for the next game. We will see if finally we get the players in 
because that is really important for the team. If not we don’t sign other 
players because that is not what I want.”

Schneiderlin has made only three Premier League appearances under José 
Mourinho this season but United are looking to recoup most of the £24m they 
paid Southampton for the player in 2015. Koeman said: “Sometimes business is 
really difficult. It is always a game between the club who needs to sell or 
likes to sell a player and what Everton or other teams like to pay for the 
player. These are negotiations. Sometimes it is going fast and sometimes it 
takes more time than we like.

“The final decision is always by the board. I am not the man involved in the 
money or the number to sign a new player. I give my technical view of the 
player. If the final decision by the board is that the player is too expensive 
and we don’t pay that price for the player I need to accept it.”

Lookman has signed a four-and-a-half-year contract and, although not in 
Koeman’s immediate first-team plans, he will be able to press his claims by 
training with the senior squad. The manager said Everton had to move swiftly 
for the coveted winger, with the club’s academy short of options in that 
position.

Everton seal naming rights deal with Alisher Usmanov’s USM Holdings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/everton-naming-rights-alisher-usmanov-usm-holdings-farhad-moshiri>
“First of all you need to look always at your under-23 team,” he said. “If you 
have that winger then you don’t sign a new young boy for that money in that 
position. We have Dominic [Calvert-Lewin] as a striker and Tom Davies as a 
midfielder and so you don’t sign a player in his position. Yes, we like to 
bring in an older, more experienced midfielder in that position but you always 
look inside at what you have and don’t have, then you try to bring other 
players in.

“Lookman is 19. He will not play next week against Manchester City but he will 
be involved in training and we will see how he improves on this level. It is 
good that we bring in the boy at this point of the season. That is the best for 
him and for us. I saw a lot of the young boy. Of course it is a little bit 
different because young boys are normally part of the scouting in the club but 
everybody was really enthusiastic about him. I had the information and I agreed 
with all of them that we needed to sign this young player.”

Koeman confirmed Calvert-Lewin would be out for up to eight weeks with an 
ankle injury sustained on his full debut against Southampton on Monday. The 
19-year-old limped off after 12 minutes of his first Premier League start.

Everton’s manager also said Gerard Deulofeu is unlikely to be sold this month 
despite the Spain Under-21 captain being linked with a move to Milan or Roma. 
Deulofeu has not featured since the 3-2 defeat at Watford on 10 December but 
Koeman said: “At the moment no because of the injury to first [Yannick] Bolasie 
and second Dominic. Then there is no possibility for Deulofeu at the moment. We 
have had no approaches.”
 