
Farhad Moshiri, Everton’s major shareholder, has said he will not allow the 
club to become a museum as it was confirmed plans to relocate to a new dockside 
stadium have progressed with Liverpool city council.

Moshiri outlined his ambitions for Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> at the club’s annual general 
meeting on Wednesday, his first since acquiring a 49.9% stake last February. 
The British-Iranian billionaire has made an interest-free loan of £80m to the 
club, used to pay off other loans totalling £54.8m plus a severance payment to 
the former manager Roberto Martínez, and has visited potential sites for a new 
stadium in recent months at Bramley Moore dock and Stonebridge Cross on the 
outskirts of the city.

Everton’s preference is to relocate to north Liverpool docks and while there 
was no confirmation of a stadium move at the AGM, the chief executive, Robert 
Elstone, and the mayor, Joe Anderson, said the club and council were working 
closely on the complex move.

Manchester United reject Everton bid for Morgan Schneiderlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-united-everton-morgan-schneiderlin-transfer-west-brom>
Anderson, asked to address shareholders by the Everton chairman, Bill 
Kenwright, said: “Everybody in this room wants the waterfront site. We have got 
‘Plan Bs’ but everyone is working exhaustingly hard to deliver the site you all 
want. It is a unique opportunity to seize so we will be supporting the club. 
This is the most exciting opportunity this club has had in decades and we will 
make sure it is developed and it happens along with the leadership there and 
with me working alongside Everton FC.”

Elstone, who told the AGM that Everton are close to announcing a new shirt 
sponsorship deal and naming rights partner for the training ground worth £75m 
in total, added: “We have looked at planning and transport issues. One site is 
more favourable. The opportunities are much greater at that site but so are the 
costs. We have to find answers to some of the uncertainties and risks because 
it is the biggest decision the club will ever make.”

The chief executive believes it will be two to three months before an 
announcement is made.

Moshiri said his ambition was to restore Everton to the elite of English 
football and that wallowing in a rich history or winning popularity contests 
would not suffice. The former Arsenal shareholder said: “It’s not enough to say 
you are a special club and a great club – we don’t want to be a museum. We need 
to be competitive and to win. The gold standard is the Premier League position, 
not the FA Cup, and I love the FA Cup. You need to do well in the league. That 
is where Everton’s competitive edge will be measured and needs to be totally 
focused.

“There is a mini-league emerging this year of six clubs. Three of the six 
clubs are historically big clubs – Arsenal, Manchester United and Liverpool – 
who started succeeding after us with the global expansion of the Premier 
League. Manchester City and Chelsea bankrolled their success before financial 
fair play came in.

“Tottenham is a mix of good luck, Harry Kane coming through and being in 
London with London ticket prices, so they have a long waiting list so can go 
for a big new stadium, but they are not there yet. West Ham with their new 
stadium could have been a threat but it is not working that way.

“We have a position but we do not have all the time in the world. We need to 
establish ourselves and we have a window to do it. Bill and previous managers 
kept the club close to the elite for many years but now we need to look at a 
sustainable base to be among the elite. It takes time but we are committed, 
that’s why we are here.”

Everton also announced at the AGM that season ticket prices for the 2017-18 
campaign would be the same or below this season’s prices. It was projected the 
club would receive £133.6m in broadcasting revenue this season with Moshiri’s 
loan saving the club more than £5m a year in interest payments on other loans.
 