
Everton's Bryan Oviedo suffered what his manager, Roberto Martínez, said 
appeared to be a double fracture of his left leg during Saturday night's FA Cup 
tie againstStevenage <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage>, raising 
fears about the 23-year-old midfielder's future.

The injury also dealt a blow to Costa Rica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/costarica>, one of England's opponents in 
the group stages of this year's World Cup. Oviedo, one of his country's 
established international stars, slid in for a routine challenge in the 16th 
minute of the game but his studs appeared to catch in the turf. A rainstorm an 
hour before kick-off had softened the ground at the Lamex Stadium.

His distressed team-mates immediately called for medical assistance and a 
stretcher, and Oviedo was taken straight to hospital.Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> were already ahead at the time 
and went on to win the fourth-round tie 4-0.

"It was very unfortunate," Martínez said. "There was nothing malicious 
intended, but unfortunately I think he's picked up a double fracture. We'll 
assess what is the next step for him, but it's one of those moments which you 
don't get many of in football, thankfully, but leaves a bad taste, a bad 
feeling.

"Bryan has been showing his level this season, the quality that he has, so 
it's one of those moments you feel terribly sad for him, because it was a great 
time in his career with the World Cup coming up. All we want now is for Bryan 
to fully recover as quickly as he can and make sure he comes back."

It is hard to believe Oviedo, who has already made 26 appearances for Costa 
Rica, will regain fitness in time for his country's match against England in 
Belo Horizonte on 24 June.

But Martínez, who can become the first manager in the history of the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> to retain the trophy with a 
different club, said the manner in which his players had refocused after the 
incident demonstrated their professionalism.

"It was difficult for my players. They had begun brightly, defended well and 
shown great concentration, so it was a real test for my players. They showed an 
incredible love for the game by giving no excuses and doing what they needed to 
do to win the football game.

"That's a really important ingredient if you want to be successful in this 
competition, so I'm really pleased with that, excited about the next round and 
looking forward to the draw."
 