
A campaign by a software engineer to fund distribution to every MP of a book 
touted as the “ultimate guide to Brexit” has crashed through its target, just 
days after it was launched – thanks to backing from more than 200 members of 
the public.

Oxfordshire-based Justen Hyde launched the appeal 
<https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/brexit-book-club> to to put copies of 
Ian Dunt’sBrexit: What the Hell Happens Now? 
<https://www.canburypress.com/store/p22/Brexit-What-the-hell-happens-now-Ian-Dunt-ISBN-9780995497825>
 into the hands of MPs a week ago. Seven days later, it had already passed its 
£4,000 goal. With three weeks to go until the fund closes, the organiser 
expects more money to come in.

Among high-profile backers for the initiative is philosopher and vocal remain 
campaigner AC Grayling, who contributed £100. He wrote on the Justgiving page: 
“Harass every MP until they have read Dunt’s book.”

Hyde said: “I’m just staggered by the response. I don’t even have much of a 
social media presence, so this has been incredible.” He was inspired to send 
copies of the book after he became increasingly frustrated by the level of 
debate surrounding Brexit.

 “After the referendum, I have been waiting for some sort of clarity from the 
government about what happens next,” he said. “But I have become so frustrated 
that no one in power seems to have a clue about what they are doing. If I 
approached my [job] in the same way that the government is approaching Brexit, 
I would be in deep trouble.”

Though he voted remain, he said his campaign was bipartisan and aimed simply 
at ensuring those in power are informed about the complexity of negotiating the 
UK’s departure from the EU.

“I picked up the book to find out what people in the know would do,” said 
Hyde, who lives in Witney, the former constituency of David Cameron, who was 
replaced as MP by Robert Courts, a leave campaigner. “I wanted to send a copy 
to him, not to change his mind but because if we are going to go ahead with 
this, we need to be clear about the task.”

Dunt’s book was written to cut through the propaganda, myth and half-truths 
perpetrated by both sides during the EU referendum campaign in June. The 
author, editor of thepolitics.co.uk <http://politics.co.uk/> website, spoke to 
constitutional and trade experts about the risks involved in Brexit 
negotiations and how to minimise any negative effect on the UK. The author 
said: “It was based on exactly the opposite of what Michael Gove wanted to do 
[by ignoring experts].”

Hyde said he hoped reading the book would “challenge the magical thinking 
among MPs that they can make Brexit a success simply by stating that it will be 
a success”.

Inspiration to send the book to all 650 MPs came from Skeptics in the Pub, the 
critical thinking and drinking group that sent a copy of Mark Henderson’s The 
Geek Manifesto to every MP to improve debate around science.

Canbury, the publisher of Brexit: What the Hell Happens Now? 
<https://www.canburypress.com/store/p22/Brexit-What-the-hell-happens-now-Ian-Dunt-ISBN-9780995497825>
 has responded to the campaign by paying for half the books, reducing a 
potential bill of £6,393 to £3,959. Hyde had initially planned to use any extra 
money raised to send copies to members of the House of Lords, but news that a 
Lords committee is pressuring the government to put in place a transitional 
deal with EU, to ease the process of Brexit, has changed his mind.

 “They are raising all the questions we want them to,” Hyde said. “What we 
think will be more useful is to send copies to all the members of the Scottish 
parliament and Welsh and Northern Ireland assemblies because they will have a 
significant role to play in negotiations.”

He added that he hoped MSPs and devolved assembly members would pressurise MPs 
to read the book. If insufficient money is raised to fund extra copies, 
remaining money will be donated to reading charity the Book Trust.

Dunt said he had been encouraged by Hyde’s campaign. “There has been so little 
content to the debate that MPs are having in parliament, I really hope that 
those who are backing leave will read it,” he said.

Dunt’s book is only the latest literary giveaway to be targeted at MPs. 
Earlier this week, a pensioner presented a collection of short stories, memoirs 
and essays about refugees to British parliamentarians. Michaela Fyson handed 
over copies – one for each MP – ofA Country of Refuge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/04/leading-writers-refugee-debate-crowdfunded-anthology-monica-ali-william-boyd-marina-lewycka>
, with help from the book’s editor Lucy Popescu, at an event attended by MPs, 
members of the Lords, writers and refugees.
 