
Every game during the inaugural AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> 
Women’s competition will be televised live.

The AFL has revealed Carlton and Collingwood will kick off the season under 
lights at Melbourne’s Olympic Park on Friday, February 3.

Fox Footy will show all 28 regular season games live, while the Seven Network 
will broadcast eight prime-time clashes – including the season opener and the 
March 25 grand final.

AFL footy by and for women: our rules, our game, our story | Nicole Hayes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/afl-footy-by-and-for-women-our-rules-our-game-our-story>
All but six games will be played as standalone contests at suburban grounds 
across the country, offering free entry for supporters.

The Western Bulldogs will host Melbourne at Whitten Oval on February 18 after 
the men’s pre-season game, while five games will be played as curtain-raisers.

AFL game development manager Simon Lethlean said the broadcast deal 
represented a major win for the league and women’s sport.

“I think you saw from the All-Star match last year that it’s very watchable, 
as are the players,” he said.

The grand final will be played during round one of the men’s season, with the 
Saturday afternoon timeslot left vacant to avoid clashes.

The venue is yet to be determined, with the AFL still weighing up whether the 
top-ranked side should automatically host the decider.

But while the MCG will be available, Lethlean said the league was leaning 
towards a smaller venue.

“We’ll do what’s right for the look and feel of the match but also for the 
players and what’s best for the game,” he said.

Carlton’s Madeline Keryk said it was a vote of confidence in the competition 
to have most games played at their own venues rather than alongside the men’s 
clashes.

“I think it’s a very good endorsement for the program and the teams,” she said.

“It’ll be really good if we can get some good numbers along to those games and 
support, especially playing at the community grounds.”

Adelaide, Collingwood, Fremantle and the Western Bulldogs have each been given 
four home games, compared to three for the other teams.
 