
The former England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> footballer 
Ray Wilkins has told a court he is an alcoholic who has no choice but to stay 
away from alcohol or face ruining his life, as he received a four-year ban for 
drink-driving.


Wilkins, 59, pleaded guilty to the offence at Uxbridge magistrates court after 
being found to have been three times over the limit.


A member of the public spotted him driving his Mercedes in the middle of the 
road and straddling a bus lane along the A4 northern perimeter road in London 
on 1 July.


He was seen striking a kerb and drinking alcohol from a bottle behind the 
wheel. The witness took his keys away when the car stopped, to prevent a 
possible accident.


The district judge, Tim Boswell, gave Wilkins – who has two previous 
drink-driving convictions from 2013 – a 10-week suspended prison sentence, 
ordered him to do 140 hours’ unpaid work and banned him from driving for 48 
months.


Wilkins said: “Abstinence is the only way I can cure this situation.” 


Wilkins’ lawyer, Sarah-Kate McIntyre, told the court of his long-running 
battle against alcoholism, saying the former top-flight footballer was “ashamed 
and embarrassed” to be in the dock.

He believes he “blacked out”, she said. McIntyre said that Wilkins appreciated 
the danger he caused to himself and the public as well as the hardship he had 
caused his family, and that he accepted full responsibility for the offence.


Wilkins, who was found to have 100 micrograms of alcohol per 100ml of breath, 
is on an intensive residential rehabilitation course at the Priory hospital in 
Woking, Surrey.


Of the offence, McIntyre said that Wilkins did not remember anything that 
happened as he left a golf club where he was attending a charity event.


She said: “He believes he blacked out, as he has done before … Mercifully no 
one was hurt.

“He was cooperative with the police. His reaction was, ‘That’s my life 
fucked.’ He is now working hard to turn his life around. He also knows that his 
marriage is in jeopardy if he continues to drink.”

McIntyre said Wilkins, of Cobham, Surrey, had done work with Sporting Chance, 
a clinic which was set up by former England and Arsenal captain Tony Adams in 
2000 so that sports stars could get support in tackling their alcoholism.


When Wilkins left that facility, he did not believe he was an alcoholic, she 
said. “He does now,” she added.


The member of the public flagged down a police car that night. A police 
officer noticed that the ex-footballer’s eyes were “glazed, he was unsteady on 
his feet and there was a smell of alcohol” coming from him, according to Izolda 
Gribbin, prosecuting.

Getting to his feet in the dock, Wilkins told the judge that his previous 
treatment with Sporting Chance had been “residential but nowhere near as 
intense as I am doing now”.


His current treatment is due to end on 1 August. He stood again when the judge 
asked if he was aware that he must not drink again after McIntyre pointed out 
that “should he relapse, his marriage would be in jeopardy”.


Wilkins said: “Yes, I do. Abstinence is the only way I can cure this 
situation.” He is also doing work with the League Managers Association.

The judge told Wilkins: “You provided your guilty plea promptly. You are now 
someone who recognises the problem you have and you are taking steps to deal 
with that problem. It will not be easy. This court sees many people battling 
addiction so you have a tough road ahead.”


The judge said he appreciated that Wilkins had a “genuine desire to change”. 
Wilkins responded by saying “absolutely”. He was also ordered to pay £85 costs 
and a £115 victim surcharge.

Before leaving the dock, Wilkins, dressed in a black three-piece suit, told 
the judge: “Thank you for dealing with it as swiftly as you have, sir. It has 
been a great help.”


Wilkins was England captain on 10 occasions and capped 84 times, including at 
the 1986 Mexico World Cup.


He played for AC Milan and Paris St Germain before going on to become a 
manager and coach for teams includingChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and Queens Park Rangers. 


Outside court, he said: “I will be judged on the crime I have committed and 
that is 100% [right].


“I only ask I will not be judged on the alcohol problem I have. I am an 
addict. I also ask that my family can be shown just a tad more privacy. I would 
be delighted with that.”
 