
At my church, Holy Child Jesus <http://www.holychildjesuschurch.org/> in 
Richmond Hill, New York, Mondays are usually a day of routine: the collection 
is counted, messages are answered and the building is swept and mopped and put 
back in order. There are rarely any surprises.

That’s how it was all morning on 23 November last year. The only irregularity 
was the assembling of the nativity scene the church displays every year. 
Recently ordained, I’d only been assigned to Holy Child Jesus in February, and 
was surprised to see our custodian Jose putting it together as I arrived. I 
remember thinking it was too early (we hadn’t even had Thanksgiving) and made a 
mental note to talk to Jose about it after lunch.

My own morning schedule included a meeting with two parishioners who were 
preparing for their wedding. Partway through, my phone started ringing. I 
apologised to the couple and ignored it, but my secretary came to the door and 
said, “Father, can I interrupt – there’s an emergency in the church.” I excused 
myself, saying I would be back as soon as I could.

As we walked over to the church, my secretary explained: “Jose says he’s found 
un niño.” In Spanish, niño means boy, so I imagined a child who had wandered 
out of school or perhaps run away from home. I know most of the young kids in 
the neighbourhood and had already started imagining whom it might be. I was in 
for a big surprise.

Jose was standing near Mary’s altar, where I’d left him earlier that day 
assembling the nativity. I could see no sign of a child, but as we approached 
he said: “I went out to lunch, and when I came back I found him.” I followed 
his gaze to the nativity scene, and that’s when I saw him huddled inside and 
wrapped in a towel – the youngest baby I’ve ever seen.

The towel was wet, probably from the birth, and after carefully unwrapping the 
baby we discovered the umbilical cord still attached. He was dark-haired and 
healthy looking – there was a little dried blood in the creases around his neck 
and on his body, as you would expect with a newborn; but he seemed unharmed and 
wasn’t even crying, just cooing and gurgling, apparently content.

We called 911 and alerted a local school nurse, who told us the baby probably 
wasn’t more than a few hours old. While we waited for the ambulance, I ran back 
to my room to fetch clean, dry towels, calling into my office where the couple 
were still waiting. I told them we’d have to reschedule.

The baby was taken to a nearby hospital. We weren’t allowed to visit, but soon 
heard that doctors were happy with his condition. Meanwhile, the news spread 
fast. Even as police tried to track down the child’s mother, my parishioners 
started discussing potential names. Emmanuel and Jose were mentioned; Jesus, 
inevitably, was popular.

I spent 28 years on death row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/21/28-years-on-death-row> 
His mother was found within a day or so. I gather she’s a young woman, just 
18, who had come from Mexico and was living with an aunt. She had hidden her 
pregnancy under baggy clothes and given birth alone in her aunt’s apartment.

Footage from surveillance cameras showed her stopping off with the baby at a 
convenience store and buying the towel. The police estimated he couldn’t have 
been alone for more than 15 minutes before Jose found him. Apparently, the 
mother had tried two other churches before walking into ours, the first that 
was unlocked.

She wasn’t prosecuted; New York State’s safe-haven law allows desperate 
parents to leave newborns in a safe location. Confidentiality rules mean we 
haven’t been told if the baby has been adopted or returned to his mother, but I 
like to imagine he’s still part of our community. I just feel blessed that he 
was left with us. I’ve always considered our church a place of love and 
compassion, and I’m proud we provided a frightened young woman with a place of 
refuge.

• As told to Chris Broughton

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
 