 In the interest of understanding bodily exposure and how it affects social 
interaction, I have decided to shave my head. 'You can't do this! I'm going to 
cry if you do. Why would you do this to yourself?' Fred is my aerobics student. 
He is a former fat person, and speaks in a high, persistent voice. He has taken 
my class several times a week for two years. We have never had a personal 
conversation. 'I'm going to call Roberta and tell her not to let you do it,' he 
says.
 Roberta takes aerobics, too.

 She and I chat in the locker room, sharing body lotion and updates on our 
love lives. She is engaged to marry a hairdresser. 'Roberta changes her hair 
every week,' I answer. 'She won't care if I shave my head.' 'You can't do 
this!' moans Fred, standing by the stereo as I rewind the music for my next 
class. I should never have mentioned anything about it. I was just making small 
talk. Why does it matter to him? What makes him think it is appropriate to try 
to influence my appearance? Why is he so interested in what I look like? I am 
suddenly aware that this man spends three hours a week or more looking at me 
joggling around in black Spandex. He's upset because I'll be ruining his floor 
show. 'It'll grow back,' I tell him, and walk away.

 Olivia is a public high-school senior. She and I meet once a week for a 
tutoring session. 'The Bible,' Olivia tells me, 'is like a book on how to live. 
It tells us how to act, how to dress, what make-up to wear, everything. Women 
are not supposed to shave their heads.' 'Is it okay for men?' I ask.

 'For men, it's okay,' she laughs in her warm, French accent.

 'But what if I'm a really good person, I do everything right, except I shave 
my head?' I say. We are talking in the shabby library of her school. Our hour 
is almost up.

 'Well, the Bible also tells women not to wear pants, but I don't believe that 
part of it,' she replies. 'I believe it's not how you look but what's inside 
that counts with God.' 'I hope so. Because I'm still going to do it.' 'I'll 
pray for you,' she tells me as she stands up to leave.

 'I have to warn Grandma B,' says my father. She is coming for a visit to 
celebrate her 80th birthday.

 'Oh no!' screams Grandma, on the phone from south Florida. 'Promise me you'll 
wear a hat when I take you to Show Boat. Promise me you'll keep it on!' Later, 
she calls back to say she was just teasing, and she's sure it will grow back 
quickly. 'But couldn't you just imagine doing it instead?' she asks. 'Wouldn't 
it be almost the same?' 'You may be sacrificing your sex life,' warns my 
friend, Holden, who uses expensive products to keep his hairline from receding.

 'You'll have to wear a wig when we go out,' jokes Jeff.

 'You're going to love it,' says Tom Comet, chainsaw juggler and fire-eater. 
He hasn't had hair for three years. 'It's addictive,' he tells me. 'I wish I 
could be permanently bald.' Somehow I think Tom's idea of pleasure is different 
from mine.

 'What's the big deal?' asks Laurel, who has gorgeous curls of her own. 'I 
know lots of women who are bald. It's very sexy.' 'Can I cut it?' asks Phyllis.

 She already has an electric shaver.

 'Can I take pictures of you?' asks Marshall, her boyfriend, who does street 
photography in gritty black and white.

 'Can I watch?' asks Jessica.

 'Can I have the hair?' asks Marnie's boyfriend, Harry. He wants it for an art 
project.

 I say yes to everyone. Why not? By shaving my head, I am asking to be looked 
at. I am interested in finding out what happens when I remove the everyday 
signs that identify me as normal to the rest of the population. What happens 
when I strip myself of my most natural protective covering, and bare my skull 
to the sky? Will people treat me differently? I expect the climate will be 
cold. Raindrops will splatter off my head and strangers will stare.

 Who will love me? Who will want to have sex with me? 'I'll still play with 
you,' says Jessica. 'I'll make sure the other kids don't tease you.' Haircut 
day, Phyllis, Marshall, and I drink beer and watch sentimental dramas on 
television. Marshall is going to take pictures and Phyll will shoot a video. I 
have become their art project. Phyll does four different haircuts on me before 
we get to the skull - groovy shag, Twenties bob, Audrey Hepburn fringe, 
Rosemary's Baby. Finally, she buzzes it down. It takes several times over with 
the shaver to get it short enough, and even then there's hair left. Rubbing my 
hands over my scalp covers my palms with fuzz, so in the bathroom, I put my 
head in the sink. The warm water stings, and thousands of tiny hairs pour down 
the drain. When I stand up, I am bald. A shadow of brown rings my head, but the 
skin is clearly visible. I feel naked.

 In the pale blue, beaded top I'm wearing for Marshall's pictures, I look like 
someone in one of the photographs Diane Arbus took before she killed herself: 
inmates of a home - whether for the emotionally disturbed or mentally disabled, 
I'm not sure - dressed up for church. The women's faces look androgynous, even 
masculine - no make-up, no self-conscious, socially acceptable smiles. Their 
shorn hair and lost expressions seem dissociated from their formal holiday 
clothes. In the mirror, I catch myself like that - head separate from body, 
unadorned and vulnerable atop a hard, sparkly costume.

 The next day, I stay in bed all day wearing a wool cap and heavy sweater, 
with a scarf wrapped around my neck. I have never been so cold. When I try to 
sleep, the skin of my head touching the cool pillow is distractingly sensitive.

 My head seems too small for my body. It is this little naked ball atop a huge 
lumbering frame, weighted down by the heavy clothes of winter. My scalp is 
dry-scaly with the irritation of the shave and dandruff I had never noticed 
before. I smear heavy moisturising cream on it several times a day and it seems 
to get better. I have a mole on the left side of my head that has no colour, 
maybe because it has never seen the sun until now.

 It's just a white bump, like a wart. It is repulsive, this uncovered area of 
skin bubbling up. I feel ashamed to have been hiding something ugly about 
myself.

 Still, I immediately try to cover it, make myself a new disguise.

 I can wear scarves and hats, but people will ask to see my head, anyway. I 
know they will. I dig an old eyebrow pencil out of the medicine cabinet and try 
to colour in the mole. But the pencil will not take, and poking the mole to try 
to get some colour to rub off is uncomfortable. So I try black eyeliner 
instead. This works okay, but it's artificial - a mole blackened into a beauty 
mark, like an 18th-century courtesan would wear.

 I am shivering in my bathroom as I experiment frantically with cosmetics. I 
know the mole isn't really that bad, but I have relinquished control over my 
appearance and I want to get it back any way I can. I've got to decrease my 
sense of exposure. I put on eye make-up. Without it, I feel like my features 
are invisible - tiny gestures on a great expanse of skin.

 I have a small nose and pale eyelashes. My jawline is soft, and, when I put 
on my wool hat to go outside, the bald head beneath the colourful rim makes my 
face infantile, the blobby features of a giant baby. So I mark my lids with 
dark-brown shadow to assert my presence in the wide ball of flesh that is my 
head.

 I have always been a good girl. I'm not supposed to scare people, or turn 
them off, or make them anxious for my welfare. And I don't. I never look mean, 
I never look tough. I always wash, I brush my teeth, I use a napkin when I eat. 
I look healthy; I project normality, competence, physical stability.

 All this, no longer. With a scarf on my head and my body covered in layers of 
clothing to keep out the cold, I look like a cancer victim.

 My stepmother, a doctor, says the scarves I've been wearing remind her of 
watching people go through radiation therapy. A girl I know from aerobics, when 
I tell her I shaved it myself, confessed she thought I lost my hair to chemo. 
My boss at the gym fields several phone calls expressing concern about my 
health. A drug dealer in Washington Square Park asks me if I'm okay.

 But if I bare my head, I look harsh, mean even. My stubble scalp says to 
people that I don't care about the unspoken rules of our society; I have broken 
one already - girls have hair, look pretty - and I may well decide to break 
another. I am a skinhead with Nazi sympathies, a sidewalk punk with safety pins 
through her nipples, an escaped lobotomy patient. The short man with the wispy 
moustache, who calls 'Beautiful' or 'Pretty eyes' to me each morning as I pass 
his doughnut cart, is effectively silenced. I no longer have to cringe in 
expectation of his unwanted compliments. There is an unspoken threat in my 
naked skull. It looks repulsive to me, the little hairs growing in, the uneven 
curve of my head, the baby hairs remaining just above my temples.

 I know I shouldn't feel sorry for myself. I chose this. It was meant to be a 
rejection of conventional notions of beauty and an experiment in bodily 
exposure. Instead, it is proving a painful encounter with the sense of 
fragility I have when insecure of my appearance. Some people, beautiful as they 
may be to their loved ones, feel ugly all the time because of some perceived 
imperfection - a big nose, heavy legs, even a balding head.

 Others have to face the world's displeasure with how they look because of 
obesity, a handicap, burns or birthmarks. Still others face it because of the 
choices they have made to flout convention - people with facial piercings, 
mohawked hair, or cross-dressers. I assume this last group puts up with any 
censure they encounter because of the pleasure they derive from how they look, 
or because of the political statement it implies.

 But I have done something that is, I think, unusual. I have deliberately 
altered my appearance in a way that I do not find attractive, cool, or 
enjoyable in any way.

 It's funny, because I never much liked my hair. Certainly, I never considered 
it as fundamental to my attractiveness or respectability. But now I see that I 
loved my stringy, split-ended mousy mop and the protection it gave me.

 It held my entire sense of self in its ragged strands. I don't want the 
people I work with to see me.

 I don't want my ex-boyfriend to, either. He leaves a message on my 
answerphone but I don't call him back. He will be sorry for me, and think I've 
lost my looks. He will forget the good times we've had in a strange combination 
of repulsion and pity. I don't want any men to look at me at all. I'm suddenly 
aware how many of my friendships with them are based on some underlying sexual 
tension, which I am confident will dissipate now that my head resembles a 
vulture's. I go out anyway, creeping into social interaction nervously, but 
with determination.

 Did you really do it?' asks Fred, who is waiting outside the aerobics studio 
as I arrive with my key.

 'What does it look like?' I say.

 'Your hair, your beautiful hair!' he moans. He doesn't say anything more, 
though. He seems silenced by the reality of my visible skull.

 'I thought maybe you joined the Hare Krishnas,' says a woman from my class in 
the locker room later on. She says that, in China, where she is from, women 
shave their heads only for religious reasons, so she assumed I had undergone a 
spiritual conversion. She seems relieved to know that I'm just eccentric.

 'Can I touch it?' asks my friend, Barry, from graduate school.

 He rubs his hand on my head.

 'I have lotion on it,' I say, worrying he'll find it greasy and repulsive. He 
looks at his hand and then wipes it on a napkin. 'Really, I do,' I say. I start 
to explain about my skin being dry, but this sounds even more disgusting than 
an oily head, so I change the subject.

 I go to lunch with Jeff. He calls me 'baldy', but otherwise seems not to 
notice. As we pull our hats on before pushing outside into the cold air, I tell 
him about how I've transformed my ugly mole into a beauty mark. The story seems 
funny to me - I'm admitting my vanity and laughing at my attempts to salvage 
it. 'Oh,' he says, with evident relief in his voice. 'So that's what that was!' 
I brave a friend's birthday party at a bar downtown. There, a literary 
gentleman with a few beers in his system starts petting my head. People have 
been touching it all night, but this man does not stop. He pets and pets and 
pets. 'Enough of that!' I finally say.

 'It's good you stopped me,' he says, looking off into space with mild 
embarrassment, 'because I couldn't stop myself.' 'I have to ask you,' says a 
drunk young man I knew in college. 'How does it feel to spend your whole life 
being very sexy, and then suddenly one day, you're not? Because it doesn't look 
good. If people are telling you it does, they are lying.' 'I thought they might 
be,' I say.

 'They are.' Later, he wraps his arms around me.

 'You're just flirting because you are sorry for me that my head looks like an 
ostrich's,' I say, laughing.

 'Yes,' he says. 'It's a mercy flirt.' I am grateful to him anyway.

 'You look like a militant lesbian feminist!' cries a man with a cellphone. 
Funny, because I'm wearing a skintight dress and shiny lipstick.

 Grandma B, who heroically braved all the sidelong glances aimed our way at 
the Show Boat matinee, takes me to a department store. Two girls behind the 
cosmetics counter ask me about my hair.

 'I could never do it!' says one.

 'But let me tell you, my boyfriend always says, 'If you like a girl and think 
she's pretty, imagine her with no hair. If you still find her attractive, you 
should date her." They chat with me and Grandma B about lipstick shades and 
engage in a typical female ritual: affirmation of appearance. They praise my 
skin and my bone structure, telling me how well I pull it off. Sinead O'Connor, 
Sinead O'Connor.

 In their compliments, I hear the kindhearted understanding of young women 
with beauty troubles of their own, but I also hear the slick patter of 
cosmetics salesgirls. Grandma B seems to hear a validation of my social 
acceptability.

 She pulls out her credit card and buys me some make-up.

 The series of interpretations people assign my lack of hair is, I think, 
typical of what we do when confronted with the exposure of a body that doesn't 
seem normal. We need to find an explanation.

 I answered phones in a talent agency one summer where the actor Evan Handler 
was a client. Handler has since written a book about his successful battle with 
leukaemia (which left him permanently without hair), but his illness was never 
discussed in the office. He'd show up, looking healthy and cheerful and bald as 
a cue ball, with a bandanna wrapped around his head. I invented a number of 
stories to explain his appearance, most of which were based on a weird 
combination of stereotypes and misinformation. Mainly, I figured he had been 
meditating heavily in Tibet, but I also wondered if he was into S&M.

 I have found myself engaging in this same interpretive process in the locker 
room at my gym; there is a bodybuilder there who is totally flat-chested, a 
woman who's had a mastectomy, an anorexic, a woman with facial hair, and a 
woman with numerous body piercings. Whereas to everyone else there I am 
respectfully blind, I have stopped and explained these aberrant bodies to 
myself, noticed them, and assigned them meanings. And now I am one of them.

 Finally, with a week's growth on my head feeling like a blessed coat of fur, 
I run into Roberta, the woman from aerobics whom Fred enlisted to prevent this 
catastrophe. 'Girl!' she cries.

 'I heard about your hair. Let me see it!' I pull off my scarf and she screams 
in delight. 'I shaved my head, too!' she cries, and pulls back the bangs of 
what I thought was her straightened hair. Beneath the wig, pushed flat with a 
black headband, is a tiny, patchy Afro. Validation! Companionship! Another bald 
woman! The very person who was supposed to prevent me from shaving my own head 
has been a baldy all along! Turns out Roberta has been having thyroid problems, 
which are now pretty much under control. When her health was at its worst, her 
hair fell in chunks.

 'I wanted to cry,' she says. 'Clumps were coming off all over, so I had to 
shave it. I always wear a wig, though.' She leans forward to show me the top of 
her head.

 I see the wig's plastic scalp.

 We go out to lunch. Roberta brings Claire with her, who has only an 
eighth-inch of hair. Bald-chick party! Actually, Claire does not look bald. 
It's more of a pixie look. She doesn't feel bald, either, but people bother her 
about it all the time anyway. Her mother hates it. Her brother hates it.

 She has to explain herself a lot, especially when she goes home to the 
islands for holidays. But she has no regrets. 'I used to spend three hours a 
day under the drier,' she says, raising her eyebrows in disbelief. 'Three 
hours! And that was with the biggest rollers in my hair. I don't have that kind 
of time.' Though I am hiding under a kerchief, I tell Roberta she should 
consider baring her head. African-American hair is so often worn extremely 
short that she seems less exposed to me than I do. But she says no. She likes 
wigs. 'But it's really different now than when I used to wear wigs for fun,' 
she comments. 'No one else can tell, but I know I can't go out without one on. 
My fiance did not want to see my head. He's really into hair. Now that it's 
grown back a little, he's curious to see it, but I won't show it to him. He 
didn't want to see it then, I'm not going to show it to him now.' The distress 
is about losing control, more than it is about how we look. It's about not 
wanting our appearances to dictate our lives, and needing to choose the 
contexts for physical exposure. Roberta doesn't want her health problems to 
influence her looks. She wants to decide how she appears each day, and is sad 
because she feels she can't go without a wig. Claire chose near-baldness to 
escape the tyranny of endless hair preparation and the conventions of feminine 
beauty. She's happy that way, because, for her, it's about controlling her time 
(no curlers, no drier), and her image, without regard for social pressures.

 And although I, too, chose baldness, I have relinquished the kind of control 
Claire has gained.

 I am spending all this extra time fiddling with scarves and lotion and eye 
pencils. The bleached, blonde shag I wore last summer seems like a glorious 
fantasy now. Instead of celebrating my departure from conventional standards of 
beauty, I have been trying to get back to them. And I can't.

 No hair gel, rubber bands, or bobby pins can change the shape of my head, and 
my lack of hair has become the single most noticeable factor in how I look. 
And, instead of celebrating my physical exposure like the happy nudists on the 
beach or in the baths, I've become less accepting of it every day. No matter 
what I wear, the meanings people attach to a bald woman in our society - 
cancerous, angry, lesbian, hyper-religious - stick to me. I wish I didn't care, 
but I do.

 As my hair grows back, the man at the doughnut stand begins to bother me 
again. I'm ashamed to say that, for the first time, I relish this mild 
harassment as evidence of my attractiveness. It is so different from the 
nervous inquisitions I suffered as a bald woman.

 I have been ridiculously vain during this period. A frustrated vanity, that 
is. Being relatively pretty in the eyes of the mainstream has its problems - 
people assume I'm stupid, men call to me like a dog on the street, horny 
aerobics students pressure me for attention - but I had not realised how easy 
it was for me to be accepting of myself and my physicality before I shaved my 
head.

 It hasn't taken much to disturb my pleasure in my body, to make me look down 
in shame when an acquaintance passes me on the street, to hesitate going to a 
party because I feel so ugly, to choose clothes that render me invisible. Not 
much to make me feel humiliated on a daily basis at my own involuntary bodily 
exposure.

 Not much at all. A haircut. 

 This is an edited extract from Tongue First, Adventures In Physical Culture, 
by Emily Jenkins, published by Virago on January 14, rrp £9.99. The book can be 
ordered through the Guardian at the special price of £6.99, plus 99p p&p, by 
ringing our credit-card hotline, 0500 600102; by e-mailing us at 
bid@mail.bogo.co.uk; or send your order with a UK cheque payable to the 
Guardian CultureShop, to 250 Western Avenue, London W3 6EE.
 