
The Wigan manager, Uwe Rösler, hailed a "fantastic" performance from Nick 
Powell which helped theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
holders seal their spot in the fourth round with a 3-1 extra-time victory atMK 
Dons.

The 19-year-old on loan from Manchester United came off the bench in the 60th 
minute to score twice after Luke Chadwick's early goal threatened a shock. 
Marc-Antoine Fortuné ensured there would be no way back for the hosts but it 
was Powell who earned special praise from his manager.

"Nick is a player that excites me because he can play everywhere," said 
Rösler, whose side now face Crystal Palace at home in the fourth round. "At Man 
United he was one of the midfield players – today he came on as one of the 
midfielders, then I put him up front and in many games I've played him from a 
wider position coming in.

"I can also play him when I need him as a number nine because he has a 
fantastic physique and technique. Every time he plays for me he gives me 110% 
and he was fantastic tonight."

A 20-minute hat-trick by Joe Garner at Deepdale gave League One Preston a 
shock 3-2 win over the Championship sideIpswich. Frank Nouble opened the 
scoring for Ipswich but two quickfire goals from Garner put Preston in control 
and he won the tie on 88 minutes after David McGoldrick had equalised.

Watford had no such problems overcoming Bristol City as goals from Marco 
Davide Faraoni and Lewis McGugan gave them a 2-0 home win. Beppe Sannino's side 
now face a trip to the winners of Wednesday night's replay between Manchester 
City and Blackburn Rovers, but the Watford head coach said he is noth bthered 
who they face. "It doesn't matter. For me it's the same, Blackburn or 
Manchester City. For me it's important thatWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> will be in that game.

"What was important for me was to get through in the Cup and I'm very happy 
with that because we had the opportunity to start again with enthusiasm."

Port Vale will face Brighton in round four after they claimed a dramatic 3-2 
win overPlymouth. Argyle took the lead twice before Jennison Myrie-Williams 
fired Vale into the next round despite having Chris Lines sent off.

Chris Burke scored twice as Birmingham sealed a comfortable 3-0 triumph over 
Bristol Rovers,while Charlton and Oxford will have to play again after the 
Championship side came from two goals down to draw 2-2 in the re-arranged 
third-round tie.

The first game had been called off as the Addicks continue to have problems 
with the pitch at the Valley and their woes were deepened when Johnny Mullins 
fired Oxford ahead after 13 minutes and Scott Davies doubled the lead 11 
minutes later. Michael Morrison pulled one back in the 54th minute to give the 
home side hope, though, and they were level in the 82nd minute through Yann 
Kermorgant.

Despite the comeback, Charlton's performance left Chris Powell fuming. "That 
was easily the worst 45 minutes since I've been manager here," he said 
afterwards. "I told them I don't ever want to see that again from them. It was 
unacceptable.

"Forget the pitch, it was a side that didn't play to our standards and didn't 
compete. I don't know why, I didn't ask questions, I just did all the talking 
and got a response."
 