
Bolton Wanderers’ match-winner, Zach Clough, was described as special by his 
manager, Neil Lennon, after the teenage debutant excelled in the 1-0 win over 
the 2013 Cup winnersWigan Athletic.

Clough’s dinked finish 14 minutes from time rounded off a fine performance. 
“When you’re that small you have to be special and I think he is special,” 
Lennon said of Clough. “We threw the gauntlet down to the players, can we play 
without ‘Chungy’ [Lee Chung-yong, who will be absent throughout January at the 
Asian Cup]? … And the answer was there.”

The Wigan manager, Malky Mackay, accentuated the positives. “I thought it was 
two teams going at it hard and I thought it was a pretty even game in all,” he 
said. “I’m disappointed for my players because to come out after half-time and 
play the way we did showed great character.”

Eddie Howe praised the depth of his squad as his much-changed Bournemouth side 
ran out 5-1 winners atRotherham United with a dominant second-half display.

“It underlined the strength in our squad,” Howe said. “It was a slightly 
scrappy first half where we weren’t at our best early in the game but the lads 
turned on the style in the second half. It was a really enjoyable game to watch 
and we were clinical in front of goal. We’re very pleased. Once we scored our 
first goal it gave us the confidence to go on and, in the second half, we 
played with real freedom.”

The Rotherham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> assistant 
manager Paul Raynor was furious and said new signings would be brought in this 
month. “Some of the defending was absolutely awful and [the goalkeeper] Adam 
Collin got no protection. You have to take defeats from time to time but the 
manner of the performance was not something we’re used to seeing. It was a 
particularly bad day at the office.”

The Blackburn Rovers manager, Gary Bowyer, said the manner of his side’s 2-1 
victory atCharlton Athletic bodes well for the rest of their season. With an 
injury- and illness-hit squad, Bowyer had to make sweeping changes to the team 
that beat Charlton in the Championship a fortnight ago, and two goals from 
Chris Taylor secured the win at The Valley in a match that suffered a 12-minute 
delay in the first half when the floodlights failed.

Bowyer said: “It was a great squad performance. We’ve got seven missing 
through injury, illness and suspension and it just shows you the value of 
having a tight-knit squad.”

Charlton’s manager, Bob Peeters, admitted afterwards that he wants to sign the 
striker Tony Watt from Standard Liège. “We had only 13 players available and 
our bench was an under-21 bench,” he said.

Ian Holloway admitted Millwall need to move in the transfer window after being 
made to dig deep to draw 3-3 againstBradford City and secure a third-round 
replay. The League One Bantams twice went ahead through Billy Knott and 
benefited from a Sid Nelson own goal butMillwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> recovered thanks to Ricardo 
Fuller’s two goals.

“It’s just the way things are going, it really is. I thought we showed 
terrific character to come back, the sort we haven’t had for the last couple of 
games. But the window is open, so let’s get cracking. I’m going to have to swap 
and wheel and deal. We will probably have a completely different set of players 
at the end of January because I cannot let it slide like this.”

The Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> manager, Phil 
Parkinson, said: “Scoring three goals away from home, we fully expect to win 
the game, but they have quality. It showed in the final third.”

Ten-man Middlesbrough eased into the fourth round at the expense of Barnsley 
in a game delayed by 10 minutes due to a gas leak. Jelle Vossen and Daniel 
Ayala scored in the 2-0 win, while Adam Clayton was sent off for two bookable 
offences.

Nick Blackman’s goal gave Reading a 1-0 win at Huddersfield Town in a scrappy 
affair. TheHuddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> 
manager, Chris Powell, called it “a flat game with no real quality – it’s a 
shame because we took it seriously and didn’t make wholesale changes.”

Matt Smith’s equaliser sent the Doncaster Rovers v Bristol City tie to a 
replay – Luke McCullough scoring the home side’s goal in a 1-1 draw.

League Two Cambridge United made it into the fourth round for the first time 
in 15 years with a 2-1 win overLuton Town, with goals from Robbie Simpson and 
Ryan Donaldson. The Luton manager, John Still, said: “I thought we played 
terrific – but illness has gone right through the club.”
 