
The fighting talk in Lincolnshire has been rumbling along for some time, even 
if it may have passed the rest of the nation by. Grimsby Town andScunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scunthorpe> United meet in the first 
round of the FA Cup on Saturday, when old rivalries will be renewed on the east 
coast and many an insult traded between two clubs not used to sharing 
pleasantries.

"They always refer to Grimsby <https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> 
fans as Codheads and we say they will be coming across in their caravans," said 
Chris Parker, chairman of the Mariners Trust. "There is animosity between the 
fans, without any doubt. I just hope it doesn't spill over."

Only 25 miles and one division separate Grimsby from their League Two 
adversaries who have met just four times in the last 23 years, with two of 
those matches coming in the Football League Trophy.

Scunthorpe, who not so long ago watched on from the lower echelons of the 
Football League while Grimsby played in the second tier against Newcastle, 
Sunderland and Manchester City, have since usurped the Mariners as the superior 
force in the region by themselves challenging in the Championship.

However, both sides' recent travails have provided miserable descents down the 
divisions. The Iron, under Brian Laws, now reside in the fourth tier while 
Grimsby dropped out of the Football League three years ago and are desperately 
trying to claw their way back, losing in the Conference play-off semi-finals 
last year.

"It's been the worst time in the history of the club, it's as simple as that," 
said Parker. "The club is over 130 years old and the last seven or eight years 
have been one disaster after another. For most of my time, 50 odd years 
following Grimsby, we'd always been well above Scunthorpe in the pecking order 
so they were insignificant neighbours. Obviously in more recent times the 
tables have turned."

The game will reignite a feud that has only been played out once before in the 
Cup, in 1983 when Grimsby prevailed 2-0 in a replay. Humberside Police are 
expecting more than 8,000 fans at Blundell Park on Saturday, with local 
interest and tension simmering expectantly in the last week.

The local newspaper produced an eight-page spread before the game while on 
Friday the club mascots – Mighty Mariner and Scunny Bunny – took part in a 
competition of their own by spinning around on the spot 10 times before 
attempting to score in a virtually unguarded net 
<http://www.grimsby-townfc.co.uk/news/article/botm-part-3-1161909.aspx>. Such 
is the magic of the Cup.

Grimsby averaged gates of 3,800 last season, one of the highest in the 
Conference, but their manager, Paul Hurst, is expecting an atmosphere like no 
other this afternoon. Hurst, who took charge the year after Town suffered 
relegation from the Football League having spent 15 years as a defender at 
Rotherham United, believes the club's rebuilding process is well underway and 
claimed the gap between certain sides in League Two and the Conference is 
negligible.

He said: "Teams that have gone up recently have usually done well. In recent 
history I think only one team has come straight back down so we feel that it's 
a strong league. I think there is animosity and it will be a really hostile 
atmosphere. It will be good to see a sold out away following here and gives our 
fans something to bounce off, because there are many occasions in our league 
when we get 15 or 20 away supporters.

"A lot of the lads live locally so they have a sense of what this game means. 
We need to have the balance between being committed and not overstepping that 
line. If we play as well as we can, we have a chance of winning the game. I 
understand it's going out on al-Jazeera.I'm not sure why, but it is. I'm 
surprised that it's not on English TV but maybe that is because if we win it 
won't be seen as a big enough upset." Whether Scunthorpe agree is another 
matter.
 