
Hopes of a recovery in the manufacturing industry were reinforced yesterday by 
a business survey recording the first rise in optimism among factory bosses for 
nearly two years. But the upswing is likely to be subdued, with output and 
orders held back by the strength of sterling.

With high street spending and the housing market strengthening in the wake of 
seven interest rate cuts since October, the quarterly industrial trends survey 
by the confederation of British industry found optimists outnumbering 
pessimists for the first time since October 1997.

But the margin was only 5% and Nick Reilly, chairman of the CBI economic 
affairs committee, said it was not yet clear that the recovery was sustainable.

The CBI said factories making consumer goods for the domestic market were 
benefiting from rising consumer spending, but exporters and firms producing 
capital goods were still suffering from the weakness of world demand and the 
strength of sterling. Overall, new orders fell for the fifth consecutive 
survey, albeit at a slower rate.

With prices falling faster than costs amid excessive global supply, 
manufacturers' profit margins are being tightly squeezed, triggering further 
job losses and prompting firms to put on hold investment plans. Mr Reilly said 
it was a cause for concern that British industry was jeopardising its long-term 
future by failing to invest in new plants and machinery which would enable it 
to respond to a pick-up in demand if and when it arrived.

In the short term, firms were banking on the pound falling to a competitive 
rate, he said, though he added that it was also necessary to implement measures 
to improve productivity to remain internationally competitive.

Given the gathering strength of the domestic economy, highlighted yesterday by 
figures showing record gross mortgage lending by the major British banking 
group, the CBI said interest rates should be left on hold for now, but it 
called for further interest rates reductions if sterling remained strong.

"If inflation pressures prove as weak as our present forecast, the next move 
in interest rates should still be downward later this year, sooner rather than 
later if the pound's recent fall against the euro is reversed," said Mr Reilly.

David Walton, senior economist at the American investment bank Goldman Sachs, 
said the survey suggested Britain was on course for a discernible recovery, but 
not one fast enough to ignite fears of a rise of inflation above the 
government's 2.5% target.

The British Bankers' Association said gross mortgage lending by the big 
British banking groups, which include 11 of the fifteen 15 largest mortgage 
lenders in the UK, totalled £6,297m in June, the highest figure on record and 
nearly 18% above May's total of £5,349m.
 