
The family of an 86-year-old man who bludgeoned his wife to death then tried 
to kill himself have said authorities did not do enough to help him cope with 
caring for her.

Angus Mayer had gone to a train station to kill himself. After he was found on 
the tracks he told a police officer who came to his aid: “I’ve killed my wife. 
She has Alzheimer’s. I didn’t want her to suffer any more.”

“I just want to die. Let me die. I’m going to be spending the rest of my life 
in prison. My wife suffers with dementia and incontinence. She told me if I 
ever put her in a home she’d kill herself. I told her it would be quick then 
I’d throw myself under a train.”

Police rushed to the Mayers’ house in Heath, Cardiff, and forced their way in 
to find Margaret Mayer, 85, dead in the couple’s bed. An inquest into her death 
heard on Wednesday that she had suffered from Alzheimer’s disease for four 
years and was progressively getting worse.

Pathologist Dr Ryk James said she suffered eight blunt-force injuries to her 
head and face, while a bedside lamp with its base stained in blood was found 
nearby. Injuries to her hands meant she may have raised them to protect her 
face, he added.

“My wife took a lot of killing,” Mayer later told paramedics. “I just wanted 
to suffocate her. There was a lot of blood.”

The coroner was told that in the months before Mayer killed his wife, the 
couple’s six children had become increasingly worried about the strain that 
caring was having on him.

They had raised concerns in February, after which Margaret Mayer began 
attending a day centre twice a week. But in the week before her death, in July, 
the children again contacted Cardiff council about their fears.

The council’s adult services manager told the inquest there was nothing to 
suggest Margaret Mayer was in danger and, in hindsight, nothing would have been 
done differently. But the couple’s sons questioned why the wider family was not 
contacted in early July when there were concerns.

“The council were passive rather than proactive,” their son Andrew, a BBC 
cameraman, said. “We don’t think the system is fit for purpose.”

Mayer, a retired salesman, had travelled three miles to Cardiff Central 
station and slid down the platform as a London Paddington to Swansea train 
pulled in. The inquest heard that he told a conductor he had wanted the train 
to run over his head. “But I couldn’t even do that right,” he added.

Mayer was charged with murder while in hospital, but died from his injuries 
seven weeks later. In a letter to the inquest, Mayer’s children said their 
father “wanted to enjoy independent living, but, caught in the fog of fatigue, 
he gave up”.

The letter added that the family “will never know” if their parents would be 
alive today if more had been done.

The coroner, Andrew Barkley, recorded a verdict of unlawful killing.
 