
Style? Nul points. I'm sopping wet, clinging to the seat of an inflatable 
raft, facing the wrong way up a thunderous wall of water. Just before my 
oversize helmet slips across my eyes delivering temporary blindness, I catch 
sight of a warning panel: "Do not exceed your paddling ability. Be honest with 
yourself."

OK, I will. I'm out of my depth. But who cares? This is a heady shot of 
adrenaline - a high voltage jolt for a lethargic city soul. And it's not as if 
I'm alone. I'm in the secure, sun-scorched hands of two bush-savvy local guides.

They're as essential as life jackets, helmets and litres of cheap Aussie plonk 
if you take on the Franklin, one of the savage rivers that riddle south-west 
Tasmania like a nest of snakes. Their knowledge and experience turn a 
potentially lethal expedition into a glorious mix of exertion, excitement and 
silent contemplation.

It's hard to believe that 25 years ago the Franklin river - one of the world's 
greatest rafting trips - was almost lost. The ribbons of water that thread 
through vertiginous valleys of rainforest, their banks littered with rocks 
eroded like Henry Moore abstracts, were to be dammed for hydroelectric power. 
As the bulldozers moved in, Tasmania's premier dismissed the Franklin as "a 
brown ditch, leech-ridden and unattractive to the majority of people".

He was wrong. The plans provoked an epic battle that included mass 
demonstrations across Australia. Protesters blockaded one of the proposed dam 
sites, chaining themselves to machinery. More than 1,270 were arrested and 600 
jailed as the dam project became a key issue in the 1983 general election. One 
of the biggest campaigns of civil disobedience in the country's history ended 
in July of that year when the high court ruled in favour of the protesters.

The Franklin still enjoys near iconic status in Tasmania. But like many 
celebrities, it has a dark side. "Warning!" screamed the sign at our launch 
point. "Several people have died on this river system." It then listed the 
causes of their demise, before ending on a cheerful note: "Not sure of your 
abilities? Do not go on."

It added extra clout to the safety talk given by Josh and Antho, our two 
Tasmanian guides. They ran through hazards that sounded like expensive plumbing 
emergencies - stoppers, undercutters, boils and sieves. The latter are 
particularly lethal: trapped logs around which the water rushes, pinning humans 
like teabags. 'We can't always pull you out. Never trust the river," explained 
Josh.

So, having learned to regard our home for the next 10 days as we would a 
politician or estate agent, we dragged our two rafts to camp, a few kilometres 
into the Franklin.

This was no trip for the slothful. Alongside Josh and Antho our eight-strong 
group included the supremely fit Bob and Nick, two Australians out for some 
father-and-son bonding, and Alex, a gap-year backpacker. Thankfully, the 
remaining two rafters were, like me, slightly past their prime. Anthony and 
Rick were ludicrously confident that their experience rowing on the Thames in 
Surrey would prepare them for rapids such as the Cauldron and the Churn. Rick 
sported a heart monitor on his chest and at the end of the first day announced 
gleefully that he had burned off 4,250 calories.

That night we slept on dry ledges beneath a rocky overhang. Just feet away, 
dollops of rain thwacked into the leaves. It was mere perspiration by Tasmanian 
standards, but showers on the plains above the valley can have serious 
repercussions. "I've known the river rise six metres in one night," said Antho. 
"In full flood you get standing waves the height of two-storey houses."
 Rafting on the rapids. Photograph: Matthew Newton/Tourism Australia  Not this 
time. By morning the Franklin was half a metre higher, perfect for an 
exhilarating spin through gentle white water. We carried, or portaged, the 
rafts around rapids with names such as Nasty Notch, before jumping back in to 
negotiate the turbulence of Descension Gorge. The day climaxed with a group 
sunbathe on smooth rocks above a canyon. At dusk the Franklin turned coal black 
with a creamy head of froth from nearby rapids. It had become a river of 
Guinness under nature's planetarium.
Others have been less appreciative of its charms. The first Europeans to see 
the wild torrent were convicts fleeing the Sarah Island penal colony in the 
1820s. Starving, they were reduced to butchering and eating each other.

On day three we followed their lead - the walking not the cannibalism - and 
climbed Frenchmans Cap. It was 1,446m, or, as Rick estimated, 4,000 calories 
high. In fact he lost 6,500 - at least that's what his monitor said - and 
gained three leeches. The 9½-hour round trip had a shockingly steep start, with 
tree roots doubling as ladders through near impenetrable sassafras, myrtle and 
scrub. It was hard to believe that in 1842, Lady Jane Franklin, wife of the 
Tasmanian governor, was carried through the area on a sedan chair shouldered by 
convicts.

Unencumbered by adventurous toffs, we zipped through eucalyptus forests and 
over several false summits before scrambling up the Cap's snow-topped dome. The 
river was now buried within a vast, rumpled quilt of rainforest, with the peaks 
of Cradle Mountain, Barn Bluff and Ossa floating above the afternoon haze. Our 
final destination, Macquarie Harbour, lurked far to the west.

Back in the rafts we passed a derelict heli-pad, evidence of the abandoned dam 
project. With each paddle, it appeared an ugly violation. There were 
5,000-year-old Huon pines, a duck-billed platypus that surfaced nearby when I 
was on the portable loo, and a campsite that had a mesmerising glow-worm light 
show.

You could almost have forgotten the Franklin's more beastly personality. 
Almost. But an increasingly angry roar told us we were approaching the Grand 
Ravine. Over the next six snarling kilometres it would drop 150m. "Is there 
anything special we should know?" I asked, trying to sound casually inquisitive 
rather than terrified. "What?" deadpanned Antho. "Other than it turns boys into 
men?"

It took us 36 hours to traverse the ravine. Josh likened the route to a series 
of brainteasers, a kind of lethal sudoku. At sections too dangerous to raft we 
portaged our gear over boulders by the rushing water.

"That's where the last dude died in '98," said Antho nonchalantly, pointing to 
a wave-lashed tree stump, a few metres from where Rick was perched unsteadily 
on sharp rocks. "Hold the rope tight." The fat-burner's knuckles were whiter 
than Tom Cruise's teeth.
 Drifting on a calm patch of river. Photograph: Matthew Newton/Tourism 
Australia  Beyond the rapids was raftable white water and stretches of deep 
peace - Serenity Sound, Transcendence Reach - as if the Franklin were 
recharging its batteries.
Each violent stretch of river has its own story. Thunderush is where a guide 
accidentally took his raft over the main fall with a reassuring cry of, "Get 
down. We're all fucked". It took an hour to rescue his shocked team. At least 
they survived. At Coruscades a group watched their guide drown.

But that was a tragic rarity. As we picked a safe passage towards the coast, 
nervous apprehension turned to wide-eyed enjoyment. The lower Franklin was 
wider, less angry. Its steep sides had vanished, replaced by views of densely 
forested mountains, and we were reduced to paddling through treacly water.

Near Pig Trough, the prison guards' nickname for the pool where convict 
labourers washed, we passed River Island Bend. A photograph of this spot 
decorated the Australian press on election day in 1983, next to headlines such 
as: "Would you vote to dam this river?" Hearts and minds were won.

Limestone cliffs were now pockmarked with deep caves such as Kutikina. As the 
most southerly habitation point on earth during the last ice age, where 10,000 
Aboriginal artefacts have been found, it helped the area to gain Unesco world 
heritage site status just before the anti-dam protests erupted in late 1982.

As we floated into the Gordon river, to begin a six-hour yacht ride out of the 
wilderness, high above us big bites in the lush vegetation marked where roads 
had already been bulldozed for the dam.

"We're so fortunate the blockaders were prepared to put themselves on the 
line," said Bob, peeling off his wetsuit for the final time. "Thank God they 
saved it."

Way to go

Getting there

Rafting Tasmania (0061 36239 1080, raftingtasmania.com 
<http://www.raftingtasmania.com> offers five, seven and 10-day trips on the 
Franklin from November-March. Ten days costs £1,126 including gear, all food 
and transfers. Qantas (08457 747 767,qantas.co.uk <http://www.qantas.co.uk> 
flies London-Melbourne from £952 return including taxes. Onward returns to 
Hobart £119.

Where to stay

The Islington Hotel in Hobart (0061 36220 2123, islingtonhotel.com 
<http://www.islingtonhotel.com> has doubles from £141 per night room only.

Further information

Australian tourist board: australia.com <http://www.australia.com>. Tasmania's 
national parks:parks.tas.gov.au/natparks/wild 
<http://www.parks.tas.gov.au/natparks/wild>

Three more extreme trips

Mountain bike safari, Tanzania

If you don't fancy being cooped up in a Jeep on an African safari, try going 
by bike. Starting in Arusha, you'll cycle to mountains, farmland, Masai 
homesteads and nature parks, through the Rift Valley and Manyara national park, 
camping at a different spot each night and passing giraffe and elephants. 
There's a week of cycling 30-80km a day on dirt roads, plus four days off the 
bikes for game viewing in the Ngorongoro crater and Serengeti national park.

· 0845 408 4541, aim4africa.com <http://www.aim4africa.com>. From £1,190pp 
including most meals, transfers, accommodation and guides, but excluding 
flights. Bike hire £90pp or £145 for full suspension bike, for duration of trip.

Rockclimbing in France

Beginners or those who are ready to progress beyond the indoor climbing wall 
can learn to scale crags on a six-day rock climbing trip to Provence. You'll 
learn climbing techniques and ropework in small groups, building the confidence 
to climb alone.

· £595pp for course, accommodation in a renovated stone barn near Buis les 
Baronnies, meals, transport and transfers from Nimes, Marseille Airport or 
Avignon TGV. Departs September 7.ClimbFrance <http://www.climbfrance.com> (0033 
475 278103).

Skiing in Chile 

Expert skiers and snowboarders can get some action in southern Chile in 
September on a 10-day trip that incorporates off-piste freeriding and skiing 
down three volcanoes - Villarica, Lonquimay and Llaima. Soaking in volcanic 
hotsprings and a cookout on a Mapuche Indian Farm are also included.

· Departures September 12 and 26, around £1400pp with Powder Quest 
<http://www.powderquest.com>, including hotel accommodation but excluding 
flights.

Local heroes: Protests that made a difference

South America

The Pantanal

If the Hidrovía Paraguay-Paraná navigation project had gone ahead, 3,400km of 
river would have been turned into a shipping channel. In the process the 
world's largest wetland, the Pantanal, would have been destroyed. In 1996, a 
grassroots activist group in Paraguay called Sobrevivência filed a complaint 
with the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, the joint funders 
of the project. They then put together a huge coalition comprising 300 local 
organisations and sent boats down the Paraguay river as "floating seminars" to 
warn local communities of what was being planned. The banks were eventually 
persuaded to pull out and the project collapsed.

Asia

The Central Cardamom forest

In 2002, a pincer movement by environmental campaigners ensured the continued 
existence of a million acres of wilderness in Cambodia.

The Central Cardamom forest was due to be extensively logged until the 
American group, Conservation International, persuaded the Cambodian government 
to ban commercial logging in the area. In the meantime, other organisations 
persuaded the authorities to make

the area an officially protected zone. The wilderness is home to tigers, 
elephants and bears, and threatened species such as the pileated gibbon and the 
Siamese crocodile.

Europe

The wild Loire

France's longest waterway is also known as Europe's last wild river and its 
massively fluctuating water levels make it home to many species of wildlife not 
found anywhere else in the continent. In 1980, a scheme to build a series of 
dams and dykes to "tame" the Loire was proposed. Aside from the ecological 
damage this would have caused, an ancient village and several picturesque 
gorges would have been flooded. An organisation called SOS Loire Vivante began 
a campaign to stop the dams, which included demonstrations, conferences, 
lawsuits and an occupation of one of the dam sites, and in 1994 the French 
government announced that it was abandoning the scheme.

UK

Rainham Marsh

A little-publicised protest that lasted more than 10 years eventually saved 
London's "jewel in the crown" wildlife haven. Rainham Marsh, a Site of Special 
Scientific Interest, was due to be concreted over to make way for a 
drive-through restaurant, a hotel and some warehouses. Locals set up Friends of 
Rainham Marsh, got backing from environmental groups, and took on the GLA's 
London Development Agency, the government's regeneration agency English 
Partnerships, and Havering Council. In 2002, the last of these three finally 
conceded defeat and the marsh was spared.

Dixe Wills
 