
Hankering to work from home more often or rejig your hours so they fit in 
better with your lifestyle? Here’s what you need to know:

You can apply for flexible working after 26 weeks

It’s worth noting that everyone who has racked up 26 weeks of service is 
entitled to make a formal request for flexible working with their employer. 
“You have the right to make a request for flexible work and your employer can 
only refuse for certain legal reasons,” says Katie Wood, a legal officer for 
charityMaternity Action <http://www.maternityaction.org.uk/>. “This means any 
request for changes to your days of work, hours of work or place of work.”

Plan ahead

Wood advises giving your employer plenty of time to consider your request and 
make necessary changes. “Try to ask at least three to four months before you 
need the change and make sure your employer deals with it in a reasonable 
timescale.” It’s important to point out that your employer must consider your 
request reasonably and within three months so make sure it doesn’t get ignored 
or forgotten about, she adds.

Consider it from your employer’s perspective too

You know what flexible working would mean for you, but consider the potential 
impact on your employer. Before you organise a meeting with your boss, think 
hard about what will work for both you and them, says Catherine Rogan, a rights 
adviser forWorking Families’ 
<http://www.workingfamilies.org.uk/advice-information/> legal advice service. 
“Something that benefits everyone is more likely to be agreed. Listen to your 
employer’s concerns and think about how you can make things work for everyone.”

Jessica Chivers, founder of The Talent Keeper Specialists 
<http://talentkeepers.co.uk/>, says having informal discussions before 
submitting the formal request asking for a trial “may make all the difference 
in getting to a yes”.

Making work changes during parental leave 

If you’re about to return from parental leave and are keen to change your 
hours or work from home, Wood says it is a good idea to flag it up to three 
months before returning if possible to allow your employer to make changes. 
“When thinking about how to approach it from your employer’s point of view it’s 
important to focus on the practical issues. What problems might arise? How does 
it fit with your role, work and colleagues? Your employer must give your 
request reasonable consideration, which usually means holding a meeting to 
discuss it. So you will need to think in advance of any issues they are likely 
to raise and how to reassure them that it will work well for the business.”

Jo Martin, a senior employment law specialist at solicitor Bond Dickinson 
<http://www.bonddickinson.com/>, says it helps to have an initial, frank chat 
with your manager and tell them you want your job to fit around childcare, but 
also that you want them to know you remain committed to your role. “There is no 
duty upon you to say this, but it can help keep the relationship smooth,” she 
says. “Ask them what they think and if they have any concerns. If they do, 
consider how you can deal with those concerns pragmatically. Procedurally, 
there are formal steps to follow when you are ready to make your written 
request, easily found online –Acas 
<http://www.acas.org.uk/index.aspx?articleid=1461> has a good website covering 
this.”

Dealing with an inflexible boss

If your employer is unsure about whether to agree to any changes, consider the 
concerns they have raised, and find sensible, meaningful answers for them, says 
Martin. “Perhaps point out the value of reducing their overheads for expensive 
office space by having a remote working system in place. You could suggest a 
pattern in which you work partly remotely and partly in the office, so their 
worries around a precedent and office culture are addressed.

Unfair dismissal cases slump under tribunal fee system, study shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/04/unfair-dismissal-cases-slump-under-tribunal-fee-system-study-shows>
Challenging a rejected request 

While flexible working can be refused by employers, there is the opportunity 
to take further action. If an employer refuses every single request and some of 
the refusals don’t seem justified, it may be that there is an underlying 
blanket policy against flexible work, which could potentially be challenged in 
an employment tribunal as it may be discriminatory, says Wood. “Employees have 
the right to appeal a refusal and can go to Acas, which will help the employer 
and employee reach an agreement. If an employee wants to challenge a refusal in 
a tribunal they must make the claim within three months, less one day, from the 
date of the first refusal.”

Leave time to switch off at home

If you are fortunate to work flexible hours and remotely, it can be difficult 
to separate work and home life. “If you like structure and boundaries you could 
stick to your normal work pattern as much as possible but enjoy the benefit of 
not commuting and do something else with that time instead,” says Chivers. “My 
husband, for instance, works from home most Thursdays and walks the dog during 
the time he’d be commuting in the morning. He takes a lunch break away from his 
home desk and eats and does something in the garden, then walks the dog and 
listens to a podcast again at the end of the day when he’d be commuting home.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 