
He had a chequered past, spent time in prison, wasn’t British, couldn’t return 
home because he would have been persecuted there, and had no regular job. In 
other words, Farzad Bazoft was a journalist to his core, good looking in that 
fine-boned Persian way, attractive to women and a man ever eager to find a good 
story with which to make his mark in Fleet Street.

Any editor, and particularly a foreign editor, knows the infinite variety and 
the chaotic ways of reporters, especially freelancers who live by the special 
insights or the unique information they can bring to the newspaper. Any editor 
also knows the trouble they bring if they get into difficulties abroad.

Farzad wasn’t the only one to get into trouble with a repressive regime or to 
fall into the wrong hands. Time and again Britons abroad find themselves in 
difficulties and time again their families complain of the same lack of support 
they get from the Foreign Office and the local embassy.

It’s something to do with the attitude that British diplomats take to their 
task. US ambassadors are trained to see themselves as representing the 
“American people”, singly and as a whole. British officials see themselves as 
representing the Queen and her government, the state and its interests, not the 
people who get into personal difficulties.

That was certainly the case with Farzad. All the advice not to make a fuss, 
that quiet diplomacy was the best route – which private families so often hear 
– was offered in Farzad’s case.

It didn’t work, and couldn’t. Once he fell into the hands of the Iraqi 
security forces, all the discreet diplomacy with their oleaginous foreign 
minister, Tariq Aziz, counted for nothing. A British journalist was a catch 
that Saddam Hussein wanted to use to demonstrate his power against Britain and 
her prime minister,Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>. What is more he was a 
journalist rootling around Iraq’s closest secret, its arms programme.

Only the toughest action by the British government could have got him released 
and that was not forthcoming.

For all the emollient words offered by ministers to the Observer during 
Farzad’s imprisonment, usually with the sting “he’s not British after all” and 
the deliberate government leaking of his record of imprisonment, Britain was 
never going to confront Baghdad. The interests of the state were in selling it 
arms.

It’s hard to say that it has changed since. Today’s ambassadors are chosen 
from a wider social background and are more willing to speak out about local 
conditions. But the arms sales and the secrecy goes on. You only have to look 
at the continuing block on information about anything to do with Saudi Arabia 
or the Gulf to see that.

Thinking of Farzad, I sometimes comfort myself for failing to prevent him 
going on that trip and for not doing more to support him and his cause during 
those awful weeks of incarceration with the knowledge that, ultimately, it was 
what he wanted. He was on to a good story, a major explosion in one of Iraq’s 
top secret military facilities. If he had brought back proof of Saddam’s 
nuclear ambitions, it would have been a revelation of huge importance – 
although of course, as today’s shocking revelations suggest, our government 
would have played it down for fear of the effect on our own arms sales there.

COMMENTARY
 