
The Bournemouth goalkeeper Adam Federici saved three penalties as his side 
eventually overcame Preston in a penalty shootout at Deepdale to progress in the
Capital One Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/capital-one-cup>.

Simon Grayson’s Championship team had twice staged late comebacks, both in 
normal time to make it 1-1 and at the end of extra time to level it up at two 
apiece, only for Federici to thwart Jordan Hugill, Alan Browne and Daniel 
Johnson with three saves in a 3-2 spot-kicks victory.

Shaun MacDonald set the much-changed Premier League side on their way when he 
headed home his first goal in eight months after neither the Preston 
goalkeeper, Jordan Pickford, nor the defender Greg Cunningham had taken charge 
of the situation.

Rudy Gestede breaks deadlock for Aston Villa against Birmingham City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/22/aston-villa-birmingham-capital-one-cup-match-report>
Preston, however, who eliminated Watford in the previous round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/capital-one-cup-qpr-carlisle-preston-watford>
, rallied in the second half and the substitute Hugill’s late header took the 
game into extra-time.

Marc Pugh, himself introduced only in the 81st minute, lurked at the back post 
to convert Josh King’s attempt and restore Bournemouth’s lead, yet the same 
player’s handball inside the area allowed Johnson to score from 12 yards and 
force the shootout, where Federici came to the fore.

Eddie Howe made nine changes from the side that defeated Sunderland three days 
ago but, as they had done when he shuffled his pack against Hartlepool in the 
last round,Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> 
started in the ascendancy, Junior Stanislas going close following a one-two 
with King. With five-goal forward Callum Wilson given the night off, King 
looked to spearhead the attack and drove one effort at Pickford before bringing 
out a sharp reaction stop from the keeper when he lashed in a volley on the 
turn.

The England Under-21 international earned applause for that save but less than 
60 seconds later he was caught out of position for the opener. Attempting to 
punch a centre from the left away, he was beaten to it by a weak Cunningham 
header that went straight to MacDonald, who looped it back over the Preston 
goalkeeper to send Howe’s side in front.

Grayson’s half-time words sparked an improvement after the interval, although 
Stanislas almost gave them a helping hand. He was caught out by Browne when he 
tried to flick past him on the edge of his area only for the winger to recover 
with a sliding challenge as the Irishman threatened to pull the trigger.

From the resulting corner Johnson’s ball in found its way to an unmarked Tom 
Clarke at the back post and his diving header crashed into the wrong side of 
the netting. Will Keane then pulled another chance past Federici’s far post as 
the home side’s six minutes of dominance failed to reap a reward.

Grayson brought on three substitutes in quick succession, however, and the 
trio produced some late pressure that eventually told as Cunningham’s back-post 
cross was nodded beyond Federici by Hugill with six minutes remaining.

It was the 23-year-old’s first appearance since his short cameo against MK 
Dons last month when he was dismissed with an altogether different contribution 
from the bench.

Early in extra time it was another replacement who restored Bournemouth’s 
lead. King stabbed a shot towards the back post and Clarke’s attempted block 
diverted the ball into the path of Pugh, who slotted home from close range amid 
protests from the home defence that he was offside.

Pickford then made a fine double save to deny Lee Tomlin after he had raced 
through having nutmegged Bailey Wright before the hosts staged their second 
fightback. Pugh was adjudged to have handled from a high ball as he tried to 
challenge Wright and Johnson dispatched the penalty past Federici’s right arm.

The goalkeeper would have the last laugh, however, by making three saves from 
penalties aimed in the very same corner.
 