
Scientists at the universities of Exeter and York have revealed new details 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-37025088> about the menopause in 
killer whales. Studying orcas in the wild has shown that females live unusually 
far beyond their fertile years because of the benefits their accumulated 
knowledge bring to the group, as well as the lifelong support they give their 
sons.

The Guardian view on granny orcas: nothing to do with humans | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/the-guardian-view-on-granny-orcas-nothing-to-do-with-humans>
Evolutionary researchers have been quick to draw comparisons between orcas and 
humans. Could early human societies also have evolved to rely on the invaluable 
wisdom and help of female elders?

These comparisons, though, have been a little too quick for some. A Guardian 
leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/the-guardian-view-on-granny-orcas-nothing-to-do-with-humans>
 column, for example, concluded that scientific conundrums like these are 
“irrelevant” to feminist theory. Human values have nothing to do with what 
science tells us about how we evolved. And whale research tells us only about 
whales.

Feminism and science have long had an uneasy relationship. That’s hardly 
surprising.Charles Darwin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/charles-darwin> 
expressed as scientific theory his opinion that women are the less evolved sex, 
and other Victorian biologists claimed women could never catch up to men in the 
evolutionary race to higher intelligence and creativity. Likewise, through the 
20th century, male scientists suggested that women had tiny sex drives, that 
the orgasm was an evolutionary vestige of male anatomy, and that women had 
smaller brains corresponding to smaller intellects.

Scientists have often looked at women as the inferior sex (some still do), 
threatening the cause of women’s rights with biological determinism. So it 
makes sense that feminists have returned their gaze with suspicion.

The problem is that dismissing science as a body of knowledge means ignoring 
the best means we have of understanding ourselves. Like all sets of ideas, we 
need to see science for what it is: an imperfect but promising road to the 
facts. Correcting itself along the way – and there’s no doubt that corrections 
are needed – it explains our bodies, minds and place in the universe.

Far from irrelevant, then, science should be a useful resource for feminists. 
When we are told that women are natural homemakers, it can tell us what 
“natural” really means. When people claim women are intellectually less able, 
science can expose this as nonsense. The more research, the more we learn just 
how much the gaps we see are rooted in society and culture, not in biology.

Scientists have often looked at women as inferior, threatening the cause of 
women’s rights with biological determinism

Evolutionary biology offers us the long view. Animal data is important because 
humans didn’t evolve independently. We share common ancestors with other 
species. When the menopause – practically unknown among other species – happens 
to orcas as well as to us, we must pay attention. They provide clues that may 
help explain how we adapted to our ancient environments. They are part of our 
history. Very distant history, maybe, but history nonetheless.

Being as far removed as we are now from how our earliest ancestors lived, we 
may assume our evolutionary story doesn’t matter. The societies we’ve 
constructed, which bear testament to humankind’s mastery over nature, have 
nothing to do with hunting, gathering, or cavewomen crouched over fires. But 
the story does have the power to answer that dark, niggling question that is 
still asked: is the sexual inequality we see today rooted in something 
biological? Is it an essential difference, dating back to the dawn of human 
life?

The old ideas of Darwin’s time are already giving way to more accurate 
accounts of our evolutionary history. The menopause represents one of the most 
exciting areas of research about women. Here, we see cruel notions about older 
women being useless to society, or sexually unwanted, are being superseded by 
compelling new theories. According to anthropologist Kristen Hawkes at the 
University of Utah, who has done the most work on this, women evolved to 
survive so far past menopausal age because, in our past, they were crucial to 
our survival – much like female orcas. The evidence so far backs her up.

Science can help rewrite the story of woman. This is where the final frontier 
of feminism really lies. As Hawkes says: “If you’re really paying attention to 
biology, how can you not be a feminist?”
 