
Successfully reducing the numbers of rabbits in Australia could reduce the 
population of native animals as feral cats look for other food sources, Western 
Australian research has found.

A study from Edith Cowan University, published on Monday 
<http://www.ecu.edu.au/news/latest-news/2015/01/feral-cats-enjoy-extensive-menu>
, shows an increase in native animals in the diet of cats in areas where 
rabbits have been reduced, meaning effective rabbit control programs could 
prompt a dip in the local native marsupial population.

Lead author Tim Doherty told Guardian Australia the results showed the 
importance of “integrated” pest control methods, rather than just focusing on 
one feral species.

“If rabbit abundance declines, then a primary food source for cats would 
decline, so cats would then turn to native animals and prey more heavily on 
them,” he said.

“It is something that should be considered when doing broadscale rabbit 
eradication.”

The study looked at 49 published and unpublished datasets of the scats and 
stomach contents of feral cats around Australia and found they dined on about 
400 Australian species, including 28 listed species.

Reptiles were the most commonly eaten animals, making up 157 species on the 
list, followed by birds (123), marsupials, (58), rodents (27) and frogs (21).

Rodents were most likely to be on the menu in northern Australia, while larger 
possums and bandicoots were among the most-eaten in south-eastern Australia.

Among the rarest dishes on the feral cats’ plate were the woylie, mountain 
pygmy possum and Christmas Island whiptail skink.

Feral cats were also found to have eaten southern rockhopper penguins, flying 
foxes and rock wallabies. Some cats were even shown to prey on nesting sea 
birds during breeding season.

“Our study confirms that the feral cat is a generalist opportunist predator 
that preys on a variety of species across the continent,” Doherty said.

Most at risk are “critical weight range mammals”, 16 of which have become 
extinct since colonisation. The term is used to describe animals weighing 
between 35g and 5,500g, or, as Doherty puts it, “the group of species that are 
the ideal lunch-time snack for a cat.”

Doherty, a PhD candidate with ECU’s School of Natural Sciences, said estimates 
of feral cat numbers in Australia ranged from eight million to 20 million. They 
areestimated to eat 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/backgroundbriefing/feral-cats-re-write-the-australian-story/5802204>
 75 million native animals every night.

Until recently there have been limited ways to target feral cats, but on 
Friday the West Australian government announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/30/new-baits-that-appeal-to-feral-cats-could-aid-recovery-of-threatened-species>
 it had registered a specialist cat-bait for public use.

The bait uses 1080 poisoning and relies on high-intensity baiting, meaning it 
is not suitable for use in the eastern states, where native animals lack the 
natural tolerance to the toxin that WA species have.

Doherty said developing a method for effectively baiting cats was an important 
breakthrough.

“Reducing the impacts of feral cats is a challenging endeavour, but it is 
essential to the conservation of our threatened fauna,” he said.
 