
UFC welterweight champion Tyron Woodley is an African American athlete in the 
modern age of sports activism. He does not take this responsibility lightly. He 
grew up in Ferguson, Missouri, and that fact alone gives him a voice on racial 
matters for it was his town, his neighborhood, his very street where Michael 
Brown was shot and his body lay for hours baking in the summer sun. As a young 
black man inFerguson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ferguson> he was 
racially profiled, pulled over needlessly by police and once thrown in a paddy 
wagon with a group of friends because he says: “We looked like we were up to 
something.”


He wrestled at the University of Missouri where last 8 November the football 
team went on strike in support of a black students and forced the school’s 
president to resign. He is proud of what the football players did at his alma 
mater, but more importantly, he sees the power their protest gives men like 
himself – African Americans with fame, money and success – to speak about 
topics like inequality. He believes they need to use it regardless of 
consequences.

In September he listened to Donald Trump rambling on about Ferguson as if it 
was some flaming ghetto and not the racially mixed suburban St Louis town he 
knows. This angered him and so he said:“He got to keep Ferguson out of his 
mouth so I can keep my fist out of his mouth.” 
<http://www.tmz.com/2016/09/27/donald-trump-tyron-woodley-fist-ferguson-debates/>
 His comments were dutifully reported by TMZ who ran a picture of him with a 
clenched fist and a headline that said he“threatens” 
<http://www.tmz.com/2016/09/27/donald-trump-tyron-woodley-fist-ferguson-debates/>
 Trump. His words made headlines and a few days later, a crowd of mostly white 
fans booed him in Madison Square Garden’s theater during a press conference for 
Saturday’s UFC 205.

Jon Jones stripped of UFC title after one-year doping ban upheld
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/jon-jones-ufc-title-doping-ban> 
Woodley seemed startled by the reaction. Was he being booed for saying he 
might put is fist through Trump’s teeth? Or because he’s a diligent wrestler 
and therefore less exciting than his kickboxing opponent Stephen “Wonderboy” 
Thompson? Or because he takes months off between fights, drawing criticism that 
he didn’t deserve theUFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 201 fight 
against Robbie Lawler that got him the title? It leads some, like fellow 
welterweight contender Belal Muhammad to say: “I don’t know why the hate.”

Woodley can’t help but wonder if it is something else. Something deeper. 
Something that still holds back black fighters in a sport that should be 
colorblind.

“I think that – this is my personal opinion – but sometimes African American 
athletes are considered overly cocky,” he says. “I have some (things to say) 
that are blatantly true about African American athletes in our sport. And if I 
mention those thing then all of a sudden I’m whining, I’m playing the victim, 
I’m race baiting or it’s somebody else.

“But I don’t think it matters,” he continues. “Because at the end of the day, 
I’m the champion of the world. I’m a successful individual and maneuvering in a 
culture where there are some racists. I still find a way to get to the top, 
whether I go around or weave through.”

The Wonderboy fight is the biggest of Woodley’s career; billed as the co-main 
event of UFC 205 just below Conor McGregor v Eddie Alvarez and it has his name 
glowing on the Garden marquee. He’s exactly the kind of fighter the UFC should 
want to promote: a Christian family man with four children, a burgeoning acting 
career and a series of broadcasting jobs. And yet he can’t shake a feeling that 
as important as he’s become he isn’t as free as the lighter faces surrounding 
him on the card’s promotional poster.

At the UFC 205 press conference Woodley watched McGregor eviscerate the rest 
of the card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/28/conor-mcgregor-ufc-donald-trump-mannerisms-new-york-earnings>
 with torrents of profane insults screamed into the roar of an adoring crowd 
that sees such bombast as part of McGregor’s Irish charm. McGregor’s act amused 
Woodley even as he rolled his eyes through some of the rants. McGregor is a 
good businessman and he respects that. He has a saying: “More drama, more 
commas”. So if McGregor wants to heap clever putdowns while the money falls all 
around them, by all means let him holler. But Woodley knows he can’t be 
McGregor, throwing bottles and spewing swear words. Doing so would only make 
him the angry black man and the boos would only come louder then.

“Name me one African American mixed martial artist who’s been able to get away 
with the amount of talk Conor has,” he says. “Name me one. You can’t. Rampage 
Jackson came to the UFC with a brain. He came to the UFC with a huge following 
from being in Asia with Pride. He was a personality before he came to the UFC. 
You don’t see them putting marketing money behind him to blow him up. Have you 
seen Jon Jones taken in any (marketing) direction? Have you seen any African 
American athlete that appeals to the urban market actually bring that market to 
theMMA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma>?”

For years Woodley never made Ferguson a part of his identity. He figured 
nobody had heard of his hometown and he found it easier just to say he was 
fighting out of St Louis. But then Darren Wilson shot Michael Brown and a 
neighborhood erupted. There were riots and looters and buildings on fire. In 
some ways he was conflicted. He knew what it was like to be a young black man 
in Ferguson – the way the police come down hard sometimes, where the greatest 
crime an African American kid might have was the color of his skin. “Those 
things are true, they are happening and Ferguson is notorious for it,” he says. 
And yet it was also the place where he was raised, the community he loved. He 
knew every bit of that town, having lived in some of the poorest sections as 
well as the best. It hurt him to sit it burn.

He knew exactly the rage that many of the protesters brought to the streets, 
but he also knew that many of those running before the cameras, throwing rocks 
at windows weren’t from Ferguson or even St Louis. The damage they did was more 
than just physical. It left an emotional scar. Suddenly little Ferguson was a 
national flashpoint and the TV commentators were getting the town wrong. They 
portrayed it as the inner city, a predominately African American ghetto where 
crime lingered on every corner. That was not his Ferguson. His Ferguson a 
mixture of white and black spread through blocks of subdivisions; a place where 
people had to accept each other’s differences and where also those backgrounds 
collided.

“You go to Ferguson and you look at January-Wabash Park and other areas 
(they’re) extremely nice and it’s not a war zone,” Woodley says. “They way it’s 
portrayed is why I have an issue. That’s not Ferguson. I think more so (it is) 
the way way the community and law enforcement have been at odds for years. They 
respect hasn’t been there for the law enforcement and definitely there is 
profiling on the citizens.”

After the riots he added Ferguson to his biography – not to capitalize on the 
unrest but to show people that the town where he grew up was not an awful 
place. He wanted the world to know that good things and good people came from a 
community whose very name sparks the tinders of ugly debate. He is sensitive 
about the impressions everyone gets of a place most have never seen. “I wanted 
to show that hey, Ferguson is a place where a lot of successful people have 
been born and raised and built so I wanted to show Ferguson in a positive way,” 
he says.

Not long after Brown’s death and before the riots, Woodley contacted the UFC 
hoping to use the organization’s enormous platform to talk about Ferguson, 
Brown’s death and police relations in general. There needed to be a productive 
dialogue, he thought, and he wanted to start it. He remembers sitting in an 
airport, explaining his idea to someone who handles social media for the UFC. 
“That’s my street, I grew up on that street!,” he implored, expecting the UFC 
to leap at a chance to promote a top fighter with direct ties to Ferguson. They 
did nothing, he says. The same thing happened a year later when the Missouri 
players went on strike, he says.

“It’s crazy,” he says, then pauses.

“Let me stop myself,” he says, “I was about to go off.”

He shakes his head. For a moment he says nothing.

“I just thought those were good opportunities to make a positive stance,” he 
continues, then his voice trails off.

In some ways, the Missouri protest surprised Woodley. African American 
students at the school have long complained of feeling isolated but he was an 
athlete in a wrestling bubble and that kept him from the experiencing things 
that happened to other black students. He had to call his brother-in-law, a 
doctor, who went to school there. “He told me some stories that I didn’t want 
to hear,” Woodley says. A few weeks ago, he went back to speak to the wrestling 
team and was surprised to see that even though he was the school’s first 
All-Big 12 wrestler and their first top five recruit, his picture was not on 
the wall with other distinguished wrestlers in the school’s history.

“All of a sudden (the coaches said): ‘Oooh, we got to get a picture of you on 
this wall,” Woodley says. “It was kind of...” He paused again for moment and 
sighed. “But it is what it is and it’s about the athletes and thats why I’m 
there but it was really weird that people couldn’t wrap their minds around the 
idea that these things can happen.”

He drove around the campus that day looking at all the giant new fraternity 
and sorority houses and couldn’t help that each mansion was only for 
predominantly white fraternities and sororities. “How many black homes are 
there?” he wondered. Where were all the big homes from the African American 
students? He glanced around and realized that even after what happened last 
fall and the racial awakening of his old college, Missouri still had a long way 
to go.

Sitting in an empty radio studio in late September, a few days after the Trump 
comments, about to promote the second biggest fight in the UFC’s biggest card 
ever, Woodley is probably at the apex of his career. Never will he have a 
larger voice in sports. Never may minority athletes have a more powerful voice 
than they do today. As a child of Ferguson he has the platform, he can be a 
kind of modern-day Ali. Boos be damned. If Donald Trump is going to fire off a 
shot at Ferguson well by God he’s going to talk about putting his fist through 
the man’s teeth. That’s not a right, its a responsibility.

“He needs to talk about (race),” Michael Johnson, another African American UFC 
fighter will later say, unaware of Woodley’s words about Trump. “He’s a 
champion and his voice needs to be heard. It’s very important to speak up with 
the things that are happening.”

In the studio Woodley laughs.

“I don’t read social media. Is (the Trump comment) getting buzz?” he asks, the 
idea Trump could actually be president probably the farthest thing from his 
mind.

Yes, he is told, his line about putting a fist in Trump’s mouth made plenty of 
headlines.

He chuckles.

“Well hopefully it made it to him,” he says.

No need to hold back now. 
 