
Stuart Fielden led Bradford to their third World Club Challenge title in five 
years last night, and after this towering personal performance by the Great 
Britain prop even those Australian judges who dismiss this fixture as an 
overhyped pre-season friendly will surely concede his status as the best 
front-row in the game.

Fielden picked up where he left off in earning the title of the world's best 
forward in last autumn's Tri-Nations series, running and tackling with his 
usual ferocity but also handling skilfully and selectively, in addition to 
scoring two of Bradford's first three tries.

The margin of Bradford's win will have done little for the credibility of the 
fixture in Australia, especially as British clubs have now won five of the 
seven games since it was revived in 2000, all of them played in England.

However, this was the perfect way for the Bulls to launch their season and 
dispel some of the gloom that has gathered over Odsal despite last October's 
unlikely run to the Super League title, with the departures of seven players 
including Leon Pryce, Robbie Paul and Jamie Peacock.

They may be a much changed team but with key players such as Michael Withers, 
Paul Johnson, Lesley Vainikolo and of course Fielden remaining, and a handful 
of experienced new signings to complement some emerging young talent, it would 
still be folly to write off their chances of extending their run of consecutive 
grand final appearances to six.

As for the Australian champions, Wests had been in England for less than a 
week, with their only "warm-up" match coming in the 40C (104F) heat of Gunnedah 
in the New South Wales interior seven days earlier, so it was no surprise that 
on a chilly Yorkshire night Bradford caught them cold with a sixth-minute try.

It came from Marcus Bai, the Papua New Guinea wing who was making history by 
playing in a third World Club Challenge for different clubs, having represented 
Melbourne in 2000 and Leeds last year. Bai applied a typically powerful finish 
after a precise long pass from his full-back Withers.

However, once they had warmed up Wests provided an early example of the 
attacking flair that adorned their surprise grand final win last September, 
with Daniel Fitzhenry wriggling under an unconvincing Ben Harris tackle to 
bring the Australians level at 4-4.

They were also defending with real commitment, and it took a remarkable solo 
try from Fielden to re-establish the Bulls' lead in the 25th minute. The prop 
was picked out in an unusually wide position by Iestyn Harris's pass, but a 
centre would have been happy with his response as Fielden stepped inside one 
defender, handed off another and then charged over the top of the Tigers 
full-back Brett Hodgson.

Harris added a simple conversion, then another stirring Fielden break 
established the position from which the new Bulls captain kicked a penalty to 
extend their half-time lead to 12-4.

Fielden powered over the Wests line again nine minutes into the second half, 
but this time Hodgson managed to prevent him from grounding the ball. But there 
was no denying him a second on Bradford's next attack, which he had the luxury 
of celebrating before touching down - although the short pass with which Ian 
Henderson sent him through looked well forward.

Stanley Gene, the second Papuan international to join Bradford during the 
winter, then marked his debut by struggling over from acting-half, with Harris 
adding an excellent conversion. Bai also collected a second, as the Bulls 
completed the most convincing of their three world club titles to leave the 
Tigers looking dejected.

Hodgson did manage a hollow consolation try with three minutes left, but Wests 
will not be the only Australians wondering if their journey, and this fixture, 
was worthwhile - making it all the more imperative that the game is played down 
under next year before it loses its remaining credibility.

Bradford Bulls: Withers; Bai, B Harris, Hape, Vainikolo; Pryce, I Harris; 
Fielden, Henderson, Lynch, Johnson, Meyers, Langley.Interchange: Vagana, Gene, 
Ferres, Cook.

Wests Tigers: Hodgson; McDonnell, Collis, Whatuira, Lolesi; Fitzhenry, Prince; 
O'Hara, Farah, Skandalis, Laffranchi, Heighington, Galea.Interchange: Gibbs, 
Fulton, Harrison, S Harris.

Referee: S Ganson (St Helens)
 