
Fifteen babies are dying every day in the UK from stillbirth, during labour or 
within four weeks of being born, according to a new report.

The health secretary Jeremy Hunt has pledged to halve the rate of such deaths 
by 2030, but the leading stillbirth charity, Sands, says the amount of funding 
committed is “woefully inadequate” - a charge the government rejects.

The new report is from MBRRACE-UK 
<https://oxfile.ox.ac.uk/oxfile/work/extBox?id=340787E44D4326BCF0> (Mothers and 
Babies: Reducing Risk through Audits and Confidential Enquiries Across the UK), 
which is a collaboration of academics and medical experts. It finds that there 
are big variations in death rates across the country from 4.1 to 7.1 per 1,000 
births. Women from the poorest backgrounds and black and Asian mothers run a 
higher risk than others that their baby will die in the womb or soon after 
birth.

In nearly half of all stillbirths (46%), the causes of death are unknown, says 
the report. The biggest causes of death in the early weeks of life are 
complications following birth (32%) and congenital anomalies such as heart 
defects (28%), and very premature birth (13%).

The MBRRACE team flagged up the need for research into premature births and 
also called for every maternity unit to review and record the causes of death 
in the same way to try to discover why there are such stark variations around 
the country.

Sands says that a fall in the death rates will not happen without extra money. 
Maternity units are already struggling, without the staff to give high-risk 
women the extra scans they need, they say. Midwives are not getting sufficient 
training and some units do not have the funds for the monitoring equipment they 
need.

“It’s clear from today’s report that variations in care across the UK persist 
and the risk of your baby dying remains influenced by where you live and who 
you are,” said Judith Abela, acting chief executive. “While the secretary of 
state’s commitment to halving baby deaths in England by 2030 is encouraging – 
as is work elsewhere in the UK – the government’s financial commitment, which 
amounts to £3.60 per birth in England, is woefully inadequate.”

Bliss, the premature and sick baby charity, said there were significant 
staffing shortages in neonatal intensive care units 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/19/bliss-neonatal-intensive-care-units-stretched>
 and the report should be a wake-up call. “Over 90,000 babies born in the UK 
each year depend on neonatal care to survive and thrive – and that care depends 
on hospitals having the right numbers of nurses and doctors in place to meet 
quality standards”, said Caroline Davey, Bliss’s chief executive.

Dr David Richmond, president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, called for efforts to reduce pre-term births, which accounted 
for two-thirds of all stillbirths and deaths in the first weeks of life. The 
college is supporting the training of teams of doctors and midwives.

NHS England publishes advice on preventing stillbirths for first time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/21/nhs-england-publishes-advice-preventing-stillbirths-foetal-movement>
“Promotion of messages which may help women reduce the risk of stillbirth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/21/nhs-england-publishes-advice-preventing-stillbirths-foetal-movement>
 – such as maintaining a healthy weight prior to conception, stopping smoking 
and attending antenatal appointments – are also essential components to help 
end preventable stillbirths,” he said.

There was a slight fall in the overall stillbirth and neonatal death rate 
overall between 2013 and 2014, the report says. One of the report’s authors, 
Elizabeth Draper, professor of perinatal and paediatric epidemiology at the 
University of Leicester, said that in future they will measure any fall against 
the government’s target, set late last year, of halving deaths by 2030.

The government has so far invested £500,000 in a new improved process to 
review and learn from every stillbirth, £1m in improved training for staff, £2m 
in a new safety equipment fund which has been shared amongst 90 trusts and 
£365m on perinatal mental health.

“It is positive that progress has been made, but this important report is 
further evidence that we must continue to tackle variation to help ensure far 
fewer families go through the heartache of losing a child,” said Ben Gummer, a 
health minister.

 “We’ve committed to halve the number of stillbirths and neonatal deaths by 
2030 - we are also investing in improved training for staff, new safety 
equipment and making sure hospitals review and learn from every tragic case.”

 * This article was amended on 17 May 2016 to correct a figure. The report 
found that death rates across the country varied from 4.1 to 7.1 per 1,000 
births; not 4.1 to 7.9.
 