
There was something unusual lurking below Vicente del Bosque's nose on 
Saturday night. Not his moustache either, for creeping out from that legendary 
facial hair was, of all things, a smile. Fair enough - Madrid had just clinched 
the league title with a 5-0 demolition of Alavés.

Luis Figo put his recent poor form behind him to turn in an awesome display. 
He provided assists for three of the five, including Fernando Hierro's 
hundredth league goal for Real, and the header which saw Raúl go top of the 
Pichichi goal-scoring table.

The Bernabéu crowd went mental. So did Real's players - the coach and 
president were drenched in Champagne, Raúl did his usual bit of performing 
faenas with a bullfighter's cloak, and Iker Casillas travelled the pitch on an 
electronic stretcher-cart "like a formula one driver" (yes, Marca really did 
say that). And, of course, there was the obligatory formation team diving. 
Still, at least there wasn't a baby in sight.

Worry not Mr McManaman, your Steve's behaving himself. Honest. He was collared 
by TVE on his way out of the Madrid dressing room, with a huge grin and what 
looked suspiciously like a pint of Champagne. "Have you been drinking 
champagne?" he was asked. "The others have," he replied, swigging away,"but not 
me - I only drink water."

After the Bernabéu came the trip to Plaza Cibeles - along with 400,000 fans - 
for Real's traditional statue climbing and jumping around in fountains.

Inevitably, Figo was the centre of attention. He turned horribly James 
Cameron, telling reporters from the top of the statue that he felt like "The 
King of the World". Thankfully, he didn't praise God in a deep South accent and 
chant "whooo! U-S-A!, U-S-A!".

It's a bit of a turn-around for Figo. His last celebration was from a balcony 
overlooking the Plaça Sant Jaume in Barcelona, when he delighted the amassed 
culés with a chant of "¡Blancos llorones, salud a los campeones!" - "White 
cry-babies, salute the Champions!" (a slightly more polite version of "¡Madrid 
cabrones, salud a los campeones" - Madrid you arseholes, salute the 
champions!").

Figo resisted the temptation to replace "Madrid" with "Barça", despite the 
best efforts of the Madrid press. "Celebrations are always great, wherever they 
are", he replied to yet another "How does this compare to Barça?" enquiry.

 Valladolid come good at Depor
 Things are also a little clearer at the bottom after this weekend. Real 
Sociedad and Zaragoza took another small step towards safety with a 1-1 draw 
and there were surprise away wins for two other sides in trouble - Valladolid 
and Real Oviedo.

Valladolid hadn't won away all season while Deportivo La Coruña hadn't lost at 
home in 27 games, so it was inevitable that Pepé Moré's cash-strapped 
strugglers would win 2-1 in the Riazor.

Moré, it seems, is a motivational genius. He told Ecuadorian striker Jaime 
Kaviedes: "Right, you've got a chance today. If you don't take it, it's 
unlikely you'll play again." And Kaviedes it was who put Valladolid in the lead 
with a clipped finish over Jacques Songo'o on the stroke of half time. Inspired.

Depor poured forward in the second half only to be caught out when Chema's 
superb pass put Fernando Sales through to make it 2-0. Depor boss Javi Irureta 
responded by sending on every forward at the club, including Argentinian Turu 
Flores, a man who's spent the whole season warming the bench with his ample 
behind. Flores bulldozed through a challenge to set up Makaay with 15 minutes 
to go, but Valladolid held on for three vital points.

Moré was delighted, while Irureta ignored sound advice from the Jackons and 
blamed it on the sunshine. "We got the end in the sunlight and that gave them a 
lifeline," he said, unbelievably.

Oviedo - another side with a shocking away record - also defied the odds to 
win 1-0 in the Nou Camp. Jamie finished off Paunovic's swift break for the only 
goal. Barça's Champions League chances are looking slimmer than ever. "The 
situation is worse than critical," screamed boss Charly Rexach, grabbing one of 
those electric shock zappy things and calling the crash team, "we're in 
Intensive Care now".

That win has taken Oviedo four points clear of the relegation zone, level with 
Real Sociedad and free-falling Rayo Vallecano. Rayo were thumped 4-0 in 
Mallorca - a result which has secured a Champions League place for Luis 
Aragonés's side. Mallorca have already strengthened the side for next year with 
the addition of Turu Flores. I think that's right, anyway - the headline did 
say "Mallorca sign Fatih".

With a four-point gap having now opened up, it's looking bleak for the bottom 
three, Osasuna, Racing Santander and Numancia.

Numancia's 2-1 win over Espanyol is probably too little too late, Osasuna's 
recent run of form came to an end at Europe-chasing Villarreal, and Racing drew 
1-1 with Valencia thanks to a late equaliser from Gaizka Mendieta.

Valencia keep their options open
 Not that anyone could really begrudge Valencia a point after Wednesday night 
in Milan. Armed with an awesome array of firecrackers and flares, and giving 
off a Kenny Rogers orange glow, Valencia's fans seemed hell bent on testing the 
foundations of the San Siro, making ears bleed, blowing off their own fingers, 
and generally enjoying themselves. They certainly did that - until Pellegrino's 
spot kick. For valencianos, the desperately unlucky Santi Cañizares hit the 
nail on the head: "The more I think about the result, the more it hurts."

After two final defeats running, it's time for Valencia's luck to change. A 
win next week will secure another shot at the Champions League, anything less 
and Héctor Cúper's side will need a result from the last game of the season 
against their nearest rivals, Barcelona. In the Nou Camp (well, if Oviedo can 
do it)

With the title, Champions League and relegation issues closer to resolution, 
the biggest battle may now be for sixth spot and a Uefa Cup place. Málaga did 
their chances no harm with a 3-1 win in Bilbao, while current incumbents Celta 
won 1-0 in Las Palmas thanks to an own-goal from Álvaro.

But the real interest was off the pitch. Having scored twice last week, keeper 
Nacho González has gone from hero to zero. Both he and Vinny Samways failed to 
reappear for the second half, leading to speculation that there had been 
trouble in the dressing room at half time. Las Palmas boss Sergio Kresic has so 
far refused to reveal why he felt "obliged" to make the double substitution, 
but did say that "neither player was in a fit state to play". Mind you, that 
never stopped Mick Quinn.

spanishfootball@hotmail.com <mailto:spanishfootball@hotmail.com>
 