
A short film that is deeply critical of the church’s attitude to homosexuality 
is to receive its world premiere in a cathedral with the approval of the 
archbishop ofWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.


The 12-minute documentary, which tells the story of two former nuns who fell 
in love, only to be ostracised by the church after their relationship was 
exposed, is to be screened in St Asaph Cathedral in Denbighshire, north Wales.

All One in Christ will premiere on Tuesday and is thought to be the first gay 
film to be screened in a British church.

The archbishop, Dr Barry Morgan, said: “This film will not be easy watching 
for church members as it reminds us how people among us have been ostracised 
and mistreated because of their sexuality.

“By sharing the personal stories of those who have suffered and been hurt, I 
hope this powerful film will bring home to all the scale of the damage done and 
ultimately help change attitudes within the church.”

The film was produced by organisers of the Iris prize, the world’s largest 
LGBT short film prize, now in its 10th year.

Although it is made with sensitivity, with many of the participants also 
talking of their undying devotion to the church, its producers acknowledge the 
venue for the screening could spark condemnation from some quarters.

In the documentary, the former nuns Ann and Marika Jane Savage-Lewis describe 
the outrage of their local bishop after they were outed by a Sunday newspaper 
about 40 years ago.

The local vicar physically blocked their entrance to the church. “That was us 
out,” Marika Jane Savage-Lewis told the Guardian. She said the archbishop was 
“very brave” for allowing the screening – “particularly in view of the hoo-ha 
that’s going on”.

Other participants include a lesbian priest who was once told by her local 
bishop that she was a “scandal risk” and a churchgoer who says “the lack of 
freedom to be ourselves amongst other Christians” takes its toll on mental and 
physical health.

Andrew Pierce, the Iris prize’s chair, said: “We have always been aware of the 
power of film and here we are days away from the historical screening of LGBT 
films in a cathedral in north Wales.”

Berwyn Rowlands, the Iris prize director, paid tribute to the courage of both 
the archbishop and the film’s participants. “The idea that we have moved 
forward and that the Church in Wales in particular is willing for the cathedral 
to be used to screen this film is amazing,” he said.

“What we have here is a process of healing. For those who have faith, I think 
it will be ground-breaking.

“We have considered carefully that there might be some criticism. We are 
hoping that common sense, humanity and tolerance prevail. Gay marriage is still 
seen as a problem, but it’s wonderful how the bishops and the archbishop 
himself have gone out of their way to make it clear that the Church in Wales is 
a church for everybody.”

The film also includes the bishop Stephen Lowe, who says: “The way in which 
gay and lesbian people have been persecuted is something that the church needs 
to feel a deep repentance about.”

All One in Christ is among 36 films produced in partnership with communities 
across Wales by Iris Prize Outreach and financed by the Big Lottery Fund. The 
project works to build tolerance and understanding.
 