
NRL stars Jason Taumalolo and Valentine Holmes will reportedly be invited back 
to the United States for a second trial for NFL recruiters. The pair impressed 
scouts from 14NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> teams during a 
two-hour workout in Los Angeles on Saturday (Sunday AEDT), performing cone 
drills, a 40-yard (36m) sprint and other skills and agility exercises.

Five teams have formally expressed interest in the players returning to again 
test their abilities in front of NFL scouts, according to News Corp Australia. 
It is unknown when rampaging North Queensland forward Taumalolo and Cronulla 
backline ace Holmes will be requested to return to the US.

Clubs call for no-confidence vote in NRL chairman John Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/clubs-no-confidence-vote-nrl-chairman-grant>
February’s annual NFL scouting combine, a week-long showcase involving top 
college draft prospects, is one option for their return. That, however, would 
clash with theirNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> clubs’ preparations 
for 2017 as pre-season training nears completion.

Taumalolo, 23, and Holmes, 21, say they remain committed to their NRL teams 
for 2017 – the last years of their contracts – but if offered an NFL contract 
would move to the US in 2018. “To come over here and have another go at a sport 
is another challenge for us,” Taumalolo said.

The scouts – from the Eagles, San Francisco 49ers, Chicago Bears, Jacksonville 
Jaguars, Indianapolis Colts, Kansas City Chiefs, New York Jets, Buffalo Bills, 
LA Rams, Cleveland Browns, Arizona Cardinals, Green Bay Packers, San Diego 
Chargers and Seattle Seahawks – stood on the field with clipboards and stop 
watches as Taumalolo and Holmes performed drills.

A Philadelphia Eagles scout, who asked not to be named, said Saturday’s 
workout was just the first step of their NFL journey. “They are big, strong 
athletes,” the Eagles scout said on Saturday. “The balance, strength, body 
control, the change in direction, they have that. Their discipline today was 
outstanding.”

The workout’s organiser, Jeffrey Foster, president of the National Football 
Scouting, was impressed by not only their physical talent, but intellect. “Both 
players were told what to do, they did it one time and they were done which I 
think speaks highly of them and their ability to listen, learn and to perform 
under what was probably a lot of pressure,” Foster said.
 