
The patient who called in tears to say a new kidney had been found

I used to be a clinical nurse specialist in kidney transplantation. Prior to 
that I had been in charge of home heamodialysis and cared for many patients in 
remote areas. On Christmas Eve I had been working and went to bed around 
midnight. At 1am I had a call from a patient of mine whom I had looked after on 
home dialysis. A kidney had become available and he had been called in for a 
transplant. He was in tears. He told me he had been waiting for this moment for 
six years but now that the time had come he felt so sad. He was sad that a 
family was devastated at the loss of a loved one onChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Day but happy to have the 
chance of a new life. I reassured him that the family who had lost a loved one 
would be comforted that the kidney was being gifted to such a wonderful man who 
would use the opportunity to lead a full life.

He then told me that he would remember this Christmas Day for the rest of his 
life and that, on receiving the call, I was the first and only person he wanted 
to talk to. He said: “You are an outstanding nurse. Wish me luck. Hopefully 
this is my last day of needing dialysis. Thank you for always being there. I 
never thought I would say this but I’ll miss you!” He had a transplant that day 
and had over a decade of healthy kidney function. That Christmas was one of my 
best ever.


Director of nursing education, Abu Dhabi 

The baby born while a choir sang carols outside 

While I’m always a little sad to be away from my family, I’m lucky enough to 
be part of a wonderful work team. We have our own traditions and put lots of 
effort into celebrating Christmases spent together. We’ve won the best 
decorated ward three years running, we all wear Christmas jumpers and eat ourNHS
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Christmas dinners in the canteen 
together. Our receptionist even comes in on Christmas morning dressed as Santa 
to deliver our secret Santa gifts. As we work in maternity, anyone who can’t be 
discharged home to be with family is normally more than happy to be spending 
their Christmas with us as they’re getting one of the best gifts delivered on 
Christmas Day. Last year when we started the Christmas Day shift we only had 
one woman in labour; she needed to be delivered by caesarean section and was 
taken into theatre. At the same time the brass band and choir had arrived on 
the ward to sing carols. They stood just outside the theatre and performed When 
a child is born and Away in a manger while our first baby of that Christmas was 
born. While all births are wonderful to be a part of, this one was 
unforgettable; there wasn’t a dry eye in the theatre.

Midwife, London

My Christmas shift showed me the human connection behind medicine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/19/christmas-shift-human-connection-behind-medicine>
The Christmas dinner that brought warring colleagues together

This year will be my first Christmas off this century. I’ve spent the last 15 
working with people with learning disabilities in residential care homes. It’s 
always a great day. Life and bodily functions go on, but the Christmas spirit 
is always wide and the enthusiasm of the people we support is contagious. Being 
left in an empty London and watching everyone I know make their way back home 
is strangely liberating. I’ll feel odd moving with the crowds this year.

One year I was managing a home where there had been a lot of issues with staff 
and staff tension. It was my first Christmas there and I was determined to make 
it a special day for everyone. We made so much effort to make it work. We were 
all eating together with Christmas songs in the background; everyone was 
wearing a paper hat and a colleague and I burst into tears as a result of what 
we had achieved.

Treat Me Right! manager, London

The girl who survived life-threatening injuries from a car crash 

Over 30 years ago on Christmas Eve morning a teenage girl was transferred from 
a district general hospital to the regional cardio-thoracic intensive care unit 
where I worked, having sustained serious chest injuries in a car crash. I was 
in charge of the unit for the late shift on Christmas Day, and looked after her 
for the shift. She was on a ventilator and heavily sedated. I can remember her 
parents at her bedside and explaining every procedure I was carrying out to 
keep them as well informed as possible and to de-mystify an often frightening 
environment for families. It was touch and go and she had numerous life 
threatening emergencies over the next few weeks. No one knew whether she was 
going to make it, but she did and was discharged a few months later. She 
returned to the hospital where she had originally been admitted to thank the 
staff for her initial care. We received a letter from the consultant there 
telling us he couldn’t believe she’d survived her injuries and praising us all 
to the skies. I bumped into her a few years later; she was doing her nurse 
training and wanted to specialise in intensive care.

Senior staff nurse, intensive care, London

The elderly woman who shared Christmas lunch with her family for the first 
time in years

I no longer work over Christmas, but my favourite memory of doing so was 
learning that one of my clients, who was over 100 years old, had a daughter who 
lived around the corner from the sheltered scheme. Her daughter was too elderly 
and unwell to collect her mother, so I arranged to take her to her daughter’s 
house where she had Christmas lunch with her daughter, grandchildren and great 
grandchildren. It still makes me happy to think of it.

Sheltered scheme manager, London

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 