
Kangaroos coach Mal Meninga has named five debutants in his squad for Friday’s 
Four Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> opener against 
Scotland in Hull and made 10 changes to the side that beat New Zealand in Perth 
earlier this month.

Matt Moylan will start at fullback, James Maloney is named at five-eighth, 
Justin O’Neill selected in the centres with Manly young gun Jake Trbojevic at 
lock. Sydney Roosters hooker Jake Friend forms part of a five-man bench with 
Meninga opting against resting Cameron Smith for the match against the 
tournament minnows.

No automatic sin-bin for punching at Four Nations and next year's World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/no-automatic-sin-bin-for-punching-at-four-nations-and-next-years-world-cup>
Maloney’s selection caps off a fantastic 12 months in which he won a grand 
final in his first season with Cronulla and he’ll partner Cooper Cronk, who is 
making his 30th Test appearance, in the halves.

Greg Inglis, Johnathan Thurston, Matt Scott and Darius Boyd have been omitted 
with one eye very much on next Saturday’s clash with New Zealand in Coventry.

Meninga insisted there is no such thing a weak Australia team and said all of 
his 24-man squad are capable of stepping up when called upon. “We can make a 
full-strength side with any of these group of players.” Meninga said.

“I always planned to ensure the entire 24-man squad has played across the 
Perth Test, and the Four Nations match against Scotland. That will set us up 
nicely for the rest of the tournament.”

After facing Scotland and New Zealand on 5 November the Kangaroos face England 
at London Stadium on seven days later and Meninga said nothing is set in stone 
in terms of his strongest starting line-up.

“I do have an idea of what my best possible squad will be, but all players 
know that they can break into the top team with a strong performance.”

Team: Matt Moylan, Josh Mansour, Justin O’Neill, Josh Dugan, Blake Ferguson, 
James Maloney, Cooper Cronk, Aaron Woods, Cameron Smith (capt), David Klemmer, 
Sam Thaiday, Tyson Frizell, Jake Trobojevic.Interchange: Jake Friend, Shannon 
Boyd, Trent Merrin, Michael Morgan, Valentine Holmes. (one to be omitted).
 