
Welcome to the Doghouse. We're at the back of an otherwise regulation gym in 
the Chinatown area of Las Vegas, miles from the alleged glamour of the Strip 
but at the heart of the Mayweather phenomenon. There are a thousand gyms like 
this one, and none.

Every day, loyal subjects gather to gawk at the main man, Floyd ("don't call 
me Junior no more") Mayweather. He has an entourage somewhere in strength 
between that which Sugar Ray Robinson dragged around Europe in the 50s and 
Muhammad Ali's squad of loud, hilarious believers 40 years ago and more.

Mayweather's camp of followers who barrel through the two ante rooms to watch 
him work are an eclectic bunch. There is the rapper 50 Cent, who tells Floyd he 
boxed back in New York and is rarely away from his side. Minding his back are a 
collection of large men: "Big" Kip, "Big" Pat and "Big" Phonz, the biggest of 
them all, a man so genial and quietly spoken you'd imagine him pressing wild 
flowers away from this madness, were the image not utterly absurd.

Like Chris Eubank and Naseem Hamed Mayweather has people to make him look 
beautiful: a personal barber called Iced Out, and a personal photographer 
called Pistol Pete. Like Mike Tyson he values loyalty and his boyhood friend 
Ricki Brazil is on hand. This week, saysBen Thompson of Fighthype.com 
<http://www.fighthype.com/news/article12312.html>, there have also been former 
and current boxing stars: Eddie Mustafa Muhammad, Hasim Rahman, Zab Judah and 
the unbeaten, unpredictable Cuban featherweight Yuriorkis Gamboa, who bailed at 
the last minute recently on a fight with lightweight Brandon Rios, giving his 
compatriot Richard Abril the opportunity to get stiffed by the judges.

Floyd never gets stiffed. He is the Ring King. Last time out he stiffed Victor 
Ortiz when the Californian butted him, kissed him and foolishly looked away 
before being levelled by a straight right he never saw but surely felt.

Mayweather will brook no challenge from fellow fighters, 42 of whom have tried 
and failed to get the better of him, nor from fight writers, few of whom have 
got close enough to mount a challenge. He regards nearly all of the latter as 
"assholes" who know nothing about his art. At the top of his A-Hole list is 
Larry Merchant, the silver-haired, tuxedoed voice of HBO.

Merchant shocked the boxing world and his TV bosses when he told Mayweather 
after a post-Ortiz spat in centre ring up the road at the MGM Grand in 
September: "I wish I was 50 years younger, I'd kick your ass!" It was the sort 
of threat an octogenarian can most safely make surrounded by TV cameras and the 
serried ranks of casino security goons.

Mayweather, who wanted Merchant sacked, said recently: "You could put 10 Larry 
Merchants in the ring withFloyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> and they all could be 21 
[years old] and they're all going to come up short."

Despite his majesty's objections the rematch is only a few days away, when 
Mayweather returns to the MGM to challenge the rejuvenated Miguel Cotto for his 
WBA light-middleweight title, a fight that has the fight scene buzzing again. 
Will Mayweather face off with Merchant afterwards, though? HBO says Larry is 
there to do his job. Floyd says he is going to knock Cotto out in eight rounds, 
"get that check and hang out with my boy 50 [Cent]. We going to do what we do."

Floyd, meanwhile, goes back to work. He looks superb for 35 – even better, if 
you can make this comparison, than Bernard Hopkins at 47, who creaked gallantly 
losing to Chad Dawson at the weekend, then sulked. Both veterans live the life. 
Both are intense, proud, driven and, when riled, "assholes" – another judgment 
best delivered from a distance.

But in the gym, it's all business. Mayweather trains at all hours and key 
members of the Money May team have to come running when they get the call. To 
witness him work the pads close up with his uncle, Roger, is to appreciate 
genius honed by repetition. To see his father, Floyd Sr, watch on, redundantly, 
is to feel the chill of a broken relationship.

On Tuesday Mayweather arrived fashionably late in the foyer of the MGM Grand, 
where a tacky throne was set up for his ongoing coronation as the Ring King, 
assuming victory on Saturday night over Cotto. He takes it as a given. He 
swirls in and out, leaving a few boasts in his wake.

There is not much left to do now – except stroke Floyd's ego. He is as ready 
as he always is, as he will ever be. There is whooping, a little sus glaring at 
strangers, high fives and knuckle-taps for no apparent reason.

The Doghouse will return to anonymity in a few days' time and the entourage 
will go home with the rest of us. In all probability Floyd will still be king.

HATTON COMEBACK?

Neither party is talking but Ricky Hatton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> might just be going back to 
Frank Warren. The former two-weight world champion (jokers say that is his 
combined poundage now) and the promoter fell out over contested claims in 
Hatton's autobiography and have been promotional rivals since Hatton retired.

Recently, though, Hatton got the bad news that Sky was dropping his promotions 
after Scott Quigg's fight against Rendall Munroe in June. With a strong stable 
of fighters to support, where would he go? Ricky, clearly gob-smacked, said a 
couple of TV stations had been in touch. Then, on Monday, Warren put out 
several Hatton quotes on the Mayweather-Cotto fight, which is being screened on 
Warren's BoxNation channel.

I'm not sure Hatton would contemplate fighting again – however big a night 
that would be for BoxNation – but he might bring his fighters to Warren in 
co-promotions. Intriguing.
 