
In perhaps his biggest and dumbest boast, Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> has declared himself the 
greatest fighter of all time, ahead of Roberto Duran, Pernell Whitaker, Julio 
César Chávez and Muhammad Ali.

Floyd Mayweather defends choice of Andre Berto as his final opponent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/07/floyd-mayweather-andre-berto> 
The list is almost as shocking for its order as for the names missing.

Mayweather, the most gifted boxer at work in his business today but clearly no 
historian, could find no place in his top five for the Sugar Rays –Robinson and 
Leonard – Henry Armstrong, Rocky Marciano or Joe Louis. One would imagine the 
names Benny Leonard, Willie Pep and Joe Palooka (kidding) mean little to him, 
either.

Mayweather’s logic is as flawed as his chutzpah. Speaking in the royal plural, 
he tells his hosts on the Spanish boxing channel 
<https://www.facebook.com/atrbox/videos/vb.397187206960037/1044369398908478/?%20type=2&theater>
, “We not going to be biased. One thing about us is we gonna have an open 
mind.” If what follows is not biased, the word has recently changed its 
meaning. “Every champion up here, I respect totally,” he asserts, looking at 
the other nine contenders. “These are the guys who paved the way for me.”

You can almost hear young Marciano saying to old Louis before he knocks him 
through the ropes and out of boxing in the eighth round of their fight at 
Madison Square Garden in 1951, “Nothing personal, Joe. This is for Floyd – 
whose father isn’t even born yet but who one day in the next millennium will 
walk around with an oversized baseball hat to fit his oversized head, 
proclaiming he is The Best Ever.”

Pointing to his own image on an electronic board, Mayweather Jr says of 
himself in the third person: “He’s beaten more champions than any other fighter 
right here. He’s done it in a shorter period of time than any other fighter up 
here. And he’s done it in less fights than any other fighter up here. 
Record-breaking numbers all around the board: pay-per-view, live gate, landed 
punches on the highest percentage and took less punishment.”

He blithely ignores the fact that there was no pay-per-view in Jack Dempsey’s 
day, that Jack and George Carpentier drew the first million-dollar gate in 1921 
(the $1,789,238 of the day converts roughly to $23,415,933 – which does fall 
short of the all-time record $72,198,500 thatMayweather and Manny Pacquiao 
generated in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/04/floyd-mayweather-manny-pacquiao-boxing-new-era>
) and that 136,274 people paid to watch Chávez fight Greg Haugen at the Azteca 
Stadium in 1993. No matter; Floydworld is another place.

He once called himself “Money”, and for good reason. He makes more of it than 
anyone in the history of the sport: promoter, manager, TV executive or fellow 
fighter. He is a phenomenon, but there is a case to be made that he is an even 
better businessman than he is a boxer, a defensive master who, through sheer 
weight of personality and perversity, presides in a bloodlust sport.

Mayweather can make a good case for being regarded as the best all-round boxer 
since Leonard. Nobody can touch him – often literally – as he rolls that 
shoulder and coils up like a rattlesnake before striking with repetitive venom. 
He has been a world champion for 17 of his 19 years as a professional, since 
the night in Las Vegas in 1998 when he retired Genaro Hernández to win the 
WBC’s super-featherweight title, the first of five divisions he would rule.

Hernández, remember, had only lost to Oscar De La Hoya – and we should not 
forget that when Chicanito died of cancer in 2011 at 45, it was Mayweather who 
paid for the funeral. As someone once famously said of the Aston Villa 
chairman, “Deadly” Doug Ellis, Floyd is a largely misunderstood man.

There can be no denying, either, that the hard-won skill that has won him 48 
fights has also made him the most powerful individual in boxing and, unless 
Andre Berto defies all form and logic, Mayweather will reaffirm that status and 
equal Marciano’s famous record late on the Saturday evening of 12 September.

However, none of this entitles Mayweather to make the outrageous claim that he 
is better than Robinson, Ali, Leonard or, at a pinch, Duran. He makes no 
mention, even, of Marvin Hagler or Thomas Hearns. I asked Mayweather once did 
he not crave a rivalry such as established the legacy of the Four Kings – 
Leonard, Hagler, Duran and Hearns – and he shrugged those famous shoulders.

We surely will miss him when he is gone – and that will not be until his 
pay-per-view pull dips alarmingly. Mayweather-Berto will come not within a 
suburb of the Mayweather-Pacquiao cash bonanza – although a spectacular 
knockout of an inadequate challenger just might get people excited again.

Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> is still waiting for 
the phone call.

Still making Haymon

The weekend before that fight, Jamie McDonnell, of Doncaster, appears on 
another free-to-air CBS show in Texas, defending the WBA bantamweight title in 
a rematch with Tomoki Kameda, with whom he shared 12 lively rounds there in May.

It is excellent Stateside exposure for McDonnell, under the all-embracing 
umbrella of the ProfessionalBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> 
Champions banner, with Eddie Hearn sharing the promotion with the Californian 
promoter, Tom Brown.

While Al Haymon’s PBC continues to pull a lot of the strings over there, the 
most mysterious man in boxing is smart enough to know the value of 
partnerships. And that puts into perspective fears that he is hoovering up 
Britain’s best fighters, following the recent acquisition ofJames DeGale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> and rumours that Kell Brook 
might join Amir Khan in the Haymon fold.

Haymon might have as many as 200 fighters queueing up to get on his shows, 
partly because other doors are shut and partly because he promises them regular 
work. He is a long way from being the King of Boxing, but he is learning about 
the process pretty quickly.

As for McDonnell, he is happy to declare: “I am delighted to be going back to 
the States and facing Kameda again. People wrote me off before the first fight, 
but I was always confident that I would beat him and I am even more confident 
that I will do it again.”

Sugar for Shane

One of the surprise returns to the big-time is that of Sugar Shane Mosley at 
43. The fighter the late Eddie Futch once favourably compared to Sugar Ray 
Robinson but who Anthony Mundine forced to quit with a back injury in seven 
rounds 10 months ago, fights Ricardo Mayorga over 12 rounds for no other reason 
but money and mutual malice at the Inglewood Forum in California on 29 August.

They are doing their level best to make something out of nothing if their 
contretemps this week are any guide, the eternally outrageous Mayorgablowing 
cigarette smoke in Mosley’s face <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pl1XAME5zSA>.

When they were both a bit livelier than they are now, Mosley stopped Mayorga 
in the 12th round in 2008. He should have enough left to stop him again.
 