
The finest prizefighter of his generation did exactly what everyone expected 
against an opponent few believed worthy of sharing a ring with him.Floyd 
Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> coasted to a 
one-sided unanimous decision over the hopelessly overmatched Andre Berto before 
13,395 fans on Saturday at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. The judges at ringside 
turned in scores of 120-108, 118-110 and 117-111. (The Guardian had it 120-108.)

Somehow it wasn’t even that close. The unbeaten Mayweather, a world champion 
for nearly all of his adult life across five weight classes, was in command 
from bell to bell of his 49th professional fight in defence of his WBC and WBA 
welterweight titles. The victory moved him level in the history books with 
Rocky Marciano, the former heavyweight champion who retired with a record of 
49-0 in 1956.

Afterwards, he announced his retirement during an in-ring interview, though 
few believe he will quit before surpassing Marciano’s mark. Having fulfilled 
his six-fight contract worth a reported $250m with CBS and Showtime, he’s 
effectively a free agent who can name his own price for the record-breaking 
fight next year.

Floyd Mayweather v Andre Berto – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/sep/12/floyd-mayweather-v-andre-berto-live>
The only question surrounding Saturday’s glorified workout was whether Berto, 
a former welterweight title-holder years past his best, was shopworn enough 
after three losses in six fights for Mayweather to deliver his first clean 
knockout victory in eight years. Not since a 10th-round TKO of Ricky Hatton in 
2007 had Mayweather stopped an opponent inside the distance, save for a 
controversial knockout of Victor Ortiz that happened when the naive challenger 
was attempting to apologise for a head butt.

Berto (30-4, 23 KOs) managed to finish the fight on his feet, but little more. 
He connected with just 83 of 495 punches (17%), compared to 232 of 410 for 
Mayweather (57%).

From the opening bell Berto seemed tense while Mayweather slipped nearly every 
jab fired his way. When he wasn’t trying to bully the champion against the 
ropes, the Florida native was trying to outbox him in the centre of the ring. 
It was difficult to tell which idea was worse.


For pockets Mayweather was as aggressive as he’s been in recent memory – like 
when he sprung from corner at the start of the third round to meet Berto at the 
center of the ring with a lunging right – but those moments were brief. By the 
fourth Berto looked gassed, though to his credit he continued to press forward. 
“He’s very smart,” Berto said afterwards. “He knows how to take his time.”

Mayweather let his hands go in the sixth, peppering Berto with a left hook, a 
right hook and an uppercut followed by an combination to the body. It was his 
biggest round of the fight. Berto rallied moderately in the seventh, but 
Mayweather landed a stinging uppercut in the eighth followed by a flurry of 
punches upstairs that left Berto looking confused and demoralised. It was then 
when Mayweather began clowning the challenger, pirouetting away effortlessly 
with his hands at his waistline as he talked trash incessantly.

With the result all but in hand entering the championship rounds, Mayweather 
looked bored. He danced about and played to the crowd, gliding around the ring 
with the same quickness he’d shown in the opening round, demonstrating 
remarkable conditioning for a fighter within 17 months of his 40th birthday. At 
one point Berto missed so wildly with a hook that he appeared to completely 
lose sight of his target. The partisan Mayweather crowd roared with delight. 
The final round was more of the same as Mayweather landed one stinging blow, an 
uppercut late in the round, and danced out of harm’s way until the bell rang.

After the final bell, Mayweather confirmed the main selling point of an 
abbreviated promotion that often felt slapdash and stripped down: that he is 
officially retired. “You have to know when to hang it up,” he said. “I’m 
knocking at the door. I’m close to 40 years old. I’ve been in this sport 19 
years, been a world champion 18 years, broke all the records. There’s nothing 
else to prove in the sport of boxing.”

The win won’t do anything to enhance Mayweather’s legacy as the best fighter 
of his era pound for pound. But what will essentially be remembered as a 
footnote in the five-division champion’s career – if it’s remembered at all – 
certainly won’t hurt Mayweather’s bottom line. He earned a minimum of $32m for 
Saturday’s light workout, not including his undisclosed cut of the pay-per-view 
receipts. Berto earned a career-high $4m.

Strip away all the hype, the pomp, the excess and the bluster of Money 
Mayweather and you’re left with a fighter who reached the summit by 
supplementing divine natural gifts with untold hours of hard work and 
dedication behind the scenes.

“He trains why everybody’s sleeping,” said Badou Jack, a fighter in 
Mayweather’s budding promotional outfit whodefended his WBC middleweight title 
against George Groves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/12/george-groves-loses-third-world-title-fight-this-time-to-badou-jack>
 on Saturday’s undercard. “He’s a workaholic. He works like he’s broke. He 
trains like he’s broke.”

The greatest champions win titles when they’re young and keep them until 
they’re old, a standard Mayweather meets as completely as few others in this 
cruel trade’s history. If Saturday is indeed his final fight – and let it be 
said it’s almost certainly not – then Floyd walks away one of the greatest to 
ever do it.

“I’ve accomplished everything, there’s nothing else to accomplish,” Mayweather 
quipped. “Money don’t make me, I make money.”
 