
Some people call him 'The Genius'. A former midfielder who played for 10 clubs 
including Juventus,Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> and 
Palermo, Eugenio Corini earned that nickname with his cerebral approach and 
knack for picking out a clever pass. Above all, though, he had his parents to 
thank. They were the ones who gave him a first name that shortens to 'Genio'.

But if Corini was so smart, then why was he repeating old mistakes? He had 
left his position as manager ofChievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> by mutual consent in May, walking 
away after less than one season. His tenure had been a successful one, the 
Flying Donkeys rising from 18th when he arrived in October 2012 to 12th by the 
end of the campaign, but Corini had reportedly run into some irreconcilable 
differences of opinion with the club's president, Luca Campedelli.

And yet, less than six months later, there he was, reclaiming his job from his 
successor, Giuseppe Sannino. Perhaps Corini was simply bored of life away from 
football, having failed to land a full-time position anywhere else. Or maybe 
Chievo were finally ready to deal on his terms. They had started the new season 
disastrously without him, collapsing into last place with just six points from 
12 games.

One way or another, Corini signed a new two-year contract on 12 November. He 
had returned at a critical moment. His first fixture in charge would be against 
Hellas Verona, Chievo's city rivals.

The two sides had not faced one another in more than a decade, their most 
recent derby taking place in March 2002. Corini started in midfield for Chievo 
that day,helping them to a 2-1 victory 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zWywqVGllRw>. He had already played in the 
fixture on four previous occasions – twice for each team.

Hellas were relegated from Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> two months later, and did 
not return until this year. Chievo, by contrast, have spent just one season 
since then outside of the top flight. They went down to Serie B in 2007, but 
immediately bounced back up. During Chievo's one season at that level, Hellas 
were plumbing even greater depths, having sunk into the third tier of Italian 
football.

They would stay there for four long seasons, almost going out of business 
altogether. At one point it was mooted that Hellas might consider merging with 
Chievo.

That thought was a distressing one for the club's fans. It was not so much 
that they hated their neighbours as that they did not even take them seriously. 
Chievo might have been enjoying greater success on the pitch, but they were 
still perceived as the city's second team. Even through the hardest times, 
Hellas's average reported attendances rarely fell below 10,000. Chievo were 
barely doing better in the top flight.

And why should they? Chievo, after all, is just a tiny suburb of Verona, whose 
population is estimated at around 3,000-4,000. It should not even be capable of 
supporting a top-flight team. That it does so is testament to the work of the 
club's directors, but also to managers like Corini.

Indeed, when Chievo first began their unlikely ascent toward the top flight, 
many Hellas fans were quite supportive. A hundred or so showed up to cheer on 
their neighbours on the day that they secured their passage to Serie B with a 
2-1 win over Carrarese in May 1994.

A sense of animosity has developed over time, and Chievo's 'Flying Donkeys' 
nickname stems from an old insult slung their way by Hellas supporters, who 
claimed that they would not make it to Serie A until said animals took to the 
sky. Even so, the rivalry is far less intense than in some of Italy's other big 
derbies.

"It is a match that is keenly felt by the various entourages of both teams, 
with training sessions being held behind closed doors," noted the Verona-based 
newspaper L'Arena last week, in the buildup to Saturday's game. "But less so by 
the city itself."

Nevertheless Hellas's manager, Andrea Mandorlini, did a good job of stoking 
the fires. While Chievo were struggling at the foot of the table, his team was 
soaring – carrying the momentum from their promotion campaign into this new 
season. Hellas had won all six of their home games to date, and sat sixth in 
the table with 22 points already.

Borrowing a phrase used by the Roma manager Rudi Garcia, one reporter asked 
Mandorlini if he felt he had put Hellas back"at the centre of the village" 
<http://eurosport.yahoo.com/blogs/pitchside-europe/sky-limit-look-roma-beating-rivals-lazio-150308609.html>
. The manager scoffed. "Independent of the league standings," he said, 
"Hellas's church has always been at the centre [of this village]."

But while Mandorlini was busy boasting about his team, Corini came up with a 
plan to defeat it. Instead of replicating the five-man defence used by Sannino 
in recent games, Corini drew up a compact 4-5-1.

Aligned in this way, Chievo could achieve a numerical advantage in the middle, 
smothering two of Hellas's most influential players, Jorginho and Romulo, in 
central midfield. And by closing down the gaps between attack and defence, 
Corini's team left no room for the explosive Juan Iturbe and Juanito to run at 
them down the flanks.

The game was unattractive as a consequence, but Chievo did not mind. They had 
succeeded in isolating Luca Toni, their opponents' greatest goalscoring threat.

And after suffocating their opponents in the first half, Chievo gradually 
became more adventurous in the second. Corini sent on the forwards Dejan 
Lazarevic and Alberto Paloschi in place of the wingers Alessio Sestu and 
Marcelo Estigarribia. His team started to create more chances. Finally, in the 
second minute of injury time, Perparim Hetemaj pulled a low cross back from the 
goal-line on the left-hand side, and Lazarevic slotted into the near corner of 
the net.

Pandemonium ensued, as Lazarevic was buried under a pile of team-mates. It was 
Chievo's first goal in almost a month, the team having failed to score in any 
of their last three Serie A games. More importantly, it was enough to seal a 
1-0 win. The full-time whistle went a few moments later.

To Corini, this result felt like vindication. "It proves that being a free man 
is the right thing to do," he said, reflecting on his time away from the team. 
"If you are true to yourself and you say what you think, you might wind up 
having to stay at home for a little bit, but in the long run that choice will 
pay off."

His time away, furthermore, had not been wasted. As Corini would explain, 
Hellas had been very generous during his period of unemployment, allowing him 
to spend time at their facility and watch their team train. "I have often been 
a guest of Hellas over these last few months," he added with a smirk. "I have 
to say that was very useful to me."

Corini's hosts, with hindsight, might feel rather differently about that 
arrangement. Hellas remain sixth, while Chievo are still stuck in last place 
despite the win. But the Flying Donkeys might just be ready to soar once more, 
now that they have The Genius back in the saddle.

Results and talking points

• Milan's miserable start continued with a 1-1 draw at home to a Genoa team 
who played most of the game with 10 men. Thomas Manfredini was sent off in the 
36th minute after fouling Mario Balotelli in the box, but theMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> striker saw his subsequent 
penalty saved by Mattia Perin. TheRossoneri created plenty more opportunities 
to win, but could not convert any of them. They are now just five points clear 
of last place, 20 behind the league leaders.

• Perhaps the bigger story at San Siro, though, was not what happened on the 
pitch, but instead what happened outside the stadium after the game had ended. 
Ultras had hung a banner inside San Siro at full-time warning: "We'll see you 
at the garage exits … Unworthy!" and they were true to that promise. A crowd of 
roughly 400 people blocked the team's bus from leaving the stadium, as fans 
demanded an audience with the team. Kaká and Christian Abbiati duly obliged, 
and Mario Balotelli attempted to join them, before being prevented from doing 
so by a security guard. Among the chief complaints relayed to the players is 
said to have been the fans' anger at seeing certain players enjoying too many 
late nights out on the town – and then posting about it on social media. The 
discussions lasted about five minutes, but it was well into the small hours of 
the morning before the roads were clear enough for Milan's players to leave the 
stadium.

• Gigi Buffon played his 500th game in Serie A this weekend (although as he 
was quick to point out, he has also played another 37 in Serie B), and it 
turned out to be a relaxing one. There was not a whole lot for the Juventus 
goalkeeper to do in his team's 2-0 win over Livorno. The win temporarily takes 
Juve top of the league, although Roma can reclaim first place with a win at 
home to Cagliari on Monday night.

• Napoli endured a less-than-ideal preparation for this Tuesday's crucial 
Champions League game at Borussia Dortmund, losing 1-0 at home to Parma. The 
more damaging aspect of the match might not be the scoreline, but rather the 
injury suffered by Marek Hamsik, who entered as a second-half substitute but 
lasted just nine minutes before having to be replaced after injuring his left 
foot. Scans revealed no fracture, but he has already been ruled out of the game 
in Germany.

• Parma's winning goal was scored by none other than Antonio Cassano – and 
was, in fact, the 100th Serie A goal of his career. This being a World Cup 
year, it was also enough to ignite a whole new debate about whether the player 
deserved another call-up to the national team. "I would love to go to Brazil," 
said Cassano afterwards. "But don't ask me if I deserve it or not. Let's not 
start a controversy. I'm happy with what I'm doing at Parma."

• Sinisa Mihajlovic finally arrived to take up his position as manager of 
Sampdoria on Thursday, quoting John F Kennedy extensively during a colourful 
press conference. "Winners find a way," he said. "Losers find an excuse." He 
did not clarify what happens to people who draw, but it must be said that his 
team were unfortunate not to take all three points from their game against 
Lazio. Samp played with more energy and cohesion than we have seen from them 
lately and thought they had done enough to win through a Roberto Soriano goal, 
before Lorik Cana equalised in the fourth minute of second-half injury time.

Results: Bologna 1-1 Inter, Livorno 0-2 Juventus, Milan 1-1 Genoa, Napoli 0-1 
Parma, Sampdoria 1-1 Lazio, Sassuolo 2-0 Atalanta, Torino 4-1 Catania, Udinese 
1-0 Fiorentina, Verona 0-1 Chievo.

• Serie A table  <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?CTID=13>
 