
With Roberto Martínez on borrowed time at Everton, the Mirror has declared that
Mark Hughesis being considered as his successor for the Goodison Park hot seat. 
TheStoke City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> manager spent 
two seasons atEverton during the twilight years of his playing career, scoring 
only once in 18 appearances after signing as a 36-year-old.

The Stoke Sentinel reports that Hughes’s current charge Marko Arnautovic is 
“playing it cool” as far as talk regarding his future is concerned. The 
27-year-old Austrian is contracted to the Potters until 2017, but fans are 
concerned he may be sold this summer so that the club can trouser a fee rather 
than lose him for nothing a year down the line. “I have had three years here, 
I’ve another year left and Stoke are still talking to my agency,” said the 
winger, who has scored 13 goals for club and country this season.

Everton board to discuss future of Roberto Martínez this week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/25/everton-board-roberto-martinez-future>
West Ham have removed the double-barrelled Arsenal midfielder Alex 
Oxlade-Chamberlain from their summer shopping list, leaving it up to Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and Liverpool 
to duke it out for his services. The Hammers have prioritised the signing of a 
new striker and are hitching their skirts in the general direction of 
Liverpool’sChristian Benteke and the Marseille goal-getter Michy Batshuayi.

The sight of the marauding Leicester City midfielder N’Golo Kanté covering 
every blade of grass at the Emirates would gladden the hearts of most Gooners, 
butArsenal will face stiff competition from Manchester City for the signature 
of a player who has been told he can leave Leicester only when they’ve found a 
similarly energetic Duracell bunny to replace him. Borussia Mönchengladbach’s 
Swiss enforcerGranit Xhaka has also been identified as somebody who might add 
some much-needed steel to what passes for Arsenal’s spine, whileZlatan 
Ibrahimovic may also pitch up at the Emirates to remind Olivier Giroud how it’s 
done.

Manchester United are ready to cash in their chips on Memphis Depay and will 
offer him toSouthampton in exchange for the Senegalese midfielder Sadio Mané. 
United are also keen on taking the up-for-sale Barcelona defenderMarc Bartra, 
who will be made available for around £10m and is also wanted by Liverpool and
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur>. 
Thomas Vermaelenhas also been deemed surplus to requirements at the Camp Nou 
and reports suggest Liverpool have already opened “formal talks” with the 
Spanish side regarding a cut-price summer move.

And finally, the former Blackburn Rovers flop Nikola Kalinic has rediscovered 
his goal-scoring mojo with Fiorentina and Rumour Mills of the Italian variety 
sayTottenham may bring the Croatian striker back to Blighty.
 