
When it comes to assuaging the impact of life’s vicissitudes, the Mill has 
always believed in the power of retail therapy. It’s true that we own 47 Top 
Man T-shirts that still have the labels on them, and that £500 treadmill still 
hasn’t seen any action, but it was worth spunking the monkey for that instant 
hit of feelgood goodness that allowed us for a split-second to forget the 
essential futility of life.

Atlético Madrid’s Antoine Griezmann sends Barcelona crashing out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/atletico-madrid-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
Barcelona, it seems, would concur with that philosophy. According to the 
Spanish grapevine, they plan to respond to their failure to be as good as 
social-media foghorns prematurely presumed them to be by paying £50m for West 
Ham’s free-kick freakDimitri Payet.

There’s no easy way to segue to the next rumour, so we’re just going to head 
straight to the news that Chelsea are considering a £63.5m bid for Real Madrid 
good guySergio Ramos. Hang on, £63.5m for a 30-year-old? It’s almost as if this 
stuff isn’t actually going to happen!

Juventus want to do Christian Benteke a solid by preparing an escape tunnel 
from Anfield to Turin. It’ll cost £20m to build.

Manchester United haven’t a hope in hell of resigning Cristiano Ronaldo, so 
they’re going for the next best thing:Naldo, Wolfsburg’s 33-year-old defender 
who put them out of the Champions League.

Mauricio Pochettino and Claudio Ranieri have stripped to the waist and slapped 
baby oil all over their tingling flesh in preparation for a sumo wrestle. The 
winner gets to signPescara <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pescara> goal 
machineGianluca Lapadula.

Leicester are also keen on Milan teenager Manuel Locatelli, but so are 
Arsenal. Ranieri has wearily ordered some more baby oil.

Arsenal will soon be involved in other tugs of love for Charlton’s Regan 
Charles-Cook(also wanted by Liverpool) and PSG defender Marquinhos (Chelsea, 
Manchester United).

Finally, if United sack José Mourinho before they’ve even appointed him, PSG 
will be waiting for him with a loving embrace, oodles of cash and a smiling
David Luiz.
 