
You know when you meet somebody you haven't seen in years and you're genuinely 
taken aback because they've put on so much weight they're barely recognisable 
from the svelte looker that's beaming out from the photograph on their Facebook 
page that prompted you to arrange "a catch-up" after several months of online 
flirting?

Today's Rumours don't, but if the look of crushed disappointment that's 
clouded the features of all those ghosts from our distant past who've sashayed 
into our local branch of Wetherspoons, spotted the pink carnation in our lapel, 
taken one look at our jowelly visage and expansive beer-gut then run screaming 
for the hills is anything to go by, we know several women who do.

Manchester City fans know what we're talking about. They experienced a similar 
sensation at the end of last month upon seeing their one-time superstar in the 
making,Michael Johnson, lumber on to the field against West Ham showing all the 
signs of a young footballer who had "summered well". From bursting on to the 
scene in 2006 to bursting at the seams today, the 21 year old midfielder is 
rumoured to be a £6m Christmas target of Harry Redknapp. And considering the 
lad's size, the Tottenham manager is unlikely to miss.

Johnson's rumoured fondness for the nightlife is believed to have stalled what 
once looked like a glittering career in the making, but a move to Spurs, where 
he'd be mentored byresponsible senior professionals 
<http://images.mirror.co.uk/upl/m4/oct2009/9/7/peter-crouch-and-jonathan-woodgate-pic-maz-cissotti-mcp-rex-image-1-251957648.jpg>
 should quickly put a stop to his nocturnal galloping.

"RAFA SACK FEAR" trumpets the headline in today's Sun, above a strap-line that 
declares "Kop boss admits he needs results". As back page splashes go, it's 
slightly misleading, even by tabloid standards. The Spaniard has helped 
mastermind 13 results already this season, just one fewer than his nemesis Sir 
Alex Ferguson, so it's probably more accurate to suggest that he needsbetter 
results.

But with matches against Manchester United (h), Arsenal under-15s (a), Fulham 
(a) and Lyon (a) ahoy, it's far from inconceivable that Liverpool could run out 
at Anfield to face Birmingham on Monday 9 November on the back of eight 
straight defeats. Should the unthinkable happen, the £10m question is whether 
Rafa's American employers Waldorf and Statler can afford to sack him.Our 
investigative reporter with the big shovel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/22/manchester-united-champions-league-advertising>
 suggests they can't.

The Sun also reports that Birmingham City will "enter the race" to sign Emile 
Heskey if he leaves local rivals Aston Villa to increase his chances of making 
Fabio Capello's squad for the World Cup finals. At the moment,Blackburn Rovers 
andFulham are believed to be pacing restlessly around the starting blocks, 
giving each other the stink eye as they wait for the starter to mount his 
rostrum and raise his pistol in the air.

Meanwhile in the north-east, Sunderland are eager to secure the scrawl of 
Middlesbrough's 22 year old England under-21 winger, Adam Johnson, despite his 
apparently cavalier attitude towards the trade descriptions act. Of course with 
Boro managerless until Gordon Strachan signs on the dotted line, a prospective 
deal could die in the water in the time it takes a fiery red-haired Scotsman to 
say: "Jings! Crivens! Help ma boab! I want Johnson to stay here atma club."

Tony Pulis will remove his trademark basball cap and twist it nervously in his 
hands as he prepares to courtHuddersfield Town's Alex Smithies. The Stoke City 
manager is set to open the bidding at £1.5m, but will probably have to pay 
considerably more after the Terriers brought their goalkeeper to a recent 
recording of The Antiques Roadshow, where a plummy-voiced old man wearing a 
cravat, a monocle and nothing else valued him - for insurances purposes only, 
obviously - at £4.5m.

Despite having a combined age of just 30, Barnsley striker Reuben Noble-Lazarus
, 16, and Montenegro midfielderNikola Zvroko, 14, have been lined up in the 
cross-hairs of Martin O'Neill and Arsène Wenger respectively.

And finally, the situation of League Two strugglers Grimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> Town looks set to remain Hopeless
 after chairman John Fenty announced that England's women's boss Hope Powell 
has not applied for the job recently vactated by wimmins' rights champion Mike 
Newell. Rumours abounded yesterday afternoon that Powell had been linked with 
the job and received the backing of the League Managers Association, but Fenty 
insists that he has "she hasn't put an application in so we can hardly consider 
her."

Powell's record in the women's game is impressive and if her CV was to find 
its way into Fenty's in-tray, he could do worse than give her the job. After 
all, the Mariners would surely benefit from all the goodwill, publicity and 
extra bums on seats such an astonishing appointment would generate. And if less 
enlightened, knuckle-dragging neanderthals are outraged by the prospect of 
Powell getting the gig, so much the better. After all, it's 2009 and about time 
certain knuckle-dragging sections of the football-supporting community started 
judging managers on their abilities, not the colour of their skin.

Right, they're today's Rumours, now you can get on with the fun ...
 