
The Labour party reshuffle may be stealing the headlines, but Pep Guardiola’s 
imminent move to the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/pep-guardiola-bayern-munich-premier-league-manager-england>
 is what most concerns the Rumour Mill this morning. Despite Manuel 
Pellegrini’s stance on the controversial Trident nuclear weapons system being 
unknown (almost total indifference is the Rumour Mill’s uninformed guess), the 
Chilean looks a certainty to be shown the door at the Etihad this summer to 
make way for the outgoing Bayern Munich manager. Should he pitch up on the blue 
side of Manchester, Pep will attempt to makeLionel Messi the latest name on a 
roll of goalscoring honour that already includes luminaries such as Shaun 
Goater, Eric Brook, Paul Dickov, Niall Quinn and Horace Barnes. No pressure, 
Leo.

Eden Hazard’s time at Chelsea could be nearing an end, with the Star reporting 
thatReal Madrid are prepared to stump up £100m to bring the out-of-sorts 
Belgian midfielder to the Bernabéu. Some manner of swap deal involvingGareth 
Bale could well be on the cards, although the Welsh winger is also being linked 
with a £75m move to Manchester United. Esteemed Guardian football scribes Sid 
Lowe and Stuart James reckonBale remains content in the Spanish capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/gareth-bale-no-plans-to-leave-real-madrid>
 and say his future will hinge on whether or not the new Real manager Zinedine 
Zidane decides to deploy him as a wide man or in his preferred new role as a 
central midfielder.

Pep Guardiola: ‘I need a new challenge, and I want to be a manager in England’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/pep-guardiola-bayern-munich-premier-league-manager-england>
The Watford Observer reports that the Spanish defensive midfielder Mario Suárez
 could be on his way to Vicarage Road, having failed to make much of an impact 
atFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> after moving 
there from Atlético Madrid last summer.Liverpool are also keeping tabs on the 
28-year-old, whose days at the Stadio Artemio Franchi look numbered. “Mario 
Suárez to Watford? I can’t talk about that now, there are many rumours around 
the player,” said his agent, Manuel García Quilón, to an old lady who’d 
actually asked him for directions to the souvenir shop at the Palazzo Pitti.

The FC Basel midfielder Mohamed Elneny’s move to Arsenal looks likely to be 
signed and sealed “in the coming days” according to the Swiss club, while their 
rivals Grasshopper Zurich are rubbing their powerful hind legs with excitement 
at the prospect of receiving a big bag of cash for the midfielderShani Tarashaj 
fromEverton. Tarashaj is understood to have coughed for the Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> doctors and agreed personal 
terms on a four-and-a-half year deal with Goodison Park suits, but will be 
loaned back to his current club for the rest of the season just as soon as he’s 
inked a contract with the Toffees.

Crystal Palace, Aston Villa and Newcastle are all interested in taking Loïc 
Rémy off Chelsea’s hands, but it seems the striker is not for sale. It is, 
however, believed he could return to his goal-shy former club Newcastle on loan 
until the end of the season in a state of affairs the Magpies manager Steve 
McClaren was not prepared to shed any light on. “Everybody can see what we are 
and what we need going forward,” he said. “That’s something that will be 
discussed privately.” Considerably less coy French sports daily L’Equipe says 
that Newcastle have already bid €25m for the Lyon strikerAlexandre Lacazette in 
the hope of securing somebody to score the goals required to keep them in the 
Premier League.

The new Fulham manager Slavisa Jokanovic’s announcement that the club’s Moussa 
Dembélé is not for sale has done little to halt speculation that the 
19-year-old could be off toManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> or Crystal Palace. 
Meanwhile inLeicester, local paper the Mercury says that reports of Claudio 
Ranieri’s interest in the Milan midfielderNigel de Jong have been greatly 
exaggerated. “No inquiries have been made,” it reports. The former Manchester 
City man has also been linked with a move toWatford, in talk featuring rumours 
ofÉtienne Capoue going the other way.

The pink Italian paper Gazzetta dello Sport says Manchester United are ready 
to splurge the thick end of £37m on Lazio’s Brazilian midfielderFelipe Anderson
, whileCrystal Palace want to add to their collection of strikers and will offer
Fiorentina £10m for Khouma Babacar, who is also inching his way across the 
radar at Southampton and Leicester. With Giuseppe Rossi also likely to leaveLa 
Viola on loan in January, with Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> a possible destination, the 
Serie A side may try to lureGraziano Pellè to Florence from Southampton. Firmly 
of the belief that there ain’t no Partey like an Atlético Madrid Partey, Saints 
are believed to be interested in bringing the Spanish side’s midfielder Thomas 
Partey to St Mary’s.

Anyone want a loan of Republic of Ireland internationals Aiden McGeady and 
Darron Gibson? You can have ’em, say Everton. Meanwhile at Championship-bound
Aston Villa, twinkle-toed midfielder Jack Grealish is also believed to be 
available on loan. And finally, the Porto striker Vincent Aboubakar may be 
drafted in to the King Power Stadium to bolster Leicester’s fairytale tilt at 
the league title. The end.
 