
It looks like West Ham’s new stadium features not only retractable seating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/west-ham-stadium-losses-retractable-seating-problems>
 but removable players, after the inspirational French footwizardDimitri Payet 
admitted he might leave as soon as January. “We’ve had a very poor start to the 
season,” he told French television programme Téléfoot. “Will I go in January? 
I’m asking other questions right now but I’ve closed the door to nothing.” 
Payet dismissed talk of a move to Paris Saint-Germain or Marseille, saying the 
French clubs “for now haven’t approached me, so it’s not a question I’ve had to 
ask myself” while criticising his current club’s new home, calling the London 
Stadium “much more modern than Upton Park, but colder”. Slaven Bilic is 
reportedly so concerned about the situation that he has scheduled crisis talks 
with the talismanic twinkle-toed free-kick fiend.

Cristiano Ronaldo signs new five-year Real Madrid contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/cristiano-ronaldo-signs-new-five-year-real-madrid-contract>
It could be a busy January for UK-based Frenchmen, with Liverpool’s Mamadou 
Sakho, yet to so much as make a matchday squad this season, told he really 
should be on hisvélo in the new year. “There has to be another solution for him 
to find another club in the transfer window,” said the France coach, Didier 
Deschamps, while Mario Balotelli – who moved from Anfield to Nice in the summer 
– invited the former team-mate to join him on the Riviera. “I said to him, ‘If 
you want to come to Nice in January, it would be good.’” As for Sakho, the 
defender yesterday described himself as “very, very well”. So that’s a plus.

Sunderland are once again being linked with Domagoj Vida, the Dynamo Kyiv and 
Croatia centre-back. They tried to buy him in the summer – attracted perhaps by 
his performances at Euro 2016, where he notably gave away a 92nd-minute penalty 
against the Czech Republic with an unnecessary handball, spotted by Mark 
Clattenburg, suggesting he would fit in seamlessly with the general air of 
calamity at the Stadium of Light – only to be put off by the £10m asking price. 
Now they’re back in the hunt, and hoping the £6m offer that failed in August 
will be more productive.

Talking of English clubs reviving summer interest in players who have made an 
impact on the international stage,West Bromwich Albion are ready to make 
another bid for theSchalke and Bosnia & Herzegovina left-back Sead Kolasinac, 
who scored the fastest own-goal in World Cup history in the third minute of his 
nation’s match against Argentina in 2014. Last weekLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> were linked with the player, 
whose contract ends next summer and could thus follow the 2016 Anfield arrival 
Joel Matip in making a free-transfer switch fromDie Knappen, even if the fact 
he can’t regularly get into the Schalke side makes this less of a coup than it 
may at first appear.

Bastian Schweinsteiger shouldn’t get too settled in Manchester United’s 
first-team dressing room, withFriday’s news that they would pay him £10m to go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/04/football-transfer-rumours-manchester-united-to-give-bastian-schweinsteiger-10m-pay-off>
 in January swiftly followed by rumours of a less individually lucrative loan 
switch to follow the turn of the year.Everton are reportedly mulling over 
precisely such an approach, and United would not only be willing to agree to 
such an arrangement, but would continue to pay half his £200,000-a-week wages 
if it would help manoeuvre him out the door.

Lukasz Teodorczyk, the Polish striker who has scored a goal – one, never more 
– in nine of his 13 league games forAnderlecht this season, and has grabbed 15 
in 19 games for the club in all competitions, is getting scouts all a-fluster. 
According to Polish media he has attracted the attention of – deep breath now – 
the German clubs Borussia Dortmund, Red Bull and Bayer Leverkusen, and English 
sides Everton,Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>, 
Aston Villa, West Ham and West Brom, the latter having been linked with a 
£12.5m offer. All of which must be making the Belgians giggle with glee, 
particularly as they included a €4.5m buyout clause in the deal that brought 
the striker to Belgium on loan fromDynamo Kyiv back in August.
 