
Chelsea and Manchester City are engaged in a Christmas cracker of a ding-dong 
transfer battle, with both Antonio Conte and Pep Guardiola apparently desperate 
to fortify their midfield by spending £26m on the former Stoke and Blackburn 
starSteven N’Zonzi, who was playing very much under their noses and yet was 
unwanted by the Premier League giants until he moved to Sevilla for just more 
than a quarter of that sum – a paltry £7m – last summer. But Chelsea’s primary 
midfield focus could lie elsewhere, given the existence of a rival rumour 
linking them with a £25m move for Atalanta’sFranck Kessié, while they are also 
one of a number of clubs – including Internazionale, Juventus and Paris 
Saint-Germain – said to be keen on the Fiorentina forward Federico 
Bernardeschi, who is unlikely to go anywhere before the end of the season.

Leicester City agree deal to sign Genk midfielder Wilfred Ndidi for £15m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/wilfred-ndidi-leicester-city-transfer>
Arsène Wenger is already considering replacements for contractual 
trouble-makers Mesut Özil and Alexis Sánchez, and has placed the Borussia 
Dortmund pair of Marco Reus andChristian Pulisic high on his list, though he 
might have to out-wrestle Jürgen Klopp if he is to stop Liverpool from swooping 
for them first. One potentialArsenal signing that is likely to be less hotly 
contested is that ofCohen Bramall, a 20-year-old left-winger spotted playing 
for Hednesford Town in the Evo-Stik Northern League Premier Division – and 
previously rejected by both Crewe and Leek Town – who apparently impressed so 
much on a recent two-day trial that a contract offer is imminent.

Manchester United are ready to firm up their rumoured interest in Benfica’s 
Nelson Semedo with a £35m bid, though the right-back’s transfer is unlikely to 
be completed before the summer, with José Mourinho about to splash his entire 
allocation of January cash on another Benfica defender, Victor Lindelof. That 
much-mooted move might not go exactly as planned, however, with newspapers in 
Portugal predicting that the Swede will instead sign a new deal with the 
Portuguese giants, raising his buy-out clause to a chequebook-bothering £50m.

Newcastle plan to respond to their post-Christmas slide to second in the 
Championship by spending even more money, with Bournemouth’sCallum Wilson seen 
as the man to fire them back to the top of the table. They are also said to be 
“leading the race” to sign Chelsea’sRuben Loftus-Cheek on loan, though there 
are “up to 10 clubs” involved in that particular sprint.Middlesbrough, 
meanwhile, are keen on Udinese’sEmmanuel Agyemang-Badu, though the Ghana 
midfielder’s involvement in the African Cup of Nations might put a spanner in 
the works.

A man who spent £4,000 on the number plate VAR9Y in the hope of flogging it on 
toJamie Vardy at a profit has sold it again for just £2,080 after he was unable 
to contact the Leicester ace, who already has a personalised number plate on 
his blue Bentley. Despite that setback there will be some new arrivals at the
Leicestertraining ground in January, with a deal for Racing Genk’s Wilfred 
Ndidi all but complete and Claudio Ranieri handed a £30m mid-seasonwar chest, 
according to the Telegraph.

The Watford striker Jerome Sinclair looks certain to spend the second half of 
the season on loan in the Championship, with Norwich, Reading, Brentford and
Cardiffall interested in recruiting him. The latter club need a striker to 
replace Marouane Chamakh, who may only have played 46 minutes of league 
football this season but has been named on their substitutes’ bench a few 
times, and could jet off to al-Arabi in Qatar in the new year.

Who’s going to be the new Swansea manager? The Sun exclusively reveal that Roy 
Hodgson “has emerged as the strong candidate” for the role suddenly and 
involuntarily vacated by bungling Bob Bradley on Tuesday, but elsewhere Ryan 
Giggs is near-unanimously considered the most likely hot-seat-sitter. And 
finally, another top Premier League star is being courted by China’s Super 
League, who plan to offer a massive salary boost in an attempt to get their 
man. This man, though, isn’t even a footballer – it’s whistle-blowing wonder
Mark Clattenburg, named the best referee in all humanity at the Globe Soccer 
Awards in Dubai yesterday.

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger bot 
<https://www.messenger.com/login.php?next=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.messenger.com%2Ft%2Ftheguardian%2F%3Fref%3Dfootball_transfers>
. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at the bottom of the screen to receive the latest 
alerts.  