
It’s no Ballon D’or, but as barometers of stardom go, Marco Reus would have 
been pretty chuffed to have won the global public vote to have his mug on the 
front of the new Fifa 17 game, succeeding Lionel Messi and beating Real 
Madrid’s James Rodríguez, Manchester United’s Anthony Martial and Chelsea’s 
Eden Hazard to the punch.

Proof, if you ever needed it, that Dortmund are one of the most admired clubs 
in the world. Yet, despite their array of glittering talent, their excellent 
coach and their unwavering walled support, they still seem like the bridesmaid.
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyanghas long been linked with Europe’s finest, and while 
he declared in the summer he would stay at Dortmund for the foreseeable, his 
mind appears made up as to where he now wants to go.

Next Generation 2016: 20 of the best talents at Premier League clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/oct/04/next-generation-2016-20-of-the-best-talents-at-premier-league-clubs>
Aubameyang told Onze Mondial magazine: “I was asked in interview: ‘What is the 
club of your dreams?’ I replied: ‘Real Madrid is the club of my heart and I 
made a promise to my grandfather to play there one day, I hope it will happen. 
So it’s just a target, I still have time. If they want me, they will come.’”

The Gabon striker would be more subtle doing donuts with Peter Odemwingie in 
his gold Batman-inspired Lamborghini outside Real’s training ground than that 
come-and-get-me-plea. But that’s not all, the 27-year-old also revealed that 
his father “held talks with Manchester City [in the summer], but in the end 
there was nothing concrete,” and that PSG were falling over backwards to get a 
deal done but he “didn’t especially want to return to France immediately”.

Another day, another Italy-based defender linked with Chelsea. Lazio’s Stefan 
de Vrijreportedly has a £30.7m release clause, something that the Rome side are 
desperately trying to tidy up by offering the 24-year-old a new contract. 
Chelsea reverted to a three-man defence in theirwin over Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/hull-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, a system De Vrij has played in for both Lazio and Holland, and with his 
former Juventus faves out of reach, Antonio Conte could opt for the 6ft 2in 
defender instead.

Arsenal are keen to add another umlaut to their ranks, and another German to 
their defence, in Hoffenheim defenderNiklas Süle. The centre-back impressed for 
Germany at the Olympics, helping them to the final, and the 21-year-old has 
also attracted interest from Tottenham and Liverpool, where Süle’s former 
team-mate Roberto Firmino is reportedly “getting in his ear”.

Crystal Palace are hoping to convince the Brazil international Lucas Lima to 
live in Croydon by offering him a wheelbarrow of cash, and the promise of 
training ground banter with Joe Ledley, but the Santos playmaker could have his 
head turned by China’s finest, namely Hebei Fortune. “There’s this possibility 
[of renewing],” Lima said when asked about his future at Santos. “I feel very 
good here. If I leave, it has to be good for me and for the club. Otherwise, 
I’m not going. It’s my home, I have friends here.”

Finally, the Luton town manager Nathan Jones is in the running for the Aston 
Villa job, and Coventry look set to appoint a man they fired in 2015,Steven 
Pressley.
 