
The Times reports that Antonio Conte and Roman Abramovich have had lunch every 
day this week, which to the Mill might indicate a healthy and amicable 
employer-employee relationship, or simply some regular early-afternoonical 
tummy-rumblage, but apparently actually means theChelsea squad is about to be 
massively remodelled. It seems it has been decided that half the team that won 
the league two seasons ago are now irredeemably rubbish, and thatBranislav 
Ivanovic, Nemanja Matic, Gary Cahill, Oscar and Cesc Fàbregas will thus be made 
available, and proper footballers brought in to replace them. 

One of these upgrades could be Álvaro Morata, who remains on the radar at both 
Chelsea andArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> despite their 
failure to capture him in the summer. Back at Real Madrid the striker is yet to 
start a Champions League game, even if he has made the first XI for four of 
their six domestic league matches, and the English clubs hope he may be made 
available in the near future.

Eddie Howe committed to Bournemouth amid speculation about England manager job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/eddie-howe-committed-bournemouth-speculation-england-manager>
Whether Arsène Wenger will still be at Arsenal when that happens is suddenly 
open to debate, with the Frenchman apparently ready to agree to become 
England’s next permanent manager, according to the Star. He isn’t, however, 
ready to actually become England’s next permanent manager – that won’t happen 
until next summer at the very earliest, but he is apparently “interested in 
taking charge of the build-up to the 2018 World Cup”. Handily hisArsenal 
contract expires in 2017, so he would be officially up for grabs at the 
season’s end, though the Gunners are hurriedly drawing up a new two-year deal 
to keep him away from Wembley. Other than when Arsenal go to Wembley, obviously.

After yesterday’s news that Mesut Özil is to demand Jack Wilshere’s No10 shirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/football-transfer-rumours-manchester-united-jose-fonte>
 if he is to sign a new contract at the Emirates Stadium comes an update from 
the permacrocked Englishman’s predecessor in the jersey,Robin van Persie, who 
is preparing to move again after a year and a bit at Fenerbahce and has 
declared himself “open to everything … whether it’s in England, Turkey or 
wherever”. The ageing forward, now 33, also says that his children will “get a 
bigger say in where they’d like to live and be”, and will thus probably end up 
moving to Disneyland.

There’s no such thing as a secret these days. Take Ezri Konsa, Charlton’s 
18-year-old centre-back, whose good form and bright future has been noticed not 
by only one top-flight club, nor even two, but by pretty much all of them. The 
young scout magnet has apparently been attracting representatives ofLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, Arsenal, Chelsea and both 
Manchester sides to the Addicks’ games this season.

Liverpool have also been eyeing up Solna’s 17-year-old striker Alexander Isak, 
who has inevitably been dubbed “the NewZlatan Ibrahimovic” by someone who 
should know better, because he is tall and Swedish. Their scouts have had to 
squeeze into the Friends Arena – not so hard really, given that Solna’s average 
attendance this season is 17,788 and their stadium can hold a little over 
50,000 – alongside those of Bayern Munich, Barcelona, Real Madrid and – and it 
is a true indication of their new status that they are included in this really 
quite prestigious list – Leicester.
 