
Former Health Services Union boss and whistleblower Kathy Jackson has been 
granted bail after fronting aMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> court over allegations 
she misappropriated union funds.

Jackson was flanked by two female supporters as she appeared in the Melbourne 
magistrates’ court on Monday facing 70 theft and deception charges.

Each charge relates to a specific transaction and the alleged offences span a 
number of years, the court heard.

The charges were issued last month by Taskforce Heracles, a joint Victoria and 
Australian federal police operation investigating matters arising from the 
royal commission into trade union corruption and governance.

Kathy Jackson charged with 70 counts of criminal misconduct
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/31/kathy-jackson-charged-with-70-counts-of-criminal-misconduct>
The NSW resident, 49, has been bailed to reappear in court on 24 January.

Prosecutors asked for her passport to be surrendered as part of the bail 
conditions, but the court heard it had already been given to a trustee after 
Jackson declared bankruptcy.

She’s also been told not to contact prosecution witnesses.

Jackson’s case would normally come back to court mid-December, but her lawyer 
asked for a longer than usual adjournment because he needed extra time to 
digest the large brief of evidence against her, which is about 5,000 pages.

Jackson declared bankruptcy last year and owes the HSU about $2.4m following 
the federal court action.

Officers raided her Wombarra home in October 2015.

Jackson became a national figure after she blew the whistle on her 
predecessor, former Labor MP Craig Thomson, and former HSU general secretary 
Michael Williamson in 2011.

Williamson was jailed for at least five years for leeching the union of almost 
$1m and recruiting others to hinder a police investigation.

Thomson was fined $25,000 after he was convicted of 13 counts of theft 
following cash withdrawals he made from a HSU bank account between 2003 and 
2007.

 