
A New York judge has declined to send former Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> prop Matthew Lodge back to 
jail, instead making him a free man and setting up a possible return to the NRL.


Lodge was originally charged with felony burglary causing injury, which 
carried a minimum of five years’ jail and a maximum of 25 years, after 
terrorising a family early on 16 October last year.


Joseph Cartright, on behalf of his wife Ruth and nine-year-old son, made a 
last-ditch, emotional plea to the judge, Kate Paek, to punish Lodge for the 
“violent and horrifying conduct” that caused physical and psychological pain to 
his family.


The judge declined.

In a plea deal signed a year ago with prosecutors, Lodge entered a guilty plea 
to a misdemeanour count of reckless assault. The victims opposed the deal.

Related: Matthew Lodge: former Wests Tigers player's alleged victims recount 
rampage in court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/matthew-lodge-former-wests-tigers-props-alleged-victims-recount-rampage-in-court>

To avoid a one-year jail sentence Lodge was ordered to complete 200 hours of 
community service in Australia, receive alcohol abuse and anger treatment, 
abstain from alcohol and illegal drugs, submit to testing and avoid another 
arrest.


In a brief hearing on Monday, Paek was told Lodge had adhered to the deal and 
she sentenced him to a conditional discharge. Lodge, 21, was not required to be 
in court for the sentencing and remained in Australia.

Lodge had confronted two women as they stepped out of a cab, told them it was 
the “night you will die” and forced his way into their apartment building.


Cartright, who had a unit near the foyer, went to help the women, but Lodge 
put him in a headlock and punched him in the face.


Lodge also went into Cartright’s apartment, locked the door, began breaking 
plates and furniture and then attempted to smash down the door to a bathroom 
where Cartright’s wife and son were hiding.


Lodge was arrested at gunpoint by NYPD officers. The family has required 
psychological treatment, with Cartright telling the court his son had trouble 
sleeping and socialising.

Renan Varghese, who is representing the family and another female victim in a 
$US1.2m lawsuit filed against Lodge inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, said his clients were 
“obviously disappointed”.

“They had thought in light of the complete lack of remorse he has showed for 
his conduct perhaps the court would have deviated from the plea agreement,” he 
said.


Lodge’s lawyer, Thomas Rotko, said Lodge had “worked very hard to address the 
issues which led to his arrest” and would continue to do so when the case was 
over.

Lodge, who was sacked by Wests Tigers after his arrest, appears set to play 
for the Brisbane Broncos’ Queensland Rugby League feeder club, the Redcliffe 
Dolphins.
 