
Recruits to the first national, free return-to-practice course for social 
workers set up by the government and local councils in England are due to begin 
their retraining next week (November 7).

More than 150 former social workers from adult and children’s services applied 
for one of the 30 training places on offer on theCome Back to Social Work 
<http://www.comebacktosocialwork.co.uk/> programme, which was launched in 
September by the Local Government Association (LGA), the Department for 
Education and the Department of Health.

Successful trainees will be on the programme for 13 weeks. During that time 
they will accrue the 30 days (or 60 days if they have been out of the 
profession for more than five years) of updating knowledge and skills required 
by the Health and Care Professions Council to re-register; this entitles them 
to practise as a social worker.

Unsuccessful applicants have been given a personal development plan to support 
them back to work. Their details are being held in a talent pool open to 
councils looking to recruit.

Social care threat level reaches new high
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/02/social-care-threat-level-reaches-new-high>
According to the LGA, this is the first fully funded national scheme of its 
kind. Others may follow, but future trainees may have to contribute to the 
costs.

The initiative has been welcomed by social workers who see the value of a 
national programme. Although some councils run their own schemes, social work 
lags behind other professions, such as nursing, which has 40 fully funded 
return-to-practice programmes on offer.

Dawn Langsford returned to social work in August after a four-year break to 
have a family. With her registration lapsed, she found it difficult to achieve 
the evidence of supervised practice she needed to get back on the register.

“It’s quite difficult because legally you can’t work as a social worker 
without that 30 days,” says Langsford. “But then if you go for an unqualified 
role and say you are looking to re-register, nobody wants to employ you, 
because they know they are going to lose you pretty soon. You don’t get past 
HR. It’s catch-22.”

Langsford worked in the voluntary sector, running a hospital-from-home service 
to help refresh her skills. When its funding ran out, she discovered that 
Wiltshire council was running a social worker return-to-practice scheme and she 
successfully applied.

Children in care: it’s not how you live, but where
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/02/children-in-care-its-not-how-you-live-but-where>
“I think it’s a really good idea to have a national programme – the allied 
health professions have had them for years,” she says. “There are a lot of 
experienced people who want to come back to social work but find it a battle 
because of the kind of barriers that I experienced.

“I think you can lose your confidence and I think you may need to update your 
knowledge, but I don’t think the basic practice skills ever go away.”
 