
Directors of a crashed company have been given the go-ahead to pursue a case 
for unfair dismissal in a landmark ruling against a business controlled by the 
former health secretary Stephen Dorrell.

The tribunal ruling allows employees of an insolvent company to sue a business 
allegedly born out of the ashes of the one that employed them and where there 
is “commonality of ownership” between the two.

After several attacks on employment protections by recent governments, lawyers 
said the surprise ruling could potentially pave the way for a landmark legal 
decision for corporate insolvencies.

Dorrell, who remains a senior figure in the health sector as chairman of the 
employers’ lobby group, the NHS Confederation, is accused of using a 
controversial insolvency procedure to move the assets of a publishing company 
into a new corporate entity owned by himself.

The insolvency made shares owned by Dorrell’s business partners worthless and 
thwarted their unfair dismissal claim against the company.

After hearing the claim, the employment judge ruled that Dorrell’s new company 
– Pixel West – must face the unfair dismissal claim instead.

Matti Rogers and his wife, Kate, who brought the claim, said they were 
delighted by the decision at the West Midlands employment tribunal in 
Birmingham. The unfair dismissal hearing will take place in May. They allege 
they were removed from the publishing company, called Project Viva, through a 
“sham redundancy exercise” that paved the way for Dorrell to then transfer 
assets out of the business.

The insolvency procedure used by Dorrell – a pre-pack administration – is 
lawful but controversial, because it allows a company in effect to walk away 
from its debts. However, this ruling shows that the new company can be made 
liable for the liabilities of the old company. The judge said there was 
“commonality of ownership and directorship between the companies so this 
[action] was hardly out of the blue”.

Dorrell was health secretary between 1995 and 1997 in John Major’s 
administration and served as a Conservative MP for 36 years until he stood down 
at the last election.

Project Viva, which published specialist health and motoring magazines, called 
in administrators in March and was immediately bought by Dorrell’s investment 
vehicle, Dorson Transform, through a pre-pack administration.


Project Viva was 35% owned by Dorrell’s wife, 30% owned by financier Paul 
Meier, and 35% by Kate Rogers, whose husband Matti, a publisher, helped to set 
up the business. Matti Rogers claims he and Kate were pushed out of their roles 
at the company last summer after opposing Dorrell’s proposals to take over 
Project Viva. Dorrell said their positions had been made redundant.

Rogers and his wife then launched the unfair dismissal case against Project 
Viva, but the company was placed into administration just weeks before the 
hearing. The new hearing in Birmingham took place after Rogers applied for 
Pixel West to be added to the claim.

This is not the first time that Dorrell has been caught up in controversy. His 
behaviourwas branded “completely immoral” seven 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/6209674/Stephen-Dorrell-criticised-over-immoral-deal.html>
years ago 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/6209674/Stephen-Dorrell-criticised-over-immoral-deal.html>
 after a South African company was left with worthless paper shares after 
selling Dorrell its UK clothing business. LA Group sold its clothing operations 
for £1m of shares in Wensum, a company chaired by Dorrell and in which he had a 
large stake.

However, a month after the deal the assets of Wensum were moved into a new 
business through a pre-pack administration. While LA Group ended up with 
nothing, Dorrell had a 15% stake in the new business and collected a £200,000 
salary as a director.

Dorrell said at the time he acted in good faith and denied that the 
acquisition of A&D was part of a pre-arranged plan designed to boost Wensum’s 
assets before it became insolvent.

He also faced calls to resign as an MP in 2014 after taking on a lucrative 
role as a health consultant with KPMG, the accountancy firm. Critics claimed it 
was a conflict of interests because KPMG was looking at bidding for a £1bn 
contract with the NHS.

Dorrell’s behaviour also drew criticism from staff at Project Viva. An editor 
of one the magazines it published, Andy Hornsby, sent an email to suppliers and 
customers after the pre-pack administration to say he was leaving the company.


In the email, seen by the Guardian, Hornsby wrote: “I really should try to 
write it as a script for a sitcom, except a lot of the stuff between the lines 
is frankly too implausible.”

In another email directly to Dorrell, the former health secretary is told that 
the reason for the pre-pack administration is morally objectionable.

Dorrell told the Guardian earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/10/former-health-secretary-stephen-dorrell-accused-over-publishing-dealings>
 that Project Viva was placed into administration “because the board concluded 
that it was unable to meet its obligations”.

In relation to the ruling this month, Dorrell said: “The tribunal ruled as it 
ruled and the issue will be dealt with in the normal way.”

Dorrell said that Pixel West is trading normally.

Mark Gray, senior employment lawyer for Harrison Clark Rickerbys, which 
represented Rogers, said: “The case throws up interesting legal issues for both 
employers and employees. It demonstrates that the TUPE [employment protection] 
regulations can still potentially have teeth, despite what was seen by many as 
a watering down of employment laws in 2013. Businesses need to be very aware 
that employment laws still protect employees in a variety of situations and 
that TUPE laws may generally remain far-reaching.”
 