
Adam Swift scored four tries as St Helens beat visiting Catalans Dragons 39-16 
to make it seven wins in a row and give their play-off hopes a massive lift. 
Fourth-placed Saints moved four points clear of Catalans, their nearest rivals, 
who went down to their sixth defeat in their past sevenSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> matches.

It was the second time this season Swift has scored four tries after a similar 
haul againstHull KR <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr>.

Saints led 16-12 at half-time thanks to Swift’s hat-trick with the forwards 
Dave Taylor and Jason Baitieri scoring for Catalans, both converted by Lucas 
Albert.

Swift, Jack Owens and Joe Greenwood added tries after the break for the home 
side with the outstanding Luke Walsh landing six goals and Owens another when 
the scrum-half was in the sin bin for an illegal tackle. Walsh also chipped in 
with a drop goal.

Denny Solomona reached 31 tries for the season with a hat-trick as Castleford 
kept alive their remote dream of a top-four finish by beating second-placedWigan
 36-22 at The Jungle.

Super League’s top try-scorer was clinical as the Tigers claimed their first 
in four attempts against the Warriors this season, backing up their stunning 
win at the league leaders, Hull. The Tigers, unchanged from the side who won at 
the KCOM Stadium, held a deserved 12-6 lead at half-time, courtesy of tries 
from Solomona and Paul McShane, with Sam Powell replying for Wigan.

Two further scores from Solomona plus late tries from Ryan Hampshire and 
Oliver Holmes clinched the victory, while Ben Flower, John Bateman and Lee 
Mossop scored for the visitors who at one stage looked set to set up a tense 
finish.

In the Qualifiers James Segeyaro scored two tries as Leeds earned a 
hard-fought 22-18 win overHull KR at Headingley. The in-form Kallum Watkins 
scored the only try of a scrappy first half and Liam Sutcliffe added two goals 
to give Leeds an 8-0 lead at the break.

James Greenwood’s try and four points from the boot of Josh Mantellato brought 
Rovers level in the early stages of the second half, only for Sutcliffe to edge 
the Rhinos back in front with a penalty.

Segeyaro stood up when Leeds needed him most as last year’s treble winners 
edged to their second Qualifiers victory despite tries from James Donaldson and 
George Lawler.
 