
For the 17 men who feature for England in the Four Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> opener against New Zealand on 
Saturday, there will be the usual sense of pride as the national team begin 
their exciting era under Wayne Bennett, but for one in particular it will 
undoubtedly mean that little bit more.

In recent months most of the sporting spotlight in Huddersfield has been taken 
up by the success of the town’s football side, but on Saturday the focus shifts 
from David Wagner and Huddersfield Town to Sam Burgess and rugby league, as a 
sold-out John Smith’s Stadium will watch England take on the world’s No1 side.

For Jermaine McGillvary, the England winger who plays for the club he grew up 
supporting, getting the nod to feature in front of his hometown crowd is 
something he has an extra element of pride in doing.

Rugby league Four Nations: team-by-team guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/rugby-league-four-nations-team-by-team-guide>
“It’s great because it’s a sold-out stadium at my home ground, with all my 
friends and family watching, so it should be a great occasion,” the Giants 
player said. “It’s amazing how everyone in the town wants to come and see the 
No1 side in the world take on England. It’s definitely a different feel when 
it’s an international – the whole nation, let alone the town, seems to want to 
get behind us and support us.

“At Huddersfield we’re not used to having the biggest crowds, but I know the 
pitch well so I hope it still feels like a normal game … even though it is a 
sell‑out. They don’t come much bigger than playing the No1 team in the world in 
your home stadium in your home town.”

McGillvary grew up dreaming of playing for his country, but not in rugby 
league. He had aspirations of becoming a professional footballer before being 
convinced to take up the code as a teenager by Leroy Cudjoe, who is now a 
Giants team-mate. Fast forward a whirlwind few years and McGillvary now finds 
himself a crucial component of Bennett’s new-look international side.

“Obviously I didn’t dream of this when I was growing up because my dream of 
becoming a sportsman washed out when I was 12 or 13 and I knew I wasn’t going 
to make it as a footballer,” McGillvary said. “I had played rugby when I was 
eight or nine but didn’t play it again until after I realised I wasn’t going to 
make it as a footballer. So to make my debut in the Championship with Batley 
was great, and then to play in Super League and a few years later be 
representing my country is amazing; it doesn’t feel real.

“I can’t put into words how proud it makes me and my family. You cannot top 
playing for your country because you are just so proud of the shirt. To play 
for my country in the town where I was born and where I’m raising my children 
is just incredible.”

The 28-year-old’s first call-up into the national side last year was a 
near-certainty after finishing 2015 as Super League’s top try-scorer. However, 
after Huddersfield finished the regular season bottom of the table in 2016 – 
despite McGillvary scoring 17 tries – a call into Bennett’s squad for the Four 
Nations seemed much less of a certainty. He is now determined to prove the 
doubters wrong.

England win bid to host 2021 Rugby League World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/england-rugby-league-world-cup-2021-hosts>
“Some people might wonder why a player from a team that finished bottom has 
been picked to play for England and I respect everyone’s opinion but I know I’m 
here to do a good job and I will prove I’m worth my shirt,” he said.

“It has been a tough, long season with Huddersfield and it wasn’t the season 
we thought we’d have. It was horrible on and off the pitch but I’ve tried to 
put it to the back of my mind. I’ve started afresh with England and I’m working 
hard and getting my head down and hopefully I can help England do well.”

McGillvary was named this week in England’s 19-man squad for the match against 
the Kiwis, and he is guaranteed to feature on Saturday after Bennett revealed 
his team in advance to the media on Friday. The Australian had a number of 
decisions to make following the victory in Avignon against France last week, 
and he admitted that the Wigan duo George Williams and Liam Farrell are the two 
men from his 19 who will miss out.

“I’ve only named a 19 because that’s the rules here, I’ve already settled on a 
17,” Bennett said. “George Williams will be out, as will Liam Farrell. I think 
George is a very talented player; it was pretty close but we’re going this way 
at the moment, so it’s up to the boys to perform now.”

England (probable) Lomax; McGillvary, Watkins, Sarginson, Hall; Widdop, Gale; 
Graham, Hodgson, Hill, Whitehead, Bateman, S Burgess. Interchange T Burgess, G 
Burgess, Clark, Cooper.

New Zealand (probable) Kahu; Nightingale, Kata, Kenny-Dowall, Rapana; Leuluai, 
Johnson; Bromwich, Luke, Waerea-Hargreaves, Proctor, Harris, Taumololo. 
Interchange Brown, Taupau, Ma’u, Blair.

Referee B Thaler.
 