
From Sunday, French companies will be required to guarantee their employees a 
“right to disconnect” from technology as the country seeks to tackle the 
modern-day scourge of compulsive out-of-hours email checking.

On 1 January, an employment law will enter into force that obliges 
organisations with more than 50 workers to start negotiations to define the 
rights of employees to ignore their smartphones.

Overuse of digital devices has been blamed for everything from burnout to 
sleeplessness as well as relationship problems, with many employees uncertain 
of when they can switch off.

The way to a better work-life balance? Unions, not self-help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/oct/11/way-to-better-work-life-balance-unions-not-self-help>
The measure is intended to tackle the so-called “always-on” work culture that 
has led to a surge in usually unpaid overtime – while also giving employees 
flexibility to work outside the office.

“There’s a real expectation that companies will seize on the ‘right to 
disconnect’ as a protective measure,” said Xavier Zunigo, a French workplace 
expert, as a new survey on the subject was published in October.

“At the same time, workers don’t want to lose the autonomy and flexibility 
that digital devices give them,” added Zunigo, who is an academic and director 
of research group Aristat.

The measure was introduced by labour minister Myriam El Khomri, who 
commissioned a report submitted in September 2015 which warned about the health 
impact of “info-obesity” which afflicts many workplaces.

Under the new law, companies will be obliged to negotiate with employees to 
agree on their rights to switch off and ways they can reduce the intrusion of 
work into their private lives.

If a deal cannot be reached, the company must publish a charter that would 
make explicit the demands on, and rights of, employees out-of-hours.

Improve your work-life balance with these tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jun/27/improve-work-life-balance-tips-stress>
Trade unions which see themselves as guardians of France’s highly protected 
workplace and working week of 35 hours have long demanded action. However, the 
new “right to disconnect”, part of a much larger and controversial reform of 
French labour law, foresees no sanction for companies which fail to define it.

French newspaper Libération praised the move in an editorial on Friday, saying 
the law was needed because “employees are often judged on their commitment to 
their companies and their availability”.

Some large groups such as Volkswagen and Daimler in Germany or nuclear power 
company Areva and insurer Axa inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> have already taken steps to limit 
out-of-hours messaging to reduce burnout among workers.

Some measures include cutting email connections in the evening and weekends or 
even destroying emails automatically that are sent to employees while they are 
on holiday.

A study published by French research group Eleas in October showed that more 
than a third of French workers used their devices to do work out-of-hours every 
day. About 60% of workers were in favour of regulation to clarify their rights.

But computing and work-life balance expert Anna Cox from University of College 
London (UCL) said companies must take into account demands from employees for 
both protection and flexibility. “For some people, they want to work for two 
hours every evening, but want to be able to switch off between 3 and 5pm when 
they pick their kids up and are cooking dinner,” she said. Others are happy to 
use their daily commute to get ahead before they arrive in the office, she 
explained.

Furthermore, she said the world of work was changing as rapidly as the 
technology, with more and more employees working remotely or with colleagues in 
other time zones. “Some of the challenges that come with flexibility are 
managing those boundaries between work and home and being able to say ‘actually 
I am not working now’,” she said.

One of the positive effects of the law will be to encourage “conversations 
with people working together about what their expectations are”, said Cox.
 