The 2014 Nobel prize for physics was awarded to Isamu Akasaki, Hiroshi Amano 
and Shuji Nakamura for the discovery of which colour LED?  Red  White  Green  
Blue Which writer was awarded the 2014 Nobel prize in literature?  Philip Roth  
Patrick Modiano  Alice Munro  Paulo Coelho Protesters in Hong Kong this week 
vowed to launch a new wave of civil disobedience unless the government agreed 
to hold free elections, as previously promised, in which year?  2015  2016  2017
 2018 Which country this week became the first major European nation to 
announce it would recognise the state of Palestine?  Norway  Sweden  Denmark  
Finland George Osborne, the British chancellor, triggered a backlash after he 
urged companies to defend the economy against the “anti-business views” of 
which groups?  Churches  Charities  Marxists  Conservationists Tristram Hunt, 
the British shadow education secretary, launched a vitriolic counterattack 
against David Cameron, calling him what?  A low-rent PR man  An Eton-educated 
toff  A cut-rate spiv  A second-rate spinner The boss of which major British 
retailer said France was finished because it was “sclerotic, hopeless and 
downbeat” and advised investors to leave the country?  John Lewis  Marks and 
Spencers  House of Fraser  Debenhams Which US bank revealed a massive data 
breach affecting 76m households and about 7m businesses?  Bank of America  
Citigroup  Wells Fargo  JP Morgan Chase Top Gear host Jeremy Clarkson found 
himself at the centre of another controversy, this time over the number plates 
used on vehicles in a trip to which country?  Chile  Argentina  Uruguay  
Paraguay Which American actor won both praise and criticism for accusing TV 
host Bill Maher and author Sam Harris of promoting 'racist' and 'gross' 
depictions of Islam?  Leonardo DiCaprio  Ben Affleck  Christian Bale  Will Smith
 You got…  Amazing! But maybe you should get out a bit more  Very well done  
Not great, to be honest, but better luck next week  Dismal, but maybe it wasn't 
your week  Challenge your friends Submit answers  