
This was a victory to be cherished as much by those overseeing Fulham’s 
academy as the management of a revived first-team. For the first time since the 
turn of the century, and admittedly after a lengthy spell in the top flight 
themselves, this club have beaten opponents from a higher division. That they 
did so with a youthful, virtually homegrown team merely added to the sense of 
achievement. Their kids are better than all right. The conveyor belt is 
gloriously productive.

It took a goal from Lasse Vigen Christensen, who had actually joined the youth 
ranks from Midtjylland at the age of 17, to see off a disjointed and 
disappointingMiddlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough>
. The Dane sprinted into the clutter of the six‑yard box to poke in Scott 
Malone’s low centre, after excellent initial work from the young Luca de la 
Torre, seven minutes from the end of extra-time. In truth the whole contest 
ended up feeling like a prolonged tribute to the work of Huw Jennings and his 
coaching staff back at Motspur Park. Boro may have had the initial swagger and 
the weighty experience, but they were still eclipsed.

Adnan Januzaj’s late goal earns Sunderland victory over Shrewsbury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/sunderland-shrewsbury-efl-cup-match-report>
A first defeat since mid-March  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/charlton-athletic-middlesbrough-championship-match-report>
will have been a shock to the system for Aitor Karanka and his team, but they 
had actually been relieved even to take this game into the extra period. The 
slickly impressive nature of Fulham’s display had arguably seemed more 
significant in the wake of the frustration voiced by Slavisa Jokanovic at the 
weekend.

The Fulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> manager’s criticisms 
had exposed the schism with the statistical recruitment director Craig Kline, a 
friend of the owner’s son, whose “Both Boxes Checked” analysis programme now 
dictates transfer policy in these parts. Jokanovic wanted Manchester United’s 
Andreas Pereira, recommended by José Mourinho, to join on loan. Kline 
apparently does not have enough data to assess the player’s numbers at present. 
As a result, the deal is off.

Jokanovic, who has “no plans to leave”, has at least seen Ragnar Sigurdsson, 
the scourge of England in Nice, join this week and could bask in a sense of 
“pride” at the performance mustered by the second-string – there were nine 
changes from Saturday – with this evidence of quality nurtured from within. 
There was the scuttling Adetayo Edun on the flank and the assured Dennis 
Adeniran in central midfield, both products of a buoyant academy. The latter 
was unperturbed by an early booking and demonstrated maturity beyond his 17 
years.

The substitute Sean Kavanagh, born in Dublin but schooled at Motspur Park, had 
a curled attempt nodded from the goal-line by Ben Gibson while, much earlier in 
the evening, another youth-team graduate, Cauley Woodrow, had been denied from 
point‑blank range by Brad Guzan and then Daniel Ayala. Ryan Sessegnon, a scorer 
at 16 on Saturday, could kick his heels on the bench all night.

Woodrow’s presence had eventually panicked Julien de Sart into converting into 
his own net early in the second half after Ryan Tunnicliffe’s burst and 
Malone’s shot had squirmed away from the Boro goalkeeper, an equaliser the 
hosts fully merited, with Boro becalmed right up to the moment David Nugent 
looped a header on to the crossbar seconds from the end of normal time. The 
chance had virtually been the visitors’ first since the striker guided an 
eighth-minute header from Fábio da Silva’s delivery beyond Jesse Joronen. 
Thereafter, it had been Fulham’s busy, energetic style, with Tunnicliffe such a 
reassuring presence at their core, which had always threatened to prevail.

The winner was eventually tapped in by Christensen, a player who had signed a 
new contract this week, with Boro utterly unable to rouse themselves in 
response. Their own midfield had been far too pedestrian in the face of such 
energy. Guzan, whose nervy mannerisms tend to suggest panic is setting in, was 
as busy as he had been for most of last season at Aston Villa. Karanka ended up 
apologising to the travelling support, but Fulham will believe Bristol City in 
the third round represents a winnable tie, not least because there is life 
after Patrick Roberts and Moussa Dembélé. The present and future feel full of 
promise.
 