
In 1945 Aneurin Bevan said: ‘We have been the dreamers, we have been the 
sufferers, and now, we are the builders.’ And my God, how they built. And what 
they built. Every bit as much a wonder of the world as any architectural 
marvel, or any natural miracle … The National Health Service. A truly 
monumental vision. The result of true representation. Of real advocacy. A 
symbol of equality, of fairness, and of compassion.

The nation that swept the postwar Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government into power was made up 
of people who had faced the horrors and the hardships of the second world war. 
And had bound together as one community to overcome them. They had been 
sustained and inspired by their feeling of comradeship, and their sense of 
responsibility for their fellow man and woman. Compelled to help those in need 
and those struggling in the face of hardship.

'By God, believe in something,' Michael Sheen tells politicians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/02/michael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians>
These were the experiences that shaped them, and this was the vision of life 
that the welfare state was born out of. Faced with an enemy that sought only to 
divide, the National Health Service strove for unity. Where they traded in 
fear-mongering, and blame, and exploitation of the vulnerable, the NHS 
represented compassion, and generosity, and acceptance. Where they slavered 
with voracious self-interest, theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
symbolised courageous self-sacrifice for the good of all.

In his book In Place of Fear, Bevan said: ‘The collective principle asserts 
that no society can legitimately call itself civilised if a sick person is 
denied medical aid because of lack of means.’

‘No society can legitimately call itself civilised’: now that begs the 
question, what sort of society do we want to be? What is our vision for 
ourselves? What are the qualities and the principles that we aspire towards, 
and choose to defend?

Because it is a choice. Do we want to be a society that is fractured, divided, 
disconnected? Do we want to be a society that is suspicious and mistrustful of 
its own people? A society that is exploitative, that sees people as 
commodities, as numbers. Mere instruments of profit, to be used while they have 
use, drained of whatever they can offer, and when they are seen as no longer 
useful, just abandoned, cut adrift. Preferably unseen and never again heard 
from.


Or … or … do we want to be a society where each person is recognised? Where 
all are equal in worth and value. And where that value is not purely a monetary 
one. A society that is supportive, that is inclusive and compassionate. Where 
it is acknowledged that not all can prosper. Where those who are most 
vulnerable, most in need of help, are not seen as lazy, or scrounging, or 
robbing the rest of us for whatever they can get. Where we … we do not turn our 
backs on those facing hard times. We do not abandon them or exploit their 
weakness. Because they are us. If not now, then at some point, and inevitably, 
they are us.


We are not afraid to acknowledge that we can be ailing, that we can find 
ourselves weak, that we can be infirm, and that we all at some point need help. 
We don’t shy away from this hard truth, we embrace it. Because in that way, 
together, we are always strong. We leave no one behind. We only say we’ve 
crossed the finish line when the last of us does. Because no one is alone. And 
there is such a thing as society.

This is what I believe to be Aneurin Bevan’s vision of a living tapestry of a 
mixed community, as he said.

At a time now, when people mistrust politicians as being too professional, too 
disconnected, no longer representing the voice of the people they have been 
elected to serve but more likely to represent the voice of wherever the money 
is. No longer standing for anything meaningful, or inspired by strongly held 
beliefs.

At a time like this a man like Aneurin Bevan seems like a mythical creature. 
Like a unicorn perhaps. Or perhaps more fittingly, a dragon. He didn’t care 
what the polls were saying. He didn’t worry about his PR, or what the current 
popular trends might be. His vision was long term. It was far-reaching, 
visionary in its scope and revolutionary in its effects. He had cast iron 
integrity and a raging passion.

This was a man who had no fear in standing up for what he believed in. And he 
made no bones about how he felt. This was a man who publicly stated: ‘No amount 
of cajolery, and no attempts at ethical, or social seduction, can eradicate 
from my heart a deep, burning hatred for the Tory party.’

In today’s political climate, where politicians are careful, tentative, scared 
of saying what they feel for fear of alienating a part of the electorate; where 
under the excuse of trying to appear electable, all parties drift into a morass 
of bland neutrality; and the real deals, the real values we suspect, are kept 
behind closed doors – is it any wonder that people feel there is very little to 
choose between? Bevan said: ‘We know what happens to people who stay in the 
middle of the road. They get run down.’

So when people are too scared to say what they really mean, when they’re too 
careful to speak from their hearts, when integrity is too much of a risk, it’s 
no surprise that people feel disengaged with politics.

There is never an excuse to not speak up for what you think is right. You must 
stand up for what you believe. But first of all – by God, believe in something.

Because there are plenty out there who believe in grabbing as much as they can 
for themselves. Constantly sniffing around for markets to exploit, for weakness 
to expose. They won’t say it, of course – they’re too smart for that.

No one says they want to get rid of the NHS. Everyone praises it, across all 
parties. It is about as powerful a symbol of goodness that we have, so it would 
be too dangerous not to. But for decades now, there has nevertheless been a 
systematic undermining of its core values.

This is beyond party politics. The Labour government arguably did as much 
damage to the NHS as any Tory or coalition-led one.

This is about who we want to be as a nation, and what we believe is worth 
fighting for. Too many people have given too much, and fought too hard, for us 
to give away what they achieved and to be left with so very little.

To those across the whole party political spectrum, and to anyone in any 
position of power or authority, I ask you to search your heart, and look at who 
and what you serve.

To those who have discarded all principles, save that of profit before all 
else; to those who have turned their backs on the very idea of a truly 
democratic society, and aligned themselves to nothing but self-interest; to 
those who have betrayed the vision of equality, and justice, and compassion for 
all – that vision that provided the crucible from which came forth the National 
Health Service – I say to you, as Aneurin Bevan said in Trafalgar Square in 
1956: you have besmirched the name of Britain; you have made us ashamed of the 
things of which formerly we were proud; you have offended against every 
principle of decency and there is only way in which you can even begin to 
restore your tarnished reputation. Get out. Get out! Get ... out!
 