
Her Majesty’s Spiffing <http://billygoat.tv/>

 PS4, Xbox One, PC, Billy Goat Entertainment, cert: 3
★★★★

Tired of Westminster chicanery, the Queen dissolves parliament and sets 
Britain’s sights on the stars. Now an independent space-faring nation, albeit 
with a fractional budget, it’s up to the bumbling Captain English and his 
sarcastic, and very Welsh, Sub-Lieutenant Jones to find new planets to colonise 
for a galactic British empire.

Mechanically, Her Majesty’s Spiffing is both love letter and update to the 
point-and-click adventures of old. Players freely guide English – who makes 
Boris Johnson’s role as foreign secretary look like a wise appointment – around 
his hilariously rundown ship and unlikely alien worlds, investigating objects 
and solving puzzles through an intuitive command wheel.HMS is modern enough for 
younger players, but retains the DNA of classic adventure games.

However, its greatest strengths are a witty script and a wry political edge 
that cuts especially post-Brexit vote. In lampooning an isolationist Britain, 
it is the court jester speaking truth to power.MK
 ‘Beautiful and compelling’: Super Mario Run. 
Super Mario Run <https://supermariorun.com/en/index.html>

iOS, Nintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo>, cert: 4
★★★★

Mario’s smartphone debut may have been somewhat swamped by the Christmas rush 
of releases, but this was one of the best games of 2016.

Unlike console Mario <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mario> titles, 
players just need to tap the screen to control the plumber’s jumping, with 
running occurring automatically. It’s not as simple as it looks – timing and 
length of presses are crucial in overcoming the 24 levels. While the story mode 
is relatively short-lived (although grabbing those elusive black coins offers 
plenty of replayability), longevity comes from Toad Rally – a competitive game 
where players must collect more coins than their online rivals. Winning rallies 
results in Toads populating and expanding the kingdom.

However, although there are no microtransactions required, the £7.99 cost is 
steep for a mobile game andSuper Mario Run also inexplicably requires an 
internet connection, which can cause frustration when the signal drops. These 
issues aside, though, Nintendo has crafted a beautiful and compelling Mario 
game more than worthy of its bigger console counterparts.CD
 ‘An impressive simulation’: Don Bradman Cricket 17 
Don Bradman Cricket 17 <http://www.donbradmancricket17.com/>

PS4, Xbox One, Big Ant Studios, cert: 3
★★★★

Next-gen cricket games are rarer than an England Test victory in India, so the 
developers of the latest iteration in theDon Bradman series could be forgiven 
for just going through the motions, safe in the knowledge that they have a 
captive market.

Fortunately for cricket-lovers, this is not the case with Big Ant Studios. 
They have produced an impressive simulation – no simple feat given the 
complexity of the game – and while the controls do take time to master, the 
reward for putting in the effort is huge depth and a wide range of options when 
batting or bowling.

The graphics might not strain a modern console’s processing power, but this is 
more than made up for by top-notch gameplay. The career mode, where a player 
can start at club level and work their way up to a county side and eventually 
international selection, is very immersive and promises plenty of replayability.

Equally, the range of different game modes should be enough for any cricket 
fan, with everything from a five-over thrash to a five-day Test available, and 
it is good to see that a wide range of women’s teams have been included.

The lack of correct player names is an annoyance, although this can be easily 
fixed – there is a detailed editor included which means almost anything in the 
game can be tweaked. This even allows for creation of new teams, tournaments or 
stadiums, offering more than enough to keep cricket fans occupied during the 
cold winter months.RF
 