
Gareth Bale built on his excellent displays for Wales at Euro 2016 by scoring 
two goals in a commanding 3-0 win for Real Madrid in their La Liga opener at
Real Sociedad <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> on Sunday.

Bale opened the scoring with a powerful header in the second minute and 
rounded off the win four minutes into injury time with a simple finish after 
the new arrival Asensio had scored his first league goal for Real in the 40th 
with a sumptuous lob.

After Barcelona laid down a marker with a ruthless 6-2 win at home to Real 
Betis on Saturday, the pressure was on Real to make a strong start themselves. 
They were without their first-choice forwards Cristiano Ronaldo and Karim 
Benzema, so Bale was accompanied by Alvaro Morata and Asensio instead.

Luis Suárez scores hat-trick in Barcelona’s 6-2 rout of Real Betis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/barcelona-real-betis-la-liga-match-report>
The winger nodded in the only goal in the fixture last season late in the 
second half but needed little more than 60 seconds to strike this time, meeting 
Dani Carvajal’s whipped cross from the right to power the ball into the top 
near corner.

Real Sociedad’s goalkeeper Geronimo Rulli had better luck with an arrowed 
effort from Toni Kroos midway through the first half, tipping the ball away at 
the near post.

The former Real midfielder Asier Illarramendi had the home side’s best chance 
to level but opted to pass to Juanmi rather than try his luck and wasted the 
opportunity. That lapse woke up Madrid and they upped their search for a second 
goal, which arrived via Raphael Varane’s scooped pass up to Asensio, the 
youngster controlling with one touch before producing a delightful chip over 
Rulli.

Madrid were just as dominant in the second half and were inches away from 
stretching their lead when Morata was denied by Rulli and Kroos met the loose 
ball on the volley, smashing it against the bar.

Mateo Kovacic was denied Real’s third by an another impressive save from 
Rulli, while the home side had a penalty appeal turned down later following a 
challenge by Carvajal on Willian José.

Bale had the last word, however, latching on to James Rodríguez’s through-ball 
to race clear and take the ball calmly round Rulli.

Atlético Madrid were held to a 1-1 draw by Alaves in extraordinary 
circumstances at the Vicente Calderon. Diego Simeone’s side missed a series of 
chances before Kevin Gameiro took advantage of a debatable penalty award in 
favour of Fernando Torres to put theRojiblancos ahead in the third minute of 
second-half stoppage time.

However, they let two points slip from their grasp as Manu was allowed the 
space to unleash a right-foot shot two minutes later,which Atlético’s 
goalkeeper, Jan Oblak, who had barely touched the ball owing to the home side’s 
dominance, got nowhere near.
 