
When 3-0 behind at Kilmarnock last month, Neil Lennon surely could not have 
envisaged this scenario. To the Celtic manager's credit, he has presided over a 
mini fightback in the Scottish Premier League title race. More work is required 
and Celtic will face better opposition thanDunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> for much of the season. 
Another home win, when St Mirren visit Celtic Park on Saturday, will narrow 
Rangers' advantage at the top to four points before the defending champions 
make their own visit to Kilmarnock. Celtic and Lennon have scrambled to the 
extent where things are interesting again.

The closing momentsof this game seemed a bit unnecessary for Celtic, who 
dominated completely until Andrew Barrowman handed Dunfermline a lifeline. 
Earlier, Ki Sung-yueng had become the latest Celtic player to miss a penalty – 
thereby keeping Dunfermline in the contest. At full-time, Lennon had a minor 
set-to with a section of theCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>
 support who he felt had been overly negative towards the team.

"They just annoyed me," Lennon said. "I can understand their frustration but 
we are in a title battle here and need all the support we can get. People will 
talk about the last three or four minutes but we created umpteen not half, but 
clear-cut chances. The only criticism I have is that we didn't put the game 
away."

Lennon said a plan to bring Gordon Strachan back to Celtic in an advisory 
capacity had failed eight weeks ago. "Gordon is someone I respect totally and 
he wasn't averse to the idea but it never materialised," the manager said. For 
now, Celtic's touch is such that Lennon does not seem to need an experienced 
hand alongside him.

On paper, Dunfermline were favourable opposition for Celtic. The newly 
promoted team arrived in Glasgow having conceded 29 goals in 14 league outings. 
Only financial warnings and cutbacks, ominously for a club who should be 
profiting from new-found SPL funding, have masked Dunfermline's defensive 
troubles.

Within 13 minutes, that generosity was highlighted. A stray pass from the 
visitors' Paul Willis fell to the feet of Gary Hooper, who lashed a low finish 
past Paul Gallacher.

Celtic's early-season league woes owed plenty to an inability to see off 
inferior teams at home. St Johnstone and Hibernian have left this venue with 
SPL reward but Dunfermline never genuinely looked likely to join that club. 
Lennon had dropped Georgios Samaras and Badr El Kaddouri to the substitutes' 
bench, perhaps an admission that the Celtic display during Saturday's win in 
Inverness had not entirely pleased their manager. Either way, an early sense of 
freshness was evident here.

James Forrest notched the hosts' second. Gallacher parried an Anthony Stokes 
shot to the feet of Hooper, who sensibly laid the ball back to his young 
team-mate.

Still, a scare for Celtic followed. Daniel Majstorovic was fortunate not to 
concede a penalty after clambering all over Ryan Thomson. That may have jolted 
Lennon's team, for whom Kris Commons and Stokes wasted fine chances before the 
interval. "We were lucky to come in 2-0 down," Jim McIntyre, the Dunfermline 
manager, said.

Eleven minutes after the restart, Celtic's victory should have been secured. 
Instead, Ki dragged his penalty wide after Paul Burns upended Forrest – outside 
the area, Dunfermline claimed. Stokes appeared more vexed than Ki, having 
wanted to take the spot-kick.

Ki looked to make amends by playing in Stokes, half an hour from time, but the 
Irishman shot against a post.

Dunfermline's best spell of the match followed, although proceedings had 
regressed into something of a nonevent. A Joe Cardle attempt that forced the 
Celtic goalkeeper Fraser Forster to bat away at his near post highlighted a 
fall in the home side's tempo. Barrowman went one better, with a fine shot 
which reduced Celtic's advantage. Crucially for Lennon, no further and 
meaningful damage was inflicted upon his team.
 