
Gary Neville’s four-game winning run with Valencia came to an abrupt end with 
a 3-0 home defeat againstAthletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> following seven frantic 
minutes late in the second half.

Sabin Merino broke the deadlock in a tense and even game on 73 minutes and 
Iker Muniain and the formerValencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> striker Aritz Aduriz added to 
the visitors’ lead in quick succession.

Neville’s side had beaten Espanyol and Granada in the league and enjoyed 
back-to-backvictories against Rapid Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/valencia-rapid-vienna-europa-league-roundup>
 in the Europa League but the late onslaught was too much to overcome.

As a result, Valencia missed out on a chance to move up to ninth in the 
Primera Division and instead stay 12th, seven points behind Athletic.

However, they have the opportunity to avenge the defeat as they meet Athletic 
twice in the next fortnight in theEuropa League round of 16. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/26/europa-league-last-16-draw-live>

The in-form striker Santi Mina was given the nod by Neville and headed into 
the side-netting early on as Valencia made an encouraging start.

André Gomes then went on a marauding run from the right wing and past three 
defenders before falling under a challenge from Xabier Etxeita but the referee, 
Jesús Gil Manzano, was unmoved.

Denis Cheryshev broke down the opposite wing to pick out an unmarked Álvaro 
Negredo but the forward leaned back and shot well over the bar, spurning the 
latest of several glaring chances to fall his way in the past two months.

Athletic took a while to get into the game but frustrated Valencia with their 
physical play in midfield and Muniain created their best chance just before the 
break, turning inside but shooting wide.

Valencia put the ball in the net five minutes into the second half but the 
effort was ruled out, Negredo in an offside position when he attempted to flick 
on Aderlan Santos’s shot, obstructing Gorka Iraizoz’s view.

Athletic then could have taken the lead, Merino trying to slot Oscar de 
Marcos’s pass into the bottom corner but denied by the fist of Diego Alves.

Just moments later Valencia came close again, Negredo meeting a Gomes cross at 
the far post but Etxeita blocked the shot.

Negredo was immediately replaced by Paco Alcácer, who had a chance straight 
after coming on, but failed to beat Iraizoz in a one-on-one after being played 
in by another fine pass by Gomes.

Athletic eventually broke the deadlock after a stray pass by Santi Mina and 
Mikel Rico picked out Mikel San José on the right, who spotted Merino unmarked 
in the middle of the box and the 24-year-old calmly headed his cross into the 
net.

The second goal came from another Valencia giveaway, Rico robbing Dani Parejo 
after an ill-advised backheel and quickly playing in Muniain, who slid the ball 
through the legs of Alves.

Valencia’s heads had dropped and moments later they conceded again, Aduriz 
getting up from Beñat Etxebarria’s corner to nod in the third.
 