
Gary Anderson is one game from true greatness. Only Phil Taylor and Eric 
Bristow have won three consecutive world championships, but Anderson has the 
chance to join that club after an ultimately comfortable 6-3 win over Peter 
Wright in the semi-final. It was his 17th victory in a row at Alexandra Palace, 
and he has the aura to match.

For so long Anderson was the underachieving genius of darts. He won his first 
world title two years ago at the age of 44, beating Phil Taylor 7-6 in a 
classic final, and followed up by retaining his title with formidable authority 
a year ago. Once he struggled under extreme pressure; now he is a big-game 
specialist, who saves his best darts for the biggest tournament of all.

Anderson was never behind in a contest that was both high-class and nervy: the 
scoring was relentless, with 25 180s, yet both players were unusually fragile 
on doubles. Wright came back from 3-1 to 3-3 before Anderson ran away with the 
match by taking the final eight legs. There was not much between the two but 
the timing of Anderson’s big scores and big finishes – particularly a 157 to 
stop Wright’s fightback and go 4-3 up – was decisive.

Fans in fancy dress at the World Darts Championship – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/costume-and-culture/gallery/2016/dec/30/fancy-dress-world-darts-championship-in-pictures>
“I’m very proud of winning the world championship twice,” said Anderson. “This 
year I just wanted to get past the first round and see what happens. The crowd 
have been amazing. I feel comfortable up here, for some strange reason. I knew 
I was scoring well – the 180s are back – and although I missed a few doubles I 
was glad to get over the line. I don’t want to give the title up.”

In the previous two rounds Anderson survived ferocious assaults from Benito 
van de Pas of the Netherlands and Dave Chisnall from St Helens. It was expected 
that he would get an even greater test from Wright, the world No3 who was 
playing beautifully. It is a reflection of the monstrous standard of modern 
darts that although Anderson and Wright averaged 103.45 and 99.83 respectively, 
it felt like the two Scotsmen were not at their best.

Wright had taken out 53% of his doubles in the tournament; against Anderson 
that figure dropped to 30. It was an insurmountable malfunction. He started the 
match with a 180 only to miss six darts at the double to win the first leg. It 
set the tone for a traumatic start. By the time Wright hit a double at the 11th 
attempt, Anderson was well on the way to a 2-0 lead. Wright had darts to win 
four of the first five legs but lost the lot; and when he dragged the second 
set back to 2-2, Anderson threw six perfect darts to extinguish any hope.

When the fourth set also went to a decider on the Anderson throw, he hit 
consecutive 180s once again. At that stage he seemed in complete control, only 
for Wright to drag the match back to 3-3 with a break in the sixth set. 
Anderson missed two darts to win both the fifth and sixth sets.

He did not make the same mistake in the seventh. With Wright waiting on 70 – 
and with the darts should the set go to a fifth leg – Anderson took out a 
devastating 157. It was a hold of throw but a break of Wright’s spirit. He did 
not win another leg as Anderson stormed through the last two sets.

“I’ve got no excuse, I didn’t play well enough,” said Wright. “I didn’t feel 
comfortable on the stage. My first dart wasn’t going in the treble 20, and that 
makes it really difficult. I really struggled to get the pitch of my darts 
right. And then when he gave me chances at doubles, I missed them as well. I’ve 
only been playing with these darts since mid-November so I’ll get better. Once 
I win a major I’ll win a few. Gary took care of me tonight and beat me up, and 
I hope he wins his third world title.”
 