
The defending champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/03/gary-anderson-adrian-lewis-pdc-world-championship>
, Gary Anderson, booked his place in the quarter-finals of the PDC World Darts 
Championship with a 4-2 win over Benito van de Pas at Alexandra Palace.

Anderson, the second seed, held off a spirited display from the 23-year-old 
Dutchman to open up a 3-0 lead without missing a double and producing nine 
maximums. After the Scot had missed a dart at double top to win 4-0, Van de Pas 
rallied to reduce the deficit to 3-2.

However, Anderson – aiming to win the Sid Waddell Trophy for the third time in 
a row – made sure of a place in the last eight as he closed out victory with a 
match average of 107.8, the highest of the tournament so far.

In the late match Raymond van Barneveld knocked out Adrian Lewis, runner-up in 
the last final, with a thrilling 4-3 win.

The fifth seed, Lewis, who won the PDC world title in 2011 and 2012, took the 
opening set before Van Barneveld, the 2007 champion, levelled with a 70 
checkout.

Van Barneveld, a four-times winner of the BDO world crown and beaten by 
‘Jackpot’ Lewis in last year’s PDC semi-final, moved ahead at 2-1. However, 
Lewis made the most of the Dutchman’s failure to finish off the fourth set and 
squared the match once more.

Lewis maintained his momentum with a 106 checkout to take the fifth set for a 
3-2 lead, only for Van Barneveld to find his range on the doubles again and 
force a decider. It was the Dutchman who then held his nerve to produce a 52 
checkout with the final dart at double 16, which secured the set 3-1 and a 
place in the last eight against either Phil Taylor, the 14-times PDC champion, 
or the Belgian Kim Huybrechts on Friday.

Earlier Peter Wright, James Wade, Jelle Klaasen and Huybrechts all recorded 
comfortable second-round victories. The No3 seed, Wright, defeated the Welshman 
Jamie Lewis 4-0, in which he dropped only one leg en route to the last 16, 
while Wade saw off the veteran Steve Beaton, the 1996 BDO world champion, 4-1.

The Dutchman Klaasen, who won the 2006 BDO world title as a 21-year-old 
outsider, beat Brendan Dolan of Northern Ireland 4-0 during which he twice came 
close to a nine-dart finish.

Huybrechts also produced a convincing display as he defeated the German Max 
Hopp in another straight-sets win.
 