
Gary Neville <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> admitted 
every defeat feels like a “punch in the face” but insisted he will fight on as 
Valencia manager while sources at the club insisted on Sunday there was no plan 
to sack him despite his side losing 1-0 at Real Betis, their ninth league game 
under him – all without a victory.

How ‘a historic humiliation’ left Gary Neville fighting for his Valencia 
future | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/gary-neville-valencia-job-barcelona-historic-humiliation->
Valencia’s president Lay Hoon Chan was in Singapore rather than in Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> or in Seville on Sunday, and 
the manager continued to have support from the upper echelons of the club, 
including the owner Peter Lim. Despite increasing pressure, and continued 
speculation, Neville saw no need for a public vote of confidence. He said that 
he is “comfortable” with the club’s owners and sporting director, with whom he 
said he speaks “three, four, five times a week”.

Neville was speaking after his side were beaten by a solitary Rubén Castro 
goal at Real Betis. Defeat came four days after Valencia were hammered7-0 by 
Barcelona in the Copa del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/gary-neville-refuses-to-resign-valencia-barcelona>
, prompting angry fans to protest at the club’s training ground on Wednesday 
night. He described that as one of the most “painful” nights of his career 
while the sporting director, Suso García Pitarch, had been evasive when asked 
about the Englishman’s future.

However, Neville said he was “comfortable” after this game and, although he 
agreed that results had been “absolutely unacceptable”, he insisted Valencia 
have deserved more under him. “I am comfortable with [my relationship with the 
club]; what I am uncomfortable about is not getting them the results they 
deserve,” he said. “There’s no doubt that at times like this, everyone needs to 
stay together. Everyone suffers. Conversations with the owners are between me 
and the owners.”

Neville is aware the pressure is building. A poll run by one Valencian 
newspaper showed almost 90% of supporters wanted him to resign. “I said before 
I came that I would be judged in five months,” he said. “The obituaries have 
already been written: I have been judged in six weeks. But I believe in myself, 
I always have. I believe in the work I am doing: there is structure, belief, 
organisation, far better fitness. What I don’t believe is that the results 
reflect the improvements we have seen.

“I don’t think we deserved the last two defeats [in the league]. But the 
reality is that they are two defeats and I am aware of the consequences when 
you don’t get good results.” Despite being pushed repeatedly, he would not 
admit that Valencia find themselves in a relegation battle, even though this 
result leaves them just four points off the drop zone.

This was Neville’s 16th game in charge, during which time Valencia have lost 
six, drawn six and won four – all of the latter coming in the Copa del Rey. The 
cup had served as a release from the side’s league form until Barcelona 
inflicted their worst defeat in over 20 years. Neville called that a “freak” 
performance and although it was humiliating, arguably more important were the 
defeat by Sporting Gijón – their first at home in the league since 2014 – and 
the failures to beat Getafe and Rayo Vallecano, who came into the match without 
a win in eight.

Results like this one, in other words. “Let’s be clear: we must deliver,” 
Neville had said. His side did not, and it was not because they were up against 
an impressive team. Going into this gameReal Betis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> had the worst home record in 
Spain, only one win here all season – against David Moyes’s Real Sociedad – and 
had scored just seven times. They made it eight, the ninth time in nine league 
games that Valencia had trailed, and after the goal they went for Valencia – as 
if they had just realised that their opponents were not that good.

Neville talked about the “fine line between success and failure” and insisted 
his team had not deserved to lose. In the final minute, they had an equaliser 
scored by Shkodran Mustafi ruled out for an offside Neville did not agree with. 
But there had been few real chances; when Álvaro Negredo had a shot cleared off 
the line midway through the second half, it was their first shot on target. 
Besides, there is no escaping the result.

A league table based on the games played since Neville has been in Spain had 
Valencia in the relegation zone. Their opponents were one of only two teams 
worse than them. Not any more. If Espanyol beat Real Sociedad on Monday night, 
and they might, Valencia would slip to the bottom of that table and worryingly 
close to the bottom of the real one.

When Nuno was sacked, Valencia were four points off a Champions League place; 
now the gap is nearly five times bigger. Fighting for survival may sound absurd 
but it has become a reality. “Completely unacceptable,” Neville called it.
 