
Even Nick Dempsey’s dad seemed to agree that windsurfing is not the most 
comprehensible Olympic spectator sport. “Oh, you won’t have a clue what’s going 
on from here,” said Mike Dempsey cheerfully, standing in sandals and shorts on 
the beach at Marina da Gloria. “All you need to know is that Nick is going to 
get another silver and we are delighted.”

A samba band played Amy Winehouse covers as ticket holders in bikinis and sun 
hats drank beer and tried to understand what on earth was going on out in 
Guanabara bay. Quite who was gybing and tacking seemed to matter less in the 
context of a view that included the spectacular granite dome of Sugarloaf 
mountain. As we squinted to try to see which sailor had reached the red buoy in 
the far distance first, a cable car ferried tourists to the Sugarloaf summit 
over the deceptively blue water which has left at least one competitor 
suffering from an unpleasant bout of “Rio belly”.

Mike and his wife, Olivia, have been watching their boy windsurf for 29 years. 
But this will be the last time they travel to see him in competition. Dempsey 
had said he would retire afterwinning silver in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/07/london-2012-nick-dempsey-windsurfing-silver>
 but this time he really means it, said Mike. After five Olympics he is 
retiring and hopes to forge a new career combining photography with coaching.

“It’s quite sad, really,” said Olivia, wistfully, as she peered through 
binoculars to see how her son was doing. She already knew what medal he was 
getting. Another silver was assured before he even pulled on his neoprene 
“shorties” before Sunday’s final. In the unromantically titled RS:X 
competition, named after the kind of board they have been racing since Beijing, 
the sailor with the fewest points wins. After the first 12 rounds Dempsey had 
sufficiently few points to take the ultimate second place, yet a few too many 
to challenge his big rival, Dorian van Rijsselberghe of the Netherlands, for 
gold.

Dempsey, who turned 36 on Saturday, could have come dead last in the final and 
he would still have got silver. But his mum was adamant that he and Van 
Rijsselberghe would race. “There’s no way Nick could go out there and not race. 
Cut through Nick’s bones and you’ll see racing all the way through. It’s the 
same with his seven-year-old son, Thomas,” said Olivia. The young lad, as well 
as his little brother, Oscar, have already started windsurfing and are showing 
the same fearless attitude as their dad, she added. Not a surprise when you 
consider that their mum, Dempsey’s ex-wife, is the double gold winning Olympic 
sailor, Sarah Ayton.

After the race Dempsey said he had spoken to his sons the night before, when 
it was clear he was on the verge of winning more windsurfing medals at the 
Olympics than anyone else. “Oscar wasn’t fussed. Thomas said: ‘It’s OK, Daddy, 
you’ve got two silvers now, which is the same as one gold.” The silvers join 
the bronze he won in Athens in 2004. “That’s something I’m incredibly proud 
of,” he said.

In some ways Olympic windsurfing is not that hard to understand. The sailors 
simply have to complete the course quicker than their rivals. The problem, from 
a spectator point of view, is that all the action takes place far out to sea. 
And even glimpsed through binoculars appearances can be deceptive. Novice eyes 
may have thought that Greece’s Vyron Kokkalanis was heading for victory when he 
streaked ahead on the first lap. Dempsey’s mum knew better. “He’s tacked off 
too early,” she said, and was proved right when he came in in eighth place.

Her son ended up placing fourth in the final, with Van Rijsselberghe fully 
justifying his gold by winning the race. The Frenchman Pierre le Coq came 
second after a close battle with his Polish rival, Piotr Myszka, and took the 
bronze medal. In the women’s final Team GB’s Bryony Shaw finished ninth 
overall, with Charline Picon of France winning gold.

After his race Dempsey seemed a little bit cross. “I wanted to win it,” he 
said, while accepting he had once again come second to “probably the best 
windsurfer that ever lived”. There was no part of him that felt tempted to go 
easy and enjoy the moment, he insisted: “I can’t.”

The sailing in Rio was much more difficult than in his home town of Weymouth, 
where the sailing events took place at the London Olympics, he said. “It was 
amazing but the sailing was actually a bit straightforward whereas here it’s 
hard. It’s tricky. In Weymouth we don’t have mountains. Here we have mountains, 
a lot of current, very complicated. Outside we have massive rolling seas. The 
scenery here is stunning, too. The theatre we are racing in is awesome here. 
And we didn’t have that in the UK.”

He said the water quality was OK: “It’s fine. I’ve had no problems.” His 
father, a former class president of RS:X, was less diplomatic. Gesturing at 
Sugarloaf mountain, he said: “If you didn’t know the water quality was so bad 
you would think this was fantastic.”

He and Olivia had been very worried about the water making the sailors 
sick. “Everybody was. Every single person was. Luckily I think there’s only 
been one illness. You swallow this stuff and it’s – ahem – not very good. But a 
lot of the rubbish that they used to have to push through while out here 
training in the last three years has been cleaned up. And we haven’t had any 
heavy rain, which helps.”

He felt confident his son would not come back for his sixth Olympics. But, 
talking to reporters after coming out of the water for what was supposed to be 
his final outing in the Games, Dempsey did not sound so sure. Do you think we 
will see you in Tokyo, journalists asked? “Probably not. But I don’t know,” he 
said. “It’s been a long time and it’s very hard to stay at the top for that 
long. I’m not sure I could do it again. But I would love to if I could … I just 
love the Olympics and everything it stands for.”
 