 A last attempt to avert the general strike timed for Monday midnight collapsed 
within an hour of twelve.
Mr. T. H. Thomas declared as he left the House, "The strike is on," and Mr. 
Cook said, "They failed: the general strike is on to-morrow.! Mr. Baldwin 
reported the breakdown at a Cabinet meeting at 11 p.m.

Westminster has become the scene of renewed discussions and much excitement 
about eight o'clock last night during the debate on the Premier's afternoon 
statement in the House on the industrial crisis. Mr. Baldwin's speech had been 
followed by a moderately phrased reply by Mr. J. H. Thomas, as labour's 
spokesman.

Later Mr. Churchill reiterated that if the strike notices were withdraw the 
Government were prepared to continue negotiations.

 Mr. Thomas pressed to know whether the withdrawal of lock-out notices was 
included. Mr. Churchill would not commit himself, but indicated that a reply 
might be given later, and the Prime Minister, followed by other Ministers, then 
withdrew, apparently for consultations.

After the close of Mr. Churchill's speech, Mr. J. H. Thomas had an interview 
with the Attorney-General. Mr. Thomas afterwards had a short conference with 
the members of the Minsters' executive, who were meeting in the Committee 
corridor, and then returned to Sir Douglas Hogg's room.

At 10.20 a joint meeting between the Miners' Executive and the Trade Unions 
Congress representatives was in progress at the House, but it was stated that 
there had not then been a rapprochement with the Government. Then at 11 p.m. 
came the news of the final breakdown.

Workers who are to stop to-day

The general strike plans provide for the stoppage to-day of all forms of 
transport including docks and railways), printing trades (including the 
newspapers), the iron and steel, metal, and heavy chemical trades, the building 
trade (apart from housing and hospital work), and electricity and gas supply 
for power.

 At midnight the Manchester stations were picketed, and though the London 
trains left it was doubtful whether they would reach their destination. No 
trams ran in Manchester after midnight.
 