
Miserly Internazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> 
recorded their eighth Serie A win of the season, all of them by single-goal 
margins, when they beat Torino 1-0 on Sunday to briefly go top – until 
Fiorentina’s 2-0 win over Sampdoria later on Sunday – with a typically cautious 
performance.

Italian clubs will not dominate Europe until they modernise their stadiums
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2015/oct/29/italian-clubs-serie-a-dominate-europe-modernise-stadiums>
Geoffrey Kondogbia scored with one of only two Inter shots on target in the 
game and Samir Handanovic was the real hero as he keptTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> at bay with a series of saves in 
the second half.

Roberto Mancini’s side, who began the weekend as joint leaders alongside 
Fiorentina, moved on to 27 points from 12 games, although they have scored only 
12 goals and conceded seven in those matches. They have won seven games by a 
1-0 scoreline and beat promoted Carpi 2-1 on the only occasion that they scored 
more than once in a game. They have also played two 1-1 draws, had one goalless 
stalemate and suffered a 4-1 home defeat by Fiorentina.

Kondogbia put Inter ahead in the 31st minute when he volleyed in at the far 
post after Rodrigo Palacio headed on Yuto Nagatomo’s free-kick. It was 
Kondogbia’s first goal since joining from Monaco in the close season.

The goal came just after Torino’s Marco Benassi had headed against the 
crossbar, and the hosts were to suffer more frustration in the second half. 
Handanovic made a superb double save to deny Fabio Quagliarella and then Andrea 
Belotti right at the start of the second half.

Inter, with tough-tackling Gary Medel and Felipe Melo providing fearsome cover 
for their back-line, made no attempt to attack and the Slovenian keeper was 
repeatedly called into action. He foiled the former Napoli and Juventus forward 
Quagliarella twice more and also did well to intercept a dangerous Giuseppe 
Vives ball into the area as Inter held on fortuitously.

“Keeping eight clean sheets since the start of the season is a great credit to 
everyone in the squad. We are all working hard and we’re united as a team,” 
Handanovic told Sky Sport Italia.
 