
George Groves <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/george-groves> is the new 
British super-middleweight champion after taking the belt from James DeGale on 
a majority decision in what was a minor war and a definite classic at the O2.

Groves proved how he defeated DeGale when they were amateurs, by taking the 
contest with scores of 115-115, 115-114, 115-114 after DeGale had spent the 
bout walking him. Yet Groves's strategy of wearing DeGale down and landing 
menacing rights found the way to the sweetest win of his 13-bout career.

In the ninth round, DeGale had first cut Groves then wobbled his legs with a 
left hook and a dynamite right that had Groves clinging on. Both men emerged 
for the 10th with cuts; an attritional evening was catching both of them.

When the decision came there was shock on DeGale's features but this had been 
a hard contest to call.

Afterwards, an elated Groves was happy to have proved his critics wrong, and 
claimed he would be willing to fight DeGale again.

"Everyone was raving about him. Only two favoured me in a boxing news poll, 
but I have self belief," he told BBC Radio 5 Live. "It feels good. I knew I'd 
won. I knew I'd done enough.

"I will fight him again. Yeah if everything is all right and it's the right 
way. But now I have beaten him twice."

A disappointed DeGale disputed the judges' decision, saying: "I'm the 
champion. What am I to do?"

Earlier, Nathan Cleverly's first defence of the WBO light-heavyweight title 
that he only inherited last week, against Aleksy Kuziemski, ended with the 
Welshman stopping the 34-year-old in the fourth round.

The Pole's nose appeared to be broken, and his left eye was bleeding, yet the 
bout had been bubbling nicely up, so boos met the decision from Mark Nelson, 
the referee.

Kuziemski was the third different opponent dealt to Cleverly, after he started 
fight-week believing he would face Jürgen Brähmer. The German pulled out (with 
little explanation), and his replacement, Tony Bellew, then failed to make the 
weight and so he, too, was unable to fight.

The Welshman said: "It feels great to finally say Nathan Cleverly 
light-heavyweight champion of the world: what a feeling. This has been my 
destiny, and something that I'd dreamt about since I was 11 years old. It's the 
night I've dreamt of and now I'm living my dream."

Of the pre-fight shenanigans he said: "Its been an unbelievable last few days 
– I couldn't believe it at times, but I needed to stay focused, I got stuck in 
and I enjoyed the performance. I felt really sharp."

Cleverly had bounded from his corner for the opening round in which the boxers 
traded impressive blows, though the champion's work was the slicker. In the 
third, proceedings got fruity: a left from the older man rocked Cleverly and, 
for a dangerous few moments, a wobble rippled through his legs. Cleverlybut the 
Welshman decided to snarl his way out of this, slapping his own right cheek 
while goading Kuziemski to come back on to him. If this had been the visitor's 
round, though, he now entered his last.
 