
The Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 
president, Reinhard Rauball, said his club’s thoughts were with the family and 
friends of a fan who died during their 2-0 win over Mainz in the Bundesliga on 
Sunday.

One fan passed away and another was in a stable condition in hospital after 
they both suffered heart attacks at the Westfalenstadion. “In the name of 
Borussia Dortmund I wish to express my heartfelt sympathy and condolences to 
the families of those affected,” Rauball said. “Our thoughts are with them.”

Fans of both clubs fell silent when the news filtered through that the fan had 
died. Dortmund led 1-0 at the time through Marco Reus but, with football put 
into stark perspective, their Japanese midfielder Shinji Kagawa, who scored the 
second, did not celebrate, though his goal confirmed the three points for 
Dortmund.

“We were informed pretty quickly in the stands of what had happened,” Rauball 
said. “From that moment on the game fell right into the background. I could no 
longer concentrate on it. The fans’ reaction was spontaneous. I’ve never 
experienced anything like it.


“I can only pay a huge compliment to all of the fans for the way in which they 
expressed their sorrow and respect in this way, in a unified manner. I take my 
hat off to the Mainz fans who, without exception, joined us in mourning and 
stopped supporting their team.

Bayern Munich hit Werder Bremen for five as Thomas Müller bags brace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/12/bayern-munich-werder-bremen-bundesliga-match-report>
“The scarves held in the air when You’ll Never Walk Alone was sung has my 
utmost respect. It shows how deeply rooted honour and respect of each other 
exists and can be expressed in such a short period of time, and I can only take 
my hat off to that.”

Most Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
clubs immediately showed their solidarity and paid their tributes to the 
deceased in response to a Dortmund tweet. Dortmund’s players lined up arm in 
arm in front of the Sudtribune as You’ll Never Walk Alone enveloped the stadium 
following the final whistle.

“Prayers & thoughts to the fan we sadly lost today at the stadium, as well as 
to our 2nd fan now at hospital,” tweeted Henrikh Mkhitaryan.
 