
The celebrations continue for New Zealand entry Giacomo, which has won the 
Sydney toHobart <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/hobart> yacht 
race’s prized Tattersall’s Cup.

The 70-footer was crowned the champion on corrected time by the race committee 
at Hobart’s Constitution Dock on Thursday afternoon – a day and a half after 
she crossed the line in second position behind super maxi Perpetual Loyal.

The blue water classic’s handicap trophy is one of the most revered prizes in 
offshore racing, and her owner and skipper Jim Delegat was understandably 
thrilled with the result in the 72nd edition of the race.

Perpetual Loyal breaks race record to take victory in 2016 Sydney to Hobart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/28/perpetual-loyal-breaks-race-record-to-take-victory-in-2016-sydney-to-hobart>
“We are feeling wonderful. We are ecstatic and excited. This is beyond 
belief,” Delegat said.

It was a superb sail for the Volvo 70, which finished inside the 2012 race 
record by nearly three hours.

Perhaps more impressive was the proximity she kept to the line honours winner 
Loyal. Despite being two-thirds the size of the black behemoth, Giacomo was a 
mere two hours astern of Loyal over the 628 nautical mile course.

Being crowned handicap winner was a sweet moment for Delegat, who was forced 
to retire from the race two years ago after his entry encountered trouble on 
the Tasmanian coast.

Delegat competed alongside his two young sons Nikolas and James in a 13-man 
outfit. “The impressive, hard work for the crew was tireless. It was a race of 
opportunity,” said the skipper, who this year topped his previous best effort 
of sixth over the line.

After three days of ocean racing it could have been another family that 
knocked off Giacomo – the father and son pairing of Sean and Peter Langman.

The Langman’s entrant Maluka of Kermandie was the smallest and oldest boat in 
the fleet that still had a chance to dethrone Giacomo.

But the nine-metre Huon pine marvel was cruelled by the easing wind conditions 
along the south east coast of Tasmania and its chances of victory were wiped 
out early this afternoon – leaving Giacomo the outright winner.

This morning celebrated sailor Adrienne Cahalan crossed the line aboard 
Ragamuffin to become the first woman to compete in 25 Sydney to Hobart yacht 
races.

The navigator – who plotted Wild Oats XI towards two of her race records in 
2005 and 2012 – was sad to see her record tumble, but was consoled by the fact 
it went to another crew she had charted for in Loyal.

All 83 competing boats are expected to be tied up at Constitution Dock by 
Friday morning.
 