
Gianfranco Zola, by reputation perhaps the nicest man in football, found 
himself in the unusual position of having to defend himself against accusations 
of stabbing a fellow manager in the back at the end of his first full day at 
Birmingham City, his appointment having been announcedwithin six hours of the 
unexpected departure of his predecessor, Gary Rowett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
.

An online poll for a local newspaper on Thursday found 83% of Birmingham fans 
would have preferred Rowett to remain in charge. The Englishman, a former Blues 
player, took over in October 2014 with the club 23rd in the Championship and 
proceeded to guide them to a 10th-place finish in both that and the following 
season, and 21 games into this campaign they lie eighth, one point off the 
play-offs.

Gianfranco Zola takes charge at Birmingham City after Rowett sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
Zola insisted there had been nothing untoward in his appointment.

“I know Gary is well considered over here and he deserved to be well 
considered for the job he’s done,” said the club’s new manager, who plans to 
speak to Rowett about the players he has inherited.

“I feel for my predecessor but you have to be professional. I’ve been sacked 
in other jobs and I know how it feels to be in that situation but I didn’t 
blame the man who came after me.”

Zola was evasive when asked about the precise timing of Birmingham’s approach 
but admitted he had been contacted some time ago, following the takeover of the 
club by Trillion Trophy Asia Limited in October, before being offered the 
position “the other day”. “I was first asked some time ago because the club was 
looking, and I said it could be interesting,” Zola said. “After that there was 
nothing else. Trust me, Birmingham is not the only club who asked me my 
interest. I cannot name the others but they were good clubs, I can assure you.”

Zola, who introduced himself to a few senior players on Thursday, will take 
his first training session on Friday morning, with little more than 24 hours to 
prepare for the televised game against Brighton, the first of three matches in 
which he will assess his squad before the opening of the transfer window next 
month.

“It’s a pity because I am stepping into the job with just one day to prepare 
for the game, and what can you do in a day?” he said. “You have to be careful 
not to change too many things because you can produce more damage than 
advantages.

“The strategy [for January] will depend on what I have but I believe the club 
wants to invest money to strengthen the team. It looks to me like they have an 
ambitious plan for this club.

“Let’s put it this way, if they didn’t have very good intentions, probably 
they wouldn’t have done what they have done. They’re taking a risk as well, to 
change a manager who has done pretty well, to bring in a manager like myself.

“They have good ambitions and rightly or wrongly they believe this is a good 
move to take the club to another level. In time we will be able to tell if they 
are right or not.”
 