
It was three years ago that Gianfranco Zola admitted his last attempt to 
conquer the Championshiphad failed and resigned as manager of Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/gianfranco-zola-resigns-watford-manager>
. It was at the end of a nine-game winless run that featured five successive 
home defeats and concluded with his theoretically promotion-chasing team in 
14th place. This week he agreed to have another go at thriving in what he 
describes as “one of the toughest leagues in the world”, this time in charge of 
Birmingham City.

Since his departure from Watford Zola has had a brief and unhappy spell at 
Cagliari and an undistinguished season at al-Arabi in Qatar. His managerial 
reputation may not survive another significant setback butthe appeal of the 
Birmingham job was enough for the 50-year-old to take the risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/brimingham-city-gianfranco-zola-gary-rowett>
. “With my position, with my name, the name I got, I could have waited and 
maybe have got a bigger job,” he said. “But for me it’s about going in a place 
where there is a challenge and where I can prove my ideas are correct.

Gianfranco Zola says he feels for Gary Rowett after taking over at Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/brimingham-city-gianfranco-zola-gary-rowett>
“I came back because every time I don’t work I miss the football, I miss the 
pitch, I miss the training ground. Then when I work I go crazy and I lose my 
hair and I lose my temper. But I feel like I have a lot to say.

“I’ve done some jobs in which I’ve done in my opinion, considering the 
circumstances, extremely well. I’m a proud man. When I do something I like to 
do it well and I believe I’ve got a lot to give. Hopefully I’ll be giving it to 
this club.”

In theory Birmingham require only a marginal improvement to thrive. Rowett 
departed with the team a point off the play-offs; should they beat Brighton on 
Saturday they could end the weekend in third place.

Zola will be expected to achieve results while simultaneously transforming the 
team’s style of play. After the 4-0 defeat at Newcastle on Saturday that 
persuaded Birmingham’s new owner, the Chinese businessman Puel Suen Cho Hung, 
that Rowett could no longer be trusted with his team’s future, the then manager 
admitted his side’s results had been achieved “through hard work, determination 
and drive, not because we have passed teams off the park”. Zola will expect his 
players to adapt swiftly to a more technical style.

“The last experiences I had confirmed what I thought that you can improve 
players,” Zola said. “Of course you cannot make a Messi or a Maradona. But even 
players who are not considered very skilful, if you coach them in a certain way 
you can make them better. And that is the first reason why I like to do this 
job. But at the end of the day, even if I get the team playing tiki-taka 
football, if I don’t get results, you know what will happen. Everyone has to 
get results in what he feels is the best way. Gary has done it his way. For me, 
to try to get better results, play my way – that is my challenge. We’ll see 
what happens.”

Zola was supposed to be in sun-kissed Sardinia this weekend but, despite 
unhappy experiences as manager at West Ham and Watford, the call of the English 
bench proved stronger than the lure of the Italian beach. “I didn’t come here 
to take the team backwards,” he said. “I’m here because I want to prove I can 
do a good job, that I can become a better manager. This is my challenge. If I 
see that I stay average, I’ll come here and say thank you very much to 
everybody and I’ll go to the sunshine, very simple.

“The day you feel like you don’t have anything to prove, it’s better you go to 
the beach and stay there and take in the sunshine. In this job, what you did 
before counts to a certain point and then you have to prove yourself every day. 
It’s correct that it’s like that. In my previous jobs I’ve done good things and 
done others that were not as good. This is an opportunity for me to prove my 
qualities as a coach.”
 