
Michel Platini touched down on the runway that separates Spain from Gibraltar 
in May.Uefa’s president had come to visit its 54th and newest member. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/24/gibraltar-uefa-54th-member-spain>
 He had enjoyed the occasion, he said. “I’m sure that the members of Uefa will 
enjoy football in Gibraltar more when it is returned to us,” snapped the 
president of the Spanish league, Javier Tebas, a one-time member of the 
far-right political party Fuerza Nueva. “We’ll invite them then.”

But if Tebas was bitter, and if the political undercurrent is unavoidable, 
particularly with moves towards official status coming in the midst of a 
dispute between Spain and the Rock, provoking long queues at the border, 
warships on the sea and sabre rattling in parliament, for football fans in
Gibraltar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gibraltar> there is only 
excitement.

Platini had been invited to attend the Rock Cup final. And now, having been 
accepted as a member of Uefa,Gibraltar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gibraltar> are preparing to play their 
first ever official competitive match, against Poland.

Gibraltar was ceded to the British in the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 and the 
Gibraltar FA was founded in 1895. They had been trying to gain acceptance to 
international football since 1999. Fifa passed the decision on to Uefa, which 
initially resisted on the grounds that Gibraltar is not a sovereign state but 
it was forced to back down by the Court of Arbitration for Sport because that 
stipulation was not in force when Gibraltar first applied for membership.

Spain resisted, with the national federation threatening to pull out if 
Gibraltar was included. But in October 2012 it was provisionally allowed in and 
formal acceptance followed in May 2013. Platini said that the “vast majority” 
of members had voted to include them. Spain did not. The Gib team’s manager, 
Allen Bula, insisted that this was no political act and nor were they trying to 
make a statement; Gibraltar just wanted to play football.

Platini’s appearance at the Rock Cup was his first trip to see them. If he 
wants to do so again this time, he will have to travel 150 miles west. 
Gibraltar do not have a grass pitch, with games being played on the astroturf 
at Victoria stadium, right next to the airport runway. A new stadium is being 
built on Europa Point, on the southside of the rock. But until then they must 
look elsewhere. Spain’s Football Federation have refused to play Gibraltar and 
will not host them, so the game will be held in the Estádio Algarve in Portugal.

They have been there before: around 500 fans travelled for a 0-0 draw with 
Slovakia in November last year. Since then Gibraltar have celebrated their 
first ever official goal, Roy Chipolina scoring in a 4-1 loss to the Faroe 
Islands, and their first ever victory, thanks to a Kyle Casciaro strikeeffort 
against Malta. Now comes their first ever competitive match.Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> are joined in the group by the 
world champions, Germany, while Scotland and the Republic of Ireland are there 
too.

With a population of 28,000 Gibraltar are the smallest member of Uefa, just 
behind San Marino. When their squad was named for this game it included three 
England-based players: Preston North End’s Scott Wiseman, Jake Gosling from
Bristol Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> and Adam 
Priestly, who plays for Farsley in the Northern Counties East football League. 
Gibraltar’s strongest side, Lincoln Red Imps, account for 10 of their players.

Gibraltar have played five official games, winning one, drawing two and losing 
two. They have taken on tiny nations. Now they will take on Robert Lewandowski 
and his team-mates, then the world champions. They do not expect to qualify and 
nor do they expect to win often, if at all, but that does not matter, as the 
excitement surrounding this game and a meeting with Germany shows. Just playing 
them is something to celebrate.
 