
Such is the luck of the draw. While the Premier League's top two are obliged 
to bust their guts in Manchester this weekend, the team on their coat tails got 
to send out the reserves for little more than a training exercise. If Harry 
Redknapp could have written his own script for the third round of theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, the only thing he might have 
added was a little more sizzle.

As it was, Tottenham cruised into the next round courtesy of three strikes 
that owed a varying degree to the craft of Giovani dos Santos. Of all the 
fringe players given a chance, the Mexican made the most compelling case.

The case for a move, that is. Redknapp admitted that he expects Giovani to 
leave during the transfer window. The Barcelona youth product, who moved to 
White Hart Lane with quite a fanfare four years ago, has never fulfilled 
expectation. Redknapp intimated that attitude and application have been a 
problem: "He's got talent but he has to work harder in training to get fitter. 
He had a real opportunity to play here if he was at it. But he's looking to 
move back to Spain. Let's see what the window brings."

Redknapp was happy to see some more important squad players in need of game 
time. Of the 10 changes he made from the side who kept Tottenham's league 
position rosy four days ago with victory against West Brom, there was a notable 
return to action for Michael Dawson, who last played in August when a very 
different-looking Spurs were beaten 5-1 by Manchester City. He was 
understandably rusty if not under particular pressure. In a relaxed atmosphere, 
the player who really enjoyed expressing himself was Niko Kranjcar, whose deft 
passing had both managers purring.

It was the Croatian's threaded ball to Giovani that forced the opening goal. 
The Mexican advanced to send a delicate chip over theCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> keeper, Scott Brown, and the 
ball was drifting comfortably into the net of its own accord, but Jermain Defoe 
seized the opportunity to make sure, tapping in from all of a whisker's 
distance from the goalline.

When the replay was shown on the big screens, the Tottenham supporters let out 
an audible chuckle at the sight of Defoe pickpocketing his own team-mate. It 
was cheeky, but the kind of hunger to make sure it is your name on the 
scoresheet is no bad thing in a striker.

Tottenham doubled their lead just before half-time. Giovani and Defoe combined 
again, this time to tee up Roman Pavlyuchenko, who swept home with a simple 
sidefoot.

Cheltenham were a little bolder in the second half and their manager, Mark 
Yates, slung on a load of attackers, including their lively top scorer Darryl 
Duffy, who was clearly unfortunate not to start the game. They did not have 
enough composure to snatch a consolation from a couple of chances, but 
Cheltenham head off for a five-day break in Portugal with their League Two 
promotion chances, and their morale, intact.

"I am massively proud," Yates said. "We showed we have got decent players and 
people are starting to take notice of us."

Tottenham added a third just before full time, scored by Giovani with the aid 
of a ricochet and a hint of handball in the buildup. If there is business to be 
done in the transfer window – and not only regarding the wantaway Mexican – 
then Tottenham are willing to do it. Redknapp did not disguise his continued 
admiration for central defenders Gary Cahill and Chris Samba, and suggested 
chairman Daniel Levy is itching to make a marquee signing to boot. Spurs 
clearly intend to roll on.
 