
I’m originally from Helsinki, Finland. I majored in English philology at the 
University of Helsinki, and began an ongoing relationship not only with my 
British boyfriend but also with the UK while on Erasmus exchange in Cardiff in 
2012. I’ve been coming back ever since: first to intern at the Finnish 
Institute in London, then to work at Oxford University Press. Though I’ve lived 
in Finland again since autumn, I think one of my feet will always be in the UK 
– I follow the news on a daily basis, most often through the Guardian website.

Language and writing are my thing. I work at Finland’s largest communications 
agency, Miltton. It’s such an exciting environment to be in: you can go from 
traditional PR, such as writing a press release or translating content from 
Finnish into English, to creating and selling a groundbreaking concept based on 
an idea you’ve just had, at a moment’s notice. Our staff median age is only 
about 32 and we’ve got people from all over the world, including the 
Philippines, Germany, and Bristol. In my spare time, I work as a blog editor for
Asymptote <http://www.asymptotejournal.com/>, an online publication of 
literature in translation: we publish reviews, author and translator 
interviews, international literature news, and much more every day.

I started reading the Guardian online about the same time my course began in 
2007. I purchase the printed version whenever I can, because it turns browsing 
into a reading experience that has a beginning and an end. Besides, you can’t 
beat the smell of ink. Newspapers in Finland don’t have political leanings in 
the way they do in the UK, but it’s actually a part of why I enjoy reading the 
Guardian: I know where it stands on issues, and it’s a view I share. It’s 
important to recognise the social and cultural bubble you live in, though, and 
that the sources you rely on tend to enforce it. It’s only become more obvious 
this year, thanks to Brexit and the US presidential elections.

There are so many reasons to read the Guardian: Sali Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sali-hughes>’ recommendations, the advice 
columns (and their comments),Oliver Burkeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/oliverburkeman>, Hadley Freeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hadleyfreeman>, the entire books section, 
the TV live blogs. Often, even if the article itself is lacking, the comments 
below more than make up for it. I also trust the Guardian to tell me about the 
latest (undoubtedly ridiculous) fads and give me intelligent analysis on any 
global news. If there are breaking stories, I check the Guardian website before 
any Finnish sources. I’m going to keep a particularly close eye on its Brexit 
reports: I don’t know where my journey is taking me next, but I hope I will 
continue to be welcome in the UK.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
 