
I am 41 and originally from Stoke-on-Trent but now I live in Nantes. I did my 
PhD at Nottingham University and then worked there as a human biology lecturer 
and education researcher, although now I teach English rather than science. We 
moved to France three years ago when my husband’s former company was bought out 
by a French firm. I don’t know how long we will be here. I used to think that 
home doesn’t really change when you are away, but after recent events I might 
have to rethink that one.

It’s been a great adventure so far; even being surrounded by things you can’t 
understand can be relaxing as you have to let things slide. Occasionally, of 
course, the language or cultural barrier is insurmountable, and then I get a 
fleeting insight into how it feels to be immutably “different”, since I will 
always sound like René Artois from ‘Allo ‘Allo. Most of the time, though, 
people are friendly and helpful and I plough on, making well-meaninggrandes 
bêtises. Probably the most scarring to date was trying to describe a new skate 
park’s half-pipe to some French friends and yet somehow in fact managing to 
describe fellatio instead. I couldn’t be corrected immediately as my new 
so-called friends were all laughing at me too much.

My parents are not particularly political and so the only newspaper I remember 
having in the house was our local The Sentinel. I started reading the Guardian 
regularly when I was a student, initially because I really likedGraham Rawle’s 
Lost Consonants <http://www.grahamrawle.com/lostconsonants/>. As I didn’t read 
national newspapers much before, I hadn’t realised they could be so different, 
although a I did a week’s work experience at the Daily Express one summer and 
all I remember is that they wanted me to find pictures of Princess Diana 
wearing similar outfits to Camilla Parker-Bowles. The Guardian (where I failed 
to gain any work experience) was by contrast, a natural fit.

When I have a whole paper to choose from I prefer the sections on the 
environment, health and technology. I also like to read the opinions. I always 
have time forPolly Toynbee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee>. 
The sections I always discard (or give to my friend Ruth) are those on travel 
(I mostly find other people’s holidays so dull) and property (I honestly don’t 
enjoy snooping around other people’s houses).

The series of stories that stands out most in my mind was the exposé that 
started in 2011 about phone hacking at News International. The whole affair was 
a great piece of journalism, although the subject was so tawdry. The mesh 
between the press and Westminster was fetid, though after both Brexit and the 
US elections I am feeling almost resigned about it now. I was a keen supporter 
of remain as I appreciate what the EU has brought to the UK in terms of 
research, legal protection, employment and peace. I found that many of the 
articles I read as external links from friends on Facebook or via Twitter were 
from the Guardian online. I found their style to be more reasoned, less 
simplistic and usually less fear-mongering than the some of the other stuff out 
there.

I do worry that I am rolling around like a fat pup in like-minded opinion. I 
follow people with quite different viewpoints on Twitter and that is always 
insightful, if complicated. I think Brexit was motivated by a genuine desire 
for change, but for me the way it happened has just left the bit from Animal 
Farm about looking “from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man 
again”, and how it was “impossible to say which was which”, rolling around 
inside my head.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
 