
The Professional Footballers’ Association chief executive, Gordon Taylor, has 
apologised to the Hillsborough families for comparing their campaign for 
justice to theChed Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans> case.

Speaking to Sky Sports, Taylor said: “The point I was making was not to 
embarrass or upset anybody at all among the Liverpool supporters. I’m very much 
an admirer of them and they know that.

“That was never my intention but it was the fact that how things at one time 
can be perceived one way but come out very differently with the passage of 
time. If people feel that way [offended] about what I said, I can only 
apologise.”

Taylor, who has backed Evans to return to professional football after the 
striker was released having serving half of a five-year sentence for rape, made 
the apology after he attempted to make a point about miscarriages of justice 
and compared Evans to the Hillsborough families.

“He [Evans] wouldn’t be the first person or persons to be found guilty and 
maintain their innocence and then been proven right,” he said. “If we’re 
talking about things in football we know what happened, what was alleged to 
have happened, at Hillsborough and it’s now unravelling and we’re finding it 
was very different to how it was portrayed at the time, indeed by the police at 
the time.”

On Thursday, Dr Phil Scraton, the academic who was the primary author of the 
Hillsborough Independent Panel report, wrote to Taylor about what he called his 
“crass, insensitive and inappropriate” comments.

Scraton, who has written several books about the disaster and who has worked 
closely with the Hillsborough Family Support Group in making the case for the 
pivotal Hillsborough Independent Panel review, said drawing a parallel with the 
institutional failings surrounding the April 1989 disaster demonstrated “not 
only poor judgment but also extraordinary naivety”.

FA chairman Greg Dyke: no basis for governing body to intervene in Ched Evans 
case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/09/greg-dyke-ched-evans-no-basis-fa-intervene>
Scraton added that Taylor’s comments, which came at the end of week long saga 
that concludedwith Oldham Athletic pulling out of a deal to sign Evans 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/2015/jan/08/ched-evans-signing-called-off-oldham>
, were particularly ill judged given the new inquest into the 96 deaths that is 
ongoing.

“Apart from making such a comment while the new inquests are in session – and 
you will be well aware of the strict contempt restrictions placed by the 
coroner, LJ Goldring, on the publication and broadcasting of comment, 
especially regarding liability – to introduce Hillsborough into the volatile 
public debate regarding Evans’ conviction and his attempt to return to 
employment as a player is, at best, ill-judged,” said Scraton.

“Drawing Hillsborough into the maelstrom that has surrounded the Evans case, 
whatever the dynamics of the public debate about the a convicted rapist’s right 
to employment as a footballer, while suggesting a parallel between these two 
entirely distinct cases, demonstrates not only poor judgment but also 
extraordinary naivety,” wrote Scraton, who is currently seconded to the legal 
teams of the families of those killed in the disaster as a special adviser for 
the duration of the inquests.

“Your comments were made seemingly without consideration of the offence that 
they would cause to bereaved families and survivors. Given your standing within 
the game and your public profile, I suggest that you issue a retraction of your 
comments. It should be accompanied by an apology to the Hillsborough families 
and survivors for the offence that you have caused during what is a sensitive 
and painful time as the inquests proceed into their second year.”

After the report of the Hillsborough Independent Panel was published in 2012, 
the high court ordered a new inquest. That inquest is ongoing in Warrington 
with families of those who were killed attending to sit through the evidence.

It is not the first time Taylor has faced calls to stand down. In 2013, he 
survived calls for his resignation following newspaper reports that he had run 
up gambling debts despite the PFA’s role in helping problem gamblers within the 
game.
 