
Well, that was another strange week and 2015 certainly seems hell-bent on 
trumping its predecessors when it comes to creating football’s Dinner Party 
from Hell XI.Ched Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans>, Dave 
Whelan and John Fashanu can count themselves in. Gordon Taylor has just put his 
name on the door and let’s not forget Eric Hall after his return to television 
and an unexpected opportunity to discuss the “rape schtick” in a salmon blazer, 
blue hankie combo that quickly made you realise he hadn’t changed a bit, 
regrettably.

Remember Eric? It’s been a while since he used to subject us to “monster 
monster” and tick every box when it came to the football agent’s worst 
stereotypes, pigging his way to the bank in the days of Harry Enfield’s 
Loadsamoney and mobile phones the size of bricks. These days you have probably 
managed to miss him unless you live in Billericay or Brentwood and ever tune 
into Phoenix FM. He is fixed up now with a radio gig in Romford and it is 
tempting to wonder how far Channel 4 and ITV had to flick through their contact 
books to find someone to play the pro-Evans role opposite one of the “so-called 
do-gooders” Charlie Webster. Or whether they just went straight to the page 
marked R for Rent‑a-Quote.

Hall certainly reminded us about the line of patter we had missed so much, not 
just the “rape shtick” but the “schmucks” who did not conform with his view 
that everyone should get off Evans’s back.His co-guest was one and got a 
wonderfully patronising “my darling” for her troubles, live on the news. 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/should-ched-evans-play-football-again-video>

Webster, a former Sky Sports presenter, campaigns against sexual abuse because 
she suffered it herself but Hall cut her off mid-sentence – “Why didn’t you 
campaign about Mike Tyson?” – and two thoughts came to mind. One, who can be 
surprised if people look inside football’s bubble sometimes and shudder at what 
they see? And, two, what does it say for Evans that the bloke they hired to 
talk on his behalf was voted fourth in a Most Hated Man in Britain poll in 1996 
and memorably once claimed Freddie Mercury had written Killer Queen about him – 
with the back-up story, just in case anyone doubted him, that “I don’t want to 
be big-headed, he fancied me like mad”.

At least we know what to expect with Hall and if the television researchers 
want to give football a semblance of credibility they will stick a black marker 
pen through his name next time. Yet it is not supposed to be that way with 
Taylor, chief executive of the Professional Footballers’ Association, where it 
is reported some colleagues want him to retire and he apparently now feels 
qualified enough to indicate there may have been a miscarriage of justice in a 
rape trial he did not attend.

Who knew as well that Steve Bruce  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/09/ched-evans-oldham-move-steve-bruce>
had trained as a defence lawyer and understood more about the intricacies of 
the Evans case than the 12 jurors who sat through the trial, saw the witnesses 
take the stand and devoted themselves to eight days of evidence and 
cross-examination in court?

“I might be upsetting people but there is a question of the rape and how he’s 
been convicted,” Bruce volunteered. “When you look in detail – and I don’t 
think most people have really, because they have just seen Ched Evans as a 
convicted rapist – Ched has got a case.”

And there we have it: the manager of Hull City putting a jury right on the 
basis of some newspaper reports, a bit of fiddling around on Google and a few 
clicks on a highly dubious campaign website.

Taylor had already blundered in by saying that Evans would not have been the 
first person who would ultimately be “proved right” and, sorry to labour this 
point, but as someone who has worked in news, covered criminal trials and knows 
the meticulous detail of these events (and how little is reported) it is always 
baffling that anyone should presume their armchair verdict is better than the 
jury’s. Maybe Evans is scum; maybe he is innocent. Maybe both. Bruce might end 
up feeling vindicated – who knows? Just don’t position yourself as an authority 
on the subject on the basis of second‑hand scraps.

Taylor managed to go even further with his comparison to the injustice 
suffered by the Hillsborough families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/09/gordon-taylor-apologises-ched-evans-hillsborough-comparison>
, necessitating an apology in which he pretty much said the same again, just in 
different words, and had to apologise for the apology, which is never a good 
look.

Presumably, he will just sit tight now and wait for football’s outrage to move 
on. It always does eventually, but is anyone else engulfed by the deja vu of 
wondering how he justifies that salary, last disclosed as £984,000 a year, and 
what a bewildering organisation the PFA appears with someone so spectacularly 
cringeworthy – the best‑paid union official in Britain, no less – as its 
figurehead?

No doubt there are some good people behind the scenes, but could you name even 
three of the other senior figures? Ritchie Humphreys, of Chesterfield, is 
rumoured to be the chairman. Yet you have done better than me if you have heard 
him utter a single word on the Evans case; or anything of relevance since he 
took the role 14 months ago. Otherwise, it feels like a one-man show – and that 
is never good when the man in question appears to have his brain permanently on 
cruise control.

Speaking of which, let’s hope Oldham can now go back to the days when it was 
never really any more controversial than that timeChaddy Owl beat up Bloomfield 
Bear <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hz2z8is3hks> at Blackpool. There are, 
however, still a couple of things that don’t quite stack up. Those revelations 
about death threats, for starters, and the specific warning about what would 
happen to a staff member’s daughter. Any journalist ringing Greater Manchester 
police has been told the same thing: that they have checked with the club and 
the sponsors and been told of zero threats and nothing worse than the usual 
“low-level abuse” on Twitter. So work that one out.

Evans, meanwhile, was showing a selflessness that had not been apparent 
previously by explaining it was him who ended the talks out of consideration to 
others and – this is almost touching – the “most significant issue” was that 
his signing might put off sponsors and jeopardise the building of Oldham’s new 
stand. “That would mean workers would lose their jobs and others would be put 
at risk,” he said. “That would simply not be fair.”

Very sweet. But let’s just walk through that one again. One of the sponsors is 
Verlin Rainwater Solutions, a guttering firm whose name went up on one of the 
stands in exchange for repairing various leaks. Mecca Bingo and Nando’s 
contribute nothing more than £2,000 per year and a few half-time prizes. 
ZenOffice’s annual input is little more than £10,000 and Sports Direct had 
privately made it clear it was going nowhere. The stand is funded largely by a 
£5.7m packageOldham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> council 
agreed in 2011 and started going up in October, opening at the start of next 
season.

Confused? Well, it isn’t easy to know what is genuine and what is spin – but 
this is football in 2015, when it feels increasingly like we should be 
suspicious of every official statement and the champions, Manchester City, have 
just been exposed as prolific benders of the truth and still appear to be 
struggling to get their story straight when it comes to the Mysterious Case of 
Frank Lampard.

If nothing else, it is always nice when the mistruths are shown up and there 
isn’t the proper space to explain how much I enjoyed Dave Beasant’s 
deconstruction the other night of Fashanu’s warped Wimbledon memories, 
including the peculiar observation from “Fash” that the Crazy Gang were “the 
brothers I never had” (he did have a brother).

So, yes, it has been an odd start to the year. When Marlon King was serving a 
prison sentence for sexual assault and ABH in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/aug/15/marlon-king-return-football>
 Taylor released a statement that is worth reflecting on now. “The PFA does not 
represent players when they have broken the law and been convicted on 
non-football matters.”

It does now, clearly, making up the rules as it goes along, while the rest of 
us watch through the gaps in our fingers.

Classic fanzines should not vanish in the blogosphere

Back in the day, it used to be that supporters found their collective voice in 
fanzines. They went by wonderfully imaginative names such asFly Me To The Moon 
(Middlesbrough) andBrian Moore’s Head Looks Uncannily Like London Planetarium 
(Gillingham).

They were stapled together, self‑produced and scruffily endearing, and over 
the years you had to admire their dedication. “Look out your window,”West Stand 
Bogs, taking its usual place outside Barnsley’s ground, instructed its Twitter 
followers recently. “You see that torrential rain? You know why that is? 
Fanzine day. That’s why.” And that has often been the fanzine editor’s lot: 
standing in the cold for hours on end, trying not to look too put out when 
someone asks if it is the programme.

The numbers have been steadily dwindling and Red Issue will be the latest to 
call it a day this weekend after almost 26 years operating outside Manchester 
United and a brief period when the club stocked it on their own premises. 
“Always keen to help, Alex Ferguson initially gave approval for Red Issue to be 
sold in the official souvenir shop,” theManchester Evening News reported in 
March 1989. “But then he read it – and copies of the 50p magazine were 
withdrawn from sale!”

Red Issue has been a bastion of dependable cynicism ever since, spiky and 
rebellious and living up to the observation in the same newspaper report that 
“fanzines go for the jugular, exposing foibles and indiscretions without mercy”.

The final issue is No295 and my hunch is that it has grown weary of fighting 
the fight. One columnist sums it up: “You can only kick for so many years 
before the toe caps on your boots wear out.”

What a shame, though, to see the fanzine culture slowly dying out. Red Issue 
is one of the few that has kept up decent sales but others have disappeared as 
a direct result of the internet age. It’s a time of blogs, podcasts and 
message-boards, and supporters have other ways these days to read about their 
teams, connect with one another and affiliate themselves with the kind of 
groups that have just persuaded Vincent Tan to return Cardiff City from red to 
blue.

At least some old classics – A Love Supreme (Sunderland), The Gooner (Arsenal) 
andA Kick Up The Rs (QPR), to name but three – are still operating. Long may it 
continue and if you remember when it didn’t feel like a proper match day unless 
you came away with one you will understand why they still matter – and why we 
should embrace the ones that are still going strong.

The Massey mystery

Has anyone heard from referees’ chief Mike Riley lately? The question is asked 
not because his predecessor,Keith Hackett, has openly questioned his leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/07/keith-hackett-referee-mike-riley>
 and recommended dropping Mike Jones, Andre Marriner, Lee Mason, Chris Foy and 
Lee Probert from the Premier League list. Or because of Graham Poll’s claim 
that Riley should be fired. It is, however, blindingly obvious that the 
referees and their assistants are suffering a collective loss of form (Jon Moss 
did exceedingly well to avoid Hackett’s list) and Riley could at least offer a 
few words about what has gone wrong and what needs to be done to put it right. 
He could also explain when Sian Massey is back. Massey has not had a 
top-division game all season because of an unspecified injury – and she has 
certainly been missed.
 