
Noé Pamarot put it best. "Not even Hitchcock could have dreamed up a scene 
like this," the Granada centre-back said. A series of interlocking stories came 
to a head, building to a violent climax late on a Saturday night only to leave 
everyone hanging on a little longer. There's one more, dramatic chapter to come 
yet: the season finale on Sunday night. A bitter battle for survival. Terror, 
suspense, paranoia; conspiracy and accusation. Whistle blowers, money and 
power. Suitcases full of cash. Suspicious minds and suspicious characters. And 
in the middle of it all, a man. A man in the wrong place and at the wrong time.

Carlos Clos Gómez, the referee, could feel them closing in. When he blew the 
final whistle on Granada v Real Madrid, it should have been the end. Instead it 
was just the beginning. Suddenly, he was surrounded by furious footballers. 
Abel Resino, the Granada coach, sprinted from the bench holding his head, never 
more Tommy Lee Jones than he was now, and piled into the crowd, grabbing at his 
players, tearing them apart and throwing them angrily to one side. But it was 
too late; the pursuit was in full flow. He could not stop them. Granada's 
Moisés Hurtado called Clos Gómez a thief. Team-mate Guilherme Siqueira called 
him asinverguenza: brass necked, shameless.

Out came the red card. Once. Twice. It was no deterrent. As the crowd grew 
bigger and angrier, the Granada winger Dani Benítez threw a bottle at the 
referee. It flew, almost in slow motion, past the crowd and hit him in the 
face. Benítez turned away, escaping the scene. But the linesman saw him and 
made a run for it, making sure he took down his number. The referee backed off, 
the pack kept pursuing. Riot police came across and, sheltering him under their 
shields, ushered him into the sanctuary of the tunnel. Only it was no 
sanctuary. Once there, Siqueira called him a son of a bitch. The club's 
delegate, Pedro Navarro, insulted him too. Another Granada player, Alex Geijo 
told him he had "fucked our entire season."

That, at least, is what he said according to the referee's report. It took a 
little longer than normal for the report to emerge because the internet 
connection in his dressing room was cut. So was the hot water. He phoned 
through the basics; three hours later, from the hotel, he sent the rest. The 
door to the dressing room was locked but someone was knocking at the door. 
Kicking at it, repeatedly. Shouting. It was Granada's goalkeeping coach. 
Eventually, he broke the lock. When he encountered the match day delegate, he 
spat: "you're dead, you son of a bitch."

The referee couldn't get a connection; reporters could. Soon, the match report 
was up on Granada's website. "Granada couldn't do it against 12 men," ran the 
headline. The referee, it said, had been "pernicious"; this was "another 
lamentable display from Clos Gómez." Up in the director's box, the club's 
president, Quique Pina, insisted: "the referee can go back to [his home town] 
happy and they'll build a statue for him." Showered and changed now, presumably 
calmer, Hurtado sought him out once more. More insults, more accusations. "They 
sent him here to rob us," Hurtado told the media.

So what exactly did Clos Gómez do? Well, that's the thing. It's hard to avoid 
the simple answer: he got it right. He gave Madrid a penalty, which was as 
correct as it was cretinous – Hurtado dragged Cristiano Ronaldo round the waist 
and tumbled to the ground on top of him, however much both players pushed and 
however much Hurtado tried to claim that the Portuguese had provoked and 
invented the whole thing. And he blew the final whistle when time was up. The 
fact that Granada were not allowed to take the corner, their final chance to 
get a goal, made it sting, but time had gone. It was not him who gave Madrid 
the penalty that led to the equaliser, it was Hurtado, and it was not him who 
gave Madrid their second goal either. It was, rather, an own goal from David 
Cortés. In the 93rd minute.

Finally back at home, on the television station La Sexta, Benítez was 
repentant. "I lost my head," he said. "I went to the referee's dressing room to 
say sorry but he was locked in and did not want to open the door." When he was 
asked what he would say to the referee now, Benítez replied: "sorry … but I 
would also ask him to understand." We have been, he added, "playing for our 
lives all year long."

"We had it all in our hands and it all got thrown away," said Resino, 
"sometimes the players are so tense, there is so much pressure that it is hard 
to control themselves."

Granada had waited 35 years to return to the top flight and it looked like 
they would survive. It was the penultimate game of the season and they had 
started the night virtually safe: 42 points put them five points off the 
relegation zone, with Sporting on 34, Zaragoza on 37, Rayo on 40 and Villarreal 
on 41. Sure, they were playing Real Madrid, but they were playing a hungover 
Real Madrid. And after five minutes, they were 1-0 up, Franco Jara dashing all 
the way through. Safety was within touching distance. Better still, four 
minutes later, Zaragoza were 1-0 down against Racing Santander. Soon, Rayo were 
trailing to Sevilla. And there was no sign of a goal from Villarreal. Sporting 
were beating Betis, but they could not catch Granada anyway.

Results shifted: Rayo lost 5-2 and watched as absolutely everything else went 
against them too. Zaragoza were all over Racing. An equaliser came quickly 
(after just 11 minutes); with chance after chance going begging, the winner 
took an age. Eventually Angel Lafita got it in the 79th minute. Zaragoza 2-1 
Racing. Amazingly, Zaragoza had a chance: when Manolo Jiménez went into the 
press conference after the game, he was given a round of applause. His mind was 
cast back to his days as a player, days when he played alongside the Scot Ted 
McMinn. "For a minute there thought Lafita was Ramón Vázquez or Postner," he 
said.

Still, Granada looked safe. Sporting had 37 points, Zaragoza 40, Rayo 40, 
Villarreal 42 and Granada 45. At almost exactly the same time as Zaragoza got 
the winner, though, the penalty was given against Granada. It was the 80th 
minute. Ronaldo scored. Still, Granada were safe. Sporting had 37 points, 
Zaragoza 40, Rayo 40, Villarreal 42 and Granada 43. Then Valencia scored; this 
was even better. Sporting 37, Zaragoza 40, Rayo 40, Villarreal 41, Granada 43. 
But then Cortés's awful own goal put them on edge once more: Sporting 37, 
Zaragoza 40, Rayo 40, Villarreal 41, Granada 42. Next week, Granada face Rayo, 
Sporting travel to Málaga and Zaragoza take on nothing-to-play-for Getafe. 
"There's still a game left," Jiménez insisted, but no one doubts that they will 
win.

Least of all the Granada president, Quique Pina – and that was the murky 
backdrop to the whole sorry scenario. Zaragoza have won four of their last 
five, eight of their last 10. And as for all that talk about Jimenez's 
bollocks, Pina thinks it is all bollocks. He says there is something fishy 
going on. In the buildup to this weekend's games he had already complained 
about a club president with an "unusual surname" – Agapito Iglesias, the 
Zaragoza president. There were five teams implicated in the battle to avoid the 
two relegation places and there still are. But Granada's fate depends mostly on 
whether or not Zaragoza catch them. After Saturday night's game, Pina was asked 
if he believed in the honesty of the competition. His reply was succinct: "not 
much." He continued: "I do not trust in thelimpieza [literally, cleanness] of a 
director who I do not see as clean and who many of us in the game know has not 
got good intentions."

If the tension and anxiety, the edginess provoked by suspicions about their 
greatest rivals to fight off relegation, explained the reaction in part it did 
not tell the whole story. Clos Gómez is also the referee whose assistant was 
hit by an umbrella at Granada in November – something Pina was keen to point 
out – but he was guilty of one crime above all: never mind the fact that his 
decisions had been correct, he is from Zaragoza, hence Pina's remark about 
building him a statue.

"That," admitted Benítez, "was in my head – and all sorts of things go through 
your mind." All week, they had been chewing on that fact; on Saturday night it 
exploded. "It is a disgrace that a referee from Zaragoza takes charge of our 
game," said Roberto the goalkeeper. Benítez said he had been told that, worse 
still, Clos Gómez's family are season-ticket holders at Zaragoza. "It is a 
disgrace that a referee from Zaragoza was in charge," said the midfielder Mikel 
Rico, "with a referee from Granada, Zaragoza would not have won."

There is no way of knowing that of course, and the presumption of guilt – so 
easily adopted, so lightly exclaimed, so often a central plank in Spanish 
football, where there are ludicrous conspiracies at every turn – does 
incalculable damage to the sport. Why would agranadino referee necessarily 
ensure that Zaragoza did not win? And, but for their own mistakes Granada would 
have won anyway, even with azaragozano in charge. Their mistakes cost them on 
Saturday and might cost them next week too: when they play Rayo for survival, 
they will be without Hurtado and Siqueira, while bottle-throwing Benítez faces 
a ban that could be as long as six months. Abel Resino, the one man to have 
come out of this with his dignity enhanced, noted: "We're damaging ourselves."

And yet they did have a point. Sending a referee from Zaragoza to referee this 
game was asking for trouble, another example of a sad, inescapable reality: 
Spanish football is played by geniuses andrun by idiots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/dec/06/osasuna-barcelona-la-liga-train>
. Another mistake from footballing authorities who, far from protecting and 
promoting the game, damage it at every turn. It is not enough for Caesar's wife 
to be above suspicion, she must appear to be above suspicion too. A referee's 
home city should not matter but in an atmosphere of accusations and distrust it 
does. In Spain, sadly, it does. The referees' committee made it far too easy 
for the usual discourse to emerge yet again.

At the end of every season, the talk begins: the maletíntakes centre stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/may/04/europeanfootball.sport1>. A 
suitcase here, a suitcase there; results for sale. Within the game, many are 
convinced it happens. The vice-president of the league told the newspaper AS 
that there might be seven or eight games a season subject to sale. But no one 
ever provides any evidence and when they do – it is not so long ago that 
newspapers published incriminating recorded conversations of games for sale in 
the race for First Division promotion – nothing happens. No real investigations 
are launched; countless unsubtle hints are. The suspicion, the stink, clings to 
everyone. Accusations are made with impunity and the more accusations are made, 
the more people become convinced. In a sense, the more it becomes justified too.
Well, everyone does it. There may be something going on – given what is at 
stake and the people involved, it might even be naive to assume that everything 
is above board – but the ease with which accusations are made shows an alarming 
irresponsibility. "When the river makes a noise, it is because there is water 
in it," said the Rayo president, "and right now it is making a lot of noise."

That suggestion, that possibility, that nagging doubt, eats away at 
everything. If sport does not have honesty, it has nothing. All that heroism, 
all that drama, all that effort, has an asterix by it. *Yes, but. What if. No 
one is presumed innocent. There is no smoke without fire, they say. What there 
is, is a smoke screen.

There is still another week to go. Granada could still survive. They should 
still survive: they need only a point and even a defeat could be enough. They 
will have to do it without three of their players. If they do not, they now 
have their excuse even though it is no excuse. This weekend, the referee got it 
right. Clos Gómez did not fuck Granada's entire season. If any one did, Granada 
did.

Results and talking points

Zaragoza 2-1 Racing, Athletic 0-0 Getafe, Mallorca 1-0 Levante, Granada 1-2 
Madrid, Sevilla 5-2 Rayo, Barcelona 4-0 Espanyol, Sporting 2-1 Betis, Atlético 
2-1 Málaga, Valencia 1-0 Villarreal, Osasuna 1-0 Real Sociedad

• Pep Guardiola's emotional farewell was not the only one this weekend. 
Goodbye, too, to the classiest player anyone can remember: Fredi Kanouté played 
his last game at the Sánchez Pizjuán … and marked the occasion with a goal. The 
shirt he wore underneath said simply: thanks.

• Pichichi or league? A season later, the roles are reversed and so are the 
arguments. Leo Messi added four more goals which, like Ronaldo's rush last 
season, have little value in terms of the league but a huge value in terms of 
the top scorer award. He is now on an astonishing 50 league goals for the 
season. Ronaldo is on a not-much-less-incredible 45.

That final-day scenario then … 

Relegation: Granada 42; Villarreal 41; Rayo 40; Zaragoza 40; Sporting 37.

• Rayo and Granada face each other, Villarreal go to Champions League-chasing 
Atlético, Zaragoza travel to nothing-to play-for Getafe and Sporting go to 
Malaga, who are also chasing a Champions League.

• If Sporting, Rayo and Zaragoza all end on 40 points, Sporting survive. If 
Rayo, Zaragoza and Villarreal end on 41 points. Rayo go down. If Rayo and 
Villarreal end on 41 points, Rayo go down. If Villarreal and Zaragoza both end 
on 41 points, Villarreal go down. If Rayo and Zaragoza both end on 41 points, 
Zaragoza go down. If there is tie on 42 points between Granada and Villarreal, 
Granada go down.

Europe, Champions League: Valencia are third. So, the fight for fourth, fifth 
and sixth – Malaga 55, Atlético 53, Mallorca (amazingly) 52, Levante 52, 
Osasuna 51, Athletic 49, Sevilla 49.

Fixtures: Levante-Athletic, Real Madrid-Mallorca, Espanyol-Sevilla, 
Malaga-Sporting, Villarreal-Atlético, Racing-Osasuna.

• View the latest La Liga table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball/tables>
 