
The Hibernian manager, Terry Butcher, admitted he was "bitterly disappointed" 
with his side as they crashed out of theScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> following a shock 3-2 defeat 
at home to Championship sideRaith Rovers. Hibs – beaten finalists in the past 
two years – fell to their fourth straight loss in an thrilling contest.

Raith twice went ahead in the first period through goals from Kevin Moon and 
Dougie Hill but Sam Stanton and Michael Nelson responded before half time In an 
absorbing second period, Grant Anderson scored the winning goal with a header 
from a Joe Cardle delivery.

Michael O'Halloran and James Dunne struck their first goals for St Johnstone 
as the Perth side responded to their League Cup loss with a 4-0 Scottish Cup 
triumph atForfar. Saints were determined to lift the gloom after their 
semi-final defeat by Aberdeen by the same scoreline and first-half goals from 
Stevie May and Frazer Wright set them up for a comfortable fifth-round victory 
at Station Park. The League One side hit the goal frame twice but O'Halloran 
came off the bench to net his first goal since his January move from Bolton and 
on-loan Stevenage midfielder Dunne completed the goalscoring with his debut 
strike.

Stenhousemuir were sent out of the Cup following a 2-0 defeat to Albion Rovers
. Despite Rovers playing in a league below Stenhousemuir, they more than 
managed to hold their own and book their place in the quarter-finals.

Ross McMillan scored a freak own goal in the 23rd minute when the defender 
headed beyond Chris Smith. In the 66th minute, midfielder Gary Phillips put 
Rovers 2-0 ahead with a left-foot shot from the centre of the box for his 
second goal of the season. Sean Higgins almost provided a nervy finish, but his 
effort came back off the crossbar in the final minute.

Billy McKay headed a 74th-minute equaliser to prevent Inverness being upset at 
Stranraer on the 14th anniversary of their famous shock win over Celtic. Aaron 
Doran had put the League Cup finalists ahead at Stair Park five minutes before 
the interval before Martin Grehan restored parity from the penalty spot on the 
stroke of half-time and Jamie Longworth put the League One side ahead.

However, McKay struck two minutes later to secure a 2-2 draw and a fifth-round 
replay and maintain Caley Thistle's hopes of a cup double. Colin Nish struck 
the winner asDumbarton beat Alloa 1-0. On the half-hour, Scott Agnew hooked the 
ball across the goal and Nish was there to tap in from close range with 31 
minutes played.
 