
The Army played the Royal Navy on Saturday, and good ol' rugger was itself 
again and so was Twickers. Who cared that the two platoons of chaps enacted 
their private war to reverberating echoes bouncing round the cavernous concrete 
suburban emptiness. They have done so annually in one of Christendom's oldest 
sportin' fixtures - first played at The Oval in 1878 when the matelots won by a 
goal and a try to a goal, probably because they had an extra man as the Khakis' 
skipper, the nicely named Captain RA Ballantyne RA, had been posted to garrison 
Sudan that very morning.

Saturday's match - for the Willis Carroon Trophy, wouldn't you know - might 
have offered spiritual balm for the diehard old union ghosts which had been 
wafting around in anguish only the Saturday before when their tabernacle of 
righteousness was used to stage the celebrations of their blighted enemy, in 
the shape of the rugby league Challenge Cup final.

Such purgatorial distress will be temporary, anyway. Soon those reactionary 
wraiths of rugby past will realise they have secured the future, and totally 
routed their traitorous antagonists of more than a century. To my mind, these 
last few months have seen rugby league totally doomed. It is only a matter of 
time - and not much of that, either - before rugby league in Britain is forced 
to merge with a voracious union. I give it five years, and that is being 
generous.

While the Challenge Cup final plays odd herald these days for the game's 
summer Super League to get into its stride, the spiteful and bickering 
committee rooms of the English union club game is wrapping up its season with a 
barmy series of championship play-offs, as if no one knew who the out-and-out 
uncontested champions are. Then in high summer union's touring British Lions 
will hog all Fleet Street's attention, as well as television's largest 
audiences.

It is unfair, for the wretched irony is that of the two codes, league is the 
more sharply organised, is far more at ease with itself, is run by more 
charming and imaginative folk and is played by more amenable fellows with not 
only more resplendent skills but with a more touching affection for, and pride 
in, their game.

Union's administration, in contrast, is beset with a corrosive enmity - yet 
within five years it will have gobbled up its north-country cousins.

The Twickenham season which ended, except for Saturday's Navy lark, with 
league's cup final had opened with another revolutionary "sacrilege" in the 
shape of league's autumn World Cup curtain-raiser, England v Australia. On a 
sorry Saturday, union's huge stadium was less than half full. A week later, in 
Cardiff's new 73,000-seater, only a few more than 15,000 turned up to watch 
Wales's national league team. A ruinously disappointing World Cup put league on 
the back foot, and once its leading players began to be poached by the union - 
ruthlessly tit-for-tat after a century the other way - any reasonable and 
unbiased forecaster could sense the game was as good as up.

In a blink, English league's supreme star, Jason Robinson, was playing union 
for England and, in another, for the Lions.

How many former league men will be union Lions when they next tour in 2005? 
Plenty. How many fellows who played in that league World Cup, come to that, 
will enjoy their next World Cup as union players in 2003? Even more.

And don't curse about the power of money in all this. That does not come into 
it: as long as television is coughing up there is plenty on the table for both 
codes, oodles of it.

No, the central point here is this. What players want is the thrill of the big 
time, the genuine international up-front occasion in packed-out stadiums, the 
experience of being watched by millions the world over.

It means that low-key, dismal, unwatched World Cups on the back of mundane 
club contests against the same blokes you played a fortnight ago, and three 
weeks before that, and for local reporters in northern editions, are no use any 
more for top sportsmen desperate for the incentive of genuine glory. That is 
what rugby union can deliver and the good old, insular, homely league cannot. 
And once global television twigs it, well, bye-bye league. In England anyway.

Last week was league's centenary cup final. Union's centenary was way back in 
the mists of 1971. For it Twickenham published an attractive little booklet, 
Touchdown, in celebration. As a wheeze, the editors canvassed predictions for 
rugby 30 years hence, heading the chapter with a science-fictionary razzmatazz: 
AD 2001. Thirty years on, but more like eons really, so steeped in aspic still 
was union and its expectations then.

The Twickenham eminence Lord Wakefield forecast a game played on artificial 
surfaces, its teams boasting "greater professionalism - but only, of course, 
purely as an attitude of mind" (of course, milord), and a midwinter break which 
these amateurs could "devote to other strenuous activities like skiing".

He also saw in his vision of the future "hoisting or lifting at the lineout - 
two men combining to obtain the ball, and I see nothing wrong with that". On 
the whole, his lordship prophesied, "the more time he has to devote to his 
hobby, the more Rugbyman will strive to attain greater efficiency".

The former Wales player and writer, Vivian Jenkins, foresaw the outrageous 
possibility of a World Cup for rugby - "though I, for one, hope it never 
happens. A World Cup is quite enough of an ordeal for our soccer players, whose 
living it is. For rugby players it would introduce a much too demanding 
complication into their daily lives."

Mind you, he added: "If every other country approached the game as we do it 
might be a different matter - but these are the days when sport is so often a 
vehicle for political propaganda ... I would prefer to see by 2001 our rugby 
having reverted to its time-honoured domestic format with as few commitments 
outside the British Isles as possible."

Which last thought, I reckon, will be one for British rugby league. Doodling 
at the same party game today, it is utterly inconceivable that rugby in 2031 
will be anything other than a single code. Did I say 2031? Make that 2006, more 
like, and alas for league.
 