
The dispute between Greece and its creditors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/greece-eu-imf-war-of-words-debt-relief-plan-tsipras-austerity>
 has turned more ugly after the European body financing the country’s €86bn 
(£72bn) bailout programme decided to freeze a deal on short-term debt relief 
measures.

The prime minister, Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, was taken by surprise on 
Wednesday when the European Stability Mechanism announced it would not honour 
an accord to ease the burden of repayment obligations on Greece’s debt pile. 
The decision, taken in direct retribution for a series of surprise social 
welfare measures unveiled by the leader, is likely to put Athens on a war 
footing with lenders amid mounting signs of the Greek crisis flaring again.

Last week, Tsipras took the unexpected step of declaring a one-off 
pre-Christmas bonus for an estimated 1.6 million retirees living on €800 or 
less a month. This week he added that the Aegean islands would be exempt from a 
sales tax demanded by creditors.

“Following recent proposals by the Greek government to spend additional fiscal 
resources for pensions and VAT, our governing bodies have put their decisions 
temporarily on hold,” said a spokesman for the ESM, referring to a deal that 
would have deferred an interest rate increase on Greece’s debt.

“Institutions are currently assessing the impact of Greek government decisions 
vis-à-vis the ESM programme commitments and targets. [We] will then analyse the 
institutions’ assessment and subsequently decide how to proceed.”

The announcement followed a statement by the Euro group of finance ministers, 
representing members of the single currency, which also suggested that Athens 
had acted out of line. Earlier on WednesdayGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> – the single biggest contributor to 
the three bailouts Greece has received since 2010 – said the benefits were 
incompatible with programme targets.

Everyone has to respect the Greek people, who for the last seven years have 
made huge sacrifices in the name of Europe
Alexis Tsipras 
But Tsipras, whose popularity has waned considerably since his leftwing 
government implemented wage cuts and tax increases it once vowed to overturn, 
appears in defiant mood. Despite the outcry he has categorically refused to 
rescind the special pension supplement, saying the €617m required for the bonus 
will be drawn from the budget surplus his government has managed to achieve.

Visiting the northern city of Thessaloniki on Wednesday, he ratcheted up his 
anti-austerity rhetoric, announcing that Athens would spend €11.5m next year 
extending free meals to 30,000 underprivileged schoolchildren.

“This programme has been factored in to the budget of 2017,” he told local 
mayors, denying the aid would derail the programme of tough fiscal targetsGreece
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> has agreed to meet.

“I think everyone has to respect the Greek people, who for the last seven 
years have made huge sacrifices in the name of Europe. We have carried the 
weight of the refugee crisis. In the name ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> we have, in recent years, 
implemented an extremely hard policy of austerity. There has to be respect from 
all.”

The prospect of the Greek debt crisis flaring up again came as Athens also 
sparred with the International Monetary Fund which, with the exception of a 
third bailout signed last summer, has supported the rescue packages shoring up 
the Greek economy. On Tuesday Tsipras derided IMF staff as “foolish 
technocrats” who had repeatedly miscalculated the impact of recessionary 
policies on the country.

“They can’t even get their numbers right,” he said, after Greek officials 
reacted furiously to what they described as intense IMF pressure to adopt 
further austerity once bailout loans end in 2018. “They’ve often admitted that 
they’ve been wrong, but now they’re telling us again, ‘What’s wrong is right’.”

With tensions escalating – and local media painting relations with creditors 
in terms of open warfare – any hope of concluding an ongoing review of the 
latest programme has quickly faded.

Tsipras, who hopes to break the deadlock in talks later this week with his 
French and German counterparts, has signalled that he will ask the IMF to 
withdraw from the bailout altogether. Few believe that will assuage creditor 
sentiment at a time when Athens is perceived to be dragging its feet on reforms.
 