
Australian and NSW State of Origin back-rower Greg Bird has been released from 
the final year of hisNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> contract with 
Gold Coast. The Titans confirmed the 32-year-old’s departure on Wednesday 
night, saying the 235-game veteran had contacted the club requesting a release.

“No one can doubt the commitment Greg has played with throughout his career 
whether it be for his club, his state or his country,” chief executive Graham 
Annesley said. “He is a fierce competitor and always gives 100% which is why 
his team-mates at all levels love playing alongside him.”

Wayne Bennett backs World Club Series in face of growing Australian opposition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/wayne-bennett-world-club-series-brisbane-broncos-england-four-nations>
Bird was believed to have found himself under the eye of NSW Police and the 
NRL’s Intergrity Unit last month after he was allegedly part of a group which 
were denied entry to a Brunswick Heads pub. He took to social media to deny any 
wrongdoing in the matter, where he claimed he ran in to break up a scuffle 
between a friend and security.

“I left the premises and someone from our party stayed and got into a physical 
altercation with the security,” Bird posted on Instagram at the time. “Me along 
with everyone else in the group ran into (sic) separate the two involved and 
no-one else threw any punches. There is footage and witnesses to verify this.”

Bird was believed to be on his last chance with the club before that matter. A 
co-captain with Nate Myles in 2013 and 2014, he was stripped of the position 
after he was caught urinating near an unmarked police car in late-2014, also in 
the Byron Bay region.

He played 129 games for the club, who resurrected his career after he was 
forced into the English Super League with French club Catalans Dragons in 2009 
after he was sacked by Cronulla after the 2008 season. He also helped the 
Titans to the finals in his first and last seasons there in 2010 and 2016.

The 32-year-old has also been closely linked to Manly in recent times, who 
released one-time State of Origin back-rower Jamie Buhrer to Newcastle last 
week, where Bird has also been mentioned as a mooted signing.
 