
The joke used to be that you knew you were on Humberside when the whiff of 
fish filled your nostrils, but for the region this year the stench of 
relegation has filled the air. Hull have gone from the top flight but that 
stink may just be clearing on the south bank, afterGrimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> took the fight to the final day 
with victory over their rivals for the drop.

Grimsby sold out their allocation for a match in which only victory would 
preserve the club's 100-year Football League stay. A healthy percentage of 
these fans flooded the Blundell Park turf after Mark Hudson drove in the 
decisive second goal in the third minute of injury time, before order was 
restored by police on horseback.

With a genuine sense of history to protect – the wooden main stand is the 
oldest of any at the 92 English grounds – there was an edginess to the occasion 
and the sense of relief was palpable when captain Rob Atkinson hooked in a 
volley on the turn just short of the hour. Momentum that sucked Grimsby towards 
non-league during a 24-game winless run earlier in the campaign has now 
seemingly switched allegiances.

This was Grimsby's sixth win in their past 12 matches while Barnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet>, with three former Premier League 
players in their starting XI, have lost half a dozen on the trot. Now victory 
for Neil Woods's team over Burton and failure by the Londoners to defeat 
promoted Rochdale would complete a remarkable escape.

"We knew this week we could affect our own destiny," Woods said. "We have now 
faced two games that we had to win or be relegated and we have done it one at a 
time." A third would not necessarily avert the drop and Paul Fairclough, who 
returned to free-falling Barnet as caretaker manager in midweek, bullishly 
declared: "We will win next week. I came back to the club to keep us in the 
Football League and we have to make sure that is what we do."

Indeed, it was hard to believe these teams were 90th and 91st on the ladder 
given the quality of the football at times and only three spectacular saves 
from Nick Colgan kept the visitors out in an end-to-end second period while 
Jean-Louis Akpa Akpro's 18-yard curler prolonged the drama when it struck the 
inside of an upright six minutes from time.
 