
A <https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-b> C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-c> D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-d> E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-e> F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-f> G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-g> H 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-h> I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-i> J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-j> K 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-k> L 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-l> M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-m> N 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-n> O 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-o> P 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-p> Q 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-q> R 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-r> S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-s> T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-t> U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-u> V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-v> W 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-w> X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-x> Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-y> Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-z>
 S - style guide illustrations Photograph: Jakob Hinrichs 
Saatchi brothers
Maurice (now Lord Saatchi) and Charles (the one with the gallery) founded M&C 
Saatchi in 1994 after leaving Saatchi & Saatchi, the advertising agency best 
known for the slogan “Labour isn’t working” in the 1979 general election 
campaign

saccharin
noun; saccharine adjective

sacrilegious
not sacreligious

Sad
seasonal affective disorder

Sadler’s Wells

Safeway

Sahara
no need to add “desert”

Sahrawi
people of the western Sahara; the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) 
claims sovereignty over the former Spanish colony of Western Sahara, but 
controls only about a quarter, the rest being controlled by Morocco

said
normally preferable to added, commented, declared, pointed out, ejaculated, 
etc; you can avoid too many “saids”, whether quoting someone or in reported 
speech, quite easily.
See reported speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-r#reported> 

Sainsbury, Lord
Lord Sainsbury of Turville (David Sainsbury) is a Labour peer.
Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover (John Sainsbury) is a Tory peer.
We have been known to mix them up, so take care

Sainsbury’s
for the stores; the company’s name is J Sainsbury plc

Saint
in running text should be spelt in full: Saint John, Saint Paul. For names of 
towns, churches, etc, abbreviate St (no point) eg St Mirren, St Stephen’s 
church. In French placenames a hyphen is needed, eg St-Nazaire, Ste-Suzanne, 
Stes-Maries-de-la-Mer

St Andrews
no apostrophe for town, university or “the home of golf”


St Antony’s College, Oxford
no H


St Catharine’s College, Cambridge

St Catherine’s College, Oxford

St James Park
home of Exeter City

St James’ Park
home of Newcastle United

St James’s Park
royal park in London

Saint John
New Brunswick; St John’s Newfoundland

St John Ambulance
not St John’s and no longer “Brigade”

St Katharine Docks
London

St Martin-in-the-Fields
church in Trafalgar Square, London

St Paul’s Cathedral

St Petersburg
Russian city founded by Peter the Great in 1703. It was known as Petrograd 
from 1914 to 1924, and Leningrad from 1924 to 1991

Saint-Saëns, Camille
(1835-1921) French composer

St Thomas’ hospital
in London; not St Thomas’s

sake
Japanese rice wine

Saki
pen name of the British writer HH Munro (1870-1916), known mainly for his 
short stories

sale
In the UK, “on sale” simply refers to something you can buy: “Widgets on sale 
here”; if a store is selling items at a reduced price, for example after 
Christmas, you might say you bought your “sale-price” widgets “in the sale” or 
“in the New Year sales”. In the US, the equivalent of “in the sale” is “on 
sale”: “These widgets were a real bargain – they were on sale!”

saleable

Salvation Army
not the Sally Army

salvo
plural salvoes

Samaritans
the organisation has dropped “the” from its name

sambuca

same-sex marriage
or equal marriage rights rather than “gay marriage”

Samoa
formerly known as Western Samoa; do not confuse with American Samoa

Sana’a
capital of Yemen

sanatorium
(not sanitarium or sanitorium) plural sanatoriums

sanction
To sanction (verb) something is to approve it; to impose sanctions (noun) is 
to stop something you disapprove of. So politicians might sanction (permit) the 
use of sanctions (forbidding) trade with a country they don’t, for the moment, 
happen to like very much.

OED definitions of the noun “sanction” involve penalties or coercion, 
typically to enforce a law or treaty. So you find “sanction-breaker” (quoted 
from the Guardian in connection with sanctions against Rhodesia in 1968). 
Rather chillingly, a draft 1993 addition to the dictionary includes a new 
definition: “sanction: in military intelligence, the permission to kill a 
particular individual.”

Definitions of “sanction” as a verb include ratify, confirm, permit, authorise 
and encourage. Hence expressions such as “sanctioned by common sense” and 
“sanctioned by usage”.

The Department for Work and Pensions, confusingly, says it “sanctions” people 
to mean it imposes sanctions on or penalises them. We should not use it in this 
sense

Sane
mental illness charity

Sanremo
(one word) town in Liguria, north-west Italy; it hosts an annual music 
festival that inspired the Eurovision song contest

San Sebastián

San Serriffe
island nation profiled in the Guardian 
<http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2012/03/23/SanSerriffe1.pdf>
 on 1 April 1977

sans serif
typeface

San Siro stadium
Milan

São Paulo
Brazilian city, not Sao Paolo

Sarkozy, Nicolas
note that the French name is Nicolas, not Nicholas

Sars
severe acute respiratory syndrome

SAS
Special Air Service, but not normally necessary to spell it out; its naval 
equivalent is the SBS

Satan
but satanist, satanism

satnav

Sats
standard assessment tasks

SATs
scholastic aptitude tests (in the US, where they are pronounced as individual 
letters)

Saumarez Smith, Charles
secretary and chief executive of the Royal Society of Arts

Savile, Jimmy

Savile Club, Savile Row
in London

Saville theatre
in London, once owned by the Beatles’ manager Brian Epstein and used for 
concerts in the 60s (Jimi Hendrix played there), is now the Odeon Covent Garden 
cinema

Say’s law
“Supply creates its own demand” (also known as the law of markets)

Scalextric
often erroneously called “Scalectrix”

Scandinavia
Denmark, Norway and Sweden; with the addition of Finland and Iceland, they 
constitute the Nordic countries

schadenfreude

scherzo
plural scherzos

schizophrenia, schizophrenic
should be used only in a medical context, never to mean in two minds, 
contradictory, or erratic, which is wrong, as well as offensive to people 
diagnosed with this illness; schizophrenic is an adjective, not a noun. After 
many years we have largely eradicated misuse of this term, although as recently 
as 2010 a columnist contrived to accuse the Conservatives of “untreatable 
ideological schizophrenia”

Schoenberg, Arnold
(1874-1951) Austrian-born composer

schoolboy, schoolchildren, schoolgirl, schoolroom, schoolteacher

schools
if in full, like this: Alfred Salter primary school, Rotherhithe; King’s 
school, Macclesfield, Eton college, etc; often the generic part will not be 
necessary, so: Alfred Salter primary; King’s, Macclesfield; Eton, etc

school years
year 2, year 10, key stage 1, etc

Schröder, Gerhard
former German chancellor

Schwarzenegger, Arnold
Arnie is acceptable in headlines

scientific measurements
Take care: m in scientific terms stands for milli (1mW is 1,000th of a watt), 
while M denotes mega (1MW is a million watts); in such circumstances it is wise 
not to bung in another m when you mean million, so write out, for example, 10 
million C.

amps A, volts V, watts W, kilowatts kW, megawatts MW, milliwatts mW, joules J, 
kilojouleskJ

scientific names
in italics, with the first name (denoting the genus) capped, the second 
(denoting the species) lc:Escherichia coli, Canis lupus, Quercus robur. The 
name can be shortened by using the first initial:E coli, C lupus, Q robur (but 
we do not use a full point after the initial)

scientific terms
some silly cliches to avoid: you might find it difficult to hesitate for a 
nanosecond (the shortest measurable human hesitation is probably about 250 
million nanoseconds, a quarter of a second); “astronomical sums” when talking 
about large sums of money is rather dated (the national debt surpassed the 
standard astronomical unit of 93 million [miles] 100 years ago)

sci-fi

Scilly
an alternative is Isles of Scilly but not Scilly Isles

scotch
Scottish (not “Scotch”) people, also known as Scots, make scotch whisky, 
usually known simply as scotch. Other countries, including Canada and Japan, 
also make whisky. In Ireland and the United States – countries that you will 
note have an E in their name – they make whiskey with an E. You can also scotch 
(put an end to) someone’s hopes or plans

scotch broth, scotch egg, scotch mist 
but Scotch argus butterfly

ScotchTape
TM; say sticky tape 

scot-free
the scot was a kind of medieval council tax, so you got off “scot-free” if you 
avoided payment

Scotland
The following was written by a Scot who works for the Guardian and lives in 
London. Letters expressing similar sentiments come from across Britain (and, 
indeed, from around the world):

We don’t carry much coverage of events in Scotland and to be honest, even as 
an expat, that suits me fine. But I do care very much that we acknowledge that 
Scotland is a separate nation and in many ways a separate country. It has 
different laws, education system (primary, higher and further), local 
government, national government, sport, school terms, weather, property market 
and selling system, bank holidays, right to roam, banks and money, churches, 
etc.

If we really want to be a national newspaper then we need to consider whether 
our stories apply only to England (and Wales) or Britain, or Scotland only. 
When we write about teachers’ pay deals, we should point out that we mean 
teachers in England and Wales; Scottish teachers have separate pay and 
management structures and union. When we write about it being half-term, we 
should remember that it’s known as mid-term in Scotland. When we write about 
bank holiday sunshine/rain, we should remember that in Scotland the weather was 
probably different and it possibly wasn’t even a bank holiday. When we write 
about the English cricket team, we should be careful not to refer to it as “we” 
and “us”. When the Scottish Cup final is played, we should perhaps consider 
devoting more than a few paragraphs at the foot of a page to Rangers winning 
their 100th major trophy (if it had been Manchester United we’d have had pages 
and pages with Bobby Charlton’s all-time fantasy first XI and a dissertation on 
why English clubs are the best in Europe). Andy Murray is Scottish, as well as 
British, rather than Scottish when he loses and British when he wins.

These daily oversights come across to a Scot as arrogance. They also undermine 
confidence in what the paper is telling the reader

Scotland Office
not Scottish Office

Scott, Charles Prestwich
(1846-1932) editor of the Manchester Guardian for 57 years and its owner from 
1907 until his death (his uncle, John Edward Taylor, had founded the paper in 
1821). Scott, who was editor when the first “Style-book of the Manchester 
Guardian” – forerunner of this guide – appeared in 1928, is most famous for his 
statement “comment is free, but facts are sacred”.

WP Crozier recalled of Scott: “Once, when an article in type was shown to him 
because a certain sentence expressed a doubtful judgment, he noticed that the 
English was slovenly, amended it, and then, being drawn on from sentence to 
sentence and becoming more and more dissatisfied, he made innumerable minute 
corrections until at last, having made a complete mess of the proof, he looked 
up and said gently: ‘Dear X; of course, he’s not a trained subeditor.’ “

Scott Trust
created in 1936 to safeguard the journalistic freedom and liberal values of 
the Manchester Guardian. The sole shareholder in Guardian Media Group, its core 
purpose is to secure the financial and editorial independence of the Guardian 
“in perpetuity”. In 2008 it became a limited company, with the same protections 
for the Guardian enshrined in its constitution

Scott, Sir George Gilbert
(1811-78) architect who designed the Albert Memorial and Midland Grand hotel 
at St Pancras station

Scott, Sir Giles Gilbert
(1880-1960) grandson of the above, responsible for red telephone boxes, 
Bankside power station (now Tate Modern), Waterloo bridge, and the Anglican 
cathedral in Liverpool

Scottish Enterprise
non-departmental public body of the Scottish government which encourages 
economic development and investment, covering the eastern, central and southern 
parts of Scotland; Highlands and Islands Enterprise is its counterpart in 
north-western Scotland

Scottish government

Scottish parliament
its members are MSPs

scottish terrier
not scotch or Scots; once known as Aberdeen terrier

scouse, scouser

Scouts
not “Boy Scouts” (in the UK, at least); the organisation is the Scout 
Association

Scoville scale
system that measures the heat level of chillies

Scrabble
TM

Scram
secure continuous remote alcohol monitor, as sported in 2010 by Lindsay Lohan

scratchcard, smartcard, swipecard

SCSI
capped up even though generally pronounced “scuzzy”; it stands for small 
computer system interface

sea change or step-change?
Used interchangeably, typically to mean nothing more than “a big change”, but 
there is a difference that you might think worth preserving. Shakespeare coined 
the former in a well-known passage of The Tempest:

Full fathom five thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes;
Nothing of him that doth fade,
But doth suffer a sea change,
Into something rich and strange.

 The idea is that a major transformation is taking place, but very slowly. By 
contrast, step-change comes from physics, where it means an abrupt change in a 
value, as in voltage

sea level, sea sickness
but seaplane, seaport, seashore, seaside, seaweed

seal pups
not “baby seals” for the same reason we don’t call lambs “baby sheep”

Sea of Japan
as generally known; but South Korea calls it the East Sea and North Korea the 
East Sea of Korea

Séamus, Seán
note accents in Irish Gaelic; sean without a fada means old

search dogs
search for people; sniffer dogs search for drugs

search engine optimisation (SEO)
How to increase traffic to your website by ensuring that your content shows up 
prominently in Google and other online search engines, for example by including 
in headlines key terms that people are most likely to search for. To help, you 
can monitor such things as hot topics on Google and what is trending on Twitter

seas, oceans
capped up, eg Black Sea, Caspian Sea, Pacific Ocean

seasons
spring, summer, autumn, winter are lowercase

seatbelt

second hand
on a watch; but secondhand goods

second world war

secretary general

Secret Intelligence Service
official name of MI6; may also be abbreviated to SIS after first mention

Secret Service
US law enforcement agency

section 28
or clause 28 of the Local Government Act 1988, widely regarded as homophobic, 
said local authorities “shall not intentionally promote homosexuality or 
publish material with the intention of promoting homosexuality” or “promote the 
teaching in any maintained school of the acceptability of homosexuality as a 
pretended family relationship”; it was repealed in Scotland in 2000 and the 
rest of the UK in 2003. David Cameron subsequently admitted: “We got it wrong”


sections, schedules, subsections
to acts of parliament thus: section 10 (3), schedule 7, etc. An act is divided 
into numbered sections, which sometimes introduced a schedule placed at the end 
of the act.


Note that schedules have paragraphs and sub-paragraphs, not sections and 
sub-sections

Security Service
better known as MI5

Segway
TM; hoverboard is a generic alternative

seize
not sieze

self-control, self-defence, self-esteem, self-harm, self-respect

selfie
a self-portrait photograph. 

There may or may not be other people in it, and you might post it on social 
media, frame it or put it in an album, but if you are in it, and you took it, 
it’s a selfie

Selfridges
no apostrophe

sell-off, sellout
noun

sell off, sell out
verb

Sellotape
TM; call it sticky tape

semicolon
Used correctly (which occasionally we do), the semicolon is a very elegant 
compromise between a full stop (too much) and a comma (not enough). This 
sentence, from a column by David McKie, illustrates beautifully how it’s done: 
“Some reporters were brilliant; others were less so.”

The late Beryl Bainbridge said in the Guardian: “Not many people use it much 
any more, do they? Should it be used more? I think so, yes. A semicolon is a 
partial pause, a different way of pausing, without using a full stop. I use it 
all the time” and George Bernard Shaw told TE Lawrence that not using 
semicolons was “a symptom of mental defectiveness, probably induced by camp 
life”.

Orwell, on the other hand, thought they were unnecessary and Kurt Vonnegut 
advised: “Do not use semicolons. They are transvestite hermaphrodites, standing 
for absolutely nothing. All they do is show you’ve been to college.”

semtex
no longer necessary to cap this

Senate
The Australian Senate and US Senate take an initial capital; state senates are 
lowercase, eg the Massachusetts senate

senator
lowercase unless used as a title: Senator Penny Wong is an Australian senator; 
Senator Mitch McConnell, a Republican senator, is the majority leader of the US 
Senate

senior
abbreviate to Sr not Sen or Snr, eg Douglas Fairbanks Sr

September 11
Use September 11 (ie contrary to our usual date style) when it is being evoked 
as a particular event, rather than just a date, eg:
How September 11 changed the world for ever
But “how the events of 11 September 2001 changed the world for ever” would 
follow our normal date style.

9/11 may be substituted for either, as necessary, particularly in tight 
headlines, eg:
How 9/11
changed
the world
for ever

The official death toll of the victims of the Islamist terrorists who hijacked 
four aircraft on 11 September 2001 is 2,976. The figure does not include the 19 
hijackers. Of this total, 2,605 died in the twin towers of the World Trade 
Centre or on the ground in New York City (of whom approximately 1,600 have been 
identified), 246 died on the four aeroplanes, and 125 were killed in the attack 
on the Pentagon.

The hijackers were: Fayez Ahmed, Mohamed Atta, Ahmed al-Ghamdi, Hamza 
al-Ghamdi, Saeed al-Ghamdi, Hani Hanjour, Nawaf al-Hazmi, Salem al-Hazmi, Ahmed 
al-Haznawi, Khalid al-Mihdhar, Majed Moqed, Ahmed al-Nami, Abdulaziz al-Omari, 
Marwan al-Shehhi, Mohannad al-Shehri, Wael al-Shehri, Waleed al-Shehri, Satam 
al-Suqami, Ziad Jarrah (though dozens of permutations of their names have 
appeared in the paper, we follow Reuters style as for most Arabic 
transliterations)

sequined
not sequinned

Serb
noun

Serbian
adjective

sergeant major
Sgt Maj (not RSM or CSM) Trevor Prescott, subsequently Sgt Maj Prescott in 
leading articles; elsewhere just surname

Serious Fraud Office
SFO on second mention

Serious Organised Crime Agency
Soca after first mention

serjeant at arms

serves to
adds nothing to a phrase such as “serves to underline”; replace with 
“underlines”

services, the
(armed forces)

settler
should be confined to those Israeli Jews living in settlements across the 1967 
green line, ie in the occupied territories

set to
It is very tempting to use this, especially in headlines, when we think 
something is going to happen, but aren’t all that sure; try to resist this 
temptation. It is even less excusable when we do know that something is going 
to happen: one of our readers counted no fewer than 16 uses of the phrase in 
the paper in two days; in almost every case, the words could have been replaced 
with “will”, or by simply leaving out the “set”, eg “the packs are set to come 
into force as part of the house-selling process”.

The first readers’ editor of the Guardian put it like this: “The expression 
‘set to’, to mean about to, seems likely to ... is often used to refer to 
something that, though expected, is not absolutely certain to happen. It is a 
rascally expression which one of the readers who have learned to groan at the 
sight of it describes as an all-purpose term removing any precision of meaning 
from the sentence containing it”

Seven
not “Se7en” for the 1995 film starring Morgan Freeman, Brad Pitt and Gwyneth 
Paltrow

sexing up
is what happens in dodgy dossiers and not, we hope, our publications.
From the editor: 

Guardian readers would rather we did give them the unvarnished truth – or our 
best stab at it. It seems obvious enough. But inside many journalists – this 
goes for desk editors as much as reporters – there is a little demon prompting 
us to make the story as strong and interesting as possible, if not more so. We 
drop a few excitable adjectives around the place. We overegg. We may even sex 
it up.

Strong stories are good. So are interesting stories. But straight, accurate 
stories are even better. Readers who stick with us over any length of time 
would far rather judge what we write by our own Richter scale of news judgments 
and values than feel that we’re measuring ourselves against the competition. 
Every time we flam a story up we disappoint somebody – usually a reader who 
thought the Guardian was different.

We should be different. Of course we compete fiercely in the most competitive 
newspaper market in the world. Of course we want to sell as many copies as 
possible. We’ve all experienced peer pressure to write something as strongly as 
possible, if not more so. But our Scott Trust ownership relieves us of the 
necessity to drive remorselessly for circulation to the exclusion of all else. 
In other words, we don’t need to sex things up, and we shouldn’t

sex offender register
abbreviation, normally sufficient, of the Violent and Sex Offender Register 
(Visor), a database set up by the Sexual Offences Act 2003

sexual abuse
unwanted sexual behaviour, or molestation. Do not use ‘sex abuse’ as the term 
‘sex’ can imply consent
sexuality 

From a reader: 

“Can I suggest your style guide should state that homosexual, gay, bisexual 
and heterosexual are primarily adjectives and that use of them as nouns should 
be avoided. It seems to me that this is both grammatically and politically 
preferable (politically because using them as nouns really does seem to define 
people by their sexuality). I would like to read that someone is ‘homosexual’, 
not ‘a homosexual’, or about ‘gay people’, not ‘gays’. Lesbian is different as 
it is a noun which later began to be used adjectivally, not the other way 
round. As an example from Wednesday, the opening line ‘Documents which showed 
that Lord Byron … was a bisexual’ rather than ‘was bisexual’ sounds both Daily 
Mail-esque and stylistically poor.”

sexual orientation
is generally more accurate and appropriate than “sexual preference”

Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band
1967 album by a popular beat combo of the day; not Sergeant Pepper’s Lonely 
Hearts Club Band

Shaanxi
(capital Xi’an) and Shanxi (capital Taiyuan) are adjacent provinces in 
northern China

Shabiha
Syrian pro-government militia

shakedown, shakeout, shakeup
(nouns)

Shakespearean
not Shakespearian

 shall or will?
Once regarded as a very important distinction, and some people still get 
excited about it. In practice, there is very little difference these days. Use 
the former for emphasis (“youshall go to the ball”) and don’t worry too much. 
They seem to get by quite happily in the United States hardly bothering with 
“shall” at all

Shankill Road
Belfast, not Shankhill

shantytown

shared possessives
Freddie and Beth’s party (they share one)
Freddie and Beth’s parties (they share two)
Freddie’s and Beth’s parties (they have one each)

shareholder

sharia law

shark-infested
A reader (one of several to complain about our use of this phrase) pointed 
out: “The seas are not ‘infested’ with sharks. They live there … Millions of 
sharks are being killed. By planet-infesting humans. They need protection.” The 
word “infest” is defined as “swarm over, cover or fill in a troublesome, 
unpleasant or harmful way, to invade and live on as a parasite”. The phrase 
“shark-infested” is in any case a lazy cliche and should be avoided

sheepdog

sheikh

Shepherd Market
Mayfair; Shepherd’s Bush west London

Shetland
rather than Shetland Isles or Shetlands, but note that the local authority is 
Shetland Islands council

Shia, Sunni
two branches of Islam (note: not Shi’ite); plural Shia Muslims and Sunni 
Muslims, though Shias and Sunnis are fine if you are pushed for space

shiatsu
massage; shih-tzu dog; shiitake mushrooms

ships
are not feminine: it ran aground, not she ran aground; no quotes, no italics; 
you sail in, not on, ships

shipbuilding, shipmate, shipowner, shipyard

shoo-in
not shoe-in

shootout
noun; not “shoot-out”

shopkeeper

Shoreham-by-Sea
not Shoreham on Sea

shortlist, longlist

Short money
payment to opposition parties to help them carry out their parliamentary 
functions, named after Ted Short, the Labour leader of the house who introduced 
it in 1975

shortsighted, longsighted, nearsighted

shrank, shrunk
shrank, not shrunk, is the past tense of shrink, except in the film title 
Honey, I Shrunk the Kids (and perhaps the occasional piece of wordplay based on 
it); shrunk is the past participle (the kids had shrunk) or what is sometimes 
known as the present perfect form (Honey, I’ve shrunk the kids)

Siamese twins
conjoined twins, please

sickbed, sicknote, sickroom
but sick pay

sickie

side-effects

sidestreet

siege
not seige

Siena
Tuscan city; sienna pigment; Sienna Miller

signoff 
noun; sign off verb

Sikh names
Singh means a lion and Kaur a princess. Guru Gobind Singh Ji gave Singh as a 
last name to all Sikh men and Kaur to all Sikh women to eliminate 
discrimination based on family name, which denoted which caste someone belonged 
to.

Over time, many Sikh families have reverted to using their family name, but 
have maintained Singh and Kaur as middle names; in such cases, include the full 
name at first mention, thereafter surname only

silicon
computer chips; silicone breast implants – we have been known to confuse the 
two, as in “Silicone Valley”

Silkin, Jon
(1930-97) English poet, not to be confused with his cousin John Silkin 
(1923-87), a Labour cabinet minister, as was John’s brother Sam Silkin (1918-88)

silly billy


sim card
(it stands for subscriber identity module)

since
See as or since 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a#as or since>

Singaporean names
in three parts, eg Lee Kuan Yew

Singin’ in the Rain
not Singing

single quotes
in headlines (but sparingly), standfirsts and captions

singles chart

singsong
(adjective): her voice had a singsong quality

sing-song
(noun): we had a sing-song round the campfire

singular or plural?
Corporate entities take the singular: eg The BBC has decided (not “have”). In 
subsequent references make sure the pronoun is singular: “It [not “they”] will 
press for an increase in the licence fee.”

Sports teams and rock bands are the exception – “England have an uphill task” 
is OK, as is “Nirvana were overrated”

sink
past tense sank, past participle sunk: he sinks, he sank, he has sunk

Sinn Féin

siphon
not syphon

Sisi
The Egyptian president is Abdel Fatah al-Sisi; Sisi after first mention

sisyphean
a futile or interminable task (Sisyphus had to spend eternity rolling a 
boulder up a hill)

sit
I sat down at the back but he was sitting near the front (the horrible “I was 
sat” is, sadly, a very frequent error)

sitcom

six-day war
between Israel and its neighbours in June 1967

size
Attempts to express the size of objects and places in terms of their 
relationship to doubledecker buses, Olympic swimming pools, football pitches, 
the Isle of Wight, Wales and Belgium are cliched and unhelpful, which does not 
stop journalists engaging in them. The same applies to measuring quantities of, 
say, hotdogs served at the Cup final in terms of how far they would stretch to 
the moon and back

ski, skis, skier, skied, skiing

skilful
not skillful

skimmed milk
not skim

skipper
usually only of a trawler

Sky
no longer BSkyB

Sky+
Sky’s personal video recorder service

skyrocket
No!

slavery
was not abolished in 1807, as we sometimes say: slavery in Britain became 
illegal in 1772, the slave trade in the British empire was abolished in 1807, 
but slavery remained in the colonies until the Slavery Abolition Act 1833

slay
past tense: slew; past participle: slain

sleight of hand
although it is pronounced “slight”

slither
slide; sliver small piece. Writers often get this wrong, saying things like “a 
tiny slither of the global population” when they mean sliver

Slovak
noun

Slovakian
adjective

Slovene
noun

Slovenian
adjective

small-c conservatism

small talk
polite conversation

Smalltalk
a computer programming language

smartphone

smartwatch
a computer you wear on your wrist

smart watch
something from the Armani retro collection, perhaps

Smith & Wesson
handguns

Smithsonian Institution
not Institute

smooth, smooth down, smoothen
(verb) not smoothe (you may be thinking of “soothe”)

smörgåsbord

smuggling or trafficking?
There are three key differences between people smuggling and trafficking.

1 Exploitation: smugglers are paid by people to take them across borders, 
after which the transaction ends; traffickers bring them into a situation of 
exploitation and profit from their abuse in the form of forced labour or 
prostitution.

2 Consent: migrants usually consent to be smuggled; a trafficked person does 
not (or their “consent” is meaningless because they have been coerced).

3 Borders: smuggling always takes place across international borders; 
trafficking does not (you can be trafficked, say, from Rochdale to Rotherham)

snooper’s charter

snowclone
A type of cliched phrase defined by the linguist Geoffrey Pullum as “a 
multi-use, customisable, instantly recognisable, timeworn, quoted or misquoted 
phrase or sentence that can be used in an entirely open array of different 
variants”. The name is derived from the cliche about how many words “Eskimos” 
are mistakenly said to have for snow. Examples of snowclones include “xxx [eg 
comedy] is the new yyy [eg rock’n’roll]”, “you wait ages for a xxx [eg gold 
medal] and then yyy [eg three] come along at once”, and so on. Such phrases are 
very popular with journalists searching for what Pullum calls “quick-fix ways 
of writing stuff without actually having to think out new descriptive 
vocabulary or construct new phrases and sentences”

snowplough

Soas University of London
Formerly the School of Oriental and African Studies

so-called
overused: as a reader pointed out when we used the term “so-called friendly 
fire”, the expression is “obviously ironic and really doesn’t need such 
ham-fisted pointing out”

social grades
The NRS social grades (not classes), originally developed by the National 
Readership Survey and still widely used in stories about market research, are 
the familiar A (upper middle class), B (middle), C1 (lower middle), C2 (skilled 
working), D (semi- and unskilled) and E (at the lowest levels of subsidence); 
they are based on the occupation of the chief income earner of a household and 
are sometimes grouped into ABC1 (middle) and C2DE (working class).

Since the 2001 census, the main UK social classification has been the National 
Statistics socio-economic classification (NS-SEC), grouping occupations by 
employment conditions and relations rather than skills, and has 17 categories, 
which can be broken down into eight (from higher managerial and professional 
occupations to never worked and long-term unemployed), or just three (higher, 
intermediate and lower occupations)

socialism, socialist
lc unless name of a party, eg Socialist Workers party

social media
are plural

social security benefits
all lc, income support, working tax credit, etc

sockpuppet
an online identity used for deception, typically by someone posing as an 
independent third party unconnected to a person or product that the sockpuppet 
then promotes

sock puppet
a puppet made out of a sock

sod’s law
See Murphy’s law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-m#murphy's> 

Sofía
queen of Spain

Soho
London; SoHo (as in “South of Houston Street”) New York

soi-disant
means self-styled, not so-called; both phrases should be used sparingly

soiree
no accent

solar system
See planets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-p#planets>

solicitor general

Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr
(1918-2008) Russian novelist

Somalia
adjective Somali; the people are Somalis, not Somalians

some
should not be used before a figure: if you are not sure, about or 
approximately are better, and if you are, it sounds daft: “some 12 people have 
died from wasp stings this year alone” was a particularly silly example that 
found its way into the paper

Sopa
Stop Online Piracy Act

Sotheby’s

soundbite

sources
Anonymous sources should be used sparingly. We should – except in exceptional 
circumstances – avoid anonymous pejorative quotes. We should avoid 
misrepresenting the nature and number of sources, and we should do our best to 
give readers some clue as to the authority with which they speak. We should 
never, ever, betray a source

South America

Southbank Centre
on the South Bank in London

South Bank University

south
south London, south-west England, the south-east, south Wales, etc

southern hemisphere

Southern Ocean
not Antarctic Ocean

south pole

Southport Visiter
newspaper, not to be confused with the Visitor, Morecambe

so what if ...
needs a comma when used at the start of a sentence to distinguish between “So, 
what if ... “ and “So what, if ... “

The former expresses an open mind (“So, what if we all voted Green?”); the 
latter is more sceptical (“So what, if we all voted Green?”)

soy sauce

soya beans
not soybeans or soy beans

space hopper

spacewalk

spaghetti western

span of years
2010-12 or from 2010-12; but between 2010 and 2012, not “between 2010-12”

Spanish names and accents
Take care over use of the tilde, which can change the meaning: Los Años 
Dorados (the Spanish version of the sitcom The Golden Girls) means The Golden 
Years; leave out the tilde and Los Anos Dorados becomes The Golden Anuses.

The surname is normally the second last name, not the last, which is the 
mother’s maiden name, eg the writer Federico García Lorca – known as García in 
Spain rather than Lorca – should be García Lorca on second mention. Note also 
that the female name Consuelo ends with an “o” not an “a”.

In Spanish the natural stress of a word generally occurs on the second to last 
syllable. Words that deviate from this norm must carry a written accent mark, 
known as the acento ortográfico, to indicate where the stress falls. A guide to 
accents follows. If in doubt do an internet search (try the word with and 
without an accent) and look for reputable Spanish language sites, eg big 
newspapers.

Surnames ending -ez take an accent over the penultimate vowel, eg Benítez, 
Fernández, Giménez, Gómez, González, Gutiérrez, Hernández, Jiménez, López, 
Márquez, Martínez, Núñez, Ordóñez, Pérez, Quiñónez, Ramírez, Rodríguez, Sáez, 
Vásquez, Vázquez, Velázquez. Exception: Alvarez; note also that names ending 
-es do not take the accent, eg Martines, Rodrigues.

Other surnames Aristízabal, Beltrán, Cáceres, Calderón, Cañizares, Chevantón, 
Couñago, Cúper, Dalí, De la Peña, Díaz, Forlán, García, Gaudí, Miró, Muñoz, 
Olazábal, Pavón, Sáenz, Sáinz, Valdés, Valerón, Verón.

Forenames Adán, Alán, Andrés, César, Darío, Elías, Fabián, Ginés, Héctor, 
Hernán, Iñaki, Iñés, Iván, Jesús, Joaquín, José, Lucía, María, Martín, Matías, 
Máximo, Míchel, Raúl, Ramón, Róger, Rubén, Sebastián, Víctor. The forenames 
Ana, Angel, Alfredo, Alvaro, Cristina, Diego, Domingo, Emilio, Ernesto, 
Federico, Fernando, Ignacio, Jorge, Juan, Julio, Luis, Marta, Mario, Miguel, 
Pablo and Pedro do not usually take accents.

Placenames Asunción, Bogotá, Cádiz, Catalonia, Córdoba, La Coruña, Guantánamo 
Bay, Guipúzcoa, Jaén, Jérez, León, Medellín, Potosí, San Sebastián, Valparaíso.

Sports teams, etc América, Atlético, El Barça (FC Barcelona), Bernabéu, 
Bolívar, Cerro Porteño, Deportivo La Coruña, Huracán, Málaga, Peñarol.

Note: Spanish is an official language in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico, 
Spain, Uruguay and Venezuela

Spanish practices, Spanish customs
If you are talking about questionable trade union activities, restrictive 
practices might be a less offensive way to put it

‘spared jail’
We should say what the actual verdict was in a court report, rather than that 
the accused was “spared jail” or “walked free from court”, which sounds as if 
we think they should have been jailed

spare-part surgery
Avoid this term

spark
overused in headlines of the “rates rise sparks fury” variety

spastic
the Spastics Society, which supports disabled people and in particular those 
with cerebral palsy, changed its name to Scope in 1994

Speaker, the
(Commons) but deputy speaker (of whom there are several); Lord Speaker 
(Lords); House speaker (US)

special
often redundant

special branch

Special Immigration Appeals Commission
Siac or “the commission” on second mention

spellchecker
if you use one, read through your work afterwards: a graphic on our front page 
was rendered nonsensical when a spellcheck turned the species Aquila adalberti 
into “alleyway adalberti”, while Prunella modularis became “pronely 
modularise”; also note that most use American English spellings

spelled or spelt?
spelled is the past tense, spelt is the past participle; she spelled it out 
for him: “the word is spelt like this”

Spice Girls
Victoria Beckham was Posh Spice; Melanie Brown was Scary Spice; Emma Bunton 
was Baby Spice; Melanie Chisholm was Sporty Spice; Geri Halliwell was Ginger 
Spice

spicy
not spicey

Spider-Man
for the cartoon and film character, but Spiderman (no hyphen) is the nickname 
of Alain Robert, a Frenchman who specialises in climbing skyscrapers without a 
safety net

spilled or spilt?
spilled is the past tense, spilt is the past participle; she spilled the 
beans: the beans were all spilt

spin doctor

spin-off
noun, spin off verb

spinster
avoid this old-fashioned term, which has acquired a pejorative tone; say, if 
relevant, that someone is an unmarried woman

spiral, spiralling
prices (and other things) can spiral down as well as up; try a less cliched 
word that doesn’t suggest a circular movement

split infinitives
”The English-speaking world may be divided into (1) those who neither know nor 
care what a split infinitive is; (2) those who do not know, but care very much; 
(3) those who know and condemn; (4) those who know and distinguish. Those who 
neither know nor care are the vast majority, and are happy folk, to be envied.” 
(HW Fowler, Modern English Usage, 1926)

It is perfectly acceptable, and often desirable, to sensibly split infinitives 
– “to boldly go” is an elegant and effective phrase – and stubbornly to resist 
doing so can sound pompous and awkward (“the economic precipice on which they 
claim perpetually to be poised”) or ambiguous: “He even offered personally to 
guarantee the loan that the Clintons needed to buy their house” raises the 
question of whether the offer, or the guarantee, was personal.

Raymond Chandler wrote to his publisher: “Would you convey my compliments to 
the purist who reads your proofs and tell him or her that I write in a sort of 
broken-down patois which is something like the way a Swiss waiter talks, and 
that when I split an infinitive, God damn it, I split it so it will stay 
split.” And after an editor tinkered with his infinitives, George Bernard Shaw 
said: “I don’t care if he is made to go quickly, or to quickly go – but go he 
must!”

spoiled or spoilt?
spoiled is the past tense, spoilt is the past participle; she spoiled her son: 
in fact he was a spoilt brat

spokesman, spokeswoman
a quote may be attributed to the organisation, eg “The AA said … “, but if 
necessary say spokesman or spokeswoman rather than spokesperson (assuming they 
have actually spoken to you)

SpongeBob SquarePants
is his full name; SpongeBob after first mention

sponsorship
We are under no obligation to carry sponsors’ names. So London Marathon, not 
Virgin London Marathon, etc. When a competition is named after a sponsor, it is 
unavoidable: Friends Provident t20, etc

spoonful, teaspoonful
plural spoonfuls, teaspoonfuls, not the old-fashioned spoonsful, teaspoonsful


sprang or sprung?
sprang is the past tense of spring; sprung is the past participle. When we got 
this wrong, a reader commented: “The error sprang out at me immediately as it 
should have sprung out to your subeditor”

spree
shopping or spending, not shooting: describing a series of murders as a 
“killing spree” sounds flippant

spring, summer, autumn, winter

spun
is the past tense and past participle of spin, despite “when Adam delved and 
Eve span” (1560), which is an older past tense form

square brackets
are used for interpolated words in quotations, eg David Cameron said: “Theresa 
[May] has my full support.”

They can clutter up a piece and make it difficult to read, as in this example: 
“I was in awe of the place as a player. You looked at Man United and you saw 
men. [Eric] Cantona, Giggs, [David] Beckham, [Andrei] Kanchelsis, Bryan Robson, 
it just went on.” And on, he might have added. The subeditor was trying to 
help, but you’d have to have spent 10 years on another planet not to know who 
“Cantona” or “Beckham” are.

Use square brackets sparingly and only when they will help, rather than insult 
[the intelligence of] the reader

square metres
not the same as metres squared: eg 300m squared is 90,000 sq m which is very 
different from 300 sq m; we often get this wrong

Square Mile
rather old-fashioned term for City of London

squaw
is regarded as offensive and should be avoided

SSSI
site of special scientific interest

stadium
plural stadiums, not stadia

staff
are plural

stalactites
cling from the ceiling; stalagmites grow from the ground

stalemate
in chess, a stalemate is the end of the game, and cannot be broken or resolved;
deadlock or impasse are more suitable for metaphorical use in such cases as 
“Zawiyah – 30 miles from the capital – is a metaphor for Libya’s current 
stalemate, which could itself end at any moment”

Stalin, Joseph
not Josef

stampede
should be reserved for herds of animals, and not used in tragedies involving 
crowds of people, for example at the hajj in Mina in 2015. People are crushed 
to death in high-density crowds and typically die of asphyxiation, not because 
they are trampled in the way that “stampede” implies. Human “stampedes” are 
very unusual, and rarely fatal.

The word “stampede” suggests a panicking mass of people who are collectively 
responsible for trampling others to death, whereas in fact the deaths occur (at 
a slower speed) as an accidental result of high densities. Those who allow such 
densities to build up are responsible and as a result, as with Hillsborough, 
they are often keen to portray the event as a panic or a stampede.

We should follow the experts and use the term “crowd crush” or similar

standoff

standout, standup
adjectives, as in a standup comedian performing a standout standup routine; 
nouns, as in one standout was a standup performing standup

Stansted

Star Wars
the Empire, the Force, lightsaber.

dark side: Darth Maul, Darth Sidious, Darth Vader, Emperor Palpatine (or just 
the Emperor).
light side: Jedi knights (or just Jedi), Rebel Alliance, Obi-Wan Kenobi, 
Qui-Gon Jinn, Princess Leia, Yoda.

Wookiee (note two Es), a species of which Chewbacca is a member 

Starck, Philippe
French designer

Starkey, Zak
(not Zac) son of Ringo Starr; plays drums for the Who

start up
verb; startup noun (as in business startup); star tup top-performing ram

state department
its official name is US Department of State

statehouse
office of the state governor in the US, one word except in New Jersey where it 
is the state house

State of the Union address

stationary
motionless; also used by some stationery shops to mean stationery; stationery 
writing materials; also used by some signwriters to mean stationary

staunch
verb: to stop the flow of something, eg blood or confidence;
adjective: steadfast, eg a staunch defender of human rights

STD or STI?
STI (sexually transmitted infection) is a broader term than STD (sexually 
transmitted disease): you can have the infection without feeling ill or 
displaying any symptoms

steamboat, steamhammer, steampunk, steamship

steam engine

steelworker, steelworks

Stelios
Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou, founder of easyJet; Haji-Ioannou after first 
mention, although Stelios is acceptable in headlines

sten gun

stentorian
loud, sometimes confused with stertorous, a snoring sound

stepfamily, stepfather, stepmother
etc, but step-parents. Don’t confuse, say, a stepsister and half-sister, as we 
did when writing about Barack Obama’s family

Stephen or Steven?
Stephen Baldwin, Stephen Chow (actors), Stephen Colbert (satirist), Stephen 
Crane (wrote The Red Badge of Courage), Stephen Foster (wrote Oh! Susanna), 
Stephen Fry (national treasure), Stephen Jay Gould (biologist), Stephen Hawking 
(physicist), Stephen King (novelist), Stephen Merchant (Ricky Gervais 
collaborator).

Steven Gerrard (footballer), Steven Moffat (Doctor Who writer and producer), 
Steven Spielberg (film director)

sterling
the pound; also sterling qualities

Stetson
TM; hat

sticky-back plastic

stiletto
plural stilettos (not stilettoes)

still life
plural still lifes (not lives)

stilton
cheese

stimulus
plural stimuli

Stirling prize
awarded annually by the Royal Institute of British Architects

Stock Exchange
caps when referring to the London Stock Exchange; but lc in other countries, 
eg Hong Kong stock exchange

stock in trade

stock market

stolen generations
Australian Aboriginal children forcibly removed from their families

stone age
The charity Survival says: “ ‘Stone age’ and ‘primitive’ have been used to 
describe tribal people since the colonial era, reinforcing the idea that they 
have not changed over time and that they are backward. This idea is both 
incorrect and very dangerous: incorrect because all societies adapt and change, 
and dangerous because it is often used to justify the persecution or forced 
‘development’ of tribal people”

stony broke, stony-hearted
not stoney

stopgap

storey
plural storeys (buildings); story plural stories (tales)

Storm Abigail, Storm Barney
etc

straight away, straightforward, home straight, final straight

straitjacket, strait-laced, Dire Straits

strait of Dover, strait of Gibraltar, strait of Hormuz
not Strait, Straits or straits

straitened circumstances, straitened times
not “straightened”, one of our most frequent errors

Strategic Rail Authority
SRA on second mention

Stratford-on-Avon
district council and parliamentary seat, although most other local 
organisations, such as the Royal Shakespeare Company, call this Warwickshire 
town Stratford-upon-Avon

stratum
plural strata

Street-Porter, Janet

streetwise

stretchered off
has a slight ring of Charles Buchan’s Football Monthly; say carried off

strippergram

students’ union
lowercase in full name, eg Sheffield University students’ union

stumbling block

stumm
as in “keep stumm”, not schtum

Sturm und Drang
German literary movement

STV
single transferable vote

stylebook
but style guide

Subbuteo
table football game in which players “flick to kick”, named after the bird of 
prey Falco subbuteo (the hobby) and immortalised in the Undertones’ My Perfect 
Cousin

subcommittee, subcontinent, sublet, subplot, subsection

subeditors, subs
Journalists who traditionally edit, check and cut copy, write headlines and 
other page furniture, and design pages; to which can be added, in the digital 
age, an ever-widening range of multimedia and technical skills. In some 
countries, eg the US and Canada, they are known as copy editors.

WP Crozier said of CP Scott: “As a subeditor he got rid of the redundant and 
the turgid with the conscientiousness of a machine that presses the superfluous 
moisture out of yarn. The man who passed ‘seaward journey to the great 
metropolis’, and when the copy came back to him found written in firm blue 
pencil ‘voyage to London’, knew what sort of English ‘CP’ liked”

subfusc
an adjective meaning dull and gloomy or a noun for the dark clothing worn for 
exams and formal occasions at some universities

subjunctive
Fowler noted that the subjunctive was “seldom obligatory” and Somerset Maugham 
declared half a century ago: “The subjunctive mood is in its death throes, and 
the best thing to do is put it out of its misery as soon as possible.” Would 
that that were so.

Most commonly, the subjunctive is a third person singular form of the verb 
expressing hypothesis, typically something demanded, proposed, imagined: he 
demanded that she resign at once, I propose that she be sacked, she insisted 
Jane sit down.

It is particularly common in American English and in formal or poetic 
contexts: If I were a rich man, etc, and you have to admit the song sounds 
better than “If I was a rich man ...”

We get this wrong at least as often as we get it right. Two examples from the 
same issue in April 2010 in which “was” should be “were”:
“If every election or ballot in which there are cases of bad practice was to 
be invalidated, democracy would soon become a laughing stock ...” (leading 
article); “If this was the centred Conservative party that Cameron claims, its 
strategists wouldn’t be half as worried as they are ...” (column)

Nobody died and no great harm was done, but as professional writers we should 
be aware of the distinction. Used properly, the subjunctive can add elegance to 
your writing; an object lesson was provided in a Gary Younge column of 5 July 
2010: “It was as though Charlie Brown’s teacher were standing for leader of the 
opposition ... “ (one of three examples of the subjunctive in the piece).

As with the hyper-corrective misuse of whom instead of who, however, using the 
subjunctive wrongly is worse than not using it at all, and will make you look 
pompous and silly

submachine gun

submarines
are boats, not ships

subpoena, subpoenaed

subpostmaster, subpostmistress
although the organisation is the National Federation of SubPostmasters

sub-prime, sub-Saharan

substitute

Is it by, with or for? If you don’t choose the right preposition, it’s not 
always easy to see who’s replaced whom.

Let’s say Player A is injured and Player B comes on as a substitute. So: the 
manager replaces Awith B; A is replaced by B; the manager has substituted B for 
A; B is substitutedfor A

suchlike

sucking-pig
not “suckling-pig”

Sudan
not “the Sudan”

sudoku

sue, sued, suing
(not sueing)

suffer little children
nothing to do with suffering, this frequently misquoted or misunderstood 
phrase was used by Christ (Luke 18:16) to mean “allow the little children to 
come to me”; it is also the title of a song about the Moors murders on the 
first Smiths album

suicide
Say that someone killed him or herself rather than “committed suicide”; 
suicide has not been a crime in the UK for many years and this old-fashioned 
term can cause unnecessary further distress to families who have been bereaved 
in this way.

Journalists should exercise particular care in reporting suicide or issues 
involving suicide, bearing in mind the risk of encouraging others. This applies 
to presentation, including the use of pictures, and to describing the method of 
suicide. Any substances should be referred to in general rather than specific 
terms. When appropriate, a helpline number (eg Samaritans) should be given. The 
feelings of relatives should also be carefully considered.

The following note should be added to stories about suicide:
In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123.
In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. 
In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. 
Change the order if necessary to reflect the context and origin of the story; 
only the Samaritans number need be used in print editions, which are not sold 
outside the UK

summer

summer solstice
the longest day of the year, but not the same as Midsummer Day (although we 
often seem to assume it is)

sun, the
celestial body

Sun, the
newspaper, but just call it the Sun, not “the Sun newspaper”

Sunday Sun
long-established newspaper covering the north-east of England, not to be 
confused with the Sunday edition of the Sun

Super Bowl

supercasino, superinjunction

superlatives
“Superlatives must be used very sparingly, in every sense. We do not wish to 
give the impression that we live in a constant state of excitement.”


Sound advice from AP Wadsworth, the then editor, in the 1950 edition of the 
Manchester Guardian stylebook


supermarkets
Marks & Spencer or M&S, Morrisons, Safeway, Sainsbury’s, Tesco (no wonder 
people get confused about apostrophes)

supermodel
model is normally sufficient

supernova
plural supernovae

Super Pac
an “independent-expenditure only” political action committee that can raise 
unlimited sums from corporations, unions and other groups, as well as 
individuals, in support of a US political candidate or party

supersede
not supercede

supine
face up; prone face down

supply days
(parliament)

supreme court

Sure Start

surge
prefer rise or increase, if that is the meaning; but surge is preferable to 
“upsurge”

Suriname
(not Surinam); formerly Dutch Guiana

surrealism

Sutcliff, Rosemary
British historical novelist (1920-92) whose works include The Eagle of the 
Ninth

svengali
(lc) although named after the sinister Svengali in George du Maurier’s 1894 
novel Trilby

swap
not swop

swat
flies

swot
books

swath, swaths
broad strip (of land), eg cut a wide swath; from the Old English swaeth, which 
in turn comes from the Old Norse svath - a smooth patch

swathe, swathes
baby clothes, bandages, wrappings; from the Old English swaethian, related to 
swaethel - swaddling clothes

swearwords
We are more liberal than any other newspapers, using language that most of our 
competitors would not. The statistics tell their own story: the word “fuck” 
(and its variants) appeared 705 times in the Guardian in the 12 months to April 
2010, with a further 269 mentions in the Observer. (The figures for other 
national newspapers were as follows: Independent 279, Independent on Sunday 74, 
Times 3, Sunday Times 2, all other papers 0.) The figures for the C-word, still 
regarded by many people as taboo, were: Guardian 49, Observer 20, Independent 
8, Independent on Sunday 5, everyone else 0.

Even some readers who agree with Lenny Bruce that “take away the right to say 
fuck and you take away the right to say fuck the government” might feel that we 
sometimes use such words unnecessarily, although comments in response to 
Guardian Style’s blogpost on the subject were overwhelmingly in support of our 
policy.

The editor’s guidelines are as follows:

First, remember the reader, and respect demands that we should not casually 
use words that are likely to offend.

Second, use such words only when absolutely necessary to the facts of a piece, 
or to portray a character in an article; there is almost never a case in which 
we need to use a swearword outside direct quotes.

Third, the stronger the swearword, the harder we ought to think about using it.

Finally, never use asterisks, or such silliness as b------, which are just a 
cop-out, as Charlotte Brontë recognised: “The practice of hinting by single 
letters those expletives with which profane and violent people are wont to 
garnish their discourse, strikes me as a proceeding which, however well meant, 
is weak and futile. I cannot tell what good it does – what feeling it spares – 
what horror it conceals”

swingeing

swinging 60s

sync
as in “out of sync”, but lip-synch, lip-synching

synopsis
plural synopses

syntax
Beware of ambiguous or incongruous sentence structure – the following appeared 
in a column in the paper: “This argument, says a middle-aged lady in a business 
suit called Marion, is just more London stuff ... “ (What were her other 
outfits called?).

In English, unlike some languages, the slightest difference in word order can 
change the meaning: we referred to the “number of average holidays taken a year 
by the most affluent households”, an apparent comment on the quality of the 
holidays rather than what we actually meant, which was the average number of 
holidays

synthesis, synthesise, synthesiser

systematic
methodical

systemic
relating to a system

A <https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-b> C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-c> D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-d> E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-e> F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-f> G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-g> H 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-h> I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-i> J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-j> K 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-k> L 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-l> M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-m> N 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-n> O 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-o> P 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-p> Q 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-q> R 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-r> S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-s> T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-t> U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-u> V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-v> W 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-w> X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-x> Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-y> Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-z>
 