
I want to take out a subscription to the Guardian Weekly. How do your 
subscriptions work?

The Guardian Weekly can be posted to addresses all over the world. You can 
sign up onlinehere  <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly/subscribe>or by 
telephone, see below to find the right telephone number for your country. We 
also regularly advertise our subscription service in the paper.

When you apply for a subscription you will be shown or given an earliest start 
date for your subscription. You can opt to defer the start date for up to 8 
weeks.

How much do I pay?

The cost of your subscription will depend on where you live. We do not charge 
for delivery and you will pay less to have your weekly copy posted to you than 
if you buy it at a newsstand. Some promotions include a special introductory 
offer. The terms of our introductory offers are stated in the promotional 
materials. At the end of any introductory offer period, the standard 
subscription prices will apply. We guarantee that if you take out a 
subscription, we will not pass on any increases in our cover price for at least 
the first 12 months.

Subscription prices vary by country. Click here 
<https://www.myguardianweekly.co.uk/subscribe/> to check prices in your country.

Please note that charges and currencies are applied according to delivery 
country.

In some circumstances, we will accept a payment in £GB as an alternative to 
payment in local currency, in which case the rates quoted for the rest of world 
will apply.

How do I pay?

Most of our subscribers pay quarterly by direct debit (UK only) or by Visa or 
Mastercard credit or debit card. There is also an option to make a one-off 
payment for a fixed number of issues by credit or debit card.

Is my online payment secure? 

Yes any information we obtain from you is kept secure. We use SSL software to 
encrypt your personal and payment information.

What is the minimum subscription term?

If you opt to pay quarterly, you enter into an open ended agreement with the 
Guardian Weekly on purchasing a subscription, with a minimum term of 12 months. 
We guarantee that during that 12 month period you will be protected against any 
price increases. In some of our introductory offers there is a trial period 
during which you are entitled to cancel without any further obligation. This 
will be specified within the promotional material.

When can I expect my copies to arrive? 

Copies are posted prior to the publication day (Friday) and in most cases will 
arrive by the publication day. However, please note, we can't guarantee this 
for every address in every region.

What happens if my copies arrive late or I miss an issue?

If your copies are persistently late, or you do not receive an issue, please 
contact your local customer services team to seek an appropriate solution. See 
below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

I'm moving/going away. Can my subscription be redirected?

Yes. Please let us have at least 2 weeks' notice of any change of address. 
Provided you are moving within the same country, you can update your address 
details online using the Manage My Account service. You'll need your Subscriber 
ID to login. Log in toManage My Account here 
<https://www.myguardianweekly.co.uk/login.aspx>.

If you are moving to a different country, please contact your local customer 
services team as they will need to make any adjustments to your payments.
See below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

I'm going away. Can my subscription be suspended?

Yes. You can take up to 6 weeks' subscription 'holiday' in any one 
subscription year. Please let us have at least 2 weeks' notice. You can confirm 
the dates between which you will be away online using the Manage My Account 
service. You'll need your Subscriber ID to login. Log into Manage My Account 
here.
You can also have your papers redirected to a temporary address, as long as it 
is within the same country. You will need to contact your local customer 
service team to arrange this.

See below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

What if I need to cancel my subscription?

Your subscription cannot normally be cancelled until the end of your minimum 
subscription period. If you have no minimum subscription period, or your 
minimum subscription period has expired or expires within one month, you can 
cancel giving us at least 30 days' notice by calling your local customer 
service team.

See below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

You also have certain statutory cancellation rights. See our Terms and 
Conditions here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/jul/10/guardian-weekly-print-subscription-services-terms-conditions>
 for more details regarding cancellation.

Do you send confirmations of orders/changes I make online?

Yes. We acknowledge your online transactions by email. In the event that you 
do not receive any confirmations we recommend you contact our customer services 
team to check your email address details.

See below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

Why do you need my email address?

We prefer to send acknowledgements by email as it means you get the 
information quicker and it helps us keep our costs down.

If we have an email address we can keep you up to date with important 
information about your account and also let you know about any special offers 
that are available to subscribers.

As a subscriber, do I get any additional benefits?

There are additional benefits of being a subscriber such as: a weekly email 
newsletter from the Guardian Weekly editor; occasional gifts and special offers 
(recent examples include free e-book downloads and money off vouchers for Folio 
Society books)

We also guarantee that as a subscriber we will not pass on any increases in 
our cover price for at least the first 12 months. Any new price that you agree 
to after that point will also be guaranteed for a year.

I would like to buy a gift subscription, is this possible?

Yes, you can buy a subscription as a gift. You can do this online here  
<https://www.myguardianweekly.co.uk/subscribe/>or by telephone by contacting 
your local customer service team.
See below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

Please note that we will ask for payment in the currency of the country into 
which the copies will be delivered.

How do I notify you of a change of address?

You can do this online using the Manage My Account service here 
<https://www.myguardianweekly.co.uk/login.aspx>, or by contacting your local 
customer services team.

See below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

How do I notify you of a change of bank/card details?

You can do this by contacting your local customer services team.

See below to find the details for the relative customer services team for your 
country.

How do I renew my subscription?

If you opt to make a one-off payment, we will invite you to renew your 
subscription either by email or by letter. You will have the option to move 
onto quarterly payments or renew by making another one-off payment. You are 
under no obligation to accept any of these invitations. If you choose to 
accept, you will be bound by the terms of the renewal offer.

When should I renew my subscription? Will I miss any issues?

You can renew at any time during your subscription. In order to avoid missing 
any copies make sure you give us at least 30 days' notice. If you switch to 
paying quarterly, you will never have to worry about missing any issues.
What do you do with my personal data?

We use third parties to fulfill certain parts of the subscription service on 
our behalf. This means that the information provided by you is passed to such 
third parties. This information will only be used for the purposes of providing 
the subscription service to you and will be dealt with in accordance with our 
privacy policy. You can read our Privacy Policyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy> for details regarding how we 
use your personal information.

You can read our privacy policy here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>.

For more information

If there is anything else you need to know, please contact us on these numbers 
and via the addresses here.

Please ensure that you quote your Subscriber ID when contacting customer 
services.

You can read our terms and conditions in full .

Customer Services contact details

Please ensure that you quote your Subscriber ID when contacting customer 
services.

UK, Europe and all other countries excluding Australia, New Zealand, Canada 
and the US(details for these below)
Tel. + 44 (0) 330 333 6767 Fax: +44 (0) 1444 445301
Email: guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com
Address: The Guardian Weekly, Quadrant Subscription Services, Rockwood House, 
9-17 Perrymount Rd, Haywards Heath RH16 3DH, UK

Australia, New Zealand, and Asia Pacific
Tel. 1800 809 233 toll free or +61 (0)2 9327 1266 Fax +61 (0)2 9362 3035
Email: guardian.australia.subs@quadrantsubs.com
Address: GPO Box 70, Sydney, 2001, NSW, Australia

Canada and USA
Toll Free: 1-888-730-4819 Direct: 1-636-736-4900 Fax: 1-636-787-0593
Email: guardian.na.subs@quadrantsubs.com
Address: The Guardian, PO Box 868, Chesterfield, MO 63006-9943, USA 

You can read our terms and conditions in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/jul/10/guardian-weekly-print-subscription-services-terms-conditions>
.
 