
Editors

Lenore Taylor: editor
 Lenore Taylor 
Lenore has won two Walkley awards and has twice won the Paul Lyneham award for 
excellence in press gallery journalism. She co-authored a book, Shitstorm, on 
the Rudd government’s response to the global economic crisis.


Email: lenore.taylor@theguardian.com / Twitter: @lenoretaylor



 Will Woodward 
Will Woodward: deputy editor

Will joined the Guardian in 1998, and has been editor of G1 (the news section 
of the paper), deputy national editor, chief political correspondent and 
education editor. He is a former Laurence Stern fellow at the Washington Post.

Email: will.woodward@theguardian.com / Twitter: @whwoodward 




News desk
 Mike Ticher 
Mike Ticher: news editor

Mike has held numerous roles at the Sydney Morning Herald and has previously 
worked on the sports desk at the Guardian. He was the founding editor of the 
independent football magazine When Saturday Comes.

Email: mike.ticher@theguardian.com / Twitter: @mikewsc1



 Patrick Keneally 
Patrick Keneally: deputy news editor

Patrick previously worked as a subeditor at the Guardian in London. He has 
also worked at the Sunday Telegraph and other newspapers in Australia and the 
UK, and as a ministerial media adviser.

Email: patrick.keneally@theguardian.com / Twitter: @patrickkeneally



 Bridie Jabour 
Bridie Jabour: assistant news editor

Bridie has reported on federal politics, state elections and social issues as 
a general news reporter for the Guardian. She worked as a journalist for 
Fairfax and News Corp Australia before starting at Guardian Australia in 2013.

Email: bridie.jabour@theguardian.com / Twitter: @bkjabour







Canberra
 Katharine Murphy 
Katharine Murphy: political editor

Katharine was national affairs correspondent for the Age and the Sydney 
Morning Herald and had senior roles at the Australian and the Australian 
Financial Review. She has worked in Canberra’s parliamentary gallery for 15 
years.

Email: katharine.murphy@theguardian.com / Twitter: @murpharoo



 Gabrielle Chan 
Gabrielle Chan: chief political correspondent

Gabrielle has been a journalist for 30 years. She has previously worked for 
the Australian, the ABC, the Daily Telegraph and as a political correspondent 
at the Hoopla.

Email: gabrielle.chan@theguardian.com / Twitter: @gabriellechan



 Paul Daley 
Paul Daley: journalist

Paul writes about Indigenous history, Australian culture and national 
identity. He has won a number of journalism prizes including two Walkley 
awards, the Paul Lyneham award for political journalism and two Kennedy awards. 
He is also a novelist and playwright.

Twitter: @PPDaley



 Gareth Hutchens 
Gareth Hutchens: reporter

Gareth has reported on economics, federal politics, courts, and business. He 
joined the Guardian’s Canberra bureau in 2016 as their politics and economics 
correspondent. He has previously worked for the Sydney Morning Herald and The 
Age.

Email: gareth.hutchens@theguardian.com / Twitter: @grhutchens



 Paul Karp 
Paul Karp: reporter


Paul was previously a journalist at Thomson Reuters covering industrial 
relations for the Workforce news service and has written for Justinian, the 
Gazette of Law and Journalism and ABC’s The Drum.

Email: paul.karp@theguardian.com / Twitter: @Paul_Karp








Sydney
 Ben Doherty 
Ben Doherty: reporter

Ben is a former foreign correspondent for the Guardian, covering south-east 
Asia, and for the Sydney Morning Herald, reporting across south Asia. He is 
twice a Walkley award winner for his foreign reporting.

Email: ben.doherty@theguardian.com / Twitter: @bendohertycorro



 Paul Farrell 
Paul Farrell: reporter

Paul is a reporter for Guardian Australia. He co-founded the Detention Logs 
website and has produced stories and investigations for the ABC, Crikey, PBS 
and New Matilda

Email: paul.farrell@theguardian.com / Twitter: @FarrellPF



 Elle Hunt 
Elle Hunt: reporter

Elle joined Guardian Australia after moving from New Zealand, where she was a 
founder and producer of the Wireless, a digital-only initiative of the national 
public service broadcaster.

Email: elle.hunt@theguardian.com / Twitter: @mlle_elle



 Christopher Knaus 
Christopher Knaus: reporter

Christopher has previously worked at The Canberra Times, where he covered 
crime, courts, and politics for about six years.

Email: christopher.knaus@theguardian.com / Twitter: @knaus



 David Marr 
David Marr: journalist

David is widely regarded as one of Australia’s most influential commentators, 
writing on subjects such as politics, censorship, the media and the arts. He 
has been a journalist since 1973 and is the recipient of four Walkley awards 
for journalism.



 Amanda Meade 
Amanda Meade: media correspondent

Amanda is Guardian Australia’s media correspondent and writes the media diary 
the Weekly Beast. She has been a journalist since 1989, first at the Sydney 
Morning Herald and then at the Australian.

Email: theweeklybeast@theguardian.com / Twitter: @meadea



 Michael Slezak 
Michael Slezak: environment reporter

Before joining Guardian Australia, Michael spent four years at New Scientist. 
Whilst there he won several awards for his journalism.

Email: michael.slezak@theguardian.com / Twitter: @MikeySlezak







Melbourne
 Gay Alcorn 
Gay Alcorn: Melbourne editor

Gay has been a journalist for more than 20 years and is a three-times Walkley 
award winner. She is the former editor of The Sunday Age and was also a 
columnist for The Age.

Email: gay.alcorn@theguardian.com / Twitter: @gay_alcorn



 Melissa Davey 
Melissa Davey: Melbourne bureau chief 

Melissa previously worked as a news reporter for Fairfax, including the Sydney 
Morning Herald and Sun Herald. She has strong medical reporting experience, 
having completed further studies in epidemiology and biostatistics.

Email: melissa.davey@theguardian.com / Twitter: @MelissaLDavey



 Calla Wahlquist 
Calla Wahlquist: reporter

Calla was a political reporter at the Fairfax regional newspaper the Examiner 
in Tasmania and worked as a police reporter for New Corp in Perth. At Guardian 
Australia she covers Western Australia, with a focus on Indigenous issues and 
legal affairs.

Email: calla.wahlquist@theguardian.com







Brisbane
 Joshua Robertson 
Joshua Robertson: reporter

Joshua previously worked on the investigations desk and covered organised 
crime – reporting extensively on outlaw motorcycle clubs – for the Courier-Mail 
and the Sunday Mail. He studied philosophy and history at the University of 
Queensland.

Email: joshua.robertson@theguardian.com / Twitter: @jrojourno




Darwin
 Helen Davidson 
Helen Davidson: reporter

Helen has worked as an online journalist for SBS World News Australia and was 
previously a news and interactive journalist for news.com.au, where she 
liveblogged major news events.

Email: helen.davidson@theguardian.com / Twitter: @heldavidson







International desk
 David Munk 
David Munk: international news editor

David looks after the Asia Pacific region for the Guardian’s international 
news team. He is the former head of world news at the UK’s Telegraph Media 
Group. Before that he was deputy head of international news at the Guardian.

Email: david.munk@theguardian.com / Twitter: @davidmunk



 Martin Farrer 
Martin Farrer: international homepages editor

Martin has worked for UK papers the Independent, the Daily Telegraph and the 
Guardian, where he was night editor and then business news editor. He also 
worked at the Australian before joining Guardian Australia.

Email: martin.farrer@theguardian.com / Twitter: @MartinFarrer



 Bonnie Malkin 
Bonnie Malkin: international homepage editor

Bonnie previously worked at the UK Daily Telegraph as Australia correspondent, 
overnight site editor and assistant foreign editor.

Email: bonnie.malkin@theguardian.com / Twitter: @bonniemalkin



 Warren Murray 
Warren Murray: international homepages editor

Warren has worked for the Guardian in London as well as ABC News Online, the 
Irish Independent group in Dublin and capital-city newspapers in Canada. He is 
based in Queensland.

Email: warren.murray@theguardian.com / Twitter: @WarrenNMurray



 Graham Russell 
Graham Russell: international homepages editor

As production editor at Pagemasters, Graham looked after copy subbing for the 
Sydney Morning Herald, the Sun-Herald and the Canberra Times. Graham was also 
chief subeditor at Metro newspaper in London.

Email: graham.russell@theguardian.com / Twitter: @G_J_Russell



 Claire Phipps 
Claire Phipps: senior live blogger

Claire joined the Guardian in London in 1998. She has worked as a news editor 
on the Guardian home desk and as editor of the education and work sections. She 
became the Guardian’s senior live blogger in early 2014 and joined Guardian 
Australia in 2015.

Email: claire.phipps@theguardian.com Twitter: @Claire_Phipps







Opinion
 Gabrielle Jackson 
Gabrielle Jackson: opinion editor

Before joining Guardian Australia, Gabrielle Jackson was a senior journalist 
at the Hoopla. She has previously written for New York’s Village Voice 
newspaper, CNN Travel, New Matilda and the Sydney Morning Herald.

Email: gabrielle.jackson@theguardian.com / Twitter: @gabriellecj



 Lucy Clark 
Lucy Clark: senior editor, opinion and features

Lucy is a journalist and editor with 30 years experience in newspapers and 
magazines in Sydney, London, and New York.

Email: lucy.clark@theguardian.com / Twitter: @lucykateclark



 Greg Jericho 
Greg Jericho: economics writer

Greg writes on economics for Guardian Australia and is also the author of the 
celebrated Grogs Gamut blog. He is a former public servant and author of the 
book The Rise of the Fifth Estate: Social Media and Blogging in Australian 
Politics.

Twitter: @GrogsGamut



 First Dog on the Moon 
First Dog on the Moon: cartoonist

First Dog on the Moon is Australia’s only Walkley award-winning 
marsupial-based cartoonist and has done all sorts of things including books, 
radio, stage shows and a lot of lying down.

Twitter: @firstdogonmoon







Culture
 Steph Harmon 
Steph Harmon: culture editor

Before joining Guardian Australia, Steph was the founding editor of culture 
and politics site Junkee.com. She was also editor of Sydney music and arts 
magazine the Brag.

Email: steph.harmon@theguardian.com / Twitter: @stephharmon



 Stephanie Convery 
Stephanie Convery: deputy culture editor

Stephanie was previously the deputy editor at Overland magazine and a 
freelance writer and arts worker in Melbourne.

Email: stephanie.convery@theguardian.com/Twitter: @gingerandhoney




Features

 Brigid Delaney 
Brigid Delaney: feature writer

Brigid has previously worked as a lawyer and journalist at the Sydney Morning 
Herald, the Telegraph (London), ninemsn and CNN. She is the author of two 
books: This Restless Life and Wild Things.

Email: brigid.delaney@theguardian.com / Twitter: @brigidwd




Sport
 Mike Hytner 
Mike Hytner: sport editor

Mike joined Guardian Australia as sport editor at the beginning of 2015. He 
had previously worked for Eurosport in Paris, London and Sydney for the best 
part of a decade.

Email: mike.hytner@theguardian.com / Twitter: @mike_hytner



 Russell Jackson Photograph: Guardian 
Russell Jackson: deputy sport editor

Russell Jackson is Guardian Australia’s deputy sport editor. He has previously 
written for ESPNCricinfo, The Cricketer and The Cricket Monthly.

Email: russell.jackson@theguardian.com / Twitter: @rustyjacko




Data
 Nick Evershed 
Nick Evershed: data and interactives editor

Nick has worked for Fairfax Media as a multimedia editor. After a short stint 
as a scientist he changed careers and now specialises in data-based 
investigations and multimedia.

Email: nick.evershed@theguardian.com / Twitter: @NickEvershed



 Ri Liu 
Ri Liu: editorial developer

Ri designs and develops interactive content for Guardian Australia. She 
previously worked on projects for The Conversation and Foreign Affairs 
Magazine. Her data visualisation work has been featured in the Washington Post, 
Fast Company, and CityLab.

Email: ri.liu@theguardian.com / Twitter: @riblah







Photography
 Jonny Weeks 
Jonny Weeks: picture editor

Jonny moved to Australia in 2015 after seven years on the picture-desk at the 
Guardian in London. He began his career as a journalist for local newspapers in 
New Zealand and England. He is also a writer and photographer.

Email: jonny.weeks@theguardian.com / Twitter: @weeksjonny
 Mike Bowers 
Mike Bowers: photographer

Mike Bowers is Guardian Australia’s photographer-at-large, primarily covering 
politics in Canberra. He was the managing editor of photography for The Sun 
Herald and Sydney Morning Herald from 2002 to 2008.

Email: mike.bowers@theguardian.com / Twitter: @mpbowers




Video
 Josh Wall 
Josh Wall: video editor

Josh joined Guardian Australia as video editor at the start of 2016.

Email: josh.wall@theguardian.com 




 David Fanner 
David Fanner: deputy video editor

David joined Guardian Australia as deputy video editor in November 2016 

Email: david.fanner@theguardian.com 




Multimedia
 Miles Martignoni 
Miles Martignoni: podcast producer

Miles has been working in radio since 2010 and teaching audio and online media 
at various universities since 2012. He’s created content for Radio National, 
ABC Local Radio, 2SER FM and FBi Radio.

Email: miles.martignoni@theguardian.com / Twitter: @milesage

Audience
 Dave Earley 
Dave Earley: audience development editor

Dave has held senior roles as digital editor at Seven News Brisbane and Quest 
Community Newspapers. He was engagement editor for the Courier-Mail before 
joining Guardian Australia in 2014.

Email: dave.earley@theguardian.com / Twitter: @earleyedition







Production
 Nikki Marhsall 
Nikki Marshall: production editor

Nikki Marshall has been a production journalist at the Sydney Morning Herald 
and the Sun-Herald. She worked at the Guardian in London for eight years until 
2006, and co-wrote its style guide.

Email: nikki.marshall@theguardian.com / Twitter: @MarshallNikki



 Merran Hitchick 
Merran Hitchick: deputy production editor

Merran has been a reporter for newspapers in south-east NSW, production editor 
at the Land and a shift leader at Pagemasters working on the Sydney Morning 
Herald.

Email: merran.hitchick@theguardian.com / Twitter: @merran_h



 Janine Israel 
Janine Israel: subeditor

Janine has worked as a writer and subeditor for publications around the world, 
including Time Out Buenos Aires, the Irish Examiner, Rough Guides, Madison and 
the Sydney Morning Herald.

Email: janine.israel@theguardian.com / Twitter: @newsjanine



 Stuart MacFarlane 
Stuart MacFarlane: subeditor

Stuart previously worked as a page editor at the Sydney Morning Herald. He was 
also shift leader at Pagemasters and has worked at Fairfax Media in production 
and reporting roles.

Email: stuart.macfarlane@theguardian.com / Twitter: @stuartmacfarla5



 Alison Rourke 
Alison Rourke: subeditor

Alison Rourke has written for The Guardian and The Observer newspapers since 
2010. Before that she was a senior journalist with the BBC in London.

Email: alison.rourke@theguardian.com / Twitter: @AlisonRourke 







Partnerships
 Alexandra Spring 
Alexandra Spring: editorial partnerships editor

Alexandra is a Sydney-based journalist who writes about the arts and popular 
culture, particularly film and television. She joined Guardian Australia in 
January 2014.

Email: alexandra.spring@theguardian.com



 