
About the app


What devices does the app work on? 

The Guardian app works on all Android devices running Android 4.1 and up.

What permissions do you request and why? 

You can find a full list of permissions that we request here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/insideguardian/android-app-permissions>. 

Is the app available in all countries?

The app is available in most countries. For more tailored content, you can 
choose the Australian, International, UK and US editions of our content in the 
settings area.

Why can’t I see Sudoku, quizzes or polls? 

We’re working hard to bring every piece of Guardian content to the apps. 
Currently there is a very small amount of content that does not work on mobile 
devices. We hope to change this in the future.

Making your app more personal

How do I add content to my homescreen?

You can add any section, topic or contributor to your homescreen. Simply tap 
the home button next to the content you want. You can find the button at the 
top of any section you’re in, on a contributor’s profile page, or on the right 
hand side of search results. This will add the section, topic or contributor 
directly under the top stories on your homepage.

How can I rearrange the content on my homescreen?

First, open the ‘edit homescreen’ option. You can do this directly from the 
homescreen by tapping the edit button, or via the settings menu. Then, use the 
small drag-handles on the left of each section to order them in a way that 
suits you.

I would prefer a compact layout of homescreen. Is one available?

Yes, the app includes a condensed layout for phones. To change to the 
condensed layout:

 * Tap on the menu button in top left-hand corner of the app 

 * Tap on the settings icon at the bottom of the screen (the button looks like 
a cogwheel)

 * Select ‘Advanced Settings’. 
 * Switch on ‘Condensed layout’ 
How can I remove content from my homescreen?

First, open the ‘Edit homepage’ option. You can do this directly from the 
homescreen by tapping the edit button, or via the settings menu. Then tap the 
home button on the right of any section you want to remove. These sections are 
temporarily moved to the bottom of the list, so if you change your mind you can 
easily find and add them again.

How can I choose which notifications I get?

As well as breaking news, you can choose to get notifications from your 
favourite contributors, liveblogs, series, and football (soccer) teams and 
matches. To do this, just tap the notifications button. For contributors, open 
an article and tap on the contributor’s name. The ‘follow’ option is at the top 
of the page. This will send you a notification when that person publishes a new 
article.

Following a football team will automatically send you goal alerts when they 
score. Search for your team or tap on their crest on a football page. The 
‘follow’ option is at the top of the page. Following a liveblog will send you a 
notification when a key event happens in that story. To enable this, tap the 
‘follow’ option near the top of any liveblog.

How can I manage or stop the notifications I receive?

You can manage your alerts from the settings area. Here, you can choose the 
alerts you no longer wish to receive or unsubscribe from all of them.

 * Tap on the menu button in top left-hand corner of the app 

 * Tap on the settings icon at the bottom of the screen (the button looks like 
a cogwheel)

 * Select ‘Alerts’

 * Then adjust your settings accordingly. 
How can I change the font-size of articles?

In any article, tap on the AA icon towards the top right-hand corner, and then 
use the control to change the text. This will change the size of the text in 
the main portion or the article. Your choice will be remembered for every 
article you then visit.

How can I change the edition?

 * In the app, tap on the menu icon in the top left-hand corner of the screen. 

 * Tap on the settings icon towards to the bottom left-hand corner. 

 * Under ‘Manage’, tap on ‘Edition’. 

 * You can then change to the UK, US, Australian or International Edition.

How do I save articles to read later?


In an article, tap on the bookmark article which can be found in top 
right-hand corner of the screen. You can then access the articles by tapping on 
the menu icon in the top left-hand corner of the screen, tapping on the icon 
with three boxes inside a circle and selecting ‘Saved pages’.

Subscriptions

What do I get with premium tier access?

When you subscribe to the premium tier you get:

• Access to the daily crosswords – available to play offline whenever you want

• Extra content hand-picked from our 200-year-old archive

• An advert-free experience 

How much does a subscription cost?

If you subscribe via Google Play, a premium tier subscription costs £2.49 
(around USD $3.99) a month for new subscribers. Because of exchange rates, the 
exact amount a subscription costs varies from country to country. The 
subscription can be used on compatible Android devices.

If you also want to access the premium tier on iOS devices, becoming a 
Guardian Supporter includes access to the premium tier on both compatible 
Android and iOS devices. Further information about becoming a Supporter can be 
foundhere <https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter>.

I also own an iOS device. Can I use my Google Play subscription on that device?

It is not possible to transfer a Google Play subscription to an iOS device, 
but Guardian Supporter membership includes premium tier access to the Guardian 
app on both compatible Android and iOS devices. If you were to become a 
Supporter you would need to cancel your Google Play subscription. If you would 
like to become a Supporter, you can by goinghere 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter>.

I have an Google Play/iTunes subscription to the Guardian and Observer Daily 
Edition app. Does it include access to the premium tier of the Guardian app?

If you subscribed via iTunes, your subscription can only be used to access the 
Guardian and Observer Daily Edition on compatible iPads and if you subscribed 
via Google Play your subscription can only be used to access the Guardian and 
Observer Daily Edition on compatible Android devices. Whereas a Guardian 
Digital Pack subscription includes access to both the Guardian and Observer 
Daily Edition for Android, Kindle Fire and iPads and the premium tier of the 
Guardian app on Android and iOS devices.

If you were to subscribe to the Digital Pack you would need to cancel your 
Google Play/iTunes subscription. Further information about the Digital Pack can 
be foundhere <https://subscribe.theguardian.com/digital>.

Can I use my subscription on more than one device?

Yes. If you subscribed via Google Play your subscription should automatically 
work on each compatible Android device you’ve signed-in to using your Google 
account. If you are a Guardian print+digital or Direct Pack subscriber you need 
to sign into the app with your subscriber ID and postcode/surname. See the 
question “I have a print+digital/Guardian Digital Pack subscription. Can I use 
it to get access to the premium tier?” for instructions.

If you are a Guardian Member (Supporter, Partner or Patron), please see “I 
became a Guardian Supporter/Partner or Patron. Am I entitled to access the 
premium tier in the Guardian app?”

I have a print+digital/Guardian Digital Pack subscription. Can I use it to get 
access to the premium tier?

Yes, you just need to follow these instructions:

 * From the app’s home screen, app the menu button (the circle with three 
horizontal lines in the top left corner)

 * Then tap the settings button (the cog button in the bottom left) 

 * Tap “Become a Member for just £5/m” Tap “Subscriber £2.49/Month” tab on 
right

 *  Scroll down and tap “I am a Guardian subscriber” Enter your subscriber ID 
and postcode. If you do not have a postcode, enter your surname into the 
postcode box 
I became a Guardian Supporter/Partner or Patron. Am I entitled to access the 
premium tier in the Guardian app?

Yes, you just need to sign into the latest version of the Guardian app with 
your email address and password as follows:


 * In the Guardian app, tap on the menu icon in the top left-hand corner of 
the screen (the icon looks like three horizontal lines).

 * Tap on the cog icon in the navigation bar and select ‘Sign in/Register’.

 * Enter your email address and password.

 * Press ‘sign in’. You should then have ad-free access. 
I have a Guardian Weekly print subscription. Can I get ad-free access to the 
Guardian app?

A Guardian Weekly subscription does not include access to the Guardian and 
Observer Daily editions or the premium tier of Guardian App for Android or 
iPhone, but you can access the Guardian Weekly Digital Edition byhere 
<http://subscriber.pagesuite-professional.co.uk/custompages/9cc33fb9-de8c-4e90-b6ba-545475feb862/subscribe.aspx>
.

If you’ve not previously registered, you will need your subscriber number. If 
you have forgotten your subscriber number or require further assistance with 
accessing the Guardian Weekly Digital edition, please email:
guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com <mailto:guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com>

I have forgotten my subscriber ID. How can I find it?

Your subscriber ID can be found underneath your name on each voucher or, for 
home delivery subscribers or digital pack subscribers, your ID will be found on 
your confirmation email. If you have any problems please email the following 
relevant department:

Guardian Direct Pack subscribers: email digitalpack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:digitalpack@theguardian.com>. Phone: +44 (0) 330 333 6767. Lines are 
open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm BST/GMT. Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm 
BST/GMT. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 numbers from landlines or mobiles.

Home delivery subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 
6767. We are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-5.30pm or Saturday & Sunday 
8.30am-12.30pm, or you can email us atcustomerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk 
<mailto:customerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk>.

Voucher subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 6767. We 
are open 9am-5pm, Monday to Friday, or you can email us at
gnmsubs@quadrantsubs.com <mailto:gnmsubs@quadrantsubs.com>.

Please note that subscriptions taken out via Google Play do not include a 
subscriber ID. The subscription can be used on compatible Android devices and 
should be recognised automatically if you are signed into Google Play with the 
account you used to subscribe.

I subscribed via Google Play, but now I require a refund.

The subscription is fulfilled by Google. You do not pay the Guardian directly. 
We cannot directly offer refunds. They need to be requested via Google Play.

How do I cancel my Google Play subscription?

 * You can cancel your subscription in Google Play as follows.

 * Open the Google Play Store app 

 * Search for Guardian and tap on the result for this app 

 * Select Cancel

How do I cancel my Guardian voucher or home delivery subscription?


Your initial subscription term will normally be for 12 months. If you then 
wish to cancel then please follow the below instructions.

 For voucher subscriptions you should telephone us at least 6 weeks before the 
date printed on the last voucher in your voucher book. The number to call is 
0330 333 6767 (9am-5pm, Monday to Friday, option 2 then option 2 for voucher 
subscriptions).

For home delivery subscriptions please call at least 4 weeks before your 
intended cancellation date. The number to call is 0330 333 6767 (Monday-Friday 
8.00am-5.30pm. Saturday & Sunday 8.30am-12.30pm, option 2 then option 1 for 
home delivery subscriptions). You can read our refunds and cancellations policy 
in fullhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/subscriber-direct/subscription-terms-and-conditions>
.

How do I cancel my Guardian Direct Pack subscription? 

If for any reason you wish to cancel your subscription, please call our 
customer services team on +44 (0)330 333 6765. Lines open Monday – Friday 8am – 
8pm, Saturday and Sunday, including bank holidays, 8am – 6pm.

You can read our refunds and cancellation policy (including your legal right 
to cancel)here <http://gu.com/p/4vgfy>.

How do I cancel my Guardian supporter/partner/patron membership?

You can cancel your membership by following the instructions on this page 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/tier/cancel>. Your membership will run 
until the end of your current payment term.

Offline reading and data

What content is available to read off

Almost all of our content is available to read offline. If you can see a link 
to a piece of content on the homepage or a section page, you should be able to 
read it offline. So simply open the app or visit a section to automatically 
cache all of the most recent content to read wherever you are.

It is also possible to download content for offline reading. In the app, tap 
on the menu icon in the top left-hand corner of the homescreen, tap on the 
settings icon towards to the bottom left-hand corner. Then select ‘Offline 
reading’. You can then choose a time to schedule a download. Pictures are not 
included in the download.

How can I get the app to load new content to read?

On the homepage or any section or topic page, scroll up to the very top, then 
continue to pull down to refresh the content. You will then see the the loading 
animation while the app gets new content. All the content will then be 
available so you can read it offline.

Getting in touch

Guardian Digital Pack subscribers: email – digitalpack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:digitalpack@theguardian.com>. Phone: +44 (0) 330 333 6767. Lines are 
open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm BST/GMT. Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm 
BST/GMT. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 numbers from landlines or mobiles.

Home delivery subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 
6767. We are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-5.30pm or Saturday & Sunday 
8.30am-12.30pm, or you can email us atcustomerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk 
<mailto:customerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk> with any changes to your 
personal details.

Guardian Membership (Supporter, Partner, Patron): email 
membershipsupport@theguardian.com <mailto:membershipsupport@theguardian.com> 
with your question. We will do our best to get back to you within 24 hours. 
Alternatively, you can call the Guardian Members customer services team on +44 
(0)330 333 6898 from 8am to 8pm Monday to Friday and 8am to 6pm at weekends.

Voucher subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 6767. We 
are open 9am-5pm, Monday to Friday, or you can email us at
gnmsubs@quadrantsubs.com <mailto:gnmsubs@quadrantsubs.com>.

If you are not a Guardian Member or subscriber or you pay via Google Play, 
emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. We are open 
10am-6pm Monday to Friday BST/GMT.

Feedback

If you have any suggestions on how we can improve our apps, email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. You can also follow 
@guardianmobile <https://twitter.com/guardianmobile> on Twitter to get news 
from the Guardian mobile team including details of updates.
 