
What is the Guardian app for Windows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/windows-guardian>?
The Guardian app for Windows delivers all the latest news and best content 
from the Guardian and Observer to your phone. Catch up with the day’s sports 
news, comment and reviews, watch video, listen to podcasts and browse stunning 
picture galleries while on the move.

What can I do with the app?
- add multiple live tiles to your start screen
- navigate news by section, topic or contributor
- watch award-winning video content
- listen to podcasts using background audio
- save contributors, topics and sections to your favourites
- customise your home and start screens with your favourites
- swipe through stunning full-screen picture galleries
- share news, articles and galleries
- view content in portrait or landscape orientation

Will it work on my phone?
The app will work on all phones running Windows 10.

How much does it cost?
The app is free and ad-supported.

Where is the app available?
The app is available now from the Windows Marketplace 
<http://www.windowsphone.com/en-GB/apps/da99dbf8-b7e5-4f1c-983c-d84f39240afe> 
where available.

How do favourites work?
Favourites populate the home and favourites pages of your app, and the start 
page of your phone, enabling you to go straight to your top sections, keywords 
or contributors.

How do I create a favourite?
When on a section, keyword or contributor page tap the white star on the 
toolbar. Or when on the sections list, tap and hold a section name. When a 
window pops up, tap “pin to favourites”.

How do I remove a page from my favourites?
Go to the favourites page. Press and hold the relevant tile until a menu pops 
up. Tap “remove from favourites”.

How do I remove a page from my start screen?
Go to the start page. Press and hold the relevant tile until a pin appears 
with a line through it. Tap it and the favourite is removed.

How many favourites can I have?
You can have up to eight favourites but be aware that the more you have the 
slower the app will perform.

How do I change the order of my favourites?
In settings, scroll to favourites. Press and hold the arrows on the right then 
drag and drop them where you want. This will change the order of your 
favourites on the home and favourites pages.

What content is available offline?
The app stores content in the cache, enabling you to read a certain number of 
stories while offline. Once you have viewed a section online you will be able 
to view the same content offline. This content will only update when you next 
go online.

Why don’t I see any images, even when the articles have appeared?
The app downloads pictures after text to ensure you get a better all-round 
experience. When using Wi-Fi or 3G you should see pictures appearing instantly. 
However, if the connection speed is too slow, or you are offline, pictures will 
be prevented from loading.

Why isn’t my content being updated?
The app needs a data connection when opened to retrieve the latest content 
(unless you’ve recently synced it). Without a connection the app will display 
the latest content it can find from the cache. When connected, by default the 
home page will check for updated content every 15 minutes. There is also a 
manual refresh option if you want to update more frequently.

Can I use the Guardian app when I’m abroad?
We advise checking with your operator prior to using the app abroad as most 
monthly plans charge extra for data roaming while overseas. As this can often 
be expensive, either sync using Wi-Fi or contact your service provider for 
details of how to purchase cut-price roaming tariffs.

How do I share content?
From an article or gallery page, tap the share icon on the toolbar at the 
bottom of the screen. This will prompt you to share the content via email.

How do I change the font size?
To change the font size on the article you’re reading, click on the font size 
button on the toolbar at the bottom of the screen. To change the font size 
across all articles, go to Settings and scroll through to “type sizes”. Choose 
the font size you want.

How do I switch off auto-rotate?
It is not possible to switch off auto-rotate within the app. 

How do I remove the app?
On your phone’s application list page, press and hold the Guardian app tile. 
When a menu pops up click “uninstall”.

How do I give you feedback/ideas on how the app can be improved?
We’d like to hear from you if you have any problems or suggestions on how we 
can improve the app. When using the app, go to Settings and scroll through to 
“about this app” and tap the “send feedback” link. To send us feedback now, you 
can comment on ourWindows Phone app blogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2011/oct/07/guardian-app-windows-phone>
 or emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto: userhelp@theguardian.com>. You can 
also follow@guardianmobile <http://twitter.com/#!/guardianmobile> on Twitter to 
get the latest news from theGuardian mobile <https://www.theguardian.com/mobile>
 team.

Please note that queries will be answered by the User Help team during office 
hours, Monday - Friday, 10am-6pm BST/GMT.
 