
A <https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-b> C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-c> D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-d> E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-e> F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-f> G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-g> H 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-h> I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-i> J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-j> K 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-k> L 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-l> M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-m> N 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-n> O 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-o> P 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-p> Q 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-q> R 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-r> S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-s> T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-t> U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-u> V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-v> W 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-w> X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-x> Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-y> Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-z>
 A - style guide illustrations Photograph: Jakob Hinrichs 
a or an before H?
Use an before a silent H: an heir, an hour, an honest politician, an honorary 
consul; use a before an aspirated H: a hero, a hotel, a historian (but don’t 
change a direct quote if the speaker says, for example, “an historic”). With 
abbreviations, be guided by pronunciation: eg an LSE student

A*
(A-level and GCSE) not A-star

A&E
accident and emergency; in the US, it’s ER (emergency room)

abattoir

abbeys
take initial cap, eg Westminster Abbey

Abbottabad
city in Pakistan where Osama bin Laden lived and died

abbreviations and acronyms
Do not use full points in abbreviations, or spaces between initials, including 
those in proper names: IMF, mph, eg, 4am, M&S, No 10, AN Wilson, WH Smith, etc.

Use all capitals if an abbreviation is pronounced as the individual letters 
(an initialism): BBC, CEO, US, VAT, etc; if it is an acronym (pronounced as a 
word) spell out with initial capital, eg Nasa, Nato, Unicef, unless it can be 
considered to have entered the language as an everyday word, such as awol, 
laser and, more recently, asbo, pin number and sim card. Note that pdf and plc 
are lowercase.

If an abbreviation or acronym is to be used more than once in a piece, put it 
in brackets at first mention: so Association of Chief Police Officers (Acpo), 
seasonal affective disorder (Sad); alternatively, use the abbreviation with a 
brief description, eg the conservation charity the RSPB. Remember that our 
international online readership will not necessarily be aware of even 
well-known UK abbreviations. If an organisation is mentioned only once, it is 
not necessary to give its abbreviation or acronym.

Cap up single letters in such expressions as C-list, F-word, “the word 
assassin contains four Ss”, etc

abdicate
renounce high office
abnegate
renounce privileges, deny oneself
abrogate
repeal, abolish
arrogate
take or claim (something) for oneself without justification

abjure
renounce
adjure
urge

aborigines, aboriginal
for indigenous populations other than in Australia, where the traditional term 
“Aborigine” is outdated and offensive to many; the preferred term is Indigenous 
Australians, for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people

abscess

absorb
but absorption

abysmal

abyss

Academy Awards 
or Oscars
individual awards are lowercase, eg best actor award, Oscar for best picture

After first mention, abbreviate the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and 
Sciences tothe Academy


a cappella
Italian for “in the style of the church”, ie unaccompanied singing

Acas
the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service, at first mention; 
thereafter just Acas

accents
Use on French, German, Portuguese, Spanish and Irish Gaelic words (but not 
anglicised French words such as cafe, apart from exposé, lamé, résumé, roué). 
People’s names, in whatever language, should also be given appropriate accents 
where known. Thus: “Arsène Wenger was on holiday in Bogotá with Rafa Benítez”

Accenture
formerly Andersen Consulting; the new name was devised by an employee from 
“accent on the future”

access
has been known as contact since the 1989 Children Act

accommodate, accommodation

accordion
not accordian

achilles heel, achilles tendon

acknowledgment
not acknowledgement

acres
Use hectares, with acres in brackets, rounded up: eg the field measured 25 
hectares (62 acres).

You multiply hectares by 2.47 to convert to acres, or acres by 0.4 to convert 
to hectares

acronyms
See Abbreviations and acronyms <>

act
uc when using full name, eg Criminal Justice Act 1998, Official Secrets Act; 
but lc on second reference, eg “the act”, and when speaking in more general 
terms, eg “we need a radical freedom of information act”; bills remain lc until 
passed into law

Action on Hearing Loss
formerly known as the Royal National Institute for Deaf People (RNID)

actor
Use for both male and female actors; do not use actress except when in name of 
award, eg Oscar for best actress. The Guardian’s view is that actress comes 
into the same category as authoress, comedienne, manageress, “lady doctor”, 
“male nurse” and similar obsolete terms that date from a time when professions 
were largely the preserve of one sex (usually men). As Whoopi Goldberg put it 
in an interview with the paper: “An actress can only play a woman. I’m an actor 
– I can play anything.”

There is normally no need to differentiate between the sexes – and if there 
is, the words male and female are perfectly adequate: Lady Gaga won a Brit in 
2010 for best international female artist, not artiste, chanteuse, or 
songstress.

As always, use common sense: a piece about the late film director Carlo Ponti 
was edited to say that in his early career he was “already a man with a good 
eye for pretty actors ...” As the readers’ editor pointed out in the subsequent 
clarification: “This was one of those occasions when the word ‘actresses’ might 
have been used”

AD, BC
AD goes before the date (AD64), BC goes after (300BC); both go after the 
century, eg second century AD, fourth century BC

adaptation
not adaption

adapter
someone who adapts; adaptor plug

adblocker, adblocking

addendum
plural addendums 

Latinate -um neuter endings that are a part of the language (eg stadium) take 
an -s plural. Exceptions: bacteria, which retain the Latin plural and take a 
plural verb, as do media, but note that spiritualists are mediums

addresses
like this: 90 York Way, London N1 9GU

Adidas
initial cap, although adidas is lc in the company logo

administration
the Obama administration, etc

admissible, inadmissible
not -able

admit
Take care – as a reader put it when we referred to Tory MPs who “admitted” 
being gay: “Admit in modern English is almost exclusively used when conceding 
or confessing something negative and/or of which one is or should be ashamed. 
Please be more careful. Language can offend.” Quite.

The former Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee urged reporters not to “hide 
their biases and emotions behind subtly pejorative words” such as admit

adoption
Mention that children are adopted only when relevant to the story: a reader 
points out that “explicitly calling attention to adoptions in this way suggests 
that adoption is not as good, and not as real a relationship, as having a child 
normally”.
So say biological father, biological family rather than “real father”, “real 
family”, etc

Adrenalin
TM; a brand of adrenaline

adrenaline
hormone that increases heart rate and blood pressure, extracted from animals 
or synthesised for medical uses

advance bookings
rather than “advanced bookings”. Or you could just say “bookings”

Advent calendar

adverbs
Most adverbial phrases do not need hyphens. Never use them after adverbs 
ending in -ly, eg constantly evolving newspaper, genetically modified food, 
hotly disputed penalty, wholly owned subsidiary.

For adverbs that do not end in -ly, use hyphens only when there would be a 
possibility of ambiguity without one, eg an ill-prepared speech.

But phrases such as ever forgiving, near fatal, now defunct, once popular, etc 
do not need hyphens.

Exceptions: much and well when used before a noun, eg a much-loved character 
(but a character who is much loved), a well-founded suspicion (a suspicion that 
is well founded), etc

adverse
unfavourable; averse reluctant
“He was averse to crossing the Irish Sea in such adverse conditions”

adviser
not advisor

advocate
member of the Scottish bar (not a barrister)

aeroplane
in UK; airplane in US; plane works well anywhere

affect/effect
exhortations in the style guide had no effect (noun) on the number of 
mistakes; the level of mistakes was not affected (verb) by exhortations in the 
style guide; we hope to effect (verb) a change in this

affidavit
a written declaration made on oath, so “sworn affidavit” is tautologous

affinity
with or between, not to or for

afghan
hound

Afghans
people

afghani
currency of Afghanistan

aficionado
plural aficionados

African American

African-Caribbean
not Afro-Caribbean

Afrikaans
language

Afrikaner
person

Afrikander
cattle breed

afro
hairstyle

afterlife, aftermath

ageing

ages
David Cameron, 49 (not “aged 49”); Freddie Bawden Marsh, four.

a 62-year-old man; a 62-year-old; 62 years old.

the woman was in her 20s (but twentysomething, thirtysomething, etc)

agenda
plural in origin, but singular in use: “agendum” is simply not on anyone’s 
agenda

Age UK
charity formed by the merger of Age Concern and Help the Aged in 2009

aggravate
Using this word to mean annoy, rather than make worse, really aggravates some 
people. Good. Both meanings have been around for more than 400 years, and there 
is no good reason why both should not be acceptable now.

She only wanted to threaten him and aggravate him ...
Wilkie Collins, The Woman in White (1860) 


aggro
abbreviation of aggravation, and spelt thus despite the once popular terrace 
chant “A, G, A-G-R, A-G-R-O: agro!”

AGM

a-ha
band from Norway; A-ha! Alan Partridge catchphrase, quoting Abba’s Knowing Me, 
Knowing You

ahead of
overused, and often jars (“Why else would they hurriedly concoct their own 
‘Confucius peace prize’, a day ahead of the ceremony in Oslo?” appeared in a 
leading article); before (which should have been used in this case) or in 
advance of are among the alternatives.

The Press Association reported: “Hundreds gathered outside Lichfield Cathedral 
to witness the arrival of a horse-drawn carriage ahead of Stephen’s body ahead 
of his funeral”

aide-de-camp
plural aides-de-camp (aide is a noun)

aide-memoire
plural aide-memoires (aide is a verb)

Aids
acquired immune deficiency syndrome, but normally no need to spell out. 

Do not use such terms as “Aids victims” or someone “suffering from Aids”, 
language that in the words of one reader is “crass, inaccurate and reinforces 
stigma”, implying helplessness and inviting pity; “people with Aids” or “living 
with Aids” are preferable.

Do not use the term “full-blown Aids”. Unesco guidelines state: “This term 
implies that there are varying stages of Aids ... People have Aids only when 
they present with an Aids-defining illness”

airbase, aircraft, aircrew, airdrop, airfield, airlift, airmail, airshow, 
airspace, airstrike, airstrip, airtime

air fare, air force, air raid

aircraft carrier

aircraft designations 
usually with hyphens after initials, eg B-52, MiG-23

Air Force One
US president’s jet

air hostess
cabin attendant or flight attendant, please

airports
Heathrow, Gatwick, Stansted (normally no need to say airport); Liverpool John 
Lennon airport, Schiphol airport, etc

air vice-marshal

AKA
also known as

akimbo
See arms akimbo <>

al-
(note lc and hyphen) before an Arabic name means “the” so try to avoid writing 
“the al- ...” where possible
See Arabic names <>

al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade

Alastair or Alistair?
Alastair Campbell (spin doctor)
Alastair Cook (cricketer)
Alastair Hetherington (late Guardian editor)
Alastair Stewart (broadcaster)

Alistair Cooke (late BBC and Guardian journalist)
Alistair Darling (politician)
Alistair MacLean (late novelist)
Alistair McGowan (impressionist)

Aleister Crowley (late satanist)

Albright, Madeleine
former US secretary of state

Alcott, Louisa May
(1832-88) American author of Little Women

A-levels

Al Fayed, Mohamed
former owner of Harrods and Fulham FC (Fayed after first mention; Mr Fayed if 
honorific is needed); the son who died in Paris in 1997 was Dodi Fayed

Alfonsín, Raúl
(1927-2009) president of Argentina from 1983-89

alfresco

algae
plural of alga

Ali, Muhammad
was Cassius Clay until 1964

alibi
being somewhere else; not synonymous with excuse

alice band
as worn by Alice in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking-Glass, and What Alice 
Found There (1871) and more recently David Beckham

Alice books
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll (Charles Lutwidge Dodgson), 
was published in 1865; its sequel, which followed six years later, is called 
Through the Looking-Glass, and What Alice Found There.
Note that they are not called “Alice in Wonderland” and “Alice Through the 
Looking-Glass”

A-list
etc, but to refer to “C-list celebrities” and its variations has become 
tedious. An edition of G2 referred to “D-list celebrities” and, less than 
hilariously, in a separate piece about the same reality TV show, “Z-list 
celebrities”

al-Jazeera

alkyl nitrite
not nitrate; commonly known as poppers


Allah
Arabic for “the God”. Both words refer to the same concept: there is no major 
difference between God in the Old Testament and Allah in Islam. Therefore it 
makes sense to talk about “God” in an Islamic context and to use “Allah” in 
quotations or for literary effect

Allahu Akbar
“God is greatest”

Allawi, Ayad
Iraqi politician

Allende, Isabel
Chilean author; her father was a cousin of Salvador Allende

Allende, Salvador
Chilean president, overthrown and killed in 1973

allies
second world war allies, the allied invasion, etc

all mouth and trousers
not “all mouth and no trousers”

all right
has traditionally been regarded as right, and alright as not all right 
(although the 1965 Who song, much loved by generations of headline writers and 
still widely quoted today, was The Kids are Alright).

Kingsley Amis in The King’s English said alright was “gross, crass, coarse and 
to be avoided” but admitted this was “a rule without a reason”.

Note, however, the difference between “she got the answers all right” and “she 
got the answers, alright!”

All Souls College
Oxford, no apostrophe

all together
as one united body: “We are all in it together”

altogether 
completely, totally: “That’s an altogether different matter”

“alt-right”

Use once and in quotes at first mention; use far right at any subsequent 
mentions. Note: far right (noun) and far-right (adjective). More specific 
descriptions can be used where relevant when mentioning individuals associated 
with the movement, but such descriptions should be evidence-based.

al-Maliki, Nouri
(not Nuri) became prime minister of Iraq in 2006

Almo
arm’s-length management organisation

Almodóvar, Pedro
Spanish film-maker

alpha male

al-Qaida
it means “the base”

al-Sadr, Moqtada
creator of the Mahdi army, or as the magazine Red Pepper described it: 
“Moqtada al-Sadr’s not-so-barmy army”

alsatian
dog

Alsatian
person from Alsace

al-Shabaab
Islamist insurgency group in Somalia; it means “the youth”. Singular, not 
plural

also
often redundant

Alta Vista

alter ego
not “altar ego”, as we have been known to spell it

alternative
normally a choice between two courses of action; if there are more than two, 
option or choice may be preferred; beware the trend to use “alternate” instead 
of alternative: in a piece about French politics we wrote “in this juddering 
alternate reality …”

alumnus
plural alumni; although in the UK graduate is preferable

al-Zaidi, Muntazer
Iraqi journalist who served a jail sentence for throwing his shoes at the then 
US president, George Bush

Alzheimer’s disease

AM (assembly member)
member of the Welsh assembly

Amazon
normally no need for com or co.uk

Amazon Prime

ambassador
lc, eg the British ambassador to Washington; “ambassador, you are spoiling us” 
has become a headline cliche

ambience
not ambiance

ambiguity
a common problem in headlines when the subject is omitted from the past tense 
of a verb, as in this example from the paper:

Westworld extras allegedly asked to participate in ‘graphic sexual situations’

Did they allegedly ask, or were they allegedly asked? A simple “were” before 
“asked” would have fixed this. Similarly:

Labour warned of financial crash (did someone warn Labour of an impending 
crash, or did Labour warn someone else?)

Tories paid millions to avoid tax 
Here not only does the reader have to ask whether the Tories paid millions or 
were paid millions, but also whether they paid millions of pounds or millions 
of people, and whether the Tories’ aim was to avoid tax or to enable the 
millions to avoid tax. This is very poor editing


amendments
to the US constitution like this: fifth amendment, 18th amendment, etc

America, Americans
the country is generally the United States or US, although its citizens are 
Americans; we should remember that America includes all of North and South 
America

American Civil Liberties Union
not American Civil Rights Union

American English
Follow US spellings for proper nouns, eg Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Department of Defense, Labor Day, One World Trade Center, Ann 
Arbor, Pearl Harbor

American universities
Take care: “University of X” is not the same as “X University”; most states 
have two large public universities, eg University of Kentucky and Kentucky 
State University, University of Illinois and Illinois State University, etc.

Do not call Johns Hopkins University “John Hopkins” or Stanford University 
“Stamford”

America’s Cup
sailing trophy named after the schooner America, its first winner

Amhrán na bhFiann
Irish national anthem

Amicus
trade union formed by a merger between the AEEU and MSF, now part of Unite 
after a further merger with the TGWU

amid
not amidst.

“James warned, however, that the second half of the year was likely to prove 
more challenging overall amid a weak consumer backdrop.”

Things fall against a backdrop, not amid one. If something is amid the 
backdrop, it’s part of it, and thus completely unremarkable. Some cliches make 
the news sound tired; this one makes the news sound as if it’s not news at all

amok
not amuck

among
not amongst

among or between?
Whatever you may have been told, between is not limited to two parties. It is 
appropriate when the relationship is essentially reciprocal: fighting between 
the many peoples of Yugoslavia, treaties between European countries, etc; among 
belongs to distributive relationships: shared among, etc

amount or number?
amount refers to a quantity, number to something that can be counted, eg an 
enormous amount of energy was exerted by a small number of people

ampersand
Use in company names when the company does: Johnson & Johnson, Marks & 
Spencer, P&O, etc

anaesthetic

analysis
plural analyses

anarchism
A political philosophy that advocates stateless societies, holding the state 
to be undesirable, unnecessary and harmful.

The term “anarchist” is bandied about carelessly, often used by politicians 
and the media to denigrate opponents of the status quo, and should be used with 
care; “self-styled anarchist” should be avoided altogether

ancestors
precede descendants; we frequently manage to get them the wrong way round

and/or
This is horrible. Make your mind up and say either “and” or “or” – whichever 
is more appropriate. The same applies to the phrase “if and when”

Andalucía

Anderson shelter
not Andersen

… And You Will Know Us By The Trail Of Dead

Angkor Wat
Angkor Wat is only one of the 100 or so temples of Angkor, albeit the best 
known (“wat” means temple)

anglicise, anglophile, anglophone

animals
pronoun “it” unless gender established

annex
verb; annexe noun; I am going to annex the annexe for the afternoon

anorexic
is not a superlative of thin. Anorexia is an illness. Like schizophrenia, it 
should not be used as a cheap and lazy metaphor. Anyone who thinks of using a 
phrase such as “positively anorexic” should think again

Ansaphone
TM; use answering machine or answerphone

antenatal

antenna
(insect) plural antennae; (radio) plural antennas

anti-ballistic missile treaty

antichrist

anticipate
Purists say this should not be used to mean expect, but expressions like “they 
did not anticipate any trouble” are now normal usage


anticlimax

antidepressants

antidisestablishmentarianism
position adopted by those opposed to the disestablishment of the Church of 
England.

Not a good headline word


antihero

antipodean, antipodes
terms Australians themselves rarely use; avoid

antisemitic, antisemitism
no hyphen: it does not mean “anti-Semitic”

antisocial

anti-vaxxer
a person who is opposed to vaccinations

anti-war

any more
Please do not say “anymore” any more

apex
plural apexes

apostrofly
“an insect that lands at random on the printed page, depositing an apostrophe 
wherever it lands” according to the Guardian’s former readers’ editor

apostrophes
used to indicate a missing letter or letters (can’t, we’d) or a possessive 
(David’s book).

Don’t let anyone tell you that apostrophes don’t matter and we would be better 
off without them. Consider these four phrases, each of which means something 
different:
my sister’s friend’s books (refers to one sister and her friend).
my sister’s friends’ books (one sister with lots of friends).
my sisters’ friend’s books (more than one sister, and their friend).
my sisters’ friends’ books (more than one sister, and their friends).

The possessive in words and names ending in S normally takes an apostrophe 
followed by a second S (Jones’s, James’s), but be guided by pronunciation and 
use the plural apostrophe where it helps: Mephistopheles’, Waters’, Hedges’ 
rather than Mephistopheles’s, Waters’s, Hedges’s.

Plural nouns that do not end in S take an apostrophe and S in the possessive: 
children’s games, old folk’s home, people’s republic, etc.

Phrases such as butcher’s knife, collector’s item, cow’s milk, goat’s cheese, 
pig’s blood, hangman’s noose, writer’s cramp, etc are treated as singular.

Use apostrophes in phrases such as two days’ time, 12 years’ imprisonment and 
six weeks’ holiday, where the time period (two days) modifies a noun (time), 
but not in nine months pregnant or three weeks old, where the time period is 
adverbial (modifying an adjective such as pregnant or old) – if in doubt, test 
with a singular such as one day’s time, one month pregnant.

Proper names that contain an apostrophe stay the same in the possessive: 
McDonald’s burgers may be delicious but Sainsbury’s are just as good.

Some shops use an apostrophe, wrongly, to indicate a plural (“pea’s”), but 
will generally omit the apostrophe when one is actually required (“new seasons 
asparagus”), a phenomenon sometimes referred to as the greengrocer’s (or 
grocer’s) apostrophe. Try to avoid this

app
an application for, typically, a mobile phone

appal
but as the Prince of Wales might say, it really is appalling

apparatchik

appeal
In British English you appeal against a decision, verdict, etc, you do not 
“appeal the verdict”. After we reported on 9 June 2010 that a convicted 
murderer “successfully appealed the sentence”, a despairing reader wrote: “This 
usage seems to be occurring more and more, sometimes even in headlines. Do 
Guardian journalists not read the style guide?” Not all of them, evidently

appendix
plural appendices

Apple
no longer Apple Computer

apples
lc: cox’s orange pippin, golden delicious, granny smith, etc

appraise
to evaluate

apprise
to inform

April Fools’ Day
also known, less commonly nowadays, as All Fools’ Day; an individual prank, or 
the victim of one, is an April fool, so you might say “one of the greatest 
April fools was the Guardian’sSan Serriffe issue of 1977 
<http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2012/03/23/SanSerriffe1.pdf>
 – it made April fools of all who were taken in”

apropos
Used most commonly to mean “with regard to”, it does not need a preposition, 
so “apropos your question ... “ But note the idiomatic “apropos of nothing ... 
“ which means something like “changing the subject” or “incidentally”.

Used to mean “pertinent” or “relevant to”, now rather rare, you might say “the 
thought was apropos to this” or, even more quaintly, “the point was apropos”.

The French idiom “à propos de bottes” (“with regard to boots”), meaning 
without rhyme or reason, was used by, among others, George Orwell

aquarium
plural aquariums

Arab
Both a noun and an adjective, and the preferred adjective when referring to 
Arab things in general, eg Arab history, Arab traditions. Arabic usually refers 
to the language and literature: “the Arabic press” means newspapers written in 
Arabic, while “the Arab press” would include newspapers produced by Arabs in 
other languages.

There is no simple definition of an Arab. At an international level, the 22 
members of the Arab League can safely be described as Arab countries: Algeria, 
Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, 
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, 
Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen. At a human level, there are 
substantial groups within those countries – the Berbers of north Africa and the 
Kurds, for example – who do not regard themselves as Arabs.

Arabic names
Though Arabic has only three vowels – a, i and u – it has several consonants 
that have no equivalent in the Roman alphabet. For instance, there are two 
kinds of s, d and t. There are also two glottal sounds. This means there are 
dozens of ways of writing the former Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi’s name in 
English, and a reasonable argument can be made for adopting almost any of them. 
With no standard approach to transliteration agreed by the western media, we 
must try to balance consistency, comprehensibility and familiarity – which 
often puts a strain on all three.

Typically, Arabs have at least three names. In some cases the first or second 
name may be the one that is most used, and this does not imply familiarity 
(Arabs often address foreigners politely as “Mr John” or “Dr David”). Often 
Arabs also have familiar names that have no connection with the names on their 
identity cards: a man might become known after the birth of his first son as 
“Abu Ahmad”, and a woman as “Umm Ahmad”, the father or mother of Ahmad (eg the 
Palestinian leader Ahmed Qureia is commonly known as Abu Ala).

Where a particular spelling has become widely accepted through usage we should 
retain it. Where an individual with links to the west has clearly adopted a 
particular spelling of his or her own name, we should respect that. For 
breaking news and stories using names for which we have no established style, 
we take the lead given by Reuters wire copy.

Note also that names in some parts of the Arab world have become gallicised, 
while others have become anglicised, eg the leading Egyptian film director 
Youssef Chahine uses a French spelling instead of the English transliteration, 
Shaheen.

Some guidelines (for use particularly where there is no established 
transliteration)

al- 
Means “the”. In names it is not capitalised, eg Ahmad al-Saqqaf, and can be 
dropped after the first mention (Mr Saqqaf). For placenames we drop it 
altogether. Sometimes it appears as as- or ash- or ad- or ul-: these should be 
ignored and can be safely rewritten as al-. But some Arabs, including Syrians 
and Egyptians, prefer to use el- in place of al-. Exceptions: by convention, 
Allah (al-Lah, literally “the God”) is written as one word and capitalised; and 
in Saudi royal names, Al Saud is correct (in this case, “al” is actually “aal” 
and does not mean “the”).

abdul, abu and bin 
These are not self-contained names, but are connected to the name that 
follows: abdul means “slave of … “ and so cannot correctly be used on its own. 
There are standard combinations, “slave of the merciful one”, “slave of the 
generous one”, etc, which all indicate that the person is a servant of God. In 
transliteration, “abd” (slave) is lowercase, eg Ahmad abd al-Rahman al-Saqqaf, 
except when used at the start of a name. abu (father of) and bin (son of) are 
similar. When they appear in the middle of a name they should be lower case and 
are used in combination with the following part of the name: Faisal abu Ahmad 
al-Saqqaf, Faisal bin Ahmad al-Saqqaf. Despite the above, some people are 
actually known as “Abdul”. This is more common among non-Arab Muslims. And some 
Arabs run “abd” or “abu” into the following word, eg the writer Abdelrahman 
Munif.

Muhammad
Our style for the prophet’s name and for most Muhammads living in Arab 
countries, though where someone’s preferred spelling is known we respect it, eg 
Mohamed Al Fayed, Mohamed ElBaradei. The spelling Mohammed (or variants) is 
considered archaic by most British Muslims, and disrespectful by many of them.

Muhandis/Mohandes, Qadi
Be wary of names where the first word is Muhandis or Qadi: these are honorary 
titles, meaning engineer and judge respectively

European surnames of Arabic origin
The guidelines above do not apply in examples such as the French labour 
minister, Myriam El Khomri. She is French born and only has one surname, which 
appears on her birth certificate and passport, written in the Latin alphabet; 
there is no other spelling. So she should be referred to as Myriam El Khomri at 
first mention and El Khomri thereafter.


Similarly, the two 2016 Brussels airport suicide bombers, Ibrahim and Khalid 
El Bakraoui, were Belgian born. The Belgian legal system and prosecutors refer 
to them by the surname El Bakraoui, and we should too

Arab spring

Aran Island
is off Co Donegal and the Aran Islands off Co Galway in western Ireland; the 
Isle of Arran is the largest island in the Firth of Clyde in Scotland. Aran 
sweaters, whether Irish or Scottish, come in lowercase with an initial cap A

arcane
esoteric; archaic antiquated (yes, we got them the wrong way round)

archbishops
It is not normally necessary to use their formal title, which for both 
Anglicans and Catholics is Most Rev: so Justin Welby, the archbishop of 
Canterbury, at first mention, thereafter Welby or the archbishop (except in 
leading articles, where he is Mr Welby); Vincent Nichols, the archbishop of 
Westminster, on first mention, subsequently Nichols or the archbishop

archdeacon
the Ven Paul Olive, archdeacon of Farringdon, at first mention; thereafter 
Olive, or the archdeacon

archery
arrows are shot, rather than fired; and if they hit the centre of the target, 
it is a gold rather than a bullseye

archetype or stereotype?
An archetype is a perfect or typical specimen, an original model or pattern, 
or prototype.

A stereotype is based on simplistic generalisations about a particular group. 
So the matriarch in a typical Woody Allen film might be described as a 
stereotypical, not archetypal, Jewish mother

archipelago
plural archipelagos

arch-rival
an arch rival would mean something different

Ardoyne
(Belfast), not “the Ardoyne”

Argentina, Argentinian

arguably
unarguably one of the most overused words in the language

Armageddon

armed forces, armed services
the army, the British army, the navy, but Royal Navy, Royal Air Force or RAF

armed forces ranks
Use as abbreviated below on first mention, then just surname, eg Col Tommy 
Smith, thereafter Smith.

Army: Gen, Lt Gen, Maj Gen, Brig, Col, Lt Col, Maj, Capt, Lt, 2Lt, OCdt, WOI, 
WOII, SSgt, CSgt, Sgt, CoH, L/CoH, Cpl, Bdr, L/Cpl, L/Bdr, Pte

Navy: Adm, V-Adm, R Adm, Capt, Cmdr, Lt Cmdr, Lt, SLt, Mid, OCdt, WOI, WOII, 
CPO, PO, LH, AB, Mne

RAF: Gp Capt, Wg Cmdr, Sqn Ldr, Flt Lt, Fg Off, Plt Off, MAcr, WO, Ft Sgt, Ch 
Tech, Sgt, Cpl, Jr Tech, L/Cpl, SAC, LAC, AC

Do not abbreviate: Field Marshal, Admiral of the Fleet, Commodore, Marshal of 
the RAF, Air Chief Marshal, Air Marshal, Air Vice-Marshal, Air Commodore

arms akimbo
hands on hips, elbows out; it is surprising how often the phrase “legs akimbo” 
turns up in the paper, “suggesting that such a posture exists, but lacks a word 
to define it”, as David McKie wrote.

The radical theatre group in the BBC TV comedy series The League of Gentlemen 
was called Legz Akimbo

around
about or approximately are better, eg “about £1m” or “approximately 2,000 
people”

around or round?
We were driving around aimlessly all weekend; it nearly drove me round the bend

arranged marriages
are a traditional and perfectly acceptable form of wedlock across southern 
Asia and within the Asian community in Britain; they should not be confused 
with forced marriages, which are arranged without the consent of one or both 
partners, and have been widely criticised

arse
British English; ass American English

arsing about
rather than arseing

art movements
are generally lowercase, eg art deco, art nouveau, cubism, dadaism, 
expressionism, gothic, impressionism, pop art, surrealism, etc, but note 
Bauhaus, Modern (in the sense of Modern British, to distinguish it from “modern 
art”, pre-Raphaelite, Romantic (to differentiate between a romantic painting 
and a Romantic painting)

artefact

artist
not artiste (except, possibly, in a historical context)

Arts and Crafts movement

Arts Council England, Arts Council of Wales, Creative Scotland

as ... as
“The hawthorn may be as old, if not older, than the stone tower of the 
windmill,” which appeared in the paper, should have read: “The hawthorn may be 
as old as, if not older than, the stone tower of the windmill.”

A common error that is quite easy to spot if you try to read it without the 
phrase inside the commas: as old ... than (wrong); as old ... as (right)

as or since?
”as” is causal: I cannot check the online style guide as the connection is 
down; “since” is temporal: Luckily, I have had the latest edition of Guardian 
Style on my desk since it was published

asbo
antisocial behaviour order

ascendancy, ascendant

Asean
Association of Southeast (sic) Asian Nations

Ash
Action on Smoking and Health

Ashton, Catherine
The former EU foreign minister (strictly “high representative of the union for 
foreign affairs and security policy”) is Catherine Ashton at first mention, 
Lady Ashton at second mention, and thereafter simply Ashton

Ashura
a day of voluntary fasting for Muslims; Shia Muslims also commemorate the 
martyrdom of Hussein, a grandson of the prophet, so for them it is not a 
festival but a day of mourning

Asio
Australian Security and Intelligence Service, the country’s domestic 
counter-intelligence and security agency (the equivalent of Britain’s MI5)

Asperger syndrome
is the proper name but it is acceptable to call it Asperger’s.

Do not use such witticisms as “Asperger-ish men”, which had to be removed from 
our website

aspirin

al-Assad, Bashar
became president of Syria in 2000 after the death of his father, Hafez al-Assad

assassin, assassination
the murder of prominent political figures rather than, say, celebrities

assisted dying
is preferable to “assisted suicide”

astrologer, astrology
horoscopes

astronomer, astronomy
telescopes

astronomer royal
currently Lord Rees

Asunción
capital of Paraguay

asylum seeker
Someone seeking refugee status or humanitarian protection; there is no such 
thing as an “illegal asylum seeker”, a term the Press Complaints Commission 
ruled in breach of its code of practice.

Refugees are people who have fled their home countries in fear for their 
lives, and may have been granted asylum under the 1951 refugee convention or 
qualify for humanitarian protection or discretionary leave, or have been 
granted exceptional leave to remain in Britain.

Someone who is refused asylum should be referred to as a refused asylum 
seeker, not a “failed asylum seeker”.

An asylum seeker can become an illegal immigrant only if he or she remains in 
Britain after having failed to respond to a removal notice

ATCU
Associated Train Crew Union; not to be confused with ACTU, the Australian 
Council of Trade Unions

athletics
also known (particularly in the US) as track and field.

1500m but 5,000m (the former is the “fifteen hundred” not “one thousand five 
hundred” metres)

Atlantic Ocean
or just the Atlantic

attache
no accent

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
ADHD after first mention

Attlee, Clement
(1883-1967) Labour prime minister 1945-51, often misspelt as Atlee

attorney general
lc, no hyphen; plural attorney generals (there will be those who tell you it 
should be “attorneys general” –See berks and wankers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-b#berks>)

auger
used to make holes

augur
predict or presage

Aum Shinrikyo
means Supreme Truth sect


Aung San Suu Kyi
Use her full name (as with other Burmese names), even on second and subsequent 
mentions, in copy; if absolutely necessary, Suu Kyi is permissible in headlines

Auntie
not Aunty if you must refer to the BBC in this way

au pair

Australasia
Oceania is preferable. See Oceania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-o#oceania>

Australian Labor party
not Labour

autism
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder, not an illness. Use only when 
referring to the condition, not as a term of abuse or in producing such 
witticisms as “mindless moral autism” and “Star Wars is a form of male autism”, 
both of which have appeared in the paper

autistic
someone with autism, not someone with poor social skills

autocorrect, autocomplete
but auto-predict

Autocue
TM; teleprompter is a generic alternative

Auto-Tune
TM; also Auto-Tuned, etc

autumn

autumn statement

AV
the alternative vote electoral system

avant garde
no hyphen

average, mean and median
Although we loosely refer to the “average” in many contexts (eg pay), there 
are two useful averages worth distinguishing.

What is commonly known as the average is the mean: everyone’s wages are added 
up and divided by the number of wage earners. The median is described as “the 
value below which 50% of employees fall”, ie it is the wage earned by the 
middle person when everyone’s wages are lined up from smallest to largest. (For 
even numbers there are two middle people, but you calculate the mean average of 
their two wages.)

The median is often a more useful guide than the mean, which can be distorted 
by figures at one extreme or the other

awaken
Say “I woke up”, “I was woken up” and so on because the forms starting with A 
are either considered wrong (“I was awoken”) or sound wrong (“I was awakened”). 
The US grammarian Bryan A Garner says: “The past-tense and past-participial 
forms of ‘wake’ and its various siblings are perhaps the most vexing in the 
language.”

Exception: Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens


awards and prizes
are generally lc, eg Guardian first book award, Nobel peace prize (but note 
Academy Awards)
lc for categories, eg Colin Firth won the best actor Oscar, Chipmunk was voted 
best newcomer at the 2008 Mobos, etc

awol
stands for “absent without leave” but, having been around since at least the 
1920s, has established itself as a word in its own right

awopbopaloobop alopbamboom
from Little Richard’s Tutti Frutti (1955), a recording that has been described 
as “the sound of the birth of rock’n’roll”

axing
not axeing, but cutting jobs is less cliched than axing them

axis
plural axes

Ayers Rock
is now Uluru

Azerbaijan
noun, Azerbaijani adjective; note that there are ethnic Azeris living in, for 
example, Armenia

Aznar, José María
former prime minister of Spain

A <https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-b> C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-c> D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-d> E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-e> F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-f> G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-g> H 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-h> I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-i> J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-j> K 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-k> L 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-l> M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-m> N 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-n> O 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-o> P 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-p> Q 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-q> R 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-r> S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-s> T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-t> U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-u> V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-v> W 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-w> X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-x> Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-y> Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-z>
 