
Use of WhatsApp to share stories, images or video footage with the Guardian is 
subject to the following guidelines. In addition to these, please refer to the
Community guidelines <http://www.guardian.co.uk/community-standards> and 
section 6 of theTerms of service 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/help/terms-of-service>.

• Don’t place yourself or others in danger when making films or taking 
photographs to share with the Guardian via WhatsApp in response to a call-out.

• Ensure you get permission from the people who you are filming or taking 
pictures of if you film or photograph them in private places or engaged in 
private activities e.g. hospitals, schools, London Underground, privately owned 
land or buildings. Private places are public or private property where there is 
a reasonable expectation of privacy.

• Treat the people in your film and images with courtesy. Let them know what 
you are filming or photographing and why, and where your film or images might 
be seen (on the Guardian).

• If you submit an image of or created by a child, and are not the parent or 
guardian of the child, you must get permission from the parent or guardian 
prior to sending the content to us. Pupils must not be approached or 
photographed at school without the permission of the school authorities. Do not 
include any material (location, name, school name etc) that could enable 
someone to identify the child.

• Always get permission from the landowner before filming or photographing on 
private property. (This includes hospitals, schools, London Underground and 
commercial premises to which the public may have limited access as well as 
privately owned land without buildings).

• Don’t include confidential or private personal information in your film or 
photograph without permission.

• Don’t use material in your video or image that doesn’t belong to you or 
which you don’t have the right to use. You may be able to use copyright 
material without permission but as a general rule do not feature other people’s 
work (such as music, artwork or photography) in your film or image unless you 
have the permission of the copyright owner. Be particularly careful about 
playing music in your video (even cover versions) without the permission of 
copyright holders especially if that music is a feature of the film rather than 
something going on in the background.

• Don’t include defamatory material (eg statements showing someone in a 
negative or disparaging way).

• It is important that everyone gets a fair trial. Don’t make films or submit 
images about criminal proceedings whilst those criminal proceedings are 
ongoing. In particular do not interview those accused of crimes, witnesses or 
jurors about cases they are involved with. We will be unable to use such 
material on the Guardian.

• Be considerate towards those involved in your submission. Don’t intimidate 
or harass anyone in the course of making your contribution. Do not use material 
which has been obtained surreptitiously, using hidden cameras or recording 
devices, and do not use material in your film or picture in a misleading way.

• Don’t use the Guardian’s WhatsApp contact for commercial purposes such as 
material intended to obtain funds or to promote, advertise or sell any goods or 
services.

These guidelines are similar to those given to contributors to 
GuardianWitness, our home for content from our readers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/jan/17/community-guidelines>.


In light of possible vulnerabilities in WhatsApp’s encryption systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages>
, please exercise caution if you intend to communicate confidential material 
using this app. For advice on secure communication with the Guardian seeHow to 
contact the Guardian securely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>

 