
I hope as many of you as possible managed to read the piece I recently wrote 
in the paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2000/jul/15/labour.labour1997to99> about 
our future attitude to two things: Downing Street briefings and the sourcing of 
quotes.

The piece promised a more official formulation of our future policy. This is 
it.

1. Downing Street briefings

Our future policy is pretty simple: we will name the official briefer when he 
or she is speaking on the record to the collected lobby.

It is damaging and wrong to persist with the pretence that Alastair Campbell – 
an intensely committed New Labour partisan – is the same sort of animal as his 
deputy, Godric Smith. Smith is a member of the Government Information Service 
(GIS) , which requires him to be "objective and explanatory, not tendentious or 
polemical . . . or liable to misrepresentation as being party political". 
No-one has ever accused Campbell of being any of those things.

We had previously reached a position where we sometimes identified the speaker 
at Lobby briefings or (more generally) referred to him in terms such as "the 
prime minister's official spokesman". In future we will name them.

At present this policy will apply to Downing Street briefings only. If 
reporters feel uneasy about other government departments where there might be 
an undesirable confusion between supposedly objective information from a member 
of the GIS and the sort of spin you might expect from a special adviser it 
would be useful to know. We will keep an open mind on whether or not to extend 
the policy.

2. Anonymous pejorative quotes

The New York Times Style Book says : "The vivid language of direct quotation 
confers an unfair advantage on a speaker or writer who hides behind the 
newspaper, and turns of phrase are valueless to a reader who cannot assess the 
source."

I agree with that. The Reader's editor has also written persuasively on the 
unthinking damage of which we have been guilty in the past by casual repetition 
of derogatory unattributed remarks.

There may be exceptional circumstances in which anonymous pejorative quotes 
may be used, but they will be rare - and it should be only after consultation 
with the senior editor of the day.

In taking the decision whether to allow the quote the editor might consider 
such factors as:

• Is the source a respected person who is well-placed to pass judgement on the 
subject in question?
• Does he/she have direct or indirect knowledge? Is it authoratitive?
• Insofar as one can judge, what are his or her motive in a) speaking 
pejoratively of someone and b) demanding anonymity?
• Can a public interest case be made for including the information in direct 
quotes?

In the absence of specific approval we should paraphrase anonymous pejorative 
quotes.

3. Unattributable quotes

We recognise that people will often speak more honestly if they are allowed to 
speak anonymously. The use of non-attributed quotes can therefore often assist 
the reader towards a truer understanding of a subject than if a journalist 
confined him/herself to quoting bland on-the-record quotes.

But if used lazily or indiscriminately anonymous quotes become a menace. 
Readers – with an increasingly sophisticated understanding of spin - distrust 
them. The more they are used, the more readers discount them. This becomes an 
obstacle between us and our readers. For this, if for no other reason, we 
should be careful about our use of anonymous quotes. The most obvious 
requirement of a story is that it be true. But it is also important that it be 
believed.

We should be honest about our sources, even if we can't name them. If you have 
only one source, do not pretend it is two or three. If she is a junior 
backbencher, do not elevate her to being "a senior backbencher." Avoid saying 
that so-and-so "declined to comment" if it is not true. "Friends of" is so 
over-used as to be a) a cliché and b) a transparent reference to the actual 
source. Avoid it if you can. One American usage is "a source who declined to be 
named". This can, I know, get tedious. And it may sometimes sound heavy-handed. 
On the other hand, it reminds one that most sources in most stories are, or 
should be, named. It isolates the unnamed source as the exception rather than 
the rule - perhaps a good discipline for the journalist and a reassurance to 
the reader.

It is - obviously - preferable if you can persuade a source to go on the 
record. Where this is out of the question think of the poor reader and try and 
give him/her some help. "One source said last night" is, in most circumstances, 
so vague as to be meaningless. The reader cannot evaluate the worth of the 
quote since he/she has absolutely no clue as to who the source is or whether it 
knows what it is talking about.

If vagueness is the only option, is it possible to explain why, or to 
elaborate on the understanding between source and reporter? Better still is to 
press your source for some form of identification. So, it is best to be a 
specific as possible. "One MP", or "a government colleague" is so weak as to be 
meaningless. "Senior minister" is an advance. "Cabinet minister with direct 
knowledge of the negotiations" is better still. By now the reader can genuinely 
evaluate the worth of the remark.

This is a counsel of perfection. We will sometimes, for any number of reasons, 
slip below these standards. That does not mean that we should not aspire to 
them. There are individual departments and specialisms – City and intelligence 
matters - where sourcing is particularly difficult (see note from Paul Murphy 
below) . But, over time, the more careful and watchful we are the more we will 
be trusted – by both readers and sources.

Appendix on City Reporting by Paul Murphy:

There are a number of special problems associated with attribution in business 
reporting.

A casual reader might come to the conclusion that many of the stories on the 
finance pages are poorly sourced.

There are clear reasons for this:

1. All publicly listed companies, their directors and advisers, are under a 
duty to inform the entire stock market of any potentially price sensitive news. 
In effect, this means they cannot talk on the record about anything of 
substance which is not already in the public domain. In fact, the breach of 
this rule is a criminal act under the legislative cocktail of Financial 
Services Act, Insider Dealing Act and various Companies Acts.

2. In practice, this means that any piece breaking a story will have smudged, 
anonymous sourcing. Since any director/adviser suspected of leaking information 
to the press will at the very least be reprimanded by authorities such as the 
Stock Exchange, business journalists often go to some lengths to disguise a 
source. Corporate financiers become industry analysts, the director of a 
company can simply become "an observer," etc.

3. Under certain circumstances, such as during takeover bids, flows of 
information in and around the City are given police state-type treatment. 
Regulators, from the Takeover Panel for example, will ring up journalists in 
this office directly, trying to get information on who said what. In theory, 
under current as well as the new City legislation, journalists can be hauled in 
front of DTI investigations with no right to silence. (The power is not used, 
of course, because it would turn the hack concerned into an overnight hero).

4. It should also be pointed out that virtually all telephone conversations in 
and around the Square Mile are recorded. Sophisticated voice-reading software 
is regularly used to search these tapes for leaks, etc. Also, many sources, 
such as stockbrokers, would be fired instantly if it emerged they were speaking 
to the press. There is a general paranoia in the business world over flows of 
information and we have little hope of demanding that the formal/informal 
channels of information change their procedures to suit us.

How do we deal with this?

The simple answer is by making sure the stories are correct, what ever the 
printed description of the "source," and then trading on our reputation.

If we demand attribution, the simple response would be "OK, you can quote me 
saying 'No Comment'," but even here there would be nervousness since the person 
would feel under suspicion for even being seen to pick up the phone.

It is illustrative to look at the Wall Street Journal, another "monopoly" New 
York paper, which uses a particularly coy description for its sources: "people 
familiar with the negotiations/company/deal said."
 