
Greater Western Sydney have been charged for a breach of AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> rules over the Lachie Whitfield affair, 
but won’t lose any picks at Friday’s draft.


The AFL had been considering stripping the Giants of draft selections after 
former officials Graeme Allan, Craig Lambert and player Whitfield were 
suspended for conspiring to avoid a potential drug test last year.


Essendon settle with 18 players over lost earnings from AFL doping bans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/essendon-settle-with-18-players-over-lost-earnings-from-afl-doping-bans>
But AFL general counsel Andrew Dillon instead opted to charge the club for a 
breach of AFL rule 2.3, which covers conduct which is unbecoming or likely to 
prejudice the interests or reputation of the AFL.


The trio was investigated after Whitfield spent three days at Lambert’s house, 
with the knowledge of Allan, in May last year in an alleged bid to avoid a 
possible drug test, which is a violation of the anti-doping code.


However, Allan and Lambert last week accepted 12-month bans and Whitfield a 
six-month suspension for breaching the same AFL rule the Giants have been 
charged with.


GWS have steadfastly maintained their innocence in the matter, arguing Allan 
and Lambert acted independently, and will contest the charge at a hearing on 
December 13.


“As reflected in the AFL sanctions for all three individuals, it has been 
established that the former staff members acted outside of their authority in 
managing circumstances and taking matters into their own hands,” a club 
statement read.


“Their handling of the matter was independent of the club and did not conform 
with the clearly established club protocols, thus in no way relating to a 
governance failure on behalf of the club.


“The club regards any potential sanction stemming from this charge as 
unwarranted and inappropriate given the admissions by the former staff members 
that they acted outside their authority.


“The club takes integrity matters extremely seriously and has cooperated fully 
with the AFL on this matter from the outset.”


The Giants will have picks 2, 15, 37, 39, 45, 52, 55, 57, 58 and 59 in 
Friday’s draft, but could be fined or stripped of picks at next year’s draft if 
found guilty by the AFL Commission.


ASADA were comfortable with the sanctions handed to Allan, Lambert and 
Whitfield given the AFL investigation revealed no use or intended use of 
performance-enhancing drugs.


Allan, who was installed as general manager of football at Collingwood in 
August, quit his post in response to the suspension.


Lambert has since moved on to a similar post with Brisbane and will miss the 
entire 2017 season.
 