
Greater Western Sydney have been fined $100,000 and stripped of 1,000 draft 
points over the Lachie Whitfield affair. AnAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> commission sub-committee on Thursday 
upheld a charge against the Giants of conduct unbecoming or likely to prejudice 
the interests or reputation of the league.


The charge was laid after Whitfield and then club officials Graeme Allan and 
Craig Lambert were suspended for conspiring to avoid a potential drug test last 
year. The Giants’ trio was investigated after Whitfield spent three days at 
Lambert’s house – with the knowledge of Allan – in May of last year in an 
alleged bid to avoid a possible drug test, which is a violation of the 
anti-doping code.

Allan and Lambert – the club’s head of football and player welfare manager 
respectively at the time – accepted 12-month bans and Whitfield a six-month 
suspension for breaching the same AFL rule the Giants were charged with. But 
GWS refused to agree to a similar negotiated penalty, the club steadfastly 
maintaining their innocence, arguing Allan and Lambert had acted independently.

AFL comes in for criticism after banning third man up at ruck contests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/22/afl-comes-in-for-criticism-after-banning-third-man-up-at-ruck-contests>
An AFL spokesman on Thursday said the three-man sub-committee, led by AFL 
chairman Mike Fitzpatrick, had ruled the Giants were responsible for the 
actions of their senior employees. The sub-committee also found that the 
Giants’ board, chief executive and chief operating officer had not been aware 
of the misconduct and the club’s governance could not be faulted.

“The club takes integrity matters extremely seriously and has co-operated 
fully with the AFL on this matter from the outset,” the Giants said in a 
statement on Thursday. “Whilst disappointed, the club now accepts the decision 
handed down and will move forward positively towards the 2017 season.”

There had been speculation GWS would lose their first two selections in the 
2017 draft if found guilty. The loss of 1000 draft points translates to about 
pick 17 in this year’s draft.
 