
I may not be popular for saying this, and given the abuse I’ve received from 
certain of its members, I am amazed at myself for saying it:Hacked Off 
<http://hackinginquiry.org/> should be awarded some sort of campaigning prize.

It punches way above its weight, as its latest note to supporters reveals. It 
has thanked the 8,500 and more people who took up its call to respond to the 
government’s consultation on Leveson part two and the implementation of section 
40 of the crime and courts act.

Rightly, Hacked Off believes it to be an “incredible” number of respondents, 
telling them: “Your support for victims of press abuse and your commitment to 
our cause is extraordinary.”

It is. But, of course, that doesn’t mean it will succeed. The weight of 
responses from newspaper owners, controllers, editors and assorted lobby groups 
opposed to Leveson two and section 40 has surely been greater still.

Indeed, even the National Union of Journalists - a tacit supporter of Hacked 
Off’s agenda and eager for Leveson two to go ahead -could not bring itself to 
support the full implementation of section 40. 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/nuj-says-press-regulation-must-include-affordable-independent/>

So Hacked Off knows it will not win. It knows the government “consultation” 
ordered by culture minister Karen Bradley is aimed at rubber-stamping the 
status quo. The government, especially this government, will not act against 
the interests of newspaper owners.

Despite wide parliamentary support, in the Commons and most definitely in the 
Lords, for the full implementation of the press regulation royal charter, it is 
the government’s call.

And prime minister Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, mired in the complex 
negotiations to effect Brexit, is aware that she will need maximum support from 
owners and editors throughout the coming years. Why rattle their cages?

Even so, Hacked Off did well to force the government into holding the 
consultation. An organisation composed largely of academics, a small number of 
celebrities and a group of genuinely outraged victims of past press 
misbehaviour has been honed into a political force that editors have been 
unable to ignore. It forced them to bring out their big guns in order to crush 
its advance.

Hacked Off has watched over the formation and official recognition of a 
regulator,Impress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress>, as an 
alternative to the industry-funded Independent Press Standards Organisation 
(Ipso).

It has, and I think I’m fair in saying this, hounded all of us who have failed 
to reflect every instance and detail of its argument in favour of the royal 
charter and Impress.

Some of its leading lights, notably Evan Harris, Brian Cathcart, Steven 
Barnett andHugh Grant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hughgrant>, have been 
tireless - and, it should be said, sometimes annoyingly tireless, even pedantic 
- advocates of their cause.

But Hacked Off probably needed that confrontational approach to ensure it got 
a hearing and kept faith with a public that remains sceptical about “the power 
of the press”.

Editors have chosen to concentrate their fire on Max Mosley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley>, the Hacked Off supporter who, 
through a family charity, has provided resources for Impress.

Unlike newspaper owners and editors, I am relaxed about Mosley’s part in this 
affair. I happen to like him. I was enormously sympathetic to him when theNews 
of the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> unfairly, and 
illegally, invaded his privacy.

And I predicted, when he won his case, that the popular press would rue the 
day they exposed him to ridicule. It came to pass.

He has proved to be a formidable opponent, firstly with his attempt at the 
European Court of Human Rights to create a law of prior disclosure 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosley_v_United_Kingdom>; secondly, with his 
support for Hacked Off and Impress.

So what? If one small set of rich men can fund newspapers - and enjoy the 
privileges it gives them - then surely they shouldn’t be so upset by another 
rich man helping to fund a single oppositional organisation.

In going for the man rather than the ball, publishers and editors do their own 
argument a disservice. At heart, this is a dispute about freedom of the press.

I have long contended that press freedom, as propounded by mainstream media’s 
controllers, is something of a fiction. AJ Liebling was surely correct in 
observing that freedom of the press is confined to the people who own one.

But I also recognise that the situation in the UK, with a diverse and plural 
media, is better than in almost every other country in the world.

Although the press is dominated by the right, and that bias is obvious, there 
are countless examples where newspapers perform their proper function by 
holding both political and business power to account.

It is the freedom for journalists to go on doing that, with as few 
encumbrances as possible, that is the proper reason to oppose section 40.

No-one can possibly deny that national popular papers have misbehaved and, 
given enough licence, would do so again. They have invaded peoples’ privacy for 
no good reason.

Leveson was a shock to their system. But the advance of the digital revolution 
has been a far greater shock and, in the long run, much more significant. That 
really does threaten newspaper owners’ dominance.


While the national press remains influential, helping to set the daily agenda 
and dominating the nation’s conversation, its power is on the wane.


Sadly, Hacked Off doesn’t appear willing to take this reality on board. Like 
Lord Justice Leveson <https://www.theguardian.com/law/lord-justice-leveson>, it 
has been overtaken by a phenomenon that will soon make much of its work 
irrelevant.
 