
I would like to say a few things about wellness and eating disorders, two 
subjects with which I am better acquainted than I’d like.

Wellness, as you almost certainly know, refers to the current trend in which 
people claim the secret to eternal health is not eating like an icky poor 
person – and by “poor”, they mean those who don’t see the point of spending £15 
on organic agave syrup and Himalayan pink salt. When future archeologists 
excavate our era, they’ll discover a cookbook byDeliciously Ella 
<http://deliciouslyella.com> and 10,000 hours of Keeping Up With The 
Kardashians, and they’ll promptly announce they have found another Dark Age.

I know an absurd amount about wellness not because I give two figs about it 
(obviously not – figs areway too high in fructose). Rather, I researched it 
last summer for afeature for this magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/27/new-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman>
 in which I pronounced it total garbage (official technical term).

Green is the new black: the unstoppable rise of the healthy-eating guru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/27/new-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman>
Of late, there has been a new focus on wellness, this time claiming that it 
encourages eating disorders. The main argument for the prosecution is the way 
the bloggers favour language reminiscent of the way those with eating disorders 
talk about food: the focus on “clean” eating, say, and praise of feeling 
“light”.The Hemsley sisters <http://www.hemsleyandhemsley.com> didn’t exactly 
help themselves when they were recently asked about a wellness writer rumoured 
to be anorexic: “Perhaps she’s just really healthy,” they shrugged.

I know even more about anorexia than clean eating, because I was hospitalised 
for three years as a teenager for severe anorexia nervosa. To clear up any 
confusion for the Hemsleys, I wasn’t just really healthy. My parents were told 
I might die.

It’s been interesting since then to watch the various trends of identifying 
things to blame for eating disorders. First it was skinny models. Then it was 
women’s magazines. Now it’s wellness. The human desire for straightforward 
causation is strong but, alas, in these cases, too simple: good health requires 
more than forsaking gluten, and eating disorders are about a lot more than 
wanting to resemble Ella Woodward/Jodie Kidd/Kate Moss (delete as appropriate 
to your era).

Yes, someone with an eating disorder will find validation in the language of 
wellness. But just as an alcoholic will always find an excuse to drink, so an 
anorexic will seek out anything that confirms their desire to avoid food. When 
I weighed five and a half stone, I explained to my psychiatrist that I didn’t 
need to increase my food intake because Elizabeth Hurley claimed she ate only 
800 calories a day. Ban Elizabeth Hurley! (No, seriously, do it.)

In truth, I’m not convinced the language of wellness is more anorectic than 
the nonsense that has been always promoted, such as the equation of female 
thinness with happiness. Obviously, neither of these things is good, but I 
thought we’d got past the idea that eating disorders were about silly girls 
wanting to look like models. Just a reminder: they are mental disorders and 
anorexia hasthe highest fatality rate of any mental illness 
<https://www.b-eat.co.uk/about-beat/media-centre/information-and-statistics-about-eating-disorders>
. To say wellness leads to eating disorders is like arguing that adverts for 
luxury vodka cause alcoholism.

What kicked off my eating disorder – “triggered”, in today’s parlance – was a 
schoolfriend describing me as “normal sized”. From that moment for the next 20 
years, every bite of food was accompanied by endless miserable internal 
calculations. She didn’t “cause” my eating disorder – that was inside me, 
waiting to bloom like a toxic weed. An eating disorder isn’t caused by an 
external event; it is an expression of internal unhappiness and the trigger is 
a part of the illness. To claim otherwise is to confuse causation with symptoms.

Whether you’re pro-choice or not, the abortion debate is not about you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jun/04/abortion-personal-experiences-legality-hadley-freeman>
My real objection to this overemphasis on eating disorders and wellness is 
that it misses the point. Most people who read these blogs and books will not 
succumb to an eating disorder, so the hyperbolic warnings are not only 
overblown, but insulting to those with actual eating disorders. If you want to 
knock wellness, and you should, there is no need to go to Defcon Eating 
Disorder. All you need to say is that it’s stupid. It’s dieting endorsed by 
photogenic posh people who believe cavemen were healthier than we are, and who 
don’t know the difference between coeliac disease and bloating.

Honestly, I wish we could pin anorexia on something like wellness, because 
deleting Instagram is a lot quicker than 20 years of therapy. Sadly, as these 
bloggers are starting to learn, blaming everything on gluten intolerances gets 
you only so far.
 