
At least Hal Robson-Kanu will remember 2016 fondly. The Welshman scored one of 
the goals of Euro 2016 during his country’s run to the semi-finals and he 
struck again here with an absolute rocket to claim three points in his first 
start forWest Bromwich Albion <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom>.

In an evenly matched first half Shane Long headed Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> into the lead, before Matt 
Phillips restored parity with a calm finish after a fluid move. But the game’s 
memorable moment came from Robson-Kanu and Tony Pulis was happy to sing the 
praises of the forward he signed as a free agent last summer.

“He is that type of player who’s so wholehearted, he gives everything all the 
time,” Pulis said. “I had no problem playing him; the problem came in leaving 
Salomón Rondón out. Hal’s been wonderful as a backup, if you like, but he 
showed today he’s kept his fitness high and was ready for his chance. I’ve got 
a choice to make on Monday now.”

Islam Slimani heads relieved Leicester to victory over West Ham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/leicester-city-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
After two consecutive away matches, the Baggies now return to the Hawthorns to 
face Hull on Monday in good heart. For the Saints, however, their Christmas has 
turned sour. After receiving a thrashing by Tottenham, this was a second 
consecutive home defeat and there were boos at the final whistle.

Their manager, Claude Puel, chose to rotate his side for the second of three 
fixtures in six days. But his decision to rest three of his first-choice back 
four looked odd even before the match. The only defender to retain his place, 
Virgil van Dijk, was sent off with minutes of the match remaining and will now 
miss Monday’s match against Everton at Goodison Park.

“Yes, you can say [you have regrets] after the result but if it’s not this 
game it would be the next game‚” Puel said of his changes. “We are the only 
team playing three games in six days, just us, and our squad have been playing 
many games since the beginning of the season. It was normal to make a rotation 
with all these games and I think it’s not the rotation that was the problem, 
it’s a problem of concentration and a problem of the calendar.”

Andre Gray grabs hat-trick as Burnley leave Sunderland floundering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/burnley-sunderland-premier-league-match-report-andre-gray>
After a predictably physical opening, Southampton broke the deadlock with a 
goal their visitors would have been proud of. After seeing their passing 
triangles simply break against West Brom’s compact defence, the crowd favourite 
Dusan Tadic used the chance of a corner to whip a wonderful ball to the near 
post, which Shane Long met with a decisive header. Coming against one of his 
old clubs, it was the Irishman’s first league goal of the season.

Before the crowd had even finished celebrating, the Baggies were level. And 
their goal was equally uncharacteristic – an attractive move from open play. 
Chris Brunt played a one-touch pass round his marker to Robson-Kanu who, in 
turn, poked it to Matt Phillips. Cool as required, Phillips stepped inside Maya 
Yoshida and fired the ball low past Fraser Forster.

All square at half-time then, but it turned out Robson-Kanu had just been 
warming up. Just as he did during those summer nights in France, the striker 
pulled a world-class finish out of nowhere, thrashing the ball from 25 yards 
past both an unsuspecting Van Dijk, then the keeper and into the roof of the 
net.

Saints went two up top almost immediately, but that only proved an invitation 
for West Brom to do what they do best. The closest Saints got to a shot on 
target was when Ben Foster cleared the ball into an onrushing Jay Rodriguez. 
With the game about to enter added time, Van Dijk earned his second yellow card 
after tangling with the substitute Rondón.

The Dutchman, currently the subject of so much transfer speculation, ripped 
the captain’s armband off in disgust as he left the field.
 