
Halifax, who have lost their last six Super League games, gained a wing but 
lost a chief executive yesterday.

The Blue Sox have snapped up Jason Lee, a 30-year-old from Pontypridd who has 
been a consistent tryscorer in the Northern Ford Premiership for Keighley, and 
was available because of the Cougars' fresh financial problems.

But Nigel Wood, who has been Halifax's chief executive since before the Super 
League revolution of 1995, supervising their move from Thrum Hall to the Shay 
and last year's escape from serious financial problems, has stepped down.

Wood's position as company director of Super League Europe will be discussed 
at a board meeting this week.

Wigan's prop Neil Cowie was cleared by a disciplinary hearing yesterday after 
being put on report in last Sunday's 20-12 defeat at London Broncos for a 
possible spear tackle. He will now be able to play in tomorrow night's home 
game against Wakefield Trinity.

The Leeds wing Karl Pratt has been summoned to appear at next Wednesday's 
disciplinary hearing after an incident in the Rhinos' 38-26 win at Halifax on 
Monday night.

Andy Gregory, who will coach Lancashire in the Origin match against Yorkshire 
at Headingley on June 5, has suffered a blow with the Great Britain forward 
Adrian Morley being denied permission by the Sydney Roosters to return from 
Australia for the game.

Salford, who have lost one second-row in Warren Jowitt for at least six weeks 
with a dislocated shoulder sustained at his old club Wakefield on Monday, are 
to offer a contract extension to another, Andy Coley. The 22-year-old has been 
outstanding since making the short move from Swinton during the winter, forcing 
his way into contention for a place in the Lancashire team, and the City Reds 
have moved quickly after rumours of interest from St Helens.

Bobbie Goulding will return from a thigh injury as Salford aim to end a run of 
three consecutive defeats at Halifax on Sunday evening.

Australia's National Rugby League has demanded an explanation from one of its 
member clubs, the Parramatta Eels, after persistent speculation that they have 
applied for a franchise for the Super 12 rugby union competition.

On the other hand the Cronulla wing Mat Rogers, a member of Australia's World 
Cup-winning squad last autumn, is expected to follow Penrith's Ryan Girdler by 
rejecting an approach from the Australian Rugby Union and signing a new deal 
with his current club.
 