
Footballing stereotypes, positive and negative, are cherished possessions that 
nobody wants to part with, even if they’re long out of date like 1980s Mad 
magazines, five-a-side trophies and Third Reich stamps from granddad Heinrich 
(don’t ask) quietly gathering dust in the loft. But, as this column’s mum, 
Bärbl, would readily agree, from time to time, a clearout is simply unavoidable.

Celta Vigo cut Barcelona off at source as their attacking trio outshine MSN | 
Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/24/la-liga-celta-vigo-barcelona-attacking-trio-msn>
Early signs suggest that 2015-16 may well be the season we have to let go of a 
couple of well-worn tropes, axiomatic jokes that didn’t need punchlines to be 
funny. Seasoned readers of these lines will know that this can only refer to 
Hamburger SV and Schalke, of course; sides of huge possibility, history and 
fantastic support who have managed to fall short of their own potential with 
unerring, somewhat hilarious regularity for so long that the former mooted 
getting rid of holy cultural artefacts, such as their mascot Dino and the 
eternalBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
clock, in an effort to exorcise their relegation-worry demons at the beginning 
of the season, while the latter have almost accepted they were a bit of a 
basket case and that was that.

But on Saturday night, when these two storied behemoths of the German top 
flight tussle again at the Volksparkstadion, it will be a game like no other in 
recent years. “An absolute top match,” as HSV’s coach, Bruno Labbadia, proudly 
put it. His northerners are sixth in the table after their best start since 
2009 (10 points) and the Royal Blues are third following their fourth win, 2-0 
over Frankfurt, in six matches under their new coach, André Breitenreiter. Yes, 
the table is still young and prone to mistakes but HSV and S04 do look as if 
they have more than some decent numbers going for them.

Ever since they opened the campaign with a customary 5-0 defeat away to 
Bayern, Labbadia’sRothosen (Red Pants) have been, if not exactly on fire, then 
at least smouldering nicely. Despite the continued presence of Johan Djourou,
Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> have become a team that 
are tough to beat, with the excellent new signing Albin Ekdal from Cagliari and 
the rediscovered Gojko Kacar providing ample cover in midfield. Lewis Holtby is 
at last growing into the player he was supposed to be and the striker 
Pierre-Michel Lasogga has reacted to the heartbreak of losing out on a move to 
Steve McClaren’s Newcastle by finding the net three times. “Labbadia has golden 
hands,” wrote the tabloidMorgenpost on Thursday.

It’s all relative of course – not one HSV manager has lasted an entire season 
since Martin Jol in 2008-09 – but the 49-year-old has already shown that he can 
tickle the Dino’s fancy. There’s a sense of tranquility and optimism around the 
place so strange and unfamiliar that the executive chairman, Dietmar 
Beiersdorfer, has been moved to insist that HSV “do not want to be a normal 
club”.

“We are a special club and I don’t believe it’s desirable to be normal. But 
it’s nice that we are becoming [more] stable,” he said before the 1-0 win at 
newly-promoted Ingolstadt on Tuesday. It’s only a question of time before the 
first fans will start dreaming of the Europa League – or more – but even if 
Labbadia’s side appear two or three players short of reaching such exalted 
heights, an extended period of time spent in the top half of the table should 
and will count as remarkable progress after two close shaves with a first-ever 
relegation.

Schalke, too, are getting their act together. The Royal Blues were never as 
bad as Hamburg have been in recent memory but in their own way, failure to 
properly capitalise on resources that are bettered only by Bayern and local 
rivals Dortmund (since they’ve started winning trophies again) has been just as 
embarrassing. History will be unkind to a Champions League club that thought 
Jens Keller andRoberto Di Matteo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/26/roberto-di-matteo-resigns-schalke-coach-disagreement-club>
 were the answers, whatever the questions. Time will tell whether the sale of 
Julian Draxler to Wolfsburg can be compensated for but in the energetic yet 
unshowy Breitenreiter, the sporting director Horst Heldt has at last unearthed 
a coach who can handle the Gelsenkirchen pressure cooker and do a bit of actual 
coaching, too.

The 41-year-old came to the Veltins-Arena on the back of relegation with 
Paderborn. Schalke commendably looked beyond that, however, and found a manager 
with a clear idea of proactive, pressing football, and the ability to get his 
side to play as a collective. It’s not exactly a revolutionary concept but one 
that hasn’t been tried since Ralf Rangnick took S04 to theChampions League 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/04/manchester-united-schalke-champions-league>
and then resigned, citing exhaustion, in 2011. Every player looks good or 
indeed that little bit improved as a result, from centre-back Joël Matip to new 
signing Johannes Geis (holding midfielder) or 19-year-old substitute Leroy Sané 
who scored a great goal in the Frankfurt win and has been one of the breakout 
stars of the season.

The race for the Champions League places will be tough now that Dortmund have 
rebounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/24/dortmund-lean-mean-bundesliga-season>
 in spectacular fashion. But with a bit of luck, Breitenreiter will be allowed 
the time to push the team further and provide some much-needed continuity on 
the bench, and the same goes for Labbadia in Hamburg. The easy laughs at both 
their clubs’ expense will soon dry up. But in the long run, the German football 
gods will be smiling: it’s much more fun being seriously good than comically 
inept.

Talking points

• The upswing in fortunes for big(gish), traditional clubs could well turn 
into one of the themes of the season. Hertha – yes, Hertha – continued their 
surprisingly good run with a win over Köln and Stuttgart finally registered a 
win when they deservedly beat a pretty woeful Hannover side. Mönchengladbach 
were at full speed again, too, as they overcame Augsburg 4-2 under the interim 
coach André Schubert.

• Elsewhere, an enthralling Englische Woche (English week) of midweek fixtures 
brought flowers for Wolfsburg’s defender Dante (at his belated farewell at the 
Allianz Arena) and that familiar Belo Horizonte feeling: the former Bayern man 
could only stare disbelievingly as the second-half sub Robert Lewandowski 
scored five goals in nine minutes inthe champions’ 5-1 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/22/bayern-wolfsburg-match-report>
. “I looked at the scoreboard and couldn’t believe it myself,” said the Poland 
striker. The 27-year-old became the fastest hat-trick scorer in the history of 
the league and also the fastest scorer of a Fünferpack (five pack) but Dieter 
Müller (no relation to Gerd) was happy to see his six-goals-in-one-game record 
from 1977 (Köln’s 7-2 win over Werder in 1977) survive.

• The Lewangoalski show saw Bayern claim the No1 spot from Dortmund, who only 
mustered a draw, 1-1 away to Hoffenheim. “We gave away the victory, it’s 
frustrating,” said the captain, Mats Hummels. Their coach, Thomas Tuchel, 
insisted that the result shouldn’t be overdramatised, though. “It’s the first 
draw in six games. We shouldn’t feel as if we lost the game,” he said.

Results: Bayern 5-1 Wolfsburg; Hertha BSC 2-0 Köln; Ingolstadt 0-1 HSV; 
Darmstadt 2-1 Bremen;Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> 2-0 
Frankfurt; Leverkusen 1-0 Mainz; Hoffenheim 1-1 Dortmund; Hannover 1-3 
Stuttgart; ‘Gladbach 4-2 Augsburg
 