
“A slight majority of Hamburg’s residents decided to vote against hosting the 
2024 Olympics,” state broadcaster Deutsche Welle ruefully reportedafter the 
surprising referendum result on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/hamburg-votes-2024-olympics>. 
Considering that Paris, Rome, Los Angeles and Budapest are the remaining 
contenders to stage the Games that year, DW’s take on the fiasco was maybe a 
little reminiscent of the famous “Heavy Fog in Channel. Continent cut off” 
headline in the Times from 1957 in its unintentional presumptuousness.

Alas, the lack of any realistic chance to win the bid was only one of a number 
of factors that put Germany’s northern metropolis off. There were also worries 
about terror, gentrification, the ongoing challenge of the refugee crisis and 
an unease about the process itself in the wake of the 2006 World Cup voting 
scandal that has embroiled the German FA. But perhaps members of the “NOlympia” 
camp simply failed to see the attraction of wasting new, huge sums of money on 
sport over a prolonged period of time with only questionable benefits for the 
locals, as Hamburger SV have been doing the very same thing so well already. 
Who needs a new €1bn sports complex on a river island, when you’ve got the 
self-styled “dinosaur” on your doorstep, the Bundesliga’s very own white 
elephant and living monument of grandiose ambitions gone hilariously wrong?

Borussia Dortmund’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang scores twice in Stuttgart win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/borussia-dortmund-stuttgart-match-report>
One of the better jokes doing the rounds on Twitter after the Nein vote 
reminded Hamburgers that they couldn’t turn things around in the relegation 
play-off this time. (The Rothosen, red shorts, managed to escape the drop to
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 2 twice in 
the last two years with dramatic success in the play-offs.) It won’t come to 
that next May, though.

Bruno Labbadia’s side has mostly played surprisingly respectable stuff this 
season, and a 3-1 win in the derby away to sorry neighbours Bremen on Saturday 
has put them as high as seventh in the table with 21 points, only two off the 
Champions League places. “It’s been a miraculous transformation,” wrote an 
incredulous Süddeutsche Zeitung; “a comeback into well-off circles after two 
horror years,” FAZ agreed, equally perplexed.

The weakness behind Bayern Munich and second-placed Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/borussia-dortmund-stuttgart-match-report>
, who denied the leaders an early Herbstmeisterschaft (winter championship) 
with another superb performance (4-1 v Stuttgart), might well see HSV have the 
last laugh this season. There are strong indications that the end of the 
hubristic Rafael van der Vaart/Marcell Jansen/Heiko Westermann years at the 
Volksparkstadion – all three left in the summer, along with 12 others – has 
freed up space for a younger, more eager team to grow.

The Croat Ivo Illicevic, the scorer of the lovely opening goal after only 
three minutes, the much-improved Lewis Holtby and the pacy forward Nicolai 
Müller – who scored the away team’s third after Michael Gregoritsch had 
dispatched a free-kick into Werder’s net courtesy of a freakish deflection and 
Anthony Ujah had pulled one back for Victor Skripnik’s men – are beginning to 
prove their numerous detractors wrong. HSV play as a team at last, with 
high-energy work in defence and well-practiced counter-attacks. A new-found 
confidence under Labbadia has clearly helped, too.

Unfortunately, the dinosaur’s resurrection as a credible top-half-of-the-table 
contender run did nothing to affect the cautious general mood in the city in 
relation to the Olympics poll, as big, international dreams are expressly “not 
allowed at the new HSV” (Morgenpost) either: the existential troubles of 
yesteryear are still too present for anyone to take any flights of fancy. “We 
have to keep our feet on the ground,” warned defender Johan Djourou, who’s not 
always been able to do just that on the pitch in the past. (His colleague Emir 
Spahic, an even bigger culprit in that respect, missed the trip to the 
Weserstadion through injury, which was probably just as well.) “We know that it 
can go the other way very quickly,” said the Swiss centre-back.

The one sour note of an afternoon made even sweeter by rival Werder’s misery – 
the Green and Whites are perilously close to the relegation places after their 
ninth defeat – was striker the HSV striker Pierre-Michel Lasogga dislocating 
his shoulder. It’s unclear how long the 23-year-old will be out of action but 
his absence will no longer be as keenly as felt as in recent seasons when, at 
times, his goals alone were keeping his team alive. Labbadia has cleverly 
downplayed the effect of other prominent squad members being injured in order 
to motivate their replacements. It’s not rocket science but a simple ploy, well 
executed, and the same goes for Hamburg’s football this season

In addition to all that merriment, Sunday’s “no” vote could yet help bring 
back international football to the Volksparkstadion – by 2024, at the latest.
Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> pulling out of the 
Olympics should strengthen Germany’s chance to stage the European championship 
that year.


Talking points

• Negotiations weren’t supposed to start in earnest before Christmas but as 
Pep Guardiola found out on Sunday, Santa alias Nikolaus arrives at the 
beginning of December in Bavaria. The Spanish coach was presented with a new 
contract by a fan in Nikolaus guise (“You can fill in the wages yourself”) on 
stage at a meeting with supporters’ club “Bayern Bazis Vilsbiburg”. Guardiola 
explained that he loved Munich (“amazing”) and added that the city “would be a 
good reason” to renew his contract beyond next summer but pointedly refused to 
sign Santa’s clause(s). This one’s not about money, for a change. But Bayern’s 
dominance in a league where even a fourth-placed team like Hertha (beaten 2-0 
at the Allianz Arena ) only come to defend with 10 men in the box is such that 
Karl-Heinz Rummenigge has sought out a new enemy. “Central marketing of TV 
rights is their last remaining domestic opponent, they’ve outgrown the league,” 
commented FAZ after Rummenigge had threatened the Bundesliga with going it 
alone in the future. Bayern are unhappy that the Premier League’s new TV deal 
will relegate them to 26th in the European ranking in TV revenue terms and 
warned that the league needed to ensure that “clubs stayed competitive 
internationally” by increasing the current TV deal to at least €1bn per year.

• Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang scored two more goals, the first one a real 
beauty, to up his tally to 17 in 14 games. BVB’s 4-1 win over Stuttgart, 
coached by interim manager Jürgen Kramny, showed once again that Dortmund, too, 
are in a league of their own in second place, head and shoulders above sides 
such as Wolfsburg (0-0 at Augsburg), Leverkusen and Schalke (1-1 at the 
BayArena) who also harbour Champions League ambitions. Gladbach, however, 
continue to be convince under André Schubert. The Foals whisperer had 
substitute Nico Elvedi hand out a sheet with instructions to a couple of 
team-mates shortly before Fabian Johnson equalised for a final score of 3-3 
with Hoffenheim. “It wasn’t a Harry Potter trick, only tactics,” insisted 
Schubert. But the 44-year-old has certainly cast his spell on the side since 
taking over from Lucien Favre – they’re still unbeaten in nine league games.

Results: Darmstadt 0-0 Köln, Bayern 2-0 Hertha, Werder 1-3 HSV, Hannover 4-0 
Ingolstadt, Mainz 2-1 Frankfurt, Hoffenheim 3-3 Gladbach, Dortmund 4-1 
Stuttgart, Augsburg 0-0 Wolfsburg, Leverkusen 1-1 Schalke.
 