“ This is a world where nothing is solved. Someone once told me, ‘Time is a 
flat circle.’ Everything we’ve ever done or will do, we’re gonna do over and 
over and over again. <http://youtu.be/ZNfOoXQ6X6I?t=11s> ” 
We don’t know if True Detective’s Rust Cohle was conceived as a Hamburger SV 
supporter but it’s an affliction that would have nicely complemented his 
nihilism and post-drug-abuse visions. A mere three games into the new season, 
the northerners are already back where they spent large parts of the last 
campaign – down at the very bottom of theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> table. “Groundhog 
day” doesn’t even begin to convey the frustration at experiencing such deja vu. 
Hamburg look trapped in a time-loop padded with nothing but misery and 
existentialist dread. Things are so bad that the club legend Uwe Seeler has 
thus far refused to convey his customary, monthly “I worry about my HSV” line. 
For fear of underplaying the gravity of the situation, presumably.

Of course a Fehlstart (false start) can happen to the best of teams. A bumpy 
ride was perhaps to be expected at the Imtech Arena, too. Hamburg brought in 
almost enough new players for an entirely new starting XI this season. Seven of 
them started in the 2-0 defeat atHannover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover> 96, the Hamburg manager Mirko 
Slomka’s former club, on Sunday. “This team needs more time, we know that,” he 
said, not unreasonably. On paper, the squad looks very decent indeed, a few 
problems in defence notwithstanding. There are certainly worse forward lines 
than that of Julian Green (on loan from Bayern), the former Tottenham playmaker 
Lewis Holtby, the striker Pierre-Michel Lasogga (bought for good from Hertha 
after his loan spell last season) and Nicolai Müller, formerly of Mainz, in the 
league.

The visitors didn’t actually play that badly over the whole 90 minutes. But 
Hannoversensed their opponents’ vulnerability and struck twice in the first half
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2014/sep/14/hannover-v-hamburg> 
(Leon Andreasen, 13min; Artur Sobiech, 24min) to effectively kill off the game. 
What’s really damning for Slomka isn’t so much the defeat against a strong 96 
team but the fact that this result fits two horrific patterns all too well. 
Firstly, this was the 16th loss in his last 17 away games (when in charge of 
both Hannover and HSV) for the 47-year-old. Secondly, Hamburg have now picked 
up only one point in their last eight Bundesliga games.

That was the 0-0 with FC Köln on match day one. Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg>, you’ll recall, had only stayed 
up because they had ‘beaten’ Greuther Fürth 1-1 in the relegation play-off on 
away goals after their relegation rivals had kindly matched their own losing 
streak.

If Slomka’s position was weak going into the new campaign, it has now become 
precarious. When he gave a no-holds-barred interview criticising the players’ 
efforts to Bild, without prior knowledge of the club, it was a risky move that 
looks to have back-fired. Axing the influential goalkeeper René Adler for the 
Gladbach game – Jaroslav Drobny came in for him – also looked a bit gimmicky.

To make matters worse, the Hamburg CEO Dietmar Beiersdorfer is said to be on 
good terms with Thomas Tuchel, the most in-demand coach currently out of work. 
Hamburg could really do with his youthful enthusiasm, to say nothing of his 
tactical dedication. The latest news coming out of Hamburg is that Slomka will 
be given two more games, against Bayern and Gladbach, to turn things around. 
(Conspiracy theorists might allege that starting after those two tough fixtures 
would also be easier for any successor).

The potential downside to this patience – or delayed firing? – could be 
getting beaten to Tuchel’s signature by Schalke, who are also stuck in a world 
of repetitive drama, where nothing ever gets solved. The Royal Blues crashed to 
a 4-1 defeat at Borussia Mönchengladbach – a result that was immensely 
flattering. “They could have scored 10, too,” lamented Klaas-Jan Huntelaar. The 
Dutch striker was reportedly close to renewing his contract atSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> but might develop one or two 
doubts over the next few weeks. “We need to talk and have a plan for 
improvement,” Huntelaar added. Was he saying that the coach Jens Keller didn’t 
have such a plan, reporters wondered. The club’s sporting director Horst Heldt 
was unhappy with that inference (“Klaas didn’t say that”) but the pressure is 
definitely on. One point from three games is a poor return, even if they missed 
their centre-back Joel Matip and a handful of other regulars due to injury. “We 
can’t look for excuses, we have to tackle this situation face on,” said Heldt.

Keller, by contrast, did play the injury cards. “The team finds it hard to 
compensate for these injured players,” said the embattled 43-year-old. Much has 
been made of Keller leading the team to their statistically best-ever second 
half of the season in 13-14 but alarmist headlines like that of Welt (“Keller 
about to be dismissed”) reflect fundamental doubts about his future that have 
never fully disappeared. Part of the problem is perception; Keller isn’t as 
charismatic as some of his peers.

Schalke themselves are not blameless either. Keller’s 20-month reign has been 
riddled with rumours that the club has approached other managers, most notably 
Tuchel. The former Mainz supremo came close to signing last winter but Mainz’s 
insistence on a hefty fee (rumoured to have been €15m) scuppered a deal. Ahead 
of the Gladbach debacle, Heldt told Bild that there was “no need” to discuss a 
new contract with Keller right now. It was meant to sound supportive – “we 
don’t question him at all, that’s why it’s not necessary to send a signal [by 
opening talks]” – but came across as deliberately noncommittal.

There was further trouble when the unused winger Tranquillo Barnetta posted 
“Three subs but no Quillo! Go Gladbach, then” on his Facebook page during the 
game. The Swiss midfielder immediately pointed the finger of blame at an 
unnamed friend who’s tasked with social media duties (“I was on the bench, 
after all”) but this little mishap didn’t do anything to lift the mood. 
Wednesday’s trip to Stamford Bridge could well exacerbate the crisis, if 
Keller’s perfunctory attempt at a war cry is anything to go by. “We are not at 
Chelsea’s level at the moment,” he conceded, with more than a hint of 
flat-circle sadness.

Talking points 

• “It’ll be a while before he can keep up with our pace,” said Sebastian Kehl 
after the heroic comeback of Dortmund’s lost son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/sep/14/shinji-kagawa-borussia-dortmund-arsenal-manchester-united>
. It’s true that Shinji Kagawa had to leave the pitch with cramps after 60 
minutes in his first game back for Jürgen Klopp’s team but that bit of drama 
only added to what had been exactly the kind of triumphant return that 
everybody had hoped for. The Japanese midfielder scored a goal in the 3-1 win 
over Freiburg and made an assist for another one. “I had goose bumps for the 
entire match, I am so happy to be able to play again here,” the 25-year-old 
said after his release from HMP Old Trafford. 80,000 supporters were beside 
themselves with excitement, and Marco Reus’s injury has suddenly become a lot 
less depressing. It’ll be interesting to see whether the Shinji-induced 
feel-good factor will survive Tuesday night,when Arsène Wenger’s men will 
attempt to silence Kloppo’s “heavy metal” band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/03/borussia-dortmund-jurgen-klopp-arsenal>
.

• In another familiar Premier League v Bundesliga fixture, Bayern welcome 
Manchester City on Wednesday. Xabi Alonso did not quite cause the same mass 
hysteria in Munich as Kagawa did in Dortmund on Saturday, but the Spaniard 
arguably had a bettergame in the 2-0 win over Stuttgart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/13/bayern-munich-stuttgart-bundesliga-match-report>
. 150 touches bore testament to the 32-year-old’s influence at the heart of the 
midfield. Pep Guardiola seemed almost worried by the extent of Alonso’s 
dominance on proceedings. “He can’t do everything alone, he can’t go up and 
down the whole time. He’ll be dead in a month, otherwise,” said the Bayern 
manager. A pleasant afternoon against the pretty harmless Swabians could have 
beenrounded off by Franck Ribéry scoring a goal upon his return from a lengthy 
lay-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/15/bayern-munich-struggling-injuries-manchester-city>
 but, sadly, Holger Badstuber has returned to the treatment table. The Bayern 
defender, who had only just started playing again after almost two years out 
(cruciate ligament) tore his hamstring and will not feature again this calendar 
year.

• Frankfurt’s 1-0 defeat by Augsburg will go down as the curious case of the 
defective head-set. The fourth official Patrick Ittich had wanted to tell the 
referee Manuel Gräfe about a foul by Augsburg’s Dominik Kohr on the Eintracht 
striker Vaclav Kadlec in the penalty box but the wireless communication system 
was down. Couldn’t Ittich have waved his arms or sent a ball boy to convey the 
message? An unperturbed Gräfe didn’t blow his whistle, and the home side went 
on to lose the match. “It’s the referee’s decision, there’s nothing we can do,” 
club boss Heribert Bruchhagen said philosophically, before ruling out an appeal.

Results: Leverkusen 3-3 Werder, Dortmund 3-1 Freiburg, Gladbach 4-1 Schalke, 
Hertha 1-3 Mainz, Hoffenheim 1-1 Wolfsburg, Paderborn 0-0 Köln, Bayern 2-0 
Stuttgart, Frankfurt 0-1 Augsburg, Hannover 2-0 Hamburg.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Bayer Leverkusen 3 4 7 
2 Bayern Munich 3 3 7 
3 Hannover 96 3 3 7 
4 Borussia Dortmund 3 1 6 
5 Paderborn 3 3 5 
6 Borussia M'gladbach 3 3 5 
7 Mainz 3 2 5 
8 TSG Hoffenheim 3 2 5 
9 Cologne 3 2 5 
10 Eintracht Frankfurt 3 0 4 
11 Werder Bremen 3 0 3 
12 Augsburg 3 -2 3 
13 Wolfsburg 3 -1 2 
14 SC Freiburg 3 -3 1 
15 Hertha Berlin 3 -4 1 
16 Schalke 04 3 -4 1 
17 VfB Stuttgart 3 -4 1 
18 Hamburg 3 -5 1  