
Hamburg hit Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> on the break to clinch 
an unexpected 3-1 victory on Friday as the Bundesliga resumed amid tight 
security following the deadly shootings in Paris last week and the cancellation 
of Germany’s friendly with Holland due to security fears.

The game in front of 57,000 fans in Hamburg’s Volksparkstadion started 15 
minutes late due to heavy traffic and long queues for increased security checks 
following the attacks that left 130 dead and hundreds injured in the French 
capital last week.

Germany had played France last Friday in Paris and the players spent the night 
inside the stadium before being whisked off to the airport.

The friendly against Holland, scheduled for Hanover on Tuesday, with 
Chancellor Angela Merkel set to attend, was then called off only two hours 
before the start.

The game in Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> started 
with a minute’s silence for the victims in Paris as well as another for the 
former West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, who died on 10 November, with 
fans holding French flags and messages of support.

Dortmund, attempting to close in on leaders Bayern Munich, who take on Schalke 
04 on Saturday, quickly lifted spirits with an attacking game but were twice 
caught on the break, with defender Mats Hummels heading in an own goal to 
complete a disappointing evening for them.

Ivo Ilicevic had a golden chance in the 16th minute only to fire desperately 
wide but the Croatian made amends, latching on to a superb through ball from 
Lewis Holtby and forcing keeper Roman Bürki to bring him down. Pierre-Michel 
Lasogga drilled in the 19th-minute penalty.

Dortmund, with Marco Reus back from injury, again dominated but were once more 
caught off guard with a quick counterattack and Holtby slotting in from a tight 
angle three minutes from half-time.

The visitors came out battling after the break with Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang 
spilling a big chance wide and Dortmund shooting four times on goal in four 
minutes before Hummels turned a lone Hamburg cross into his own net to end any 
hopes of a comeback.

Aubameyang clinched a late goal to take his tally for the season to 14 but 
could not avert their second league loss of the season.

Dortmund remain on 29 points, five behind leaders Bayern, while Hamburg, who 
needed a relegation play-off to stay up last season, move up to eighth with 
their second win in seven matches.
 