
Ronny Deila had no problems with the red card shown to Dedryck Boyata and told 
his player that he must learn to stay on his feet after the Celtic defender was 
sent off in the 1-1 Premiership draw withHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> at New Douglas Park.

The visitors were leading through a Leigh Griffiths penalty when Boyata was 
shown a red card by the referee Craig Thomson just before the break for a 
last-man tackle on Carlton Morris just outside the box.

In the 65th minute the Hamilton goalkeeper and captain Michael McGovern saved 
another Griffiths penalty after Thomson had penalised the defender Ziggy Gordon 
for wrestling with hisCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> 
counterpart Mikael Lustig at a corner.

The Hamilton substitute Eamonn Brophy - who had scored his first Hamilton goal 
in the 8-1 defeat at Parkhead in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/celtic-hamilton-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 – came on for Darren Lyon in the 70th minute and levelled four minutes later 
with a great strike for a share of the spoils which took Celtic seven points 
clear of Aberdeen, who host St Johnstone on Saturday.

Asked about the sending off, the Norwegian manager said: “I think it was an OK 
decision. Rule number one, as a defender, is stay on your feet and run with 
people and it is something we have to learn from.

“I have seen it again one more time and I don’t think he touched the ball and 
we have to learn from these situations.

“When you have one versus one, you have to run with people. We have to run 
with them instead of taking chances.”

Deila claimed that missed chances in the second half even with 10 men cost his 
side dearly. Gary Mackay-Steven and Griffiths spurned chances, aside from the 
Scotland striker’s penalty miss.

The Celtic manager said: “I was disappointed that we lost two points because 
we controlled the game quite well at 1-0, and then in the second half we 
produced three chances, should have scored two but we couldn’t do it.

“When you get two alone with the goalkeeper and a penalty and miss it, then it 
is going to be hard to win football games.

“At the end, the opponents will get a chance or two and it was a good finish 
from the set-play.”

Griffiths took his tally for the season to 33 but was left to regret the 
penalty miss.

He said: “I take responsibility. I’ve scored the first one so I should be 
stepping up confident of scoring the second one.

“But I’ve got to give credit to Michael, it was a great save and they’ve 
kicked on from that to get a point. But that’s twice he’s saved a penalty from 
me so hopefully I don’t have to face him again.

“It’s annoying that we haven’t stretched our lead but we’ve got to accept that 
and take it forward. We just concentrate on what we do so our mind is only on 
Dundee on Wednesday now.”

The Hamilton player-manager Martin Canning felt that pride had been restored 
after the thrashing at Celtic Park, and even expressed some disappointment that 
his side could not force the win.

He said: “Everyone was hurting after the last game but we showed we can get 
over that and put on a performance.

“We knew it was a bad night for us. Every game has to be taken individually 
and that proved it. It feels like a win in a way as we would have taken a point 
before the game.

“But I said in the dressing room in a quiet moment it was disappointing we 
didn’t win given the way the game went.

“It was a big opportunity to get the three points, which would have been the 
most important thing. But I was proud of the players and the effort they put 
in.”
 