
With an hour played of this, the opening match of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> season, perhaps 
some Rangers supporters wondered if the struggle had been worth it. Precisely 
150 games – league and play-off – after being consigned to the bottom tier, 
Rangers found themselves labouring badly against Hamilton Academical. 
Welcome back?

Two instances thereafter were interesting. In basic football terms, the 
introduction of Harry Forrester and Michael O’Halloran rescued a point for
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> even if Martyn Waghorn 
claimed the crucial goal. The duo injected much-needed pace and life into a 
stagnant attacking display. The reaction from the stands at full time was also 
noteworthy, the howls of derision which would historically have greeted a 
result against one of the top tier’s lesser lights who have not won here in 29 
years – replaced by understanding and, generally, applause.

The latter aspect was both a credit to the Rangers support and, if it 
continues, a benefit to a team who could otherwise be weighed down by 
expectation which would not apply to other newly promoted teams. Perhaps four 
years in the nether regions of the Scottish game tempered lofty aspirations. It 
has not doused anger as to what occurred in 2012, going by the vociferous 
booing as afforded to the SPFL’s chief executive, Neil Doncaster, as he took to 
the field before kick-off. “Back by unpopular demand” read a flag unfurled in 
the Broomloan Stand. Fans of other clubs will at least concur.

In public, Mark Warburton bemoaned a lack of quality from his players and 
admitted that perhaps the magnitude of this occasion affected them. Privately, 
the Rangers manager may actually view this low-key return as a benefit to the 
level of background noise that otherwise would surround his position.

There is no real, present-day logic behind ideas of Rangers challenging Celtic 
for the title this season on the grounds of on- and off-field resource alone. 
Those pining for an immediate return to blow-for-blow Old Firm battles as title 
races will almost certainly have to wait .

This was all apparent even before Ali Crawford’s brilliant strike sent Hamilton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> ahead at Ibrox. The forward 
had easily escaped a challenge from Niko Kranjcar before blasting high past Wes 
Foderingham. The goalkeeper need not have bothered diving.

Earlier, the Rangers defence had not dealt with a perfectly routine Greg 
Docherty cross from the right. By this 30th minute juncture, a promising 
Rangers start had faded badly. Kranjcar was heavy-legged in midfield, Kenny 
Miller anonymous in attack and Joey Barton, while accurate with long-range 
passing, doing little to hurt the opposition.

Change was key. With Forrester’s first touch, he played a cross to the feet of 
the prolific Waghorn. The striker needed only one touch to slide the ball 
underneath Remi Matthews, thereby raising hope that Rangers could begin what 
they hope will be a fresh era of success with three points. That cause was 
hampered by the loss of Waghorn – Rangers had already made three substitutes – 
with eight minutes to play. The 26-year-old crumbled in a heap holding his 
right hamstring and, while the best case scenario is that Waghorn has suffered 
only a spasm, it will be today when a proper diagnosis is available.

The one from the Rangers captain, Lee Wallace, in respect of this game was 
“disappointing”. Hamilton, of course, are entitled to different emotion 
entirely, the team heavily tipped for relegation having claimed a result that 
few had predicted. Either to the visitors’ credit or the detriment of Rangers, 
Hamilton were hardly sweating during the dying embers of the encounter.

“Coming here was always going to be difficult but to take something from the 
game was great,” said Hamilton’s manager, Martin Canning. “We worked so hard 
and I’m delighted to come away with a point.”
 