
The British sailors Hannah Mills and Saskia Clark will have to wait one more 
day to claim gold after officials decided it was not windy enough to run the 
women’s 470 Olympic final.

The pair were poised to sail to victory on Thursday but the Brazilian breeze 
had other ideas. For more than three hours the women bobbed about in Guanabara 
Bay, waiting to be given the green light, only for commissaires to decide that 
the seas were too calm. The sailors passed their time by sunbathing on their 
dinghies and looking over at the judge’s boat to see if there was enough wind 
to crack on.

It was an agonising afternoon for the British pair. Like their team-mate Giles 
Scott, whotook gold in the Finn class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/giles-scott-sailing-finn-class-rio-2016-olympics>
 on Tuesday, they were guaranteed a place on the podium’s top spot even if they 
came last in the final. They went into the last race with such a lead that none 
of their rivals could touch them. A 20-point advantage over their nearest 
competitors meant gold was inevitable, as long as they did not sink or get 
disqualified.

The final is now scheduled for 1.05pm local time on Friday if the weather 
plays ball. There is light rain and breeze forecast for tomorrow afternoon.

The men’s 470 was also postponed and will take place at 2.05pm on Friday. The 
British pair Luke Patience and Chris Grube go into their final in fifth place 
but are out of medal contention. The Croatians, Sime Fantela and Igor Marenic, 
are in first place but are not assured of gold. Mills and Clark are chomping at 
the bit to be given their gold medals. It will be particularly satisfying to 
beat New Zealand’s Jo Aleh and Polly Powrie, who pushed them into silver 
position in London for years ago.

The Kiwis were in second place heading into the final but with such a slim 
lead over the United States, French and Japanese sailors that the other medals 
were very much to play for.

The Olympic sailing takes place in Guanabara Bay, against the spectacular 
backdrop of Sugarloaf Mountain. Unfortunately for the sailors, the blue waters 
are heavily polluted withsewage <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sewage> , 
rubbish and oil spills.

All were advised to keep their mouths shut if they capsized after a 16-month 
study commissioned by the Associated Pressfound the water was contaminated 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/2c9894db31b74fc081d7f1ee3f0cf673/expert-rio-athletes-dont-put-your-head-under-water>
 with raw human sewage teeming with dangerous viruses and bacteria.

Happily Clark and Mills avoided Rio belly to reach the aborted final on 
Wednesday in full health. Clinching victory will be an emotional ending for the 
pair, who do not plan to race together again, with 36-year-old Clark hanging up 
her boat shoes after 28 years on the water.
 