
Oak-leaves still rustle in the woods of Llechwedd Hir, pale green and vivid 
tan long after western winds have stripped ash and sycamore bare. On the wild 
cherry, foliage hangs bright as lamps as I climb by twisting paths to the 
moorland plateau between Harlech and the rough bounds of the northern 
Rhinogydd. This was the country Robert Graves loved best. Drab stone of Harlech 
town seems forever grieving the loss of that Edwardian innocence he knew.

But, as I struggle up savage gradients through the woods and lean on a 
drystone wall to regain my breath, my eye is drawn to the reminder of an 
earlier Edwardian era. The military masterpiece ofHarlech Castle 
<http://www.harlech.com/> dominates the scene, memorably gaunt against mercury 
shimmer of a sunset sea. Jackdaws tumble and call as they quit battlement and 
tower to roost in pinewoods behind the dunes. A slow grey heron ghosts through 
their commotion, tide having driven it from estuary-fishing along the Dwyryd. 
Out of the wood, along the green path by an abandoned farmstead, an early 
badger snuffles and scurries, pausing to scrape a dung-pit by the wall and 
relieve itself copiously. Stonechat and wren leave off berating each other and 
scold at the intruder, who lumbers on without concern.

Higher hills of central Snowdonia to the north are rain-palled, but not the 
shapelier peaks to the west and south. On Moel Hebog golden vapour trails down 
the precipice of Y Diffwys, veiling it with lace. The sun dips to cloud-level, 
sends out a searching lateral beam beneath that suddenly illuminates Cnicht and 
Cwm Croesor, the whole landscape flushed with its radiance. The oakwoods and 
their remnant leaves are transformed to a flaming glow that lasts less than a 
minute. As it fades, the hills behind – goats' hill, hill of the hare, hill at 
the head of light, to translate sibilant loveliness of their Welsh names – mass 
blocky and solid, as the badger shuffles past my feet and Venus rises.

A Snow Goose and other Utopian Fictions 
<http://www.cinnamonpress.com/a-snow-goose/>, by Jim Perrin, is published this 
week by Cinnamon Press
 