 To describe Harry Mullan, who has died aged 53 of cancer, as one of the finest 
and most perceptive sports writers to have graced journalism in the last 30 
years would be accurate, but would undersell his life.
In the wonderful anthology of his work, Fighting Words, Harry wrote: "What I 
hope comes across, above anything else, is the sheer exhilaration that I never 
lost at the realisation that I am actually making a living out of what I would 
do for nothing: writing about boxing."

Whether he was writing in newspapers like the Sunday Times, Independent on 
Sunday or, most recently, in Sport First; broadcasting, or thundering his 
observations from the pages of Boxing News, the trade paper which he edited for 
20 years, Harry was always a must-read. Entertaining, controversial, 
cantankerous and compassionate, he was a fighter's writer.

From his place at ringside, Harry analysed them all. Muhammad Ali, Marvin 
Hagler, Roberto Duran and Sugar Ray Leonard were greats whom he revered; his 
fellow countrymen, the Irish champions Barry McGuigan and Steve Collins, 
perhaps gave him greatest satisfaction, but his admiration was for all who have 
the guts to step through the ropes and make a living from boxing.

For that reason, fighters returned his honesty and integrity with their trust, 
affection and friendship. Although he never boxed, they regarded the 
grey-haired Irishman as a kindred spirit. He was quietly-spoken and smiling, a 
bon viveur whose love of a yarn over a few carafes of red wine will never be 
forgotten by those of us lucky enough to have shared the hangover.

Four months before his death, I sat with Harry in an Italian restaurant in Las 
Vegas, a city which endlessly intrigued him because of its Mafia origins, 
corruption, gambling and overt hedonism. He knew that his life was nearing its 
end, but said: "Why should I be sad? I have done more than I ever believed 
possible. For a boy from Coleraine to have travelled the world and experienced 
life as I have has been a dream come true."

 His love affair with the sport began, aged five, when he heard the radio 
commentary of Randolph Turpin's victory over Sugar Ray Robinson. Two years 
later, he persuaded his father to give him half a crown, the price of admission 
to watch Billy "Spider" Kelly boxing in Portstewart, Northern Ireland, the town 
where Harry grew up.

There was no turning back after that. Aged 11, he read Boxing News for the 
first time: tales of epic fights, interviews with his heroes and dark rumours 
of skullduggery; pictures and words to fuel a fledgling passion. He was hooked. 
His desire was to edit the magazine. By 1977, he had realised his ambition.

Although it was a job which never brought him more than modest financial 
reward, Harry was fearless in using the paper to fight for what he believed in. 
Promoters were confronted; he was banned from shows and sued for libel. He 
loved to lambast the British Boxing Board of Control at any moment when he 
sensed an abrogation of responsibility or a hint of failure in what he argued 
was the Board's principal duty, to protect the rights of the fighters.

Boxing writers and broadcasters shared a love of the man. Ian Darke, 
commentator for Sky Television spoke of Harry as a maverick: that was high 
praise. Too often, as Mullan used to say, sports reporters move as a pack 
churning out repetitious quotes. He avoided all press conferences and shunned 
any hospitality that he believed was intended to buy his goodwill.

For more than four years at the end of his life, Harry had to cope with 
illness - which he did with extraordinary dignity and courage - and was given 
support by his wife of almost 30 years, Jessie. Throughout, he remained op 
timistic, insisted on working and he stayed controversial . When, last March, 
much of the world was condemning the decision which gave Evander Holyfield a 
draw in the world heavyweight title fight against Lennox Lewis, he went on 
television and radio to state that the fight had been close and that a draw may 
have been the right result. In the Guardian, I had written that the decision 
stank. Harry called me to say: "Great piece, but I didn't agree with a word of 
it." He was a great friend, and he will be irreplaceable.

He is survived by Jessie, two sons and a daughter, and four grandchildren. 

Patrick Henry Pearse Mullan, born April 22, 1946, died May 21, 1999
 