
“My name is Aris Moro and I have a question,” begins Aris Moro, who has a 
question.“When I was younger, my football coach asked me if it were possible 
for a team to score two consecutive goals without the opposition touching the 
ball in between. In Fifa ‘05 it was impossible, which is why I said ‘no’. He 
then proceeded to explain to me that one team can score a goal right before 
half-time with the referee blowing his whistle right after the goal was scored, 
and then start from kick-off and score again. It can happen then. But has it 
ever happened?”

As several readers have emailed to point out, it has indeed. Let’s head back 
to 23 September 2000. The Tamagotchi craze was over, the Sydney Olympics were 
in full swing, French Euro pop duo Modjo were at No1 with Lady (Hear Me 
Tonight), andWycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> Wanderers 
welcomed Peterborough United to Adams Park for a mid-table Division Two clash.

The first 45 minutes was fairly uneventful, but then Wycombe’s Steve Brown was 
brought down on the edge of the area by Jun Cullen. Up stepped Jamie Bates, who 
crashed the free-kick through the wall and past Mark Tyler in the Peterborough 
goal. Referee John Brandwood immediatel blew his whistle before Posh had chance 
to restart. Half-time, 1-0 to the Wanderers.

After the interval 23-year-old Jermaine McSporran kicked off for the home side 
and headed straight for the Peterborough goal. The defenders, caught napping, 
let the striker through on goal and he calmly slotted past Tyler to double the 
advantage. Two goals separated by nine seconds and without the opposition 
touching the ball.

Wycombe would go on to finish 13th but the season was a memorable one: it was 
the year that they reached the FA Cup semi-finals under Lawrie Sanchez. You can 
read more on that campaign inthis piece on the Two Unfortunates blog 
<http://thetwounfortunates.com/great-football-league-teams-22-wycombe-wanderers-2000-1/>
 and there’s a longermatch report on the Peterborough game here 
<http://www.chairboys.co.uk/onthenet/reports0001/peterborough_h_23sep00.htm>.

INITIAL ISSUES

“Upon musing at the trend of football managers having their initials on their 
jackets or tracksuit tops, I wondered if any manager has been replaced with 
another who has the same initials, thus saving the expense of new matchday 
apparel?” pondered thrifty Ed Ginzler last week.

There have been a few. Gareth Southgate, for example, was replaced by Gordon 
Strachan at Middlesbrough, though as Pete Scarborough points out: “I’m not sure 
if Gareth’s jacket would have fit wee Gordon, though.” And as Tom Pringle adds: 
“It was a bit of a false economy on the kit initials though, as Strachan 
proceeded to spend every penny in the piggy bank on dross before being sacked 
himself a year later.”

That does seem to be a theme – the savings on matchday apparel initials seem 
to be regularly offset by spending (or general failure) elsewhere. “Wolves did 
exactly this in March 1994, replacing popular but limited stalwart Graham 
Turner (two promotions on a shoe-string, Steve Bull, Sherpa Van Trophy) with 
Graham Taylor (stagnation, tried to sell Steve Bull, Turnip),” writes Phil 
Russell. “Although given the transfer budget squandered on the likes of Tony 
Daley, Mark Atkins, Steve Sedgeley etc I can’t imagine cost savings were high 
on the agenda when he was appointed.”

David Weir replaced Danny Wilson at Sheffield United in the summer of 2013, 
and won one game before being sacked after 13 matches. And it was a similarly 
sorry story at Manchester City in 1984. “As a diehard Manchester City fan I 
remember only too well the dark days of the 80s when City truly were a 
shambles,” writes Phil Hammond. “John Bond resigned in 1983 to be replaced by 
assistant manager John Benson. City were duly relegated, Benson was sacked.

“The following season Bond went to Burnley, Benson followed him as assistant. 
Bond was sacked and Benson took over from him as manager again. So that’s two 
clubs who saved on the reprinting of initials - beat that!”

CAP IN HAND

“James Milner has now amassed 52 England caps, but has only played 2,812 
minutes, averaging at just over 54 minutes per game,”noted James Hamilton 
before the game with Scotland.“Has any other international footballer have a 
lower minutes-per-game ratio? (Let’s say a 10-cap minimum for qualification).”

The 10-cap minimum is fairly arbitrary but pretty essential. Strictly speaking 
the Liverpool full-back Martin Kelly has the lowest minutes-per-England-cap 
ratio with his solitary cap earned thanks to an 88th-minute substitute 
apperance against Norway in 2012. Similarly, the former Derby County winger 
Kevin Hector has two-caps despite playing only 18 minutes for England, while 
Stan Collymore has three earned in 84 minutes of international football. 
England’s other shortest international careerscan be found here 
<http://www.englandfootballonline.com/TeamPlyrs/PlyrsShortest.html>.

As for those with more than 10 caps, unsurprisingly in these subsitute-heavy 
times the list is dominated by players of a recent vintage. By our reckoning, 
Rickie Lambert comes top of the list thanks to histhree starts (during which he 
was twice replaced) and eight substitute appearances 
<http://www.englandstats.com/players.php?pid=1196>. Both he and Ross Barkley 
have plenty of time to add to those appearances, though, so perhaps the numbers 
posted by Kieron Dyer, Jermaine Jenas, Alan Smith and Jermain Defoe are the 
most impressive.

Rickie Lambert 11 caps, 316 minutes = 28.7 minutes per cap

Kieron Dyer 33 caps, 1088 minutes = 33 minutes per cap

Ross Barkley 10 caps, 348 minutes = 34.8 minutes per cap

Jermaine Jenas 21 caps, 768 minutes = 36.6 minutes per cap

Ray Parlour 10 caps, 381 minutes = 38.1 minutes per cap

Alan Smith 19 caps, 774 minutes = 40.7 minutes per cap

Darius Vassell 22 caps, 898 minutes = 40.8 minutes per cap

Jermain Defoe 55 caps, 2355 minutes = 42.8 minutes per cap

Adam Johnson 12 caps, 519 minutes = 43.3 minutes per cap

Robbie Fowler 26 caps, 1151 minuts = 44.3 minutes per cap

Aaron Lennon 21 caps, 997 minutes = 47.5 minutes per cap

Steve Bull 13 caps, 618 minutes = 47.5 minutes per cap

Owen Hargreaves 42 caps, 2056 minutes = 48.9 minutes per cap

Paul Merson 21 caps, 1041 minutes = 49.6 minutes per cap

Peter Crouch 42 caps, 2198 minutes = 52.3 minutes per cap

And we should perhaps also pay homage to a few that just missed out:

Carlton Cole seven caps, 127 minutes = 18.1 minutes per cap

Kieran Richardson eight caps, 174 minutes = 21.75 minutes per cap

Danny Murphy nine caps, 287 minutes = 31.9 minutes per cap

FAROE ISLANDS: THE AFTERSHOCKS

Last week we asked whether the Faroe Islands’ win over Greece in Euro 2016 
qualifying was the biggest shock ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/19/the-knowledge-faroe-islands-biggest-shock-ever>
 and we concluded that, as far as the Fifa rankings were concerned, it almost 
certainly was. And Thankfully no one has emailed in to tell us otherwise. A few 
of you have been in touch, though, to add a bit of meat to last week’s bones.

Uni Arge of the Faroe Islands reckons that the country’s biggest win came 24 
years earlier. “Probably the biggest upset in football was the Faroese victory 
against Austria in 1990,” he writes. “This was the islands’ first ever 
competitive match, and the match was played in Landskrona in Sweden because 
there were no grass pitches in the Faroe Islands. The Faroese team, which won 
1-0, was probably not even ranked at that time, and Austria had just been 
playing in the World Cup in Italy with stars like Toni Polster and Gerhard 
Rodax. Today they are ranked 187, but in reality they are much stronger than 
those remote teams surrounding them on the list. The should probably be ranked 
between 100 and 130.”

And Eduard Ranghiuc of football-rankings.info 
<http://www.football-rankings.info/> has been in touch with an incredibly 
detailed list of the top ranking-based shocks. “The only result to come close 
to the Greece v Faroe Islands is a 1996 friendly between Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
Italy, which B-H won 2-1,” he writes. “The former Yugoslav country was 170, 
while Italy were fifth. Thus a gap of 165 spots.”

Eduard’s list reveals that the biggest shock in a competitive fixture 
involving a team in Fifa’s top 10 is Niger’s 1-0 win over Egypt (No154 v No9) 
in October 2010, while the biggest shock featuring a team at No1 in the 
rankings came earlier this year when Poland (ranked No70) beat Germany last 
month.

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

“What on earth was the Mercantile Credit Football Festival?” wondered Martin 
Helme, apropos of not very much, back in the halcyon days of 2008.

Destined for a dusty shelf next to the Watney Cup, the Texaco Cup and the 
Anglo-Scottish Cup, the little-known Mercantile Credit Football Festival was 
part of the Football League’s spectacular centenary celebrations in 1988. 
Played at Wembley over the weekend of April 16 and April 17, it involved 16 
teams battling it out in a series of 40-minute knock-out matches (a move that 
meant many games went to penalties - only eight goals were scored in the eight 
first-round matches).

Nottingham Forest were the winners (and they proudly record that fact on their 
website <http://www.nottinghamforest.co.uk/club/history/honours.aspx>). After 
swatting aside Leeds 3-0 in the first round with goals from Franz Carr, Stuart 
Pearce and Garry Parker, they beat Aston Villa on penalties in the 
quarter-final after a 0-0 draw, surprise package Tranmere on penalties in the 
semi-final after a thrilling 2-2 draw with goals from Carr and Neil Webb, and 
Sheffield Wednesday, yes, on penalties with Webb scoring the decisive 
spot-kick, after a goalless draw in the final - all this despite the absence of 
their manager, Brian Clough. In essence, the tournament turned out to be 
something of an elongated shoot-out - nine of the 15 ties went to spot-kicks - 
and the crowd dwindled from a healthy 41,500 on the first day to a miserable 
17,000 on day two, but it did provide Forest with a shiny new trophy for the 
cabinet and £75,000.

It provided the finale, if that is the right word, to nearly a year of 
celebratory events, one of which was a match between a Football League XI and a 
Rest of the World XI in August 1987. It was a game that had the Guardian 
spluttering in a leader column: “Soccer in August is not just an absurdity, it 
verges on the immoral.” The 60,000 fans that turned out at Wembley to watch two 
star-studded sides probably disagreed.

Football League XI: Peter Shilton (Derby County), Richard Gough (Tottenham), 
Kenny Sansom (Arsenal), John McClelland (Watford), Paul McGrath (Manchester 
United), Liam Brady (West Ham), Bryan Robson (Manchester United), Neil Webb 
(Nottingham Forest), Clive Allen (Tottenham), Peter Beardsley (Liverpool), 
Chris Waddle (Tottenham). Substitutes: Steve Ogrizovic (Coventry), Steve Clarke 
(Chelsea), Pat Nevin (Everton), Osvaldo Ardiles (QPR), Norman Whiteside 
(Manchester United), Alan Smith (Arsenal). Manager: Bobby Robson.

Rest of the World XI: Rinat Dasaev (USSR), Josimar (Brazil), Celso (Portugal), 
Julio Alberto (Spain), Glenn Hysen (Sweden), Salvatori Bagni (Italy), Thomas 
Berthold (West Germany), Gary Lineker (England), Michel Platini (France), 
Maradona (Argentina), Paulo Futre (Portugal). Substitutes: Andoni Zubizarreta 
(Spain), Lajos Detari (Hungary), Dragan Stojkovic (Yugoslavia), Igor Belanov 
(USSR), Preben Elkjær Larsen (Denmark), Lars Larsson (Sweden), Alexandre 
Zavarov (USSR). Manager: Terry Venables.

For thousands more sepia-tinged questions and answers, take a trip through the 
Knowledge archive <https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/theknowledge>.

CAN YOU HELP?

“Last week Braga’s forward Éder (brilliant small name from his real name, 
Éderzito) reached his 16th cap while playing for Portugal against Argentina at 
Old Trafford,” Cláudio Gameiro writes from Portugal. “Although he played a good 
part in the late winning goal of Raphaël Guerreiro while, inadvertly, passing 
the ball to Ricardo Quaresma after blocking Adrien Silva’s shot, he still 
hasn’t found the net on those 16 games. Surelly there’s got to be an worst 
ratio between caps and goals among other international forwards in the sports 
history, right?”

“David Meyler was the Republic of Ireland’s captain last week in their 4-1 
friendly win over the USA in Dublin,” notes Jamie Ralph. “It was somewhat a 
surprise as Meyler was winning only his 11th cap for Ireland. This made me 
think – what player has been made captain of their country in the shortest time 
after their debut? Perhaps a better way of phrasing this question is: have any 
other players first captained their country with fewer caps than Meyler’s 11?”

“Sheffield Wednesday have already reached double figures for draws this season 
after 18 games, six of them being 0-0,’ writes Bob O’Mara. “It would be pretty 
easy to brand this football purgatory as boring but I’m sure the football 
hipsters amongst your readership wouldn’t like such a banal generalization. I 
expect they’re still a long way off breaking any records but who holds the 
record for the most 0-0 draws in a season in English football? And would it be 
right to presume the lazy stereotype that an Italian side holds the record for 
no score draws?”

“In today’s Guardian we can read: ‘[Aston] Villa, who managed to arrive for a 
home fixture late after their coach got stuck in what Paul Lambert described as 
“horrendous traffic”, took the lead from their only shot on target,’” begins 
Robert Sleigh. “My question (apart from why a team playing at home needs a bus) 
is this: Has a home team (other than Estonia in 1996 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One_team_in_Tallinn>) ever failed to turn up at a 
game (at a serious level of football) and what were the reasons?”

• Send your questions and answers to the lovely people at 
knowledge@theguardian.com <mailto:knowledge@theguardian.com>.
 