
Germans, other Germans sometimes joke, love cars and dogs more than children. 
It’s an old, cliched line and readers of this column will be relieved to learn 
that it doesn’t – at all – apply toBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> players. They tend 
not to have dogs.

Still, coming between a professional fußballer and his drive is rarely 
advisable, as many unhappy stories indicate. Who can forget the heartfelt 
bromance between Stefan “middle finger” Effenberg and Brian Laudrup at 
Fiorentina, so cruelly getting cut short when the German took the Dane’s new 
Mercedes SL for an illicit ride after Euro 1992? The extra 100km on the clock 
constituted a breach of trust from which there simply was no comeback. 
Effenberg, in hindsight, might have also done better placating his angry Viola 
team-mate. “What do you want? It’s not as if I stuck it to your wife” was 
lacking a bit in contrition as a reply.

Bayer Leverkusen’s press officer Dirk Mesch had a much better excuse handling 
Emir Spahic’s car behind his back: the Bosnian defender had parked it in the 
wrong spot. Instead of thanking Mesch for his discreet valet service, however, 
Spahic went mad and throttled Mesch in the changing room, as Express revealed 
in September 2013. Leverkusen buried the matter. “Just one of those football 
misunderstandings between men,” they laughed it off.

Until midnight on Wednesday, after Leverkusen’s DFB Cup quarter-final defeat 
on penalties by Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/08/bayer-leverkusen-bayern-munich-german-cup-match-report>
. This time, no one had touched the centre-back’s car. However, a couple of 
Leverkusen stewards interfered with another, almost as important, status symbol 
in the modern footballer’s world – access to the VIP stadium lounge for his 
entourage. The BayArena exclusive hospitality area is not quite the stuff that 
hip-hop videos are made of, eyewitness accounts suggest, but the irate Spahic 
nevertheless deemed that his loss of face was best punishable by the stewards 
suffering the same fate. The 34-year-old head-butted one of them. The victim 
lost four teeth.A mobile phone video captured the fracas in all its grubbiness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/12/bayer-leverkusen-emir-spahic-security-guards-bayern-munich>
.

“Emir: one of us,” a deliberately provocative 04 banner in the away end in 
Mainz proclaimed on Saturday but the team and the board saw things very 
differently. The captain, Simon Rolfes, dedicated the 3-2 win to the injured 
employee – “he is part of the Bayer family, we wish him all the best” – others 
spoke of their shock at seeing the injured defender’s violent outburst. At 
first, the club had wanted to wait for the police to conduct their own 
investigation but the appearance of the mobile footage had “left no other 
choice,” as CEO Michael Schade put it on Sunday. The player’s contract, valid 
until 2016, wasrescinded “by mutual agreement” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/12/bayer-leverkusen-emir-spahic-security-guards-bayern-munich>
. The fact that a faster, technically better upgrade on the Bosnian was one of 
coach Roger Schmidt’s priorities for the summer transfer window might have 
helped the club to arrive at their decision more easily but one hopes that it 
was made on principle. If you tolerate this,interns shot with airguns will be 
next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/mar/01/chelsea-ashley-cole-air-rifle>
.

Sadly, that wasn’t the only unsightly bout of manic street fighting in 
Germany’s top flight this week. Bild revealed thatHamburg’s Johan Djourou and 
Valon Behrami went head to head in the dressing room at half-time versus 
Wolfsburg 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/2015/apr/13/johan-djourou-faces-fine-dressing-room-fight-hamburg-valon-behrami>
, first in French, then mano a mano, rolling around on the floor on top of each 
other between studded boots and making so much noise that their opponents were 
disturbed in the adjoining dressing room. No cars were involved, by all 
accounts, only frustration about yet another disastrous showing from the 
relegation-threatened Northerners.

In the second half, the performance of interim coach Peter Knäbel’s men 
reached a new nadir; 2-0 for the second-placed Wolves flattered the home team 
in the end. You couldn’t even spin the fisticuffs as “a show of passion” as 
Djourou managed to get himself sent off for dissent with two brainless bookings 
in the space of four minutes. The CEO, Dietmar Beiersdorfer, threatened 
disciplinary measures but ruled out installing the third – no, fourth – coach 
of the season in place of Knäbel, whose grand record reads: L2, (goals) F0, A 
6. Felix Magath, like a latter-day Lothar Matthäus, has naturally announced his 
willingness to help in whatever capacity.

Now that Paderborn – 2-1 winners against Augsburg – and even VfB Stuttgart – 
3-2 over Bremen – are showing signs of life, even Hamburg’s biggest strength of 
recent years – getting lucky with relegation rivals who are even worse – seems 
to have dissipated. They’ve hit rock bottom, in the table and otherwise. 
Increasingly, all that’s left is hope of redemption in the afterlife. The fear 
of passing on to second division hell was briefly replaced by the heavenly 
vision of a lean, haggard figure with a side parting digging the fossilised 
dinosaur out of the ground and turning him into a heavyweight predator once 
again. However, Thomas Tuchel, the designated next manager in either league, as 
Sky Sport News Germany revealed on Friday morning, denied having a €3m-a-year 
agreement in place a couple of hours later. The 41-year-old will surely think 
long and hard whether his “rule-breaker” schtick should go as far as trying his 
hand at the toughest task in German football, bar TSV 1860 Munich. No one could 
accuse him of shirking a challenge but most coaches and players of his calibre 
would much rather increase their chances of success by working with the best in 
the business. Beiersdorfer, you might recall, was of course in charge at 
Hamburg when Mainz’sJürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> was regarded as an 
unsuitable appointment because of his penchant for distressed jeans and his 
stubble. Losing another one of Europe’s most in-demand coaches before he’s even 
had his first game on the bench would be no mean feat.

Talking Points

• The aforementioned Klopp, by the way, experienced a week of extremely mixed 
emotions. On Tuesday, veteran Sebastian Kehl’s extra-time thunderbolt helped 
BVB to an emotional 3-2 quarter-final win over Hoffenheim. The Dortmund coach 
had a feeling that his team would have to play Bayern in the next round again, 
for the fourth time in a row, so he “watched Law and Order instead of the 
draw”, he said – and that’s how it came to pass. Bayern will host the Black and 
Yellows in two weeks, when Dortmund’s last chance to rescue the season could 
well come and go.

• In the league, the 3-1 defeat at Borussia Mönchengladbach has left them in 
10th spot <http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/bundesligafootball/table>, not 
beyond the possibility of squeezing into the Europa League places but bereft of 
any positive momentum. For the third time this season they conceded a goal 
within the opening minute – “world record,” sneered the sporting director, 
Michael Zorc, and once again the team looked physically well short of their 
best. Leverkusen, who had also gone 120 minutes in the cup and had 24 hours 
fewer to recover, appeared much fresher, by contrast. Perhaps it isn’t a 
coincidence that Oliver Bartlett, BVB’s former fitness guru, now works at 04.

• Gladbach, who played one of their typically efficient games against a 
“bigger” team, will finish the season ahead of the other Borussia for the first 
time since 1991. More importantly, they only need six points from their last 
five games to finish in the top four. Schalke 04 are all but resigned to the 
Europa League after the second 0-0 – this time against Freiburg – in a row. 
It’s an extraordinary achievement for the Foals, secured without much money but 
plenty of smart work by the manager, Lucien Favre, and the sporting director, 
Max Eberl.

• A Bayern team with only three substitutes beat Eintracht Frankfurt 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/11/bayern-munich-eintracht-frankfurt-bundesliga-match-report>
, mostly thanks to Robert Lewandowski, who’s the “best Lewandowski possible” at 
the moment, according to Pep Guardiola. Two goals from the Polish striker took 
his tally to 16 and it’s not hyperbole to call him the most important player – 
along with Thiago – beforeBayern’s trip to Porto in the Champions League on 
Wednesday <http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/championsleague/fixtures>. 
Bayern are a more direct, centrist team without the injured wingers Arjen 
Robben and Franck Ribéry. The current set-up is beneficial for his game.

Results Hannover 1-1 Hertha, Bayern 3-0 Eintracht, Schalke 04 0-0 Freiburg, 
Gladbach 3-1 Dortmund, Mainz 2-3 Leverkusen, Paderborn 2-1 Augsburg, HSV 0-2
Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg>, Stuttgart 3-2 
Bremen, Köln 3-2 Hoffenheim.
 