
There must be something about Ayrshire. Thirty nine years on from the duel in 
the sun,an epic battle between Jack Nicklaus and Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/16/theopen.golf5> at Turnberry, 
Royal Troon staged a Sunday worthy of identical status. That is no 
exaggeration; Henrik Stenson and Phil Mickelson produced one of the finest 
denouements in the history of major championship golf. There was privilege in 
watching it. Not even a Mickelson 65 was good enough.

For Stenson, the Claret Jug and a major record-crushing score of 264. Or, in 
more simple language, 20 under par. In his 42nd major appearance, Stenson 
finally reached his holy grail. He took just 63 Sunday shots in doing so.

Henrik Stenson dedicates Open victory to late friend Mike Gerbich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/open-champion-henrik-stenson-dedicates-victory-mike-gerbich>
Only Mickelson, who was eventually battered into submission – ultimately 
falling short by three during the closing stretch – may grudge the 40-year-old 
his maiden major title. In cold reflection, hopefully the left-hander will 
appreciate the part he played in a monumental tussle. Here is further context: 
Mickelson finished 11 shots clear of JB Holmes, who was third.

Stenson was inspired. He had to be, such was the pressure applied upon him by 
a player seeking a sixth major at the age of 46. One of the most popular 
players on golf’s scene has thereby delivered Sweden’s first triumph in the 
sport’s prime four events.

Stenson has also touched upon karma. Allen Stanford, the man who swindled 
millions of dollars from the golfer, continues to servea 110-year sentence in a 
Floridian jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/14/allen-stanford-jailed-110-years> 
as Stenson etches his name into history books. Who emerged the better from that 
deal, after all?

Even though Phil Mickelson came up short we couldn’t take our eyes off him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/17/phil-mickelson-troon-open> 
A sign of things to come arrived as the final grouping took to the 1st. For 
the first time in three days, the sun came out as an indicator of what the 
final 18 holes of the 145th Open would produce. An opening Mickelson birdie as 
Stenson three-putted levelled the scores at 12 under par. On the 2nd, Mickelson 
lipped out when chipping from off the green and over a bunker. The duo traded 
blows during identical, stunning outward halves of 32. Stenson had regained the 
lead by that turn, which was conceded again as the pair took to the 12th tee in 
a tie at minus 16.

Mickelson’s par save on 12, converted from outside 20ft, suggested the golfing 
gods may be smiling favourably upon him. That sentiment belied one key factor; 
this was to be Stenson’s time, an opportunity he wouldn’t pass up. Stenson’s 
22nd birdie in just 68 holes, from 12ft at the 14th, edged him back in front.

The advantage was two in the moment that perhaps defined this event. From off 
the 15th green, Stenson holed for a birdie. Mickelson, a ferocious competitor 
but a respectful one, raised a smile. The American’s look on the 16th was of 
frustration as an eagle putt slid so agonisingly past the hole.

Typically, Stenson’s short putt to allow the relative cushion of three shots 
when standing on the 18th tee was to miss. The theatre couldn’t end at 71 holes.

Jordan Spieth falls away as big four struggle under scrutiny at Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/17/jordan-spieth-rory-mcilroy-struggle-the-open-2016>
It duly didn’t. Stenson’s tee shot at the last held up a mere inches from a 
treacherous fairway bunker. A career of near misses flashed before the 
Gothenburg man’s very eyes. Now he wouldn’t be denied, a shot to the centre of 
the green and single putt sparking moving moments. The outpouring of Stenson 
emotion was entirely justified.

In making up the numbers, Steve Stricker finished in fourth, a shot adrift of 
Holmes. Dustin Johnson sneaked a top 10 finish with a Sunday 70. Jason Day, the 
world No1, signed off with a 71 for disappointing aggregate of plus one. “I’m 
just used to greens that are 12, 13, 14 on the Stimpmeter,” Day said. “Then we 
get here and it’s nine. Obviously, that’s understandable because of the 
conditions and the elements that you have to battle out here, how windy it is, 
you have to keep them at a certain speed or else they’ll blow off and it won’t 
be fair for anyone.

“I tried to get in early, tried to get used to the greens. It just feels like 
I’m hitting it with a sledgehammer and it’s going nowhere. It’s something you 
have to get used to and unfortunately I just didn’t putt really well this week.”

He just about admitted as much himself but it surely isn’t asking too much for 
a player of Day’s standing to appropriately adjust to the pace of putting 
surfaces by the final day of a tournament.

Rory McIlroy will head for the final major of the season, at Baltusrol from 
Thursday week, in fine fettle. The 27-year-old posted his best round of this 
Open, a 67, on day four. McIlroy thereby shared fifth.

“I missed a few short putts this week but I’m not really putting that down to 
anything,” said McIlroy. “I think I just need to do a little bit of work and 
maybe just be a bit more confident over them. Tee to green was good and I can 
only be positive going into Baltusrol, really.

“I’m playing well. I’m driving the ball great. I think that’s a big thing, 
especially with the US PGA coming up. The PGAs are usually [such that] if you 
can drive the ball well, you’ll do well. I’ve had success in that tournament 
before. I’ll go there feeling pretty good about myself.”

Another reason for McIlroy’s cheer was that he could watch the ending to the 
third major of 2016. Sunday 17 July at Royal Troon will linger long in the 
memory, with Stenson’s recollections the most vivid of all. One of the most 
talented players of a generation is the nearly man no more.
 