
My friend Herbie Dixon, who has died aged 73 of lung cancer, was a self-taught 
musician, and played alto sax and clarinet at venues all over Britain. Then, 
learning the trade by his own ingenuity, he made a living in the antiques 
business. Later still he achieved formal qualifications as a history teacher, 
and trained to be an instructor of Alexander technique.

He was born in Wallsend, Northumberland, to working-class parents, Henry and 
Dorothy (known as Hen and Doll), who named him John. Brought up in Shepherd’s 
Bush, west London, in a house without bath or book, as a youngster he expressed 
courage and competitive drive through boxing. He also began to explore his 
musical talents, and to read an eclectic range of material.

He obtained a clarinet and a saxophone, taught himself to understand chord 
structures and to read music, initially playing in a trad jazz band and then 
experimenting in modern jazz groups and big bands. At 14 he discovered the 
London jazz clubs and became a regular attender.

He left Christopher Wren comprehensive at 16 and took jobs that required his 
skills in mental arithmetic but were of no value to him. In 1966 he became a 
professional freelance musician, playing alto sax and clarinet in south coast 
bars and briefly at such exotic venues as Pontins holiday camp in Brixham, 
Devon, and the touring Roberts Brothers Circus. From 1971 he also worked in the 
antiques and rugs trade, as well as repairing furniture.

In 1972 he married Lucy Dickson, a teacher of French, and they had two 
children, Helen and Jonathan. In the late 1970s Herbie went back to education. 
He took an A-level in history, then studied for a degree in humanities at 
Thames Polytechnic and a postgraduate teaching diploma. He taught history at 
secondary schools and literacy skills to people with learning difficulties, and 
to some of the men incarcerated at Wormwood Scrubs prison. In 1996 he qualified 
in Alexander technique, which aims to improve posture and movement.

Herbie was always looking for something more meaningful in life. In 1971 he 
experienced an “opening” to latihan spiritual exercise, taught by the 
Indonesian Subud movement, with the aim of being in harmony with, rather than 
be dominated by, life’s forces. He legally adopted the name of Herbert. During 
the last 20 years of his life he also followed the teachings of the Asoka 
Gakkai International Buddhist discipline, in the Japanese Nicheren tradition. 
Their chant, Nam-myo-ho-renge-kyo, is a vow to oneself never to yield to 
difficulties and to seek to overcome suffering.

Herbie lived most of his life in west London but latterly moved to Brighton 
and Lewes. Until recently, he played alto sax in the Mood Swings Trio, 
specialising in relaxed jazz.

His marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by Helen and Jonathan, and two 
granddaughters.
 