
Today the body of a Nottingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nottingham> 
lacemaker who helped found one of the world’s most important football clubs 
lies alongside those of famous poets, sculptors, actors, politicians, musicians 
and racing drivers in Milan’s Cimitero Monumentale, a place of ornate marble 
tombs and elegant tree-shaded avenues. But when Herbert Kilpin died on 22 
October 1916, aged 46, the memory of his role in establishing the place of 
football in Italian life already seemed to be fading fast enough to deny him 
even a name plate on the vault where his remains were originally placed, in the 
humbler surroundings of a cemetery in Milan’s north-western outskirts.

Although a story in Gazzetta dello Sport had announced the death of “the 
pioneer of Italian football”, many decades would pass before his bones were 
transferred to a place of greater honour. In 1998 a fan ofMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> named Luigi La Rocca, who 
devoted his spare time to tracing the players of the club’s early years, 
matched an entry in the cemetery’s record card – on which the dead man was 
erroneously identified as “Alberto Kilpin” – to the number on the vault where 
the club’s founder lay.

Milan: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/sep/12/ac-milan-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
The resurrection of Herbert Kilpin had begun. Now the Englishman’s face – with 
a serious expression and a handsome moustache above a striped jersey whose red 
and black colours he proposed – is a familiar image at San Siro, emblazoned on 
banners and scarves as a symbol of the club’s long and illustrious history.

Although finally recognised in Italy, until recently Kilpin remained 
completely unknown in the city where he was born, where he first went to work 
in the lace industry, and which he left in 1891 to make a new life in Italy at 
the age of 21. But that, too, is changing. Nottingham now has a recently opened 
pub and a city bus named after him, and a few days ago the Herbert Kilpin Cup 
was contested for the first time by school teams on the pitches of the Forest 
recreation ground, a large open space close to his home and his school, where 
in boyhood he played his first games of football.

Next week, too, La Rocca and a group representing Milan will be among those 
gathering in Nottingham to celebrate the publication of a book devoted to 
Kilpin’s life at a reception where descendants of the brothers and sisters he 
left behind in 1891 will also be welcomed. Afterwards there will be a drink at 
the recently opened Herbert Kilpin pub, barely a goal-kick away from the 
restored red-brick buildings of the historic Lace Market, where the young man 
began his working life.

Robert Nieri, the author of The Lord of Milan, is a half-Italian, half-English 
lawyer who was born in Manchester – and supports City – but has lived and 
worked in Nottingham for two decades. Intrigued by a story mentioning Kilpin in 
the local evening paper, he began seven years of research into a scantily 
documented life.

Nieri’s subject was one of the 15 children of Ernest Kilpin, who lived with 
his wife and family above his butcher’s shop near the city centre. When Herbert 
began to play organised football, an early Italian connection emerged in the 
name bestowed upon his junior team. Nottingham Garibaldi were so called because 
their red shirts evoked those of the troops led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, the hero 
of Italian unification whose popularity in Victorian England had led tens of 
thousands to witness his brief visit to the UK in 1864 – hosted, as it happens, 
by a Nottingham MP, the industrialist Charles Seely.

Kilpin left school to work in the lace factory and warehouse established by 
Thomas Adams, a flourishing firm which provided its workers with on-site 
facilities that included a schoolroom, a library, a tea-room and a chapel for 
daily services. It was there that he met Edoardo Bosio, an Italian textile 
merchant who had started his own football club back home and watched Kilpin 
turn out at the weekends with Notts Olympic and a church team, St Andrew’s. 
When Kilpin accepted Bosio’s offer of a job in his silk mill in Turin, a bonus 
at the end of the long train journey from England to Italy lay in the chance to 
help his new employer with the team, called Nobili, which he and his 
aristocratic friends had started. Kilpin quickly set about imposing some sort 
of discipline on a bunch of amateurs who had no ideas of technique or tactics.

After six years in the city he moved to Milan. He continued to play for the 
Turin team, but grew tired of the travelling and eventually he and a group of 
friends met in a bar to plan the creation of Milan Football and Cricket Club, 
which played its first match in January 1900 on the trotting course in the 
Piazza Doria, later the site of Mussolini’s huge Stazione Centrale.

Kilpin seems to have been the club’s first guiding spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/sep/12/ac-milan-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
. He invited the British consul general, Alfred Edwards, to become their 
president, and after handing the captaincy for the first season to another 
Englishman, David Allison, he assumed the responsibility himself for the next 
seven seasons, during which Milan won the newly-formed league three times. 
Having started out as a midfield general, he retreated to defence later in his 
career before finishing off as a forward, scoring four goals in six matches in 
his last season. He retired in 1907, after theRossoneri’s third league title.

Practically nothing is known about the last decade of his life, including the 
cause of his death, although it seems probable that a fondness for a drink and 
a smoke might have played a part. He had married an Italian woman, but left no 
children. In the absence of further evidence, Nieri treats the biographical 
facts in the same way as more celebrated writers have dramatised the lives of, 
say, Julius Caesar and Mozart, adding flesh to the skeleton of verifiable 
history through invented scenes and dialogue.

The Lord of Milan might not be great literature, but it makes a very good 
story. Nieri imagines Kilpin tasting a Campari and soda for the first time, 
witnessing the bloody aftermath of a food riot in 1898 and encountering the 
anarchist who assassinated King Umberto – as well as teaching the rudiments of 
the game to his Milanese team-mates, in the shirt that would later be pulled on 
by Altafini and Rivera, Van Basten and Baresi and a couple of Maldinis, not to 
mention his fellow Englishmen Greaves, Blissett, Wilkins, Hateley and Beckham. 
Not a bad contribution, all told.
 