
Hershey is looking at replacing the high-fructose corn syrup in some of its 
products with sugar.

Will Papa, chief research and development officer at The Hershey Co, told the 
Associated Press the company uses a mix of sugar and high-fructose corn syrup 
in its products but that it is “moving more toward sugar”.

“We take into account what consumers want. And consumers are telling us 
between the two, they prefer sugar,” Papa said.

A switch to sugar would make Hershey a high-profile example of the move away 
from high-fructose corn syrup in the food industry. Many people say they avoid 
it because it has gained a bad reputation for fueling weight gain and diabetes, 
though health experts says there’s not enough evidence to conclude it’s any 
worse than regular sugar.

In an emailed statement, Hershey said its work on “exploring” the replacement 
of high-fructose corn syrup “is just under way” and that it did not have a 
timeframe on when it might be complete.

A representative for Hershey, Jeff Beckman, said classic Hershey bars are 
already made with sugar. He cited Almond Joy, Fifth Avenue, Take 5 and York as 
examples of products that use corn syrup.

“Our aim is to be transparent with our consumers about the ingredients we use 
in our products. Once we have more information to share, we will be back in 
touch,” Hershey said in its statement.

Other products that have changed from high-fructose corn syrup to sugar 
include Gatorade drinks and Yoplait yogurt.

As for health, the American Medical Association has said there’s not enough 
evidence to specifically restrict the use of corn syrup. The Center for Science 
in the Public Interest, which advocates for food safety, has also said that 
there’s no evidence that the sweetener is any worse nutritionally than sugar.

The Corn Refiners Association, an industry group, has been pushing back at the 
negative perceptions about high-fructose corn syrup, which is generally cheaper 
than sugar. In 2010, the association submitted an application to the Food and 
Drug Administration to have its sweetener renamed “corn sugar” on nutrition 
labels. The request was denied.

The association said it has also commissioned market-research firms Mintel and 
Nielsen to study perceptions of sweeteners and shared the results online. For 
instance, the group notes in media materials that “67% of consumers agree that 
moderation is more important than specific sweetener types.”

John Bode, president of the Corn Refiners Association, said in an interview 
that the number of companies changing from corn syrup to sugar has slowed. 
Still, he said consumption of high-fructose corn syrup has declined more than 
other sugars.

Part of the reason is that people are cutting back on soda, which he said 
accounts for a majority of the market for high-fructose corn syrup.

In some cases, he noted that companies have switched back from sugar to 
high-fructose corn syrup after failing to see a notable sales spike. Hunt’s 
tomato ketchup switched to sugar in 2010, but then switched back to 
high-fructose corn syrup in 2012. Lanie Friedman, a spokeswoman for ConAgra 
Foods, said demand for the version without high-fructose corn syrup wasn’t “as 
strong as expected.”

She noted the company still offers a 100% Natural line that uses sugar.

Among the members of the Corn Refiners Association are agribusiness companies 
Archer Daniels Midland, Cargill and Tate & Lyle.
 