
A Hillsborough campaigner and academic has turned down an OBE in the Queen’s 
New Year honours list <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/new-year-honours-list> in 
protest against those who failed to help survivors of the disaster and their 
bereaved families.

Prof Phil Scraton, who led the Hillsborough Independent Panel’s research team, 
refused the honour in protest “at those who remained unresponsive” to efforts 
for truth and justice after the tragedy.

An inquest jury concluded in April that the 96 who died in the crush at 
Hillsborough stadium on 15 April 1989 wereunlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
.

Scraton’s book, Hillsborough: The Truth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hillsborough-the-truth-375567.html>, is 
regarded as a definitive account of the disaster and he was given the freedom 
of the city of Liverpool for his work.

In a statement reported by the BBC, he said: “I researched Hillsborough from 
1989, publishing reports, articles and the first edition of Hillsborough: The 
Truth in 1990. Until 2009, and despite compelling evidence, successive 
governments declined to pursue a thorough independent review of the context, 
consequences and aftermath of the disaster.

“This changed as a direct result of the families’ and survivors’ brave, 
persistent campaign. It led to the Hillsborough Independent Panel, its 
groundbreaking findings, new inquests and their crucially significant verdicts.”

He added: “I headed the panel’s research team and was a consultant to the 
families’ lawyers throughout the new inquests. I could not receive an honour on 
the recommendation of those who remained unresponsive to the determined efforts 
of bereaved families and survivors to secure truth and justice.”

Scraton said he appreciated his decision “might come as a disappointment to 
some Hillsborough families, survivors and whoever nominated me,” the BBC said.

But he added: “I could not accept an honour tied in name to the ‘British 
empire’. In my scholarship and teaching I remain a strong critic of the 
historical, cultural and political contexts of imperialism and their 
international legacy.”
 