
In these early, heady Bundesliga weeks, grandiose records are no more 
difficult to come by than inFrankfurt's Friedberger Landstraße between 1988 and 
1990 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4rY_F6nEewY> (60 seconds in). Three wins 
in three games for both Hoffenheim (2-0 at home v Schalke) and Mainz (2-1 over 
Kaiserslautern) at the very top of the table, for example, unsurprisingly 
constitute "best-ever" Bundesliga starts for two clubs with almost zero 
pedigree at this level.

Hoffenheim weren't quite the razor-sharp passing and counter-attacking machine 
that threatened to eat up the competition two years ago in the 
Rhein-Neckar-Arena on Friday night, but they're a much harder-working, fitter 
and more collectively-minded side than the one who flirted with relegation last 
season.

"We all saw that we had to change", said the midfielder Tobias Weis, one of 
the Hoffe players who had really lost his way over the past 18 months. The 
manager, Ralf Rangnick, reportedly concentrated on endurance levels in 
pre-season, and you might say that his idealistic, Arsène Wenger-influenced 
attacking philosophy has been watered down a bit in the process: in Isaac 
Vorsah and Joe Simunic, he now has two centre-backs who instinctively look 
towards row Z rather than the perfect lay-off. "They give us security and 
confidence", said the captain, Andreas Beck.

Vorsah, the (rather old looking) 22-year-old defender, described his 
partnership with Simunic, Graham Poll's World Cup 2006 nemesis, as "a wall". 
The Ghanaian scored Hoffenheim's first goal with a fine, unmarked header and 
later dedicated his second strike in two games to his recently deceased brother 
Joshua, who was allegedly poisoned in an attempt to murder the player. "If he 
continues this way, he'll be one of the best centre-backs in Europe soon", said 
Simunic. The Bosnian midfielder Sejad Salihovic made it 2-0 with a free-kick in 
injury time.

Mainz weren't quite as convincing against Kaiserslautern. But in the 
19-year-old André Schürrle, they have one of the potential shooting stars of 
the season on their books. The roving forward or attacking midfielder who has 
modelled his game on Thomas Müller, was brought on by Thomas Tuchel after the 
break and turned the game with a deflected strike in the 74th minute.

"I can't stop being amazed by him", said the club's president, Harald Strutz. 
He might have to stop though, eventually. Schürrle is heavily linked with a 
move to Bayern or Leverkusen in 2011; Manchester United are said to be 
interested in him, too. "I'll definitely see out the season here", was the 
player's rather ambiguous reaction to the rumours.

Ten-man Hannover, too, were only a few seconds away from registering their 
best-everBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
start. A last minute 2-2 equaliser by the Leverkusen striker Patrick Helmes 
reduced their points total to seven from a possible nine – still their most 
successful opening spell in 41 years. The Lower Saxons' clever rearguard action 
after the early red-card for the self-styled "mad dog" Emanuel Pogatetz after 
36 minutes was somewhat overshadowed by Bayer's inability to turn plenty of 
possession into many decent opportunities, however.

"We were just running towards them, hoping that something might happen", 
Helmes said. The draw at the death spared the visitors' blushes but for poor 
Michael Ballack, Saturday amounted to literally another bad break – a kick from 
Sergio Pinto saw the 33-year-old hobble off with a fine shin bone fracture. 
Hewill be out for six weeks, and as far as the national team is concerned, 
possibly for good. The manager, Joachim Löw, didn't sound particularly bothered 
when he offered his commiserations ("I feel sorry for him") to the deposed 
Nationalmannschaftskapitän.

"The last few weeks haven't been easy for me", said a frustrated Ballack. "In 
football, strange things can happen very quickly".

There will be not much schadenfreude about the Capitano's sad demise in 
Stuttgart, Wolfsburg or Schalke, however. The "top three" contenders are down 
at the very bottom, more pointless than the German "comedian" Oliver Pocher's 
entire TV output over the last decade or so 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_wQHl04cAOU>. Needless to say, two of the 
hapless trio have managed to set new "worst Bundesliga starts" records along 
the way.

Schalke were actually worse 24 years ago.

Stuttgart, it's not unfair to write, were godawful again in their 2-1 defeat 
at Freiburg. Coming out of the blocks with all the agility and pace of a 
one-legged horse on tranquilisers is their very own speciality, of course, but 
the Swabians can surely not rely on turning it around after Christmas year 
after year. The squad seems to have lost too much quality over the summer and 
the new sporting director Fredi Bobic is,as the Berlin-era David Bowie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GXV3rlr9G04> nearly sang, not quite a (Horst) 
Heldt – not for one day, even.

Heldt, instrumental in signing the most important players in Stuttgart's 
recent history, has followed his mentor Felix Magath to Schalke in the summer. 
He wasn't personally involved in the mad trolley dash through the transfer 
market on deadline day, though. It was Magath's sole decision to spend big on 
big(gish) names such as the striker Klaas-Jan Huntelaar and the attacking 
midfielder José Manuel Jurado instead of concentrating on defence, where 
Christoph Metzelder does his best to remind everyone why Bild dubbed him 
"Brother Snore" during the 2008 Euros. The good news for the Royal Blues is 
that Metzelder might miss the away trip to Lyon on Tuesday due to injury.

Heavy, late spending could possibly explain Steve McClaren's troubles as well. 
Under his tutelage the 2009 champions have yet to play a full decent 90 
minutes. "We'll need more time to make it work", said the Englishman, who was 
mindful of stressing his opponents' credentials. "We've lost against Bayern and 
Dortmund, they're both title contenders", said McClaren. "It's nice of him to 
call us challengers but he's obviously not here that long and doesn't really 
know what's going on", was Jürgen Klopp's succinct reply. The Dortmund manager 
was probably happy that his young and immensely talented side weren't burdened 
with a "best start ever" tag. But then again, three-match statistics are hardly 
worthy of their name. Last autumn Bayern, the eventual double-winners, were of 
course involved in their worst campaign since the Bavarian monarchy lost the 
1866 war against Prussia.

Talking points 

• In other non "best or worst ever starts" news, one Scottish streaker was 
visibly not satisfied with Frankfurt's 4-0 rout of Gladbach and started, ahem, 
man-handling himself on the pitch.

• In Munich, proceedings were somewhat limper: Werder Bremen held the 
champions to a 0-0 draw. Tim Wiese was the man of the match with some fine 
saves in goal; even a violet-striped shirt and hairstyle that looked as if 
someone had beamed him back from a 1980s nightclub in the Paderborn suburbs 
didn't distract from his fine performance in the Allianz Arena. Bayern bemoaned 
post-World-Cup fatigue, "many players are not 100% fit", said Louis van Gaal. 
Apart from that, it was business as usual really, with one Bayern official 
expressing an earnest wish for "world peace" (the honorary president Franz 
Beckenbauer on his 65th birthday) while another was threatening all-out 
(legal)war. "We might sue until forever" said president Uli Hoeness in view of 
a first, fruitless round of talks with the Dutch FA, who don't want to 
compensate the club for the injured Arjen Robben.

Results

Hoffenheim 2-0 Schalke, Dortmund 2-0 Wolfsburg, Hamburg 1-1 Nürnberg, Gladbach 
0-4 Frankfurt, Freiburg 2-1 Stuttgart,Hannover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover> 2-2 Leverkusen, Bayern 0-0 
Bremen , Mainz 2-1 Kaiserslautern, Köln 1-0 St Pauli.
 