
If Jason Taumalolo has his way he will be living in sunny California and 
suiting up in the menacing silver and black of the Oakland Raiders while 
Valentine Holmes is a fan of the New York Giants and wouldn’t mind the hustle 
bustle of life in Manhattan.

The two NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> stars will soon discover 
if their NFL dreams have a shot at becoming a reality.

Taumalolo and Holmes will be tested for speed, agility, strength and other 
skills in front of scouts from at least 15NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> teams at a Los Angeles high school on 
Saturday (Sunday AEDT).

CFL commissioner refuses to admit link between football and brain disease CTE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/cte-football-link-concussion-cfl-commissioner>
“We’ve played the highest calibre rugby league in grand finals so for us it is 
a new challenge to see what we are capable of as athletes,” Taumalolo told 
reporters poolside at a Santa Monica hotel on Friday.

The San Francisco 49ers, Los Angeles Rams, Green Bay Packers, Buffalo Bills, 
Cleveland Browns, Indianapolis Colts, New York Jets, Carolina Panthers, 
Philadelphia Eagles, Seattle Seahawks, Kansas City Chiefs and Arizona Cardinals 
are among the teams to confirm their attendance for the work out.

Ironically, their favourite teams, the Raiders and Giants, are not scheduled 
to send scouts, but Taumalolo and Holmes would be happy to secure a contract 
with any of the NFL’s 32 franchises.

They are both also open to letting NFL teams decide what position they play.

Taumalolo, 22, is a 191cm, 113kg powerhouse forward for the North Queensland 
Cowboys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-queensland-cowboys> and 
Holmes, 22, is a 186cm, 93kg backline speedster for the premiership-winning 
Cronulla Sharks.

During Jarryd Hayne’s headline-making season at the 49ers last year NFL teams 
began taking a closer look at the NRL’s top prospects and the duo’s manager 
Chris Orr received a surprise call from the Colts.

Saturday’s work out has been a year in the making.

Taumalolo and Holmes are contracted to their NRL clubs for 2017 and both said 
they would honour their deals in Australia.

If offered an NFL contract they would make the move to the US in 2018.

Holmes brushed off criticism from his Cronulla captain Paul Gallen, who said 
in a radio interview last week he did not think Holmes would make it in the NFL 
and was only trying to bump up the value of his next NRL contract.

“He’s always got comments on anything that happens,” Holmes said.

“Some of the boys have been supportive and messaged me.”

If their NFL dreams are not realised they will be happy to continue their NRL 
careers, with both yet to achieve all of their goals in Australia.

Despite Hayne going through a similar scout workout last year, Taumalolo and 
Holmes have not reached out to Hayne because they “don’t know him”.

Hayne had difficulty getting used to wearing an NFL helmet and the way it 
blocked some of his peripheral vision.

Holmes joked he had a way to get used to the helmet.

“I’ll wear it to bed,” he said.



 