
Torquay United: A striker turned commercial director

Pts 52 Pos 18th Final match (h) v Bristol R (13th)

"We've looked into every possible permutation and we're favourites to stay 
up," says Dean Edwards, a former Torquay striker who now serves as the club's 
commercial director. The days when the 51-year-old scored for the Devon team in 
two separate Wembley finals are long gone but in recent weeks Edwards has 
become accustomed to fans telling him they wished he could pull his boots on 
again. "It's amazing what a good player you become when you retire," he jokes.

Martin Ling, Torquay's manager, has been off work receiving specialist 
treatment for a stress-related illness since January. Alan Knill has filled in 
for what has been an unusual season at Plainmoor. "It's been strange, a bit 
weird," says Edwards. "You don't expect your manager to become ill, and the 
instability hasn't helped, but the board and the supporters have stayed strong. 
Everyone's anxious though; if we stay up, I think the entire town will be 
partying on Saturday night.

"The financial cost of relegation doesn't bear thinking about. We'd lose about 
£750,000 a year – and I'd find selling individual match sponsorships and 
hospitality deals for winter Tuesday nights near-impossible. Player contracts 
also have to be honoured – and those inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> don't all include 
automatic wage-reducing relegation clauses.

"The impact on local tourism would also be significant. From the start of 
April to the end of October many away fans combine watching their team play us 
with a break on our Riviera.

"It's funny having seeing things from both sides of the fence. As a player, as 
long as you've got your contract and you're being paid, you don't worry about 
your club's finances – but now I watch and worry about every penny. I know we've
got to stay in League Two, and I believe we deserve to."

Plymouth Argyle: An ambitious owner

Pts 52 Pos 19th Final match (a) v Rochdale (15th)

When James Brent bought Plymouth in 2011 he immediately took them out of 
administration and began looking upwards. "People keep telling me we're the 
largest city in England not to have had a Premier League team," says Brent. 
After 93 years as a Football League club he trusts John Sheridan, Argyle's 
manager since January, will choreograph the win or draw required to secure 
safety.

"We're not examining our navel," says the owner. "I know we're not 
mathematically safe and I'm not complacent but we haven't prepared any budgets 
for going down. We're planning to start climbing towards the Championship. 
We've got an accomplished manager and some good capable players and I'm 
confident they will do the jobs they are paid for at Rochdale."

Brent hopes to finance the building of a new main stand at Home Park and 
ensure the club's long-term financial viability by constructing an adjacent 
£50m leisure complex featuring, among other things, an ice-rink, a multi-screen 
cinema and a hotel. First, Sheridan and company must emerge smiling from 
Spotland. "I'll be driving the kids back from Rochdale on Saturday evening," 
says Brent. "But I hope to enjoy a few celebratory glasses of wine when I 
finally get home."

York City: The experienced manager

Pts 52 Pos 20th Final match (a) v Dag & Red (21st)

Nigel Worthington played for Leeds United and Sheffield Wednesday, and managed 
Northern Ireland and Norwich City, but there is nothing blase about his 
approach to rescue York from relegation. "Losing League status would cost this 
club more than £1m," says the manager who succeeded the sacked Gary Mills in 
March and whose side need a point at Dagenham and Redbridge to ensure survival. 
"It's in our hands but, as I've seen many times before, anything can happen in 
football so we have to focus on doing our job and doing it very well. We have 
to throw everything into this. It's a huge game but my players have got to deal 
with the pressure. Big games like this are what football is all about."

Results have improved during the nine games the well connected Worthington has 
been in charge. It did not help that two of his loan signings – Sheffield 
United's Richard Cresswell and Ipswich's Josh Carson – sustained season-ending 
injuries but Adam Reed, a midfielder borrowed from Sunderland, promises to be 
influential. "Losing Richard and Josh was a blow but other players have come in 
and done well," says Worthington. "Keeping York in League Two is a big 
challenge which I always thought would go right to the wire but it's been 
exciting. It's something I'm really enjoying."

Further incentive comes from the fans, 1,204 of whom are travelling to London. 
"I've been amazed by York's supporters," says Worthington. "Home and away 
they've been phenomenal. I want to give them something to shout and sing about."

Dagenham & Redbridge: The managing director

Pts 51 Pos 21st Final match (h) v York City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/york-city> (20th)

Steve Thompson acknowledges he will be "nervous". "The cost of relegation is 
something I've looked into it but I'm trying not to think about," says the 
club's managing director. Thompson's calculator tells him that the Daggers 
could lose up to £750,000 per annum in the event of relegation in the form of 
lost central Football League payments, "solidarity money" from the Premier 
League, gate receipts and assorted commercial income streams.

"I'm not planning for going down because I don't think we will," he says. "But 
the effects of relegation on our local microeconomy would be devastating. 
Barking and Dagenham is one of the poorest boroughs in the country and we 
employ over 100 part-time staff. Local families depend on those jobs but we'd 
have to make cuts.

"Then there's a local pub which does a roaring trade on match days but would 
be fearful of being forced to close with the number of away supporters alone 
down by at least 50%. This season Gillingham brought 1,000 fans and Southend 
1,400 but we'd be looking at most teams bringing only 100-200. I'd also worry 
about our local minicab firm."

The Daggers' excellent community work would also be under threat. "The 
football club is a coat-peg to hang important issues on," says Thompson. "On 
Saturday we're promoting bowel cancer awareness but we've also had anti-racism 
and anti-domestic violence initiatives as well as various health campaigns. 
But, if we went down, the staff would shrink and we'd only be able to look 
after core football business."

The responsibility of averting such misery rests on Wayne Burnett's shoulders. 
Once one of Kenny Dalglish's first signings at Blackburn Rovers before slipping 
down the divisions, the former midfielder became interim manager when John 
Still departed for Luton in February.

"Wayne's been very unlucky," says Thompson who approves of Burnett's decision 
to "ease the pressure" on his young team – some of whom are on basic wage deals 
of around £300 a week – by training at Tottenham's former weekday HQ, Spurs 
Lodge, this week. "Wayne's had to cope with injuries to our two strikers and 
we've rarely lost by more than a single goal."

As a director, Thompson serves as a guarantor of the financially well run 
Daggers. "Four or five of us have risked more than is healthy," he says. "But 
even if we went down, Dagenham and Redbridge would survive, albeit in a much 
more slimmed down form – and with the prospect of it taking us quite a while to 
come back up … That isn't going to happen though; I'm absolutely confident 
we'll be fine."

Barnet: The director of football

Pts 51 Pos 22nd Final match (a) v N'hampton (6th)

Shortly before Barnet's vital 1-0 home win over Wycombe last Saturday, Paul 
Fairclough, the club's director of football, confronted the team's 40-year-old 
player-manager, Edgar Davids. "We had words," he says. "Edgar had shifted 
himself to a left-sided role but I convinced him to move back to central 
midfield and he was outstanding, a terrific influence."

Fairclough believes the former Ajax, Milan, Juventus, Internazionale and 
Tottenham midfielder will play a key role in retaining Barnet's League Two 
status ahead of their new life in a fresh home at The Hive in Harrow after 
being forced to vacate Underhill.

"A lot of players are in love with things around the game rather than football 
itself," says Fairclough, a formerBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> manager. "The difference with 
Edgar is that he's in love with football. It's so refreshing. Edgar's got huge 
self-belief and he wants to be a great manager but he's under no illusions that 
he's still learning."

Despite his L-plates, Davids has improved Barnet appreciably since his 
installation in October. "If Edgar had been here longer we'd be challenging for 
the play-offs," says Fairclough who has worked closely with the former Holland 
international, particularly since Davids assumed sole charge in December when 
his former co-manager Mark Robson departed. "We had a little wobble recently 
when I think the fear factor crept in and we were playing not to lose rather 
than to win, but Edgar's changed the shape a bit. We've had a talk about our 
beliefs and I'm confident about winning at Northampton."

AFC Wimbledon: The manager and on-loan striker

Pts 50 Pos 23rd Final match (h) v Fleetwood (12th)

"In a way, we're walking along a cliff," says Neal Ardley, Wimbledon's 
manager, as he strives to conjure up a home win against Fleetwood. "We can 
choose to look down and worry about how far we might fall or we can admire the 
view. We're trying to get the players to admire the view, to embrace the 
pressure."

Thanks to an injection on an injured ankle, Gary Alexander should lead 
Ardley's attack. "We have to do whatever it takes to stay in the Football 
League," says the striker, borrowed from Crawley. "Helping keepAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> up would be one of the 
biggest achievements of my life. This is massive."

Aldershot: The fan and statistician

Pts 48 Pos 24th Final match (a) v Rotherham (3rd)

Pete Stanford has supported Aldershot – in its different guises – since 1979 
and now doubles as club statistician. Unfortunately he fears "the math" does 
not add up to survival.

"My head's telling me relegation but my heart says we've still got a chance," 
says Stanford as he prepares to head for Rotherham. "Our defence hasn't been 
too bad but we struggle to score goals." He suspects Andy Scott's appointment 
as Dean Holdsworth's replacement in February did not come soon enough.

"Andy's incredibly enthusiastic – watching him on the touchline you'd never 
guess he's got the same heart condition as Fabrice Muamba – and he's inspired 
the team," he says. "Some players really seem to believe we can stay up but I 
fear the change was made too late. At least things aren't all bad, though – 
Reading are getting relegated too."

Interviews by Louise Taylor
 