
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> hospitals are making more money 
than ever from car park charges, with more than half charging disabled visitors 
and making thousands every year in fines, an investigation has found.

Hospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> across England made 
more than £120m from charging patients, staff and visitors for parking in the 
past year, up 5% on the year before and rising year on year, according to data 
collected by the Press Association.

About 120 NHS trusts across England were asked to give figures on parking 
charges and fines under the Freedom of Information Act, with 89 providing 
responses.

Overall, the study found that NHS trusts netted £120,662,650 in 2015/16 in car 
park charges, up from £114,873,867 the year before.

About 27 trusts provided data on parking fines, showing they made just over 
£2.3m in fines over a four-year period. In 2015/16 alone, £635,387 was made 
from fining patients, visitors and staff on hospital grounds.

The investigation also found that almost half of all NHS trusts charge 
disabled people for parking in some or all of their disabled spaces.

The Heart of England NHS foundation trust came out top when it came to parking 
income, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/21/nhs-trusts-make-as-much-as-3m-per-year-car-park-fees>
 making £4.84m across the year. This included £3,465,357 from patients and 
visitors and £1,375,751 from staff. Almost £40,000 was collected by the trust 
in car park fines.

More than half of trusts who responded to the FOI request are making more than 
£1m in car park fees every year, with some also handing money to private firms.

In the capital, London North West Healthcare NHS trust made £968,170 in car 
park charges, but a further £1.26m was kept by the private firm Apcoa under a 
private finance initiative (PFI) contract.

The trust made £28,449 from car parking fines and the private firm kept a 
further £25,990 in fines in 2015/16. Over four years, Apcoa has kept £167,357 
in fines under the terms of the PFI contract.

Many trusts defended their revenues, saying some or all of the money was put 
back into patient care or was spent on maintaining car parks or grounds.

Others claimed their sheer size and the fact that they served busy 
neighbourhoods meant they took more in revenue.

The total amount raised by NHS trusts is likely to be higher. Some large 
trusts, such as Oxford University Hospitals NHS foundation trust and Royal 
Surrey, failed to provide figures for 2015/16. In 2014/15, Oxford raised 
£3,728,000, while Royal Surrey made £1,421,172.

Katherine Murphy, the chief executive of the Patients Association, said it was 
unfair that hospital parking in Wales and Scotland was largely free, but that 
patients in England were still forced to pay.

She added: “The shocking reality about car parking charges is that they are 
taking money from the sick and vulnerable to top up NHS coffers. This is not 
what car parking charges should be used for.

“The NHS is clearly underfunded, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/nhs-head-disputes-theresa-may-claims-over-health-funding>
 but the onus on meeting the funding crisis should most certainly not be 
shouldered by the sick, injured and vulnerable.

“We are not talking about insignificant amounts of money either. It is 
alarming that trusts think it is OK to charge people so much money for visiting 
a hospital as it makes patients question the values of the people leading the 
organisation. We take a very clear line that car parking fees need to be 
scrapped or strictly capped.”

Murphy said it was important that drivers parked sensibly, but said fines were 
a burden on the sick.

She added: “It is not right that fines should be so heavy-handed on sick and 
disabled patients.”

The shadow community health minister, Julie Cooper, said: “These new figures 
reinforce the worrying trend that hospitals across England are increasing 
hospital car parking charges and making record amounts of money.

“Raising car parking charges has a knock-on effect on patients, carers and 
family members who have no choice but to pay.

“The current situation is wholly unfair and will only cause more stress for 
patients, families and carers.

“Hospitals cannot justify increasing car parking charges, nor can half of all 
NHS trusts justify charging disabled people for parking.

“The government urgently needs to address this situation and take steps to cap 
the amount hospitals can charge for car parking fees.”

Rosie Downes, the campaigns manager at Macmillan Cancer Support, said: “The 
last thing that somebody going through cancer treatment should be doing is 
worrying about whether there is enough money in the parking meter.

“Cancer can have a huge impact on someone’s finances, and paying for hours of 
parking at hospital each week is a completely unacceptable expense at such a 
hard time.

“Government guidance is very clear that cancer patients in England should not 
continue to pay unfair hospital parking charges.

“Hospitals must start adopting these guidelines as a matter of urgency.”

In October, a Press Association investigation revealed that a third of 
hospital trusts in England had increased their car parking charges in the past 
year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/14/car-parking-at-hospitals-in-england-rises-average-15-since-2014>

The most expensive trust in the country for a one-hour stay was the Royal 
Surrey County hospital in Guildford, where patients are forced to pay £4 for 
any stay up to two hours. It does have a few bays where people can park for 20 
minutes before being charged.
 