
Recruitment has almost entirely shifted online, making it theoretically 
quicker and easier to apply for jobs. But because employers have different 
screening processes, candidates have to be flexible to make sure their 
applications stand out.

Some online applications involve creating an account to track your 
application, while others can be downloaded. Employers may ask you to take part 
in a variety of tests or even record a video. Whatever the requirements, the 
same principles for a successful paper application apply to online ones.

Give yourself enough time

Six out of 10 applicants quit in the middle of competing an online application 
because of the complexity or the number of screening questions, according to 
recruitment siteCareerBuilder 
<http://careerbuildercommunications.com/pdf/hrtechreport.pdf>. 

Setting aside enough time to complete an application is important, especially 
if there is no “save and return” function, meaning you have to complete it in 
one sitting. Make sure you are in a calm and quiet environment – completing it 
at your desk during your lunch hour surrounded by colleagues may not be 
conducive to producing quality work. And don’t leave it until just before the 
deadline, as the recruiter may decide to close the vacancy early.

'I've no idea if the lie or the truth got me hired': your job application fibs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/oct/27/ive-no-idea-if-the-lie-or-the-truth-got-me-hired-your-job-application-fibs>
Be prepared

Check what is involved in the application before you start. Some employers use 
personality and scenario tests to screen candidates before they even get to the 
application point. If this is the case, make sure you have read and absorbed 
the job description and specification so you can really understand what the 
employer is looking for. Similarly, if it’s a video application, where you’re 
given the questions in advance to answer, prepare what you are going to say. 
It’s unlikely there will be an editing function, so you have to get it right 
first time.

If you’re completing a personal statement as part of the application, make 
sure you demonstrate how you meet the required competency or skill. TheStar 
technique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/11/job-interview-questions-example-answers-star-technique>
 can help to structure your examples. Make sure your CV is to hand so you can 
access your dates and employment and education details easily.

Look at the job advert, description and person specification and make sure you 
use the employer’s language when describing your experience.

Be organised

Make sure you save a copy of what you submit. If you get called to interview 
you need to know what you said and if you’re applying for similar jobs you can 
re-use some of the examples.

Even though you’re filling in boxes, ​your application ​still needs to stand 
out

If the application requires you to send in a copy of your CV, make sure it’s 
saved as a PDF so the formatting and content remain intact, regardless of how 
it’s opened. You don’t want your hard work to be binned because the recruiter 
failed to open the file.

Always label your documents or attachments clearly, stating the job title, 
your name and date. Make it easy for your potential manager to access your 
information.

Create an impact

Even though you’re filling in boxes, your application still needs to stand 
out. Think about how you can demonstrate your unique qualities and the value 
you can bring to the organisation.

Demonstrate that you can spot trends and have opinions in your area of 
expertise. If you’ve written a blog, had something published or spoken at an 
event relevant to your work life, include a link in your application. Don’t be 
afraid to communicate your enthusiasm and interest for the job and company.

The future of recruitment will become even more technology-based, so now is 
the time to embrace it and become a master at completing applications online.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 