
Be American. Design software. Sell luxury baubles. Brew beer. Open a shop. 
Make chocolate … but don’t be British – they are rubbish at becoming 
billionaires.

Eight of the top 10 richest people in the world – or, more precisely, men, 
because every one of them is male – are American. And no, the other two aren’t 
Chinese, who despite the country’s extraordinary economic growth only appear 
three times in the list of the world’s 50 richest individuals.

Forbes, a business magazine, not only compiles an annual rich list, but 
updates it online in “real time” 
<http://www.forbes.com/billionaires/list/#version:realtime> – and fund manager 
Nick Train of Lindsell Train has undertaken a fascinating analysis of what it 
tells you about how wealth is created in the 21st century.

Technology is creating wealth, for a few people at least, in a manner 
unparalleled in economic history. Of the 13 richest in the world, eight made 
their money from tech, including Bill Gates (Microsoft), Jeff Bezos (Amazon),
Mark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> 
(Facebook), and Larry Page and Sergey Brin (Google).

What are the five biggest companies by stock market value? Apple, Google, 
Microsoft, Amazon and Facebook. As Train notes, this is historically 
significant – not even in the tech-led stock market bubble of 1999-2000 were 
the top five companies all in the tech sector.

In earlier periods, big oil (such as Exxon or BP) or big finance (such as 
Citibank) occupied the top spots. A decade ago 
<http://www.forbes.com/lists/2006/18/MktVal_1.html> Citibank was the world’s 
fourth biggest company, with BP fifth. Citibank and BP would now have to treble 
in value to match Facebook in the top five.

In the past, instant fortunes were made by striking oil or finding gold and 
diamonds. Or vast wealth was inherited, mostly in the form of land. Today, only 
five billionaires in the top 100 are in natural resources. When Forbes produced 
its first billionaires list in 1987, one in five of the world’s richest were in 
real estate. Today that number has halved.

Will tech fortunes disappear as fast as they are created? Ros Perot and the 
Hewlett Packard founders were in the top 100 list in 1987 but have since 
dropped out. But Train reckons today’s tech billionaires may hold on longer, 
with intellectual property now the world’s most valuable asset. Gates, with a 
current stash of $78bn, has been the world’s richest man for 17 of the past 22 
years. “It is instructive that real assets – metals and land – no longer 
dominate the list in the 21st century. Now intellectual property prevails,” 
Train says.

After tech, it’s consumer brands where the biggest fortunes lie. Of the 100 
richest people in the world, 20 have made it from luxury goods and booze. The 
world’s richest woman, Liliane Bettencourt ($40.5bn, 11th) is the principal 
shareholder in L’Oreal. Bernard Arnault ($36bn, 14th) made his fortune from 
Louis Vuitton.

Germans, we all know, are brilliant industrialists. But the richest have made 
their money from shops: the Albrechts (Karl, $28.4bn, 22nd; and Theo, $21bn, 
34th) are behind Aldi, while Dieter Schwarz ($19.7bn, 39th) runs Lidl.

Chocolate is another tasty moneyspinner. Three of the richest 30 people on the 
planet (two from the Mars family, one from Nutella) have become fat filling us 
with sweets.

And the British? The country that was the cradle of the industrial revolution, 
and which has more Nobel prize winners than any nation other than the US? The 
only home-grown billionaire in the top 100 2016 ranking, before he died, was 
the Duke of Westminster, whose wealth came from inherited property. You have to 
go to 343 on the list before you find a Brit who actually makes anything – 
James Dyson.

I have not mentioned the richest person in the world. It’s a name few will 
recognise: Amancio Ortega, with a $78.7bn pile. A humble shopkeeper from Spain 
– he started Zara in 1963 – has trounced even Amazon’sJeff Bezos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jeff-bezos>. Maybe there’s hope for all 
of us yet.

 p.collinson@theguardian.com <mailto:p.collinson@theguardian.com>
 