
The University of Alicante has just issued a report 
<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/09/160926100011.htm> saying that 
people over 50 must be prepared for retirement and – since we’re all living 
longer and staying healthier, too – we must look to retrain, keep learning and 
look towards what it optimistically describes as a “dynamic third age”.

I know no one between 50 and 70 years old who, having retired, is not full of 
beans. “I’ve never been so happy!” is the usual cry. “I’ve never been so busy!” 
In my experience, most people feel released after retirement, like a cork out 
of a restraining bottle, with bucket lists as long as your arm and a fiendish 
determination to hang on in there, get down with the yoga classes, travel the 
world and take up hobby after hobby, from investigating one’s ancestry to 
joining a choir. Who needs to prepare for it when there are grandchildren to 
look after, groups to join, degrees to take and book clubs to start?

But here are some tips, should you need any, on how one might prepare, or 
“train”, for retirement.

Help older people 

The great thing about helping older people to do things – ferrying them from 
hospital to hospital, doing their shopping – is not only does it make you feel 
tremendously young yourself, but it also gives you a realistic (if often 
chilling) glimpse of the future that awaits you.

Taylor Swift Shake it Off video gets a makeover courtesy of retirement village
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/26/taylor-swift-shake-it-off-video-new-zealand-retirement-village-viral>
Have a makeover 

Now is not the time to “let yourself go”. Since many of your contemporaries 
will be doing just this – slipping into trackie bottoms and cutting their own 
hair – you can shine very easily by making the slightest of efforts. Make even 
more of an effort – dye your hair in stripes, swathe yourself in oriental 
scarves (and that’s just the men) – and you will stand out as one of the oldest 
stylies in town. You’ve now got the confidence.

But don’t let that confidence, which, being old, you’ll now have in abundance, 
push you too far

Machu Picchu might sound like something to “go for” now you’re older, but is 
the humiliation of being stretchered down after a couple of days really worth 
the risk? Also, go dancing. But don’t go mad. You may break your leg.


Remember your Freedom pass 

This, and a Senior Railcard, can get you around Britain for a matter of only a 
few pounds, if you get your times right. You could also visit every museum in 
the country if you felt so inspired.

Volunteer 

There are lots of volunteering projects designed specifically for older people 
<http://www.projects-abroad.org/how-it-works/older-volunteers/>. So you need 
not worry that you will be asked to build a local hospital single-handed or 
even dig a well; you could teach children maths orreading 
<http://www.beanstalkcharity.org.uk> instead.

Get a routine 

Office life at least ensures you get dressed every morning. Make sure you’re 
out of your nightie or jim-jams by 10 at the latest. Don’t start ordering 
things on Ocado just yet.

Remember that after 70, it’s a different matter 

Be prepared, yes, but for a completely different scenario. You will need to 
get used to:


• Spending your days in doctor’s surgeries, waiting for appointments for blood 
tests, EEGs, x-rays and the falls clinic.


• People offering you their seats (always accept: don’t let vanity get in the 
way of letting other people express their kindness).


• Smiling gratefully when everyone you meet ends the conversation with the 
words: “Now you take care!”


• Finding yourself starting every conversation with the words: “You wouldn’t 
remember, but …”


• Reading up about euthanasia and making a living will or final directive.

• Realising that the banisters aren’t quite good enough and considering 
installing a rail in your home on the wall side.

• Eating earlier and earlier in the evening.
 