
Degree or no degree?

In the UK, the majority of MPs studied at prestigious universities. But with 
so many paths into politics, and a variety of jobs available, having a degree – 
in politics or another subject – is helpful, but not essential.

“The main benefit of having a degree in politics is that it gives you a 
theoretical understanding of our political system and politics as a whole,” 
says Afzal Khan, a Labour member of the European Parliament for the north-west. 
“But it’s no substitute for practical political experience and actually getting 
out and doing it.”

 Caroline Russell, a member of the London Assembly and an Islington councillor 
for the Green Party, says that increasingly employers recognise routes into 
employment other than having a degree. Apprenticeship schemes, such as those of 
the Greater London Authority and Civil Service Fast Track, for example, do not 
require degrees.

What is it like to apply for the civil service fast stream? Here's what you 
said
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/19/applying-civil-service-fast-stream-reader-views>
 Universities do offer an array of opportunities to get involved in politics 
and campaigning through political parties and campaign groups within the 
student union. Fiona Richardson, senior careers consultant with the Careers 
Group London, says that many student unions find it hard to fill all their 
positions, so this is a good place to start. “Go to university-run events where 
you will come into contact with those already working in the field,” she 
suggests. “Networking at these events can be a very effective way of accessing 
the hidden internship market.”

How can I get useful work experience?

Our experts agree that campaigning is the best route into politics – and there 
are plenty of opportunities to volunteer with a campaign group or political 
party. “You will be making a useful contribution and you will gain essential 
skills that could be useful in politics or in wider life,” says Russell. It’s 
important to choose an issue you care about passionately, she adds, because it 
can be “a long road” and dedication is important.

Khan says local campaigning is a good place to start. “The best thing about 
being involved locally is that it’s your area – and the difference you make you 
will see and will directly benefit you and your loved ones. I divide my time 
between Brussels and Manchester, but it’s the local side of things that gives 
me the most satisfaction,” he says.

Many people underestimate quite how difficult it can be to get selected for a 
seat, let alone winning at an election

Employers are interested in how candidates have taken opportunities to broaden 
their skill sets, says Carl Thomson, director of the Whitehouse Consultancy, a 
corporate affairs agency. “It’s important to be able to demonstrate relevant 
work experience and skills, such as initiative and creativity,” he says. He 
suggests writing to a local MP and asking for a week’s work experience or if 
you have the resources, asking for a placement in their Westminster office.

 Julian Cooke, a national political officer for the trade union Unison, 
suggests visiting political institutions, like the Houses of Parliament or 
Welsh Assembly, and sitting in a local council meeting. “It will get you used 
to the rules of the game and allow you to imagine yourself in the chamber, 
arguing for the things you passionately believe in,” he says.

Experience outside of politics

While many people choose to head straight into politics, working outside the 
political sphere can be helpful and – as some experts argue – vital. “The more 
experience you have in other things will only serve as an asset,” says Shazia 
Awan, a PR consultant, equality activist and media commentator. “I’ve worked 
leading the communications strategy for several fashion brands, I’ve run my own 
clothing business, I write, I volunteer and I find time for my political 
interests. That diverse background makes people more valuable to the political 
party they choose to align themselves with,” she says.

 Getting involved with a union is a good way to gain experience in politics 
through your existing job, suggests Cooke. “I have a degree in politics but it 
was the experience I gained as a local rep in the NHS that gave me the skills 
and knowledge to get a job with the union.”

 Experience outside of politics, however, should not be viewed as a “box to 
tick” says Peter Allen, a senior lecturer in politics at Queen Mary University 
of London. “It would be better if we thought about ways to make the divide 
between daily life and politics more fluid. In any case, the ‘real-life 
experience’ thing has definitely become a cliché at this point,” he says.

The way to a better work-life balance? Unions, not self-help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/oct/11/way-to-better-work-life-balance-unions-not-self-help>
Working in politics is not just about becoming a politician

From lobbying to communications, journalism to research, academia to strategy, 
there is a wider variety of jobs in politics than people think. “Many people 
underestimate quite how difficult it can be to get selected for a seat, let 
alone winning at an election,” says Jo Blackman, senior EU and international 
campaigner at the NGO Global Witness. “There are lots of other ways to make a 
difference and have a fulfilling job in politics, whether that’s in a political 
party, the private sector, consultancies or NGOs,” she says.

 Her advice is to always be open to new opportunities. “Political jobs can 
offer ways into interesting organisations and offer opportunities to develop 
new skills and experience, which take your career in a whole new direction,” 
she says.

Keep pushing ahead with what you are passionate about and your talent will 
shine through every time

 Richardson agrees there is no need to fixate on a chosen career path. To get 
an understanding of the variety of jobs available, she suggests looking at the 
positions advertised onwww.w4mp.org <http://www.w4mp.org/>. “Spend some time 
looking at the skills, knowledge and experience required in the job description 
and think how you might go about acquiring these,” she says.

Work hard and stick with it

In politics, it is vital to be yourself and be open to change and challenges, 
says Ivana Bartoletti, chair of the Fabian Women’s Network and vice chair of 
the Fabian Society. “Every journey is long and unique – and can be as rewarding 
as disappointing. So the important thing is that you fully enjoy it.” She says 
that people can enter politics at any age, but like most other professions, it 
is important to find mentors, sponsors and people you look up to along the way.

 Awan agrees that a career in politics does not happen overnight. “In 
politics, as with life, there can be a lot of knock backs, so don’t be 
disheartened. Keep pushing ahead with what you are passionate about and your 
talent will shine through every time,” she says.

 As well as working hard to get ahead in politics, being nice to people along 
the way is also important, says Thomson. “Westminster at times can feel like 
it’s full of arrogant and aggressive people. You don’t need to behave like that 
to get ahead, and you should remember the old maxim, ‘Be kind to the people you 
meet on your way up, because you’ll see them again on your way back down’.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 