
Internships offer an attractive route into some of the UK’s top jobs; if 
there’s one thing you should do to make yourself more attractive to prospective 
employers, it’s gain experience of work.


The Association of Graduate <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/graduate-jobs>
 Recruiters’ annual survey charts the student recruitment activity of some of 
the UK’s leading companies. This year nearly three-quarters of graduate 
employers hired interns, offering more than 9,000 internships, which represents 
a 13% year-on-year increase in vacancies.

We also found that nearly half of last year’s interns went on to secure 
graduate jobs in the same company, with 1 in 10 employers converting more than 
83% of their interns into graduate hires.

Our experts said: A guide to work experience
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/work-experience-guide> 
However, just a third of graduate intakes are comprised of previous interns, 
so there are plenty of graduate jobs that don’t go to interns. Employers are 
also targeting students at a younger age with the number of higher 
apprenticeship and school-leaver programmes doubling in the last four years.

If you’re a student thinking about how you can make yourself more employable, 
then getting work experience is one of the most important and effective steps 
you could take, no matter how big or small the employer. Even if you can’t get 
a formal internship, lots of employers value people who have an understanding 
of the world of work: managing time, meeting deadlines, dealing with tricky 
situations, working in a hierarchy that resembles company structures.

So if you are about to start a work experience placement, here’s how to get 
the most out of your experience:


Set objectives

There are different types of work experience; all of them are valid for 
building your CV and having something meaningful to talk about at interview. 
The key is to have an idea of what you want to get out of it from the outset, 
so set some clear objectives. Internships are typically structured programmes, 
lasting from 6 to 12 weeks, but can be up to a year long. Many employers expect 
to hire their interns eventually, so use your experience to make a good 
impression. Also use them to get an idea of what working in the sector and with 
a particular employer is like. At the other end of the scale is work shadowing; 
this is usually for a much shorter period, but it could be useful for making 
contacts and gaining experience of work in more competitive sectors.

Keep a diary

It’s surprising how quickly time will pass and you’ll soon find yourself at 
the end of your internship trying to remember what it was all about. By keeping 
a diary throughout your experience, it will help you to remember what you 
achieved, which you can review at any time to gather examples for job 
applications and interviews.

Road test your employer

Remember that this isn’t just a chance for employers to get to know you. 
Internships are a great opportunity to experience an organisation before you 
join. Make sure you take time to think about whether you like the company and 
its culture. Talk to colleagues about their experiences and don’t be afraid to 
ask questions. Asking good questions shows an employer you are interested in 
their industry and care about your career.

How to find and make the most of your work experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/how-to-find-work-experience-internship>
Use what you learn

Interpreting what you’ve learned, what you understand work to be and 
demonstrating this to a prospective employer at interview, is one of the 
biggest challenges of being an intern. Take time to think about your experience 
and how it could be applied in different situations. Don’t overlook how you’ve 
developed as a result of more casual work too. Some of my best hires were able 
to articulate great experiences from relatively menial roles. One graduate 
talked about arranging special evenings as a waitress to attract customers at 
quieter times, so I knew she’d be great in an events role.

Show willing

To help make sure you are considered for the next available permanent position 
make sure you show enthusiasm and energy for whatever is put in front of you. 
And never sit with nothing to do; there is always something you could be 
getting on with. Make yourself invaluable by getting involved and asking if you 
can help out; employers love people who can do the dull stuff as well as the 
exciting. Ultimately, show that you are somebody an employer should invest in.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice.
 