
The baby-kissing season is almost upon us once more. New Labour is no longer 
so new. Already its term in office is probably almost two thirds complete. As 
the next electoral battleground is mapped out, so Britain's investment agenda 
for the next 18 months will be defined.

This has been a good week for Gordon Brown. He was dismissed for his 
pre-budget statement by one middle-aged scribbler as the Iron Tinkerer, but 
such puny barbs will bounce off his well-armoured chest. His statement was not 
just replete with tasty morsels, but indicated that the real fiscal feast is 
yet to come.

The economic and political cycles are - from the government's perspective - 
coalescing nicely. The rate of economic growth is ahead of expectations and the 
treasury has concluded that the growth potential of the economy is greater than 
its model originally suggested.

Both factors increase the chancellor's scope to curry favour with the 
electorate nearer to the election, without being accused by the City - or the 
monetary policy committee - of imprudence.

Labour traditionalists beef that spending on the social infrastructure is long 
overdue. That, though, is to forget the true foundations of New Labour's 1997 
victory. Gordon Brown and Peter Mandelson are unlikely to be so forgetful as 
they bend to their shared task of engineering a repeat performance.

Investors only have half an eye on these early manoeuvrings in the political 
battle. They understand the chancellor's political imperatives, and will only 
take fright if vote-buying exceeds normal bounds. Of greater interest is likely 
to be the role of sterling as the skirmishing begins in earnest.

If the Opposition has any weapon of mass destruction it is Europe and the 
pound's future in it. Opinion polls are ambiguous on the importance of the 
European issue in shaping voter intentions. The Tories may yet find its weapon 
is a dud. But Labour is unlikely to risk making that assumption.

It is far from clear what the impact of Britain adopting the euro would be for 
the economy and markets. Short-term European interest rates are 3%. But there's 
no logical reason why Britain should not - at the right moment - enjoy a 
similar low cost of money while remaining outside the eurozone.

It is still early in the euro adventure, and premature to herald it a success. 
A "one size fits all" interest rate policy has yet to inflict damage on any 
single economy, but the strains from rampant growth in the likes of Ireland 
might yet end in inflationary tears.

With the long-term stability of the eurozone still open to question, it may be 
that its participating states would rather not test the system further by 
admitting Britain. Whether any European statesman is prepared to voice such 
concerns in public is another matter.

The shifting sands of financial sentiment about sterling and the euro were 
thrown into sharp relief by this week's comments by the outgoing Lord Mayor of 
London. One year ago a zealous advocate of Britain's participation in the euro, 
Lord Levene is now reported to have doubts from a City perspective.

This about-face is startling, especially in the light of the publicity 
hugging, crusading stance adopted by Lord Levene in his early days at Mansion 
House. The lesson is that there can be no certainty to the economic debate at 
this early stage of the euro's life. Not that this will stop the politicians 
adopting entrenched positions.

It may be that over the course of the next few years the European issue will 
not prove material for markets. Economies are growing on both sides of the 
Channel. Bond and equity valuations are sufficiently close for any relative 
benefits to British assets on euro entry to be slight.

This is unlikely to prevent investors hurrying to exploit any perceived gap 
between British and European valuations if membership of the eurozone becomes a 
realistic prospect. The outcome could be a bubble in sterling assets as the 
currency itself is ushered into history.

The government would doubtless welcome such a financial "endorsement" of its 
European intentions in the run-up to what can be expected to be a tight 
referendum result.

The chancellor's greatest challenge in the years ahead could be engineering 
the pound's extinction at an appropriate exchange rate. Most would argue that 
such a rate is below the current level. It will not have escaped his notice 
that pre-election pump priming could have a double benefit, taking his party a 
big step closer to victory in both general election and euro referendum.

Edmond Warner is chief executive of Albert E Sharp Securities
 