
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> state has announced 
plans for the most far-reaching paid family leave law in America, as well as 
promising to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour.


The state will mandate the right to 12 weeks of paid leave for both private 
sector workers asking for time off to care for a new baby and workers who need 
to look after a sick child or partner, a dying parent or other such family 
emergency.

The system is designed to be paid for with insurance-style funds made up of 
fees deducted from pay packets, rather than costing companies directly.


After long and largely unsuccessful battles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/14/obama-give-federal-employees-six-weeks-maternity-leave>
 to improvenotoriously stingy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2015/jan/06/mommy-track-maternity-leave-careers>
 maternity leave rights across the country, the New York law will introduce an 
extensive and egalitarian model which advocates hope will now influence other 
states and federal lawmakers.

Growing momentum to expand paid leave is fantastic news for Americans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2016/mar/13/paid-leave-benefits-vermont-minnesota-congress-obama>
New York’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, announced late on Thursday that the state 
legislature had agreed the new policy on paid family leave. In addition, he 
promised to increase the state minimum wage, in phases, from $9 to $15 an hour 
over two to six years.

Employees’ rights advocates are calling the wage boost a “revolution in the 
workplace”.

“I believe this is the best plan the state has produced in decades,” Cuomo 
said after long hours of negotiations in Albany brought agreement on the next 
annual budget, which includes the new measures.

The right to three months of paid family leave a year will be offered to 
mothers and fathers adopting or fostering as well as having their own 
biological children. It will be mandated for men and women needing to nurse a 
sick partner, spouse, parent or other family member.

New York is only the fifth state in the US to adopt a paid family leave law. 
California implemented such a law in 2004, but it only offers six weeks of paid 
leave, as do provisions passed in New Jersey in 2009 and Rhode Island in 2014. 
Washington state adopted a similar measure in 2007 but has yet to put it into 
practice.

Federal family and medical leave laws passed in 1993 under Bill Clinton’s 
administration only guaranteed 12 weeks of unpaid leave and job protection, and 
excluded companies with fewer than 50 employees.

New York’s new law will guarantee pay and applies to small businesses as well 
as large companies. It covers the private sector; public sector unions can opt 
in.

“This is the most robust paid family leave program in the US, it’s tremendous 
and will be a revolution in the workplace and for economic justice,” said Donna 
Dolan, executive director of theTime to Care New York Paid Leave Coalition 
<http://www.timetocareny.org/nyc/>, a campaign group with corporate and union 
members that has been battling for better leave rights for more than 15 years.

Dolan pointed out that America is still far behind the rest of the developed 
world; countries such as the UK offer 40 weeks of paid maternity leave. But she 
called New York’s plan a “pacesetter”.

Massachusetts, Connecticut and Washington DC are close to passing new paid 
family leave laws, she said.

Dolan said Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie 
Sanders have declared strong support for mandatory paid family leave, while the 
Republican candidates left in the race, Donald Trump, Ted Cruz and John Kasich, 
have not publicly addressed the issue.

“It’s just not on their radar screen,” she said.

New York senator Kirsten Gillibrand has co-sponsored a bill mandating national 
paid family leave, but, Dolan said, it has no chance of passing a Congress 
paralyzed by partisan legislative gridlock and controlled by Republicans.

Mandated paid family leave in New York state will begin in 2018 with employees 
being docked approximately 70 cents a week from their pay. The money will be 
paid into a family leave insurance fund, and the program will be phased in over 
three to four years.

According to the New York state department of labor, workers paid at or below 
the state average weekly wage, which in 2014 was $1,266.44, will receive 
two-thirds of their average pay while on family leave. The program will be 
capped at the state average, so higher-paid workers will lose out.

“This program will be funded entirely through a nominal payroll deduction on 
employees, so it costs business, both big and small, nothing,” Cuomo said.

The Business Council of New York State <http://www.bcnys.org/>, which 
represents thousands of companies and chambers of commerce, is opposed to the 
plan as well the $15 minimum wage.

“We are disappointed with the multibillion-dollar increase in the minimum wage 
… [and] further discouraged that the budget deal includes the most expansive 
paid family leave law in the nation while leaving out meaningful business cost 
reductions,” said Heather Briccetti, chief executive of the business council, 
in a statement.

But Laura Ornstein, coordinator of the New York State Sustainable Business 
Council <http://nyssbc.org/>, said the new law will help employers, by boosting 
morale, productivity and loyalty of workers.

“Debating whether you want to stay home and lose out on pay, or maybe even 
lose your job, is awful,” she said. “If you go into work you are worried, you 
are distracted. We are very excited by this new law.”

She added that the wide reach of the law, beyond maternity leave, had probably 
made it more popular and relevant, therefore winning it easier passage through 
the legislature.

Cuomo talked about deeply regretting not spending more time with his dying 
father in 2014. His wife recently had surgery for breast cancer.

Upstate, Jan Rhodes Norman, a small business owner and co-founder of the Local 
First Ithaca <http://localfirstithaca.org/> business association, said she 
would have preferred the state to have announced more tax cuts for businesses 
in tandem with the new laws. Overall, she supported the paid family leave plan.

“America is so behind other developed countries in not having this sort of 
safety net and we need to be moving in that direction,” she said.
 