
There is a rule of thumb that financial advisers and asset management 
companies use to tell us how much we need to save, and how long our pensions 
will survive in retirement. But research released this week finds that we’ve 
been getting it wrong all along.

The rule of thumb is that the safe level of withdrawal from your pension is 4% 
a year. Advisers say that as long as you don’t take more than that your money 
should last 30 years, and give some protection from inflation.

But research by investment analysts Morningstar has found little support for 
the suggested 4% 
<http://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/news/149651/how-much-can-you-safely-withdraw-annually-from-your-pension-pot.aspx>
. It says that figure arose in the US and is based on projections that are 
questionable when applied in the UK. Its conclusion is that British savers 
should actually take out no more than 3.2% a year, while the more cautious 
saver should rely on no more than 2.5% a year.

These differing figures may seem small in themselves, but have a devastating 
affect on the amount you will need to save for a reasonable retirement income. 
Using the 4% figure, someone wanting a £10,000 income in retirement would have 
to save £250,000. Once the withdrawal rate is cut to 3.2%, then the sum of 
money needed to create a £10,000 income rises to £312,500. It gets worse if you 
use the 2.5% safe withdrawal rate: you’ll need £400,000 in the bank.

Broadly, what Morningstar is saying is that workers should decide what income 
level they think they need for retirement, then multiply it by 30 to work out 
how much they need to save.

In the past, this sort of esoteric analysis needn’t have bothered workers 
saving for their pensions. Either they had a final salary-related pension or 
were forced to use their pension savings to buy an annuity. But the pension 
world has changed dramatically in recent years. Final salary pension schemes 
have all but disappeared in the private sector; what’s more, savers no longer 
have to buy an annuity. Instead, they have to decide what to do with their 
money on retirement. They will be joined by the millions of lower-income 
workers being auto-enrolled into pensions this year.

All of these people will have to work out what they can safely do with their 
money once they reach their retirement date. Given that most people are unable 
to significantly increase their savings, what it suggests is that incomes in 
retirement for most of today’s workers are going to be dire.

The new state pension, if you have a full national insurance record, will be 
worth about £8,000 a year. We can only guess how much people are going to save 
through auto-enrolment or in their company pension schemes, but most of the 
figures kicking around at the moment make for miserable reading.

The typical sum that was used to buy an annuity was only about 
£30,000-£35,000. Applying a safe withdrawal rate of 3% to that means a 
pensioner would get £1,200 extra a year – and have to survive on just £9,200 a 
year through their retirement. Many will have saved more, but if they wish to 
retire on two-thirds of today’s £27,000 average UK salary – equating to £17,800 
a year – they need to have put away about £300,000.

How did advisers get it so wrong on the 4% figure? Morningstar says it was an 
“overly optimistic” figure based on historical US stock market returns that 
were higher than returns earned by British savers – and, in any case, not 
applicable to a world in which interest rates have fallen to zero and where 
longevity continues to rise steeply. “Retirement is going to last longer and 
longer. This is a risk that is not likely fully understood by UK investors 
today,” it says.

So what should you do? Save more is the trite answer; work until you are 70 or 
beyond is more likely. Older pensioners will have to turn to equity release, 
where available. And younger pensioners may take another look at annuities and 
decide that maybe they weren’t such bad value after all.
 