
There had been little to advertise the Bayer Leverkusen onslaught. Tottenham 
Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> had not only 
been comfortable in the first half, they were impressive and, on another night, 
they would have been in front. Dele Alli was off target with a gilt-edged 
header while Vincent Janssen sent another one against the crossbar.

But this was an occasion when Tottenham’s resilience would endure an exacting 
test. They passed it and they could yet come to be grateful for the point that 
kept them above Leverkusen in a congestedChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> Group E, going into the 
German club’s visit to Wembley in two weeks’ time.

Bayer Leverkusen v Tottenham Hotspur: Champions League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/18/bayer-leverkusen-v-tottenham-champions-league-live>
The resistance was symbolised by the goalkeeper and captain, Hugo Lloris, and 
the save that he made to deny Javier Hernández, the former Manchester United 
striker, in the 48th minute was one that needed several replays simply 
to understand.

Hernández had to score, following Lars Bender’s cross from the right; the 
range was point-blank and a significant portion of the goal was gaping. But he 
sent his low shot too close to Lloris and that represented the lifeline. The 
Frenchman seized it. He showed incredible agility to get down and then strength 
to clamp the ball with his right hand on to the line. Video technology showed 
that the whole of the ball had not crossed over.

Tottenham were hanging on for much of the second half, as Bayer showed pace 
and adventure. There were nervous moments in a visiting defence that seemed to 
miss the authority ofthe injured Toby Alderweireld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/tottenham-optimistic-toby-alderweireld-injury-harry-kane>
 and Lloris was required to work again, although not in such spectacular 
fashion. Mauricio Pochettino’s team rode their luck at times and there was 
relief when Omer Toprak sent a free header over the bar in the 68th minute. 
Toprak beat the ground in frustration. But Tottenham could feel some 
satisfaction upon the full-time whistle and it was telling that Pochettino 
described it as a “strong point”.

Goalless draws are not supposed to be so watchable and Bayer showed themselves 
to be formidable opponents when they hit their stride. It was a game in which 
the margins were knife-edge thin and the right to play had to be earned. Bayer 
started brightly, with Roger Schmidt having played Stefan Kiessling up 
alongside Hernández, but Tottenham came to control the first half.

Pochettino could be pleased with the assurance that his players demonstrated 
in possession before the interval and, on a number of occasions, their 
interchanges were too sharp for Bayer. They had two moments when they were 
agonisingly close to taking the lead. Kieran Trippier took Victor Wanyama’s 
pass and his cross was measured for Alli, who had timed his run into the area. 
Alli rose but his free header, for which he was stretching slightly, flashed 
past the post.

Janssen had some encouraging moments in the first half and when he teed up 
Alli on 38 minutes, Toprak blocked the midfielder’s shot. Trippier got to the 
loose ball and, from his cross, Janssen’s header struck the bar. Érik Lamela 
scooped the rebound towards the roof of the net only for Bernd Leno to tip it 
over.

Pochettino had kept faith with Janssen in the centre-forward position, which 
meant that Son Heung-min played off the flank, initially on the right and then 
the left. He would later move up front when Janssen was withdrawn.

Riyad Mahrez volleys Leicester City to narrow win against FC Copenhagen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/leicester-city-fc-copenhagen-champions-league-match-report>
It was an emotional night for Son and there were whistles and boos for the 
former Bayer attacker from the home support, who have not forgotten the 
acrimonious nature of his departure in August of last year. He missed the 
club’s Champions League play-off second-leg at home to Lazio because he was in 
London to undergo his Tottenham medical. Son flickered. He teed up Janssen to 
stroke the ball into an empty net during the early running but the South Korean 
had been flagged for offside in the buildup and he had a shot blocked by 
Benjamin Henrichs on 25 minutes. He was substituted to jeers in the last minute 
and Pochettino finished with Josh Onomah in the striker’s role.

Bayer have been erratic this season and they sit just below halfway in the 
Bundesliga. They offered little in an attacking sense in the first half – a 
Hernández pot-shot the sum total of their efforts – but they crackled to life 
after the break. Admir Mehmedi had the ball in the net only for play to be 
called back for a foul by Hernández on Lloris before the goalkeeper 
distinguished himself with the save from Hernandez that he had no right to make.

Schmidt’s half-time introduction of the defensive midfielder, Julian 
Baumgartlinger, made a difference and it became one-way traffic. Charles 
Aránguiz worked Lloris with a free-kick; Danny Rose made a vital block to 
thwart Hernández; Mehmedi extended Lloris and Toprak headed over from Kevin 
Kampl’s corner.

Not for the first time, Pochettino lamented his team’s lack of clinical edge 
in front of goal but he recognised Lloris was the decisive factor. “Some 
brilliance from Hugo kept us in the game,” he said. “He is one of the best in 
the world and he is in the best moment of his career.”
 