
The room’s single, overhead light is of such low wattage that reading small 
print becomes a strain and the gloom feels slightly oppressive. “Can’t we make 
it a bit brighter?” inquiresSteve Bruce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/steve-bruce>, his sunny Geordie humour 
and Algarve tan suddenly out of step with the surrounds.

How Sheffield Wednesday returned from wilderness to stand on brink of big time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/27/sheffield-wednesday-hull-play-off-final-premier-league>
As Hull City’s manager settles into his chair, deep inside the KCom Stadium, 
things remain stubbornly dim but then someone quips: “Win on Saturday and this 
club will be able to afford a few new lightbulbs.”

Should Bruce reaffirm his reputation as a promotion specialist by 
choreographing a Wembley play-off final victoryagainst Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/sheffield-wednesday-hull-championship-play-off-premier-league>
 on Saturday afternoon, his side will have returned to the Premier League one 
year afterbeing relegated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/hull-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

It is all very different from 12 months ago when he offered Assem Allam and 
the Hull owner’s son Ehab his resignation. “The old man talked me round – and 
Ehab too,” he says, the tenor of his voice reflecting real affection for the 
76-year-old Allem, who is seriously ill and will watch the final from a 
hospital bed.

“Both he and Ehab wanted me to stay,” says Bruce. “But I told them: ‘Let’s 
have a week to think on it’, and that’s what we did. We went away and then I 
came back and said: ‘If you still want me to carry on, OK, let’s have a crack.’

“I offered to fall on my sword because that’s the right thing to do. I offered 
my resignation to make it easy for them if they wanted to make a change but 
they were adamant they didn’t.

“It was a difficult time, with all sorts of gloom and doom flying about the 
place, and people saying we could fall right through the divisions. I was 
worried there might be a fire sale but we were able to keep most of the squad 
together.”

Bruce’s future, like Hull’s, is again at a crossroads, with it uncertain 
whether he intends remaining in charge next season. “We’ll speak about that 
after Wembley,” he says. “There’s talk of a takeover here being pretty close 
but whether that’s true, I don’t know.”

Whatever happens – and the feeling is he is inclined to stay, particularly if 
Hull secure the £170m, some say £200m, prize that elevation to the top division 
offers – promotion would be dedicated to Assem Allam. “He’s the reason I came 
here, his naivety and the way he was,” Bruce says, smiling.

“He’s a genuinely good man. Who would have bought a club for £40m when he 
could have had it for a pound? Only he could do something like that. Most 
people would have let it go into administration and let the debts not be paid, 
but he wanted them settled. He bought the club for the community.

“He’s let one or two issues upset a few people but he’s made those decisions 
for the benefit of the club and I can’t stress that enough. He’s having a tough 
time at the minute, so if we can get promotion for him and his family … ”

It would also help bolster an often overlooked city. “We’re stuck out on a 
limb a little bit,” Bruce says. “Nobody really gives a jot about Hull because 
of where we are geographically but promotion would put us back on the 
international map; thePremier League’s overseas television audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/arsenal-premier-league-100m-premier-league>
 is huge.”

Replugging the city back into the game’s central grid and switching the lights 
back on by the Humber will not necessarily be easy.

“I’ve been fortunate enough to have some big games as both a player and a 
manager,” the former Manchester United captain says. “But, because of what’s at 
stake – and the money washing about in the Premier League is quite unbelievable 
– this is my biggest for a long, long time.

“Sheffield Wednesday have some very good players and they’ll take a huge 
following to Wembley. I have to be honest and say I wasn’t aware of Carlos 
Carvalhal [Wednesday’s Portuguese manager] before this season but he’s made a 
big impression.”

Bruce knows a talented Hull squad featuring, among others, Tom Huddlestone, 
Jake Livermore, Robert Snodgrass and Michael Dawson will have to cope with 
considerable pressure. “On the big occasions experience usually helps,” he 
says. “Make no mistake, though, even the experienced players and managers get 
themselves in a state; it’s only human. It’s then about how you deal with that 
pressure.”

Should Hull succeed in securing a place in the sun, Bruce will head for his 
villa on the Algarve harbouring a sense of “absolute relief” next week. “If we 
win I’ll celebrate a couple of days later,” he says.

“On the night you’re too physically exhausted, you’ve been through the wringer 
and even if you’ve won, you feel horrendous.”
 