
The response to playing in a Challenge Cup final is always a challenging and 
demanding one, perhaps more mentally than physically. Win or lose, switching 
back to league matters after the often overwhelming experience of playing at 
Wembley can be a tough task – just ask Leeds, who after winning the competition 
for the first time in 15 years last season, lost all their league fixtures 
after the final.

Hull Kingston Rovers’ response to being on the wrong end of the biggest loss 
in the history of the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/leeds-emphatically-shut-out-hull-kr-to-win-challenge-cup>
 was always going to be an intriguing story to follow, but after continuing 
their perfect record in the Super 8s with two wins following the final, they 
are now almost certain of their place back in Super League next season.

The biggest success story lodged within their impressive Wembley response is 
undoubtedly the winger Kieran Dixon. The 23-year-old endured a horrendous 
afternoon against Leeds in the 50-0 loss last month, making several 
high-profile errors on the game’s biggest stage – but he has thrived since 
moving back to his natural position of wing, scoring six tries in two games and 
earning the praise of many for his performances since that Wembley loss.

“It wasn’t just a big stage, it was a global stage he was on,” said the Hull KR
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr> assistant coach, Willie Poching, of 
Dixon. “He was in a dark place after it and it would have been easy to throw 
him under the bus – but he’s responded immensely well. We’re very proud.”

While Hull KR are practically secured of their place back in Super League next 
year thanks to this win, the same cannot be said about their opponents, 
Bradford. The have now suffered two crushing defeats in six days –losing the 
second half here and against Widnes last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/06/bradford-bulls-widnes-vikings-super-8s-super-league-match-report>
 to a combined scoreline of 78-0.

Their performance was littered with errors, ill-discipline and stunted 
attacking play without star man Lee Gaskell, and next weekend’s game against 
Championship rivals Leigh now seems like being a straight shoot-out for fifth 
place and a spot in the ‘Million Pound Game’ against the fourth-placed side to 
determine the final promotion place from The Qualifiers.

“The second half was rubbish and I take full responsibility for that,” said 
the Bradford coach James Lowes. “We’ve not been good enough in getting the lads 
to be strong when things start to go away from us. The buck falls on me and 
it’s not good enough – we’ve got a big week ahead of us now to prepare for the 
Leigh game.”

Dixon’s first of four tries on the afternoon and two from Josh Mantellato put 
Hull KR into a 12-4 half-time lead after Danny Addy’s try for Bradford, but 
when Epalahame Lauaki was sin-binned for gauging – an incident which could end 
his season – KR cut loose and took full advantage.

Dixon’s second and a great individual try from Dane Chisholm secured the win 
before Lauaki had even returned from the sin bin, before five more tries put a 
further dent into Bradford’s already ailing points difference. Dixon completed 
his hat-trick after tries from Ken Sio, Kris Welham and Graeme Horne – all of 
which involved appalling defending from the Bulls – before the winger scored 
his fourth and Hull KR’s tenth on the hooter.
 