
The frustrated Hull City manager, Steve Bruce, admits his side have given the 
title advantage to their rivals after slipping up atBirmingham City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/birminghamcityfc>.

Jon Toral’s deflected first-half goal secured a 1-0 victory for Birmingham and 
denied Hull the chance to leapfrog Burnley at the top of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. Bruce’s side are a point 
behind Burnley in the race for the title and will fall behind Middlesbrough if 
Boro avoid defeat against Wolves on Friday.

Football Weekly Extra: Leicester stay top after midweek madness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/mar/03/football-weekly-extra-leicester-stay-top-after-midweek-madness>
Jake Livermore and Michael Dawson hit the woodwork as the visitors dominated 
for long spells but could not find an equaliser.

Bruce said: “It’s a disadvantage because all the others will have got a boost 
from it. We have 12 games to play and we have some big games. Birmingham have 
all the top teams here, so I’m sure they’ll do us a turn.

“We have a lot of games coming up, a lot of points to play for and a lot of 
water under the bridge for everybody. We have dominated the match really and 
had 20 attempts on target but we cannot keep relying on Abel Hernández to 
score. You couldn’t say it was a bad performance.”

Hull also wanted a second-half penalty after Paul Robinson handled Hernández’s 
shot in the box and Bruce insisted the referee, Stephen Martin, got it wrong.

“It’s a stonewall penalty, you need the referee to do his job and for both 
teams he didn’t do his job all night,” he said. “He knew what he was doing, 
Robbo, trying to put something in the way and when you see it again, it’s a 
stonewall penalty.”

Birmingham moved a point behind the top six and have kept six clean sheets in 
their last eight games following successive 1-0 home wins.

Their manager, Gary Rowett, revealed the victory meant he had to fulfil a 
promise to his daughter Lily on her 16th birthday.

He said: “She was here, I was under a little bit of pressure because I 
obviously hadn’t spent enough money on the birthday present. She said to give 
her a mention if we won. I’ll be honest, I thought I’d probably be safe with 
that – making myself look an idiot – but I have to give her a little mention.”

Birmingham have lost only three of their last 12 games and Rowett believes 
victory keeps their play-off hopes alive.

“Hull are the most complete team in the division in terms of what they’ve 
got,” he said.

“At home we have been fantastic, we’re making really good progress and putting 
in some big performances. I thought if we were to lose maybe that’s our chance 
gone but you end up winning. You cannot doubt your team’s ability to bounce 
back.”
 