
Hull Kingston Rovers survived an almighty scare from Championship side 
Bradford to progress to the sixth round of the LadbrokesChallenge Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/challengecup>.

In a weekend that produced a major cup upset when Leigh Centurions, also of 
the Championship, beat Salford on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/18/leigh-salford-red-devils-challenge-cup-match-report>
, Bradford threatened to do the same for long periods against higher-ranked 
opposition of their own before a late blitz of scores saw Hull KR home.

Four of their nine tries were scored by the wing Josh Mantellato, who is 
rapidly turning into a fantastic acquisition for Chris Chester’s side since 
joining from the NRL. With his tries and his goals he finished with a personal 
points tally of 30 – as many as Bradford’s entire team.

The Bulls have lost only once this season – to the Centurions on the opening 
weekend – and, when they led as the game entered the final quarter, a second 
upset of a thrilling Challenge Cup weekend seemed likely.

It is only 12 years since Bradford’s name was last inscribed on the Challenge 
Cup, when they beat Leeds 22-20 in the final. But a number of financial crises 
in recent years culminated in relegation from Super League last year, forcing 
them to play outside the top tier for the first time in Super League’s history.

But, like Leigh on Saturday, they showed enough here to suggest that, when the 
bottom four of Super League have to compete against the Championship’s top four 
later in the season to determine who plays in the top tier next year, they will 
cause more than a few headaches.

“I’m always proud of their effort. That’s never in doubt,” said the Bradford 
coach, James Lowes, who was part of the Bulls’ cup-winning side of 2003. “We 
went 10 rounds in a 12-round fight against a very good team, and for us to get 
into Super League, then you’ve got to go the distance in games like these.”

A winning margin of 20 points does not reflect the difference between the two 
sides over the whole 80 minutes but ultimatelyHull KR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr> showed just enough Super League 
class to get the job done and move a step closer to a Wembley final later this 
year ahead of Monday’s draw.

“I’m a very relieved man,” said their coach, Chester. “We’re a bit busted with 
our squad but I’m delighted to get over the line and get a result. They were 
the better team for long parts but we somehow found a way to win the match and 
progress.”

Chester was not wrong. Bradford were the better side for periods of a 
thrilling cup tie, not least from the opening stages, when they quickly soared 
into a 12-0 lead courtesy of tries from Adam O’Brien and Dale Ferguson. 
However, that seemed to stir the Robins into life and three tries from them in 
a blistering spell before the break – including the first of Mantellato’s four 
– put the visitors 18-12 in front at the interval.

Prior to the half-time break tempers flared as the Hull KR prop Adam Walker 
caught O’Brien flush with a blow to the face and, despite the majority of the 
4,538 crowd in attendance demanding a red card for the shot, the referee, Matt 
Thomason, opted to send Walker and the Bulls forward Adam Sidlow to the sin-bin 
for the blow and the mêlée that ensued.

With both sides down to 12 men for the opening part of the second half, it was 
Bradford who responded the better, with Danny Addy restoring parity at 18-18. 
From that point the game and the lead changed hands on a number of occasions; 
Hull KR led again when Graeme Horne and Kevin Larroyer crossed, before a brace 
of tries from Lee Gaskell and Lucas Walshaw put Bradford 30-28 ahead and the 
upset was well and truly on.

From there though KR burst into life, and Mantellato’s performance swung the 
game in their favour. He scored three more magnificent tries in a seven-minute 
period to make the game safe, before the French hooker, John Boudebza, grabbed 
another on the hooter to put gloss on the scoreline.

Bradford Shaw; Uaisele, Walker, Henry, Ulugia; Gaskell, Addy; Clough, O’Brien, 
Sidlow, Olbison, Ferguson, Pitts.Interchange Walshaw, Mellor, Baile, Fleming.

Tries O’Brien, Ferguson, Addy, Gaskell, Walshaw Goals Shaw 5

Hull KR Dixon; Mantellato, Welham, Salter, Sio; Campese, Kelly; Walker, Lunt, 
Burke, Larroyer, Horne, McCarthy.Interchange Cockayne, Donaldson, Ollett, 
BoudebzaTries Mantellato 4, Welham, Kelly, Horne, Larroyer, Boudebza Goals 
Mantellato 7

Referee M Thomason (Manchester) Att 4,538
 