
Marco Silva is close to being appointed Hull City’s new manager on an initial 
six-month contract and should be in the home dugout for the FA Cup third-round 
tie against Swansea City at the KCom Stadium on Saturday.

Considering the 39-year-old former Estoril, Sporting Lisbon and Olympiakos 
coach has no experience of English football, speaks limited English and will 
inherit a largely British squad, he represents a considerable gamble on the 
part of the Premier League’s bottom club.

Silva, though, is immediately available, having left Olympiakos for personal 
reasons after securing the Greek title last season. Barring any unforeseen 
last-minute hitches, he and is set to accept the twin challenges of attempting 
to ensure Hull avoid relegation and endeavouring to beat Manchester United in 
their impending EFL Cup semi-final.

The man who got Hull there, Mike Phelan, was sacked on Tuesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/mike-phelan-parts-company-hull-city>
 in the wake of a wretched run of one win in 18 Premier League games but by 
then the club’s owners, the Allam family, had already approached his successor 
whose appointment is expected to be confirmed on Thursday.

Before his sole campaign in Athens, Silva – whose contract will be extended if 
all goes to plan and who is provisionally scheduled to address the media on 
Friday – worked exclusively in his native Portugal, leading Estoril into the 
country’s top flight and then Europe before a short sojourn with Sporting 
Lisbon.

Hull and Mike Phelan part company with Gary Rowett favourite for the job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/mike-phelan-parts-company-hull-city>
Despite winning the Portuguese Cup with Sporting in 2015, he was sacked 
shortly afterwards, apparently for failing to wear the club suit in the 
technical area. Now it appears Silva – believed to be the only candidate the 
Allams have spoken to – will very shortly find himself being measured up for a 
Hull suit.

The team’s fans have planned to stage protests against the Allams’ stewardship 
on Saturday but the presence of a new head coach in the home dugout could 
deflect attention from their grievances.

Silva’s first key test will be a home game on Saturday week against 
Bournemouth, who defeated Hull 6-1 in October, in Phelan’s first match after 
being given the position on a permanent basis.

Although Steve Bruce’s successor retained the support of the dressing room and 
many fans, the team had won only once in the Premier League since he formally 
accepted the role almost three months ago. Despite being widely regarded as 
having done a decent job in an almost impossible context, he is believed to 
have upset Ehab Allam, Hull’s vice-chairman who runs the club on a day to day 
basis, by emphasising that relegation is all but inevitable without 
considerable investment in the squad during the transfer window this month.

It is thought the board hope that Silva – represented by the influential 
Portuguese agent Carlos Goncalves and his ProEleven agency – will use his 
contacts to attract some of the continent’s brightest hidden gems players to 
Yorkshire, quite possibly making use of the loan market.

Ehab Allam said on Wednesday that he anticipated signings being made. “I 
maintain the belief that the current squad, with two or three key additions 
during the current transfer window, is good enough to survive in this 
division,” hetold the club’s website 
<http://www.hullcitytigers.com/news/article/2016-17/a-statement-from-the-vice-chairman-3501855.aspx>
. “I acknowledge that our position in the table will make recruitment more 
challenging, however all of our efforts are now focused on enhancing the 
existing squad with Premier League survival our priority.”

He thanked Phelan for his work but said the sacking had been necessary to give 
Hull “the best possible chance of retaining Premier League status” and added 
pointedly that “a significant investment [was] made in the signing of six new 
players” last summer.

With the Allams engaged in continuing – but so far unsuccessful – attempts to 
sell Hull, they are not thought to be overly keen on spending heavily in order 
to restock a slender, injury-hit squad but will need to re-equip their backroom 
after Phelan’s support staff of Neil McDonald, Bobby Mimms and Stan Ternent 
were all released on Wednesday. The sole survivor is Tony Pennock, the former 
academy head and, most recently, first-team coach.
 