
Humanity is driving an unprecedented extinction of sealife unlike any in the 
fossil record, hunting and killing larger species in a way that will disrupt 
ocean ecosystems for millions of years, scientists have found.


A new analysis of the five mass extinction events millions of years ago 
discovered there was either no pattern to which marine species were lost, or 
smaller species were the ones that disappeared.


But today’s “sixth extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/19/humans-creating-sixth-great-extinction-of-animal-species-say-scientists>
” is unique in the way that the largest species, such as great white sharks, 
blue whales and southern bluefin tuna, are being pushed to the brink, due to 
humans’ tendency to fish for larger species more often than smaller ones.


We’d never kill an albatross or gorilla: but we let others do it on our behalf 
| George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/extinction-let-others-kill-albatross-gorilla-whale-shark-conumerism>
The consequences, according to a study published in the journal Science on 
Wednesday <http://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.aaf2416>, are 
devastating for the ecology of the world’s oceans.


“If this pattern goes unchecked, the future oceans would lack many of the 
largest species in today’s oceans,” said Jonathan Payne, associate professor 
and chair of geological sciences at Stanford University. “Many large species 
play critical roles in ecosystems and so their extinctions could lead to 
ecological cascades that would influence the structure and function of future 
ecosystems beyond the simple fact of losing those species.”

The danger is disproportionate to the percentage of threatened species, with 
the authors warning the loss of giants would “disrupt ecosystems for millions 
of years even at levels of taxonomic loss far below those of previous mass 
extinctions”.


The loss of larger species in the oceans could have knock-on effects on 
ecosystems, Payne said, citing the loss of very large predatory seasnails 
(Triton) from coral reefs, which appears to be one of the reasons behind the 
explosive growth in numbers ofcrown of thorns starfish, which eat coral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/23/coral-eating-crown-of-thorns-starfish-can-be-killed-with-vinegar-scientists-find>
.


Humans would be affected by such trends too, he said, as communities rely on 
coral reefs to attract tourism. He also pointed to the examples of tuna and 
cod, whose extinction would deprive people of an important source of income and 
protein.


To see how the current loss of species compared to previous extinctions, Payne 
and his team analysed a database of 2,497 groups of marine vertebrate and 
mollusc over the past 500 years, and compared it to the ancient past.


They found no precedent in the fossil record for today’s trend towards killing 
off larger-bodied species, with previous mass extinctions marked by either no 
association with body size or an association with smaller species.


“The link that we found between body size and extinction threat in the modern 
oceans is quite strong,” Payne told the Guardian.


Co-author Noel Heim, also at Stanford, said: “We see this over and over again. 
Humans enter into a new ecosystem, and the largest animals are killed off 
first. Marine systems have been spared up to now, because until relatively 
recently, humans were restricted to coastal areas and didn’t have the 
technology to fish in the deep ocean on an industrial scale.”


Fellow author Douglas McCauley said large body size was often linked with the 
need for larger ocean spaces to range in, so an increasing trend for 
governments to create very large marine protected areas could hold some hope 
for species.

“Historically marine protected areas have been small boutique affairs - more 
like the size of golf courses. In the past five years, however, the world has 
begun aggressively setting up very large marine protected areas.

“Recently Obama created the world’s largest protected area in Papahānaumokuākea
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/26/obama-to-create-worlds-largest-protected-marine-area-off-coast-of-hawaii-papahanaumokuakea>
, a protected area just over a million square kilometres in size. This is 
really good news as parks of this size will indeed provide meaningful 
protection for large vulnerable animals we highlight as being at risk.”
 