
Mats Hummels may no longer be international flavour of the month – it’s been 
noticeably ages since any “good friend” of his has told reporters that he 
dreams of playing for Chelsea/Arsenal/Manchester United/Barcelona – but his 
place in German football history looks more assured by the minute.

You will remember that in 2014, the perennially unsweaty dandy of Borussia 
Dortmund’s defence became the catalyst for the introduction of goalline 
technology in Fußball, when his headed goal was wronglychalked off in the DFB 
Pokal final against Bayern Munich <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SlmV-Wx8gp4>
. And now, following on from BVB’stumultuous 2-0 win over Ingolstadt on Saturday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/borussia-dortmund-ingolstadt-bundesliga-match-report>
, Hummels’ devilishly handsome visage – man-crushes on footballers are 
permitted, Mrs Bundesliga blog assures me – could well be the involuntary face 
of technological progress yet again.

The 27-year-old was involved in two of three controversial refereeing 
decisions that all went against the hard-done-by visitors, elicited sympathy 
from the beneficiaries at the Signal Iduna Park and instantly fired up the 
debate about widening the use of video evidence for all goals or goalscoring 
opportunities. The genie, one cannot help but feel, is very much out of the 
bottle.

The bad day for Ralph Hasenhüttl and his men had started in the 29th minute. 
Dario Lezcano, theIngolstadt <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ingolstadt> 
striker, was through clear on Borussia’s goal when Hummels challenged him. 
Referee Guido Winkmann waved play on. No penalty, no red card, no upset on the 
cards.

Just after the hour mark, Hummels scored a fine goal, with a typically elegant 
22-yard chip over the keeper. The fact that the keeper in question was BVB 
stopper Roman Bürki diminished the accomplishment somewhat, but Winkmann was 
once again on hand to spoil it for the newly promoted Bavarians. He awarded a 
free-kick to Dortmund; Lezcano was adjudged to have kicked Hummels just before 
his overhit-backpass-cum-own-goal.

“We were lucky but I wouldn’t call these decisions refereeing mistakes,” said 
Dortmund boss Thomas Tuchel. “If they’d gone the other way though, we couldn’t 
have complained.”

Hummels, too, admitted that he’d gotten away with the penalty (“It was a foul, 
unfortunately”) but insisted that he had himself been fouled later on: “I would 
have played it back on the ground if he hadn’t hit me in the calf.” Marvin 
Matip was left to lament, cynically: “Maybe Mats Hummels is not allowed to 
score an own goal.”

There were no disagreements about the third and most unnerving incident, 
however. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s header for the opening goal 12 minutes 
before the end, the de facto game decider, should not have stood. The Gabon 
international had strayed offside before Lukasz Piszczek’s cross. That hadn’t 
been easy to spot but the whole stadium, including the irate Ingolstadt team 
and Winkmann, staring sheepishly into the middle distance, got to see the 
replay on the two big video screens. Cue pandemonium and righteous anger from
Die Schanzer (Ingolstadt are nicknamed after the city fortress).

“I can’t believe they are so stupid to show that goal,” said Matip. “The 
referee should have punished them for that by taking it away from them.” Sticky 
scenes are not supposed to be replayed in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> grounds but, just 
like Winkmann and his assistants, the video technician had missed Aubameyang’s 
offside position. Winkmann was immediately aware of his mistake but told the 
players there was nothing he could do about it – to rule out the goal would 
have effectively made use of video evidence, contrary to regulations. “If we 
had had a referee even half as courageous as my players were today, we wouldn’t 
have lost this game,” said Hasenhüttl. “My players are in the changing room and 
can’t believe what’s happened here.”

One wonders whether Winkmann couldn’t have found a more elegant solution to 
that problem, after a little chat with the fourth official, for example, as the 
Fifa officials did when it came to sending off Zinedine Zidane at the 2006 
World Cup final.

But this being Germany, a land where even thinly disguised attempts to, ahem, 
curry favour with Fifa executive committee members before World Cup votes get 
carefully documented and filed in a ring binder, Winkmann must have felt that 
he had no choice than to play it by the rule book. Which raises the question 
whether the rules still make sense when thousands of viewers inside and outside 
the ground, managers and even players and officials can see the evidence but 
the referee must put the blinkers on. “It’s grotesque,” felt Kicker magazine. 
“The referee is rendered a hapless fool, playing blind man’s buff,” wrote 
Süddeutsche Zeitung.

Tuchel agreed. “It’s impossible that every guy with a smart phone knows what’s 
going on but the referee doesn’t,” he said. “I’m a huge fan of checking every 
goal [with video evidence].”

Hummels, too, concurred. “It would be important to have only correct goals 
being awarded, I get the sense that 10 to 15% of them should have gone the 
other way,” he said. “I’ve been a supporter of video evidence for a long time 
and I won’t change my mind.” For Ingolstadt, he added, it must have been 
“doubly and triply painful” to witness the refereeing mistake being replayed in 
the ground.

Fifa and the International Football Association Board, which presides over law 
changes, may see things differently but it can surely be only a matter of time 
before technology will at least help decide all objectively verifiable matters 
such as offside and the ball being in/out of play. Maybe it’ll take a ball 
coming off Hummels’ unsettlingly telegenic brow from an offside position – did 
we mention that he’s really good looking? – against Bayern (or vice versa) to 
get the German FA to make the case for extended video surveillance more 
vigorously.

Talking points

• Deadline day, despite Sky Deutschland’s best and yellowest effort, was even 
duller than usual in Germany. Bayern Munich getting former Germany 
international centre-back Serdar Tasci on loan from Spartak Moscow– in 
technical director Michael Reschke they increasingly trust at Säbener Strasse – 
was the sole biggish high-profile last-minute deal, while some light relief 
from the tedium was at least provided by Hamburger SV, the Bundesliga’s 
traditional purveyors of assorted mishaps. Their transfer of midfielder Sekou 
Sanogo fell flat because an email sent by Young Boys Bern from Wankdorfstadion 
hadn’t gone through in time. Perhaps a problem with an over-sensitive firewall?

• Elsewhere, VfB Stuttgart (2-1 over HSV) and Werder Bremen, who battled back 
from 3-1 down to get a point against Hertha with two goals from Claudio 
Pizarro, continued their promising start to the Rückrunde. BSC player Änis 
Ben-Hatira, an unused sub at the Weserstadion, however, was forced to trade the 
challenge for the Champions League with the relegation fight, as he was hastily 
moved on to Eintracht Frankfurt on Monday. The 27-year-old had rowed with 
Mitchell Weiser on the team bus and was told to pack his bag as a result, 
Hertha confirmed on Tuesday. “Fairness, decency, respect and team spirit are 
part of our most important principles at the club,” read an official statement.

• Indecency, in a very real sense, also put paid to Nick Proschwitz’s future 
at Bundesliga 2 side SC Paderborn. The 29-year-old had his contract rescinded 
after drunkenly exposing his backside and front bits at a hotel party during 
Paderborn’s winter training camp in Turkey. Unfortunately for him, “the stupid 
boys’ prank” as he called it, was also witnessed by a female employee of the 
organising agency. She came out to forcibly deny headlines that spoke of 
“sexual harassment” by Proschwitz – “I wasn’t being harassed at any time, I’m 
only being harassed by the way this has been reported” – but the former Hull 
City and Brentford pro was nevertheless shown the door. He will now have to 
pitch his tent at Sint-Truiden in Belgium.

Results: Stuttgart 2-1 HSV, Dortmund 2-0 Ingolstadt, Mainz 1-0 Gladbach, 
Leverkusen 3-0 Hannover, Augsburg 0-0 Eintracht Frankfurt, Werder 3-3 Hertha, 
Darmstadt 0-2 Schalke, Wolfsburg 1-1 Köln, Bayern 2-0 Hoffenheim.
 