
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/dearjeremy> advice column in the 
Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. 
We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.

I am applying for jobs as a school librarian. I hold a master’s degree in 
information and library studies, and have seven years’ experience working as a 
school librarian. The last job I applied for, I phoned before sending in my 
application and asked whether it would be possible to have a look around the 
library and meet the librarian. The school responded quickly and I visited the 
following day. I was impressed with the library space and could see by the 
friendly behaviour of the students that the current librarian was well liked.

I sent her a thank you card after my visit and promptly sent in my 
application. I was one of seven applicants, but I did not get the job.

There were a number of things we were asked to do on the day of our interview, 
including being interviewed by a panel of students and two senior members of 
the school. When it was my turn for the student panel, the librarian was also 
in the room but she did not acknowledge me. I noticed the students looked to 
her at one point and I would have looked too, only it seemed rude to turn my 
attention away from the students. Of the seven applicants, I was rated least 
liked by the student panel.

Is it no longer appropriate to ask to look around a school library prior to 
applying for a job being advertised? Or doing what I consider essential 
research? My feeling is that I do not enhance my chances of being hired by 
doing so and that I may be creating an atmosphere of mistrust. I am applying 
for another job in a school library and would have asked to have a look around 
and perhaps meet the people involved, but I don’t want to lower my chances of 
being chosen.

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally. 

 