
My mum put me in care when I was two years old and, although I spent 
increasing amounts of time with my dad as a teenager, I remained in care for 
the next 14 years. I experienced the full range of local authority provision: 
several foster placements, a children’s home and a boarding school for children 
with emotional and behavioural difficulties.

My mum left me before I was three. Now I can finally move on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/feb/10/mum-left-care-files-childhood-identity>
The first 10 years post-care were not easy for lots of reasons and I 
experienced bouts of crippling depression. The gloom lifted a little when I was 
27 and I had a long think about what I wanted to do with my life. I decided 
initially to become a social worker. I took a job in a local children’s home to 
gain relevant experience and chose to stick around. I have now been working in 
various roles in different homes for 12 years.

It may be hard to believe, but at no point was the fact that I had been in 
care part of my decision making. I was simply looking for a job I might find 
meaningful and fulfilling. I had no narcissistic fantasies about giving 
something back or being able to make a difference because of my experiences. 
And so, despite having given it a great deal of thought, I have never disclosed 
my past to the children I look after.

One reason for this stems from a conversation I had with another care worker 
about a year into the job. He had just started, and said: “I come at it from a 
different angle. I grew up in care so I know what they are going through.” I 
couldn’t believe the assumptions he was making about both the young people and 
his colleagues. I was furious: although I would never have said it, I had 
secretly been thinking the same thing. His stupidity had exposed my own.


But there is no reason to believe my experiences would reflect the child’s – 
for example, two people who have been looked after by birth parents will have 
had different experiences. For good or bad, wounded healers abound in social 
care and many colleagues I have spoken to, who did not grow up in care, had 
childhood experiences which, to my mind, were considerably more traumatic than 
my own.

The only good reason I can think of to tell young people about my past is to 
let them know being in care is survivable

An 11-year-old girl I used to look after and was fond of, Sarah, once shouted 
at me: “Ask Maggie, she understands – she was in care.”

Sarah had been repeatedly sexually and physically abused by her father over 
many years. She had been removed at the age of nine and was living in a 
therapeutic community. Maggie had lived in foster care for a few months when 
her mother was ill – a difficult experience for sure, but hardly like for like. 
So what fantasies was Sarah having about Maggie’s life? If she was assuming it 
was similar to hers she would have been massively overburdened.

Another reason is that since I was in care there have been big changes. 
Children’s social care still isn’t good enough for numerous reasons but there 
is greater understanding now about why children in care behave the way they do, 
how their past affects them and the issues they face. In the children’s home I 
was in, the staff were quaintly referred to as aunts and uncles. I would be 
surprised if any of them had even heard about attachment theory. I sometimes 
envy the help available to children today. I don’t think I knew what 
counselling was before I was 18, let alone understood how it might have helped.

The only good reason I can think of to tell young people about my past is to 
let them know that being in care (and the reasons they are in care) is 
survivable. But in my experience, the few colleagues I know who have disclosed 
personal experience of being in care have been giving the implicit message that 
“I am not like the rest of them – I really get it”. This is dangerous practice.

Young people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> will sense if 
you have genuine empathy and understanding. You won’t convince them simply by 
saying: “I understand - I have been there.”

Jack Brookes is a pseudonym. All names in this piece have been changed

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 