
In 1948 a report blamed cold mothers who failed to bond with their children 
for the autism in their offspring. The latest research (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/25/autisc-children-therapy-method-potential-breakthrough-care-preschool-autism-communication-trial>
, 26 October) has provided evidence that parents who are taught specific skills 
to engage their autistic children can dramatically increase the likelihood of 
positive family outcomes. In the span of less than a lifetime, I have gone from 
being a “refrigerator mother” to “super parent” as we have finally been given 
the tools to break through the ice surrounding what was once described as our 
“frosty” children.

I remember our first speech and language therapy session with our first 
autistic child. It was apparent that the therapy was not for my child directly 
but a way of teaching me to be his therapist on a daily basis. As in this 
study, this has in effect given me the ability to engage my autistic children. 
This is slowly allowing our children to enter our world and warm our hearts. I 
hope the results of the study not only encourage further participation in this 
practice, but also an appreciation for the parents of autistic children out 
there. They are so often misjudged when in reality they are doing a super job.
Ann Hickman
(Writer at Rainbows Are Too Beautiful <http://www.rainbowsaretoobeautiful.com/>
, a blog raising awareness and supporting families with autism), London

• Those of us working day to day with families with children with profound 
autism will be delighted with evidence to support what we do. There is no doubt 
that helping parents as early as possible to see “behaviour” as communication 
and to encourage them to have the confidence to keep trying and to respond 
positively works and has long term benefit. However, we have to battle demands 
for “learning outcomes” phrased in a way that fit traditional education and 
that do not recognise the importance of relationships, play and alternatives to 
the spoken word as valuable. We have many families with under-fives desperate 
for help sitting on our waiting list. There is little money or will to put in 
the level of early support necessary to make a difference. The longer families 
wait the harder it gets.
Liza Dresner
Resources for Autism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism>, London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 