
There is no such thing as a “good” cancer. If you’re being told you have 
cancer, by any criteria, you’re not having a good day.

On 26 August, 2015 – Daffodil Day – I was diagnosed with lung cancer. I was 
52, a mother of three, and have never smoked. Apart from a cough I’d had for a 
couple of weeks, I was feeling great. I turned up to the GP ready to be 
lectured on the overuse of antibiotics. Instead I was sent for an X-ray.

The first I knew I was in trouble was when the technician looked at the film, 
turned to me, and asked if I was a “real” doctor. I thought about arguing 
semantics. Technically I was a “real” doctor and medical doctors are the 
interlopers, but feeling the tectonic plates beginning to shift, I mutely took 
the films, minus the reports (I wasn’t trusted with them), back to the GP.

The plates shifted again when the GP lit up the film. It turns out I didn’t 
need the reports. Even a “real” doctor could see that life as I knew it was 
over.

To sustain hope while preserving honesty is the greatest challenge in oncology 
| Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/to-sustain-hope-while-preserving-honesty-is-the-challenge-in-treating-cancer-patients>
The final shift to a new world order happened while googling life expectancy 
and reading my chances of survival. If my life is nothing but a series of 
miracles from this point onwards, nothing will undo that moment. The change was 
immediate and irrevocable.

Like everyone, I’ve had my share of hardships and deep sadness, but I am a 
school principal and we deal in hope daily. It is my default with young people 
and their families. Which is just as well, because if there is any theme needed 
around lung cancer, it is hope. Those who have hope; those who don’t. Those who 
try to be hopeful but who cannot mask pity; those who know the odds yet exude 
hope and strength by their very presence.

You may think that to get lung cancer is just bad luck. And you’d be right. 
Except that lung cancer is the number one cancer killer in Australia. So that’s 
a fair bit of bad luck. More women die each year from lung cancer than from 
breast and ovarian cancer combined – the fastest growing subset is young women 
who have never smoked.

With so many people getting lung cancer and the death rate so high, you’d 
think there would be group hug sessions, fun-runs and gala balls.

Not so. 

From the moment I discovered some bright spark in the marketing department 
decided the symbol for LungCancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> 
would be an invisible ribbon, it was evident “lung cancer” needed some 
practical assistance in the hope department.

Throughout my smorgasbord of treatments – chemotherapy, surgery and 
radiotherapy – I never met a soul with lung cancer. Literally no one. It wasn’t 
till I’d finished treatment that I came across Lilian, a young woman with lung 
cancer, a mother of one, non-smoker. Over a year later, I met Lisa, a mother of 
three, a non-smoker, and David, a father of four, and a non-smoker.

Bluntly, there are so few advocates till now because so few people survive. By 
the time there are symptoms, the disease has usually progressed so that people 
live weeks or months, rather than years. A significant number of lung cancer 
patients are told by their doctor to go home and get their affairs in order. 
Hope appears in short supply.

We don’t invest in research because one of the risk factors, and only one, is 
smoking. Not my risk factor, nor Lilian’s, Lisa’s, or David’s. But a risk 
factor. At latest count 13.3% of the Australian population smoke daily. And 
because their risk of lung cancer is increased, everyone with lung cancer is 
penalised.

It is the most stigmatised of cancers, attracting less than 5% of research 
funding tofinding a cure 
<http://www.liverpoolchampion.com.au/story/4223698/a-liverpool-doctors-innovative-research-secures-funding/?cs=1465>
, despite taking the lives of more Australians than any other cancer.

This differs starkly from other cancers, some of which can have survival rates 
around 90%, and yet continue to receive significantly greater funding.

The most frustrating aspect of this is that Australia has brilliant 
scientists, researchers and doctors. We punch above our weight on the world 
stage, in every regard. The development of medicine in this area is on the 
brink of a seismic shift as we move into immunology and targeted therapies, led 
in no small part by practitioners who operate on the smell of an oily rag. 
Imagine what they could do if funding matched the greatest need? Given half a 
chance, this cancer would be a chronic condition at worst and fully curable at 
best. Hope would reign supreme.

My patient had private health insurance for peace of mind. Then he got cancer 
| Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/my-patient-had-private-health-insurance-for-peace-of-mind-then-he-got-cancer>
When it comes to cancer, we do all we can to control our risk. We educate, 
raise awareness and fund research. But if we are going to make judgment calls 
about where our research funding goes on the basis of stigma, or by moralising 
on lifestyle choices, then we should be consistent. Cut funding to Type II 
Diabetes till everyone stops eating sugar, stop researching heart disease while 
some patients continue to eat fatty food, cease researching bowel cancer till 
everyone eats fibre, and recognise that 40% of breast cancers are exacerbated 
by lifestyle choices. And acknowledge that more than 85% of the population do 
not smoke. Then let’s talk about funding allocations.

I wish we had a team of advocates for lung cancer and that more people 
survived. I wish I could raise public awareness with pithy campaigns and 
beautifully coloured ribbons. But wishes count for nothing. There is a 
pragmatic reality to hope that demands action, funding and research.

But the number one cancer in Australia, like its ribbon, is invisible. As are 
those who have been through it, and those who have died from it.

I am back at work, rallying the troops (students and parents) through term 
four, and looking forward to the Christmas break. Mercifully, the timbre of my 
journey was set by a eclectic tribe of romantic pragmatists – they knew the 
odds and fought every step of the way. They assumed I would win. Hope dictated 
their agenda and not stigma. And for that, I will be forever grateful. It is 
time to make this outcome a reality for everyone.
 