
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/dearjeremy> advice column in the 
Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. 
We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.

 I have a history of poor career decisions, which is why I need your advice. 
After a few years of various short job experiences, I realised I needed to 
seriously focus on a career path. I decided to study HR and managed to get a 
job in recruitment team of a media company.

 I never wanted to focus on recruitment, as this type of role requires 
personality characteristics far from who I am. However, I thought it could be a 
good starting point to later shift to a different type of HR activity, so I 
rolled up my sleeves and performed the best I could.

 During the past four years in this role, I have realised it is quite hard to 
get out of recruitment. There was no possibility to do so in this media 
company, so I moved to a different one in which making the move after a while 
seemed more plausible.

 After a few months in the new role, however, I find myself facing a great 
struggle. I know I am not performing as well as I should, as I have started 
feeling burned out by the constant pressure and contact with candidates and 
hiring managers.

 I dread candidates’ calls, emails and requests, and tough meetings with 
hiring managers. I sometimes find myself avoiding these situations or 
procrastinating. This cannot continue: my health is deteriorating, my 
self-esteem is low and I am not doing any justice to these candidates and 
hiring managers. But I need a job to sustain myself, so I cannot leave without 
a plan.

 During these years I realised what I enjoy (and am good at) is connected to 
reporting, data analysis (or applicant tracking systems software that handles 
the recruitment process) and support for other people. I switch on when there 
is an issue with the system and I need to figure out how to solve it.

 I need a role with less people interaction. It’s too early here to request a 
transfer to a more suitable role, as I have not been in the company long and 
have not been a superstar. And when I look at outside opportunities, I realise 
I don’t fit all the requirements for junior data/HR systems/business analyst 
roles.

 I am trying to fill in the gap (taking Excel advanced online courses, for 
example), but I need guidance.

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.




 