
Few managers can rival Ian Holloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ian-holloway> when it comes to offbeat 
soundbites, and there were many at his Queens Park Rangers unveiling on 
Wednesday. From the Football Association undermining Gareth Southgate and the 
dangers of Snapchat to putting books in his trouser pockets and the police’s 
apparent inability to find the culprits who set his son’s tattoo parlour on 
fire in February, the 53‑year‑old covered all the bases and more.

QPR confirm appointment of Ian Holloway as new manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/qpr-ian-holloway-new-manager> 
Yet behind the seemingly infinite digressions, both witty and grim, there was 
also substance when it came to outlining his plans for restoring this club to 
its former self. Holloway wants to makeQPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> something the local community and 
its “working-man fanbase” can be proud of again. Most of that will centre on 
building up the belief of a young squad, but Holloway also needs time.

It would be patently foolish to assume a team currently equidistant between 
the playoffs and relegation can be promoted immediately. Elevation may not even 
happen next season – particularly when one weighs up QPR’s restricted budget 
compared to others in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> – but with patience he is 
in no doubt that Loftus Road can once again host top-flight football.

“This club belongs to the people, we understand that,” Holloway said. “I 
believe QPR fans just want to see their team care, to see them try and then 
believe that they’ll have a chance of being there [the Premier League] one day. 
I know we’ll do it, it’s just when. I’d be stupid to say this year or next.”

All well and good, but so much has happened in the decade he has been away, 
the immediate temptation is to point out the forbearance required for him to 
implement his masterplan is unlikely to be afforded by the club. Eleven 
managers have passed through since his departure in 2006, while he has enjoyed 
success and failure in equal measures with five other teams.

“Everything is instant now, you have got to win,” added Holloway, who kicks 
off his second spell with a home game against Norwich on Saturday . “You have 
to earn that right and it’s becoming more difficult in this crazy world.”

On a positive note, Holloway described the attitude of the squad he has 
inherited as being “so refreshing” and believes he is in the “state of my life 
to bring all my knowledge” to help them improve. Bearing in mind the makeup of 
the team, which he thinks contains too many No10s and not enough goalscorers, 
it is worth contrasting with his last unveiling,at Millwall in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/06/ian-holloway-returns-millwall-manager>
, when he spoke of that squad having “too many chiefs but not enough Indians”.

The opposite is probably true here. In Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s final game, a 
1-1 draw at Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-sacked-qpr-after-draw>
, six of the starting outfield players were 25 or under. It is going to take a 
while to nurture the young players and there was a moment here when he was 
listing every attacking member of his squad with a lofty superlative attached – 
clearly a deliberate attempt to augment confidence.

Holloway made the players sit down and watch the Samuel L Jackson film Coach 
Carter at the beginning of the week as a motivation tool. “We have more than 
enough young fellas coming through who have had a really hard life and find it 
very difficult,” he said. “I want to be there for them. I wanted them to 
understand that.”

He also says he knows more now than ever. Since leaving Millwall Holloway 
became a prominent figure on television screens, working as a lead pundit for 
Sky’s Football League coverage, and said it was fascinating to hear how he 
could “see the pressure we were putting on managers” when analysing their 
performances. The flipside is it also helped him learn, namely from discussions 
with Rafael Benítez and Gary Rowett among others. He has praised both to the 
hilt but must now look at them as the enemy to achieve his goal of promotion.

“I want to carry on that legacy of what QPR means to people, and I think they 
trust me with that at the moment and a ball hasn’t been kicked yet. They’ve had 
a lot of distrust around the place about where it’s going, so I’m going to try 
and find them some new superstars.”

That may sound like getting QPR running before they can crawl but if Sky was 
not the limit for Holloway, he wants his squad to aim for the very top too.
 