
Environmental destruction and landgrabs could lead to governments and 
individuals being prosecuted for crimes against humanity by the international 
criminal court following a decision to expand its remit.


The UN-backed court, which sits in The Hague, has mostly ruled on cases of 
genocide and war crimes since it was set up in 2002. It has been criticised for 
its reluctance to investigate major environmental and cultural crimes, which 
often happen in peacetime.


 In a change of focus <https://www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/item.aspx?name=pr1238>, 
the ICC said on Thursday it would also prioritise crimes that result in the 
“destruction of the environment”, “exploitation of natural resources” and the 
“illegal dispossession” of land. It also included an explicit reference to 
land-grabbing.

The court, which is funded by governments and is regarded as the court of last 
resort, said it would now take many crimes that have been traditionally 
under-prosecuted into consideration.

The ICC is not formally extending its jurisdiction, but the court said it 
would assess existing offences, such as crimes against humanity, in a broader 
context.


The ICC’s policy paper on case selection and prioritisation declares: “The 
office [of the prosecutor] will give particular consideration to prosecuting 
Rome statute crimes that are committed by means of, or that result in, inter 
alia, the destruction of the environment, the illegal exploitation of natural 
resources or the illegal dispossession of land.”

Land-grabbing has become increasingly common worldwide, with national and 
local governments allocating private companies tens of millions of hectares of 
land in the past 10 years.

The anti-corruption campaigners Global Witness say this has led to many forced 
evictions, the cultural genocide of indigenous peoples, malnutrition and 
environmental destruction.

Alice Harrison, an adviser at Global Witness, said: “Today’s announcement 
should send a warning shot to company executives and investors that the 
environment is no longer their playground.

“The terrible impacts of land-grabbing and environmental destruction have been 
acknowledged at the highest level of criminal justice, and private sector 
actors could now be put on trial for their role in illegally seizing land, 
flattening rainforests or poisoning water sources.”

International lawyers said broadening the priority cases to include 
land-grabbing would recognise that mass human rights violations committed 
during peacetime and in the name of profit could be just as serious as 
traditional war crimes.

“It will not make land-grabbing per se a crime, but mass forcible evictions 
that results from land-grabbing may end up being tried as a crime against 
humanity,” said Richard Rogers, a partner in the international criminal law 
firm Global Diligence.

Rogers has lodged a case with the ICC on behalf of 10 Cambodians alleging that 
the country’s ruling elite, including its government and military, has 
perpetuated mass rights violations since 2002 in pursuit of wealth and power by 
grabbing land and forcibly evicting up to 350,000 people.


“Cambodia is a perfect example for this new ICC focus. It fits in to the new 
criteria,” he said.

He predicted it could have a bearing on the way business is done in certain 
countries. “Companies who want to invest in [some] places risk being complicit 
in crimes against humanity. Tackling land-grabbing will also help address some 
of the causes of climate change, since deforestation is very often a result of 
land-grabbing.”

Paraguay battles over land rights in the courts and across the airwaves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/03/paraguay-battles-over-land-rights-in-the-courts-and-across-the-airwaves>
The new ICC focus could also open the door to prosecutions over climate 
change, Rogers said, because a large percentage of CO2 emissions had been 
caused by deforestation as a result of illegal land-grabbing.


The ICC can take action if the crime happens in any of the 124 countries that 
have ratified the Rome statute, if the perpetrator originates from one of these 
countries, or if the UN security council refers a case to it. Crimes must have 
taken place after the Rome statue came into force on 1 July 2002.

Reinhold Gallmetzer, a member of the ICC working group who drew up the policy 
document, said: “We are exercising our jurisdiction by looking at the broader 
context in which crimes are committed. We are extending the focus to include 
Rome statute crimes already in our jurisdiction.

“Forcible transfer [of people] can already be a crime against humanity, so if 
it is committed by land-grabbing – whether as a result or a precursor – it can 
be included.”

The ICC paper also lists other crimes, such as arms trafficking, human 
trafficking, terrorism and financial crimes, in which it intends to provide 
more help to individual states to carry out national prosecutions.

• This article was amended on 19 September 2016. An earlier version said the 
ICC could take action in any of the 139 countries that had signed up to the 
Rome statute. The court has jurisdiction over the 124 countries which have 
ratified the statute.
 