
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> moved to within three 
points of second-placed Aberdeen in impressive style at Tynecastle.

In a first half of power, pace and no little skill the Gorgie side took 
complete control through an Igor Rossi header, a strike from Osman Sow and a 
Gavin Reilly penalty.

Callum Paterson made it 4-0 in the 77th minute before substitute Juanma 
Delgado added a fifth with four minutes remaining and Arnaud Djoum hammered in 
thefinal goal from the penalty spot in added time.

Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> missed several 
chances in their first defeat in seven matches but ultimately had no answer to 
a superior and purposeful Hearts side who have lost one of their past 11 
matches.

Aside from a long-range drive in the third minute from Paterson that sped wide 
there was little real action until the home side took the lead in the 11th 
minute. However, after Rossi headed in a Billy King corner – the linesman 
determining the ball had crossed the line before Motherwell’s Joe Chalmers 
managed to clear it – Hearts dominated.

Motherwell did have a chance to level when Louis Moult played in Lionel 
Ainsworth but his angled drive from 14 yards was saved by Neil Alexander.

In the 16th minute, as Hearts swept forward again, Sow picked up the ball 20 
yards out and drilled a shot low past the flailing Connor Ripley in the 
Motherwell goal.

The Fir Park men could not muster a response and Ripley escaped with a yellow 
card from Kevin Clancy when he pulled down Reilly in the penalty area to 
prevent the striker rounding him to score. However, Reilly was happy enough to 
pick himself up and hammer the resultant spot-kick into the net.

The hosts went looking for more and in the 34th minute Sow had the ball in the 
net but was ruled offside from Reilly’s header before Ripley made a fine save 
from Prince Buaben’s 22-yard drive that was heading for the top corner.

Understandably, the early stages of the second half saw a drop in tempo from 
Hearts as they soaked up some Motherwell pressure with Moult and Stephen 
Pearson missing the target with efforts. In the 70th minute it looked like 
Hearts had another good penalty claim when a thunderous shot from King appeared 
to be blocked by the hand of Stephen McManus, but it was ignored by Clancy.

Motherwell’s Scott McDonald missed with a close-range header and substitute 
Wes Fletcher could only earn a corner when he ought to have scored with 
Alexander to beat.

Paterson showed how it should be done as he took a pass from Dario Zanatta and 
fired low past Ripley from 16 yards.

The home side were not yet finished, though. Juanma took a pass from Djoum, 
turned and shot low past Ripley and then Djoum finished the scoring after he 
had been tripped by David Clarkson.

In the final seconds of added time, Juanma had the ball in the net only to be 
ruled offside, saving the bedraggled visitors further embarrassment.
 