
The International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Christine Lagarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde>, is due to stand trial on 
Monday afternoon over her role in a €400m (£335m) payment to a French 
businessman when she was France’s finance minister in the government of former 
conservative president Nicolas Sarkozy.

Speaking on the eve of her trial, Lagarde said she was confident she had done 
nothing wrong over state the payout to Bernard Tapie in 2008.

Lagarde is accused of negligence leading to misuse of public funds by 
improperly approving a decision to allow an out-of-court arbitration in the 
dispute with Sarkozy supporter Tapie.


 She could face up to a year in jail and a fine of €15,000 if convicted. A 
guilty verdict would risk plunging the IMF into a new leadership crisis; 
Lagarde took over in 2011 when Dominique Strauss-Kahn quit because of a sex 
scandal.

“Negligence is a non-intentional offence. I think we are all a bit negligent 
sometimes in our life. I have done my job as well as I could, within the limits 
of what I knew,” she said onFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> 2 
television.

 Lagarde said she was confident and determined, and denied that she had 
favoured Tapie or acted on Sarkozy’s orders.

Patrick Maisonneuve, a lawyer for Lagarde, told Europe-1 on Monday morning 
that he would seek a postponement when the proceedings open, arguing that it 
doesn’t make sense for Lagarde to go on trial while a separate investigation in 
the case is still underway.

 The case goes back to when Tapie sued the state for compensation after 
selling his stake in sports company Adidas to Credit Lyonnais in 1993. He 
claimed the bank, owned by the French state at the time, had defrauded him 
after it resold his stake for a much higher sum.

 Lagarde, who was French finance minister from 2007 to 2011, signed off on the 
decision to seek an extremely rare out-of-court settlement in the dispute 
between the state and Tapie that ended up costing taxpayers dearly.

 The arbitration judges ruled in Tapie’s favour and ordered the state payout, 
but appeal courts have since thrown out that decision.

 A Paris appeals court ordered Tapie to reimburse the state, but he has lodged 
an appeal that is still pending.

 The trial will be only be the fifth in the history of the Cour de Justice de 
la Republique, a special court that tries ministers for crimes in office made 
up of three judges and six lawmakers from the lower and upper houses of 
parliament.

 The IMF said on Thursday that its executive board continued to be briefed on 
the court case and retained confidence in Lagarde’s ability to lead the 
organisation.
 