
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, the brash 
property tycoon, yesterday launched an assault on mild-mannered Sir Richard 
Branson - whose copycat US reality television show opened on Wednesday night to 
lacklustre ratings.

In a clash of the publicity-seeking titans, Mr Trump aimed a stream of 
invective at his British rival, whose programme employs a similar format to the 
property tycoon's successful series, The Apprentice. He said Sir Richard had 
"zero personality", mocked his attempts to circle the world in a hot-air 
balloon and questioned whether Sir Richard is the billionaire he claims to be.

He told the New York Post: "I don't know the guy but I think he's got zero 
personality and zero television persona. He doesn't have the look and whether 
we like it or not, the look is a big part of ratings and success, and he 
doesn't have it - and his show doesn't have it." His comments to the New York 
Daily News were more succinct. "I thought his show was terrible."

In Sir Richard's show, the Rebel Billionaire, players compete in business 
tasks and daredevil stunts to win $1m and a job in the Virgin group. The 
two-hour primetime debut on Rupert Murdoch's Fox channel drew five million 
viewers, making it the least watched of the five main networks.

Mr Trump said his rival was "a lot of hot air - like his balloons". He went 
on: "Branson even failed in the balloon business. The guy spent his whole life 
trying to circle the world in a balloon and then some guy comes out of nowhere 
and beats him to it."

Sir Richard could not be reached for comment. 

Mr Trump's own opaque finances did not stop him casting doubt on Sir 
Richard's. "I'm a major billionaire because it's easy to add up my stuff. But 
his airline has got to be sucking him dry," he told the Post.

The Apprentice, in which contestants compete for a job in Mr Trump's empire, 
has spawned a clutch of similar shows. The Benefactor, hosted by dotcom 
entrepreneur Mark Cuban, has already been cancelled.
 