
An 18-year-old Great Britain international triathlete who died from sepsis 
after going to an accident and emergency department twice in 24 hours might 
have survived if she had been given antibiotics earlier, a coroner has 
concluded.


But Prof Paul Marks said he could not be sure it was probable that Ellie 
Penrose would have been saved if the drugs had been administered on her arrival 
at the A&E unit.

Penrose died at Hull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> Royal 
Infirmary on 13 August 2015. She had gone to A&E in the middle of the night 
suffering from diarrhoea and a headache but was sent home after a junior 
diagnosed a stomach bug with associated dehydration.

Hours later – after she found out she had won a place at York University to 
study maths – she was rushed back to the hospital in an ambulance. Her 
condition deteriorated and she died that day of sepsis caused by a 
meningococcal infection.

An inquest in Hull on Monday heard that Penrose was not given vital 
antibiotics until two hours after she arrived at the A&E for the second time.

Dr Mike Beadsworth, an expert on infectious diseases who was brought in by the 
coroner to give an independent opinion on the case, said that given the 
symptoms Penrose had displayed, he could not criticise the decision to 
discharge her at her first A&E visit.

He said that in retrospect Penrose would not have died if she had been given 
antibiotics at that time.

He said he believed Penrose should have been given antibiotics as soon as she 
arrived at hospital the second time, when a number of warning signs for sepsis 
were present.

“She may have survived, but I can’t say that she probably would have 
survived,” he told the inquest.

Pushed again on this issue by Adam Korne, representing Penrose’s family, 
Beadsworth said: “I think I have to say 50/50. I just don’t know if she would 
have survived or not.”

Penrose, from Cottingham, East Yorkshire, was a promising international 
triathlete, and the court heard that she had competed in a race at Lake Geneva 
in Switzerland a month before she was taken ill. She had a bout of diarrhoea on 
a holiday in Florida and then began to feel unwell again on 9 August.

The coroner Marks said it was “not inappropriate” for Penrose to have been 
discharged at 3.50am. But he said she should have been given antibiotics as 
soon as she arrived at hospital the second time.

He said he was able to say that this “may have resulted in her surviving”, but 
added: “I am unable to a make a finding of fact that she would have survived.”

In a narrative verdict, Marks said: “Had antibiotic therapy been given 
immediately, she may have survived.”

He said that although Penrose had developed a severe meningococcal infection, 
she never had meningitis.

A statement was read from Dr Mark Simpson, clinical director for emergency 
medicine at Hull and East YorkshireHospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> NHS trust, who said a number of 
changes had been made to the A&E department since Penrose’s death.

Korne, for the family, asked the coroner to write to the trust stressing 
concerns about issues including the inexperience of the doctors in A&E on the 
night when Penrose first arrived, which he described as “one very junior doctor 
reporting to another very junior doctor”.

The barrister also said the family wanted to encourage ongoing work to raise 
awareness of the dangers of sepsis.

Chris Long, the chief executive of Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS 
trust, said: “This is clearly a very tragic case and the trust would like to 
offer its sincere condolences to the family of Miss Penrose for their loss. 
Miss Penrose’s case is currently the subject of a legal claim, therefore, in 
light of this, it would be inappropriate for us to comment further at this 
stage.”
 