
The surprise in the health service is not how little collaboration there is 
across professional and organisational boundaries, but how so many people 
achieve so much in the face of overwhelming odds.

Ministers and NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> leaders encourage 
and cajole staff to improve services, but even the most driven transformation 
zealots find themselves worn down by having to fight the system rather than be 
supported and encouraged by it.

In the words of one GP: “There is a hell of a lot of bureaucracy that gets in 
the way. The whole thing around designing care is how straightforward it is as 
a concept, but the bureaucracy cannot disentangle itself from the engineering 
to allow simple things to happen.

Improving services should not feel like a quest in a labyrinth

“Change can be virtually impossible because money flows will not allow it to 
happen, so you have teams of people wading through spreadsheets and legal 
issues. There are boards, frameworks and contracts which create a system that 
never moves, but people are crying out for a system that allows care to be 
integrated.”

Arguing that there are ways of working around this misses the point; improving 
services should not feel like a quest in a labyrinth. On the contrary, a system 
designed for improvement should be looking for opportunities to sweep away 
obstructions.

Instead, the NHS has managed to reach the perverse point where a bureaucratic 
error that allows an member of staff to access patient data without 
authorisation is treated as a serious problem, but staff not being able to 
access the notes of someone arriving in A&E is routine.

The imperative to meet national targets irrespective of whether they reflect 
local priorities is one of the most powerful headwinds. One leading physician 
described the impact: “We have a significant local transformation plan which 
will have long-term benefits for mothers and children, and is beginning to gain 
traction with the local population after a big consultation piece. However, we 
were threatened with central support being pulled if we didn’t refocus our 
efforts on our two local trusts’ access and waiting targets.”

Alongside money and staff time, the most precious healthcare resource is data. 
But too often it is squandered on retrospective beatings around national 
targets rather than used to inform real-time decision-making and predict future 
events. Data “tends to be used as whips to constantly show failing, without 
doing anything to actually change or improve [the system]. It drains resources 
that could be used to collect more relevant data that would allow people to 
improve, and find efficiencies.”

Sustainability and transformation plans (STPs) are a credible attempt to get 
NHS organisations to work together. But while system rhetoric encourages 
collaboration, outdated accountability and funding rules forces people apart.

The NHS is riven with fault lines. Managers and clinicians look after their 
own organisations at the expense of others because that is how they will be 
judged. As one doctor put it: “Drivers, incentives and regulation are the 
biggest thing. People’s skills have been honed against that backdrop.”

A chief executive said: “The central bodies say one thing and do another. The 
bottom line is that the regulators are playing politics. You can’t say ‘we are 
working as a system’ and then say that each organisation has to balance its 
books.”

I have heard a GP describe a consultant as “the enemy”, not out of personal 
animosity but simply because he represented the local hospital, the source of 
most of the difficulties in the GP’s life.

This divisive culture permeates the entire NHS. It can be seen in the poor 
collaboration between physical and mental health services. I have heard a 
diabetic consultant admit that he had never met a consultant psychiatrist, 
despite the high risk of mental illness among his own patients.

There are signs of a more collaborative culture emerging. Leadership and 
teamwork are increasingly important training priorities for clinicians, and 
STPs – although subject to stringent oversight – are an attempt to give local 
leaders at least some power to shape the future.

But creating a system that champions and spreads collaboration and improvement 
is a long way off. It requires a change of attitude at every level – from the 
practice manager to the NHS England chief executive – and a recognition that 
leadership is about liberating the talent below and around you.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 