
Today you’ll notice some changes to our website. Since relaunching 
theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2015/jan/28/welcome-to-the-new-guardian-website>
 earlier this year, we have been continually working to ensure that the site 
continues to adapt and improve. There have been a number of changes which are 
designed to help users navigate and discover our journalism. Some of these you 
may have noticed, some simply absorbed into the way you interact with the site.

This week, amongst a number of changes, we are rolling out a significant 
addition to the site navigation: a persistent or “sticky” navigation bar across 
the entire site, designed to help users find their way around theguardian.com 
with more speed (and less scrolling).

After several months of trials, surveys and testing on the site and in our 
user experience lab we’ve got a first release of this feature that today we are 
opening up to our whole readership. Having released it to a proportion of our 
audience already, we know that readers navigate more quickly around the site. 
The navigation elements of a site are by no means a static thing - over time, 
readers needs and preferences change and so must we. We also know that not 
every user is the same - we’vebegun to provide personalised elements already 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2015/jan/23/paving-the-cowpaths-recent-history>
 and there will be plenty more to come.

Other changes include some alterations to the way in which we present and 
deliver advertising on the site, to both improve the load time of the whole 
site and to more clearly present the partners who support the site through 
their advertising.

We’d love to hear what you think about this change, and the direction we 
should be going. As we develop in the open, many of our ideas for change come 
from outside the Guardian’s four walls, and ultimately all of them are aimed at 
making the site a more pleasurable and helpful medium by which to discover and 
enjoy our journalism.
 