
Engineering industry leaders yesterday urged the Bank of England to keep 
interest rates on hold for the forseeable future, warning that a further rise 
in borrowing costs would stifle a "fragile recovery" in manufacturing.

The warning came amid fresh evidence of a north-south divide, with southern 
engineering firms looking forward to increased output and northern companies 
experiencing further pressure on both prices and jobs.

The Engineering Employers' Federation accused the bank's monetary policy 
committee of refusing to listen to the manufacturing sector because of fears 
about a non-existent inflationary threat.

"There's a growing polarisation between manufacturing and services," said 
Martin Temple, the EEF's director general. "There's pressure for interest rates 
to rise and that will push the pound up, so we could face a double whammy. 
Manufacturing will suffer because of the successful service sector."

Mr Temple's comments came as the EEF said in its latest quarterly trends 
survey that engineering output had grown marginally for the first time in 15 
months. High value segments such as aerospace, electronics and rail 
rolling-stock, often based in the south, are experiencing a genuine recovery 
while production of basic metals and machine tools, usually in the north, still 
face falling output.

The EEF predicted that overall growth would be 2.6% next year, with 
manufacturing and engineering output as a whole rising by 1.8%. It forecasts 
that the underlying rate of inflation will be 2.1% next year, or below the 
MPC's 2.5% target.

Warning that the Bank of England seemed to ignore the advice of its regional 
agents and to be fixated by the boom in south-east house prices, the EEF said a 
further rates increase would simply prolong the investment drought in 
engineering and manufacturing as a whole.

John Tissiman, managing director of Sheffield-based engineering firm Edward 
Pryor & Son, said sterling's strength was forcing firms in his area to shed 
labour. The EEF forecasts 60,000 further job-losses in manfacturing next year 
after a net loss of 160,000 in 1999.

But Mr Tissiman, president of the EEF's Sheffield association, said a further 
squeeze was being imposed by cheap imports from the Far East, India and Turkey.

Manufacturers of finished products like cars and trucks were now demanding 
price cuts of between 20 and 30% to match Turkish prices for basic metals.

"These are not companies that are dead beat and worn out. 

"They are good and sound, but because it's a global market we have to make it 
a better economic environment for them to survive," Mr Temple said.

Admitting that it was unrealistic to expect any reduction in borrowing costs, 
he called for a long period of stability in interest rates. "We are not against 
holding inflation down, but on its own it's a very dangerous thing to run the 
economy on this one instrument."

The EEF said the tougher climate in the north was evident with the north-east, 
north-west, Yorkshire and Humberside and east midlands the only ones reporting 
further falls in orders.

These areas are also substantially cutting back on investment plans while 
several - excluding the north-east - are also shedding more labour than other 
regions.

A ray of hope for firms still crippled by an effective sterling exchange rate 
of three German marks is that the EEF expects the euro to strengthen next year 
as economic growth improves in mainland Europe.
 