
To coincide with the US launch of Windows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10> mobile, we’re excited to 
announce that the Guardian app is now available across phones, tablets, 
laptops, and desktops running Microsoft’s latest operating system.

World-class design

Like our other award-winning apps, the Guardian on Windows 10 inherits our 
unique design and layouts. These quickly convey the news agenda, and make our 
articles, comment pieces, and features easy to browse and discover. They also 
communicate the tone and type of content you’ll find. In addition, story, 
live-blog, video, gallery, and interactive pages are all designed to work 
gracefully no matter what size of screen you choose to read us on. This 
includes, for the first time for our apps, new templates for screens larger 
than 10 inches.

Read anywhere

Because we know that people use mobiles in all kinds of places where network 
coverage is poor, the app is built to download every article on the homepage as 
soon as you open it. So all you need is a few seconds of good coverage on your 
way to the underground in the morning to get a good hour’s worth of journalism 
to read and enjoy.

Windows 10 exclusives

In addition, the new Guardian app takes advantage of exclusive Windows 10 
features. So you can see the latest headlines directly from your homescreen 
using our live tile, and even ask Cortana to open the app directly to your 
favourite section or topic.

Much more to come

The team here, and at our Windows 10 development partners Sonic Trio, have 
worked tirelessly to bring the best possible reading experience to Windows 10, 
but we’re not stopping there. Over the next few months we’ll introduce features 
that enhance and deepen your enjoyment of the app. These include breaking news 
alerts, reading and contributing comments, personalising your homepage, 
following favourite blogs, football (soccer) teams, and contributors, and 
crosswords. So make sure you’re regularly updating your apps, and watch this 
space.

You can download the Guardian from the Windows Store  
<https://www.microsoft.com/store/apps/9wzdncrfj2pr>now.

As ever, if you have any questions please use the comments section below, or 
tweet us at @guardianmobile
 