
Inadequate investigations are regularly being carried out into the 
circumstances surrounding the births of stillborn babies, children who die at 
less than a week old and those who suffer brain injuries during labour, 
according to government-funded research.

The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG)found that reviews 
into such cases often excluded parents – in a quarter of cases they did not 
even know an investigation was taking place – and impartial experts.

The Each Baby Counts study revealed that 27% of investigations – known as 
local reviews – were of poor quality and of those that passed initial quality 
checks, 39% contained no actions to improve care or made recommendations solely 
focused on individual actions, rather than systematic failings.

The college, whose study was part-funded by the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, has set a target of halving the 
number of stillbirths, neonatal deaths and severe brain injuries during term 
labour (37 weeks or beyond) by 2020. But it warned that failings in 
investigations could impede progress.

Prof Alan Cameron, RCOG vice president for clinical quality and co-principal 
investigator for Each Baby Counts, said: “When the outcome for parents is the 
devastating loss of a baby, or a baby born with a severe brain injury, there 
can be little justification for the poor quality of reviews found in a quarter 
of cases.

“Only by ensuring that local investigations are conducted thoroughly with 
parental and external input, can we identify where systems need to be improved. 
Once every baby affected has their care reviewed robustly we can begin to 
understand the causes of these tragedies.”

There were 654 severe brain injuries, 147 neonatal deaths and 119 stillbirths 
during term labour reported to Each Baby Counts in 2015. Of 610 reports 
completed, 599 have had a local investigation of some kind. More than half of 
those were found to be inadequate.

 Meanwhile, just less tgab half (47%) of parents were made aware that an 
investigation was taking place and were informed of its outcomes, but parents 
were invited to contribute in only 28% of cases.

Nicky Lyon, parent representative on the Each Baby Counts advisory group and 
co-founder of the Campaign for Safer Births, had first-hand experience of being 
excluded from the investigation process when her son Harry, who died aged 18 
months, suffered brain damage during labour.

“In the days following Harry’s birth we asked what had gone wrong, but we were 
ignored,” she said. “It was only after submitting a formal complaint that we 
learned that an investigation was already under way. It’s hard to describe how 
upset, confused and angry we were – the poor communication and secrecy made a 
terrible situation so much worse.

“Patients and their families should always be at the heart of a review … being 
included in the process would have made such a difference to our family.”

Each Baby Counts said that parents should always be told that a review is 
taking place and be invited to participate. It also said external experts 
should be employed – they were used by only 7% of local review panels – and 
there should be standardisation of reporting.

Health minister Ben Gummer said: “These findings are unacceptable. We expect 
theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> to review and learn from every 
tragic case which is why we are investing in a new system to support staff to 
do this and help ensure far fewer families have to go through this heartache.”
 