
On Saturday, Gennady Gennadyevich Golovkin (34-0, 31 KOs), the best 
middleweight boxer in the world and holder of the WBA, IBF, IBO titles and WBC 
interim belt, will take on unheralded challenger Dominic Wade. In the 
co-feature, flyweight Roman Gonzalez (44-0, 38 KOs), considered by many the 
world’s pound-for-pound best, will defend his WBC crown against Puerto Rican 
McWilliams Arroyo.

Golovkin and Gonzalez are exciting and technically gifted knockout artists, 
who continue to sell out arenas – the Forum is expected to draw 16,000 
attendees – and the fight card will air on HBO.

Carl Frampton to fight Léo Santa Cruz for WBA featherweight title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/22/carl-frampton-leo-santa-cruz-web-featherweight>
While these two elite fighters should be in the sport’s vanguard, they 
continue to struggle to break out of boxing’s insular world and reach the 
status afforded their sublime skills. In one of the many quirks in a sport that 
endlessly frustrates its fans, and makes little sense to casual observers, the 
most dangerous fighters often have the most difficult time finding worthy 
opponents, meaning that the best are rarely fighting the best because of a 
myriad of competing promotional concerns. In boxing, these kind of calculated 
delays can go on for years as fighters allow their most competitive opponents 
to become shop worn. (In soccer, it would be the equivalent of only agreeing to 
play against Lionel Messi and his current cohorts at Barcelona when they are in 
their late 30s.) Floyd Mayweather Jr used this strategy to make hundreds of 
millions of dollars while concurrently disillusioning millions of sports fans.

Of Saturday’s two headliners, Gonzalez, who is known by Chocolatito, seems to 
be in a slightly more competitive fight against Arroyo, who is best known for a 
solid amateur career. He was a 2008 Olympian and won a gold medal at the Pan-Am 
Games. But Arroyo hasn’t fought for more than a year, and will be in with maybe 
the best fighter on the planet regardless of weight. Gonzalez is probably the 
most anonymous elite athlete in the world. HBO has, yes, given him some air 
time, and this is the second time he has been coupled with Golovkin on a card 
to join forces and expose both men to a wider audience. And, yes, fighters 
below lightweight are often ignored by the public. Gonzalez of Nicaragua will 
probably never receive much recognition. (Manny Pacquiao, for example, made his 
professional debut at 106lbs but climbed several weight classes because larger 
purses and prestige are in the heavier division.)

Golovkin, a baby-faced middleweight, has become a cult favorite, which has 
landed him an appearance on an Apple Watch commercial and a multi-year 
endorsement deal with Nike’s Jordan Brand. But the Kazakh has found it 
difficult to land a signature fight. Most observers believe that Saturday’s 
bout is yet another walkover. It is a testament to GGG’s popularity in his 
adopted hometown that ticket sales have been so brisk: people want to witness 
his 22nd straight knockout. He has the aura of Mike Tyson in his prime: other 
fighters are intimidated by him. To truly test his skills, the boxing world 
wants him to faceCanelo Alvarez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/canelo-alvarez>, 25, the popular Mexican 
fighter who yo-yos between the super welterweight and middleweight classes. 
Since his loss to Mayweather three years ago, Alvarez (46-1) is trying to 
burnish his popularity with a nearly invincible record. He figures the easier 
he rolls through opponents, the longer his career will last, and the easier it 
will be to score big paydays. In May, Alvarez will take on the slighter and 
lighter punching Amir Khan rather than take on Golovkin. GGG is growing 
increasingly frustrated at being ignored, and has called Alvarez “100% a 
businessman” rather than a true sportsman.

(Said Canelo in response during a recent press conference promoting the Khan 
fight: “It’s in my future plans. It’s definitely in my future plans. I want to 
have that fight. I want to give that to the fans. I’m just not sure when.”)

In modern boxing, the top fighters rely on pay-per-view bouts to make millions 
upon millions. Boxing is very popular in Mexico, and as Mexico’s top fighter, 
Alvarez is a greater draw than Golovkin. In October, Golovkin, 34, collected 
less than 150,000 pay-per-view buys for histitle-unification victory over David 
Lemieux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/gennady-golovkin-stops-david-lemieux-in-eighth-to-unify-middleweight-titles>
 at a sold-out Madison Square Garden. In November,Alvarez took on fellow star 
Miguel Cotto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/canelo-alvarez-takes-middleweight-title-after-epic-against-miguel-cotto>
, garnering 900,000 buys, and Alvarez’s 2013 loss to Mayweather was the 
third-most lucrative bout in the sport’s history. Canelo’s numbers put him in 
the more powerful negotiating position.

Gennady Golovkin now has golden opportunity to become one of the best | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/18/boxing-gennady-golovkin-willie-monroe-jr-floyd-mayweather-middleweight-wba-kevin-mitchell>
Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones has expressed interest in hosting a fall 
super-fight between Golovkin and Alvarez in Cowboys Stadium.Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> fans crave the matchup, and it has 
the potential to bring casual sports fans, many of whom swore off the sport 
after the Mayweather-Pacquiao debacle, back into the sport. Both fighters are 
known for their knockouts.

But Alvarez and his team have appeared lukewarm about the fight, hinting that 
Canelo is not a true middleweight. The claim is dubious. In his last seven 
fights, Alvarez has fought as a superwelterweight (154lb limit) or a 
middleweight (160lb limit). He is taking on Khan at a catchweight of 155lbs. If 
negotiations do occur, the Mexican’s team will probably force Triple G to come 
down to a much lower catchweight to debilitate him.

Alvarez versus Golovkin would be good for the sport. Every few years there is 
talk of the “death of boxing”, but in reality the sport has always gone through 
ebbs and flows of popularity. It is clearly at a low point right now. Since 
Mayweather-Pacquiao, there has been a trailing off of interest in the sweet 
science. Therecent Pacquiao-Bradley “super-fight” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/10/manny-pacquiao-twice-floors-timothy-bradley-in-unanimous-decision-win>
 generated very little media or popular buzz. And the growing number of 
promotional and network fiefdoms continue to harm the sport. Alvarez versus 
Golovkin might just be smelling salt that boxing needs right now.
 