
Just days after Steven Gerrard made his debut for the LA Galaxy, in front of a 
packed StubHub Center crowd, another British midfielder flew into the US – 
although there was no such fanfare to greet him upon arrival at Houston. John 
McGinn hardly carries the repute or sparkle of someone like Gerrard, but the 
Dynamo see the 20-year-old Scot as a significant coup of their own – and 
rightly so.

McGinn is one the brightest young Scottish talents right now, as captain of 
the country’s under-21 team with 87 top-flight appearances forSt Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> to his name before he’s even 
old enough to buy a Lone Star beer. But he is now out of contract and actively 
searching for a new club, with Hearts, Hibs and a number of English teams 
reported to be interested – although it is Dundee United who are believed to 
hold the most competition for Dynamo. Even Celtic – dominant giants of the 
Scottish game – have previously been linked with a move for the midfielder.

Yet McGinn is looking further afield, and spent last week training with the 
Houston Dynamo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/houstondynamo> as talks 
continued between the player and the MLS side. Fans might not be overly 
familiar with a player who has only made an impression within Scotland, but 
McGinn would represent an exciting capture for a team that hasn’t always been 
the most inspiring in the transfer market.

“John’s a terrific young player,” Houston boss Owen Coyle told MLSSoccer.com 
<http://mlssoccer.com/>. “He’s an outstanding young player and he’s one that 
I’d like to have here at Houston Dynamo, that goes without saying.” The 
apparent viability of a move for McGinn has been met with surprise in Scotland, 
with many still of the opinion that MLS is a retirement home. Houston’s move 
for the former St Mirren midfielder could blaze a trail for many who had never 
even considered such a route.

Nonetheless, while the LA Galaxy are splurging $10m a season on contracts for 
Gerrard and Giovani dos Santos, the Houston Dynamo – both owned by the Anschutz 
Entertainment Group (AEG) – are forced to be smarter with their transfer 
movements, looking to slightly more obscure markets for talent. McGinn shows on 
how shrewd scouting could draw the likes of Houston closer to those inMLS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> that can afford the marquee signings 
that come with a Times Square billboard.

It’s not that McGinn is better than Gerrard, Giovani or even Frank Lampard, 
Kaka, David Villa, Andrea Pirlo and the rest. It’s more that he’s a different 
kind of signing – providing MLS with his own degree of quality, but also making 
a statement of its own. The old retirement home saw certainly isn’t applicable 
to McGinn, a fledgling with his pick of several British clubs to choose from. 
Towards the end of last year, St Mirren coach Gary Teale claimed that only 
“ridiculous” would prise him away from the Paisley club. Now he could join 
Houston for nothing, and the should be taken as a small victory for MLS.

What is concerning for Scottish clubs, in the eventuality of McGinn’s move to 
the United States, is that MLS is in a position to poach more of the country’s 
best young talent. Even with someone like McGinn – unattached and out of 
contract – European clubs are required to pay a development fee when signing 
players under the age of 24, with St Mirren set to receive somewhere in the 
region of between £200,000 and £270,000 should their former midfielder sign for 
another team. MLS clubs however, are exempt from these rules, and so St Mirren 
will receive nothing if McGinn decides to join the Houston Dynamo – or any 
other US team, for that matter.

Such is the financial insecurity of Scottish soccer, players are often signed 
up to short-term contracts – leaving the free agent market at the end of each 
season decidedly fluid. That’s where MLS could benefit, holding an advantage 
over British suitors for free agents. McGinn’s move to Houston could set a 
precedent, or at least open up a new avenue for clubs in North America.

Maybe we should rein in such analysis just a little while the move remains in 
the balance. Coyle has gushed about the quality of McGinn – with the player 
also believed to be keen on a move to Houston – but a deal between the two 
parties might be complicated by MLS’s rules on international roster spots.

The Dynamo are thought to have six such places this season, but with all of 
them currently filled McGinn will have to wait until an occupying player is 
traded out, another spot is traded in or until one of Houston’s international 
players is naturalised – and that process can take just as long for a 
professional sportsman as it can for a civilian. “If we’re able to manage a 
couple of those and some movement happened then we would obviously look to do 
something,” confirmed Coyle, referring to Houston’s lack of roster space.

And so McGinn is training with the Dynamo indefinitely until a solution can be 
found. The current circumstance must be a frustrating one for both player and 
club, although the midfielder is probably glad to be back merely training 
having missed the final portion of last season following a freak training 
ground incident, which involved him being spiked with a training pole thrown by 
St Mirren captain, Steven Thompson.

But now fully fit and ready to play, McGinn would provide Houston with a 
degree of guile and invention that they are perhaps lacking. The Scot is 
certainly good enough to hold down a first-team place in Texas – a “fantastic 
young player” in Coyle’s opinion – and would surely become a key player for the 
Dynamo in no time at all. The likes of Gerrard, Lampard, Pirlo et al might be 
off-limits to much of MLS, but that doesn’t mean the rest can’t find their own 
transfer market gems. Big signings aren’t always showered in ticker-tape.
 