
As Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> nears, and 
output slows, you’re always within six feet of a really grumpy person with a 
hangover, and many of us are beginning our annual festive slowdown. Office 
workers aren’t so much phoning it in as wandering away from their desks 
whenever their phones go off.

In my local supermarket yesterday, I spotted one employee riding up and down 
the frozen foods aisle while hanging off the side of a cage on wheels, singing 
“Have a Holly Jolly Christmas” while using a pricing gun as a microphone. Some 
of our colleagues were last spotted at the bar in Wetherspoon’s at 8pm, on the 
day of the work Christmas lunch, telling anyone who would listen that 2017 
might be the year that they got “really into” Pernod.

While the majority of the working population manages to stay fairly 
professional for at least 11 months of the year, a few apply December Rules all 
year round. When you have a “proper” job, there’s always some temptation to 
behave improperly, and the more boundaries we push, the more relaxed we get 
about breaking the rules. No one minds the first time you’re five minutes late 
and panicking breathlessly, so next time it’s 10 minutes, and you stroll in 
clutching a coffee. You take a long, wine-fuelled lunch with your boss – then a 
longer, boozier one when your boss is away on holiday.

Suddenly you’re wondering whether it’s OK to take the Post-its home for 
personal use. Or if you’re Robin Pyke –a former housekeeper 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/20/couple-sacked-housekeeper-let-boyfriend-stay-10m-mansion-drove/>
 – whether you can drive your employer’s Porsche without permission (according 
to its owner, at least), have your boyfriend over and moonlight as a dogsitter 
on company property, in company time.

Pyke successfully sued his employers for unfair dismissal, after a tribunal 
ruled that they didn’t follow the correct procedures in letting him go. Does 
this mean there’s hope for those workers who might already be worried that 
they’ve “gone a bit far” this month? Will we all be able to look the boss in 
the eye on Friday when we wish them a final merry Christmas?

As a former office junior, and a fan of Mad Men, I’ve noticed that those who 
are the most badly behaved at work are usually the ones with the most power, or 
at least, an office with a lock on the door. Slacking off is a privilege to be 
earned. The trick is to know when you’ve been with an organisation long enough 
to start bending the rules – and to work out when you’ve stayed for too long. 
Your shortcuts turn into risks and you have to worry about whether you’re going 
to get yourself sacked, just to stay interested.

Bosses are human beings, and they have the same priorities as the rest of us 
during December. They just want to get through the month with minimal fuss, 
avoid any mention of secret Santa and be able to sit in their chair to rest 
their eyes at 4pm without question or comment. They don’t care what you do as 
long as it doesn’t disturb this routine. Being late the morning after the 
Christmas party probably isn’t an issue. Trying on your Asos deliveries in the 
back boardroom on a very quiet afternoon might be OK. Anything that is going to 
get you hauled up in front of HR, requiring them to go into that boardroom to 
tell you off will interrupt their own quiet, lazy routine and make them furious.

Ultimately it’s all about the difference between winding down for Christmas, 
and winding everyone else up. December marks the end of a long, challenging 
year. If we began it bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, resolving to give 110%, it’s 
only natural to end it feeling burned out, less than bothered and running at 
90% or less. Laziness is forgivable. But if you’re bored, and using the festive 
slowdown to cause chaos, break clearly defined rules and make everything more 
difficult for your colleagues, you should probably start looking for a new job 
in the new year – and not just because you’re on the brink of being fired.

No one can be bothered to rock the boat in December, so your employers will 
probably overlook all but the most serious slip-ups. If you’ve got enough 
creative energy to make them angry, you probably have talents and ambitions 
that could be better fulfilled in a different workplace.
 