 For the first time since he forfeited Labour's deposit in the 1982 
Beaconsfield by-election, the Prime Minister has lost an election. And how! 
Then, the aspiring Tony Blair could claim that it was a safe Tory seat, the 
Falklands War was in full swing, Michael Foot was leader. Yesterday, when the 
members of Unison rejected Blair's chosen candidate, Alun Michael, and voted 
for Rhodri Morgan for the leadership in Wales, the circumstances were of his 
making.
He will claim that the final election is not lost yet, and already he has been 
to Wales three times to campaign for Michael. His influence may weaken Rhodri's 
support among individual party members the block votes of the T& G and the AEEU 
are in the bag. The party-list candidates for the Assembly are being fixed, 
even on a Sunday. An outrageously undemocratic electoral college will make Alun 
Michael Labour's candidate as First Minister ofWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> whatever individual Labour members wish.

 This victory is likely to damage Blair more than a defeat. In the first 
seriously contested election of his premiership, he has emerged as the man 
wheeling the block vote, dealing with the Tafia, to impose his will.

 Suddenly, the danger of an independent voice in Cardiff threatened to unravel 
the monopoly essential to the supermarket state. Wales! Who would have thought 
that the lachrymose, linguistically divided, one-party Principality should turn 
into the cutting edge of resistance to the Empire State? They are trying to 
screw Wales down, most of all because of Scotland, where they fear the real 
danger of the nationalists. Not so much in the coming May election, although 
that too perhaps.

The question that concerns them most is what happens after May 1999, when they 
have to run a more devolved UK, even assuming Donald Dewar wins. The plan is to 
establish a joint Ministerial Committee that works out of Number 10 to draft 
concordats to establish common UK-wide policies and to ensure that civil 
service appointments in Scotland and Wales are made in London, not Edinburgh or 
Cardiff. With a pliant Michael on board, Dewar can be locked in. But Morgan has 
the spirit to raise objections whereupon Dewar might find it impossible to side 
with London and Whitehall might find itself outnumbered.

 And Downing Street is preparing a second line of defence. The Good Friday 
Agreement provided for a Council of the Isles to reassure the Unionists that 
there would be a British framework larger than the north-south relationship. 
This will bring together the First Ministers of the UK, Ireland and the Isle of 
Man. The prospect of Morgan dealing with Blair as an equal was too humiliating 
to contemplate. This week, ahead of the Unison outcome of which it was 
forewarned, the Government announced that Richard Caborn would be First 
Minister of England. Perhaps you missed this or thought it a misprint. A man 
not even in the Cabinet is now the protocol equivalent of the First Ministers 
of Scotland and Wales... the British voter is supposed to be reassured that 
devolution is of no real importance.

By spurning popular support in Wales, by turning his back on a people who were 
all too willing to be grateful,Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> has done more than lose his 
first election since 1982. He has ensured that there will be other defeats to 
come.
 