
Exciting Sydney AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> youngster Isaac 
Heeney will urge Swans coach John Longmire to give him more time in the 
midfield after committing to a five-year contract extension with the Swans.

Heeney, 20, who is now tied to Sydney until the end of 2022, played most of 
his first two seasons as a small forward, but was given time in his favoured 
midfield area towards the end of 2016, which whet his appetite for an extended 
role in the middle in 2017. He joins Luke Parker, Dan Hannebery and Sam Reid as 
players in recent years who have re-committed to the club for such a lengthy 
period.

Sam Mitchell and Trent Cotchin presented with Brownlow medals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sam-mitchell-and-trent-cotchin-presented-with-brownlow-medals>
“I’m out there running my butt off just to push and get that fitness under my 
belt to be able to run out a game in the midfield, so I’ll be in Horse’s (Swans 
coach John Longmire’s) ear constantly just saying ’get me in there’,’” Heeney 
said. “But whatever he chooses to do, I’m happy with.”

Heeney was outstanding when given time in midfield towards the end of 2016. “I 
feel most comfortable in midfield and if I can slip in to that next year that’s 
definitely what I’ll be aiming for,” Henney said. “Growing up I was always a 
midfielder so ultimately I would love to get there.”

A NSW product from Newcastle and the Swans academy, Heeney is now tied to the 
club until 2022 and said he would definitely like a leadership role down the 
track. He never contemplated playing for another club and wants to stay a Swan 
for life.

“I love this place and I’d never want to leave it,” Heeney said. “I think 
every player wants to be that one club player and if I I could do that I would 
love to be. To be offered a contract like this is obviously pretty special and 
I wouldn’t have expected it, not at all.”

Heeney predicted a bright future for Sydney who were beaten grand finalists in 
2014 and 2016, but have made the finals for the last seven seasons and 13 of 
the past 14.

“We’re of that belief going in to next year that hopefully we can go one step 
further,” Heeney said. “The success they’ve had over the past 10, 15 years, has 
been up there with the best and I can’t see that slipping in any way. I think 
the young group that we’ve got coming through can really push and make us 
hopefully get that elusive premiership.”

Heeney was happy to get his deal done early and avoid potential distractions. 
“There’s always a little bit of speculation there and you just over-think 
things I think, so to get that under the belt and a bit of security there 
definitely eases me up a bit,” he said. Sydney also announced on Friday that 
former AFL commissioner Sam Mostyn would join their board, replacing retiring 
director Andrew McMaster.
 