
The way Leicester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> 
rounded off the greatest year in their history augurs well for 2017. The 
champions will not retain their title, but this timely reassertion of the 
virtues that earned them their proudest honour at least suggested they are 
primed to avoid an undignified descent into the relegation zone. Not that 
Claudio Ranieri is making any bold declarations in that regard: he counts 
points, not chickens, but he acknowledged that this tenacious performance was a 
step in the right direction.

“It has been an amazing, unforgettable year and 2016 will remain in our hearts 
and minds,” he said. “But it was important to win here and see our fans 
supporting us and our players fighting together.”

Ranieri had similar thoughts three weeks ago after the rousing victory over 
Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/leicester-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 but his team did not sustain their form after that, which is why it remained 
their only victory in nine league matches before this one. That run had left 
Ranieri facing accusations that his persistence with the 4-4-2 system that 
served his side so well last season amounted to trying to make cake from stale 
bread. He concocted a new formation for this match and it worked a treat. But 
an even bigger factor than the switch to 4-2-3-1 was the attitude of the 
players. They played with the zest and resilience that had made them kings.

Willian double sinks brave Stoke and extends Chelsea run to 13 straight wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
No Leicester player stood out because all played well. Islam Slimani scored 
the winning goal but the display of his Algerian compatriot Riyad Mahrez was 
equally notable given that the latter’s performances had fallen so far below 
the level that earned him thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> player of the year crown 
last season that he had been dropped for the last home match. Although he did 
not quite reach the heights of last term, he responded in the way Ranieri had 
hoped. Deployed just behind Slimani, Mahrez gave flickers of his brilliance, 
justifying the decision to assign him a central role rather than a wide berth.

“It was important to change something because now all the world is waiting for 
Riyad on the left or right to come inside, we have to improve how we find him 
between the lines,” Ranieri said.

It took 63 seconds for Mahrez to show he was on song, but Darren Randolph 
prevented him opening the scoring by tipping his half-volley just over the bar.

West Ham could not match Leicester’s early intensity and slickness. Marc 
Albrighton and Demarai Gray were excellent out wide, ensuring a regular supply 
of threatening crosses. Slimani met one from Albrighton in the fourth minute 
but the striker’s header rebounded out off the post.

A similar move in the 20th minute produced the breakthrough. Quick thinking 
and passing by Danny Simpson and Danny Drinkwater launched the attack before 
Albrighton delivered another delicious cross from the right and Slimani headed 
powerfully into the net after peeling away from Winston Reid.

“They deserved the goal, it was a combination of their aggression and our 
sloppiness,” said Slaven Bilic.

Hal Robson-Kanu’s touch of class fires West Brom past Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/southampton-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
West Ham soon got up to speed with their hosts. They provoked havoc in the 
home penalty area only to be thwarted by defenders who had rediscovered their 
sharpness, as shown by the number of timely blocks on shots. Even so, Leicester 
were lucky in the 41st minute when Michail Antonio’s shot cannoned out off the 
crossbar. The chance had been created by Aaron Cresswell, whose raids down the 
left were becoming a nuisance. They were not the only source of bother for 
Leicester – Simpson and Daniel Amartey had thrown themselves in front of shots 
by Antonio and André Ayew just before that and Kasper Schmeichel had made a 
fine close-range save to foil Dimitri Payet.

A free-kick by Payet forced Schmeichel into another save just before 
half-time. Randolph then had to make an even better stop from a free-kick by 
Mahrez.

West Ham exerted strong pressure in the second half. Schmeichel made a 
high-class save on the hour to paw away a shot by Cresswell after it took a 
treacherous deflection off Ben Chilwell.

With the visitors on top, Ranieri replaced Mahrez with Christian Fuchs in an 
attempt to reinforce his team’s solidity. It worked. For the last stages of a 
helter-skelter contest that was generally clean despite being strewn with eight 
yellow cards, West Ham were for the most part kept away from Leicester’s goal.

Andy Carroll’s header into the side netting was the closest they came to an 
equaliser thereafter. Leicester, indeed, ended the game on the attack and 
Carroll’s last significant touch was a block that prevented Chilwell from 
making it 2-0.
 