
Do US soccer leagues need their own Super Bowl, a week-long festival of the 
sport at a neutral site? Or should they reward the best regular-season team 
with home-field advantage for the final game?

Didier Drogba fined but not suspended for Montreal Impact tantrum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/didier-drogba-fined-not-suspended-montreal>
Why not both?

US leagues have long mimicked the big fish in the American pro sports pond, 
the NFL, by holding play-offs concluding with a neutral-site final. The NASL of 
the 1970s and 1980s even imitated the NFL’s name, putting Pele, Franz 
Beckenbauer, Rodney Marsh and company in the “Soccer Bowl”.

MLS changed that in 2012, moving the final to the home field of the highest 
remaining seed. The relaunched NASL also plays the new Soccer Bowl (technically 
the name for the trophy and not the game, as of 2014) at a home field. TheNWSL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nwsl-national-womens-soccer-league> has 
gone the other direction, playing the last two finals at a neutral site.

The neutral site has plenty of advantages. A league can plan out several days 
of festivities and meetings, bringing supporters, players, sponsors and 
executives together in one place without scrambling for last-minute plane 
tickets and hotel accommodations. Neutral-siteMLS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> Cups had a colorful convention 
atmosphere through the weekend, with events everywhere from swanky clubs to 
hotel conference rooms. Even in the NWSL, with its more modest resources, fans 
and reporters converged on Houston this month to see a thrilling final and chat 
about the sport.

Purists, though, want to reward regular-season performance. If home-field 
advantage is on the line, those last few games in October will mean much more. 
It’s especially rewarding for supporters, who can see their club compete for a 
championship without traveling. Clubs with a strong base of season-ticket 
holders will have no trouble filling their home grounds, even on short notice.

If only soccer had some long-standing way of setting knockout competitions 
with two games rather than one. Perhaps we could call it a “two-leg aggregate 
series”. Oh, right. Soccer does indeed use such a format, in all sorts of 
competitions all over the world. But in this case, leagues can give it a twist.

The two-leg format is meant to minimize home-field advantage, making each team 
play on each other’s home ground, whether it’s Barnsley v Fleetwood Town in the 
Football League Trophy semi-finals or Jordan battling Uruguay for a spot in the 
World Cup.

To give the higher seed an advantage, give that team the first game of a 
two-leg final. The club gets a hot-selling home game, and the players get all 
the other advantages of playing on familiar turf. But instead of giving the 
second leg to the other finalist, hold that at a neutral site.

The lower-seeded finalist may disagree, but the format is a win-win. The 
league can advertise the time and place for its biggest game months in advance, 
plotting out events for sponsors and supporters to enjoy. And yet the 
higher-seeded team gets a just reward for winning that last game in October.

Other US sports <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/us-sport> don’t need to 
tinker with their play-offs. In the NFL, the conference champions play few 
teams in common through the unbalanced regular season, and there’s no reason to 
give one team a home-field advantage. The seven-game series in baseball, 
basketball and hockey are perfectly fair – though baseball could and should 
drop the insistence that the league that wins the All-Star Game, where the 
prime directive is to avoid wearing out pitchers’ arms, gets the home-field 
edge in the World Series. They also have other occasions – the All-Star Game, 
the draft – for which the league can plan several days of festivities.

Soccer is different. MLS has an All-Star Game, but it often shares the stage 
in soccer’s cluttered summer months with a World Cup or other international 
tournaments. MLS and the NWSL hold their drafts at the NSCAA (national soccer 
coaches) convention, a good meeting point for people in the soccer business but 
largely inaccessible to the general public.

And MLS has the perfect stadium situation for a mixed two-leg series. Most 
clubs today play in smaller stadiums whose schedule they control. These grounds 
are perfect for the first leg of a final series. The second leg can be held in 
a larger venue.

Spreading out the final also gives fans more time to make travel plans to that 
second leg. The game’s crowd can have more fans of the specific teams, not just 
neutral fans who love the sport or the event.

And the two-leg series will give everyone plenty of talking points for the 
second leg. What adjustments will each team make? If the top seed won the first 
leg, can their opponents bounce back? If the lower seed held the top seed in 
the first leg, will that stop the top seed’s momentum?

Maybe the media, still focused on the traditional “Big Four” sports, will take 
notice for a change.
 