
Jürgen Klopp has warned Augsburg pose a serious threat to Liverpool’s Europa 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> ambitions as 
the German club are prepared for “the biggest game in their history”.

The last 32, first leg tie on Thursday marks Klopp’s first competitive 
appearance back on German soil since leaving Borussia Dortmund last summer. 
Unsurprisingly, theLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
manager is the centre of attention in Bavaria, where theFuggerstadter have 
struggled in the Bundesliga since qualifying for Europe via a fifth-placed 
finish last season.

‘Giving it bifters’ in German? Augsburg offer translation tips to Liverpool 
fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/giving-it-bifters-german-augsburg-scouse-translation-liverpool-fans>
Markus Weinzierl’s side are only one point above the relegation zone following 
Sunday’s home defeat by Bayern Munich and have lost key players such as 
midfielder Daniel Baier to injury. But Klopp has noted Weinzierl’s comments on 
the importance of Liverpool’s visit, with the coach describing the Anfield club 
as “a cult” who can elevateAugsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> onto the international stage, 
and believes their domestic problems will be easily forgotten on Thursday.

“I was here for 47 years. It’s no problem, I know this country,” said the 
Liverpool manager on his return to Germany. “It is more special for other 
people because there are not too many German managers working in foreign 
countries. Most of my colleagues are working in Germany so if a German manager 
works somewhere else and comes back, yes it is possible to be a more 
interesting story but, for us and for me especially, it is a Europa League game.

“From the first moment I’ve said this is a very important tournament for me. 
It is not too easy, Bundesliga clubs are never easy to play and especially a 
club like Augsburg who are a special story in Germany. It is a similar story to 
my former club, Mainz, with a little bit more history than Mainz had. One of 
the most famous German footballers played here – Bernd Schuster – but it took 
them a long time to come back to the Bundesliga and now they are there with a 
really good manager, Markus Weinzierl, who is one of the highest-rated managers 
in Germany at this moment. A lot of clubs are thinking about him. They are 
having a few problems this season – 21 points, only one point above the 
relegation line – but they came through their group with a spectacular last 
game: last game, last second, last goal against Partizan Belgrade.

“I know a lot about Augsburg and that makes the preparation easier but that is 
all. In the end, they will fight for everything. They have said it is the 
biggest game in their history. If it is the biggest game in their history you 
can imagine how ready they are for this game. You could say the Europa League 
is not the best competition for them at this moment when they are fighting in 
the Bundesliga but they are really confident and they want to go to the next 
round.”

Klopp faced Augsburg 10 times with Mainz and Dortmund, winning five, drawing 
three and losing twice, and insists Liverpool’s opponents will not find extra 
motivation from his presence in the technical area.

“I have never had a problem with their players or something like this,” he 
said. “But it is a special situation. For a club like Augsburg this competition 
is the biggest money they can get in Europe because the Champions League is far 
away – they have not a real chance – so these clubs want to go for the Europa 
League and no one would ever ask them: ‘Don’t you think it’s better to go out 
of European football and concentrate on the league?’ Maybe in this case when 
you have 21 points and are in a difficult situation but you will not see this 
in the game. They will fight for their life, for sure, because for them it is 
an absolute highlight.”

The Liverpool manager added: “They usually play build up, they like to play 
football. They have a good mixture of experience and young players and made 
some really good transfers. They have players with big potential and have one 
of the most physical strikers in Europe in Raúl Bobadilla. You need a 
navigation system to drive around him.”
 