
James DeGale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> will have to wait 
until next year to get a world title shot at Carl Froch but he is convinced he 
has the tools to dethrone the WBA and IBF super-middleweight champion. They all 
say that, of course, but DeGale showed enough power and slickness in stopping 
the unbeaten American Brandon Gonzales in four rounds at Wembley to suggest he 
deserves the opportunity to make his case.

DeGale is now the mandatory challenger for Froch’s IBF belt but, if Froch 
decides to vacate and fight the former WBC middleweight champion Julio César 
Chávez Jr in Las Vegas, DeGale could yet be manoeuvred into an IBF world title 
fight against either his old foe George Groves or Mikkel Kessler. And the 
likable 28-year-old will be hugely encouraged that his promoter, Eddie Hearn, 
has promised a world title next – with the possibility of a mega-fight against 
Froch next year.

“That’s the one I want,” said DeGale. “I always said that I am all wrong for 
Froch. I have huge respect for him, but when we fight I am very confident in 
beating him.”

Recently he told the Guardian exactly why in brusque, bullet-point style: 
“He’s slow. Technically his feet are all over the place. His chin is up in the 
air. He holds his hands down.”

Whatever happens next, DeGale has plenty of options and opportunities 
–something that didn’t seem the case when he considered quitting last year. “I 
have been boxing injured since I won the European title [in October 2011],” 
DeGale said on Saturday night. “I had a problem with a knee. I had something 
called Gilmore’s groin. For two and a half years I have been getting through 
fights and being paid, if I am being brutally honest.

“The last couple of fights boxing on [Channel] Five I was rubbish. I was just 
getting through them. But now I’m injury-free and fighting at Wembley Stadium, 
not shopping centres. These big stages are what I am made for.”

Three of DeGale’s previous six contests had been at Bluewater shopping centre 
in Kent, not far from the Dartford tunnel. There was a sense his career was 
stuck in a traffic jam. But at Wembley Stadium, he had his mojo back.

Would the punch that hurt Groves have floored him? “Listen, if anyone hits you 
on the chin you are probably going to get hurt,” he said. “But I wouldn’t be in 
the position to be hit with one of the swinging right hands.”

DeGale’s trainer, Jim McDonnell, also believes he has the tools to give Froch 
all the trouble in the world. “Boxing is all about styles,” he said. “Froch has 
a chin, an engine, and he’s a true soldier but James has amazing talent. George 
Groves is fast but James is faster. His hand speed is amazing and he has such a 
fast jab. He could dominate fights just with his jab.”

McDonnell added: “People don’t realise he can punch too, but I have seen what 
he has done with good fighters in the gym. He’s not like some fighters who can 
only do in for five to six rounds. He spars 15 rounds. He is there for the full 
journey. He’s the real ticket.”

DeGale has a lot of knockers but his CV remains impressive: British champion 
in his ninth fight; European champion in his 12th fight; and only a solitary 
blemish on his record – to Groves, who fiddled and flicked his way to a highly 
contentious majority points verdict.

On Saturday night, when he was asked whether he would take on Groves again 
immediately, he shook his head. “I don’t need him,” he said. “I’m moving on 
with my career. He had his chance of a rematch and he didn’t take it. Now is my 
time.”

But asked whether it could happen in the future, DeGale’s stance softened and 
he offered a few words of solace for his bitter enemy. “I think so with our 
rivalry,” he said. “Let’s be real, he’s a good fighter. He’ll come back and he 
will win a world title.”
 