
James DeGale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> made history by 
claiming the vacant IBF super-middleweight title with a thrilling unanimous 
decision over Andre Dirrell in Boston.

The Londoner has become the first Briton to win Olympic gold and a world crown 
in the professional ranks after withstanding a fierce comeback from his 
American opponent.

It was a thrilling victory for the 29-year-old, who claims he is now second 
only to the unbeaten Andre Ward in the super-middleweight division. After 
improving his record to 21-1, with 14 knockouts, DeGale said on Sky Sports 1: 
“I’ve finally done it. It’s an unbelievable feeling, I’m world champ. I made 
history. I will take on any super-middleweight in the world. I’m hard to beat 
when I’m at my best.

James DeGale beats Andre Dirrell for IBF super middleweight title – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/23/james-degale-v-andre-dirrell-ibf-super-middleweight-championship-live>
“Dirrell is a very good opponent. He’s very talented. He’s hard to beat. If 
anything it’s me and him second and third in the rankings. Andre Ward’s there 
and there’s me and him.”

DeGale went on the attack in the first round and one of his flurries opened up 
a cut on Dirrell’s forehead. Dirrell landed a hard shot in the second and 
looked to be controlling the round until DeGale landed a brutal left to the 
chin that had the 31-year-old on the canvas. Dirrell beat the count, but was 
clearly shaken, and he was on the floor seconds later as DeGale went in for the 
kill.

However, the American survived the round and spent much of the next two trying 
to avoid DeGale’s left hand, although he was left hanging on again late in the 
third after one found its mark. Dirrell had some success when he switched from 
southpaw to an orthodox stance in the fourth and fifth rounds but received more 
heavy shots and another cut was opened below his left eye.

In the seventh, DeGale started to slow and Dirrell started to land some 
effective combinations of his own and knocked the tiring Briton back on his 
heels with a solid straight right.

But DeGale, Olympic middleweight champion in 2008, found a second wind in the 
11th and finished strongly in the 12th, doing enough to convince the ringside 
judges.
 