
Frank Warren has been three decades in the business and claims James DeGale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> may be his best fighter yet. 
This is the startling verdict of the promoter who nurtured Prince Naseem Hamed 
and Amir Khan, among others, after DeGale won the British super-middleweight 
title in just his ninth professional fight. Warren does not rule out DeGale 
fighting for a world title by the close of the year.

That may be too soon even for the prodigious DeGale, but witnesses to the 
lesson he handed Paul Smith in front of the champion's home crowd on Saturday 
evening understand that the 24-year-old has something special.

DeGale stopped Smith in the ninth round, the referee Howard Foster finally 
deciding the blur of fists had become a downpour that needed halting for the 
Liverpool fighter's sake.

It meant DeGale had followed Olympic middleweight gold in Beijing two years 
ago with the British title. Naseem required 12 fights to land his first belt 
(the European bantamweight title), while Khan took 13 bouts (Commonwealth 
lightweight title). Even the great Joe Calzaghe claimed the same belt as DeGale 
now holds in his 14th visit to the ring.

Warren said: "How good is he? At this stage in his career, I don't want to 
fill his head but he's probably in front of any fighter I've signed. Even Naz 
[Naseem].

"It's because of two things: the occasion – the amount of people who were 
here, they are all pro-Paul [Smith], to come in the other guy's backyard and 
keep that temperament and control the fight from the first bell, which is what 
he did. Paul never got into it and maybe he never let him get into it. But the 
point is James is just an amazing talent and I can't think of anybody who's 
done that.

"This has always been our premier division – super-middleweights are 
what Britain is known for, we've got great pedigree for that. It was a 
phenomenal performance."

DeGale said: "It was tough but I [said] it was going to be a pretty easy fight 
and I just felt comfortable all the way through. I had a great camp, I was 
super-fit, I could have done 15 rounds tonight."

The Londoner should next be in action by late February or early March. Who 
might his opponent be? "I don't know," said DeGale. I'm going to have to speak 
to Frank over the next couple of days and my coach [Jim McDonnell] and whatever 
they put in front of me I'll just do it. Domestically I feel I'm strides in 
front of everyone. I'd like to win the British belt outright. But we'll have to 
see."

George Groves, DeGale's great rival from his amateur days, is the mandatory 
challenger for the title now. Will Groves take the fight? "I hope he does. He's 
got heart and a bit of bottle so hopefully it'll come about early part of next 
year," DeGale said. "But I would trigger him to pieces, it wouldn't last four 
rounds and deep in his heart he knows that as well."

Warren believes Groves, 22, may be reluctant to share a ring with the new 
champion. "If I was handling George Groves I wouldn't go for the fight. Styles 
make fights and George Groves's style and James's style: there's only one 
winner. From our side it'll happen, we tried to make it last time, it's the 
fight we want to do."

DeGale may be correct when he says he is already too good for any domestic 
challenge. Maybe this is why Warren, when asked if a world title fight by the 
end of next year was possible, replied: "I'd say with my sensible head, 'no'. 
But you know what he's capable of. He's a precocious and special talent."
 