
James DeGale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamesdegale> does not need 
reminding what a crazy business boxing can be. He has only to turn on one of 
his social media gadgets or open the sports pages of any newspaper to see the 
fighter he despises more than any other, George Groves, revelling in the 
attention roused by his upcoming world-title rematch with Carl Froch, and his 
normally calm demeanour is disturbed.

Groves-Froch in front of up to 80,000 fans on 31 May is the British fight of 
the year – at least until Amir Khan lands a shot at Floyd Mayweather Jr earlier 
that month or later in the summer (a bonanza some way from sealed). DeGale, who 
lost his British title in 2011 in a disputed points verdict to Groves, his 
former Dale ABC gym rival, thinks he will be "too fast, too young, too fresh" 
for the champion, but it is not a forecast offered with any enthusiasm.

"You know what," he says, unwrapping the gauze on his hands after a light 
workout at the Harlesden gym a short walk from where he has lived all his life, 
"I feel like I'm not in a position yet to talk about Carl Froch and the winner, 
and whatever. I've been winning but I haven't been putting on good 
performances. So it ain't my time to run my mouth yet. But, as soon as I'm 
boxing well – which I will be from now – then you'll see me start calling these 
people out and start sayin' how it is. There's no point yet. People will say, 
'Ah, DeGale ain't done nothin'. Who's he think he is?'"

At which point Chunky [the name that has stuck with him since his fast-food 
teenage years] can't help himself: "Listen, Groves ain't done nothin'. Who's he 
fought? What's he done? All he's done is put a good show on against an old, 
rubbish champion. Froch was technically horrendous. In his last fight against 
Groves he was bad, falling over his own feet, his hands down. He's terribly 
slow – and that's not me bad-mouthin' him."

Well, it is. But DeGale is rarely anything but candid.

Since he edged Groves out of the Great Britain team that went to the Beijing 
Olympics DeGale has gone his own way. After splitting with the promoter Frank 
Warren he has put his trust in Mick Hennessy to deliver him a world title shot. 
It has not been easy but he is finally within a routine win of an eliminator 
with Badou Jack, the Swede boxing out of Mayweather's thriving Las Vegas gym. 
If he wins that fight, he will be the mandatory challenger for the WBC 
super-middleweight champion, Sakio Bika. Until then he can only watch and 
wonder what has happened to his professional career since his finest night, six 
years ago in Beijing, when he turned back the wild, chest-biting challenge of 
the Cuban Emilio Correa to win an Olympic gold medal.

And, if the paid progress of Groves were not enough to wind him up, DeGale 
could ponder on this quirky coincidence: the night he has his 19th professional 
fight, against Gevorg Khatchikian, a Dutchman of moderate skill, in Bristol on 
1 March, a fellow gold-medallist from the Beijing Olympics, the Ukrainian 
featherweight genius Vasyl Lomachenko, will challenge Orlando Salido for his 
world title in Texas – in only his second paid bout.

"Hopefully Mick wins the purse bid [on 14 March] and that fight is over here. 
But, if it ain't, I'll go over there and beat Badou Jack. I'm not fussed. I've 
boxed all around the world. But what I need is a fight where people are going 
to take notice. So that would be a perfect opportunity for me, in Vegas against 
Badou Jack. Put on a good show, America watching, then box for a world title.

"My last couple of fights I've found it hard to get up for them, if I'm being 
brutally honest – like it's hard, boxing at the Glow, in Bluewater [Kent] 
against someone who's ranked 50 in the world, whatever. I ain't had that 
feelin', of big-fight excitement, probably since when I boxed for the European 
title [outpointing the experienced Polish champion Piotr Wilczewski in October, 
2011]. That's a long time ago. I want that excitement, that edge that I had in 
those fights, against Groves and the European title.

"The first couple of years of my career were going fantastic, everything 
running smoothly. I was the next best thing. Obviously there were problems that 
were out of my hands, changing promoters and all different things behind the 
scenes that people don't see. And everything's got a bit quiet.

"This year – and I've said it the past couple of years – 2014 has to be my 
year. It's my sixth year as a professional."

DeGale has had other frustrations, like the recent discovery of long-time 
muscle tears in his lower abdomen that could have wrecked his career.

"I can tell you the honest truth now," DeGale says. "My last five fights I've 
been injured. After my last fight I had an operation [on 7 December].

I had something called Gilmore's Groin [a muscle tear in the lower abdomen, 
first identified by the consultant surgeon Jerry Gilmore in 1980, when he 
operated on the former Tottenham full-back Don McAllister].

"A lot of footballers get it. Years ago they had to retire. I couldn't run or 
twist, turn, couldn't train properly. I've been boxing like this for a couple 
of years but it gradually got worse. I fought, boxed shit, I won. I just got 
through it.

"Then, 10 days after, I went and got it sorted in Harley Street."

He is fit at last but still frustrated.

"All I get on my Twitter is 'Please fight Groves again' and 'Why won't Froch 
take the fight?' and 'Get in the mix…' But it's just so hard to do that. I wish 
it were easy. Mick's got to start pulling his finger out and start getting me 
these fights. I'm on this path and I've got to stay there."
 