
He may be leaving on a jet plane today and we don’t know when he’ll be back 
again, but Aussie star Jamie Soward is convinced he will return to the British 
game later this year. After playing a leading role in London Broncos’ 
ultimately fruitless promotion campaign that ended on Sunday –despite a 46-6 
win over Featherstone <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/rugby-league/37419786> – 
Soward flew home to Sydney, vowing to be back soon.

“I’m off contract and my services are available,” he said. “I’m open to 
offers. I would play in the Championship butSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> is more realistic because of 
the salary. I want to come back and start a family over here with my missus. 
We’re interested in travelling over. It’s exciting times but hard on her not 
knowing what we are doing next.”

Soward will be 32 in pre-season and is no longer the lightning-fast darter 
from dummy half or first receiver he was in his last spell in Super League, 
when he dragged the blundering Broncos to the Challenge Cup semi-final in 2013. 
But his experience and creativity at half back would be a fine acquisition for 
most Super League clubs, as would his kicking, despite being unusually awry on 
Sunday, missing three successive conversion attempts before nailing four in a 
row.
Jamie Soward (@sowwowofficial6) 
Heading home after a great experience with some great blokes. What's next..... 
Well I'm a free agent and hopefully back in England soon.....
 <https://twitter.com/sowwowofficial6/status/780124828493897728> September 25, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/sowwowofficial6/status/780124828493897728> 
“I’ve got a couple more years of footy left in me and anyone who’s watched me 
play the last couple of weeks can see I can still control a team and steer them 
around. That’s been my strength the last couple of years,” said Soward, who 
played nearly 200NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> games for St 
George Illawarra Dragons and Penrith Panthers, earning every representative 
honour available to him other than a Kangaroos cap. Understandably, the stocky 
schemer stood out as London hammered Batley and Featherstone in the Qualifiers 
and showed he was still a Super League talent in the win at Salford.

Soward is among a dozen players leaving London – their replacements apparently 
include Featherstone duo Danny Craven and the returning Michael Channing, plus 
mercurial Maltese halfback Jarrod Sammut – as they rebuild yet again, but he 
intends to be back in England for pre-season in November.

“It’s a shame I couldn’t have stuck around to help London to the next phase 
but they’ve gone in a different direction,” he said after Salford’s win at 
Batley denied London a place in the Million Pound Game on points difference. 
“At the moment there is nothing there. Salary-wise they don’t want to put all 
their eggs in one basket. I’ve enjoyed my time and I’ll move on, have a rest 
and hopefully be back in a couple of months.

“We didn’t achieve what I came over for and that’s disappointing. I knew it 
would be tough, that we would have to beat a Super League side and we did, but 
the points difference did for us. We were not good enough againstHull KR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr> and Huddersfield: the second halves 
of both of those games has cost us.”

Clubcall: Hull Kingston Rovers

Who would have predicted that a pair of drop goal attempts would decide the 
Qualifiers? While Leeds and Leigh were too good for everyone else and Batley 
and Featherstone were out of their depth, the middle of the Middle 8s was 
tremendous. If Terry Campese’s extraordinary drop-goal attempt from just inside 
halfway had gone over rather than hitting the post, Hull KR would be in Super 
League and Huddersfield would be hosting Salford in Saturday’s MPG. Likewise if 
Danny Brough’s effort moments earlier had been ruled out. Jamie Peacock was 
among the Robins players to claim adamantly that it sailed wide, while on TV it 
looked legit. We can only assume Sky boffins are working on a GPS/laser tool to 
prove whether kicks go between the posts or not.

Either scenario would have produced only the third draw in the whole of Super 
League, Super 8s and Qualifiers all season – and all three involved Hull KR! 
One of the others ended up earning Warrington the League Leader’s Shield. An 
equally incredible stat is that Campese has only kicked one drop goal in his 
career, while the winner by fellow half-back Brough was his 44th!


Foreign quota

There were strange goings on in France last week. After Rochdale stunned them 
to lift the League One title, Toulouse Olympique responded by hammering hapless 
York 62-10 last Saturday and will now host Barrow for the second promotion 
place this Saturday. That York only named 12 players and were still allowed to 
play reflects dismally on that disintegrating club, the RFL and the sport in 
general but bravo to their brave dozen.

A couple of hours earlier, Toulouse’s second team were opening Elite 1’s Magic 
Weekend at Catalans Dragons, going down 16-10 to newly-promoted Saint Gaudens 
Bears. Sunday was one-sided with Avignon smashing Palau and champions Limoux 
hammering Carcassonne in the final game. Saturday was tight: Villeneuve beat 
Albi 24-22 and former Cronulla and Catalans star Ben Pomeroy scored four 
minutes into his Lézignan debut as they won 30-26 against Saint-Estève XIII 
Catalan, whose scorers included Ugo Perez, Toulouse-bound Stan Robin and goals 
Joan Guasch, who is in the Spain squad for their World Cup qualifiers.

Bizarrely, so is Lezignan coach and former France international Aurelien 
Cologni, who has also been appointed the new France head coach! Apparently 
Cologni was lined up to come out of retirement to help Spain before getting the 
France gig. Rather than playing against Russia and Ireland, Cologni will be 
preparingLes Chanticleers to face England in Avignon on 22 October.

Goal-line drop-out

A couple of years after being an utter shambles, Cronulla Sharks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cronulla-sharks> are going to their first 
Grand Final since the 1997 Super League shindig and Canberra’s wait continues. 
The Raiders have not reached a Grand Final in the Murdoch era – their last was 
in 1994 – longer than anyone in the competition, other than relative newcomers 
Gold Coast. Everyone else has experienced the down under denouement.

Compare that to the UK, where only five of our Super League dozen (and 
Bradford) have reached the Grand Final since it launched in 1998. No one new 
will be there on 8 October either, but we will have a different name on the 
trophy base if Warrington and Hull win their semi-finals this week. Strangely, 
none of the rest have finished runners-up since their last title triumphs. It 
has been 54 years since Huddersfield were champions, a 48 year wait for 
Wakefield, 40 for Salford, 31 for Hull KR, and 26 since Widnes ruled the land. 
Castleford are still waiting. At least Catalans won the French title regularly 
in the 1980s and 1990s.

Fifth and last

The NRL Finals have proved a far bigger draw than our Super 8s play-offs. The 
final round of NRL games with its combination of dead rubbers and win-or-bust 
thrillers, averaged nearly 18,000 a game. Week one of their finals series 
averaged 28,000. Both of week two’s games were at capacity: 24,000 in 
Townsville and 21,500 in Canberra. Same again on Friday when nearly 36,000 
Sharks fans annexed supposedly neutral Allianz Stadium, and over 28,000 
Melbourne and Canberra fans rocked AAMI Stadium on Saturday. In the three 
rounds of play-offs, the average was 28,000: approximately twice the weekly 
norm.

Meanwhile, our Super 8s are attracting no more fans than regular season games. 
Rounds four, five and six of the Super 8s brought in a total of 100,000 fans: 
an average of just over 8,000, roughly the same as the regular season. Only in 
the final round did we see the type of leap play-offs should bring, with four 
Super League games drawing a total of 50,000.

Gates in rounds six and seven should be considerably higher as most clubs were 
playing their last home games of the season. Over 10,000 gained free entry to 
Leigh Sports Village, where the statue of Leigh legend John Woods was unveiled 
before the promotion party against Batley, and Leeds had another outstanding 
attendance of 14,700 on Thursday for their closer against Leigh. They have 
helped the Qualifiers average around 6,000.

The RFL and the clubs need to get their heads together to address this 
tail-off when the season is climaxing. The surfeit of unhelpful kick-off times 
– Thursday and Friday nights proliferate, and midday on a Saturday hardly 
helps. The first half of Leeds v Leigh didn’t finish until 8.55pm, the game at 
10.05pm: no good on a school night or for national newspaper coverage. Leigh 
have seen the light and will play home games at 6pm on Saturdays when possible.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 