
My wife, Jan Reed, who has died of advanced multiple sclerosis aged 56, was 
professor of health and social care for older adults atNorthumbria University 
<https://www.northumbria.ac.uk/research/case-studies/making-it-work-involving-older-people-in-their-own-care/>
. A leading nurse academic, she wrote or co-edited seven books on topics 
relating to healthcare and research.

Born in Gateshead to Don Robson, a businessman, and his wife, Ruth (nee 
Hailes), a teacher, she went to Hookergate school and then gained a place at 
Newcastle Polytechnic (now Northumbria University). She and I met in Newcastle, 
in theLiterary and Philosophical Society 
<http://www.litandphil.org.uk/catalogue/> library. We were both studying for 
nursing exams. Jan graduated in 1981, at a time when degree-level nursing was 
still a rarity.

She was one of the first nurses to enter an innovative PhD scheme at the 
polytechnic, designed to foster future academic leaders in the profession. She 
went on to take up a postdoctoral research fellowship atNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> University. We married in 1984 and 
set up home in the city, later moving to Hexham in Northumberland.

From early on in her career Jan believed that research should make a practical 
difference to people’s lives. In her early 20s she had worked as a volunteer at 
a Rape Crisis centre in Newcastle and this experience made her determined to 
use her professional position to help others have a voice.

She saw research as a collaborative process and believed it was important to 
communicate with the older people actually using social and health services. 
With her colleague, Sue Procter, she co-edited Practitioner Research in Health 
Care (1995), an important text for health and social care professionals. One of 
her last books was about the research method “appreciative inquiry”, which 
explores what works well in an organisation rather than simply identifying 
problems.

She retired from academic life in 2010 because of her deteriorating health but 
continued to write, publishing articles on Zen Buddhism, which she practised 
for many years.

Jan is survived by me, our children, Chloe and Davy, her brother, Ian, and her 
stepmother, Jenny.
 