
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, 
has called for a debate on rewriting the country’s pacifist constitution after 
his Liberal Democratic party [LDP] and its alliessecured a supermajority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/10/coalition-election-victory-in-japan-could-herald-bigger-role-for-armed-forces>
 in upper house elections on Sunday.

 The LDP, its junior coalition partner Kōmeitō, and several like-minded 
smaller parties and independent MPs now control two-thirds of the 242 seats in 
the upper house. The ruling coalition already has a similar majority in the 
more powerful lower house.

Conservative MPs have enough seats to push ahead with constitutional changes, 
including scrapping the war-renouncing article 9 – a prospect that has caused 
alarm in China and among many Japanese who value their country’s postwar 
pacifism. Any amendments passed in parliament would then require approval by a 
simple majority in a nationwide referendum.

Abe had studiously ignored the constitution issue during the upper house 
campaign, insisting that the election was an opportunity to reaffirm public 
support for his troubled economic policy, as he sought to capitalise on the 
lack of a credible alternative offered by the opposition.

The LDP won 56 of the 121 seats – half the upper house total – being 
contested, while Kōmeitō secured 14 seats. Abe had set a goal of winning a 
combined 61 seats.

But speaking soon after his landslide victory, Abe said his party had always 
been committed torewriting the postwar constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/16/shinzo-abe-sets-sights-on-japans-pacifist-constitution-after-election-win>
. The Asahi Shimbun newspaper quoted him as saying that he hoped deliberations 
by expert panels and a deeper public debate would lead to a consensus on which 
parts of the constitution needed changing.

The most controversial move would be a revision of article 9 to allow Japan’s 
self-defence forces to act more like a conventional army. The clause forbids
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> from using force to settle 
international disputes and restricts its land, air and naval forces to a 
strictly defensive role.

Rewriting the constitution, imposed by the US occupation authorities after the 
second world war, has been the ideological driving force behind Abe and other 
conservatives who believe it unfairly restricts Japan’s ability to respond to 
new threats such as international terrorism, an increasingly assertive China 
and a nuclear-armed North Korea.

However, Abe risks losing the political capital he has built over the past 
three and a half years if he is seen to be neglecting the economy in favour of 
constitutional reform.

“The key question will be whether he can carry out structural reforms,” said 
Nobuhiko Kuramochi, chief strategist at Mizuho Securities. “If Abe fails to do 
so, despite the political freedom he has gained, that will be negative for 
foreign investors’ appetite for Japanese stocks.”

Xinhua, China’s official news agency, described Sunday’s election result as a 
threat to regional stability, as it had given MPs who support constitutional 
reform an unprecedented advantage.

“With Japan’s pacifist constitution at serious stake and Abe’s power 
expanding, it is alarming both for Japan’s Asian neighbours, as well as for 
Japan itself, as Japan’s militarisation will serve to benefit neither side,” 
Xinhua said in a commentary.

Some analysts played down the prospects for change, noting that the loose 
collection of pro-reform parties and independents had yet to reach a consensus 
on which parts of the constitution should be altered.

“It’s the first time to have two-thirds in both houses of parliament, but you 
can’t find any issue on which the two-thirds can agree,” said Gerry Curtis, 
professor emeritus at Columbia University.

But Curtis added: “With these numbers … he [Abe] is going to want to see what 
he can achieve. That means less attention to the economy and a lot of spinning 
over the constitution.”

The LDP’s dovish coalition partner, Kōmeitō, is cautious about any change that 
would expand the role of the military, while the public remains deeply divided. 
An exit poll conducted by the Asahi on Sunday showed that 49% of voters 
supported constitutional revision, with 44% opposed.

 