
A new multi-year sponsorship deal and the arrival of superstar Jarryd Hayne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jarryd-hayne> won’t rush the NRL into 
selling Gold Coast.

The governing body wants to off-load struggling Newcastle first.

Gold Coast have been in the league’s hands since entering voluntary 
administration in March last year.

Jamie Lyons and Benji Marshall feared to have played their last NRL games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/jamie-lyons-and-benji-marshall-feared-to-have-played-their-last-nrl-games>
At the time the club’s existence was under threat, dealing with allegations of 
cocaine possession against several players, no major sponsor and no training or 
administration base.

Since then the Titans have transformed themselves on the field, with Hayne’s 
arrival on a two-year deal the icing on the cake as they close in on a first 
finals appearance since 2010.

The club have also signed a long-term deal with sponsor Aquis and are 
preparing to move into a purpose-built facility for the club’s football and 
administration arms at Parkwood International Golf Course next year.

Despite that rise in stature, NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> 
chief executive Todd Greenberg says getting new ownership sorted for 
last-placed Newcastle comes first.

“We’ve said from the outset we’re not long-term owners of clubs,” Greenberg 
said.

“Our first priority at the moment is the Knights, and we’re in the middle of 
that at the moment, about figuring out the best ownership model.

“Next year into 2017 will be when we really get into the grunt of figuring out 
what the ownership model of the Titans will look like.”

Greenberg praised the Titans for their turnaround and said the transformation 
showed the value of a strong off-field leadership.

“Clearly the club is in much better shape,” he said.

“What it does demonstrate to me is that the great old quote from Jack Gibson 
about needing a strong front office to be able to perform well on the field 
rings true in the modern day.

“The Titans are a great example of that.”



 