
Mark Warburton remains on course for his first silverware as Rangers manager 
after his side booked their place in the Petrofac Training Cup final with a 4-0 
win overSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> at Ibrox. 
Jason Holt fired his side ahead nine minutes before the break with his fourth 
goal in seven games before Kenny Miller added a second on 77 minutes.

Martyn Waghorn’s 18th of the season and a late Sean Kelly own goal rubbed salt 
into Saints’ wounds but it was far from a vintage display fromRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>.

Apart from a Stuart Carswell effort that hit the bar, Ian Murray’s team were 
never a threat to Warburton’s men, who will now face the League One side 
Peterhead in the April 10 final. Ater the match, Warburton expressed his 
support for the game to be staged at Hampden. “I hope so. That’s what I’ve been 
told and I hope that’s the case. Rangers will send a very strong support and we 
would look forward to that type of challenge.”

Warburton responded to last week’s drab draw at Livingston by handing Miller 
and Danny Wilson recalls. Murray, meanwhile, brought on-loan Celtic midfielder 
Paul McMullan back in to start The St Mirren manager – already under pressure 
following the Buddies’ miserable start to the campaign – was forced to 
apologise this week after insisting he knew more about the game than his side’s 
grumbling fans.It was clear to everyone at Ibrox from the start that the 
Paisley men were never a match for Rangers, even if the Ibrox men failed to get 
out of first gear. The only surprise was the fact it took the hosts 34 minutes 
to open the scoring.

St Mirren had Jamie Langfield to thank for that fact. The keeper denied Gedion 
Zelalem inside the opening three minutes with an impressive finger-tip save 
before pushing away a deflected Lee Wallace effort.

Langfield also kept out Waghorn and Barry McKay as Rangers continued to tease 
their opponents, while Waghorn was denied the opener when Kelly got back to 
block on the line after the striker rounded Langfield.

Rangers kept plugging away, encouraged by Saints’ inability to get out of 
their own half.

Their reward came after McKay’s short corner made its way to Halliday, who 
clipped the ball over the top for Holt, who had timed his run in behind the 
visitor’s defence to perfection after Scott Agnew wandered away and rammed the 
ball past the exposed Langfield.

Saints’ lone sight of goal in the first half came after 14 minutes but Wes 
Foderingham was untroubled by Stevie Mallan’s limp free-kick.

Warburton was irked by criticism of his side following last week’s dropped 
points at Livingston but they failed to sparkle again after the break.Warburton 
was left in no doubt about what the Gers followers thought as they responded 
angrily after 68 minutes when their lacklustre troops allowed Carswell to 
rattle the bar from the edge of the box. Miller, though, eased their fears when 
he tapped home the second after Waghorn collected substitute Dean Shiels’ 
clever reverse pass before squaring for his strike partner.

Waghorn got on the scoresheet himself as he drove through the middle before 
rifling a shot into the bottom corner. Kelly then turned Shiels’ cross into his 
own net.
 