
Javier Clemente is nails.  Real Valladolid  Sporting Gijón's new coach, known 
as the 'Blonde of Barrakaldo', is the foul-mouthed, feisty chain-smoking 
football manager who knows no fear, laughs in the face of danger, and thinks 
nothing of checking himself out of hospital against doctors' advice and driving 
from Bilbao to Belgrade with four broken ribs, a fractured collarbone and a 
punctured lung. The man who could start a fight in an empty house but would 
prefer a full one, begins every phrase with a brilliantly Basquejoder, and says 
"I'm not hard, I'm hard-ísimo"; the former Spain boss who told his players the 
way to win the 1994 World Cup was to "sharpen your studs and get booting", the 
footballing Red Adair brought in to put out fires who has a worrying habit of 
doing so armed with a petrol pump and a bumper box of Swan Vestas.

Hang on a minute … haven't we been here before? Er, yes. Yes, we have. And not 
that long ago either.Right here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/apr/15/real-valladolid-javier-clemente>
, in fact. But this weekend the 'Blonde of Barrakaldo' returned to 
centre-stage, and possibly even for the last time; this weekend, it was hard to 
avoid the feeling that Javier Clemente is half the man he used to be: he used 
start some fires and put some others out; now he just starts them. Now he just 
gets burned – and so does everyone around him. This weekend, many people 
decided that he had gone too far – and for someone who has spent his life going 
really quite far, that is very, very far indeed. Not just because of what he 
did – although that matters too – but because of what he didn't do. Because of 
what some wonder if he will ever do again. If it is not that long since we were 
last here, there is a sneaking suspicion now that we may never be here again.

On Sunday morning, Clemente was at it again. This, don't forget, is the coach 
who told the Iranians to stick it live on TV and gave José Molina his Spain 
debut on the wing – even though Molina was a goalkeeper. He's the man that 
infamously told one journalist who claimed to have seen a lot of football that 
"the cows at Lezama, [Athletic's training ground] have seen a lot of football 
but they don't have a fucking clue". The coach who, since taking over at 
Sporting 45 days ago, let one journalist off for a daft question because she 
was "pretty" but certainly did not let off the "dumb-arse who comes here to 
complain that we're playing the wrong people even though we're playing the same 
people as we played last week [when we won]", adding: "Fuck me, sunshine, 
you're a Nobel prize winner, you!"

It was the morning after the night before, and another press conference. The 
one place where Clemente shows a little creativity and attacking intent. For 
most managers press conferences involve answering questions; for Clemente, they 
involve going off on bizarre, aggressive and often brilliant tangents. They 
are, frankly, often very funny. Other times, he is a caricature of himself, a 
self-parody.This time he focused on the journalist who he claims has had it in 
for him from the start <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gADmSYmjsFU>, Juan 
Gancedo from La Voz de Asturias, the journalist that had complained about his 
"out-dated" and "old fashioned" style. And this time, it was brutal and more 
than a little sinister, with Clemente insisting: "I know that you have a son 
and one day he'll be told what asinvergüenza [shameless bastard] his father is."

When Gancedo asked what his son had to do with it, Clemente continued: "You're 
not listening to me are you? In 15 years time, I'll tell your son what his 
father is - rude, asinvergüenza … and as stupid as a bag of stones." Gancedo 
collected up his stuff, packed his bag and quietly departed but Clemente 
continued, abusing him even after he had left the room, calling him "sick". He 
later refused to apologise, which was not surprising. After all, Clemente has 
always reacted badly when he has felt attacked. At times he has been right; 
other times he has had a habit of dishing out uncomfortable truths. At other 
times he has been very, very wrong: he has long had a habit of saying 
spectacularly insensitive things. Like the time he called polio sufferer JJ 
Santos, a "cripple", or when he claimed it would have "been better if 
[car-crash victim] Manolo Lama had died".

But this was different – and not just because Santos and Lama were big names, 
powerful enough to defend themselves and more than capable of playing dirty 
too. This was different because of the victim and because of the context.

In the past, Clemente's big mouth has been seen as a price paid for his 
services. So too has his football – largely, and exaggeratedly, decried in the 
media as neatly slotting into the evolutionary continuum somewhere before 
Neanderthal. Clemente, lest it be forgotten, invented the phrase tiki-taka. As 
an insult. He once moaned at Athletic Bilbao that they had bought him a 
17-year-old who was rubbish: "I wanted bread, they brought a jar of Nutella," 
he snapped. The kid's name was Javi Martínez. Yet if his football was ugly, it 
didn't matter. Because while it might not have been pretty it was effective; 
because Clemente was the man that rescued you. He was the man you called when 
you were desperate, the man who came and put out the fire.

Who cared if he started a few more? What did a bit of lip matter? What was a 
bit of collateral damage? Clemente rubbing people up the wrong way felt right 
somehow. Not least because it worked.

No more. Clemente did not just bitterly, unjustifiably attack a journalist 
this weekend, warning him that he'd tell his son exactly what he thinks of him, 
his team also lost. Again. Worse, they lost to the team from the bottom of the 
table, Real Zaragoza – and they did so in the last minute. It finished 2-1. 
They lost a seven pointer – three points they didn't win, three points their 
opponents did win and the extra point from the head-to-head goal difference 
which could be vital at the end of the season. Clemente took over Sporting 
Gijón 45 days ago. He was charged with rescuing them. Manolo Preciado was 
sacked because theSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> owners decided that he no 
longer could.

Sporting's football has been rinse-your-eyes-with-bleach bad. Clemente has 
made them dirtier – their foul count has almost doubled – and he booted out 
Nacho Novo, accusing him of "shitting himself", but he has not made them any 
better. In fact, they have got worse. Clemente could not even claim to have 
given them more character: twice they have lost games in the 92nd minute, not 
won them. They have picked up six points from 24 and won one in eight. Far from 
climbing out of the relegation zone, on Saturday afternoon they slipped to the 
bottom of it. They now lie seven points from safety. They are, in short, down. 
Four years later. Four years of miraculous escapes and Sporting – a side whose 
fans graced the First Division like few others,making it a better place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/sep/22/sportinggijon.barcelona> – 
are almost certainly on their way back to the second. As the Spanish phrase has 
it, they will go more in pity than glory.

"I didn't poison the dog, the previous guy poisoned the dog," Clemente claims. 
And he is quite right. Just as he is right when he notes: "We haven't got 
Messi." Or when he insists: "Money makes a difference – if you're poor you 
can't eat steak." He was even right to note that while Rayo Vallecano and 
Granada stocked up on loans, no one was rushing to lend Sporting players during 
the winter window.

Sporting's problems are deeper. Some insiders think that in the long-term 
their promotion in 2008 was a disaster because it enabled the wrong people to 
survive, just at the time when Sporting needed a change; those same people who 
not only sacked the coach Preciado but his sporting director Emilio de Dios too 
and hide behind a club figurehead who genuinely cares but can do little, a 
powerless president controlled as if he were a puppet. The fact that they have 
survived over the last four years is a miracle. Yes, it's been close every time 
– frighteningly close – but they clung on somehow. They have spent little on 
players and what very they have spent in the last two years has been badly 
spent – €900,000 for Gastón Sangoy, €1m for Oscar Trejo. Damián Suárez cost 
€450,000 in the summer; he has played just nine times.

Ultimately there is an inescapable reality: their current squad cost less than 
€3m. It could even be the worst in the first division. Going down is natural 
enough. And it certainly isn't Clemente's fault. At least not only his fault. 
The problem is that he is supposed to be the man that rescues you – however bad 
things get. That's supposed to be his speciality, his calling card: "No job too 
big, no club too small." It is almost three decades since he won anything and 
two decades since he completed a full season at a club. He didn't need too: he 
instead carved out a lucrative career as the saviour, some kind of 
potty-mouthed, feisty superman. Like a gruff New York cop, he didn't do things 
by the book and he roughed up a few bad guys – roughed up a few good ones too – 
but he got results. Now, he doesn't even do that.

He's a St Bernard whose dinky little barrel has run dry. So has his credit; 
Sunday morning was just another Clemente rant – bang out of order but not 
really out of character – but somehow it felt a little more permanent this 
time. Time may diminish its impact as it did so many others, it may soften 
memories and harden resolve to once again turn to the saviour, but there was 
something a little more lasting about this one. Not least because his role as 
saviour no longer looks so convincing. Those close-to-the-bone rants look funny 
when you win; even the most bitter of personal attacks can be justified. 
Winners will always find defenders; losers won't. And Clemente's football is 
not only largely considered anachronistic these days, it is considered 
ineffective too. The man who saved Athletic and Real Sociedad has lost his 
touch. Murcia went down, Valladolid went down, and now Sporting Gijón are going 
down. It is a hat-trick of sorts.

This weekend as Javier Clemente launched yet another vicious attack, it was 
hard to avoid the feeling that he was going down with them. The difference is 
that if and when Sporting come back, they'll be welcomed with open arms.

Talking points

• It was not so much a fist on the desk as an iron fist that went right 
through the desk and out the other side. On the weekend circled in red, the one 
that might have blown the title race wide open, Madrid responded – and in 
style. They travelled to Osasuna, who they had not beaten away for three 
seasons, and there was a feeling that here was a game they really might not 
win. But thenKarim Benzema scored a gorgeous Marco van Basten style volley 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=alkQoOgxlwY>, Cristiano Ronaldo battered one in 
from 35 yards and Gonzalo Higuaín dinked one over the goalkeeper. Higuaín and 
Ronaldo added another one each in a 5-1 victory. Barcelona kicked off soon 
after, opportunity having turned to obligation and defeated Athletic Bilbao 
2-0. The gap is still six points at the top.

• "I believe in the divine … and also in hard work," said Manolo Jiménez. And 
who can blame him? Zaragoza are off the bottom. They're alive! Or at least they 
might be.

• More whistles, more boos, more hankies. Valencia were at home again. And 
they dropped points from a winning position again. That's 44 times under Unai 
Emery now. Here's a mad fact for you, thanks to the bonkers statman Mr Chip: if 
every game finished with the first team to take the lead winning the match this 
season, ie if no comebacks were allowed, Valencia would be ahead of Madrid.

• Good grief, Sunday night's live game was bad. Still, at least the 
goalkeepers were happy – they both got away with really rubbish moments thanks 
to the unwritten law that says that it's always, always a foul on them. Just in 
case, like.

• Betis' Rubén Castro celebrated his goal this weekend by running across the 
pitchand lovingly hugging the club's psychologist 
<http://youtu.be/WuCEejDcLMc?t=4s>. The fact that the club's psychologist is a 
blond bombshell in a power skirt and high heels is, of course, purely 
coincidental.

Results: Sporting Gijón 1-2 Zaragoza, Racing 0-1 Granada, Osasuna 1-5 Madrid, 
Barcelona 2-0 Athletic Bilbao, Atlético Madrid 3-0 Getafe, Real Sociedad 4-0 
Rayo Vallecano, Málaga 0-2 Betis, Valencia 1-1 Levante, Villarreal 0-0 Espanyol

• Latest La Liga standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=29>
 