
A Star Wars-inspired organisation has failed to use the force of its arguments 
to convince the charity watchdog that it should be considered a religious 
organisation.

The Temple of the Jedi Order, members of which follow the tenets of the faith 
central to theStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> films, 
sought charitable status this year, but the Charity Commission has ruled that 
it does not meet the criteria for a religion under UK charity law.

The commission wrote 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications//the-temple-of-the-jedi-order> that 
Jediism “lacks the necessary spiritual or non-secular element” it was looking 
for in a religion.

The Temple of the Jedi Order was an “entirely web-based organisation and the 
Jedi are predominantly, if not exclusively, an online community,” the 
commission noted. There was “insufficient evidence that moral improvement is 
central to the beliefs and practices of [the group].”

It said the doctrine promoted by the group borrowed widely from other world 
religions and philosophies, but “the commission does not consider that the 
aggregate amounts to a sufficiently cogent and distinct religion”. It added 
that Jediism was highly permissive, with many different interpretations 
possible.

Kenneth Dibble, the Charity Commission’s chief legal adviser, said: “The 
meaning of ‘religion’ in charity law has developed over many years and now 
encompasses a wide range of belief systems.

“The decisions which the commission makes on the extent of this meaning can be 
difficult and complex, but are important in maintaining clarity on what is and 
is not charitable.”

The Temple of the Jedi Order, based in Beaumont, Texas, is recognised as a 
charitable or non-profit group by the US Internal Revenue Service. Last year 
the charity regulator in New Zealand rejected an application by another group 
for Jediism to be considered a religion for charitable purposes.


The Temple’s website <https://www.templeofthejediorder.org/faq> says it 
promotes “goodwill, understanding, compassion and serenity.”

“We do not teach mystical powers or how to build lightsabers, we are not a 
dedicated Star Wars fan site, we are not affiliated with George Lucas or Disney 
and we are not for people who just want to wear a badge reading ‘I’m a Jedi’,” 
it says.

Brenna Cavell, 32, a psychologist and spokeswoman for the Temple, said the 
group was disappointed by the charity commission’s decision. “We put a lot of 
work into the application and really did our best to illustrate why we do 
consider ourselves a religion and why we believe we do offer benefits not just 
to our members but also to the public at large,” she said.

The group had made the application to ensure that people who donated money 
towards the Temple’s upkeep “have a sense of the legitimacy, that we do take it 
seriously and that any money that they do give to us is properly stewarded”, 
she added.

Cavell said the Temple of the Jedi Order was inspired by the philosophy that 
underpinned the Star Wars universe, which itself was inspired by the work of 
the mythologist Joseph Campbell rather than by the movies themselves.

“It’s not based on worshipping of the force or George Lucas, although many of 
our members refer to a higher power or the transcendent as the force. But you 
could easily exchange it for God, the universe … it’s the same thing to us, we 
just happened to pick that name.”

In the UK, Jedi has been the most popular alternative religion in two 
consecutive editions of the census, after a national campaign led to more than 
390,000 people (0.7% of the population) describing themselves as Jedi Knights 
on the 2001 census. Numbers fell sharply a decade later, but there werestill 
176,632 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/11/census-data-religion-jedi-knights> 
who told the government they were Jedi Knights.

The Temple of the Jedi Order could not provide figures on how many active 
members it has in the UK. Cavell said around 30,000 people had accounts with 
the site worldwide, and around 750 people a year became members.

“It’s always a little busier around the time the new movies come out, of 
course,” she said.
 