
My friend Jennifer Hill, who has died aged 57 in a cycling accident in the 
Pyrenees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/03/british-woman-dies-cycling-ravine-pyrenees-jennifer-hill-gavarnie>
, was the director of education for the Vale of Glamorgan. She had a lasting 
impact on education in the region.

Jennifer arrived in Wales in 2012. A quiet English woman of slight build in a 
culture dominated by dark-suited, Welsh-speaking men, she was unrelenting in 
demanding raised standards in the face of much resistance. She had a clear 
vision that her authority would become the best inWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> and match the best in England, and 
successfully oversaw year-on-year improvements in results. While she set high 
standards at work, her sense of humour and integrity earned the affection of 
staff and colleagues.

Jennifer worked closely with Robert Hill, an adviser to former prime minister 
Tony Blair, whoseJune 2013 report on education in Wales 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-22948229> recommended the creation of local 
authority consortiums. She was the first lead director of theCentral South 
Consortium <http://www.cscjes.org.uk/> and overcame political differences to 
create a successful partnership covering some of the most and least deprived 
communities in Wales.

Outside work, Jennifer was devoted to her two daughters, Hannah and Imogen. 
She met her husband, Adam Spector, an IT project manager, in the Islington 
Cyclists Action Group and at Islington CND in 1985, when I also came to know 
her through Adam, and the couple married in 1990. They shared a love of 
cycling, and together rode prodigious distances.

The family lived in Hertfordshire, but had a holiday home in Wales. Jennifer 
loved Wales, the beautiful countryside and the warmth of the people. She would 
have been pleased that the papers who reported her cycling accident described 
her as being Welsh.

Born in Dartford, Kent, the daughter of Margaret (nee Clarke), a primary 
schoolteacher, and Roger Hill, a materials scientist, Jennifer grew up in 
Bexley and attended Parkwood primary school there. At Dartford grammar school 
for girls, she won the prize for geography. She studied the subject at degree 
level at Manchester University, then went to Birmingham for an MSc in 
meteorology.

Jennifer spent her whole working life in the field of education, though she 
never worked as a teacher. Her first job after graduating in 1981 was at the 
Business and Technology Education Council (BTec) as a research and development 
officer. She joined the Secondary Schools Examination Council in 1984 when 
O-levels changed to GCSEs, before moving to local authorities. She was 
appointed assistant director in Enfield’s education department in 2001, led the 
change to a commissioning model for schools and created the borough’s first 
academy in 2007.

Jennifer is survived by Adam, Hannah and Imogen, Margaret and Roger, her 
sister, Jane, and brother, Richard.
 