
Jeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> has been 
accused of contradicting official government advice for taking his children to 
A&E at the weekend rather than waiting to see a GP.

The health secretary told the Commons he visited an accident and emergency 
department as he “didn’t want to wait” for the GP surgery to reopen.

He added he believes it needs to be recognised that society is changing, with 
people not always knowing whether the care they need is urgent or an emergency.

But shadow health secretary Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> later wrote to Mr Hunt about 
his “apparent contradiction” of official Government advice.

The Labour front-bencher claimed it was “highly problematic” for Mr Hunt to 
suggest it is acceptable for people to “bypass GPs and go straight to A&E” - 
particularly given the pressure on A&E departments.

NHS advice points people towards walk-in centres, minor injuries units and NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 111 before A&E if the situation is 
not an immediate emergency or if an illness is non-life-threatening, Mr Burnham 
added.

The pair continued to debate the issue on Twitter with Mr Hunt insisting A&E 
provides a trusted service for parents with an unwell child needing medical 
attention.


In his reply, Mr Burnham claimed the “NHS would collapse” if all unwell people 
went to A&E, adding it was “irresponsible” for theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Secretary to “continue to 
contradict official advice”.
 Frontbenchers go head to head 
Prime Minister David Cameron has offered to extend access to GPs - seven days 
a week for every NHS patient in England - should the Tories win the general 
election.


Speaking during health questions, Conservative Lorraine Fullbrook (South 
Ribble) told Mr Hunt: “Many people in South Ribble will be able to see their 
GPs in the evenings and at weekends thanks to a locally led initiative by 
Chorley and South Ribble CCG and Preston CCG to extend GP surgery opening hours 
this winter.

“Do you agree that initiatives such as this, which will give greater 
flexibility to patients and alleviate pressures on other areas of the NHS - 
particularly A&E - is exactly what is needed in the busy winter months?”

Mr Hunt replied: “I do agree with you.

“I’ve taken my own children to an A&E department at the weekend precisely 
because I didn’t want to wait until later on to take them to see a GP and I 
think we have to recognise that society is changing and people don’t always 
know whether the care that they need is urgent or whether it is an emergency, 
and making GPs available at weekends will relieve a lot of pressure in A&E 
departments.”

In his letter to the Health Secretary, Mr Burnham said: “While I sympathise 
with the situation in which you found yourself, and have no wish to inquire 
into your family circumstances, it is your statement that needs to be 
challenged.


“It appears to be at odds with long-standing advice to the public and, in 
advance of a potentially difficult winter in the NHS, could add pressure to 
already overstretched A&E services.”

He went on: “Your statement in the House implies that it is acceptable for the 
public to use A&E on an on-demand basis or as a substitute for GP services.
“You will be aware that this is in contradiction with the official advice on 
NHS choices.”

In exchanges on Twitter, Mr Hunt told Mr Burnham: “If parents have an unwell 
child needing medical attention, A&E provides a trusted service.”

Mr Burnham, a former health secretary, replied: “If all ’unwell’ people went 
to A&E, £NHS would collapse. Surprised you continue to contradict official 
advice. Irresponsible.”

Asked whether Mr Cameron would support Mr Hunt’s choice to take his children 
to A&E rather than wait for a GP, the Prime Minister’s official spokesman told 
reporters at a regular media briefing: “I’m not sure the Secretary of State for 
Health was giving advice.

“He was describing a challenge that I think many people up and down the 
country will recognise in terms of access to GPs.

“It is not uniform across the country, but there are certainly parts of the 
country where there is a challenge around access to GPs and that has a knock-on 
consequence for A&E centres.

“That is perfectly understandable, because people - particularly those with 
young children - will, of course, want to see a doctor as quickly as possible.

“He was describing that situation before going on to say what the Government 
is doing in terms of increasing access to GP services for people as a whole.”
 