
The details of who Jeremy Corbyn chooses to place in any particular frontbench 
job matter less than the fact that it is the leader who gets to choose. The
shadow ministerial reshuffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/jeremy-corbyns-choices-the-big-roles-in-the-shadow-cabinet>
, which started last night and will continue through today, is not the product 
of peace talks between Corbyn and his rebellious parliamentarians. It expresses 
a judgment that talks are no longer necessary: that his victory in last month’s 
leadership contest ismassive enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/24/labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn-wins-landslide-victory-party>
 to exert a gravitational pull on any MP who wants a portfolio, and that the 
refuseniks can be marginalised.

Rosie Winterton thought she was speaking to Corbyn yesterday in her capacity 
as chief whip to continue negotiations. Insteadshe was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/nick-brown-labour-frontbench-return-chief-whip-rosie-winterton>
. Talk of the parliamentary party electing a pool of shadow ministers for 
Corbyn to pick from has abruptly died. And just as quickly it becomes obvious 
that the idea would never fly. Why should the leader, having vanquished his 
enemies, reward their failure with any kind of institutional veto over 
appointments?

It would be more democratic, say the rebels. It would promote unity. But in 
Labour’s internal struggles, “unity” and “democracy” are rhetorical motifs for 
prettifying a ruthless power play, like the chivalric colours worn by knights 
before they joust to the death.

Corbyn knows that MPs wanted a say in his shadow cabinet choice in order to 
limit his room for manoeuvre. They mean to diminish the leader’s authority and 
he judges – correctly – that they have nowhere to go if he refuses.

A principal driver of Corbyn’s victory over the summer was the perception among
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members that his project 
had never been given a fair chance to succeed by MPs – that they were 
determined it should fail and were dressing sabotage up in arguments (sound 
though they may have been) about competence and electability.

As much as its signal of preference for a radical-left agenda, the leadership 
vote represents an instruction from the membership to let Corbyn be Corbyn. And 
the MPs know it.

If the leader had wanted to reflect the broadest spectrum of parliamentary 
opinion in his senior appointments, he would not have made Diane Abbott his 
shadow home secretary. Had he wanted to signal readiness to compromise, he 
would not have demoted Clive Lewis from the shadow defence brief to shadow the 
business department – a move that looks very much like a rebuke for Lewis’s 
assertion at Labour conference that Trident policy needs no revision.

Nia Griffith, the new shadow defence secretary, is a more committed unilateral 
disarmer. If Corbyn had been worried about any perception that he is wielding 
powers of patronage without regard for the niceties of democratic process, he 
would not have chosen Shami Chakrabarti as his shadow attorney general. 
Chakrabarti’s qualifications to do the job are not in question, but she sits in 
the Lords (from where she will not be able to challenge ministers in the 
Commons), and her peerage looked like a reward for writing a report on 
antisemitism in Labour designed more to close the issue down than to grapple 
with it in earnest.

One proof of Corbyn’s newly enhanced authority is the decision by Sir Keir 
Starmer, former director of public prosecutions, now MP for Holborn and St 
Pancras, to accept a role as shadow “Brexit” secretary. That is a strong 
appointment to a vital portfolio. Starmer’s sparring with David Davis now 
promises to be one of the more engaging and significant political contests 
inside and outside parliament. Labour’s response to Theresa May’s nebulous 
Brexit plans has so far lacked coherence, and Starmer should bring some rigour.

It has not escaped notice, meanwhile, that four of the most senior shadow 
cabinet ministers are all parliamentary neighbours. Starmer’s patch adjoins 
Corbyn’s Islington North seat, which shares boundaries with Abbott’s Stoke 
Newington manor and the Islington South constituency held by Emily Thornberry, 
who retains the shadow foreign secretary role.

This geographical intimacy has already invited satirical comment to the effect 
that most of the shadow cabinet top team can more easily convene in north 
London gastropubs than in Westminster.

But any “liberal metropolitan” tilt in Corbyn’s frontbench describes not so 
much the limits of his ambition as the circumscription of his reach within the 
parliamentary party. His authority may have been substantially bolstered by 
re-election with a stronger mandate but that gives him only the right to ignore 
critics – it doesn’t give him the power to change their minds or compel them to 
believe what he believes.

In that respect, one of the most revealing appointments was the first one to 
be announced: the replacement of Winterton as chief whip by Nick Brown, the 
Newcastle MP who held the job under Gordon Brown. He has a reputation as a 
ruthless enforcer – one of the most tribal “Brownite” lieutenants and a veteran 
of guerrilla war against the “Blairites” that consumed so much political energy 
in the fag-end years of the last Labour government.

Brown (N) was removed by Ed Miliband in 2010 in what was then seen as a 
symbolic gesture of independence from the Brown (G) regime and a concession to 
supporters of Miliband (D), who feared that all their old enemies were running 
the show.

It is unlikely that Brown will have agreed to return to the whips’ office out 
of eager ideological affection for a full Corbynite platform. His motivation is 
surely more tribal – acceptance that the leader is supreme (for the time being) 
and that the rest of the troops need to behave themselves in the wider 
interests of Labour structural integrity.

The potency of this kind of raw us-against-the-rest party allegiance is often 
underestimated by outside observers. It is the force that prevents even the 
most aggressive anti-Corbyn MPs from breaking away to try their luck in some 
other political vehicle. And it is the force that gives Corbyn the relative 
freedom to now shape a frontbench more in accordance with his will. Even the 
most disconsolate and recalcitrant rebel concedes that the party has spoken and 
that the leader’s mandate commands attention, even humility, although not yet 
sincere respect.

It has taken a year of chaos for the message finally to get through: this is 
Corbyn’s party now, and it will succeed or fail on his terms.
 