
Just over a year ago Jersey's director of rugby, Ben Harvey, turned to one of 
his players while they were sitting in the stands at Newcastle's Kingston Park 
and said, "We'll be playing here one day." The player in question turned to him 
in disbelief; it was a conversation stopper.

That day has already come. Following the latest of a remarkable five 
promotions in eight years Jersey are playing in their firstChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> campaign while 
Newcastle dropped down from the Premiership at the end of last season. With the 
teams due to meet at Kingston Park on Friday evening, Harvey chuckles at the 
anecdote but issues a warning that his team, albeit fighting to avoid 
relegation, do not wish to be thought of as the David to Newcastle's 
table-topping Goliath.

"I don't think they'll be overawed," says Harvey of his players, who will face 
a much-changed Newcastle line-up minus such players as New Zealand fly-half 
Jimmy Gopperth. "We're not there for autographs. I've reminded them that 
they're here because they've earned it. The biggest thing people fail to 
realise is this is the most inexperienced team ever to play in the 
Championship. It's a full-time league and we play week in week out with a squad 
who, bar four players, have never played at this level before. So to be winning 
games is phenomenal."

Investment of £75,000 from the Jersey government has helped the club to 
flourish – and set some of the islanders grumbling about the use of public 
funds – but Jersey RFC, who have considerable costs to fly to away games, argue 
that they are promoting tourism for the home matches and giving people a 
positive reason to talk about Jersey, a refreshing contrast to the now 
ubiquitous news reports about tax dodgers using the island as a haven.

Integral to Jersey's rugby philosophy is a commitment to developing local 
talent – with a high ratio of Jersey-born players in the first-team squad. When 
Harvey, who played top-level rugby for Richmond and Bristol, first arrived on 
the island five years ago, following a coaching post at Solihull, he had a 
vision. "I could see a certain degree of desire and I felt I could build 
something," he says. "I stood in front of them in the first AGM and I said, 
'We'll go as far as the best Jersey-born players.' That put pressure on me to 
find them."

The Jersey academy has bloomed, a world away from the old days when there were 
no regular fixtures at junior level and the club used to struggle to attract 
enough boys for a match on a Sunday. Now hundreds turn up each week.

It is all a very different picture from the club a long-standing fan and 
former winger Rupert Myers remembers. Myers began playing for Jersey at a time 
when rugby union did not even have a league structure and the club would invite 
visiting teams – from as far afield as Australia and Zimbabwe – to compete. "I 
believe the club has the biggest collection of shields from rugby clubs in the 
world," says Myers, who played from 1986-94, in the days when an archaic 
Methodist Jersey law prevented anyone from dancing on a Sunday, except in the 
rugby clubhouse – thus providing the club's main source of income.

"It would take an age to count all the plaques, they're five deep on the 
walls, there's even one from HMS Sheffield which went down in the Falklands – 
our plaque went down with them." (The Jersey press officer, Tom Innes, kindly 
obliged with the counting chores and reached a total of 764, although he 
believes quite a few more were lost after being exchanged in pubs after the 
game).

A committed pub schedule certainly used to be a central theme of playing for 
Jersey, even as recently as a few years ago, as the club's longest-serving 
player Jon Brennan recalls. "A conservative preparation for the game was five 
pints and no more," says the 32-year-old prop who, in holding down a job as a 
history teacher, is in the minority these days with most of the squad training 
full-time. "The guesthouse we used to stay at was a ramshackle affair with an 
all-night disco where the noise went through the walls.

"In the old days you'd have guys coming in from nightclubs waving inflatable 
crocodiles at breakfast, our pre-match meals were Indian or Chinese takeaways. 
On one occasion one of our props, I won't say who, was sat eating leftover 
pizza out of the takeaway box in the dressing room right before the game. All 
of that was a good laugh and I'm glad to have had that experience but if we'd 
always been at that level I wouldn't be experiencing this now."

Brennan has to fight for his place against full-timers brought through in a 
more professional set-up. He squeezes his training in around teaching history 
at De La Salle boys' school just outside St Helier, testing the patience of his 
long-time girlfriend – "If you could just mention her, her name is Jen, I would 
be so grateful" – as he juggles early-morning training sessions with taking the 
register at school.

Brennan says the biggest challenge in ascending the league ladder so quickly 
has been adjusting to the longer recovery time needed after a match but he 
still believes the club can compete with the big guns. "We don't want to play 
this plucky underdog thing, we just want to prove ourselves. We don't really 
think about being 'little Jersey'. We're bona fide, we're part of this league."

Asked how far they believe the club can go, Harvey, Myers and Brennan point 
out that no one ever thought they would get as far as they have. "I think they 
can reach the top," says Harvey. "What a fantastic story that would be for the 
island. With the financial situation there's not a great deal of good press 
about the island but for the island to put themselves on the map on the 
sporting world stage would be a phenomenal achievement."
 