
“Sinners go to: HELL. Rightchuss go to: HEAVEN,” a sign near Julia Scheeres’s 
childhood home in rural Indiana reads. “The end is near: REPENT. This here is: 
JESUS LAND.”

Scheeres documents a hard childhood under the eye of her born-again, strict 
protestant parents in her memoir Jesus Land. Her father was a surgeon, while 
her housewife mother spent her days writing to various international Christian 
missions and sending them money, while she scrimped at home: Julia recalls 
being told that they could only use two squares of toilet paper at a time, and 
being served what her mother called “garbage soup”, made from a week’s worth of 
frozen plate scrapings and hamburger.

The Scheeres raised their children – Julia and her adopted brothers Jerome and 
David – according to “biblical” principles. These included monitoring what the 
children read, listened to and watched on television, and their mother 
installing an intercom system so that she could listen to her children’s 
conversations.

And beatings. Julia’s father returned from work every day and punished the 
kids with clockwork regularity, citing Proverbs 13:24 (“spare the rod, spoil 
the child”) as justification. The primary victims of her father were her two 
adopted brothers, Jerome and David, who were both African American. While Julia 
was disciplined for infractions of the multiple strictures that her unfeeling 
parents imposed, she does not recall being touched. Jerome and David were 
beaten, often severely: in one sickening episode, Julia recounts how her father 
broke David’s arm with a 2x4.

While Jerome ran away and was banned from the house, David and Julia engaged 
in everyday acts of resistance and rebellion under their parents’s noses. Their 
greatest acts of bravery were the times they laughed at their mother behind her 
back, blasting Christian music in their rooms to fool the intercom while they 
held private conversations. Rather than open defiance – which frequently 
resulted in David being whipped – the two found other ways to subvert their 
mother’s rules.

But if they found ways to laugh at things at home, the Indiana heartland was 
not a laughing matter. As one of the few black kids in that part of rural 
Indiana, David was subjected to racial slurs. Julia veered between being his 
protector and ignoring him, trying to melt into the white crowd where, without 
David by her side, she was invisible.

After a terrifying encounter with a car full of racists, Scheeres uses the 
environment to show their terror without spelling out how scared she and David 
had been.

Only as we bump down the gravel lane to our house do I notice the trembling 
cottonwoods, the frenzied chirruping of sparrows, the dirt devils churning 
across the back field. On the horizon, heat lightning dances along a column of 
towering thunderheads. The air is suddenly sweet and cool, refreshing. It’s 
perfect weather for a tornado.

Eventually, their parents send them to Escuela Caribe 
<http://www.newsweek.com/where-american-teens-abused-name-god-258182>: a 
Christian “re-education” camp in the Dominican Republic, one of several that 
exist to break the free will of Christian teenagers. When they first arrive, 
Julia and David are not allowed to use the toilet without someone watching 
them. They must ask permission to sit, stand, eat and speak. Only by conforming 
to the rules do they gradually gain privileges. “Jesus is always watching and 
listening and knowing. You can fool us, but you can’t fool Jesus,” David and 
Julia are told.

While Julia observes students giving themselves to Jesus during sermons and 
complies with rules, she stays inside her own world. Her body conforms, but her 
mind remains rebellious. She and David support each other, even in moments when 
they are not allowed to speak to each other, and they develop a secret body 
language for private communication.

Reading Jesus Land reminds me that defiance doesn’t have to be as loud as a 
trumpet blast to bring down the walls of the oppressors. The love between David 
and Julia fortified them against their Christian captors in the Dominican 
Republic, and their faith in each other was enough to withstand the appalling 
treatment they received at the hands of people who insisted that God’s love 
demanded a beating.

Defiance comes in many forms. As a US citizen considering life under Donald 
Trump for the next four years, I know I do not have to be out in the streets 
demonstrating every day. I can find other ways not to conform with the demands 
of the new government while maintaining an illusion of participation. 
Resistance does not have to be a surface activity in order to thwart the 
demands of power.
 