
Jim Jefferies has joined Dunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> on a 15-month rolling 
contract after being unveiled as their new manager on Wednesday. Jefferies 
replaces Jim McIntyre and faces a battle to keep the Fife club in the Scottish 
Premier League.

Jefferies has been out of work since parting company with Hearts two games 
into the season and now finds himself plunged into a relegation battle.

He was initially offered a short-term contract to take charge of team affairs 
for the remaining eight games of the campaign but has now been recruited on a 
longer deal.

Speaking at a press conference on Wednesday, Dunfermline's chairman, John 
Yorkston, said: "The board of Dunfermline are delighted to welcome Jim 
Jefferies as the new manager. Jim has a great track record of developing 
players and bringing on players and we are delighted to have him.

"Jim has signed on a rolling contract of a minimum 15 months which means he is 
here for the remaining eight games plus the following season and then it's a 
rolling contract thereafter."

The length of contract was thought to be a stumbling block to Jefferies 
agreeing the deal. The new manager said: "Having had a decent break, I was 
pleased when I got the opportunity to speak to the chairman.

"I know the questions you are going to ask me about it initially being short 
term. When I had discussions about that, what followed on was that they 
cancelled that out and offered me a longer-term deal.

"I decided to think about it for a couple of days and I was then delighted to 
give him the answer that I would take up the challenge."

Yorkston added: "Initially, we were talking to Jim about the eight weeks and 
once we got talking he was keen to come here and we were keen to have him so we 
developed that."

Jefferies now has eight matches to overturn a four-point deficit on Hibernian 
and keep Dunfermline in the SPL.

He said: "I know it's going to be tough but it's going to be tough for clubs 
above us as well. "But I wouldn't have taken the job if I didn't think there 
was a chance."

Jefferies confirmed that the current assistant manager, Gerry McCabe, will 
remain at the club as his No2.

His long-time partner Billy Brown – who worked with Jefferies at Gala 
Fairydean, Berwick Rangers, Falkirk, Bradford City, Kilmarnock and two spells 
at Hearts – is now assistant manager at relegation rivals Hibernian.
 