
Dean Richards' dream of taking Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> back to the Premiership at 
the first attempt is still alive but only after his team squeezed past Leeds in 
the second leg of the play-offs at Kingston Park on Sunday. They play Bedford 
in the two-leg final starting on 23 May.

Newcastle went into Sunday's game five points behind despite being 31 points 
clear of Leeds after the regular season, and seemed well on their way when 
Jimmy Gopperth landed his first two penalties within 18 minutes.

Their pack were on top, the forwards were bullying the mauls and bossing the 
lineouts, and Leeds looked destined for a heavy beating as they struggled to 
get out of their own half. Richards had made six late changes to his announced 
side and the extra bulk was paying dividends with the wind and rain at their 
backs.

The Kiwi fly-half added two more penalties before half-time but in the five 
minutes leading up to the interval there were the first signs of a possible 
Leeds revival. Joe Ford, son of the former England coach, Mike, landed his only 
kickable chance of the half and then reduced the aggregate lead to a point with 
a drop goal five minutes after the interval. But that was as good as it got.

Gopperth, who is on his way to Leinster, kept Leeds in the game by pushing two 
penalties wide but his one success of the second half was good enough.

Leeds defended gamely and denied Newscastle a stiff of a try, but Richards' 
side go on to meet Bedford who do not qualify for promotion because their 
ground at Goldington Road does not meet Premiership standards. However, a 
Bedford victory against Newcastle could save London Welsh from relegation.

Newcastle Tait; Catterick, Hufanga (Hodgson, 74), Powell, Shortland; Gopperth, 
Fury; Shields (Golding, 50), Thompson (Vickers, 66) , Tomaszczyk (Hall, 66), 
Del Fava, MacLeod, Wilson (Tu'ifua, 70), Welch (capt), Hogg.

Pens Gopperth 5.

Leeds McColl; Goss, Griffin, Burdon, D Doherty; Ford, J Doherty (Hampton, 55); 
Harris (Imiolek, 50) , Freer, Tussac (Currie, 50), Green, Phillips (Beck, 59), 
Baldwin (Walker, 55), Rowan (capt), Burrows.

Pen Ford. Drop goal Ford.

Referee Wayne Barnes (RFU)
 