
While Jimmy Hill’s football career recedes into a monochrome era of Woodbines 
and reinforced toecaps – he was a wing half, which tells you everything you 
need to know – his later role as a TV football pundit will be more readily 
recalled.

Jimmy Hill changed the way football is played, watched and talked about | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-maximum-wage-three-points-match-of-the-day>
Hill was the first former professional to do the job, a trailblazer as he was 
in so many areas of the national game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-maximum-wage-three-points-match-of-the-day>
, and more forthright in his views than many of those who followed.

Not that this made him a national treasure. Jimmy wore hostility like a badge 
of honour. The current presenter ofMatch of the Day, Gary Lineker, told me 
about a match at Goodison, where Des Lynam and Alan Hansen were gently 
barracked, as is traditional, on their way to the TV gantry, but when Jimmy 
appeared the good-natured banter turned venomous. “Jimmy Hill, you’re a wanker, 
you’re a wanker” was the refrain. Jimmy turned to his colleagues, beaming. 
“There you are, that’s fame for you,” he said.

“To Jimmy, it was justification for what he did on TV,” Lineker told me. “He 
knew football, having had experience of every role in the game; fan, player, 
coach, chairman, director – he was a qualified referee for goodness sake – but 
he also knew television, and his view was there was no point in being 
mealy-mouthed. It wasn’t an act. He was passionate about the game and had 
strong opinions he believed in expressing. Sometimes, of course, they came from 
left of field.”

But not from the political left. If your experience of Jimmy on TV dates no 
further back than his latter days at theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> – who terminated his contract amid some 
acrimony at the end of the 1990s – and hisSunday Supplement on Sky from 1999 to 
2007, you may view him as a grumpy old man with values distilled in the 19th 
hole at a suburban golf club, a kind of Peter Alliss-lite.

That is not to say the Supplement was not enjoyable, like pretty well every 
project of Hill’s in 40 years of television. Admittedly, some of the fun came 
from Jimmy’s pretence that the Sunday morning paper review was broadcast from 
his lovely rural home. To foster this illusion, he used to introduce the 
commercial breaks saying he had to attend to some domestic duty, many of which 
seemed straight from aCarry On script. “Well, I’m off to peel the turnips now,” 
he would announce, or: “It’s high time I went and basted my meat.”

But late-period Hill misrepresents the man grievously. From a pretty decent 
footballing career with Brentford and Fulham, aided by a speed of thought not 
always present in his team-mates, through his successful campaign, as chairman 
of the PFA, to topple the feudal regime under which footballers were kept, his
innovative management at Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-dies-aged-87-fulham-alzheimers>
, and his time as head of sport at London Weekend Television from 1968 to 1972, 
Hill was nothing less than a revolutionary.

The effects of Jimmy’s revolutions in football and broadcasting are still 
being felt today. Take the panel of four outspoken pundits he introduced to ITV 
for the World Cup in 1970. Quite apart from its effect on football punditry, 
it’s a format that thrives more than 40 years later on programmes such as
Strictly Come Dancing and X-Factor.

Also at ITV he brought the much-loved Brian Moore, authoritative without being 
strident, to London Weekend, to commentate and to hostOn The Ball, a Saturday 
lunchtime football magazine show way ahead of anything the BBC was doing at the 
time. “We devised as many innovative ideas as possible to attract a young 
audience,” Jimmy wrote in his autobiography. “One idea was a penalty 
competition where kids took spot-kicks against professional goalkeepers,” a 
tradition that lives on in programmes such as Sky’sSoccer AM.

Under Hill’s stewardship World Of Sport, of blessed memory, was spruced up, 
too, with the introduction of the ITV Seven, combining the races covered into a 
handy betting format.

Jimmy Hill: a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill-a-life-in-pictures>
Away from TV, Hill’s innovations as manager of Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> in the 1960s – his espousal of 
all-seat stadiums and proper readable match programmes, and his rewriting of 
the Eton Boating Song as the Sky Blue Song – have passed into legend in that 
part of the Midlands (A statue of Hill at the Ricoh Arena was unveiled by the 
man himself in 2011). What is less well advertised are Jimmy’s “pop and crisps” 
nights at Highfield Road, when he got his players to stay behind and sign 
autographs and hand out free snacks to hundreds of young fans – not a million 
miles away from the “community work” football makes such a fuss of these days.

Decades before fans’ forums, footballers’ Twitter feeds, and radio ’phone-ins, 
Jimmy was an advocate of interaction with fans, which did not always go as 
smoothly as Jimmy wished. In his early days onMatch of the Day, he introduced a 
feature in which a supporter got to interview the manager of his club, but was 
requested not to ask anything too personal or controversial, a plan that was 
scuppered by the Spurs fan who kicked off his chat with then manager Keith 
Burkinshaw by asking: “Why, did you sell Pat Jennings to Arsenal? Why?”

Jimmy was what is sometimes described as “a real football man,” but he was a 
real TV man as well. He is undoubtedly godfather to Gary Neville, until this 
month making waves as a Sky analyst, as well as Lineker at the BBC.

“My first presenting job was the Euro 96 highlights,” said Gary, “Jimmy was my 
pundit and he was hugely helpful to me. I was shaking like a leaf, of course, 
but he was very encouraging. He was totally involved in all aspects of the 
programme, and gave me lots of advice, some of which was obvious, some not, 
telling me to slow down, when to listen more, that kind of thing.”

The former Arsenal goalkeeper Bob Wilson is among many broadcasters who pay 
tribute to Hill in their autobiographies. Wilson praises Hill’s versatility, 
recalling that when the 1971 Arsenal Double team needed a Cup final song – all 
teams had one back then – Jimmy altered the lyrics of Rule Britannia to “Good 
old Arsenal, we’re proud to say that name, While we sing this song, we’ll win 
the game,” for which, given his massive contribution to football and 
broadcasting, he should be forgiven.

Martin Kelner is the author of Sit Down and Cheer, a History of Sport on TV, 
published by Wisden Sports Writing, £8.99
 