
On a day when the match appeared almost secondary to incidents in the stands, 
Brighton ensured that promotion to the Premier League remains in their own 
hands thanks to goals from Sam Baldock, Jiri Skalak and Tomer Hemed to defeat 
the already-relegated Charlton on another day of protest from the London club’s 
furious supporters.

Following Burnley’s win at Preston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/22/preston-burnley-championship-match-report>
 on Friday and Middlesbrough’s draw with Ipswich, Albion’s win means all three 
automatic promotion contenders are on 87 points with two games remaining. Chris 
Hughton’s team, who have the worst goal difference of the trio, travel to Boro 
on the final day in what is likely to be a shootout.

The manager said Brighton are “desperate” to be promoted but believes there is 
“equal pressure on all three clubs” even though his side would have been 
considered dark horses at the campaign’s outset.

Brighton certainly deserve credit for keeping focused in a poisonous 
atmosphere. After their demotion was confirmedby the midweek draw at Bolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/charlton-athletic-relegated-league-one-bolton>
, Charlton fans again turned up the heat on the Belgian owner, Roland 
Duchâtelet, and chief executive, Katrien Meire, who last week “apologised for 
our mistakes”. While sightings of Duchâtelet at the club have been rare this 
season, he held talks with José Riga about the manager’s future last Thursday.

Riga confirmed a short meeting took place but no decision has been taken on 
whether he will remain in charge next season. Asked if he knew how to solve the 
club’s problems Riga said: “It’s really difficult to say but communication is 
not enough. It’s about acting and decisions, there needs to be collaboration.”

That looks a long way off. Before kick-off around 5,000 supporters marched to 
The Valley singing anti-Duchâtelet songs with the visitors offering plenty of 
support. At one point in the first half the away end were chanting “We want 
Roland out” but the standout moment came a minute into the game when home fans 
launched hundreds of beach balls and balloons on to the pitch. The 
demonstration forced a six-minute delay, allowing for the pitch to be cleared. 
Meire was pictured smirking from the directors’ box.

The significance of a win for Brighton could almost be forgotten in such a 
surreal atmosphere, yet their concentration did not wane and within seconds of 
the restart they were ahead. A pass from Jiri Skalak was knocked down by Connor 
Goldson and Baldock was on hand to sweep home from close range.

Hughton was pleased by their reaction. “It was evident there would be 
protests,” he said. “We had warned players it would be early and to use the 
opportunity to keep warm but it was impossible to prepare for it.”

Charlton did not play badly and had several first-half chances. In the 12th 
minute Morgan Fox connected with Ademola Lookman’s corner, only for his effort 
to be smothered by David Stockdale. Jordan Cousins saw a strike blocked by 
Hemed and Johann Gudmundsson also found the side-netting.

The match was halted again seconds into the second half due to another deluge 
from the stands and when play was allowed to continue Baldock almost repeated 
his trick, shooting across goal and narrowly wide. But then Brighton’s lead was 
taken away in the 51st minute. Cousins’ cross from the left evaded three 
players, leaving a loosely marked Gudmundsson to tap in from six yards.

Brighton’s response was quite impressive and they regained the advantage 
within four minutes. Skalak took Beram Kayal’s clever feed in his stride and 
drove an unstoppable effort and into the top right corner.

While that was a strike fitting enough to win any game, Hemed made sure of 
three vital points in injury time from the penalty spot after Rod Fanni brought 
down Anthony Knockaert.
 