
Joe Ledley's second-half header gave Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> a deserved point against Rennes 
at the Route de Lorient but Neil Lennon was left to count the cost of a 
defensive mistake.

Around the half-hour a long punt by the home goalkeeper, Benoît Costil, was 
making its way harmlessly through to Fraser Forster in Celtic's goal but Cha 
Du-ri helped it on then watched in horror as the ball slipped past his 
goalkeeper and into the net. The South Korean was playing in midfield and back 
as the last man only because Glenn Loovens and Charlie Mulgrew were still at 
the other end following the set piece.

It looked as if another disappointing European night was on the cards for the 
Scottish side but in the 70th minute Ledley flicked a Mulgrew free-kick over 
Costil to give the visitors a draw, although they remain bottom ofGroup I 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/?cpid=-35&ctid=-35&lang=0&pStr=Cup_Comp&r=1> on 
goal difference.

The Celtic manager, Lennon, said he was satisfied with a point. "It would have 
been a real shame having played so well to lose a game with the goal we 
conceded," Lennon said. "But credit to the players in the second half, we 
weathered a wee bit of a storm.

"Fraser Forster showed his character, tremendous saves, but we created some 
good chances and I felt on the balance of play we should have won the game. 
It's a testament to the team after the weekend. They come and show the quality. 
I'm very, very proud of them tonight."

Lennon praised Ledley, who played out of position at left-back. "He's a 
terrific player and no matter where you ask him to play he does a great job for 
the team," the manager said. "He's gradually got better and better and he was 
marvellous tonight against really top-class players. To get the goal was a 
bonus but his overall display was fantastic."

Celtic started confidently and Ki Sung-yueng had an early drive from long 
range which forced a save. Ki then went down in the box following a challenge 
from Vincent Pajot but his claims for a penalty went unheeded by the Polish 
referee, Robert Malek.

The French club worked their way into the game and in the 12th minute the 
captain, Kader Mangane, headed a looping free-kick from Julien Féret wide at 
the back post before a drive by Youssouf Hadji was headed over by Victor 
Wanyama for a corner, which the visitors survived.

Celtic's first real chance came in the 24th minute when the stand-in captain, 
Mulgrew, threaded a long pass through to Anthony Stokes, who smartly turned 
Mangane, but Costil diverted the Irishman's shot over the bar for a corner 
which came to nothing.

That near miss appeared to energise Lennon's side but they were undone when 
the mix-up between Du-ri and Forster handed the home side the lead.

Celtic still looked a bit shell-shocked at the start of the second half. In 
the 49th minute, though, Loovens did well to deny Alexander Tettey who had 
burst into the box to get on to a pass by Abdoulrazak Boukari, the Dutchman 
shepherding the ball back to Forster.

The game swung from end to end and in the 70th minute Celtic got their deserts 
when Ledley jumped high in a packed goalmouth to head in. Both sides went all 
out for the winner and in the dying seconds Forster made yet another fine block 
from Jonathan Pitroipa, but the visitors were worthy of a point.
 