
Joey Barton’s deflected free-kick after six minutes returned Burnley to the 
top of theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> by 
sealing a 1-0 win over Lancashire rivals Preston.

The 33-year-old’s third goal of the season was diverted beyond a flat-footed 
Chris Kirkland by Alan Browne’s head as the Clarets extended their unbeaten run 
to 21 league games and amped up the pressure on Middlesbrough and Brighton, who 
they now lead by one and three points respectively.

It was revealed this week that midfielder Barton had been voted the fourth 
best player in the division by opposing managers, behind team-mate and eventual 
winner Andre Gray. Both players were brought to Turf Moor in the campaign’s 
opening few weeks.

Gray’s 24 goals, 22 of which have come with the Clarets, have grabbed the 
attention but free-agent Barton looks a class above at this level and his 
capture will prove to be an astute bit of business by the Championship club if 
he can carry Sean Dyche’s side across the line.

There may have been a degree of fortune in the early winner from the former 
QPR midfielder, but he was at the heart of everything in an opening half-hour 
when the visitors threatened to run amok as Simon Grayson’s decision to utilise 
a 3-5-2 formation backfired.

The Clarets made inroads down the right flank in particular and George Boyd 
fired a warning shot wide after 34-year-old goalkeeper Kirkland failed to get 
good distance when punching Matt Lowton’s cross away.

The veteran was unable to do anything with Barton’s free-kick from 30 yards 
out which was diverted past the North End goalkeeper by the head of Browne, who 
was standing in the wall.

Some of the visiting support spilled onto the pitch and it was a surprise that 
the extra stewards then drafted in were not monitoring more goal celebrations 
in the following minutes. Sam Vokes narrowly missed Gray’s fizzing cross across 
the six-yard box, the latter almost steered one Barton free-kick into the top 
corner and Ben Mee flicked another set piece just wide.

A pair of blocks denied goalbound efforts from Scott Arfield and Andre Gray 
before Grayson finally decided to dispense with his system and revert to a flat 
back four. North End looked more comfortable in that template and displayed a 
bit more fight, too, as Joe Garner and Lowton got into a stoppage-time scuffle.

For all Burnley’s dominance it remained 1-0 at the break, as it did early in 
the second period despite the frame of Kirkland’s goal being struck twice in 
quick succession. Gray’s sweetly-struck half-volley came off the England cap’s 
near post and while the initial danger was cleared, Boyd landed an effort from 
distance on the top of the crossbar from the second wave of Clarets attack. 
Arfield and Calum Woods traded long-range efforts wide before Lowton had to 
block from Jermaine Beckford after the striker had cleverly flicked the ball 
over Michael Keane’s head.

For once Barton made the wrong decision when firing a shot into Kirkland’s 
legs from near the byline after he had rolled Browne and looked set to roll the 
ball across the six-yard box. Burnley’s wastefulness did not look like coming 
back to haunt them, though, as Preston were creating little at the other end – 
Tom Heaton saving from Daniel Johnson on one of the rare occasions he was 
called upon, while substitute Callum Robinson’s volley deep into stoppage time 
went over.

The victory leaves Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley>, and 
possibly Barton, ever closer to a top-flight return with Dyche’s side having 
just two fixtures to fulfil.
 