
John Guidetti’s second-half strike gave Celtic a deserved 2-1 Premiership win 
overSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> in Paisley in a 
match of sporadic inspiration and excitement.

St Mirren’s midfielder Thomas Reilly hit the woodwork in the third minute but 
that was the closest either side came to a goal until three minutes from the 
break.

A tangle between Guidetti, St Mirren goalkeeper Marian Kello and player-coach 
Jim Goodwin, in trying to deal with a Scott Brown cut-back, ended up with the 
ball crossing the line for Celtic’s opening goal, Guidetti claiming and 
credited with it.

St Mirren midfielder Kenny McLean levelled four minutes after the break but 
the champions stormed back and their second goal arrived in the 63rd minute 
when Guidetti fired past Kello.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager Ronny Deila will 
now prepare for the visit of Dinamo Zagreb in the Europa League on Thursday 
knowing that a better performance will be required if they are to secure their 
first Group D win.

Swedish striker Guidetti, who scored his first goal since arriving on loan 
from Man City in the 3-0 League Cup victory over Hearts on Wednesday, will be 
ineligible for the European tie so Deila must look elsewhere for a match winner.

St Mirren, with only one league win this season, were certainly not lacking in 
effort but will have to find a way to start gathering points before the 
pressure on manager Tommy Craig intensifies, although once again he was hit by 
injuries.

Jason Naismith, Sean Kelly, John McGinn and Thomas Reilly came into his side, 
with Adam Drury, Gary Teale and Isaac Osbourne out and Gregg Wylde starting on 
the bench.

Kris Commons and Jason Denayer dropped out of the Celtic side through injury, 
replaced by 19-year-old Eoghan O’Connell and winger Mubarak Wakaso, the latter 
making his league debut.

There was an eventful start to the game. Kello had to rush from his goal to 
thwart Guidetti before Celtic left-back Emilio Izaguirre flashed the ball 
across the St Mirren goal, failing to find a touch.

Reilly then sent a thundering strike from 25 yards past Celtic goalkeeper 
Craig Gordon only to see it crash off the crossbar. The visitors looked the 
more likely to get the breakthrough. In the 12th minute a free-kick from wide 
on the right by Anthony Stokes found Hoops defender Virgil van Dijk but on the 
stretch the Dutchman volleyed over the bar.

However, until Stokes fired just wide of the target from 20 yards in the 25th 
minute, little more of note had occurred.

Moments later, McLean headed a free-kick from James Marwood cross across the 
goal and past the post when he might have hit the target at least.

By then the game had turned into a scrap, at times almost literally. Six 
minutes from the break Reilly was rightly booked for taking Wakaso out of the 
game on the touchline after the Ghana winger looked like leaving him in his 
wake to speed towards goal. The first half looked ending goalless but in the 
42nd minute Izaguirre played in Brown who raced into the penalty area to cut 
the ball across where Guidetti, Kello and Goodwin all came together, with the 
Hoops striker happy to see the ball end up over the line.

Wylde replaced Jeroen Tesselaar for the start of the second half with the home 
side clearly buoyed by their dressing room pep talk. St Mirren’s leveller in 
the 49th minute began with a terrible throw out by Gordon who then had to make 
a fine save from Naismith but ultimately to no avail, as McLean fired in the 
loose ball.

Celtic rallied and restored their lead when a clever reverse pass from Stokes 
found Guidetti racing clear of the Buddies defence, and he rifled a shot from 
14 yards past Kello before celebrating more enthusiastically than he had for 
the scrambled opener. Guidetti soon made way for Stefan Scepovic but it was Van 
Dijk who went close to getting a third in the 75th minute with a 25-yard 
free-kick which just missed Kello’s right-hand post. The visitors finished the 
game stronger with both Brown and Callum McGregor having long-distance efforts 
before the final whistle.
 