
This may not have been the most surprising result of the weekend or even the 
most significant but, forSt Helens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sthelens>
, it was another indicator they are slowly piecing their season back together.

Plagued by inconsistency and injuries during the opening three months of the 
season, this felt like a game Keiron Cunningham’s side could easily have lost 
several weeks ago, not least when they were trailing by eight points heading 
into the final quarter.

But as Cunningham’s big players return from lengthy injury layoffs, the Saints 
are starting to find ways to win games.They edged out Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/leeds-st-helens-super-league-match-report>
 in a similarly close contest last week and this was another such victory, 
which suggests that, even though they are not quite at their best yet, St 
Helens do have the makings of a top-four side this season.

Mark Percival, Atelea Vea and Jonny Lomax have all given Cunningham’s side an 
undoubted lift, with Lomax’s return after over a year out with a serious knee 
injury again grabbing a large amount of the headlines with the late try that 
ultimately sealed victory, with the Saints now two points off the top four 
following results elsewhere this weekend.

“We’ve got the win but we can play better,” warned Cunningham afterwards. “But 
winning can become a habit. It’s two in a row for us now and that’s pleasing. 
When you start to get your key players back you can forge better combinations, 
as you could see today.”

And those words from Cunningham will offer hope for his opposite number, Daryl 
Powell, who is still without eight frontline players himself. For an hour here 
they were on a par with St Helens but the absences seemed to catch up with the 
hosts in the final quarter, as well as another injury, this time to the prop, 
Andy Lynch. They remain in eighth, only four points above the bottom four, but 
despite a worrying run of form,theCastleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> coach refused to panic 
post-match.

“If we continue to work that hard like we did today, things will flip for us,” 
said Powell. “We took a massive step forward today and I thought our attitude 
was great. We just made a couple of errors which they punished and they put 
their foot on our throat and it did for us.”

Tries for Joel Monaghan and Denny Solomona ensured Castleford led 10-6 at 
half-time and they put themselves in a position to win after tries for Mike 
McMeeken and Jy Hitchcox cancelled out a Shannon McDonnell try to make it 20-12 
in their favour.

But as Castleford’s injury-hit side began to tire, the Saints took advantage. 
Kyle Amor crashed over before Joe Greenwood scored his second of the afternoon 
and, although the Tigers fought late on, Lomax’s well-executed finish 
rubber-stamped a win for St Helens that, in a heavily congestedSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> table, may well turn out to be 
vital in the long run.

Castleford Hampshire; Hitchcox, Crooks, Monaghan, Solomona; Millington, Gale; 
Lynch, Milner, Jewitt, Cook, McMeeken, Massey.Interchange McShane, Maher, 
Springer, Fitzsimons.

Tries Monaghan, Solomona, McMeeken, Hitchcox. Goals Gale 2.

St Helens McDonnell; Lomax, Peyroux, Percival, Owens; Fages, Walsh; Walmsley, 
Roby, Amor, Vea, Greenwood, Wilkin.Interchange McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Tasi, 
Richards, Knowles.

Tries Greenwood 2, McDonnell, Amor, Lomax. Goals Walsh 5.

Referee G Hewer. Attendance 6,658.
 