
Jordan Rhodes opened his goalscoring account for Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> with a dramatic 
last-minute equaliser to earn his side a 1-1 draw at MK Dons – and send them 
back to the top of the Championship.

Dean Bowditch’s ninth-minute goal appeared to have given relegation-battling 
Dons a vital win, but Rhodes climbed off the bench to net a leveller deep into 
stoppage time at stadium:mk. It was Rhodes’s first goal for Middlesbroughsince 
joining from Blackburn last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/jordan-rhodes-blackburn-middlesbrough-agree-fee-transfer>
.

The head coach, Aitor Karanka, said: “It was an amazing, massive point because 
this game was tough and every single game is going to be really tough from now 
until the end.

“So for this reason the main thing is we are at the top of the table with a 
game in hand so I am really pleased, the players are really pleased. If we had 
scored at the beginning of the second half we would have won the game for sure.”

Middlesbrough went into the game having picked up just one point from their 
previous three matches, yet Karanka still initially opted to keep Rhodes on the 
bench. He was forced into a defensive change, with Tomas Kalas replacing the 
injured Daniel Ayala, and his side’s back four was breached inside the first 10 
minutes.

Middlesbrough equipped to handle the pressure in frantic Championship run-in | 
Jacob Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/05/middlesbrough-pressure-championship-aitor-karanka>
Kyle McFadzean launched a routine long ball forward, but with Ben Gibson 
ball-watching, Bowditch was able to gain possession and turn on the edge of the 
area. The striker’s low shot was weakly struck, but the goalkeeper Dimi 
Konstantopoulos somehow allowed it to squirm from his grasp and roll into the 
net.

Boro almost responded immediately, but while Cristhian Stuani raced into the 
area to latch on to David Nugent’s through ball, his shot was too close to 
goalkeeper David Martin, who saved with his legs. That was a rare moment of 
threat from a Middlesbrough side who have lost their way in the last month or 
so, and Martin was not called into action again before the interval.

Stewart Downing cut in from the right-hand side before drilling the ball 
narrowly over the crossbar, but the former England international was a 
peripheral presence for the majority of the night, with theMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> back four suffering precious few 
scares.

The hosts were hardly rampant themselves, but with Jay Emmanuel-Thomas 
covering a lot of ground at the heart of midfield, they mounted a successful 
rearguard action that successfully curtailed their opponents’ attacking threat. 
They came close to adding to their lead at the start of the second half, but 
McFadzean’s glanced header from Jake Forster-Caskey’s free-kick was saved by 
Konstantopoulos.

That sparked Middlesbrough’s best attacking spell of the game, but the 
visitors spurned two decent chances within the space of 60 seconds. First, 
Nugent rolled a 12-yard shot wide after a committed run into the area had taken 
him past two MK Dons defenders, then, after Stuani’s shot was saved by Martin, 
Ritchie De Laet saw his follow-up effort blocked on the goalline.

Rhodes came on for the final 22 minutes in an attempt to change the game, and 
the Scot made his decisive intervention deep into stoppage time. De Laet swung 
over a hanging cross from the left and Rhodes looped a header over Martin and 
into the net.

“If you had said to me or the supporters in the summer that we could be in 
this position at this time of the season, we would have signed up for that,” 
added Karanka.

And the Dons manager, Karl Robinson, said the late sucker-punch from Rhodes 
was hard to swallow. “I’m gutted,” said Robinson. “I said to my staff that we 
might have scored too early against one of the best teams in the league.

“I’m so proud of the players but one individual error has cost us again. 
That’s the man in the middle. Josh Murphy should have had a blatant penalty in 
the first half, and the referee is looking right down the line. They’ve got a 
massive slice of luck with that.

“We should have had a penalty on Saturday and we should have had one here. 
This is a young kid learning the game and I can’t wait to get downstairs and 
speak to the referee.”
 