
Jordan Rhodes turned the second half of Blackburn Rovers’ FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie at Newport into a showcase 
for his attacking talents as he hauled his side out of the mire and into a 
fourth- round trip to Oxford United.

Rovers were in danger of being sunk in this third-round match, postponed from 
9 January when the pitch was waterlogged, after Chris Brown was shown a red 
card in the 10th minute and Newport’s inspirational captain, Mark Byrne, had 
equalised the visitors opener from a penalty with a magnificent strike on the 
half-hour.

Carlisle pitch perfect and preparing for emotional return home after floods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/19/carlisle-united-floods-fa-cup-replay-yeovil>
Newport, ranked 50 places below their Championship opponents, had all the 
momentum and most of the possession up until the interval when Paul Lambert 
decided to send on Rhodes. No sooner had he stepped on to the field than the 
balance of the game changed.

The question for Blackburn’s manager now is can he keep the Scottish 
international at the club after January? With Championship rivals Middlesbrough 
and Sheffield Wednesday reputed to be willing to spend more than £10m for 
Rhodes, the 25-year-old could not have picked a better time to display his 
striking credentials.

“I haven’t heard anything about Jordan leaving since I’ve been here,” said 
Lambert after the game. “As far as I am concerned he is our player and we are 
delighted with his contribution. Until a manager picks up the phone and asks 
the question then I don’t have a problem but I haven’t had any calls at all. 
He’s a terrific professional, he gives it everything he’s got in all the games 
and we are delighted with him.”

Rhodes struck in the 75th minute as he ghosted away from his marker in the box 
to head home a wonderful cross from the left by Tom Lawrence. It was his 10th 
goal of the season, and 83rd for the club, and he was delighted to have turned 
the match around. “It’s great to come to a tough place like this and come away 
with a win. It was hard after going ahead and then losing Chris Brown, and then 
what a goal from their midfielder Mark Byrne,” he said. “But we said before the 
match, as long as we work hard, then we’ll be OK. We scored one more goal than 
them and that’s all that matters. We’ll take it.”

The treacherous surface seemed tailor made for an upset and County, coming 
into the game on a high after their first league victory since the end of 
November at York City two days earlier, gave the big crowd plenty to shout 
about in the frantic opening exchanges.

Aaron Collins, whose goal had secured the win on Saturday, threatened with his 
first touch in the Rovers penalty area and there was no sign of nerves from the 
home players as they attempted to give their new manager, Warren Feeney, 
another win on his first home game in charge.

But Rovers, who had scored only one goal in their previous six matches , took 
the lead after eight minutes. Ben Marshall drew a foul from Scott Barrow after 
running on to a return ball in the box from Chris Taylor and the referee, 
Charles Breakspear, had no hesitation in pointing to the penalty spot.

Marshall stepped up and placed the ball beyond the left hand of Joe Day. If 
that was the perfect start for Lambert’s side, their joy was brief because 
Brown raised his studs in a clumsy tackle on the Newport midfielder Medy Elito 
and was given an instant red card. It took five minutes to get Elito off the 
field on the stretcher and he had to have 18 stitches put into a deep gash in 
his left leg.

County pressed high up the pitch to keep Rovers contained in their own half 
for long periods and Byrne fired in a fierce half-volley from just outside the 
box to force a great flying save from Jason Steele. That may have denied County 
a quick equaliser but there was no stopping Byrne’s next effort.

Lambert’s response was to turn to Rhodes earlier than expected and almost 
immediately everything revolved around the substitute. When Connor Dymond 
clattered into Tommy Spurr on the right-hand touchline to concede a free-kick, 
it provided an excellent opportunity to exploit Rhodes’ aerial power. The 
initial delivery did not find its intended target but, when Lawrence got a 
second chance to float the ball into the box, he picked out Rhodes, who headed 
home.

“I’m not going to be too hard on the lads because they gave it everything but 
we are all a little disappointed we couldn’t keep that momentum going in the 
second half,” Feeney said. “For where we are in the league and the small squad 
we’ve got I’ve told the lads they can be proud.”
 