
Anthony “Million Dollar” Crolla failed to offer up a display to match his 
moniker as the Manchester fighter lost his WBA lightweight title to Jorge 
Linares, the 31-year-old Venezuelan, whose triumph gave him a fourth world 
crown across three different divisions, nine years after his first.

After an intriguing contest which went the distance, the score was a unanimous 
verdict of 115-114, 117-111, 115-113 to Linares. It felt the right result and 
margin of victory as Crolla won barely three rounds of the 12.

Anthony Joshua could face Wladimir Klitschko if Tyson Fury loses belts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/anthony-joshua-could-face-wladimir-klitschko-if-tyson-fury-loses-belts>
The 29-year-old can be proud of taking the teak-tough Linares the distance and 
there is no argument here regarding his heart and willingness to stand and 
trade with his opponent.

Equally to his credit was Crolla’s post-defeat honesty. “I have no 
complaints,” he said. “He rocked my world, I’m not going to lie, my head is 
still spinning. I am absolutely gutted. It was a pleasure to share a ring with 
him and he is the best fighter I have fought but I never celebrate losing. I 
have to make sure I win a rematch.”

While Eddie Hearn, Crolla’s promoter, confirmed an “agreement” for a second 
meeting, the gracious Linares said: “We gave Manchester a beautiful fight and 
we can do it again. Why not come back to Manchester in the future? I love it 
here.”

As Crolla conceded, the glaring truth is Linares turned in a far classier 
exhibition of technical and pure punching acumen. Each time he connected it 
hurt Crolla. The same cannot be said of the Mancunian who did, of course, pose 
questions of Linares on occasion – just not often enough.

The first round had each man taking tentative shots and refusing to give 
ground. Crolla would have been be the happier of the fighters, though, getting 
in behind his left jab more than Linares managed with his own.

Those opening three minutes were illustrative of the tactical approach the 
home fighter had spoken of before the bout but at the start of the second round 
Linares managed to unload quicker, though one blow was definitely below 
Crolla’s belt. By the third round the sense already was that while Crolla may 
have been the title-holder he would have to turn in a career-defining display 
if he was to emerge the victor.

Linares underlined this with a sweet combination; later a left uppercut hurt 
Crolla, who countered by walking Linares into a corner and landing, though his 
opponent was quick to wriggle away.

By the start of the fourth Crolla responded by finding his best form, landing 
a heavy right and backing up the Venezuelan. Moments later the referee Terry 
O’Connor warned Linares about a low blow. Yet he repeated the tactic – to boos 
from the crowd – and the referee was forced once more to step in.

If this made Crolla the clear winner of the fourth, the fifth began with him 
pinning Linares back with his heaviest connections so far. Linares was now cut, 
over his left eye, but this did not prevent him clumping Crolla with a vicious 
round-house to his temple.

The tear-up that had been anticipated was unfolding and as they broke for the 
bell before the sixth, Crolla had claimed a second round in a row.

Yet this was about as good as it got for Crolla. Having made the ring-walk to 
the sounds of the White Stripes’ Seven Nation Army he failed to find the heavy 
artillery required to stop Linares as the ensuing rounds followed a pattern of 
the challenger landing thudding shots that Crolla found difficult to 
replicate.Crolla’s preparation

He had described this as a potential “legacy fight”; one which, if he won, 
could propel him to the bright lights and lucrative pay days of Las Vegas. But 
in front of a crowd that numbered around 15,000 and which included Crolla’s 
friend Wayne Rooney, Michael Carrick, plus Leicester City’s Wes Morgan and 
Danny Simpson, he came up short and by the final bell grimaced, seeming to know 
as much.

Crolla should come again, of course, and the hope will be that this night can 
be drawn upon when he seeks to regain a world belt.
 