
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> have confirmed 
that their captain, José Fonte, will not be part of the squad to face Liverpool 
in the EFL Cup semi-final on Wednesday.

The 33-year-old defender, who has 18 months left on his contract, handed in a 
transfer request on Thursday, with the club’s director of football, Les Reed, 
saying that Fonte wanted to “explore opportunities for a transfer”.

Southampton captain José Fonte submits transfer request
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/southampton-jose-fonte-submits-transfer-request>
Fonte, who joined Southampton in 2010 from Crystal Palace, was absent for 
Saturday’s FA Cup draw against Norwich and Claude Puel has decided to leave him 
out again, although the manager refused to rule out selecting the Portugal 
international in the near future.

He said: “José won’t participate for this game. We will see for the next game. 
It is important to keep stability. We do not know the future of José, it is a 
difficult situation in the market. I respect José, it is not an easy situation 
for the staff or players. It is difficult.

“We will see [about including him in the future], I do not comment on the 
possibility [of him moving]. I think it is important to respect the other 
players. It is an opportunity also for José to view different opportunities and 
it is important to respect this. For me, it is important to keep stability in 
defence first, and second, we will see what the situation of José in this 
market is.

“If José came to leave the club, it is normal for us to look at other 
opportunities [to buy players to replace him]. It is important for us to remain 
open in the market and look at other opportunities, we do not know about other 
opportunities yet, it is difficult for the club to improve the squad this 
month.”

The Southampton midfielder Sofiane Boufal will miss the Africa Cup of Nations 
because of a knee injury. The 23-year-old was due to link up with Morocco for 
the competition but has been forced to pull out and Puel is hopeful the player 
will be fit within a few weeks.

He said: “Boufal is injured with his knee. His knee needs operating and he 
cannot do the African Cup. He will stay with us to recover. I hope he can come 
back in a few weeks.

“It is not a bad injury, after the operation the reaction will tell. It is 
important to get a good recovery. He can stay calm because now he is an 
important player for the club, he has quality and it is important he comes back 
strong.”
 