
Josh Magennis's late strike rescued a 3-3 draw for Aberdeen in a dramatic 
second-half goal spree atDunfermline.Magennis scored with two minutes left as 
the Dons showed great character to cancel out the Pars' two-goal lead.

Andrew Considine opened the scoring in first-half injury time but the hosts 
responded after the break through Andy Barrowman, David Graham and Liam 
Buchanan. Alex Keddie gaveAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> hope with an own goal before 
Magennis made amends for missing a host of earlier chances with the equaliser.

Hearts eased their numerous concerns with a 2-1 Scottish Premier League win 
overInverness at Tynecastle. Hearts' off-field problems are well-documented, 
with their owner, Vladimir Romanov, voicing his desire to sell the club, who 
are £35m in debt and have failed to pay their players for a second successive 
month. But a four-match winless run was brought to an end with second-half 
goals from Rudi Skacel and Eggert Jonsson, either side of a headed equaliser 
from Ross Tokely. David Templeton hit a cross inside the six-yard box and the 
ball ricocheted off Jonsson's head and in for the winning goal. Victory for
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> meant that Caley suffered 
their second straight loss and remain bottom.

Steve Lomas claimed his first victory as St Johnstone manager with a 3-1 win 
overHibernian, whose new manager, Pat Fenlon, watched from the stand. Hibs took 
the lead through Richie Towell at McDiarmid Park but goals from Francisco 
Sandaza, Marcus Haber and Dave Mackay sealed the win for the Perth Saints.

Billy Brown was in charge of team affairs for this game as caretaker manager 
but Fenlon – appointed on Friday – would have been far from impressed from his 
vantage point in the directors' box. The Edinburgh side returned to the capital 
empty-handed, and have only three wins so far in the SPL this season.

Motherwell and Dundee United could not beat each other or the conditions 
during a match played in heavy rain and fierce winds at Fir Park. United had 
some decent chances towards the end of a scrappy first half but Darren Randolph 
saved well from John Rankin and Jon Daly in quick succession.Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> pushed United back for much 
of the second half but the visitors defended their penalty area resolutely and 
held on for 0-0.
 