
Growing up a dyed-in-the-wool Wigan fan and wanting to play for the Warriors 
and nobody else, Josh Charnley probably hoped his rugby league career would one 
day end with a Grand Final victory for the club he cherishes. However, his bold 
decision to not only switch clubs, but also sports, means that dream finale has 
arrived a lot sooner than he had probably expected.

Last year Charnley watched from the stands as Kevin Sinfield lifted the Grand 
Final trophy in his final rugby league game for Leeds before moving to rugby 
union and in a peculiar twist of fate, the 25-year-old’s goal is to replicate 
Sinfield’s achievement on Saturday when Wigan return to Old Trafford once again.

Charnley’s transfer to Sale immediately after the Grand Final against 
Warrington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> will make him the 
latest in a long line of Wigan players to make the switch to rugby union; 
following in the footsteps of players such as Jason Robinson, Andy Farrell and 
Joel Tomkins, who have crossed codes in the past with varying degrees of 
success.

However, any talk of rugby union and Sale is on hold as a second Grand Final 
ring and the perfect end to his time in rugby league is at the top of 
Charnley’s agenda first. “I’ve been here before doing the pre-match media 
duties at Old Trafford, but it definitely feels a bit different this time 
knowing that it’s for one final time before I leave,” Charnley says. “It’s been 
a good year as a club; we’ve come through some ups and downs so to be here is 
brilliant.

“I’ll put the emotion to the back of my mind otherwise it could get the better 
of me. I just want to be hugging my mates with a ring on my finger come 
Saturday night, when it all ends. I’ve tried not to think about what it will be 
like pulling that famous shirt on – the one I dreamed of wearing as a kid – for 
the final time.”

Charnley has been backed by the Wigan coach, Shaun Wane, to emulate Robinson 
by becoming a dual-code England international in rugby union – which is some 
turnaround considering how his career had stalled 12 months ago. Left out of 
the squad forlast year’s Grand Final defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/leeds-wigan-super-league-grand-final-match-report>
, Charnley has rediscovered the form that at one time made him an England 
regular and one of Super League’s most prolific try-scorers, with 19 in 28 
appearances in his final season at the club.

“I sat out most of last year due to injury, not being right and coming in and 
playing a game and just getting a setback which escalated into something 
worse,” Charnley recalls. “I wasn’t at my best and I made it my goal from the 
start of the year to have a strong season for Wigan, especially when I knew it 
would be my last one. I’ve been impressed with what I’ve done, I’ve just got 
one more game to go to finish my rugby league career on a high.

“It didn’t feel right 12 months ago – sat on the sidelines watching the boys 
was a surreal experience. I didn’t want to be in that situation ever again and 
I worked hard all pre-season to get fitter and better, and I believe it has 
paid off.”

Most of the talk was of how Wigan have again defied their critics to reach Old 
Trafford for the fourth successive year – but Charnley is perhaps in a better 
position than most to speak on that topic, given how his top-flight career was 
deemed to be in serious doubt this time last season.

“Both the club and myself have answered some critics this year,” he adds. “We 
were written off due to having key individuals out injured and it is tough to 
cope with for a club known for winning all the time. It’s expected of us to be 
here at Old Trafford.”

Despite winning two Challenge Cups and one Grand Final – in 2013, against the 
same opposition as this year – Charnley is in no doubt about where victory on 
Saturday would rank before he switches codes. “To close the final chapter with 
a Grand Final ring in my hand come Saturday night would be the best thing I’ve 
ever achieved. I’ve won here in the past but I already know that this would top 
the lot.

“I’ve lived and breathed Wigan ever since I was a kid, so to be able to fulfil 
the dream of playing for the club has been incredible.

“It has been an honour to represent Wigan. It’s been a tough ask for me and my 
family to begin to say goodbye, but you never know what the future holds.”
 