
My parents were religious and going to church was a really big part of growing 
up in Orpington. I used to sing in a choir and be paid with a Mars Bar – 400 
calories of pure sugar – and also I’d sneak off, in the middle of service, to a 
newsagent for sweets and curry-flavoured chip sticks. Then, when I was 10, me 
and my sister started going just up the road to a Lutheran church where the 
American pastor did socials with pot-luck dinners and would tell everyone to 
bring along a dip or dish. It was my first experience of a really incredible 
buffet.

Mum was into convenience food so she’d do us microwavable doner kebabs, or 
pasta with a thick cheese sauce with her signature detail of loads of tomato 
ketchup stirred in. I got well fat and I remember, when starting at grammar 
school, a teacher taking me into a cupboard and saying: “We like to talk to 
pupils with weight problems.” It was really harsh; excruciating.

I think of my life up until 12, when my parents split up, as one thing and my 
life afterwards as another. Mum married someone else and it was really 
difficult and kind of catastrophic, including foodwise. My sister got kicked 
out but I lived with Mum and my stepdad and they’d buy food for themselves and 
cook for themselves and I ended up eating on my own. At 15 I was eating most of 
my meals at Orpington’s New World Noodle Bar or at boyfriends’ homes I’d stay 
over at.

Stage terrors didn’t affect my desire to eat but did affect my ability not to 
feel sick. At 17 I won the BBC NewComedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Award, although for five days 
before the final I’d not been able to keep any food down. But I was given a 
whole crate of Bacardi Breezers and thought: “They’re worth £15 so I must drink 
them all.” Seeing how drunk I was the presenter, Bob Monkhouse, kindly said: 
“In my dressing room is a fruit plate and you need to go and eat them.”

Most comediennes have polycystic ovary syndrome. Not all do, but a spookily 
large amount. I discovered I had it when I was 21-ish. POS can really mess with 
your hormones, menstruation and moods and makes it easy to put on a “middle” 
and hard to get it off. So I’d get freaked out about my body. I started going 
to WeightWatchers but the snacks were £7 each and it was too much like 
Scientology for me.


My attitude changed after I miraculously survived a car accident. A lorry 
carrying logs drove over the car and then we hit a tree and a log came through 
the windscreen and stopped right close to my face. I went to a Chinese 
restaurant that night and had the biggest meal – I’d never eaten so much in my 
life. I had a sort of epiphany: “From now on I’m going to be kinder to myself 
and stop beating myself up about weight and dieting.”


I’ve just been on Bear Grylls’ Island, for a Standup To Cancer charity thing, 
surviving for two weeks, with 13 others. I had to kill a crab by stabbing it 
behind the eyes with a knife and I couldn’t bear it. I thought: “I have to be 
more honest about how uncomfortable I am with eating meat, even though I’ve 
loved it for 30 years.”


I didn’t go thin on the island: I’m not someone who loses weight easily. So my 
body’s very much built for survival. When someone else was, like, “I’m in pain 
from having nothing to eat”, I’d say: “Mate, I’ve got gas in the tank.”

Recently some noisy lad threw an orange really hard and it splattered across 
the wall behind me, because he hated the show. I’d given it to him at the door 
of my monthly comedy club in Camden, where everyone gets the choice of being 
given an orange or cake. I think that gives them less right to be rude about 
the show. And it’s just nice. Food’s such an easy way to be generous.


Josie Long’s Something Better is at the Soho Theatre 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/josie-long-something-better-2016/>, 30 
September-15 October
 