 It is morning in Pontypool. At 10.15, the time given by the Labour Party for 
the start of their campaign event, a group of elderly people have gathered 
outside Woolworth's, as though waiting for something that may or may not ever 
happen.
 Two minutes later it happens. The 19 bus turns up, and they clamber on 
arthritically. It is another half-hour before the sounds of politics can be 
heard in the distance, and a man in a grey suit moves quickly down the road 
handing out leaflets: 'Can I say hello?' he says. 'I used to be Colin in 
EastEnders.'

Michael Cashman, whose only connection with Wales is a few weeks spent at 
Theatr Clwyd, has come up from London to encourage the Welsh to take control of 
their own affairs. He is surrounded by the traditional band of local 
councillors and activists. One of them is on the megaphone, addressing the new 
crowd that has gathered at the bus stop: 'Vote Yes on Thursday. Vote Yes for
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> .'

 As he drones on, an elderly passer-by comes up to me and whispers 
conspiratorially: 'It's only to make jobs for people like him.'

 All over Wales the story is the same. On a windy hillside above the Ebbw 
Valley, three Labour MPs are canvassing the old pit village of Trinant. There 
may not be a more Labour community in the kingdom, rock-solid even in the bad 
years, never mind in May 1997. They are welcomed with genuine warmth, even 
affection. Then they mention the referendum . Voters aren't sure. They think 
it's a waste of money. It'll do nothing for them. And, over and over again, the 
same phrase: 'It's jobs for the boys.'

 In Trinant, it feels like a byelection might feel in three years time, when 
people are starting to hate the Government. But people like the Government. 
They like used-to-be-Colin from EastEnders. It is just that vast numbers of 
them hate the Government's idea of a Welsh assembly.

 What is it with the Welsh? Everywhere else, from Chechenia to Catalonia, from 
Glasgow to Gaza, people seem desperate - in many places violently so - to 
govern themselves and stop being bossed about from afar. Wales is different.

 'Shout yes in a street in Wales ,' goes a local saying that long pre-dates 
referendums , 'and a dozen people will shout back no.'

 The latest poll suggests 37 per cent will shout back yes, 29 per cent no and 
34 per cent don't know. The odds are still narrowly in favour of the assembly.

 The Yes side - backed by the three parties, Labour, Liberal Democrat and 
Plaid Cymru, which hold every parliamentary seat - will have a huge 
organisational advantage. The No campaigners contain a pretty rum bunch of 
Europhobes and eccentrics, and there is still a fair chance that one of them 
will make a major prat of himself in the final 24 hours. But this is not going 
well for the Government. And everyone knows it.

 'The English have raped this country,' said a man I met in Pontypool. So 
that's one vote for the assembly, isn't it? Certainly not. 'If you have an 
assembly, you've got to have resources, and we haven't got any left, except 
water. I wish we'd won our war with the English but we didn't'

 Anyone who subscribes to all that overheated guff about there being a new 
spirit in Britain has not been to Wales . 'The problem is confidence,' says one 
devolutionist. 'The Welsh haven't got it.'

 Some of the trouble has been Labour-made. Ron Davies, the Welsh Secretary, is 
nowhere near as popular as Donald Dewar in Scotland. The bullying of Labour 
dissidents was a whacking error. The Tory spokesman, Nigel Evans, has regularly 
hit the 'waste of money' button without being rebutted. Many now feel there 
should have been a much broader debate.

 But while it is easy to have an argument in Wales , it is near-impossible to 
hold a national debate. There is nowhere to hold it. In Scotland, more than 90 
per cent of morning paper readers read Scottish papers or Scottish editions in 
Wales the figure is less than 10 per cent. Almost a third of television viewers 
don't even get Welsh TV: they get regional news from Bristol or Manchester.

 The road and rail systems all run east-west getting from North Wales to 
Cardiff is not much faster than it was a century ago. Wales is not centred on 
its capital, because until 40 years ago there was no capital. Indeed, the whole 
concept of Wales as a nation is a modern interpretation of some fairly murky 
history.

 'There are unifying factors - language, religion, music - that separated the 
Welsh from the Anglo-Saxons,' says Kenneth Morgan, former vice-chancellor of 
the University of Wales , 'but the idea of Welsh nationhood is more a matter of 
legend and fable than history.'

 The Scottish parliament voted to merge with Westminster in 1707. Wales has 
not had a parliament since Owain Glyndwr's supporters met somewhere near 
Machynlleth in 1406. But no one even knows where they met.

 For most of the six centuries since then, Wales had no standing as a nation 
whatever. The Encyclopaedia Britannica used to say simply: ' Wales - see 
England'. Even the matters supposed to unite the Welsh actually divided them, 
and still do. Gwynfor Evans, the former Plaid Cymru leader, threatened to 
starve himself to death until he was given a Welsh language TV channel. He got 
it, and now the non-Welsh-speaking majority has the hump because they are given 
S4C and not Channel Four.

 The first specifically Welsh piece of legislation ever passed by Westminster 
was the Sunday Closing Act of 1881, a victory for the chapel lobby over the 
drinkers which caused argument until last year, when the last redoubt, on the 
Lleyn Peninsula, finally caved in.

 On radio phone-ins they keep moaning about each other: chapel against pub 
Welsh-speakers v English-speakers East Walians v West Walians North Walians v 
South Walians one valley against the next. Wales used to be united by its rugby 
team. Now that's no good, they seem to be united only by their sense of 
grievance, and their unwillingness to do anything about it. This is not my 
observation many Welsh people say the same. It may date back to Glyndwr's 
defeat it may be due to the old roles of the coal and steel industries, and the 
secure, if grim, jobs they provided. Choices were for other people.

 One Labour MP tells the story of a constituent who marched into his surgery 
and banged his fist on the table. 'The council are putting my family at risk,' 
he said fiercely. 'They haven't changed the battery on my smoke alarm.' The 
only logical conclusion is that if the Welsh do not want control, they should 
not be forced to take it. The Welsh Office dates back only to 1964. Since then 
it has taken over nearly all the subjects dealt with by individual Whitehall 
ministries: agriculture, education, environment etc.

 Why? Economy and efficiency would argue that these can be dealt with better 
by specialists. If the Welsh vote No, why not end the pretence, and integrate 
the place back into the old concept of 'England and Wales '? Why have a Welsh 
Office at all? It only needs a civil servant or two to supervise the language 
lessons in schools and the painting of bilingual road signs.

 The justification for devolution is the opinion of the Welsh themselves, and 
their belief in their own nationhood. Historically, there is no more reason for 
it than there is to disinter the kingdoms of Northumbria and Mercia. 
Politically, it might make more sense to offer an assembly to somewhere that 
might appreciate it - Yorkshire, maybe. Kent. Rutland.

 All is not lost yet. The Welsh broadcaster Patrick Hannan once said he had 
never met anyone who said: 'I want an assembly'. He was standing in the Gents 
at the Angel Hotel in Cardiff when the man at the next urinal turned to him and 
said: 'I do'.

 Eventually, Hannan worked out what he was talking about. Only another 
million-odd people left to be convinced. And 24 hours to do the convincing.
 