
Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> picked up their first 
point in Serie A when a late penalty helped the four-time defending champions 
to rescue a 1-1 draw against surprise front-runners Chievo Verona on Saturday.

Paulo Dybala converted the disputed spot-kick, which was awarded after Juan 
Cuadrado was tripped byChievo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> 
defender Bostjan Cesar.

Chievo’s Perparim Hetemaj had opened the scoring after just five minutes, 
after being given time and space on the edge of the area to pick his spot and 
fire into the far corner.

Hernanes, making his debut for Juventus after his move from Inter Milan, had a 
chance to level the scores, but was denied by a fantastic stop from Albano 
Bizzarri.

Chievo almost doubled their advantage six minutes after the break, but 
Juventus keeper Gianluigi Buffon pulled off a fantastic save to palm Cesar’s 
volley on to the upright.

Juventus should have equalised minutes later when Roberto Pereyra’s effort 
came off the right post and half-time substitute Paul Pogba seemed certain to 
net the rebound, but his shot was charged down by Nicolas Frey and Dybala then 
blazed over.

Chievo thought they had extended their lead in the 62nd minute, but Cesar’s 
strike was ruled out after he was adjudged to have pulled down Leonardo 
Bonucci, although both players appeared to be tugging each other.

The result means Chievo lose their 100% record, but they remain top of the 
table, above Roma on goal difference.

“We conceded a goal that we could have defended better,” said the Juventus 
coach, Massimiliano Allegri, who rested several players ahead of his side’s 
Champions League trip to Manchester City on Tuesday. “After the goal the team 
played well. It’s not a fortunate time for us, but I don’t have anything to 
reproach the lads about.

“No one expected Juve to have only one point after three matches, but there 
are also positive aspects.”

The Chievo coach, Rolando Maran, said: “There were two key incidents which 
could have been judged in a different way.”
 