
Shannon Boyd heads a list of seven Test rookies named in Mal Meninga’s 24-man 
Kangaroos squad for the Four Nations competition. The hard-running prop was a 
key figure in Canberra’s charge to theNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> preliminary final. He will travel to 
Britain later this month alongside fellow rookies Jake Friend, Tyson Frizell, 
Valentine Holmes, James Maloney, Matt Moylan and Justin O’Neill.

Coach Meninga said Boyd had enjoyed a sterling season. “He is big and fast and 
mobile and can get the team on the front foot,” Meninga said at Rugby League 
Central on Tuesday. “He is a player in his prime at the moment and he will be 
for many years to come.

“I imagine he will be in the (selection) frame for a long time.”

Maloney played a crucial role in Cronulla’s premiership win on Sunday. It was 
his second title win in four years after success with Sydney Roosters in 2013. 
“He has been in the picture for a while, his success on the field suggests he 
is a player of influence,” Meninga said. “I thought his Origin series was 
extremely good and he played a big part in Cronulla’s success.”

Koori Knockout: Indigenous Australia's festival of rugby league – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/oct/04/koori-knockout-indigenous-australias-festival-of-rugby-league-in-pictures>
Boyd, Friend and Holmes have all earned a Kangaroos call-up before playing 
Origin football. However the representative careers of incumbent forwards Paul 
Gallen and Corey Parker are over. Parker has retired from the NRL, while Gallen 
has retired from Origin football but will play on for the Sharks next year.

“They have been great servants to the game we all know that,” Meninga said. 
“But we move on and pick the best players playing the game at the moment but 
also with an eye to the future. As selectors we discussed loyalty and respect 
and we chose what was best for the team going forward.

“It was hard, both Corey and Paul were disappointed. I was honest and I told 
them I thought other players were playing better than them at the moment.”

Incumbent interchange props James Tamou and Josh McGuire also missed out on 
selection due to form. Australia play a one-off Test against New Zealand in 
Perth on 15 October before flying out to England. The Kangaroos open their Four 
Nations campaign against Scotland at Hull on 28 October.

Kangaroos squad: Cameron Smith (c), Darius Boyd, Shannon Boyd, Boyd Cordner, 
Cooper Cronk, Josh Dugan, Blake Ferguson, Jake Friend, Tyson Frizell, Matt 
Gillett, Valentine Holmes, Greg Inglis, David Klemmer, James Maloney, Josh 
Mansour, Trent Merrin, Michael Morgan, Matt Moylan, Justin O’Neill, Josh 
Papalii, Matt Scott , Sam Thaiday, Johnathan Thurston, Aaron Woods
 