
Kangaroos regulars Cameron Smith and Matt Scott have no intentional of 
retiring from representative football anytime soon.

Australian skipper Smith will play his 45th Test when the Kangaroos clash with 
the Kiwis at Perth’s nib Stadium.

One of the key figures in Queensland’s and Australia’s long periods of 
dominance Smith, 33, still gets a massive buzz out of playing in the green and 
gold jersey 10 years after he made his Test debut.

Australia and New Zealand well set to justify pre-Four Nations scheduling | 
Matt Cleary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/australia-and-new-zealand-well-set-to-justify-pre-four-nations-scheduling>
“For myself, I think it’s a privilege just to wear the Australian jersey and 
for any guy playing rugby league, to represent their home nation,” Smith said.

“I just want to try to keep playing well as long as I can and if I’m doing 
that and still contributing to the team the way the coaches want me to, I’ll 
keep putting my hand up.”

Smith took over the Kangaroos captaincy from Darren Lockyer in 2011 but first 
captained Australia in 2007.

“I’m really enjoying being part of the Kangaroos team, we’ve had a new 
sprinkling of youth injected into our squad, which is great for our team and 
great for the younger guys in our squad, it brings a new sort of energy to our 
program.”

Likewise Scott, who will play his 18th Test in the first ever rugby league 
international in Perth, can see no end in sight for his representative career.

“”I will play until I don’t get picked. That is how I see it, while ever I can 
do my job for the jersey I will,” Scott said.

“I would love to have a successful Four Nations and be a part of the World Cup 
next year.

“I will play until the body breaks down or until I don’t get picked.”

Meanwhile, coach Mal Meninga has named three new faces Valentine Holmes, 
Shannon Boyd and Tyson Frizell who he maintains will bring a new energetic edge 
to the Kangaroos against New Zealand.

The selections continue a transformation of the Australian team under Meninga 
after his choice of four debutants in May for his first Test in charge of the 
Kangaroos.


“Shannon, Tyson and Valentine have all added a new dimension to our team with 
their enthusiasm and excitement,” Meninga said on Friday.


“We have a big Kiwis pack, we will be out to match that and big Boydy is a big 
part of that.


“Tyson Frizell had a great year, he had an outstanding State of Origin series, 
played well in the Prime Minister’s game and deserves his opportunity – while 
Valentine had a great year for Cronulla.”


Meninga said the rookies were excited and shocked by their call-up 
particularly St George Illawarra star Frizell.


“Tyson couldn’t get any words out. He was smiling from ear to ear.


“It is an exciting time for them. They are playing with some exceptionally 
talented players. They will be nervous. They have to make that first run, that 
first tackle and see it is just a game of footy.

“The Kiwis have picked a very strong squad themselves.


“It will be great to see how some of our younger players fare against such an 
opponent.”


Boyd will be charged with helping to win the ruck battle against the monster 
forward pack named by Kiwis coach David Kidwell in his first game at the helm 
since taking over four weeks ago from new Warriors coach Stephen Kearney.


“New Zealand are a very formidable footy side,” Meninga said.


“Their terrific pack is one of their best assets.


“If they can give (halfback) Shaun Johnson some space, he will take it.


“It is great for international rugby league that we can have contests like 
this.”


Described by Kangaroos captain Cameron Smith as one of New Zealand’s 
most-passionate representatives Kidwell has had precious little time to shape 
his side.


“I am pretty relaxed at the moment but ask me the same question tomorrow night 
- it might be something different,” he said.


“It is great that we get to showcase the game over here for the first time. 
That is something special that we are all looking forward to.”
 