
Australia coach Mal Meninga has named an extended 19-man squad for the crucial 
Four Nations clash against New Zealand in Coventry on Saturday (Sunday 7am 
AEDT).

Meninga will make several changes to the side that beat Scotland, with 
Queensland big guns Johnathan Thurston, Greg Inglis, Darius Boyd and Matt Scott 
all recalled after being rested for the 54-12 win at Hull.

Back-rowers Matt Gillett and Boyd Cordner also return along with Cronulla 
winger Valentine Holmes, with the 17-man line-up likely to be confirmed late on 
Friday night (AEDT).

Scotland fly flag for developing rugby league countries in Four Nations | 
Aaron Bower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/03/scotland-four-nations-developing-rugby-league-countries>
However, St George Illawarra pair Tyson Frizell and Josh Dugan and Manly young 
gun Jake Trbojevic are omitted along with Cooper Cronk, who, as expected, will 
be kept fresh for the England match in London next week.

North Queensland’s Michael Morgan is likely to get the nod over James Maloney 
to partner his Cowboys teammate Thurston in the halves.

“We know the Kiwis will be a significant challenge for us so it will be great 
to welcome back some of the players who missed the Scotland game,” Meninga said.

“Having said that it is still important to try out a few combinations and I am 
looking forward to seeing what this squad can do against the Kiwis.”

Josh Mansour’s serious knee injury has cast a shadow over preparations for the 
game at the Ricoh Arena.

The Penrith winger was in line to be picked on the wing after impressing 
Meninga against Scotland but will fly home for surgery to repair the ruptured 
anterior cruciate ligament injury he sustained in training on Thursday.

Holmes, was impressive on debut against the Kiwis last month and Meninga is 
excited about unleashing the Sharks flyer against the side he tormented in 
Perth.

“Valentine Holmes’ debut was fantastic,” Meninga told AAP.

“He brings a new dimension to the position. He’s got speed, he’s a great 
competitor playing outside Greg Inglis.

“He’s had a great year with his club and is someone you can’t leave out.

“He’s been part of the emerging Queensland set-up for a few years but was a 
player we were always very excited about in Queensland at junior level.

“I think we’re starting to see that potential really starting to show now.”

Meninga has a 100 per cent record from the three matches he’s been in charge 
of since replacing Tim Sheens in late 2015.

Taking on the role meant he had to reluctantly walk away from the Queensland 
job following a decade-long run of success.

He admits not being involved with the side for the first time since 2005 was 
harder than he expected but he’s been relishing the chance to lead Australia 
back to the No.1 team in the world – a position currently held by the Kiwis.

“I missed it, and I missed it because I love being around the players,” he 
said.

“It makes you young again and it’s a great position to be in when you’re 
coaching a representative side whether it be Queensland or Australia.

“To be able to tour with players, manage them and coach them hopefully to 
success. It’s a privilege to be involved.”

Likely team: Darius Boyd, Valentine Holmes, Greg Inglis, Justin O’Neill, Blake 
Ferguson, Johnathan Thurston, Michael Morgan, Matt Scott, Cameron Smith (capt), 
Aaron Woods, Boyd Cordner, Matt Gillett, Trent Merrin.

Interchange from: David Klemmer, Shannon Boyd, Sam Thaiday, Matt Moylan, James 
Maloney, Jake Friend (two to be omitted).
 