
In the original version of the 1974 film, The Longest Yard, starring Burt 
Reynolds, Eddie Albert and James Hampton as “Caretaker”, Reynolds’ character, 
former NFL quarterback Paul “Wrecking” Crewe has a conversation with Albert’s 
prison warden Rudolph Hazen.

Crewe, for a slew of reasons, has ended up in Hazen’s jail. And Hazen wants 
some advice from Crewe about how to improve his prison football team, otherwise 
he’ll further imprison Crewe because he’s been bad.

“Well, it’s relatively simple,” replies Crewe. “Yeah. Get yourself a tune-up 
game, you know?”

Australia open Four Nations with comfortable victory over Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/australia-scotland-four-nations-match-report>
And so Hazen organises a game, guards versus inmates, and Crewe is the 
quarterback, and leads his team to a mighty victory, and it’s a really quite 
fine story and film, and you should check it out if you get a chance, it’s a 
ripper.

And certainly more entertaining than Australia’s 54-12 romp over Scotland in 
game one of rugby league’sFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>, which probably should be 
Three Nations because unless they ever get a Pacific Islands team going then 
international rugby league has three teams that compete, and that’s it.

Not to say it wasn’t entertaining, in its way. Watching Cam Smith, Cooper 
Cronk, Matt Moylan (particularly) go about their business, the skill of these 
people, their smarts, speed and skill. Footy nerds, we have to watch. Tyson 
Frizell? Some player.

But as a “contest”? As Australians have taken to saying in the way of 
localised linguistics: “Yeah, nah.” It was 22-nil after 15 minutes. It was a 
training run. It was good watching quality rugby league, it was high speed and 
soft hands and all-out alacrity. Fine alacrity.

But it was big kids versus small.

The players walked out having a laugh with little kids. Scotland players wore 
kilts off the bus. Australia bombed it in the first hit-outs and owned the 
fixture early. Then they got a bit loose, a bit ragged. And Scotland scored a 
try. And there was some rejoicing. But the 5,000-odd crowd wasn’t really into 
it.

It was a tool-about-on-Twitter type of match. In that funny old echo chamber, 
types were tweeting about tartan shorts, the referee’s “ridiculous” grey ones, 
and that Scotland’s second-rower Dale Ferguson looks more like David Klemmer 
than David Klemmer.

Klemmer has hair these days but looks far scarier bald, more like The Kurgan in
Highlander. But there can be only one. And Klemmer thundered up the guts for 
151m, and Ferguson managed 66m, and 33 tackles, and good luck to him.

Elsewhere a betting mob described Scotland captain Danny Brough as “4’10” and 
looking like an 1800s chimney sweep”, which is humorous.

It was also a match for checking records. For finding out that Australia 
played Russia once, in 2000, in this very city of Hull, and won 110-4. Wendell 
Sailor scored four tries. Ryan Girdler scored a hat-trick and kicked 17 goals 
for a personal haul of 43 points. Russia’s points came from a try to their wing 
man, Matthew Donovan, which is not Donovanov because he’s from Coffs Harbour. 
As Russian as Vegemite toast.

Soon enough at Hull it was 30-nil. Australia were smokin’, playing footy. 
Scotland scored from a kick and we went to half-time where Phil Gould told us 
Australia scored five tries in the first 23 minutes but Scotland won the next 
17 minutes 6-4. Like everyone, pundits did their best.

Look, sorry, League People – it was entertaining enough if you like that sort 
of thing. And it was better than Saturday morning fare such asRomper Room 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Romper_Room>, if not Thunderbirds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BfIAKj3Gl1E>. We used to watch a show called 
Lancelot Link, Secret Chimp <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0d5dKBMK5mo> and 
next time you’re watching Australia play Scotland in rugby league you could 
check it out on YouTube.

Rugby league Four Nations: team-by-team guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/rugby-league-four-nations-team-by-team-guide>
In the second-half there were some more tries and Scotland had a crack and 
scored one. Luke Douglas bumped heads with Josh Dugan, a man who so often seems 
to finish games of footy more beaten up than a feral cat trapped in a sack full 
of cat-traps.

And Australia won 54-12 in a canter.

The Four Nations will begin in earnest when England plays New Zealand, and 
you’ll watch that even if you don’t have any parochial skin in the game, 
because it’s a contest.

But if Scotland’s the fourth best nation in international rugby league, then 
they may as well go with Three Nations. And have a sub-tournament of second 
tier nations. And when Scotland or Samoa or a combined Polynesian team of 
absolute belters is, you know, any good in terms of competing and even sneaking 
a win over the Big Three, then boom, have a Four Nations.

But if you’ve thrown in a fourth nation that is so obviously, so easily 
out-classed by the other three, whose representatives may have never even been 
to that country, and whose citizens, the majority of whom don’t even know they 
have a rugby league team, then, well. Apart from Australia enjoying a tune-up 
game, there appears to be very little point.
 