
Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> will have to 
wait but probably not for long. He remains one away from 500 career goals after 
a victory over Granada was secured by a solitary Karim Benzema strike. More 
significantly, he remains three away from becoming Real Madrid’s all-time 
leading scorer. So astonishingly quickly has he racked up the goals since 
arriving in Spain seven years ago that he could take 435 matches to get them 
and still have a better goals-per-game record than Raúl, the man he must still 
overtake.

Barcelona expecting Dani Alves back to face Levante after groin strain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/19/barcelona-dani-alves-levante-luis-enrique>
This was, though, a frustrating afternoon. He came into it having scored eight 
in two games and 321 in 304 for Madrid. His 305th ended without adding to that 
tally, the Portuguese booting the ball into the stands, disappointed at an 
opportunity lost. It was not for want of trying. Yet if there was frustration, 
there was also relief: Granada made this more difficult than anticipated and 
may feel they could have taken a point. They too had failed to take chances.

Most expected an easy victory for Madrid and a heavy enough one for the record 
to fall. When Granada came last seasonthey were defeated 9-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/05/real-madrid-granada-la-liga-match-report>
 with Ronaldo scoring five. Granada’s manager José Ramón Sandoval had said that 
luck was “crazy” and maybe it would favour them and it was his side who first 
had the ball in the net, after 19 minutes. Luck did not favour then, though: 
Youssef El-Arabi’s low pass was finished off by Isaac Success, only for the 
linesman’s flag to go up. It was tight; it was also wrong.

That was not an isolated moment. Granada were neat and swift too, particularly 
when heading beyond Madrid’s full-backs. Marcelo had been forced to hook the 
ball off the line after just seven minutes and a horribly heavy touch from 
Success on the corner of the six-yard box denied them another clear 
opportunity, his control escaping him. When El-Arabi and Success combined again 
not long before half-time, Keylor Navas was out to him extremely quickly.

Diego Costa should have been sent off himself, says Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/19/diego-costa-sent-off-himself-arsene-wenger-arsenal-gabriel-paulista>
At the other end, there were chances for Ronaldo. Played in by Isco, the first 
of them ended with an unusually unconvincing shot that came back off the legs 
of Andrés Fernández; next a 30-yard free-kick, dipping but central and not 
particularly venomous, was spilled by the goalkeeper but he recovered in time 
to prevent Lucas Vázquez from following up; and then Ronaldo hit the post with 
10 minutes to go until half-time. The linesman had signalled offside anyway.

Ronaldo had been the focus but not the only one. Modric’s shot was blocked by 
Fernández and Isco thumped wide. Both should have ended with goals. The first 
half ended with timid whistles and the second began with Ronaldo’s shot from 
the edge of the area rolling easily into the goalkeeper’s hands. Five minutes 
after that, another skewed shot flew a long way over.

Immediately afterwards, Granada wasted perhaps their best opportunity, 
Success’s name becoming increasingly inappropriate. El-Arabi’s assist, a 
backheel into his path, was gorgeous but Success, one on one, tried to lift the 
ball over Navas only for it to float wide. They paid for it too: immediately 
after Madrid had the lead when Isco’s clipped cross was headed in by Karim 
Benzema. It wasn’t Ronaldo, but it was a relief. And this time it would have to 
do. A header saved, a low shot pushed away and another skidding past the post 
followed for the Portuguese, but none went in. They surely will soon.
 