
Keighley are considering taking legal action against the Rugby Football League 
after claiming its decision to not punish Batley for fielding an ineligible 
player has led to their relegation from the Championship.

The Cougars were condemned to the fifth and final relegation place on Sunday 
with a dramatic 26-24 defeat by Featherstone, who scored a last-gasp try, while 
Batley preserved their status courtesy of a 34-10 win over Doncaster to stay up 
by a solitary point.

However, Keighley are questioning how the Bulldogs were effectively unpunished 
for breaching dual-registration rules and fielding an ineligible player during 
a win against Sheffield on 27 July.

John Kear’s side were deducted three points by an RFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> operational rules tribunal for playing 
Jacob Fairbank, who had failed to meet the minimum requirement of three matches 
on dual registration to make him eligible, with the second-row scoring a try in 
the 28-18 win.

But that sanction was quashed on appeal after the club had provided “fresh 
evidence relating to previous historical breaches of operational rules by other 
clubs which had not faced similar sanctions”.

The ruling, and the subsequent end to the season, has left Keighley fuming, 
with the chairman, Gary Fawcett, outlining his intentions in a statement on the 
club’s website.

“I spoke to the RFL yesterday straight after the match expressing that we are 
feeling very hard done to,” he said. “Currently, we are seeking legal advice 
regarding this problem.”

Doncaster also escaped punishment for the same offence and Fawcett highlighted 
the recent Champions League case involvingCeltic and Legia Warsaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/18/celtic-safe-champions-league-legia-warsaw-appeal-rejected>
, who were thrown out of the competition by Uefa for a similar breach of rules.

“It is agreed that Doncaster and Batley broke the rules and fielded ineligible 
players, one of which, Jacob Fairbank, scored the winning try for Batley during 
the game in which he was ineligible,” Fawcett added.

“For breaching this rule Batley and Doncaster were found guilty and deducted 
three points by a disciplinary panel, which were somehow, miraculously, 
reinstated the following week and, as far as we know, neither club has been 
punished at all.

“There is no publicly available information informing us why the points were 
reinstated. May I remind the reader that when the same thing happened in 
football earlier this year the team in question were thrown out of the 
competition.”
 