
Kenny Miller’s stoppage-time strike gave Rangers a dramatic Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> home 
win over Motherwell.

Mark McGhee claimed Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> would not have it as tough as 
they did while shipping five goals against Celtic in the Betfred Cup two weeks 
ago and he was right as Rangers toiled to find a way through. His side even 
took an early lead when Scott McDonald tapped home from close range. But Miller 
scored late on after Harry Forrester had equalised.

“We lacked penetration in the first half and conceded a poor goal but the 
second half was much better,” Mark Warburton said. “Thankfully we got our 
reward in the end. How concerning is the performance? We can turn around and 
say we were below bar but got three points. We’ll take that.”

Both managers went with unchanged lineups, although there was disappointment 
among home fans that the £1.5m signing Joe Garner had not arrived in time from 
Preston to be able to play.

Their mood did not improve when the action got under way as Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> failed to assert themselves. 
Their only real opening of the first half came 12 minutes in and even then it 
was a Motherwell mistake that allowed Miller to pounce on Lionel Ainsworth’s 
errant backpass The former Scotland striker found himself clean through on 
Craig Samson but blazed his shot.

And with Rangers’ standards slipping, a Motherwell side showing no fear were 
more than eager to take advantage. There was a warning when Ainsworth was 
allowed to collect a long punt from Samson on the edge of the Rangers penalty 
area before firing wide.

Rangers would not be so lucky 60 seconds later. Marvin Johnson drove down the 
left flank before cutting back on to his right foot to cross. His delivery 
bounced off Rob Kiernan’s leg before dropping to the unmarked McDonald to tap 
home from two yards.

Rangers were booed off at half- time but there was more urgency about them 
when they returned. Andy Halliday twice failed to convert after getting on the 
end of fine deliveries from James Tavernier and Lee Wallace, while the lapses 
at the back were still evident and only Wes Foderingham’s reactions kept 
McDonald from scoring again as he palmed the striker’s volley away.

Danny Wilson headed over before Warburton acted, throwing on Joe Dodoo and 
Niko Kranjcar as he sought some added impetus from meandering Rangers.

And that is what the Rangers manager got as Kranjcar lobbed a sublime ball 
over the top for Miller as he galloped into the box. Samson rushed from his 
line to save but could do nothing as Forrester tucked away the rebound.

Motherwell had been right in Rangers faces in the first half but now it was 
the hosts snapping into tackles. The second goal proved hard to come by and 
there was a reminder of Motherwell’s threat when Foderingham had to push away 
Johnson’s 20-yard effort.

It appeared Rangers were set for more home frustration after their opening day 
draw with Hamilton but then Miller struck to send the Ibrox crowd into raptures.

Joey Barton robbed McDonald on the halfway line before feeding Kranjcar. His 
layoff was fluffed by the Rangers substitute Michael O’Halloran but Miller made 
no mistake as he rammed home the winner at the back post. 
 