
Rangers gave a signal of their intentions as they battled to their first 
Scottish Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>
 victory of the season at Dundee. First-half strikes from Harry Forrester and 
Kenny Miller put Rangers two up as Mark Warburton’s side produced some tidy 
attacks. However, Mark O’Hara – relishing a new advanced midfield role – gave 
Dundee hope just before the interval when he lost Joey Barton at a corner to 
score.

Dundee made Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> work in the 
second half but the promoted Ibrox side held on to collect their first 
top-flight success since beating St Johnstone 4-0 in May 2012.

Having sold Greg Stewart to Birmingham on Friday, Paul Hartley went with the 
sameDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> side who defeated Ross 
County 3-1 last weekend. Rangers made six changes to the side who romped past 
Peterhead in the League Cup on Tuesday, with Miller given the nod ahead of Joe 
Dodoo to deputise for the injured frontman Martyn Waghorn.

The game took time to warm up but once it did, it was compelling stuff. When 
the sides met in the Scottish Cup last season, it took Forrester 14 seconds to 
fire his side ahead. This time, it took 14 minutes.

Dundee failed to cope with a Rangers raid down the right and Barrie McKay was 
allowed to knock a loose ball into the box. Forrester still had it all to do as 
Cammy Kerr put him under pressure but he did well to hook an impressive finish 
into the top corner.

Dundee tried to counter with a Danny Williams effort which the Rangers 
goalkeeper Wes Foderingham gathered comfortably. But Rangers were quickly back 
on the front foot. Andy Halliday sent Wallace down the right but Forrester 
fired over from the cut-back before the former Doncaster playmaker headed over 
from a James Tavernier cross. Their second goal after 39 minutes, however, was 
clinically executed as McKay clipped a perfect ball forward for Lee Wallace to 
sprint on to. The captain pulled the ball back again, with the on-rushing 
Miller rifling the ball into the roof of the net.

The 36-year-old should have killed off the Taysiders’ challenge off moments 
later but allowed Scott Bain to pinch the ball as he tried to round the 
goalkeeper.

And instead of going in at the break 3-0 up, suddenly their lead was cut to 
one when Barton allowed O’Hara to bullet home a header from Williams’ corner in 
the final minute of the half.

The tempo dropped a couple of notches as the second period got under way but 
Rangers relaxed too much on 65 minutes when Williams was allowed to run in 
behind. Foderingham, though, came to the rescue.

The goalkeeper was almost at fault when he fired a clearance straight at Nick 
Ross but was relieved when the Dundee substitute Yordi Teijsse could not 
provide a finish.

Forrester, booked two minutes after the break, was then replaced by Michael 
O’Halloran to ensure there was no chance he may be sent off after a couple more 
risky challenges. McKay should have made added a gloss to the scoreline when 
another of Rangers’ replacements, Dodoo, sent him galloping through on goal, 
but he nudged his stoppage-time effort wide.

Post-match Warburton sounded relieved with the result. “There was resilience, 
but we shouldn’t have to show resilience. I thought we were very, very good in 
the first half. We controlled the game and our movement was good. We should 
have been more clinical. First half, it should have been game over. It could 
have been four or five with the chances we had.”
 