
Greater challenges are still to come this autumn, but to all intents and 
purposes, England’s victory in Avignon was a fairly satisfying first tick in 
the box for Wayne Bennett as coach. His side may well look back in a month’s 
time and see this as vital preparation for the Four Nations.

Anglo-French games at this level have been hindered by a lack of 
competitiveness in recent years, best epitomised bythe 80-point margin of 
victory for England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/24/england-france-rugby-league-match-report>
 when the sides met in Leigh this time last year, their sole warm-up game for 
the Test series against New Zealand.

This, however, had the feel of a proper Test match and a thorough examination 
for England. More importantly, it was, for the most part at least, a stern 
challenge to efficiently prepare them for the Four Nations opener against New 
Zealand next Saturday in Huddersfield.

Bennett’s team selection, and indeed his interchange rotation through the 
game, suggested this represented an open audition for a number of places in his 
17 for the first group game and there were some encouraging performances for 
the England coach to deliberate over in the next week.

In the absence of captain and elder brother Sam, the Burgess twins, George and 
Thomas, strengthened their case for inclusion with impressive performances. As 
did another forward, Hull’s Scott Taylor.

The new-look half-back pairing of Luke Gale and Gareth Widdop also showed 
promise, but Kevin Brown’s impressive cameo from the bench suggests there are 
still one or two difficult decisions for Bennett to make.

However, that the French led after 25 minutes was no fluke. They took the lead 
when the Leigh hooker, Eloi Pelissier, darted over from close range, but that 
was the moment England were sparked into life. By half-time they had forged a 
commanding 16-point advantage courtesy of four tries, three of which came in an 
impressive eight-minute burst.

Ryan Hall touched down in the corner following a fine pass from Jonny Lomax, 
before further tries from Daryl Clark, George Burgess and a second for Hall put 
the visitors in control at the interval.

There were moments of trepidation for the visitors in the second half again, 
but as the French tired and their discipline lapsed, England showed their 
ruthless side to add three further tries in the final quarter despite the 
pouring rain.

Brown’s impressive stint in the halves brought him a try 12 minutes from time 
before Jermaine McGillvary and Widdop crossed late on, the latter thanks to a 
great break from Brown, to round off a successful evening for England.
 