
Kevin Sinfield has revealed he rejected overtures from a number of sports and 
organisations before agreeing tobecome the Rugby Football League’s new rugby 
director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/24/kevin-sinfield-top-job-rfl>, 
insisting he can see himself staying in the role beyond his current two-year 
contract.

Hull KR turn to Tim Sheens as coach for next Super League season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/hull-kr-tim-sheens-super-league-salford>
The former Leeds and England captain began working for the sport’s governing 
body last week in a role specifically created for the 35-year-old, with his 
initial remit the development of the England national side at all levels, as 
well as building the programme for England towards the 2021 World Cup. And 
Sinfield, who finished his playing career in rugby union with Yorkshire 
Carnegie this year, admitted he had offers to play on, coach and take on 
administrative positions in different sports – including the 15-man code – 
before settling on theRFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> and rugby 
league.

“Yeah, there were plenty of offers, including from rugby union,” he said. “I 
always wanted to be in administration so the playing and coaching offers were 
always at the bottom of the queue, though. The way the RFL worked hard to get 
this over the line really impressed me. They worked so hard to get me and were 
so welcoming that it makes you feel like they care about you. It wasn’t that 
difficult to decide. If I’m being honest, I thought I’d end up at a club; I 
didn’t know in what position but as soon as this came up and it was put to me, 
this is where I wanted to be.

“The concern was to join an organisation where everything was fantastic and 
there wasn’t a job to do, but I feel like there is something to do here. I can 
see myself staying here a long time. It’s initially a two-year agreement but I 
can see it going beyond that. The job sits perfectly for me.”

Sinfield will also conduct a review of England’s performance in the Four 
Nations later this year, and he said he would be disappointed if the national 
coach, Wayne Bennett, opted to pick a significant number of Australian-born 
players for the tournament, with players such as Josh and Brett Morris – who 
have played for the Kangaroos in the past – rumoured to be on Bennett’s radar.

He said: “I’ve got one hat saying Wayne can pick who he wants, of course. But 
having been a former England captain I would probably be disappointed if we 
pushed it too far.

“ Having played with guys like [Australian-born] Chris Heighington and Jack 
Reed, those players wanted to put the jersey on, I can promise you. Our 
competition is very strong, though, and I’d like to think the group would be 
picked from our core base of players in the UK and our NRL players who have 
already played.”

Sinfield also stressed that he will not be directly involved with Bennett’s 
plans for the Four Nations unless he is personally asked by the Australian. He 
said: “I’ll be watching the Four Nations from afar. Unless Wayne needs me to be 
involved it’ll be from afar, but I’ll be available if he needs me to be.”

Sinfield will also be involved in the hunt for an English-based, full-time 
assistant for Bennett during his two-year tenure in charge, and the RFL chief 
executive, Nigel Wood, said that process and the recruitment of the new Super 
League general manager have both yet to be concluded.

“The general manager process is in the final stages but there’s no fixed 
date,” Wood said. “Kevin will rightly have a role in finding Wayne’s full-time 
assistant, as he should do. We haven’t had an on-field champion in the RFL for 
quite some time and it’s good to have such profile with Kevin coming in – but 
it is not a token appointment, it’s more than that.”
 