
Kevin Sinfield is to make his return to rugby league in a high-profile role 
with the governing body. The 35-year-old former Leeds and England captainended 
his glittering league career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/kevin-sinfield-announces-retirement-from-all-forms-of-rugby-leeds>
 at the end of last season and bowed out of rugby altogether in April after 
cutting short his brief stint in union with Yorkshire Carnegie.

Sinfield revealed in March how he missed rugby league “every single day” and 
he is to take up the role of rugby director, reporting to the Rugby Football 
League’s board of directors, from 1 September.

Kevin Sinfield announces retirement from all forms of rugby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/kevin-sinfield-announces-retirement-from-all-forms-of-rugby-leeds>
Sinfield will split his time between the performance and development 
department at the RFL’s headquarters in Leeds and with the commercial, 
marketing and communications teams based at Media City UK in Manchester.

He will lead a review of England’s 2016 Four Nations campaign and help put in 
place a four-year plan for the 2021 World Cup.

Sinfield said: “I’m delighted to be joining the RFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl>. I am very grateful for the opportunity 
and really excited about working with some talented people. I’m aiming to help 
our sport achieve great things in the coming years both domestically and 
internationally.

“I believe it’s important for our sport to have a strong international setup. 
With the World Cup next year in Australia and then potentially on home soil 
again in 2021, the coming years could be really positive for rugby league.”

Nigel Wood said: “I’m pleased that we have been able to attract someone with 
the experience and calibre of Kevin Sinfield to join the RFL.”

The RFL chief executive added: “The 20 years Kevin has spent as a player at 
the very highest level of the game will provide us with incredible insight and, 
having spoken to him at length about the opportunity to work with us, I know he 
is determined to make as much of a difference off the pitch to the sport of 
rugby league as he did on it.

“This appointment is one of a number of significant executive announcements 
that we will be making in the coming months.”

Sinfield led Leeds to seven Grand Finals, three World Club Challenges and two 
Challenge Cup triumphs during his 13 years as captain and won 40 caps for his 
country.

The Oldham-born stand-off or loose forward succeeded Jamie Peacock as England 
captain in 2012, leading them for the last time in the World Cup semi-final 
defeat by New Zealand in 2013, and in December was runner-up to Andy Murray as 
the BBC Sports Personality of the Year.

He made the last of his 521 appearances for Leeds in the 2015 Grand Final and 
kicked the winning goal to take his points tally for the club to 3,967. His 
total of 4,231 put him third in rugby league’s all-time list of leading scorers.

As part of his performance role, Sinfield will be reunited with Peacock under 
the new England head coach, Wayne Bennett.

Peacock, who like Sinfield brought his rugby league career to a glorious end 
with victory in theSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> 
Grand Final in October last year, took up the role of head of rugby at Hull KR 
at the start of the year and in July was named as England manager.

Sinfield believes other players could follow suit. “There are some incredible 
personalities in rugby league who have a great mix of experience and 
knowledge,” he said. “Hopefully by taking on this role it will encourage other 
players, both former and current, who have aspirations of furthering their 
careers to come and pursue a new pathway at the RFL.”
 