
In his comparison between 1936 and 2016 (A view from 1936: what Keynes would 
say now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/keynesian-economics-is-it-time-for-the-theory-to-rise-from-the-dead>
, 12 December), Larry Elliott omits to mention one of the major differences, 
and one that JM Keynes would surely have noticed as he speculated on its 
implications – namely the enormous increase in the productive power of labour 
and of the economy.

Our priority should be to help people reduce their working hours (whether over 
a lifetime or weekly or daily) so that they can enjoy the leisure their 
productive capacity allows; today most people are still wage slaves, indeed 
more so than ever in the richest countries.

Keynesian economics: is it time for the theory to rise from the dead?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/keynesian-economics-is-it-time-for-the-theory-to-rise-from-the-dead>
Part of the issue is how we can enable this to take place in a way that is 
fair. At present, some cannot find any well-paying work, while others are 
overburdened with it. Technological change means that the goods and services 
demanded and available change over time, so that the more productive economy of 
today is producing different products from those of 1936, and consumers seek 
what is available today, but it remains true that without leisure we cannot 
enjoy the fruits of our labour.

Leisure is not about lying around doing nothing but eating and drinking: a 
distinction between fruitful activity and work or labour undertaken to earn 
enough to live on is fundamental to this debate.

How to achieve this end is by no means clear or easy, and certainly deserves 
debate and discussion, but it is disappointing that Larry Elliott is only 
concerned to use Keynes’s insights to allow even more people to be tied to the 
work economy, rather than liberated from it. This reminds us also that part of 
the debate needs to be about making the products and methods of production 
environmentally sustainable.
Roger Gibbs
Loughton, Essex

• With another 100 years tucked inside his sarcophagus, Keynes might observe 
that we don’t do moderation very well. There is little point in governments 
kickstarting an economy, just to crash it again within a decade. While growth 
provides the momentum that keeps an economy going, it is the rate of growth 
that sustains democratic government. The economy is like a bottle of whisky; 
sipped daily the pleasure can last a long while; knock it back in half a hour 
and you’ll get a hangover. We seem to insist in growing the economy at a rate 
way beyond sustainability. The richer elements of society seem determined to 
drive the economy to maximise their individual gains, intending to hang on to 
those gains, while the less successful are expected to repay all accumulated 
debt when the economy tanks.
Martin London 
Henllan, Denbighshire

The illusion has been created that higher house prices represent an increase 
in real national wealth
Christopher Padley 
• Judging by Larry Elliott’s account, a thawed-out Keynes would still target 
growth as the solution to our current economic problems. So, apparently, he 
would not yet have noticed the finite nature of our planet, nor accepted the 
need for environmental sustainability that this imposes. Actually, there are 
hints in his 1930 essay Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren that he 
may well have been a quicker learner than this. So perhaps it’s Larry who is 
not keeping up.
Richard Middleton
Crossmichael, Dumfries and Galloway

• Keynes’s prediction in the 1930s was that as countries became wealthier, 
they would take this greater prosperity in the form of greater leisure rather 
than higher and higher incomes. Alas, this has not happened. Western society 
has been obsessed with earning more and more money, often through longer hours, 
rather than what we now call quality of life.
Michael Franklin
London

Oh for the 1960s! People earned less but could afford more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/dec/10/sixties-pay-people-earned-less-but-could-afford-more>
• Patrick Collinson is right in his observation that behind the “lost decade 
of wage growth” there is a far worse situation (Oh for the 1960s! Take home 
less but buy more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/dec/10/sixties-pay-people-earned-less-but-could-afford-more>
, Money, 10 December). The mismatch between the official figures and the 
apparent fall in living standards is explained by the omission from official 
inflation figures of house prices. Since 1963 house prices have inflated a 
total of about 5,000% while the official inflation figure is only 1,800%. 
Housing is such a high proportion of living costs that this is a very serious 
distortion indeed.

Exactly why property prices are excluded is not clear, but the problem created 
goes far beyond hiding the truth of people getting poorer, bad enough as this 
is. The illusion has been created that higher house prices represent an 
increase in real national wealth, rather than the truth of money losing its 
purchasing power by the inverse of the increased price.

This illusion permeates the banking industry and even the government’s 
management of the economy, with potentially disastrous results, some of which 
we have already seen. For example, it can be seen as the underlying cause of 
the 2008 banking crisis, with the banks lending into an illusory economy, far 
beyond what the real economy could afford.
Christopher Padley
Lincoln

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 