
Pascal Chimbonda has grown used to the ridicule. At first, the sight of the 
defender from the French Caribbean shivering in the Wigan dressing room 
pre-season had his manager perplexed and his team-mates in stitches. When he 
trotted out last month sporting gloves in the midst of this country's mildest 
autumn in six years, the gasp of incredulity which rippled around the JJB 
stadium hardly registered. "Things that have happened to me in football have 
made me stronger," he points out. "I really don't think people laughing at me 
for wearing gloves is going to be a problem."

That much is clear. Chimbonda has endured the worst already, the racist abuse 
which drove him from the Corsican club SportingBastia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bastia> at the end of last season still 
plaguing his thoughts. Wigan Athletic have been a breath of fresh air for the 
Premiership this season, a newish club breezing into elitist company and 
excelling at the thrill of it all. Yet, for their newly recruited right-back 
from Les Abymes, Guadeloupe, this team's grand adventure also represents an 
escape.

It is a little under a year since Chimbonda and his team-mate Franck Matingou, 
a Congolese midfielder, traipsed out of Bastia's stade Armand Cesari Furiani 
following a humiliating 3-0 home reverse to St-Etienne. The defender's brother 
and cousin were waiting for him at the gate but, as they made their way towards 
the car park, around 30 home supporters barred their passage. "They were 
pushing and shoving us, calling us monkeys," Chimbonda recalls. "We got to my 
car and tried to drive away, but they started kicking the car, throwing stones 
at it."

A report published by the French government a year ago revealed the staggering 
statistic that over half of racist attacks committed in France over the period 
under review had occurred on Corsica. "It's more concentrated on the island 
than, say, in a city like Paris or Marseille where there are bigger 'minority' 
populations," says Chimbonda. "We lived with abuse. Matingou, Anthar Yahia, 
Djibril Sidibé and I all received written racist threats at the club. My 
girlfriend was scared - you don't know what one of these idiots might do - and 
eventually went back to Paris.

"But it didn't stop. Six months after St-Etienne we played Istres at Furiani 
and their Senegalese midfielder Moussa N'Diaye was racially abused by our fans 
in the South Stand as he took a corner. They were spitting and screaming at 
him, making monkey noises but, when the ball went behind and I went to retrieve 
it, they turned on me. One bloke called me a 'filthy black'. I made eye contact 
with him and he jumped on the fence, trying to get on to the pitch. He spat at 
me and others then joined in. I couldn't believe what was happening. These were 
my club's own fans turning on me.

"I wanted to get off the pitch, but my team-mate Youssouf Hadji persuaded me 
to stay. Some of the other Bastia fans, realising what had happened, started 
chanting my name in support but that minority of lunatics was ruining my life. 
They're young and they don't understand what they're saying. But the club tried 
to brush it all under the carpet. It wasn't good for their image to be talking 
about racist fans all the time."

The club president, Louis Maltari, had taken action in the wake of the scenes 
after the St-Etienne match but, post-Istres, insisted that the abuse was down 
to "five or six madmen" and that the small number "did not justify the club 
taking any action". His stance hardened when pressure was exerted by the French 
equivalent of the Professional Footballers' Association and La Ligue Contre le 
Racisme et l'Antisémitisme, yet the initial indifference ostracised those 
affected. Log on to Bastia's website and the snazzy introduction hails Sporting 
as "Le club d'une communauté entíre". Chimbonda would argue that is anything 
but the case.

The right-back scored the following week in a 5-2 defeat at Monaco but refused 
to celebrate. The club were relegated with most of the players who had endured 
the racist threats sold on in the summer. Nancy and Marseille were keen on 
keeping Chimbonda in Le Championnat, but a three-year contract at Wigan was too 
good to turn down. "When my agent Roger Boli mentioned Wigan I didn't have a 
clue who they were," admits the 26-year-old, "but they had clearly done well to 
be in the Premier League. Then you visit the place, see the ambition, sense the 
excitement, and it's an easy choice to make.

"The manager made a difference, too. In preparation for games, he keeps things 
simple but, when he's unhappy, you know it. At first I didn't understand what 
he was going on about when he was shouting at us - I have just started my 
English lessons - but I do now. You can tell he is special and will go far in 
the game."

Wigan are going with him. A side expected to wheeze their way through a first 
top-flight campaign have breezed to sixth with only two points dropped since 
August 20. They visit Aston Villa this afternoon aware that a sequence of games 
against Arsenal, Tottenham, Liverpool, Chelsea and Manchester United looms 
large, though confidence abounds.

Mention that his side are currently in a Uefa Cup place and Chimbonda erupts 
in fits of the giggles. "Let's see how we do against those five teams before we 
get carried away. Nothing I've seen so far has surprised me and it's only the 
cold that's a problem. Even at Bastia I'd wear my gloves from September because 
as soon as the temperature drops to about 15 degrees my hands feel it. Maybe 
it'll be tights next when the winter sets in, but I'll live with the stick. I'm 
not one for changing the way I do things."
 