
Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> have confirmed 
Lee Clark as their new manager on a three-and-a-half-year contract.

The former Huddersfield, Birmingham and Blackpool manager was at Rugby Park on 
Monday morning for a media conference.

Clark said: “I’m delighted to be back. It’s the longest I’ve been out of the 
game since I left school. It was a time for reflection, a time to look back at 
what happened in my managerial career.

“This is an opportunity for me to put down a new challenge, something 
different. The short-term objective is to keep the club in the top level and 
moving forward to progress it back to the top end of Scottish football.

“Hopefully in doing that we can then get the club to compete for the European 
stage. That’s the long-term job of what I’m trying to do.”

Lee McCulloch has led the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> side since Gary 
Locke resigned on 30 January, winning at Motherwell on Saturday after earning a 
Scottish Cup replay with Rangers.

That replay, on Tuesday, will be Clark’s first game in charge. McCulloch, who 
is being retained as an assistant, said: “I believe the board has made a 
fantastic appointment having taken time to interview a number of strong 
candidates and I look forward to introducing him to the media.

Scottish roundup: Michael O’Halloran rescues point for Rangers at Alloa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/scottish-premiership-championship-dundee-united-rangers>
“With everyone pulling together, I’m confident that the new manager will lead 
the team to success. On a personal note, I have thoroughly enjoyed being 
interim manager and thank the board, staff, players and fans for their support 
and encouragement.”

Clark, 43, most recently managed Blackpool where he won three of 33 games in 
charge, although he had considerably more success in his first job at 
Huddersfield where he won 87 of 178 games at the helm.

Kilmarnock sit 10th in the Ladbrokes Premiership, a point above second-bottom 
Motherwell.

The Kilmarnock winger Greg Kiltie spoke to the media before Clark’s unveiling 
and said he was looking forward to working with the new manager.

He said: “We hope it’s a boost and that he has a plan that we can take into 
Tuesday night. I don’t know too much about him to be fair. I know he did well 
with Huddersfield but apart from that I haven’t heard a lot.

“I think we’ve got a good squad and he will find a team that is better than 
the league position says it is. Hopefully we can now start climbing the table.

“It’s been nice working with Lee and [assistant coach] Peter Leven these last 
two weeks so for them to stay on and work with the new manager is positive.

“With the new manager coming in, he won’t know massive amounts of what is 
going on inside the changing room but with Lee and Peter there it will help.”
 