
Some years ago when Australia played France in a Test match in the regional 
NSW town of Parkes – known for a giant space dish, a movie about it called The 
Dish, and as home of the Parkes Spacemen rugby league club – it was the great 
and wise Ray Warren who said, “There’s something about Test match rugby 
league”. And he was bang on.


 For though that Test match is pretty much remembered only for a rooster that 
was set free on the field, there was, as Warren said, something indefinable 
about Australia playing Test match footy. Regardless of the opposition, to wear 
the famous wattle gold V-stripes on a background of eucalyptus green, makes you 
the best of your kind and from a storied line of champions.

Valentine Holmes stars on debut as Kangaroos down Kiwis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/valentine-holmes-stars-on-debut-as-kangaroos-down-kiwis>
 And thus, as the Australia and New Zealand teams stood for anthems in the 
sunny pre-dusk of Perth on Saturday evening, cynicism about why Channel Nine 
and rugby league would want a Test match between the NRL grand final and the 
Four Nations tournament abated. And from a couch 3,948 kilometres from nib 
Stadium it was clear the Test meant plenty to players.

 For to play against our cousins from across the pond, you can’t not be up for 
it. Facing that haka – brilliantly choreographed and executed, all the throaty 
masculine “challenge” to it, the ripping open of chests, the crazy eyes, all 
that – you can’t do anything but think, ‘Well - these people really mean it’.



 Other nods to culture: the “Welcome to Country” was was well received. The 
anthems – we got into ‘em, got ‘em over with. And a capacity crowd of 20,283 at 
nib Stadium – home of Perth Glory, Western Force and one day who knows West 
Coast Pirates – got ready to rumble. There are 1.85 million people in Perth and 
many, many Kiwis. If they couldn’t find 20,000 to fill the joint for a Test 
match, Perth could forget rugby league forever.

 The early footy, as always between these foes was physical, willing, meaty, 
thick – all the good stuff. Jared Waerea-Hargreaves dropped the ball (a common 
Kiwi theme) and went at Johnathan Thurston’s head with an old-fashioned 
coat-hanger. Yet Thurston was running low and the big prop’s action was 
reaction. It looked bad – but Matt Cecchin’s penalty sufficed.

 Cooper Cronk was a factor early, the fast little speed boat, nipping into the 
meat of the Kiwis D-line with his pointed incisions. The Kiwis coughed up the 
ball, and had no plan for when their allotted number of tackles ran out. 
Perhaps it was new coach David Kidwell’s plan to let them play “off the cuff”. 
If so, it was a bad idea. What came from the cuff was poor.



That’s not an accusation you could have levelled at Greg Inglis. “GI” can look 
busted and even disinterested in club rugby league, such are the expectations 
put on the champions. But even after joining the camp on Thursday after the 
birth of his second child, the big man ran free, scored a double and fed Holmes 
with precision, purpose-built pill. Keep Inglis fit and Australia has 
super-strike on the left.

 Meanwhile the Kiwis continued to stuff things up. Isaac Luke – passionate, 
full-on, the leader of the tight-knit haka pack – gave away his customary 
penalty for attacking the knees of a player held up by another two. It’s not a 
good piece of Luke’s game and one day he’ll snap a man’s ligaments and feel 
really bad.

 And so it was all Australia in the first 20 minutes. And yet because of the 
strong sou-wester – the famous wind called “the Fremantle Doctor” because it 
provides succour from the heat – Thurston’s conversions were blown to hell. And 
Australia, with all the ball and territory, led just 8-nil.

Australia too good for rusty Kiwis in Perth league Test – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/15/australia-v-new-zealand-trans-tasman-rugby-league-test-live>
 And the worm turned. All action Adam Blair, rock hard Manu Ma’u and Martin 
Taupau came on as the Kiwis found their mojo.

 Jason Taumalolo ran hard, which is very hard indeed. Kevin Proctor ran a hard 
line on an angle and hit a hole off a short forward pass by Shaun Johnson. It 
was one of maybe three marginal passes missed by Cecchin and his touch judges, 
who did pick up another couple. But overall one referee was better than two. 
And it proved again that rugby league’s quest for “perfect” adjudication does 
not make it a better game.

 And so onwards the Test match rolled, both teams repelling and attacking and 
throwing themselves about. The Kiwis got plenty from their “Hair Bears” – 
Blair, Proctor and Tohu Harris. Australia’s Boyd Cordner bled from the head 
like you he’d been in a UFC fight while Holmes ran hard and straight – a super 
player who enjoyed a super debut.

 Cecchin punished poor ball control, and was roundly applauded. There was the 
odd “hint of a knock-on” and Josh Dugan had hands on a ball that wasn’t called 
six-again. But commentator Phil Gould said it best after watching a couple of 
replays when he said in summary: “Anyway.”



 Tyson Frizzel rumbled hard for Australia, making you wonder if he should’ve 
been in a blue jumper a couple years ago, whether the great Paul Gallen could 
have retired an Origin champion in 2014 when he was 33. How good could Frizell 
be now? Just a thought.

 Into the second half and the Kiwis’ fifth-tackle plays continued along the 
lines of ad-libbing clowns and bad street mimes. It’s something that’s pretty 
heavily practiced in as structured a game as rugby league can be, the fifth 
tackle play. To beat Australia – to beat anyone in an NRL all the Kiwis play in 
– you must “complete” your sets of six tackles. It’s a fundamental building 
block. As is hanging onto the ball. And the Kiwis did neither of those things 
to reserve grade Metropolitan Cup-level standard – much less a Test match 
against Australia – and were summarily towelled-up by 20 points.

 And yet, looking forward, these things can be fixed. That’s a take-away for 
New Zealand. As poorly as they played, it was “only” 20 points. Drop that much 
ball and stuff up so much end-of-set action you could expect to have 50 put on 
you. Yet New Zealand defended hard and with passion. It was a Test match, not a 
tea party. New Zealand can improve.

 But Australia can also and they will go into the Four Nations tournament in 
England as short-priced favourites. They will welcome back Aaron Woods and Josh 
Mansour, who’ll likely take starting positions from Shannon Boyd and Blake 
Ferguson. At right centre Dugan did little good and was out-pointed by Solomone 
Kata. Dugan looks like a fullback out of position, and there may be a reason 
for that. Justin O’Neill plays right centre for Queensland and North Queensland 
and had a storming Origin series. We’ll see what Mal Meninga does there.

 But Australia are short-priced Four Nations favourites. Their champions – 
Thurston, Cronk and Cameron Smith in the decision-making positions, Inglis and 
Boyd out wide – on the back of enough ball just know how to get things done. 
They know how to win.
 