
Atlético Madrid secured a place in the Champions League group stage for next 
season andDeportivo La Coruña narrowly escaped relegation when they came from 
two goals down to draw 2-2 at championsBarcelona on the final day of La Liga. 
Lionel Messi had putBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 
in front with his 42nd and 43rd league goals of the season.

Atlético made sure of third place with a 0-0 draw at Granada, while Valencia 
twice had to come from behind to beatAlmería 3-2 and clinch fourth and a 
qualifying spot for Europe’s elite club competition.Almería were relegated.

Sevilla, the Europa League holders and finalists again this season, won 3-2 at 
Málagato finish fifth, sending them into the continent’s second-tier 
competition once more along with sixth-placedVillarreal and Athletic Bilbao in 
seventh.

Bilbao, who face Barça in Saturday’s Copa del Rey final, ended the campaign 
with a flourish by thrashingVillarreal 4-0 at the San Mames. Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> face Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk in 
the Europa League final in Warsaw on Wednesday, when victory would earn them a 
place in the Champions League group stage along with Barcelona, second-placed
Real Madrid and Atlético.

The 16-year-old Martin Odegaard made his debut for Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> in the 7-3 victory over Getafe
. The Norwegian teenager replaced Cristiano Ronaldo, who scored a hat-trick, in 
the 58th minute.

Depor’s comeback against a second-string Barça, who wrapped up their fifth 
title in seven years last weekend, sentEibar back down after one season in the 
top flight despite the Basque club’s 3-0 win over already relegatedCordoba. 
Gaizka Garitano, Eibar’s coach, stood down after the match.

Sami Khedira has accused Real of freezing him out by dropping him after talks 
on a contract extension broke down. The midfielder will leave for free at the 
end of the season, with Chelsea, Manchester United, Arsenal and Liverpool, as 
well as Juventus, reportedly keen to sign him.

“I’ve always felt I’ve had the coach’s backing,” he told Marca, “but the 
message indirectly came through to me that I was no longer needed, I was frozen 
out and wouldn’t have a chance to continue playing. It’s not the end I wanted.”
 