 Three Labour MPs yesterday broke ranks with Tony Blair to attack the 
Government's plans for limited devolution in Wales as an undemocratic and 
inadequate blueprint for returning power to the Welsh people.
 Although Denzil Davies, Sir Ray Powell and Allan Rogers denied acting in 
concert, their condemnation of the Government's plans came as the Welsh 
Secretary, Ron Davies, relaunched the devolution campaign, promising that a 
Labour assembly would improve education, strengthen the health service and 
create jobs.

With 10 days to go to the referendum in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> , Mr Davies shrugged off the latest 
salvoes from the dissident Labour MPs, and insisted that he was confident Welsh 
voters would opt for change.

 Every party agreed with devolution on principle. But, he added, 'the question 
we have before us now . . . is whether that power which everybody agrees should 
be devolved, should be exercised by democratically elected representatives of 
the people, or whether it should be exercised by a secretary of state for Wales 
.'

 Mr Davies signed with a flourish a list of 10 pledges to the Welsh 
electorate. A Labour assembly would:

 Make education the priority 

 Take young people off benefit and provide them with work 

 Divert NHS money from bureaucracy to patient care 

 Pay for the new assembly by cutting the cost of quangos 

 Strengthen British national unity by modernising democracy 

 Give a voice to every region of Wales 

 Represent all communities in Wales , both English and Welsh speaking 

 Support farmers and improve rural services 

 Clean up politics and improve procedures for selecting the best election 
candidates

 Create a power house for business and industry, and raise the profile of 
Wales internationally.

 The Conservative leader, William Hague, was in Wales to spearhead his party's 
No campaign. But a potentially more telling boost to the anti- devolution cause 
came from the Labour dissidents, who lambasted the proposals as 'a cosmetic 
exercise' and 'poorly thought out'.

 All three rebels MPs focused on details of the scheme, including the absence 
of legislative or tax-raising powers - unlike Scotland's proposed assembly. 
They also complained that it will not get rid of the 'quango state' bequeathed 
by the Tories, which means more public bodies are democratically-unaccountable 
in Wales than elsewhere.

 Denzil Davies, MP for Llanelli and a Treasury minister in the last Labour 
government, said the proposed assembly would have no power to take over 
existing quangos. 'The Welsh Office has tried to mount a cosmetic exercise, 
pretending that an assembly would be able to dismantle the quangos. The Tory 
quango state would live side by side with a Welsh assembly.' Sir Ray Powell 
accused Mr Davies of pushing for a centralised system of candidate selection, 
and claimed that those who intended to vote No were being threatened and abused.

 The MP for Ogmore, who was a leading campaigner for devolution in 1979, said 
that then the people knew what they were voting for. 'It was an act of 
parliament, and not just a series of poorly thought out promises which can be 
broken at any time,' he said.

 Allan Rogers, MP for Rhondda and the only No campaigner of the trio when 
devolution was defeated in Wales in 1979, said last night: 'If anyone tells me 
that a transfer of power from the Welsh Office - if that is going to happen - 
to yet another elected body is real devolution , I'll eat my hat.'

 Ron Davies pointed out that Sir Ray, like all Labour MPs elected in May, had 
backed an assembly. Even after a week's break in campaigning, as a mark of 
respect to the late Princess of Wales , yesterday's relaunch was muted. After 
his press conference, Mr Davies and Welsh minister Peter Hain delivered their 
'vote yes' message in Cardiff city centre.

 They chatted to shoppers, while supporters handed out leaflets and stickers. 
Mr Davies encountered little outright opposition, although there were a few 
polite but firm No voters who marched on their way stickerless.
 