 The only two Labour MPs to mount vocal opposition to Tony Blair's devolution 
blueprint for Scotland and Wales face the certain prospect of censure - and 
eventual deselection - once the campaigns for assemblies in Edinburgh and 
Cardiff are over.
 The veteran backbencher, Tam Dalyell, is engulfed in renewed controversy in 
his Linlithgow constituency over his anti-devolution views after local 
activists accused him of breaking a deal by agreeing to a TV debate alongside 
Conservatives against the Scottish Secretary, Donald Dewar.

 Llew Smith, MP for Blaenau Gwent, yesterday provoked the wrath of senior 
figures in the Welsh Labour hierarchy for denouncing Welsh Secretary Ron 
Davies's new mini-version of his devolution white paper as 'a scandalous waste 
of taxpayers' money (which) treats fairness and free speech with contempt'.

 Some MPs and activists will be dismayed at 'the suppression of open debate.' 
Last week's disciplinary letter sent by the government chief whip, Nick Brown, 
to every MP highlighted rule 2A(8) of the party rule book, which states that 
'no member of the party shall engage in a sustained course of conduct 
prejudicial, or in any any grossly detrimental, to the party'.

 Though Mr Dalyell and Mr Smith have been careful to avoid joining the 
Tory-dominated No campaigns, they stand accused of sustained opposition to 
Labour's devolution project.

 They could lose the whip or be suspended and their local parties could expect 
pressure to pick another candidate before the likely 2001 general election.

 Officially Labour in Scotland is 'relaxed' about Mr Dalyell's campaign. But 
constituency sources said last night he had broken a pre-election agreement not 
to campaign against devolution and hinted he would be severely censured when it 
meets after next month's referendum .

The Old Etonian MP, who will be 70 at the end of the current parliamentary 
term, would face 'a real battle' if he sought reselection as a Labour 
candidate, it was claimed. Mr Smith, aged 52, has been an MP since 1992 and 
lacks Mr Dalyell's seniority or admired status as a Westminster maverick. But 
allies of Ron Davies, with whom the MP clashed last month, say that predicted 
anti-devolution MPs inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> have taken 
the hint.

 'There's not been a peep,' said one, citing three MPs, Alan Williams, Allan 
Rogers and Sir Ray Powell, as keeping their heads down after Mr Davies managed 
to unite his Welsh party behind the policy against deeper opposition than Mr 
Dewar faced in Scotland. A Yes vote in Wales on September 18 is much less 
likely than in Scotland a week earlier.

 Mr Dalyell was unrepentant last night over his participation in a TV debate 
alongside the Tory's constitutional spokesman, Michael Ancram, against Mr Dewar 
and the SNP leader, Alex Salmond, just three days before the September 11 poll.

 'I lost all inhibitions about taking part in the debate when Donald Dewar 
made it clear he was prepared to take sides with the leader of the SNP. If he 
can sit down with nationalists, I believe everyone should be able to put their 
own views forward.

 'Like Mr Salmond, I believe that there is no way the devolution proposals can 
remain stable because it will lead to a situation where all of Scotland's 
problems will be attributed to the parsimony of the English treasury.'

 Mr Dalyell played a prominent part in No campaign alongside Neil Kinnock 
during the 1979 referendum .

 Mr Dalyell denied that he had reneged on a deal with his constituency party 
not to campaign overtly against the devolution proposals. 'I agreed that I 
would not set up a No campaign this time round and I have stuck to that 
agreement,' he said.

 But Jim Swan, secretary of the Linlithgow Labour Party, described his MP as a 
'loose cannon' and said many activists were hurt by his actions.

 * The Government's popularity has been hit slightly in the last month, 
according to the latest opinion poll. A Mori poll in the Times today puts 
Labour on 54 per cent, down three points on the end of July, with the Tories 
gaining five points to 28 per cent.
 