
Bristol Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> have been 
taken over by the Al-Qadi family from Jordan. The family have taken a 92% 
shareholding in the League Two club, who are eighth in the table and only one 
point shy of the play-off places.

Wael al-Qadi, a Jordanian Football Association member, has been named the club 
president, while Steve Hamer replaces Nick Higgs as the chairman. Hamer was the 
Swansea chairman between 1997 and 2000.

Higgs said: “Bristol Rovers can count itself as being very fortunate to 
attract the interest of Mr Al-Qadi and his family. We know Wael and his 
advisers had looked closely at other clubs but they explained to us that they 
were drawn to Rovers because of the massive potential the club has, both on and 
off the field.”

The Al-Qadi family are keen to build a new stadium, which has been an issue 
for the club for over a decade, with Rovers having recently had their appeal 
heard in a long-running dispute with Sainsbury’s central to their plans for a 
new £40m development on land at the University of West England.

Rovers have played at the 11,916-capacity Memorial Stadium since 1996, with a 
proposed move to a 21,700-seater stadium delayed by a lack of funds.

The new owners have interests in the tourism and banking industries, and Wael 
Al-Qadi said: “We really see the potential of this great club, we want to 
improve in all areas, not just on the field. Bristol Rovers has always been 
known as a family club and it is my family’s wish to maintain that tradition. 
This deal is all about my passion for football. This club has some fantastic 
supporters.

“When we purchased the club we knew about the stadium issue but we know a new 
stadium is a requirement. This club needs a new stadium. [The legal case] has 
to be sorted and finished before thinking of a new stadium but once everything 
is in order and ready, the stadium has to be done for this club.”

Al-Qadi went on to give his backing to the manager Darrell Clarke, saying: “We 
will support Darrell in every way we can, 120%. Sorry, I mean 10,000%. We hope 
he can bring us even more success.”
 