
Paolo Di Canio's Swindon Town dished out another harsh Football League lesson 
toCrawley Town on a night when none of the teams starting in the top six in 
League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> managed to 
win.

On Saturday last season's Blue Square champions suffered a 6-0 humiliation at 
Morecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> and now they were 
undone by a late Mehdi Kerrouche double as Swindon, already leading through 
Alan Connell's 28th-minute effort, cruised to a 3-0 win.

Morecambe stay top of the table on goal difference after a 1-1 draw at 
Macclesfield Town, for whom Ben Tomlinson opened the scoring in the first 
minute. Danny Carlton's 16th-minute equaliser was enough for a point.

Second-placed Rotherham United failed to capitalise as they also had to settle 
for a 1-1 draw, away atAccrington Stanley. Richard Cresswell gave the Millers a 
38th-minute lead before Sean Hessey's 83rd-minute free-kick pegged them back.

Shrewsbury Town slipped to a 1-0 defeat from an early Chris Zebroski goal at 
Bristol Rovers but sit fourth in the table above Cheltenham Town and Torquay 
United, who shared the points at Plainmoor. Joshua Low gave the Robins a 
fourth-minute lead, only to see it cancelled out two minutes later by Billy 
Bodin. ThoughCheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> went 
back in front through Kaid Mohamed, Kevin Nicholson secured the draw with his 
71st-minute strike.

Port Vale were the biggest beneficiaries of the slip-ups above them, leaping 
to third in the table thanks to Tom Pope's injury-time header which edged a 
five-goal thriller againstBradford City.

Vale twice led through first-half goals from Robert Taylor, only for Jamie 
Devitt and Ritchie Jones to level for the struggling Bantams before Pope's late 
intervention grabbed a 3-2 win.

At the bottom life does not get any easier for Plymouth Argyle, who remain 
with a solitary point from eight games after Izale McLeod and Daniel Leach gave
Barnet a 2-0 win at Underhill.

Second-bottom Hereford United also continue to flounder and they were beaten 
2-0 by improvingAldershot Town at Edgar Street. Michael Rankine opened the 
scoring on 19 minutes and Peter Vincenti made sure of the win eight minutes 
from time.

Mark Phillips headed home a Ryan Hall corner three minutes from time to earn 
10-manSouthend United a hard-fought 1-0 win at home to Gillingham. Bilel Mohsni 
was sent off midway through the second half.

And 10-man Northampton Town did an equally impressive job at AFC Wimbledon. 
Adebayo Akinfenwa put the Cobblers ahead and, despite Nick McKoy's 45th-minute 
red card, Michael Jacobs's second-half double wrapped up a 3-0 win.

Burton Albion jumped into the play-off places with Justin Richards scoring the 
only goal of the game at home toCrewe Alexandra, while Robert Hall scored in 
the first half forOxford United in a 1-0 win at Dagenham and Redbridge.
 