
This defeat by Leeds should not overshadow what has been a remarkable effort 
from Leigh to secure promotion toSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> this season but it felt like an 
evening from which the promoted Centurions could learn plenty of valuable 
lessons before their return to the top flight in 2017.

Leigh were not disgraced in front of almost 15,000 fans at Headingley but, 
despite making life relatively easy for themselves throughout the majority of 
the Qualifiers, this was an illustration that games against the bigger sides 
next year will require a significant step up in quality from what they have 
been used to when dominating the Championship during the past three seasons.

This looked a game too far for Leigh from the early stages. Leeds will have 
wanted to end this season on several occasions – not least midway through the 
year, when they looked in genuine danger of relegation – but this was at least 
a winning end to a season that has provided misery at almost every turn for 
last year’s treble winners.

“There was a genuine threat that we could get relegated,” said Brian 
McDermott, the Leeds coach. “But since we got the job done the players’ 
attitude has been bob-on. Tonight I thought we were great. It was one of our 
best performances for some time.”

Leigh’s attention will now turn to preparing for Super League but for a club 
with such high standards, this was a disappointing finish for a team that had 
earmarked winning all seven of their Qualifiers games from an early date.

“We wanted to come here and win and we’re disappointed we haven’t but that’s 
not me being arrogant,” said the Leigh coach, Neil Jukes. “The fact we’re 
disappointed shows where we are as a club. There’s some lessons to be had there 
for us in terms of rugby league, not just Super League.”

A much changed Rhinos side looked untroubled throughout, leading 18-6 at 
half-time courtesy of tries from Brett Ferres, James Segeyaro and two for the 
centre, Jimmy Keinhorst. Leigh’s only moment of joy in the first half came via 
a Sam Hopkins try and they crossed only once in the second half, too, when 
Matty Dawson touched down. By that stage the Rhinos had closed the game out.

Ashton Golding, Joel Moon and Tom Briscoe all crossed for further tries in the 
second half as Leeds ensured it was they who finished top of the Qualifiers. 
Whether that is considered a success for a team that swept all before them last 
year is open for debate. As for Leigh, their hard work was done several weeks 
ago. The fun and hard work of life in Super League starts now.

Leeds Golding; Briscoe, Watkins, Keinhorst, Hall; Sutcliffe, Moon; Singleton, 
Segeyaro, Jones-Buchanan, Ferres, Ward, Cuthbertson.Interchange Handley, 
Hallas, Smith, Jordan-Roberts.

Tries Ferres, Keinhorst 2, Segeyaro, Golding, Moon, Briscoe. Goals Watkins 4. 
Drop goal Moon.

Leigh Smith; Brown, Worthington, Tonga, Dawson; Ridyard, Drinkwater; Moimoi, 
Higham, Weston, Dixon, Maitua, Hock.Interchange Hopkins, Tickle, Burns, Hansen.

Tries Hopkins, Dawson. Goals Ridyard 2.

Referee G Hewer. Attendance 14,747.
 