


Leeds United have proposed deducting points from what they termed "predator 
clubs" asManchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 
became the latest Premier League side to be accused of an illegal approach to a 
promising French teenager.

Leeds are upset about losing a youth player, Luke Garbutt, to Everton who have 
been ordered to pay an initial £600,000 – £400,000 more than the Goodison Park 
club are believed to have envisaged – for the 16-year-old left-back. Garbutt 
had spent eight years in the Leeds youth academy before signing his first 
professional contract at thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> club this summer.

Garbutt's departure is the latest to enrage Leeds in recent years, with 
Chelsea paying several million pounds in compensation for taking three players 
from them, and the club's chief executive, Shaun Harvey, believes the current 
tribunal system is an inadequate deterrent.

"Compensation awards, we feel, are no longer a sufficient deterrent – and 
perhaps now is the time to start considering points deductions," said Harvey. 
"We need to arrive at a system whereby in any transfer there is a willing 
buyer, willing seller and willing player.

"If we'd had an option we would have chosen to keep the player. We feel we 
were deprived of the opportunity to develop the player to his full potential. 
We now appeal to the football authorities to mount a combined review of the 
registration system in place domestically to provide further financial 
assurances for clubs who lose players to predator clubs."

Fifa has confirmed it is investigating a complaint from Rennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> over City's signing of the 
17-year-old defender Jérémy Hélan, having banned Chelsea from signing players 
until January 2011 for inducing Gaël Kakuta to break his contract with Lens. 
Another French club, Le Havre, have made similar accusations over Manchester 
United's acquisition of Paul Pogba.

Domestic transfers have also come under renewed scrutiny since the ruling 
against Chelsea, with Crewe's director of football, Dario Gradi, complaining of 
an approach by Liverpool to the 15-year-old Max Clayton.

City responded to Rennes' official complaint over Hélan today by insisting 
that they had acted legally and only after the teenager had launched a civil 
action against his former club.

A club statement read: "Manchester City is aware of the ongoing contractual 
dispute in the French labour courts between Jérémy Hélan and Stade Rennais. The 
dispute between the player and the club pre-dates any interest from Manchester 
City.

"Manchester City obviously cannot comment on the case until the French 
judicial process has run its course; however, we are comfortable that we have 
acted within the rules throughout the process and in no way induced any breach 
of contract by Jérémy Hélan."
 