
Torino remain one point clear of the relegation zone after a 1–0 defeat at 
Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> but, for one day 
at least, present concerns will be kept in perspective. Sixty years ago today a 
Fiat G-212 plane, its pilot's vision apparently impaired by dark clouds and 
heavy rain, crashed into the side of a hill at Superga, just outside of Turin. 
On board were 18 Torino players, along with 13 other passengers and crew, 
returning from a friendly in Lisbon. None survived.

The greatest side in the history of the club, and arguably all of Italian 
football, had been wiped out at a stroke. The Grande Torino (Great Torino), as 
that side is still known, were on course for a fifth successiveSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> title at the time – four 
points clear with four games to go. They were unbeaten in 18 games, and had not 
lost at home since 1943 (albeit the league was suspended from 1943 to 1945). In 
a 40-game 1947-48 season, they scored 125 goals and conceded just 33. For some 
international games in the late 1940s, Italy fielded as many as 10 Torino 
players in their starting XI.

More than that, though, the Grande Torino side had been a rallying point for a 
country that was struggling to get back on its feet in the wake of the second 
world war. There was no formal structure to international club competition at 
the time, yet Torino were known throughout Europe and had even toured South 
America. When news of the disaster broke, parliament was immediately suspended. 
One 38-year-old woman inBologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> 
was reportedly so overcome that she committed suicide.

Two days later close to 500,000 mourners turned up to pay their respects at 
the players' funerals. A year later, in the summer of 1950, the Italian 
Football Federation refused to allow the national side to fly to Brazil for the 
World Cup. Instead they travelled by boat, showing up in terrible condition 
after a fortnight-long journey in which they had been able to do little more 
than go for an occasional jog. They lost their first game 3–2 to Sweden, and 
failed to make it out of their group, but were at least allowed to make the 
return journey by plane.

Torino themselves were awarded the 1949 Scudetto, though they went ahead with 
their four remaining fixtures anyway, fielding a side made up of youth players 
and the only two members of the first-team squad not to make the trip: the 
defender Sauro Toma and the reserve goalkeeper Renato Gandolfi. Toma had wanted 
to make the trip to playBenfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> 
despite an injury to his knee, but was persuaded to stay behind by his wife, 
Giovanna, who was pregnant at the time.

The Granata's four remaining opponents fielded youth teams of their own as a 
mark of respect, allowing them to finish top of the table in any case, but 
thereafter they slid into decline. Torino would be relegated in 1959, and 
though they recovered to enjoy a successful run in the late 1970s, even winning 
the Serie A title in 1976, they finished up all too often as Italian football's 
nearly men. At the beginning of the 1980sTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> reached the final of the Coppa 
Italia for three years running but lost every time – twice on penalties.

Since then, the bright moments have been few and far between for Torino. 
Despite reaching the Uefa Cup final in 1992, Torino spent a good part of the 
90s in Serie B, while repeated financial mismanagement meant that any small 
step forward was swiftly followed by two in the opposite direction. Hopes that 
Torino would one day return to Stadio Filadelfia – abandoned in 1963 in favour 
of a more cost-effective ground-share withJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, but still viewed by many fans 
as the Grande Torino's spiritual home – were built up time and again by a 
string of owners and directors, only to inevitably be crushed by the 
realisation that none had the money required to restore it.

The current president, the businessman Urbano Cairo, has been rather more 
careful with his promises. He bought the club in 2005 after it had been 
declared bankrupt, and the team were promoted from Serie B at the first 
attempt. He has been careful not to stretch the club beyond its resources, 
though his one big signing – Rolando Bianchi fromManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> – has so far failed to 
live up to expectations. As a result it has not been easy on the pitch. After 
finishing 15th and 16th on their first two seasons back in the top flight, 
Torino are once again struggling to keep their heads above water.

Cairo appointed Giancarlo Camolese as Torino's third manager this season in 
March. Although they have lost three of five games since he took charge, they 
have also won both times they have faced teams in the bottom half of the 
league. That is probably as much as can be hoped for from a team of modest 
talent. With Bianchi erratic and the captain, Alessandro Rosina, not even 
deemed worthy of a regular starting berth these days, Torino lack a cutting 
edge up front, while their midfield boasts little real creativity. Injuries, 
meanwhile, have further reduced an already thin squad.

It is easy, this close to the end of a season, to make glib statements about 
football being a matter of life and death. But as the present Torino team, 
along with several thousand fans, and relatives of those who died, make their 
way up to Superga this afternoon to pay tribute to the Grande Torino, they will 
know that it is anything but.

Round 34 talking points

• At time of writing Claudio Ranieri was still the manager of Juventus, but it 
is increasingly hard to imagine him staying in that job beyond the end of the 
season after his side failed to win for the fifth week in a row, drawing 2–2 at 
home toLecce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lecce>. Perhaps more 
disconcerting than the result itself for Ranieri are reports of a stand-up row 
with Mauro Camoranesi at half-time, as the winger reacted badly to being 
substituted, and of the goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon deciding to simply walk out 
of the dressing room during said argument and return to the pitch ahead of his 
team-mates.

• The mood is no better at Roma, whose players came out of their enforced 
ritiro(training camp) on Wednesday after Francesco Totti and Daniele De Rossi 
went directly to the club's president, Rosella Sensi – without telling their 
manager, Luciano Spalletti – and convinced her that they could be trusted to 
turn things around without such a punishment. Then they drew 0–0 at home to
Chievo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo>. Spalletti has always 
insisted he is not a fan of such punishments and claimed during the week to 
have been fine with the players' decision to go above his head, but after the 
game the manager suggested he may even be willing to walk away without having 
his contract paid off should the club wish to part ways at the end of the 
season.

• Yet another man who could be on his way this summer is Zlatan Ibrahimovic, 
who was heckled by Internazionale's own fans before he opened the scoring in 
their 2–0 win overLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> at San 
Siro. Ibra reacted to the goal by turning to the home support and raising a 
finger to his lips and, though he played down the incident afterwards, you 
could hardly blame him if he did decide to move on. Although he can appear 
uninterested, Ibrahimovic has scored 21 goals in the league alone this season 
and Saturday was not the first time he has secured a win, almost 
single-handedly, that Inter scarcely merited.

• After seeing Fiorentina beat Torino earlier in the day, Genoa knew that 
nothing less than a win would do in their derby againstSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> at Stadio Ferraris. Diego 
Milito ensured they got one, scoring a hat-trick in a 3–1 win. How much, 
though, will they come to regret the sendings-off – and therefore the 
forthcoming suspensions of – Matteo Ferrari and Thiago Motta during the final 
moments of the game?

Results: Bologna 1–2 Reggina, Catania 0–2 Milan, Fiorentina 1–0 Torino, Genoa 
3–1 Sampdoria,Internazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> 2–0 Lazio, Juventus 2–2 
Lecce, Palermo 5–1 Cagliari, Roma 0–0 Chievo, Siena 2–1 Napoli, Udinese 3–0 
Atalanta

Latest Serie A standings 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=13>
 