
Ronny Deila praised his team’s appetite and aptitude after the 8-1 thrashing 
of haplessHamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> took Celtic 
six points clear of Aberdeen at the top of the Premiership.

The home side stormed into a three-goal lead after 10 minutes through the 
stand-in captain, Mikael Lustig, Nir Bitton and his fellow midfielder Tom Rogic 
and kept going with the in-form striker Leigh Griffiths scoring twice before 
the interval.

The half-time substitute James Forrest scored eight minutes into the second 
half before Griffiths completed his hat-trick with Celtic’s seventh and, after 
Hamilton’s second-half substitute, Eamonn Brophy, got a goal on the break, 
Callum McGregor made it eight right at the end.

Deila was confident it was the biggest margin of victory of his managerial 
career. “I think so, I can’t remember better,” he said and was pleased with the 
way his players kept going for goals after the points were effectively secured 
so early on.

The Norwegian said: “It was a fantastic night, a very good performance, we 
scored a lot of goals and could have scored more, so I am very pleased with the 
boys.

“We deserved eight and we could have had much more, we had so many more 
chances. You always want games like this and I am very pleased.

“It is always hard to keep up the tempo and intensity when you are 3-0 up 
after 10 minutes but we did that very well.

“We looked sharp. I’ve seen it in training that we have looked better and 
better and today you could see what kind of tempo we can play at if we play at 
our best.

“We have kept going since June 20 and since Christmas we had some weeks with 
training and rest and now you see more energy in the team.”

Hamilton’s player-manager, Martin Canning, vowed to battle on after another 
abject display and result.

They have now gone eight games without a win and are above 11th-placed 
Kilmarnock on goal difference. The demoralising defeat comes after the recent 
4-1 Scottish Cup fourth-round defeat by Annan Athletic at Galabank.

Asked if he was confident that he will get the chance to get Hamilton out of 
trouble, he said: “We need to wait to see what happens. As long as I am doing 
it, I will be fighting and continue to do the best I can.

“Obviously it hurts. I am hurting more than anybody, I can assure you. I am 
gutted. When you lose goals in that manner and concede three goals in 10 
minutes, you are giving yourself no chance. We didn’t have enough leadership to 
pull us together when we needed it.

“It is so frustrating but what I have to keep thinking is that this 
performance and result againstCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, as much as it hurts, our season 
won’t be defined by it but we have to make sure we bounce back on Sunday.”
 