
A Leigh Griffiths double gave Celtic a narrow but deserved 2-1 win over 
Motherwell to strengthen the leaders’ grip on theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> title.

The striker missed the target with a penalty in the 26th minute – his fourth 
failure from the spot this season – as a remarkable display by theMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> goalkeeper Connor Ripley kept 
the visitors at bay until Griffiths eventually got the breakthrough just before 
the interval. The former Celtic player Scott McDonald levelled on the hour mark 
but Ripley undid all his good earlier work when he allowed Griffiths’ shot to 
slip through his legs for the forward’s 37th goal of the season, which took 
Ronny Deila’s side eight points clear of Aberdeen.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> can now prepare for next 
Sunday’s Scottish Cup semi-final against Rangers at Hampden Park secure in the 
knowledge their fifth consecutive title win is all but sealed.

Motherwell had won 2-1 at Celtic Park in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/celtic-motherwell-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 and might have gone ahead in the third minute had Chris Cadden connected 
properly with a Marvin Johnson pass, instead of mis-hitting the ball to the 
visiting goalkeeper Craig Gordon. At the other end, Griffiths looped a header 
from a Mikael Lustig cross on to the top of the netting as Celtic came back, 
with Ripley making early saves from Stefan Johansen, Patrick Roberts, Nir 
Bitton and Griffiths.

Griffiths had another chance to open the scoring – and end a four-game run 
without a goal – when Morgaro Gomis tripped the tricky Roberts just inside the 
area but he fired the spot-kick wide of Ripley’s left-hand post. Then came 
another period of activity for the inundated Ripley as he denied Griffiths, the 
substitute Colin Kazim-Richards, Kieran Tierney and Roberts again.

However, one minute before the break Griffiths smartly converted a cut-back 
from Tierney, and his enthusiastic celebrations, a mixture of relief and joy, 
took him to the other end of the pitch in front of the bulk of the Celtic 
support, where he picked up a yellow card from the referee, Willie Collum, for 
taking his shirt off. Motherwell were more enterprising after the break and in 
the 54th minute McDonald had the ball in the net following a pass from Louis 
Moult, only to see the offside flag up.

Ripley saved twice more from Roberts but the game turned when, from 12 yards, 
McDonald drilled in a cut-back from Cadden. This time the strike stood and it 
knocked Deila’s side out of their stride. However, in the 75th minute Celtic’s 
lead was restored by Griffiths, who scored again from a Tierney cut-back, 
although this time Ripley was culpable, allowing the shot to slip through his 
legs and over the line.

The visitors finished the game in control – Ripley denied Griffiths a 
hat-trick after the Celtic striker had robbed Kieran Kennedy – and will start 
looking towards Hampden Park next week where more drama is certain. Post-match, 
the Motherwell manager Mark McGhee had no complaints about the defeat but 
questioned the offside decision which denied McDonald an equaliser. He said: 
“We were beaten by the champions elect. They deserved to win the game but we 
are very aggrieved that once again a decision has gone against us,” said 
McGhee.” I have watched it over and over and I know the linesman has only one 
look at it but for me it is onside and it should have stood. But we can’t have 
any complaints.”

Meanwhile, Griffiths bemoaned his penalty miss and telling Sky Sports that he 
had “one million percent” stepped down from his penalty duties. “The first 
chance I had was a penalty and I will never hit a bad penalty like that again 
in my life and then the chances kept falling for me and my head was a little 
bit down. And then the ball came to my left foot and just tried to make contact 
with it and thankfully it went in.” And for Celtic’s chances of retaining the 
title too.
 