
The substitute Leigh Griffiths’ dramatic late strike gave Celtic a barely 
deserved 1-0 win overPartick <https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> at 
Parkhead. The Hoops striker, who had missed the previous four matches with a 
calf injury, spared the blushes of Nir Bitton, especially, after the midfielder 
was sent off midway through the second half.

Griffiths replaced Nadir Ciftci for the start of the second half after a 
dismal first 45 minutes from the home side and Ronny Deila’s men continued to 
struggle, with Bitton sent off in the 67th minute after picking up his second 
yellow card. However, in the 89th minute Griffiths pounced to fire the ball 
into the net and takeCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> three 
points clear of Aberdeen at the top of the Premiership.

It was cruel luck on Thistle, who suffered their first defeat in seven 
matches, but it was a huge relief for Deila, whose side had failed to win in 
their last four home games.

Befitting a side who had finished the year in such good form, the Maryhill men 
looked comfortable and indeed confident in a low-key start to the match as 
Steven Lawless sent a dipping effort from 25 yards past the far post.

The champions’ response was a drive from Callum McGregor that sped wide of the 
far post before a Tom Rogic drive from outside the penalty area was saved by 
Tomas Cerny.

However, this was no assault on the Jags goal – though there were loud Celtic 
claims for a penalty when Rogic’s shot was blocked by Liam Lindsay. The 
referee, Stephen Finnie, was unimpressed and the game limped on.

Ciftci had the ball in the net but was flagged offside before boos from the 
home fans accompanied the half-time whistle.

Deila put on top scorer Griffiths for the start of the second half in place of 
Ciftci but the nervousness in the Hoops defence – especially when Efe Ambrose 
was in possession – gave Thistle continuing encouragement.

James Forrest replaced Rogic in the 64th minute to more boos from the 
increasingly disgruntled home fans, who were stunned soon afterwards when 
Bitton, booked in the 61st minute for pulling back Stuart Bannigan, was sent 
packing after a late shoulder challenge on the substitute Gary Miller.

The dismissal stung Celtic into action. Forrest had a powerful drive beaten 
away by Cerny, who then denied Griffiths twice as the home side tried to 
increase the pressure.

As opposed to settling for the point, Thistle pushed forward for a goal and 
they came close when the defender Dan Seaborne’s header was cleared off the 
line by left-back Kieran Tierney.

With a minute remaining, though, Kris Commons’ drive from the edge of the 
penalty area was deflected high up into the air and fell kindly for Griffiths 
to volley past Cerny and into the corner of the net. 
 