
Two first-half goals from Leigh Griffiths gave Hibernian a 3-2 victory over St 
Mirren in an exciting Scottish Premier League match at St Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> Park.

All five goals were scored in the first 45 minutes with a mistake from the St 
Mirren goalkeeper Craig Samson after six minutes gifting Griffiths his first 
Hibs goal since signing on loan from Wolves in the summer.

A Paul McGowan double within two minutes put the home side in front before 
Hibs' defender Sean O'Hanlon levelled with a header in the 37th minute .

Griffiths fired his side back in front with an angled drive and Hibs held on 
in a goalless second half.

Life without Derek McInnes began with a creditable 0-0 draw for St Johnstone, 
who emerged unscathed from an insipid encounter atDundee United.

The home side struggled to penetrate their organised and industrious visitors 
throughout, although they did see a stunning Garry Kenneth drive come back off 
the crossbar in the second half. The busy Fulham loanee Lauri Dalla Valle saw a 
series of attempts fail to find the net as the home side's attacks were 
continually repelled by resolute defending.

Chances for the visitors were at a premium, but Dusan Pernis had to be alive 
to deny Francisco Sandaza an opener with a fine sprawling save, blocking the 
Saints' best chance.

St Johnstone's caretaker managerial pair of Alec Cleland and the former 
Chelsea player Jody Morris will have every reason to be pleased with a 
courageous point on the road, but United will again rue a below-par home 
display.

The substitute Liam Buchanan's late penalty meant Inverness had to share the 
points withDunfermline in the SPL basement battle.

Caley Thistle led through Grégory Tadé's diving header until the 86th-minute 
equaliser at Tulloch Caledonian Stadium.

Tadé's close-range header put the Highlanders ahead after 33 minutes but David 
Proctor's trip on Buchanan gave the Pars the opportunity to level and prevent 
the bottom side Inverness from replacing them in ninth place in the SPL table.
 