
There have been plenty of performances this season which have suggested that 
Hull FC are capable of their firstSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> title but this one could be the 
biggest indicator yet, albeit for a very different reason.

At times this year Hull have been irresistible, dominating and looked every 
inch contenders for the finale at Old Trafford. Here, though, they were below 
their best by some distance, yet still found a way to see offCastleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> and restore their two‑point lead 
at the top of the table heading into the Challenge Cup quarter-finals next 
weekend.

Errant goal-kicking – Castleford kicked only one from five while Marc Sneyd 
missed only one of his five – played a significant part in the outcome but Hull 
had to withstand plenty of late pressure from Castleford, who deserve 
considerable credit for playing their part in a thrilling game despite missing 
11 first-team players due to injury.

“I’m disappointed really and not pleased with the performance again,” Lee 
Radford, the Hull coach, said. “But we halted Cas’s momentum a couple of times 
which we’ve not been able to do here in recent years.”

Hull had to fight back and led 18-8 at the break the hard way; they trailed 
8-0 after tries from Luke Dorn and Jake Webster but three tries in 15 minutes 
from Frank Pritchard, Danny Houghton and Mahe Fonua – all of which Sneyd 
converted – put Hull in control.

However, when Paddy Flynn finished a fine Castleford handling move on 57 
minutes and Denny Solomona followed suit three minutes later with a remarkable 
finish, Danny Tickle converted the latter to drag the injury-hit Tigers back 
level at 18-18. On the balance of play it was arguably the least they deserved.

Hull were reeling and offering little in attack but, as the game ticked into 
the final quarter, Radford sent for the veteran half‑back, Leon Pryce, from the 
bench to try to spark his side. It was an inspired decision, as within minutes 
the 34‑year‑old produced what Radford described afterwards as the match-winning 
play; Pryce stepped off his right foot and produced a superb offload for Jamie 
Shaul to race home, with Sneyd converting for 24-18.

Solomona produced another acrobatic finish to score his 24th try of the season 
with nine minutes remaining but, crucially, Tickle’s touchline conversion 
struck a post.

That was far from the end of the drama, though, as Hull were forced to defend 
with vigour and effort to keep the Tigers at bay and put a potentially fatal 
dent in their top-four hopes this year.

“You obviously don’t like losing games but I can’t fault the effort from 
them,” Daryl Powell, the Castleford coach, said.

Hull have established an unfortunate reputation in recent years as one of the 
game’s biggest underachievers – and this was undoubtedly a game they would have 
found a way to lose last year. In that regard the class of 2016 seem a very 
different bunch from their predecessors.

Castleford Dorn; Flynn, Crooks, Monaghan, Solomona; McShane, Millington; 
Tickle, Milner, Patrick, Moors, Webster, Massey.Interchange Holmes, Springer, 
Maher, Cook.

Tries Dorn, Webster, Flynn, Solomona 2. Goal Tickle.

Hull FC Shaul; Michaels, Fonua, Yeaman, Naughton; Tuimavave, Sneyd; Taylor, 
Houghton, Watts, Pritchard, Washbrook, Thompson.Interchange Hadley, Green, 
Pryce, Bowden.

Tries Pritchard, Houghton, Fonua, Shaul. Goals Sneyd 4.

Referee G Hewer (RFL). Att 10,790.
 