
The match between Bayer Leverkusen and Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>, then fourth and second 
in the table, had flown by fairly fast, not really that furious and very, very 
goallessly for 63 minutes: a series of low level bangs and unrealised 
half-chances, laced with a hint of impending violence. A regular top of the 
table Bundesliga game of the 2015/16 season in other words, another exercise in 
error induction (opposition half) and error avoidance (own half), done so 
diligently, expertly, with a great amount of earnest effort and collective 
cohesion on both sides, that it produced a perfect equilibrium, a spectacle of 
the invisible. “So far it’s a lot of Stückwerk (piecemeal stuff),” the 
Bundestrainer, Jogi Löw, lamented at the BayArena.

But then came Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s 21st league goal of the season, a 
tap-in, scored in a thrilling, three-point counterattack that actually wasn’t a 
counterattack at all but a move that stemmed from a free-kick deep in the 
Dortmund half, and with it came unprecedented controversy.

Leverkusen coach Roger Schmidt sorry for refusing to depart after red card
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/bayer-leverkusen-coach-sorry-red-card-refusal>
The German sports magazine 11 Freunde witnessed “scenes that would embarrass 
three-year-olds in the kindergarten”. “Another example of the moral decline on 
German football pitches,” was Frankfurter Rundschau’s severe verdict, while 
Handelsblatt determined that “everything that football stands for has been 
flouted” and called for “a punishment that dwarves anything that hardened 
offenders like Borussia Dortmund’s former coach Jürgen Klopp have faced in the 
past”. Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger sarcastically proposed an award for the villain of 
the piece, the Leverkusen boss and Lieutenant Commander Data dead-ringer Roger 
Schmidt, as “the most undiscerning manager inBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> history”. Due to his 
“lack of self-control”, the Cologne-based paper argued, Schmidt had managed 
“what no one had managed before in German professional football”: he had caused 
a game to be suspended by refusing to be sent to the stands.

The 48-year-old’s anger was later neatly measured in metres. The Dortmund 
free-kick, taken by the quick-thinking Matthias Ginter, was exactly 5.8 metres 
away from the spot where Leverkusen captain Stefan Kiessling had fouled Sven 
Bender. Leverkusen were still coming to terms with Felix Zwayer’s decision to 
allow the away team that unwarranted territorial gain as Marco Reus raced 
forward, passed out to Erik Durm on right, and Durm found Aubameyang with a 
smooth low cross.

Thomas Müller downs Darmstadt with bicycle kick for Bayern Munich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/bayern-munich-darmstadt-bundesliga-match-report>
Schmidt’s loud protestations caught the attention of the fourth official who 
told Zwayer that the manager had overstepped the line and needed to leave the 
coaching zone. The referee sent Schmidt off, from a good 40 metres away but 
Schmidt didn’t budge. “Come here and tell me why”, he angrily gesticulated at 
the official. Zwayer, a Fifa referee, was in no mood to heed the call and sent 
over Kiessling with a message instead. Calm down or this game will be aborted. 
Schmidt didn’t calm down. “Then abort it,” he shouted. So Zwayer did, taking 
the teams off the pitch for nine minutes. Schmidt at last relented, but the 
well of controversy was not yet exhausted after the restart. Zwayer overlooked 
a blatant penalty (Sokratis Papastathopoulos had handled the ball in the 
penalty area), as Dortmund survived the angry onslaught from a now managerless 
Leverkusen to claim three points that all but guarantee them second spot in the 
table.

Leverkusen, though, had missed yet another chance to put pressure on Hertha 
Berlin, who are inexplicably still third after a grand haul of four points from 
five games since the winter break. Leverkusen’s sporting director, Rudi Völler, 
a man who wears his heart on his sleeve and has a very low tolerance level for 
perceived sporting injustices, was so irate that he repeatedly turned the 
tables on Sky’s Sebastian Hellmann, pushing him to comment on Zwayer’s 
decisions. “Didn’t he harm us more than (Schmidt’s expulsion)?” the former 
Germany international queried. Völler also alleged that Zwayer had overlooked 
Sokratis’ handling of the ball as an act of “revenge” and answered questions 
about a lengthy ban for Schmidt with a nice, dark quip: “A ban? I don’t think 
Zwayer will be banned”.

Schmidt was charged on Monday by the German FA and will undoubtedly miss the 
odd game, as he’s a repeat offender. He haspartly apologised for his petulance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/bayer-leverkusen-coach-sorry-red-card-refusal>
, admitting that he should have moved to the stand much earlier. Völler will 
probably have to pay a few thousand Euros for his outburst. Whether this whole 
affair really warrants such strong headlines is a different matter, however. 
Yes, Bundesliga coaches and officials are role models, and yes, referees need 
to be protected in view of the increasing hostility they face at lower levels. 
But neither Schmidt nor Völler did anything that veered from mere 
heat-of-the-moment stupidity into seriously wrong, 
the-future-of-football-endangering misdemeanour.

Zwayer, even if he wasn’t obliged to do so, might have been able to defuse the 
situation altogether with a smile and a little talk. To his credit, though, he 
explained the whole thing step by step in front of the cameras later on, and 
the handball aside, there was, strictly speaking nothing really wrong with the 
goal (“a free-kick three, four, five metres away from the foul is still within 
the referees’ discretion and tolerable,” he said), nor with his handling of the 
aftermath. He did everything by the book and the latter will thus be thrown at 
Schmidt.

But let us not pretend with po-faced indignation that Sunday’s novelty 
touchline altercation wasn’t first and foremost incredibly entertaining and 
really good fun to watch. German football has become very professional, the 
domain of bright, hard-working coaches and well-spoken young men who’d rather 
use one big, foreign word too many than lose their nerve. That development has 
been good for the quality of the football, without question, but much less so 
for the showbiz factor. Sunday was a welcome, one-off throwback to much wilder, 
louder times 20-odd-years ago, when spats and verbal indiscretions were 
frequent occurrences. You wouldn’t want to listen toTechnotronic 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9EcjWd-O4jI>, Bomb the Bass 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9EcjWd-O4jI> or MARRS 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cak1xly8oUM> every day, but it’s cool to come 
across some of these classic mad tunes from time to time. The present, and its 
altogether more refined soundtrack, will reclaim the airwaves soon enough.

Results: Frankfurt 0-0 Hamburg, Ingolstadt 2-0 Bremen Hoffenheim 3-2 Mainz, 
Hertha 1-1 Wolfsburg, Bayern 3-1 Darmstadt, Gladbach 1-0 Köln, Hannover 0-1 
Augsburg, Leverkusen 0-1 Dortmund, Schalke 1-1 Stuttgart.
 