
Tuesday is a day of double significance for Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>. In the evening they look 
to extend their 100% start to the League One campaign by beating Notts County 
at Brisbane Road for a seventh win. Earlier their chairman, Barry Hearn, will 
be fighting for the club's very survival at a judicial review into the process 
by which West Ham United were granted exclusive football use of the Olympic 
Stadium. Orient are in a corner, less than half a mile from the Park entrance, 
but no one fights a corner harder than Hearn; and his team are showing the same 
characteristics.

They had to on Saturday to suppress Port Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale> 3-2. The Valiants scored first 
after 20 minutes through Louis Dodds, equalised through Jennison Myrie-Williams 
within 10 of the resumption, after Orient had gone ahead in first-half added 
time, and hit the bar with a free-kick before Orient's 88th-minute winner. 
Micky Adams, Vale's manager, not unreasonably thought they were "worthy of a 
point" but admitted "defensive frailties let us down".

There is no room for those against the O's at present. Only Chris Neal's 
fingertips stopped them going behind early as David Mooney – from the same 
stable, Cork City, as Shane Long and Kevin Doyle – showed his brimming 
confidence with a controlled spin and shot slung to the far top corner. His 
thumping volley instantly equalised Vale's opener and Romain Vincelot, hounding 
the ball off Chris Robertson, had no hesitation in picking out Mooney's run for 
the second goal, too, when he himself might have shot. It was Mooney's seventh 
in six games. It was a measure of Vincelot's influence that he was man of the 
match.

Both Vale goals betrayed a prolonged failure to clear – Russell Slade, the 
manager, admitted as much – but Nathan Clarke showed his mettle in central 
defence and Elliot Omozusi was a consistently incisive interceptor at 
left-back. It was left to Kevin Lisbie to keep the Orient express on track. 
Receiving 30 yards from goal, he surged forward, like a towed caravan in high 
wind, before hitting the winner.

"Everyone got their rewards for pulling together," Slade said. He is unusual 
in his job in not having been a player, turning to it from teaching 20 years 
ago, and after three years with Orient he is the seventh longest-serving 
manager in 92. His squad is small but virtually free from injury. Nine of 
Saturday's starting XI have started all six league games and the other two 
five. They rose from 15th in February to end seventh and are carrying on. 
Perhaps Roy Hodgson, needing two wins next month, should tap in or hand over. 
The Slade school of fine art spells Light Ages.

Promotion is Hearn's thing – boxing, snooker, darts – but he has only one with 
Orient in 18 years, in 2006. He saved them in 1995, which is why he does not 
want them to go to the wall now. The estimate is that, if there can be no 
ground share with West Ham, they will be non-league in five years – so much for 
Olympic legacy.

He has championed financial fair play and on Saturday reminded fans that "60p 
in every pound spent with us we can give to Russell to build the squad". A 
crowd 900 up on last year's 4,000 average rewarded him. He also urged fans to 
"shout from the rooftops that now more than ever is a time to be proud to be an 
Orient fan". With tower blocks of flats, initiated by him, at each corner of 
the ground, the rooftops are high and the cries should reach the Olympic 
Stadium. After years of Hearn but not seed, something is growing at Orient that 
may end up in the Championship with serious investment promised.
 