
I am a local government manager and proud of it, working for a local unitary 
authority in the north. Reading some of the red tops, though, I wonder if they 
are talking about the same sector as me.

It’s just not true that we are lazy and own gold-plated pensions, as the Sun 
suggests. Reading an Express article last year that regurgitated something from 
the Taxpayers’ Alliance about the amount spent by councils on biscuits led to 
accusations from friends that my colleagues and I eat £10m of biscuits each per 
year. If only.

It is this inaccurate, headline-grabbing drivel that causes people to think we 
all earn £200k per year, drive expensive cars, work four hours a week and 
retire aged 30. In truth, I earn £30k for a 50-hour week, drive a Toyota Aygo 
and cannot afford a mortgage. I’ll currently retire at 68 with an £18k pension. 
Bring on the gold.

This government vilifies people who put their lives on the line for their job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/09/government-villifies-people-public-sector-intelligence>
I manage a regeneration team at my council and witness people doing their 
utmost to improve the local area, working long hours for low pay. Yes, there 
are cuts and inefficiencies and there are certainly ways the sector can 
improve, but my local authority and the wider sector is resourced by 
hardworking people with a passion for the locality and a quiet professionalism 
that will never cease to impress me.

The first project I worked on for my current local authority showed me the 
positive role we play. Running an employability skills project in one of our 
most deprived areas, we took 12 long-term unemployed people and spent time 
building a relationship, understanding their lives, their wants and the 
barriers to them accessing training or employment. We found them courses that 
plugged any training gaps they had. We wrote CVs with them, went to interviews 
with them and worked on implementing feedback from unsuccessful interviews.

We didn’t change the world, but we improved a few lives: five of them got 
jobs, three still did the job a year later; all undertook accredited training. 
And we stayed in touch in case they wanted advice afterwards. Most of them did.

Here is another example of the distance between the rhetoric and reality about 
councils: my town, supposedly suffering a death knell via the ailing steelworks 
industry, is leading one of the largest housing developments in the north of 
England, with £1.2bn invested and 6,000 homes built. Thousands of jobs are 
being created in the offshore wind energy sector in our patch, with the largest 
enterprise zone in the country.

I'm a bed manager in mental health – and the scapegoat of the NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/14/bed-manager-mental-health-scapegoat-nhs>
As soon as the local steelworks redundancies were mooted, the council 
established a taskforce to coordinate a response and bring key partners 
together to support those exiting that industry. It secured £12m as grants to 
local business for retraining and investing in other industries, as well as for 
one-to-one support for people facing redundancies. So much for the slow-moving 
bureaucracies of local government.

It’s this quiet, dignified dedication that probably allows misinformation 
about the public sector to go unchallenged – so consider this a polite 
rebuttal. I am biased, I admit it: I have experience of being a looked-after 
child. The state fed me, educated and housed me, as well as being my 
(corporate) parent on-off for a period. I remain utterly grateful for them 
being there and despair at what the alternative would mean without such a 
safety net for the vulnerable.

It is that gratitude and belief in the sector that led me to choose the 
graduate management programme for local government. I’ve worked in the sector 
for nine years now, across frontline and corporate services and have yet to 
find a service that was not underpinned by that core value of wanting to 
improve a person’s life, family or area. Some may mock, but it’s a good thing 
to go to work for – and despite the cuts, efficiency drives and press 
hostility, I’ll still be here, because it’s worthwhile and I love it.

The views expressed here are personal and do not represent the views of any 
council.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 