
Achiltibuie, north-west Scotland, is one of those places for which the phrase 
'back of beyond' was invented. A tiny, straggly coastal settlement, it looks 
across narrow straits to the Summer Isles. Behind it, empty Highland scenery 
looms large: moors, lochs, mountains; nature at its desolate best. Such is the 
sense of loneliness that even the sheep, not usually given to complex emotions, 
look like they could do with some company.

 Yet in this place where rain is more common than shine, bananas and 
strange-shaped cucumbers grow. Orchids vie for space with giant tropical 
fronds. There are figs, aubergines, oranges, and more varieties of salad than 
you can shake a stick at. Scotland is famous for its autumn raspberry crop, but 
in Achiltibuie, the soft-fruit season stretches to six months.

 The reason for this unlikely paradise is a giant, hangar-like building called 
the Achiltibuie Hydroponicum. Inside are gardens using a soil-less, water-based 
form of horticulture known as hydroponics. 'We were set up to provide fresh 
produce for the Summer Isles hotel across the road,' says the manager, Nick 
Clooney. 'Now, we exist as a showcase for what hydroponics can do.' What 
hydroponics does is make a jungle out of a comparatively small container. And 
we're not just talking cannabis cultivation, with which this science is 
invariably connected. Manipulate the environment slightly, and you can have a 
monster banana tree, stuffed like a genie into a standard beer keg. It is as if 
these athletes of the plant world have had a course of herbaceous steroids.

 The plants grow in sterile media such as vermiculite, rockwool or perlite, 
through which the roots absorb nutrient-rich water.

 The latter is in constant supply, through a continuously replenished 
reservoir or via irrigation channels. The roots take only what they need, while 
heat and light is varied, much the same as it is in standard horticulture. Some 
hydroponics systems rely totally on artificial light; but at Achiltibuie, with 
its see-through, plastic roof, they prefer to use what God gives them. Only the 
tropical section gets any artificial heat in winter - with force ten gales 
common, you can hardly blame them. 'You can get a consistent product anywhere 
with a minimum amount of water and power,' says Clooney. 'In places where there 
is no soil - deserts, for example - it means you are approaching 
sustainability.' It was not the lack but the abundance of water that brought 
about the earliest-known hydroponics system. The Aztec's chinampas involved 
planting crops in soil spread on rafts, the roots of which would work down to 
the water below. But in 1936, researchers from the University of California 
came up with the modern idea of hydroponics, cultivating tomatoes on a wire 
mesh above basins filled with water and nutrients.

 Today, the US National Science Foundation uses hydroponics to give its 
Antarctic survey a bigger menu than penguin and krill. At its McMurdo station, 
it now grows 1,100lbs of vegetables in winter. Also, Nasa is looking into 'gas 
exchange' hydroponics for its planned space station, which would not only 
provide food for the astronauts, but also recycle carbon dioxide as oxygen. If 
we ever get to settle on Mars, you can bet your bottom dollar that hydroponics 
will have more than a walk-on part.

 For scientists, then, and for the Nick Clooneys of this world, the future of 
horticulture will come in the standard plastic pot, with maybe an artificial 
light or two. Such is the prolific potential of hydroponics, its proponents 
argue, it could solve the world's food problems. They also make a green case 
for the system, saying that no water or nutrients are wasted, and that massive 
savings could be made on the energy which goes into fertiliser production.

 But eggheads are only part of the story. Hydroponics is wending its watery 
way into the domestic environment, too. Most of the shops selling equipment are 
less than five years old, and say they are increasingly supplying homes as well 
as commercial greenhouses. Nigel Piper opened his second hydroponics shop in 
Peckham (Greenfinger Hydropnics, 0171-708 4999), south London, last year. There 
is no typical hydroponic set up, he says. 'A lot depends on how much you want 
to spend. You can grow tomatoes for under a pound, or you could spend thousands 
on automated water and climate-control systems. But you could do it on a flat 
floor covered in polythene sheeting with a gully of water running down the 
middle.' Britain is a new target for established hydroponics companies in 
Holland and Australia, where the industry is far more developed.

 A year ago, the industry also got its own magazine, Gromag. 'In the past 
three years, there's been a change from almost nothing to quite a fast-growing 
industry,' says Nick Tomory, Gromag's editor. When you think about it, 
hydroponics is perfect for the modern urban person who is short of space but 
wants to try their hand at growing something. Suddenly, you can see the 
wardrobe-sized balcony in a different light; your tiny back yard as a real 
urban jungle. And even if you have no outdoors, a window-ledge, or an attic 
with artificial light, is a start.

 Unsurprisingly, this technology has been of particular interest to cannabis 
growers. Over the past decade, seizures of home-grown marijuana have rocketed 
tenfold, to 116,119 plants in 1996. Part of this increase might be due to 
better policing, but there's no getting away from the fact that there is also a 
great deal more of the drug around to seize. And much of that can be put down 
to hydroponics, where a small system set up in an attic can keep a stoner happy 
all year round and still leave a tidy amount left over to sell to friends. Not 
only this, but the way hydroponics allows for adjusting nutrients in the plants 
means that mind-bending strains, such as skunk, have been developed. 
Hydroponics, it is safe to say, has transformed the British cannabis scene from 
ropy old weed into a world-class smoke.

 But you can no longer write off hydroponics enthusiasts as drug-fanciers, 
says Nick Tomory. 'One of the things about cannabis growers is that what they 
grow is worth a lot of money - so the cost of the equipment and cost of the 
techniques doesn't matter. Now, prices are coming down and the industry has a 
more realistic feel to it. A lot of schools have a hydroponics system; it's a 
wonderful way for children to learn about plants.' There are other hurdles to 
cross, too - such as convincing environmentalists and lovers of natural food 
that the chemicals involved are a good thing. According to Achiltibuie's 
Clooney, plants take only the chemicals they require, just as they would from 
the soil, so no harm is done, but the Soil Association will have none of this. 
'The whole process of organic growing is based upon soil contact,' says Philip 
Stocker, SA's agricultural development officer. 'This is basically about 
importing fertility.' Tomory, who himself used to work in organic horticulture, 
says Stocker is being narrow-minded - 'Why should the Soil Association have a 
monopoly on the definition of organic?' - and is currently importing a US 
nutrient that claims to be totally organic. However, he admits there is a 
problem with the image of hydroponically-grown vegetables as a tasteless 
offence to the palate - cheap, watery Dutch tomatoes common in British market 
stalls are particular offenders. The Dutch example, says Tomory, is where the 
technology has been abused, and where artificial nutrients have been cynically 
employed to grow tomatoes intensively. Hydroponically-grown food, he says, can 
taste excellent.

 Despite such difficulties, the idea that hydroponics might revolutionise 
urban gardening is an attractive one - with its ability to grow vegetables in a 
very confined space, or triffid-like flowers in the short British summer, it 
could be to the millennial urban dweller what the allotment was to their 
great-grandparents.

 Get used to the idea that 'technology' does not have to be incompatible with 
nature, says Tomory, and the only real problem would seem to be an aesthetic 
one. After all, those plastic pots grate on the senses as much as any sci-fi 
tomato upsets a foodie. Hydroponics might be space age, a futuristic answer to 
our crowded world, but surely we can do it in good old terracotta.
 