
As an actor Lionel Jeffries, who has died aged 83, was a master of comic 
unease. This was perhaps fuelled by the personal unease he felt in a 
sex-and-violence era which overtook the gentler sensibilities he sometimes 
brought to his acting. But he was able to bring these sensibilities fully to 
bear in his scriptwriting and film directing, particularly in his much-loved 
adaptation of the classic children's novel The Railway Children. With the 
latter, he left an indelible mark on the British film industry and generations 
of teary-eyed viewers.

The son of two devoted workers for the Salvation Army, Jeffries disliked 
personal publicity and was a zealot when preparing a role (he ran two miles 
every morning before appearing in the musical Hello Dolly! after an absence 
from the London stage of 26 years). He deplored permissivism, and was not 
frightened of being quoted to that effect; he was a member of the British 
Catholic Stage Guild, and served as its vice-president for some time. In a 
profession sometimes characterised by the loucheness of its morals, he had only 
one wife, the former actor Eileen Walsh, with whom he had one son and two 
daughters.

With his hard-boiled egg of a head, barking voice, interrogator's nose, 
demented moustache and apprehensive eyes, he was the British film industry's 
archetypal officious policeman or half-unhinged bungling crook. For Hollywood, 
which he called "Shepherd's Bush wrapped in cellophane", and the domestic 
industry he adapted the act in more than 100 films to roles such as the 
Roundhead colonel in the British civil-war epic The Scarlet Blade (1963), the 
perfidious Inspector Fred "Nosey" Parker in The Wrong Arm of the Law (1962), 
and as Stanley Farquhar, the spy who was as inefficient as the dog in The Spy 
With a Cold Nose (1966).

Such broad comedy roles obscured his more thoughtful and intelligent side. He 
was a good-natured man who combined a formality of manner sometimes evocative 
of the constipated behaviour of his comic creations with an instinct for the 
warm and life-enhancing aspects of writing and direction. When first introduced 
to the actor and film director Bryan Forbes, on the set of the wartime escape 
film The Colditz Story (1957), he surprised him by addressing him as "sir".

The two men and their wives, Eileen and Nanette Newman, became friends. In his 
polite way, in the 1950s a nd 60s, Jeffries also socialised at The Wick, the 
handsome Richmond Hill home of the actor Sir John Mills, where he and his wife 
mixed with the Oliviers, the Nivens, the Attenboroughs, Noël Coward, Deborah 
Kerr and the playwright Emlyn Williams. His friendship with Forbes was later to 
launch his own career as a film director.

Born in Forest Hill, south London in 1926, Jeffries attended Queen Elizabeth's 
grammar school in Wimborne, Dorset. He grew up just in time to step into 
wartime service with the Oxford and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry and the 
Royal West African Frontier Force in Burma, and rose to the rank of captain. 
After the war, he won the Kendal award at Rada — the first of many prizes for 
his acting and writing — and made his first London stage appearance in 
Carrington VC at the WestminsterTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in 1949.

His West End appearances dried up in the early 1950s when his lucrative work 
for the British film industry took over; it did not resume until 1984, when he 
played Horace Vandergelder in Hello Dolly! at Birmingham Rep and the Prince of 
Wales theatre in London.

From 1954, he was in a stream of British and Hollywood films. Some roles, such 
as Lieutenant McDaniel in Bhowani Junction (1956), the Hollywood version of 
John Masters's novel about India's struggle for independence, were serious 
dramatic parts; others, such as Dr Hatchet in Rank's Doctor at Large (1957), 
were slighter and more risible. He enhanced Blue Murder at St Trinian's (1957), 
about the madcap girls' school, and was Grandpa Potts in the successful 
children's film Chitty Chitty Bang Bang (1968), alongside Dick Van Dyke. But he 
was far from comic as the splenetic Marquis of Queensberry, hounding Oscar 
Wilde to prison over his son's liaison with the homosexual playwright, in The 
Trials of Oscar Wilde (1960).

Three of Jeffries's scripts were made into films. The first was based on E 
Nesbit's novel The Railway Children, which Jeffries adapted in pursuit of his 
belief that there were more wise children than wise adults. When he took his 
script to Forbes, then head of production at Elstree, Forbes asked him who he 
visualised as the director. Jeffries replied: "I know it's a crazy idea and not 
on, but I've always secretly harboured a longing to direct it myself." The 
finished film impressed Forbes by its "great style and warmth" and was a 
financial and cult success, being shown year after year on television, 
especially at Christmas time.

The Amazing Mr Blunden (1972), which he also directed, was a science-fiction 
film in which Diana Dors played against glamorous type as the repulsive Mrs 
Wickens. The film won him a gold medal for best screenplay at the International 
Science Fiction and Fantasy Festival in Paris in 1974. Wombling Free, which 
Rank made in 1977, was another children's favourite. He also directed the films 
Baxter! (1973), and The Water Babies (1979), after Charles Kingsley.

He had many television roles, but his career never really took off in the 
medium. Although, among jobbing-actor roles in series such as Casualty, Lovejoy 
and Inspector Morse, he also appeared in the Dennis Potter drama Cream in My 
Coffee (1980), with Peggy Ashcroft; a TV version of Mr Jekyll and Hyde (1990) 
and Ending Up (1989), based on the Kingsley Amis novel about old buffers going 
grumbling to their doom. His constrained but explosive style of acting may not 
have been quite right for the domesticated small screen, added to which he 
tended to have bad luck, and twice sued TV companies: first Thames, for 
negligence, when he was nearly drowned on location; and second Harlech, when a 
comedy series was abruptly cancelled after the German backers pulled out. His 
gentlemanly manner did not mean he could not stand up for his rights.

Such an attitude was not the most comfortable one for an actor to have in the 
tiny world of British TV. But the fact that his directorial flair was so unused 
on TV, when many lesser talents were allowed to prosper, does not reflect at 
all well on the openness of that small world.

He is survived by Eileen and his children.

• Lionel Jeffries, actor, screenwriter and director, born 10 June 1926; died 
19 February 2010

• This article was amended on 24 February 2010. The original said that as a 
captain, [Jeffries] was awarded the Burma Star. However, the Burma Star was a 
campaign medal awarded to all personnel. This has been corrected.
 