
Lionel Messi scored his 300th and 301st career goals for Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> and extended his record 
scoring run to 14 league games in a 2-1 comeback win at Granada on Saturday, 
four days before the Champions League last-16 match at Milan.

Messi pounced on a rebound of Cesc Fábregas's strike five minutes after 
half-time to cancel out Odion Ighalo's opener that had come against the run of 
play in the 26th minute.

The Argentina striker then hit the winner in the 73rd minute with a 
brilliantly struck free-kick to take his season's tally to 37.

Despite the result, Granada confirmed their revival under their new coach, 
Lucas Alcaraz. But even the minnows' best efforts were not enough against 
Barcelona's all-time leading scorer who again proved impossible to stop.

It was Barcelona's first win in three away matches. They stayed on course to 
reclaim the league title with their 21st win in 24 matches. They lead Atlético 
Madrid by 15 points and Real Madrid by 19 before their games on Sunday.

With Wednesday's game at Milan in mind, Barcelona rested Andrés Iniesta and 
Carles Puyol, while Xavi and David Villa were both unavailable.

Barcelona dictated play from the start but lacked a goal threat, with Alexis 
Sánchez particularly indecisive, before Ighalo put Granada ahead. After Alexis 
was again hesitant to shoot, Granada's Carlos Aranda launched a counterattack 
and lobbed a cross to the far post that Manuel "Nolito" Agudo knocked down for 
Ighalo to push over the goalline and ignite the Los Carmenes Stadium crowd.

Messi tried to revive Barcelona, first by floating a free-kick into the arms 
of Antonio "Tono" Rodriguez. Thiago Alcantara followed by setting up Messi with 
a deft side-footed pass, only for Tono to block his close-range attempt.

After failing to weave their way through Granada's packed defence in the first 
half, Barcelona turned to long strikes.

Fábregas surprised Tono with a bouncing shot that the veteran keeper tamely 
batted down in front of his goal, letting Messi rush in to drive it home.

Granada wilted after the equaliser and Barcelona sent on Iniesta to press home 
their advantage.

Pedro Rodriguez hit the post with another long-distance effort in the 66th 
minute before Messi swerved an unstoppable left-footed free-kick just over the 
wall that bent Tono's right hand back and left him kneeling on the turf with a 
stunned look on his face.

Granada gathered themselves for one last effort in the dying minutes, and 
goalkeeper Victor Valdés had to step up to deflect substitute Yacine Brahimi's 
shot into the side netting in stoppage time.
 