
“Please don’t compare it with Dortmund,” Jürgen Klopp pleaded with the media 
in Villarreal, moments after telling Liverpool’s players they had five minutes 
to get over the deflation of their first European defeat of the season as 
“another magical night” beckons at Anfield on Thursday. Yet there was no 
contradiction between the Liverpool manager’s public and private view on the 
Europa League semi-final after thefirst-leg defeat at El Madrigal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-match-report>
. Klopp has not called for another “wonder at Anfield” in the second leg. He 
does not believe Liverpool need one.

They do require another comeback to book their place in Basel after succumbing 
to Adrián López’s 92nd-minute winner for Villarreal in Spain. And of course, 
with ample justification even without that remarkable quarter-final defeat of
Borussia Dortmund two weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
, Anfield expects to play its part.

Liverpool should not be in Europa League after Mamadou Sakho’s failed test | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/29/liverpool-europa-league-mamadou-sakho>
Klopp expects that too but, given that Liverpool’s predicament with at least 
90 minutes of the semi-final left is nowhere near as bleak as it was with 33 
minutes to play in the quarter-final, his optimism is based onVillarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> wilting against an improved 
Liverpool attack rather than an intense atmosphere. That is where his “magical 
night” comes into play.

The Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager 
explains: “Everyone was saying Villarreal were not in the best moment in the 
league in their last eight games – two wins, two defeats and four draws – so we 
had to look over a lot of games. They didn’t lose to Barcelona when they played 
them recently. We used the information, played the game and 80% of what we did 
was really good. You couldn’t see how strong they usually are. Now we have new 
information. They have new information.

“Usually that game would have been nil-nil away and we then need to score at 
home to go through. The situation hasn’t really changed a lot. If we have 
stability in our game again and if we can be more clear, direct and aggressive 
in our finishing, that is what we need to do.

“Yes, we need to create an atmosphere from the pitch to the crowd and from the 
crowd to the pitch. My first thought after they scored, when I saw all of them 
celebrating, was: ‘Sorry to say but you have to come to Anfield.’ It is not 
that I think we will always do wonders at Anfield. I don’t think we need a 
wonder at Anfield in this moment. Two goals is enough with this result. We have 
a real chance in the second leg. That’s what I thought before the first leg and 
I don’t want to stop thinking this after the first leg. Let’s do something 
special.”

Klopp’s decision to omit Daniel Sturridge from the starting lineup for the 
third successive European game and deploy Roberto Firmino as the focal point of 
Liverpool’s attack, with Divock Origi out injured, invited accusations of 
over-caution in the first leg. They may not have been made had it finished 0-0. 
The manager believes it would have been folly to open up against Marcelino’s 
gifted counter-attacking team and arrogant to expect anything other than a 
finely poised European semi-final.

“We need to find a balance,” he said. “If we just go in this direction [covers 
his eyes and moves forward], then they will score goals. That was not a game we 
were going to win 5-0. The city of Villarreal is small, only 40 or 50,000 
people, but with a big man behind with a lot of money. They are number four in 
the Spanish league. It is easy to know that Real Madrid, Barça and Atlético are 
brilliant teams but next is Villarreal. If anyone thinks we should win easily 
in Real, Barça or Atlético, then they have absolutely no idea about football. 
Why should we beat Villarreal like this?”

Klopp’s selection for Sunday’s midday kick-off at Swansea City in the Premier 
League will be with both legs of the Villarreal tie in mind. “Sunday, 12 
o’clock?” he said with incredulity at the fixture scheduling. “Everyone in 
England is having their lunch at that time and we have to play football.”

The demands aside, Liverpool have moved forward under Klopp and quicker than 
he anticipated when hereplaced Brendan Rodgers in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/jurgen-klopp-confirmed-liverpool-manager>
. He added: “I had a few impressions about the squad and a few impressions 
about the club but I had no real idea what we could do this season. We wanted 
to improve and that’s what we did. It’s a semi-final. It’s difficult but we 
still have a real chance. I want to fight in this second leg for the 
opportunity to play a final but then we will not have a European cup. We will 
still have to play a final.

“At this moment people speak about Liverpool and it’s still a little bit like: 
‘Big name, not so good squad.’ In my opinion the club is a big name and a much 
better squad than everybody thinks. We are in a good way and I like the 
attitude of the players. They will always strike back. That’s the important 
thing and that’s what we can show. That’s the relationship we have between the 
crowd and the players because it’s honest. It’s absolutely honest. We are not 
perfect, sorry, but we are really hard workers and I think that’s the most 
important thing to show when you are not the best.”
 