
This time Liverpool took the stoppage time sucker-punch. The Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> semi-final had been 
Borussia Dortmund in reverse – devoid of the drama, incident and sense of 
occasion that made for that extraordinary quarter-final – when Villarreal 
conjured a similarity that Jürgen Klopp could have done without. Adrián López’s 
92nd-minute winner leaves Liverpool in need of another Anfield recovery next 
week.

“We were lucky enough to score,” said Marcelino, the Villarreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> coach. “But it was not an 
unfair result.” Klopp viewed it through a different lens. His team had produced 
a resolute, disciplined and patient European away display to remain on course 
for the final in Basel, Europa League success and qualification for the 
Champions League but it was undermined by one disorganised moment and precise 
counter-attack.

Villarreal 1-0 Liverpool: five Europa League semi-final talking points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-talking-points>
In injury time, with Liverpool on the front foot, Adam Lallana lost possession 
and Villarreal broke throughtheir stylish captain, Bruno Soriano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/28/villarreal-liverpool-europa-league-talking-points>
. The midfielder swept a perfect pass over the exposed Kolo Touré to Denis 
Suárez, the former Manchester City academy prospect cut in behind and squared 
across Simon Mignolet for the substitute López to convert into an unguarded 
net. In the 91st minute against Dortmund it was Dejan Lovren who transformed 
the tie. The 92nd minute did not transform the semi-final, Anfield was always 
likely to be a decisive factor, but it has made Liverpool’s task more 
complicated than it needed to be.

Villarreal 1-0 Liverpool: Europa League semi-final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/apr/28/villarreal-v-liverpool-europa-league-semi-final-live>
The Beatles’ Yellow Submarine, the nickname adopted by Villarreal as they 
began their remarkable rise up the ranks in Spain, replaced their traditional 
pre-match anthem at El Madrigal and helped to create a jovial atmosphere. Ringo 
does not do intimidation. A banner containing the Villarreal crest, 96 and 
You’ll Never Walk Alone also showed how this week’s inquest verdicts on the 
Hillsborough disaster have been felt throughout football. But the Spanish club 
from a town of just over 51,000 inhabitants were not so accommodating on the 
pitch as they pursued a first appearance in a European final.

Bruno immediately began dictating play from deep in central midfield and there 
was a clear purpose from Marcelino’s side in possession as they looked to both 
wide men, Suarez and Jonathan Dos Santos, to stretchLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>. But it was the visitors who 
created the first real chance of the semi-final and should have claimed a 
valuable away goal inside five minutes.

James Milner released Lallana into space down the right and his low cross 
deflected perfectly off a home defender into the path of Joe Allen as he 
arrived in the area. Unmarked, from the penalty spot, the Wales international 
side-footed tamely straight at Sergio Asenjo. The Villarreal goalkeeper was not 
tested again before the interval. A big opportunity wasted.

Klopp had started with Roberto Firmino leading the Liverpool attack and 
without Daniel Sturridge for the third consecutive European game. The decision 
to omit the England international was justified by Divock Origi’s contribution 
against Borussia Dortmund and explained here by the need for intelligent 
movement in the absence of the injured Belgium international. Firmino struggled 
to vindicate the call in the first half, rarely featuring in the contest but, 
in fairness, receiving little supply too. The Brazilian’s contribution and the 
latest demotion for a big European occasion will not have been lost on 
Sturridge as he looked on from the substitutes’ bench.

Villarreal were sharp and inventive in possession but frequent attempts to 
thread a final ball through to Cédric Bakambu or Roberto Soldado were thwarted 
by the defensive instincts of Dejan Lovren and Touré, Klopp’s preferred 
replacement for the suspended Mamadou Sakho. But they did have their moments in 
the goalless first half. Soldado dragged a difficult chance wide from Bruno’s 
chipped free-kick and went close with a curling shot from the edge of the area. 
A vital challenge from Alberto Moreno deflected Mario Gaspar’s shot over after 
Villarreal had again looked to get in behind the Liverpool left-back. Their 
best chance fell to Tomás Pina after Bakambu and Soldado had combined inside 
the box and Simon Mignolet produced a fine save from the midfielder’s low drive 
towards the bottom corner.

It become a test of organisation and discipline for Klopp’s men and the 
midfield trio of Milner, Lucas Leiva and Allen, while not one many would pay to 
watch for invention, were integral in stifling Villarreal until the final act.

Liverpool lost Philippe Coutinho to illness at half-time and their 
concentration seconds after the restart. Bakambu, an obvious threat with nine 
goals in 11 Europa League ties this season, was left unmarked at a Dos Santos 
corner but fortunately for the visitors the Congo international steered his 
header against the outside of a post. Liverpool received another reprieve when 
Gaspar elected to shoot from a tight angle despite Bakambu being unmarked in 
the six-yard box, with inevitable repercussions. The ball flew harmlessly over 
Mignolet’s goal and the right-back got an earful from the striker.

Incident was sorely lacking but Firmino posed more problems for the home 
defence in the second half as he concentrated his runs on the penalty area 
rather than out wide. Milner picked him out with one measured pass and it 
required a fine save from Asenjo to tip the Brazil international’s low drive on 
to the post. Lallana was also fouled inside the area by Eric Bailly but was 
given offside – wrongly according to Klopp.

In the closing minutes Mignolet produced a superb save to deny Bakambu and 
Moreno broke the length of the field following a Villarreal corner only to 
slice wide from 12 yards. Then, in youthful enthusiasm for the winner, Klopp 
lamented, Liverpool forgot the game plan for one vital, punished moment.
 