
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have completed the 
signing of Loris Karius from Jürgen Klopp’s former club Mainz in £4.7m deal. 
Klopp wants the 22-year-old goalkeeper to increase the competition with Simon 
Mignolet for next season.

Karius, who spent time with Manchester City as a teenager, has signed a 
five-year contract at Anfield and will wear the No1 shirt with Mignolet happy 
to stick with his current No22.

The German is Klopp’s third signing since taking over in October, having 
secured deals in January for the Schalke centre-back Joel Matip and the Red 
Star Belgrade midfielder Marko Grujic to join this summer.

Liverpool target Mario Götze commits future to Bayern Munich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/23/liverpool-mario-gotze-bayern-munich-future>
“It’s a very good feeling and it’s an honour to play for a club like this,” 
Karius told liverpoolfc.com. “I know a lot about the club from watching them on 
TV. The history, everybody who plays football knows. There are a lot of things 
in my head when I think of this club.

“I spoke to the manager and I had a good feeling afterwards because he told me 
what he wants to do with the club and with the players. It was a good talk with 
him and after that I was convinced this was the right decision.”

The former Borussia Dortmund manager Klopp has returned to Germany for the 
second time to bolster his squad. “I am delighted we have signed Loris, he has 
had a fantastic season with Mainz and has developed into a very good goalkeeper 
since his return to Germany,” he said.

“I am really pleased that we were able to move so quickly to get him and that 
Loris has shown such a desire to come to Liverpool with a lot of other clubs 
interested in him.

“I know he will add to the quality we have in this position and I look forward 
to working with him and all our players when we return for pre-season.”

Next on Liverpool’s list of targets is the Leicester City left-back Ben 
Chilwell, for whom they are prepared to offer £4m up front with some add-ons. 
Martin Skrtel looks poised to depart, with the Turkish side Besiktas leading 
the race for the centre-half.

Kolo Touré, whose deal expires next month, could yet earn a new short-term 
contract should Mamadou Sakho’s failed drugs test lead to a lengthy ban.

However, the promising Spanish midfielder Sergi Canos, who impressed on loan 
at Brentford this season and was handed his Liverpool debut in their 
penultimate match of the campaign, seems destined to leave this summer. It is 
understood the 19-year-old has told the club he wants to leave after contract 
negotiations stalled and, while there has been interest from clubs in Portugal, 
the player is keen for a permanent move to London, with Watford and Queens Park 
Rangers potential destinations.
 