
Jürgen Klopp congratulated Markus Weinzierl, the Augsburg coach, on being “a 
bit annoying” and that was before kick-off. By the end, the Liverpool manager 
would hold Weinzierl’s team in the same regard and with the same respect, 
having emerged from a fraught night at Anfield with a place in the last 16 of 
theEuropa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>.

The struggling Bundesliga team claimed they were robbed by a referee called 
Turpin after James Milner scored the decisive, only goal of the two-legged tie 
from the penalty spot. But it was legitimate, as were Liverpool’s claims of a 
merited victory that provided Klopp with the preparation he craved before 
Sunday’s Capital One Cup final against Manchester City. His only complaint was 
the nervous finale – in which Kostas Stafylidis curled a free-kick a fraction 
wide in the 89th minute – which could easily have been avoided with more 
ruthlessness in front of goal.

Liverpool 1-0 Augsburg (1-0 agg): Europa League second leg – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/25/liverpool-v-augsburg-europa-league-second-leg-live>
“If you can’t decide the game early enough that is how it is,” said the 
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager. “The 
free-kick was the biggest challenge up front for us. It was a good game, it was 
absolutely deserved. We were the better team, we created chances but we had one 
problem in that we didn’t use them.

“We couldn’t control the game in the last 20 minutes. It was hard, that is how 
it should be, but we are in the next round.”

Liverpool were handed the perfect start, literally, when Clément Turpin was 
possibly the only person inside the stadium to spot a needless handball by 
Dominik Kohr.Augsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> had 
started brightly with Caiuby blazing a good chance over after 44 seconds and 
Koo Ja-cheol dominant in central midfield but momentum was checked when his 
fellow midfielder made a mess of dealing with Jordan Henderson’s cross into the 
area.

Kohr was impeded by his own team-mate as he shaped to head clear and, with 
Caiuby climbing all over his back but getting nowhere near the ball, the 
midfielder’s raised arm made contact. No one appealed, not the Liverpool 
players or the Anfield crowd, but the alert French official had no hesitation 
in pointing to the spot. Milner beat Marwin Hitz with a powerful spot-kick low 
to the goalkeeper’s left. The breakthrough enabled Liverpool to settle but they 
had enough chances to have eased all anxieties long before the interval. Hitz’s 
sharp reflexes and a few wrong decisions in front of goal kept the tie in the 
balance.

Manchester United see off Midtjylland with Marcus Rashford’s debut double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/25/manchester-united-midtjylland-europa-league-match-report>
Liverpool were edgy in defence but their play in the final third showed the 
benefits of a first full week’s training since Christmas. There was greater 
intensity and understanding to their attacking performance than there has been 
for several weeks. The quickfire combinations between Philippe Coutinho and 
Daniel Sturridge on the left were a constant worry for the Augsburg defence.

Sturridge started a third consecutive game for the first time in 11 months as 
Klopp refused to let the impending Capital One Cup final influence his starting 
selection. Kolo Touré was perhaps the only player rested before Sunday, though 
Lucas Leiva will hope otherwise having started in central defence, with the 
Liverpool manager striving for the continuity that has eluded the team in 
recent months.

Liverpool’s best chance of a second fell to Sturridge shortly after the 
restart, when Hitz and the Augsburg right-back, Paul Verhaegh, played 
themselves into trouble and invited Coutinho to intercept. The England 
international was offside when released by the Brazilian but, allowed to 
continue, he cut inside the last man Ragnar Klavan before placing his shot 
inches wide.

The threat from Augsburg was limited yet they had their moments to score a 
crucial away goal. Stafylidis forced Simon Mignolet to save at full stretch and 
Caiuby was gifted a clear opening when Lucas under-hit a back pass straight to 
his fellow Brazilian. The Augsburg striker rounded Mignolet but could not find 
the target from a tight angle. A reprieve.

The impressive Hitz thwarted Henderson at close range and clawed away a 
deflection off Halil Altintop that was bound for his own goal. At the opposite 
end Mignolet tackled Tobias Werner on the edge of his area, Alexander Esswein 
went close to connecting with Caiuby’s centre and Stafylidis thought he had 
sent Augsburg through only for his curling free-kick to miss the top corner. 
Nervous but job done.

“It is important for Augsburg to feel proud tonight,” said Klopp. “I 
congratulated Markus before the game for being annoying but at the end of the 
day we respect each other.”
 