
It will take more than a victory against Burton Albion to provide evidence 
that Liverpool are back on the right path aftertheir sobering defeat at Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/burnley-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday but Jürgen Klopp’s side did all that was asked of them on a night 
when the chasm in class was every bit as wide as the scoreline suggests.

Klopp’s team selection underlined how seriously he was treating this match 
and, in truth, their progress to the third round of the League Cup was a 
formality before the midway point of the first half. Courtesy of goals from 
Divock Origi and Roberto Firmino,Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> were 2-0 ahead after 22 
minutes and it already felt like an exercise in damage limitation for the 
Championship club.

Burton Albion 0-5 Liverpool: EFL Cup second round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/23/burton-albion-liverpool-efl-cup-second-round-live>
Nigel Clough, who made five changes to his starting XI, may well have had one 
eye on the visit of their neighbours Derby County on Friday in another landmark 
game for a football club who have come so far in such a short time. Klopp, 
however, was thinking only of returning to winning ways and his players had no 
intention of disappointing him.

On a balmy evening in Staffordshire, Sadio Mané was the pick of the bunch. The 
£34m summer signing from Southampton had a hand in four of Liverpool’s five 
goals and set up three. Returning to the starting lineup after missing the 
Burnley match with a shoulder injury, the Senegalese was a constant threat as 
he wreaked havoc with his searing pace. At times he was almost unplayable.

Daniel Sturridge, who was introduced from the bench in the second half, 
gratefully dispatched one of Mané’s assists to register his second goal in the 
space of six minutes in a rewarding late cameo. Tom Naylor had earlier put 
through his own net, just after the hour mark, to extinguish any faint hopes 
that Burton may have had of getting back into a game that Liverpool controlled 
from start to finish.

For Klopp it was exactly the response he wanted. “We had to use the defeat at 
Burnley to improve and we did. So all good,” Klopp said. “We were much sharper 
around the box, though there were still a few moments when we could have been 
sharper. We need to have better quality with the final pass, and today was 
better – we were where we needed to be in the box.”

As for Mané’s performance, Klopp gave the impression that he is seeing only 
what he expected. “I really like this player but I don’t like to talk too much 
after only two games for him,” the Liverpool manager said. “It’s not that we 
have to pat ourselves on the back every day at signing him.”

The only slight worry for Liverpool was the sight of Emre Can, who was making 
his first start of the season, limping off with an ankle problem. Klopp 
confirmed that it was the same ankle that Can was struggling with last season 
but also made it clear that he did not believe the injury was serious.

Can was one of four changes to a strong Liverpool side, with Mané and Origi 
also coming into the starting XI and Joel Matip making his competitive debut 
for the club. Matip partnered Dejan Lovren at centre-half and this was a gentle 
introduction to English football for the Cameroon international.

Dominating possession from the outset, Liverpool’s slick passing and fluid 
movement was too much for Burton and it was no surprise when Origi opened the 
scoring in the 15th minute. Mané was the architect, his terrific burst of speed 
on the right bamboozling Damien McCrory and creating the space to slide a low 
cross that Origi, with a back-heel flick, turned in from a yard out.

The last thing that Liverpool needed was a helping hand but Stephen Bywater, 
the Burton goalkeeper, gave them one with a wayward throw that Mané 
intercepted. Nathaniel Clyne galloped forward on the right, Mané released him 
and the full-back’s inch-perfect cross picked out Firmino, who had the 
relatively straightforward task of heading past Bywater from six yards.

The occasion had always promised goals. Burton’s opening four Championship 
matches had yielded 18 in total –nine at each end – providing a measure of the 
open, attacking football that Clough likes his teams to play. For a long 
period, though, it was one-way traffic here and it was something of a surprise 
that Liverpool had to wait until the 62nd minute for a third goal, when Matip’s 
header was turned in by Naylor.

Sturridge, on for Firmino, made it 4-0 when he tapped in Milner’s low centre 
and the England striker completed the rout with a well-struck shot after more 
fine work from Mané. “We couldn’t get close to them,” said Clough, the Burton 
manager. “It was a great learning experience for my side. They saw what is 
required at that level.”
 