
Teams

Liverpool: Westerveld, Babbel, Henchoz, Hyypia, Carragher, Gerrard, Murphy, 
Hamann, McAllister, Owen, Heskey. Subs: Arphexad, Smicer, Fowler, Berger, 
Barmby, Vignal, Wright.

Alaves: Herrera, Geli Roura, Contra, Eggen, Karmona, Tellez, Desio, Astudillo, 
Tomic, Javi Moreno, Cruyff. Subs: Kike, Ibon Begona, Gomez Ortiz Pablo, Magno, 
Raul Ganan, Ivan Alonso, Azkoitia.

Referee G Veissiere (France) 

1 So its Owen and Heskey up front with Fowler on the bench as Liverpool go in 
search of their third trophy this season - as if you needed reminding. 
Liverpool kick-off with McAllister and, in what must surely be a first, there 
is no customary punt upfield. What could this mean?
4 GOAL: Liverpool 1 - 0 Alaves Well there you go, game on with barely nothing 
on the clock. McAllister's free-kick is floated in from 25 yards on the right 
and Babbel gets up for a clear hedaer past Herrera. Encouragingly, Alaves look 
suspect at the back - Liverpool must be hoping for a blitz of set piece scares 
and corner calamities for the Spanish side after that start.
9 McAllister just fails to find Heskey running in to space in the Alaves half. 
11 Booking Astudillo for upending Heskey with a flying a challenge. McAllister 
attracts words from the ref when he offers his tuppence worth and also gets a
booking. Alaves still looking uncomfortable and in some disarray after the goal.
13 Alaves free-kick 25 yards out - cleanly around the wall but Westerveld 
saves to his right to deny the equaliser.
15 Alaves start to get things together 
16 GOAL: Liverpool 2 - 0 Alaves Hamann with a short centre to Owen in 
midfield; Owen looks up, spots Gerrard ahead, threads him through and bang with 
the right, there you go. All quite boring really.
20 Alaves all over the place as they give away a needless corner - McAllister 
takes, headed out to Gerrard, he mis-kicks, back, out to Owen on the left, back 
in, Alaves clear. Much agitation on the Alaves bench.
22 McAllister blows a great chance 25 yards out when he skies his shot despite 
being under no pressure at all.
23 Substitution Ivan on for Eggen.
27 GOAL: Liverpool 2 - 1 Alaves Liverpool caught on the hop. Ivan gets away 
from Babbel and up well at the far post to head in Contra's cross. Full marks 
for the substitution.
29 Contra coming alive on the right as he whips in another cross that Henchoz 
puts behind for a corner - comes to nothing.
32 Henchoz completely misjudges a flighted ball into Moreno in the Liverpool 
area. Moreno can't control it and Babbel puts behind. Westerveld forced to save 
at the far post from the corner. Liverpool now on the back foot after 
dominating the first 25 minutes.
35 Another great challenge by Babbel to deny Moreno on the by-line.
36 Liverpool on the rack as Moreno gets away again just outside the six-yard 
box; sells a dummy to Henchoz and takes two touches before shooting, which 
allows Westerveld to big up and block.
40 Penalty Herrera lucky to stay on the pitch after bringing down Owen - 
McAllister to take and he puts it away to Herrera's left.Liverpool 3 - 1 Alaves.
45 Alaves free-kick 25 yards out - comes to nothing. Top stuff so far from the 
first major European final of the season. Swinging both ways, Liverpool finish 
the half in the driving seat.Alaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alaves> great going forward but hapless 
at the back, and Liverpool know it. Half-time.


46 Substitution Magno on for Astudillo. Alaves the second 45 underway. 
47 Heskey gets away on the left, but fails to look up and wastes his centre.
48 GOAL: Liverpool 3 - 2 Alaves Contra twists and turns on the edge of the 
area and finally crosses for Moreno to head Alaves back into contention at the 
back stick.
50 Liverpool under pressure at the back as Henchoz gives away a free-kick just 
over 20 yards out. Moreno shapes up, blasts through and under a shaky, 
levitating Liverpool wall and would you believe itGOAL: Liverpool 3 - 3 Alaves.
56 Substitution Smicer on for Henchoz.
58 Sloppy passing by Liverpool repeatedly hands the initiative to Alaves.
59 Booking Karmona for clattering Owen 20 yards out to the Liverpool left. 
McAllister takes the free-kick - into the wall.
61 Heskey indecisive again as he gets away on the left and is run out at the 
by-line.
63 Liverpool corner. McAllister again, Herrera comes out and catches well.
64 Substitutions Fowler on for Heskey; Pablo on for Moreno.
68 All a bit scrappy, but Alaves ejoying more possession.
70 Owen unlucky in the area as the ball is whippedoff his toes, Murphy gets to 
the rebound but his shot is blocked.
73 GOAL: Liverpool 4 - 3 Alaves A fairytale for Fowler. He picks it up on the 
edge of the area from McAllister's pin-point through-ball, turns square and 
slots it home with his right just inside Herrera's left goalpost.
79 Substitution Berger on for Owen.
83 Booking Magno for trying to blag a penalty.
84 Alaves steadily plugging away which is making for a nervous final few 
minutes for Liverpool as keep back in numbers. Fowler the lone man up front 
with Smicer playing behind him.
89 GOAL: Liverpool 4 - 4 Alaves Westerveld concedes a corner. Cruyff gets up 
to meet the corner at the near post and it's level.
90 Alaves with possibly the last free-kick of the half - comes to nothing. 
McAllister makes a run to the edge of the Alaves area but is burgled before he 
can shoot. Full-time. Golden goal it is.

1 Do or die time for Liverpool.
2 Alaves free-kick in the middle of the park, comes to nothing. Both teams 
understandably cautious in everything they do.
4 Alaves get it in the net... offside.
5 Berger plays it right to McAllister but Alaves close him down.
6 Booking Fowler chopped down by Tellez when he was about to send Smicer away 
on goal. McAllister takes the free-kick towards Gerard but it comes to nothing.
8 Another free-kick to Liverpool after Kardoma brings down Smicer - Hamann 
wide from 25 yards.
9 Second booking / sending off Magno for a challenge on Babbel. Theoretically 
a little easier now for Liverpool.
12 Berger powers through from midfield but Herrera blocks the shot. Alaves 
clear for a corner - comes to nothing.
13 Smicer cuts in from the by-line and goes for goal when two were waiting.
15 Fowler gets it in the net... offside. Half-time.

16 Liverpool get the second nail-biting half of extra-time underway.
17 Alaves free-kick 25 yards out - beats the wall but goes wide.
19 Alaves defending high up and pressuring the Liverpool backline before 
retreating en masse whenever Liverpool get the ball..
21 Berger has a crack from 35 yards - over the bar.
24 Liverpool corner - McAllister takes but Herrera holds well.
26 The referee has a go at the Alaves bench, who are close to taking to the 
pitch.
26 Booking / sending off Karmona for tugging down Smicer just outside the 
Alaves area...
27 McAllister takes the corner and BANG... GOAL: Liverpool 5 - 4 Alaves, in 
off the head of Alaves' Geli. All over, Liverpool get their treble. Fantastic 
cup final.

 