
Senior officials and politicians in local government, as well as those in the 
fire and police services, receive honours in the 2017New Year honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/new-year-honours-list>.

There is a CBE for Dr Jane Martin, who has been the local government ombudsman 
since 2010 and chair of the Commission for Local Administration in England 
since 2012.

CBEs also go to Kim Bromley-Derry, who has been the chief executive of the 
London borough of Newham since November 2010; to Clare Chamberlain, the 
director of family services for the triboroughs Hammersmith and Fulham, 
Kensington and Chelsea, and Westminster; and to Chamberlain’s former colleague, 
Andrew Christie, who was executive director of children’s services for the 
triboroughs for five years before being appointed as commissioner for 
children’s social care in Birmingham.

Rotherham’s former children’s social care commissioner, Malcolm Newsam, 
brought in by the government to oversee children’s services in the town 
following thedamning Jay report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/26/rotherham-abuse-report-blatant-failures-of-care-system-condemned>
, receives a CBE, as does Nigel Richardson, former director of children’s 
services at Leeds city council, who retired in August after seven years in the 
post. There is also a CBE for Paul Rowsell, the deputy director for democracy 
in theDepartment for Communities and Local Government 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-communities-and-local-government>
.

Local politicians feature in the honours list, including the Conservative 
leader of Wandsworth council, Ravi Govindia, who gets a CBE, as does David 
Hodge, the Conservative leader of Surrey county council and vice-chair of the 
Local Government Association. Doncaster’s Labour elected mayor, Ros Jones, also 
gets a CBE.

Peter Fox, the Conservative leader of Monmouthshire county council since 2012, 
gets an MBE, as do Bob Sleigh, the Conservative leader of Solihull metropolitan 
borough council, and Neil Stock, the Conservative leader of Tendring district 
council.

OBEs

There are OBEs for several local government officers, including Eleanor 
Brazil, children’s services commissioner in Slough since 2014; Jack Straw, who 
retired this year as chief executive of Swansea council; and Sarah Browne, the 
former assistant director of Northern Ireland’s south-eastern health and social 
care trust, who retired in December after 38 years of work on older people’s 
services.
 Eleanor Brazil, children’s services commissioner in Slough, receives an OBE. 
Photograph: Anna Gordon 
Terry Dafter, former director of adult social care for Stockport council, 
receives an OBE, as does Alexander Fox, chief executive officer ofShared Lives 
Plus <http://sharedlivesplus.org.uk>. 

Ciara Eastell, the former president of the Society of Chief Librarians 
<http://goscl.com>, receives an OBE, as do James Newman, former chair of the 
Sheffield city region local enterprise partnership (LEP), and Chris Pomfret, 
former chair of the Cornwall and Isles of Scilly LEP.

Dr Steven Chase, people director for Thames Valley police, receives an OBE, as 
do Kim Considine, former head of the north-west Protected Persons Service; Sara 
Lewis, head of prosecutions at the Metropolitan police; and Danny Wilks, 
resourcing manager at West Yorkshire police.

MBEs

Local government <https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment> 
officers receiving MBEs include Catherine Blair, the former director of 
specialist children and families services for Islington council; Dr Anthony 
Hill, the former director of public health for Lincolnshire county council and 
NHS Lincolnshire; David Neill, emergency coordination officer at Belfast city 
council; and Mark Riddell, social worker, leaving care service, Trafford 
council.

Peter Reeve, a councillor on Huntingdonshire district council, also receives 
an MBE for services to local government and the community in Ramsey, 
Cambridgeshire.

Queen’s fire service medals 

Five officers in England and Wales receive the Queen’s fire service medal for 
distinguished service:

Alex Bennett, former chief fire officer of Northumberland fire and rescue 
service, who retired in July

Christopher Davies, chief fire officer of mid and west Wales fire and rescue 
service

 Trevor McIlwaine, group manager of Leicestershire fire and rescue service

Ann Millington, chief executive of Kent fire and rescue service

and Jason Thelwell, chief fire officer and chief executive of Buckinghamshire 
fire and rescue service.

Queen’s police medals 

Seventeen officers in England and Wales receive the Queen’s police medal for 
distinguished service:

David Jones, chief constable of North Yorkshire police 

Simon Letchford, a former commander in the Met, who retired in March 

Angela Williams, the temporary assistant chief constable in West Yorkshire 
police

David Allard, who retired in August as assistant chief constable of the 
Ministry of Defence police

Jagdev Atwal, the chief superintendent of Derbyshire constabulary

Victor Olisa, chief superintendent and strategic lead for diversity in the Met

Gordon Briggs, who retired in January as a detective chief superintendent in 
the Met

Carol Ellwood, a detective inspector at Humberside police

Ifor Williams, a constable in Avon and Somerset police 

Shirley Lindsay, also a constable in Avon and Somerset police

Louise Pye, a constable in Sussex police 

Chris Smith, a constable in Dorset police 

Leslie Eke, Thames Valley police 

Jacqueline Oliver, who retired as a constable in August from the Met

Martin Fry, chief superintendent, British Transport police

Ian Hanson, inspector, Greater Manchester police service

and Tim Slade, sergeant, City of London police.

The honours explained

Order of the Companion of Honour (CH)
For service of conspicuous national importance, held by only 65 people at a 
time.
Order of the Bath 
For service of the highest calibre. It has civil and military divisions and is 
awarded in the ranks of Knight/Dame Grand Cross (GCB), Knight/Dame Commander 
(KCB/DCB) and Companion (CB).
Order of St Michael and St George 
Awarded to British subjects for extraordinary and important services abroad or 
in the Commonwealth: Knight/Dame Grand Cross (GCMG), Knight/Dame Commander 
(KCMG/ DCMG) and Companion (CMG).
Order of the British Empire 
Awarded mainly to civilians and service personnel for public service and other 
distinctions: Knight/Dame Grand Cross (GBE), Knight/Dame Commander (KBE/DBE), 
Commander (CBE), Officer (OBE) and Member (MBE).
British Empire Medal (BEM) 
The “people’s medal” is awarded for meritorious civil or military service.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 