
London Irish’s hopes of a reprieve from relegation should they finish bottom 
of the Premiership have been all but dashed by the top three clubs in the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/championship-rugby-union> all 
passing the entry criteria for the top flight.

Bristol and Yorkshire Carnegie were expected to pass, having played in the 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> before, but 
Doncaster, who finished second in the Championship, have never been in the top 
division. While their Castle Park home, which has a capacity of 5,000, did not 
meet the minimum standards, their alternate ground, Doncaster Rovers’ Keepmoat 
Stadium, did.

England appoint Neal Hatley as new scrum coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/28/england-appoint-neal-hatley-new-scrum-coach>
Bedford, who finished a distant fourth in the Championship, did not apply for 
the criteria audit. If they overcome Bristol in the play-off semi-final and go 
on to win the final, they would not be promoted and the club who finish bottom 
of the Premiership would remain in the top flight.

London Irish will be doomed to finish bottom if they lose against Harlequins 
at the Madejski Stadium on Sunday and fail to secure two bonus points.They are 
seven points behind the club above them, Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/newcastle-london-irish-premiership-rugby-match-report>
, with two rounds to play and their final match is at the title contenders 
Wasps.

Doncaster had made plans to double the capacity at Castle Park and meet other 
requirements such as a minimum of covered seats but concerns that they would 
not be able to complete the work in time – it will not start unless they win 
the Championship final – forced them to agree a deal with Rovers.

“Aside from the huge expense of speculatively doubling the seating and 
terraced capacity of Castle Park before the outcome of the play-offs was known, 
the time constraint between one season ending and the next beginning made it 
impossible to guarantee that Castle Park would be up to standard by the start 
of the new season,” Doncaster said.

“A Championship club seeking promotion to the Premiership is required to meet 
the Minimum Standards Criteria set by the Rugby Football Union and the 
Professional Game Board. The MSC are exhaustively wide ranging and include an 
examination of facilities, services, staffs (rugby, medical, administrative, 
community), policies and procedures. Most of today’s criteria arose following 
the Hillsborough Stadium disaster which has returned to the public domain in 
the last 24 hours. Where Castle Park currently falls short is the licensed 
capacity.

“The starting point was to be able to play at a stadium with a minimum 
capacity for 10,000 spectators, double the approved capacity of Castle Park. To 
meet the criteria, the club must have a stadium available that meets all of the 
specifications by the start of September, just 14 weeks after the second leg of 
the Championship play-off final. The club has agreed terms for the use of the 
Keepmoat Stadium and in parallel has been working to meet the capacity criteria 
at Castle Park through the installation of temporary facilities.”

Doncaster travel to Yorkshire Carnegie on Sunday for the first leg of their 
semi-final while Bristol visit Bedford, where they won 39-6 last weekend. The 
return matches will be played seven days later with the aggregate winners 
progressing to the two-legged final.
 