
No doubt about it, this is the sharp end of the rugby union season. In the 
upper reaches of the AvivaPremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership>, Sale, potentially a new power 
in the land, arm wrestle Bath on Friday for one of the play-off places while on 
Saturday Leicester – no surprise that they are back looking for a home 
semi-final – set about reducing the gap to their East Midlands neighbours, 
second-placed Northampton.

And at the bottom? Finally I have to concede that Sunday is make or break.

From the day the fixtures were released it looked likely that my side 
Worcester's visit to Newcastle would be pivotal. Then, from the days early in 
the seasonwhen we lost at home to London Irish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/14/worcester-london-irish-premiership>
 and then Dean Richards' side, it became inevitable that Sunday would be 
crucial for Worcester's survival.

We're a better side than we were then. Since the start of February, Worcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> have got within a point of 
both Leicester and Harlequins, but we're not yet good enough to put sufficient 
distance between ourselves and the opposition. Our games are never dead and 
buried, it seems, because we don't have the firepower to pour on the points. 
Nevertheless it was particularly painful last Friday when we led Wasps 11-6 as 
the clock turned red, only for Jake Cooper-Woolley to force his way over 
minutes into added time.

The conversion by a Worcester old boy, Andy Goode, meant another close defeat 
and a visit to Kingston Park that will be crucial. The sums say defeat on 
Sunday isn't the end, but with our run-in to the end of the season …

So, the big question. If I knew a year ago what I know now, would I still be 
sitting in the coach's dug-out rather than on a television gantry?

Emphatically yes. Despite being 12 points adrift at the foot of the table, I 
feel we're in a good place.

Last May we set two targets – to build something for the future and achieve 
Premiership survival. We had a good picture of what needed to be done and what 
it might involve, but that first target was never going to be compromised by 
making short-term decisions to hit the second one.

We took a view that Worcester had been short-term for too long and that in 
their last six Premiership seasons, it had never got them higher than 10th. In 
fact it's worth noting that the team who were relegated at the end of the 
2009-10 season included the likes of Chris Latham, 78 times a Wallaby and once 
reckoned the best player on the planet, Greg Rawlinson, a South African who 
chose to be an All Black, Rico Gear, a wing with 20 New Zealand caps, and Pat 
Sanderson, a former England captain. So no lack of talent.

Worcester had never been short on stars, but we reckoned that to break the 
cycle and create a team of soul and talent, we couldn't compromise and turn to 
the chequebook alone in the search for the handful of senior players and the 
aspiring youngsters that we thought would be needed.

And that's what we've done. Many of the deals have been announced and some are 
still to come, but there is no "Championship get-out clause" in any of their 
contracts. Every one of them knows what they are getting themselves into and 
what it means. Also, the guys who are going have been told, and a look at how 
the squad has evolved over the season will give a good idea of those who will 
be at Sixways next season.

The key was not to compromise, not that there haven't been temptations. Trying 
to survive in the Premiership and at the same time make root-and-branch 
structural change is a tricky balance and the easiest thing would have been to 
roll over a few contracts. It's just that you also roll over a problem that 
will come back to haunt next time around.

There was also the competitive nature of the market place and the type of 
player Worcester wanted and needed; guys who would buy into our ideas and who 
would add to the soul of a club which has been enhanced already by what the 
guys who are staying have achieved, in making us a hard team to beat.

Given those conditions, the lack of "celebrity" signings should be 
understandable. By and large there would be two reasons why a top-shelf player 
– a name – might be tempted to Sixways at the moment; either he is at the end 
of his career and wants a pension plan or I was about to overpay him for his 
services. And frankly, as a coach, I want to believe I can improve a player and 
that's not going to happen with a fully formed 33- or 34-year-old who has been 
around the block a few times.

That said, I believe the new arrivals will be joining a team which is already 
in a better place than it was six months ago. On those occasions when the 
pressure has been off we've played some good rugby – much like Newcastle, who 
seem to be at their best when the game's gone.

Actually, in many ways, we and Dean Richards have similar targets for the 
sides we want to build. It's just that he's two years further down the track 
and on Sunday we can't hide.
 