
Louis Moult underlined his importance to Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> by hitting all of their goals 
in a 4-2 victory over Hamilton.

The forward inspired Motherwell to their second Premiership win in his first 
league start of the campaign, immediately moving second in the top goalscorer 
list behind Ross County’s Liam Boyce. Motherwell now sit fifth in the league, 
aboveRoss County, who drew 0-0 with Rangers at Ibrox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/scottish-roundup-premiership-championship-rangers-st-johnstone-hibs>
.

Despite undergoing groin surgery, Moult has managed to score seven goals in 
210 minutes of action in all competitions and he had to make do with an hour of 
the Lanarkshire derby.

Ali Crawford struck twice to keep Accies in the game but, like everyone else, 
he had to be content with a supporting role to the main man.

Moult had already set up Scott McDonald for a half-chance and had a headed 
goal disallowed before he opened the scoring in the eighth minute. Motherwell 
were forced all the way back to Craig Samson after a corner but Ryan Bowman 
headed the goalkeeper’s kick into the path of Moult, who kept his composure to 
slot home.

The goalscorer was soon winning the ball back from Massimo Donati deep inside 
his own half before setting up a counterattack that ended with Bowman sweeping 
a shot wide from a Chris Cadden cross.

Moult’s second came in the 13th minute. Some sharp passing left Richard Tait 
with yards of space to cross and Moult had the simple task of heading into an 
empty net after a misjudgment from Remi Matthews.

Crawford missed a good chance when he blazed over from Dougie Imrie’s square 
ball and Moult soon completed a 13-minute hat-trick after Cadden got round the 
outside of left-back Grant Gillespie and sent in a low cross. McDonald and 
Bowman both had efforts before the ball broke to the former Wrexham striker to 
volley home from 15 yards. Accies moved Donati back into a three-man defence 
with Gillespie moving from left-back into central midfield, and they got a 
lifeline in the 36th minute. Tait headed a clearance straight to Crawford and 
the midfielder curled the ball in off the post from 18 yards after a one-two 
with Gillespie.

Accies continued to press. Michael Devlin missed a good headed chance before 
Crawford hit the post from a free-kick and Georgios Sarris missed the rebound 
from four yards.

Eamonn Brophy forced a save just after the break but Moult, who had switched 
to left midfield at half-time, was back on target in the 50th minute.

Bowman looked set to take the penalty after being tripped in the area by 
Darren Lyon but was soon given word to hand over to Moult, who sent Matthews 
the wrong way.

The Motherwell defender Stephen McManus had a shot cleared off the line before 
Moult made way for Lionel Ainsworth, to a standing ovation.

Crawford kept the game alive four minutes later when he hit the substitute 
Rakish Bingham’s cutback high into the net. Motherwell suddenly started to look 
shaky and Samson made a triple save before Ben Heneghan cleared a Bingham 
header off the line. But Brophy headed wide when presented with Hamilton’s best 
chance to really put the pressure on.

In a post-match interview with BBC Scotland, the Motherwell manager, Mark 
McGhee, praised Moult and his Motherwell side: “For the first half-hour we 
played the style of football, quality of football as a manager you dream about. 
And three great goals and a hat-trick. He [Moult] is moving better and more 
fluently. He was tired and wanted to come off when he did .
 