
Celtic suffered their first home Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> defeat of the 
season as Motherwell came from behind to win at Parkhead.

A statue in honour of Celtic’s former captain and manager Billy McNeill was 
unveiled outside the stadium before the game and the impressive sculpture of a
Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> giant holding aloft the 
European Cup won in 1967 seemed to cast a shadow over Ronnie Deila’s side, who 
were well off the pace despite taking the lead in the 49th minute with a 
deflected Nir Bitton shot.

The Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> striker Louis 
Moult levelled four minutes later before scoring from the spot in the 59th 
minute after Jozo Simunovic tripped the former Celtic player Scott McDonald.

It was the Motherwell’s first win at Parkhead since 2008 and left the league 
leaders one point ahead of Aberdeen, although they have played a game less than 
the Dons.

In an insipid first-half, the Celtic striker Nadir Ciftci had the ball in the 
net in the 19th minute after Motherwell’s Conor Ripley spilled a long-distance 
effort from Bitton but the flag was up for offside.

The home side’s finishing exasperated their fans with Kris Commons, Ciftci, 
James Forrest and Callum McGregor all missing the target with efforts before 
the half-time break.

The start to the second half was much more energetic with the Motherwell 
captain, Keith Lasley, clearing a Dedryck Boyata header off the line.

The visitors, however, were presented with a golden opportunity when Lionel 
Ainsworth, on for Liam Grimshaw at the start of the second-half, capitalised on 
a mistake by Kieran Tierney to go one on one with the Celtic keeper, Craig 
Gordon, but he lobbed the ball on to the roof of the net.

Not long after Motherwell paid for the missed chance when Tom Rogic broke down 
the left and picked out the unmarked Bitton whose side-foot shot from inside 
the box was deflected by Stevie Hammell past Ripley.

Far from being deflated, Motherwell fought back and when Marvin Johnson drove 
the ball across the box from wide on the left Moult directed it high into the 
net from two yards out.

When Simunovic tripped McDonald inside the Celtic box after 59 minutes, Moult 
confidently sent Gordon the wrong way with his penalty to stun the home 
supporters.

Anxiety cascaded down from the stands any time Motherwell ventured forward and 
a mistake by Boyata left Gordon having to make a save at point‑blank range from 
McDonald with Moult sending the loose ball over the bar.

In the 76th minute the former Celtic defender Stephen McManus had to be 
replaced by Louis Lang after appearing to suffer a head knock after clashing 
with Carlton Cole, who had come on seconds earlier for Rogic, but the visiting 
defence stood firm

Motherwell could have added to their lead when Ainsworth picked out Johnson 
but his shot was blocked by the foot of Gordon and after surviving four added 
minutes they emerged with a deserved three points.
 