
As Janetta Hamilton-Brown, director and co-founder of Only Lunch, instructs 
her PA to take a note, on-lookers swivel their heads in surprise. There in 
front of them is no traditional Miss Jones but the benign, bespectacled 
features of 46-year-old Glaswegian Peter McCann, who has been PA to 
Hamilton-Brown for the past year.

 'Yes, people are surprised that I am a chap and quite a bit older than my 
boss,' McCann admits. And, yes, sometimes people do get the relationship wrong: 
'We were at an exhibition recently and, to my horror, the contacts were talking 
to me rather than Janetta, but I very quickly pointed out who was the boss.'

Only Lunch is the latest concept in dating for professional people, imported 
from the US and, if figures so far are anything to go by, a great success. The 
company, which describes itself as an introduction agency for the unmarried 
professional, has seen membership zoom from 200 to 800 in just two years, and 
it is a business about which McCann waxes lyrical.

 'The growth in this kind of industry will be enormous,' he predicts. 'You 
only have to look at the statistics to see that there are more single 
households than ever before. Our service is ideal for busy professionals who 
need someone else to organise their social life.' He is also full of admiration 
for Hamilton-Brown - a dancer before she entered the dating agency business - 
and the pair obviously have a highly successful and efficient working 
relationship.

A large part of McCann's working day is spent organising Hamilton-Brown's 
hectic business life of photo-shoots, press calls and publicity opportunities 
to promote the company. He gets into the London office at 8am to deal with the 
post and field enquiries and check the diary. Typical daily tasks involve 
liaising with the media to sort out where his boss is supposed to be, 
accompanying her on photo-shoots to ensure everything goes the way she wants it 
to and dealing with her mobile messages.

 Then, when he has dispensed with his role as PA, McCann puts on his other 
hat, as interviewer. 'We have people coming in all the time,' he explains, 
'particularly in what we call the season, which runs from April to October. 
Before Christmas it's a little quieter because people are so wrapped up in the 
festivities, what with parties and suppliers taking them out. Things build up 
from February onwards.'

 Prospective members can expect to spend an hour with McCann and other 
colleagues to discuss whether this is the right dating organisation to meet 
their needs. 'People may have had experience of other agencies or it may be the 
first time for them,' he explains. 'The biggest emotion I face is fear of 
embarrassment. It is my job to break that down.'

 McCann previously worked as a sales office manager for a firm in Kent. Before 
that, he had a varied career in marketing, training and even catering - which 
proves exceedingly useful when he's sussing out London's eateries to recommend 
to Only Lunch members.

 So what qualifications did he acquire to be a PA in such an unusual 
organisation? 'None really,' he admits. 'I had no training and my typing skills 
are self-taught. But I've employed a PA myself in the past and I know what I 
wanted then - I simply replicate those qualities and skills for Janetta.'

The key things for a job like this, he believes, are patience and a sense of 
humour. 'And you cannot afford to be judgmental.' As for what attracted him to 
the agency in the first place: 'The job sounded such fun and so quirky that I 
just had to go for it.'
 