
Luis Suárez and Rafinha struck first-half goals and Neymar hit two late on to 
give Barcelona a 5-0 win at 10-manSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>, their first game this 
season without Lionel Messi.

Messi hurt his groin in the draw with Atlético Madrid at Camp Nou last week, 
and will miss anotherLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> game, one Champions 
League match and Argentina’s World Cup qualifiers against Peru on 6 October and 
Paraguay on 11 October.

Head coach Luis Enrique packed his midfield with Arda Turan, Rafinha and André 
Gomes, resting Andrés Iniesta and Ivan Rakitic. He also left out Javier 
Mascherano and Jordi Alba before the Champions League game at Borussia 
Mönchengladbach on Wednesday.

“I have different kinds of players and that gives me a lot of options,” he 
said. “Depending on who we are playing and the players I have available, I’ll 
pick the ones that I think are right for the situation.”

After a slow start by Barça, Turan set up Suárez and the Uruguayan rounded the 
Sporting goalkeeper Iván Cuéllar to tap in the opener in the 29th minute. 
Rafinha then headed in Sergi Roberto’s cross at the near post for the second 
three minutes later.

Sporting lost their captain Alberto Lora to a second yellow card for a late 
challenge on Sergi Roberto in the 74th minute. The floodgates opened with nine 
minutes remaining when substitute Paco Alcácer hit the crossbar but Neymar 
pounced on the rebound and tapped in.

Roberto came up with his second assist of the game when his cross was headed 
home by Turan for Barça’s fourth in the 85th minute and Neymar got his second 
two minutes from time with a close-range strike past Cuéllar.

Roberto, who has switched this season from a midfield position to defence, 
said: “The right-back position was new to me but I’m growing to like it more 
and more.”

The win means Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> have 
taken 13 points from their first six La Liga games.
 