
So, where now for Leeds Rhinos? The obvious answer is the Qualifiers and a 
relegation battle in the second half of this most extraordinary of seasons, and 
this was a performance that prompted yet more questions about the spectacular 
demise oflast year’s treble winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/02/leeds-rhinos-st-helens-super-league-semi-final-match-report>
.

The more optimistic Leeds fan would have argued that a combined losing margin 
of just 12 points from their last two games suggested the defending champions 
were slowly getting their act together. But this? This was a complete 
annihilation, and the firmest evidence yet that Leeds are destined for the 
bottom four.

Sam Tomkins insists he will not be a ‘weak link’ on Wigan return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/10/sam-tomkins-weak-link-wigan-return-injury-rugby-league>
The schadenfreude that is engulfing Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> concerning Leeds’ plight has 
made it easy to overlook the strengths of their opponents, but here Castleford 
were impossible to ignore. Led by the former Leeds youngster and England 
international in waiting Luke Gale, Daryl Powell’s Tigers produced the kind of 
one-sided performance Leeds fans have become accustomed to seeing in recent 
years – but not from their opponents.

“There are positives, although that probably won’t wash with many people,” 
said the Leeds coach, Brian McDermott. “This is a really spirited group of 
people but we’ve got a list of things we need to get on top of. I’ll back my 
players to come up with something – I’m not going to criticise them.”

Incredibly, Leeds led early on thanks to Mitch Garbutt’s early try, but that 
merely inspiredCastleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> to run 
in five first-half tries of supreme quality. Most of them came via magnificent 
work from Gale – who Powell described as being “right up there” when it comes 
to England honours later this year.

Gale played a role in all three tries for the returning fullback Luke Dorn, 
who was as impressive as his namesake throughout. However, the one try Gale 
could not claim too much involvement in was the standout effort of the night, 
as Super League’s top try-scorer, the Castleford wing Denny Solomona, seemed to 
defy the laws of physics with an incredible finish: placing the ball in one 
hand and touching down with his entire body off the ground.

It was a moment Leeds could do nothing about, but Dorn’s second and third 
tries were largely down to insipid defending from the hosts as the Tigers began 
to cut loose. Gale then showed all his nous to effectively kill the game off 
before the break; with everyone expecting Castleford to line up for a drop goal 
to extend the lead to 19 points Gale, clearly smelling blood against such a 
vulnerable Leeds side, dropped his shoulder and shifted the ball wide for Joel 
Monaghan to cross. His conversion made it 30-6 and in all honesty, the Rhinos 
were never likely to mount a comeback.

Yet after half time Castleford decided to continue entertaining rather than 
shut up shop. Any lingering doubts over the outcome were killed off by 
Solomona’s second and an effort from the prop Gadwin Springer, who shook off 
five Leeds defenders in a moment that emphasised the gulf in class between the 
sides.

Leeds had a brief moment to savour as Ash Handley crossed midway through the 
half, but the Tigers underlined their superiority when Ben Crooks collected and 
raced home, before Grant Millington benefitted from more Gale wizardry to touch 
down with five minutes remaining.

“It was very good,” admitted Powell afterwards. “To piece both sides of our 
game together the way we did was hugely pleasing, and we go to Magic Weekend to 
face Warrington now having set a real benchmark.”

 Leeds Golding; Handley, Watkins, Keinhorst, Hardaker; McGuire, Lilley; 
Galloway, Burrow, Garbutt, Ferres, Jones-Buchanan, Cuthbertson.

Interchange Sutcliffe, Achurch, Mullally, Walters.

Tries Garbutt, Handley. Goals Lilley 2.

Castleford Dorn; Flynn, Crooks, Monaghan, Solomona; McShane, Gale; Patrick, 
Milner, Jewitt, McMeeken, Moors, Massey.Interchange Millington, Cook, Springer, 
Tickle.

Tries Dorn 3, Solomona 2, Monaghan, Springer, Crooks, Millington. Goals Gale 8.

Referee R Silverwood.
 