
Luton Town have sacked John Still after four straight defeats. The 65-year-old 
became manager at Kenilworth Road in February 2013 and led the club to the 
Conference title in his first full season. The Hatters finished eighth in their 
first campaign back inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> but have struggled to 
replicate that form this term and are 17th.

Andy Awford has stepped up from running the academy to take charge of the side 
on a caretaker basis and will be assisted by the existing backroom staff, with 
his first game against Exeter on Saturday.

“On behalf of the board I would like to thank John for everything he has 
brought to Luton Town,” the club’s chief executive, Gary Sweet,told their 
website 
<http://www.lutontown.co.uk/news/article/club-statement-john-still-leaves-luton-town-by-mutual-consent-2855913.aspx>
.

“We have shared some unbelievable moments in this club’s history together, 
ones which will never be forgotten. The decision to make a change was a 
unanimous one by the board but one of the most difficult since we took over as 
custodians in 2008.

“We are genuinely saddened that our partnership with John has come to an end 
earlier than we expected. We had hoped John would be with us for the longer 
term but now attention turns to finding the next man for the job.”

Still left their now League Two rivals Dagenham & Redbridge after nine years 
in charge to take over at Luton and his decision was vindicated as the Hatters 
broke the 100-point mark and scored a century of goals on their way back to the 
Football League.

But he departs Luton on the back of three league losses, including two 4-3 
home defeats, and an FA Cup exit at the hands of Peterborough.

“Naturally I am hugely disappointed to be leaving Kenilworth Road but I would 
like to thank everyone involved atLuton Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown> for making my time at the club 
an enjoyable one,” he said. “The board of directors have been fantastic every 
step of the way, all of the staff - on the football side and behind the scenes 
- have been unbelievably supportive and the fans have been nothing short of 
incredible.

“The Conference championship season is one which will live long in my memory 
and I was proud and honoured to have played a part in bringing Luton Town back 
in to the Football League.

“I wish the club all the very best for the rest of the season and beyond.”
 