
Saturday was Luton’s 130th birthday and they tweaked their badge to mark it – 
and maybe sell shirts. Sadly they could not tweak the nose ofBurton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion>, the League Two leaders, 
making their first visit to Kenilworth Road. Matty Palmer’s late goal gave the 
Brewers their second 1-0 win over them. In November it was Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink’s first home match as manager and Luton were top.

Burton have lost only three of 26 games under him and with four to go need 
five points to be sure of promotion. Luton all but stayed with them, mostly in 
fourth, until last month when they lost all seven games. It was as if they had 
strayed into the company of the March Hare and Mad Hatter, where nothing makes 
sense. Now they will be glad of the final play-off place.

Whatever happens, they are back on an even keel. Six years ago, in financial 
disarray, they suffered a third successive relegation, propelled by a 30-point 
deduction, that dropped them into the Conference as Burton climbed out of it. 
Regrouping under the chairmanship of Nick Owen and with substantial supporter 
input, they are now owned byLuton Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown> Football Club 2020, which 
suggests they have a vision. Two years ago they appointed the experienced John 
Still as manager. He has restored them to the League and respectability.

He has a sizeable, almost wholly English squad but on Saturday executed what 
has become a challenge of player husbandry, especially in attack. Elliot Lee, 
son of Robert and on loan from West Ham, was judged to have an hour in him 
while Paul Benson is feeling his way back from a broken tibia. His class up 
front worked better with Mark Cullen in the last half-hour but Luton’s best 
chance fell to another attacking substitute, Luke Guttridge, who scuffed from 
20 yards. A minute later Palmer, from similar range, decided the match.

Luton’s most eye-catching character is the captain, Steve McNulty, a greying 
Scouser of 31, standing 6ft 1in and 14st. An improbable figure, he patrols 
central defence like a dirigible, dangerously deep as if to see the big picture 
yet, when untethered, jet-propelled and delivering pinpoint passes, often with 
chest or shoulder. Significantly he and his fellow centre-back, Luke Wilkinson, 
missed matches in March following their second red cards of the season.

Such was their vigilance here and the commitment of Scott Griffiths, deferring 
a hernia operation, that the Brewers looked barely able to make a pot of tea, 
let alone a chance. “We limited them to very little,” said Still. “We looked a 
good team in good spirits and made attacking changes. I thought we ground them 
down.” Without the significance it might have been bumping and boring.

Luton go to Dagenham & Redbridge on Tuesday, whom Still took into the League 
in 2007 in a nine-year spell. He is “delighted they have pulled away” to 
safety. The closing line of the hymn Dear Lord and Father of Mankind puts it 
nicely: “O, Still small voice of calm.”

David Wilkinson, vice-chairman, told fans that “investors and members of 2020 
are trying to correct the wrongs of the past and ensure the club is 
self-sustainable for the next 130 years”. With such admission Easter may be the 
time to remove the giant banner: “Luton Est 1885. Betrayed by the FA 2008”.
 