
Luton Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown> have revealed they 
will rename their 110-year-old Kenilworth Road stadium for one match – calling 
it the Prostate Cancer UK Stadium in an effort to raise awareness for the 
charity.

The move, the first time a Football League ground has been renamed to support 
a charity, will happen for the League Two game against Wycombe on 24 March – 
with Kenilworth Road’s 10,000 capacity reflecting the number of men who die 
from the disease in the UK every year.

The renaming is part of the Football League charity partner’s “Men United 
<http://menunited.prostatecanceruk.org/?p=ppcmen_united&gclid=CNj4xODiscQCFRHLtAodDBkA3g>
” campaign, which includes players’ shirts bearing their Man of Men logo this 
season.

Luton’s chief executive Gary Sweet said 
<http://www.lutontown.co.uk/news/article/kenilworth-road-to-become-prostate-cancer-uk-stadium-2341171.aspx>
 the club were “extremely proud” of the move, which had been trailed in a 
recent matchday programme.

“When we first hinted at the idea we were met with a mixed reaction – which is 
understandable given the history of the ground, and the amount of affection our 
supporters hold for Kenilworth Road,” said Sweet.

“We felt sure that once the full story emerged about our supporting Prostate 
Cancer UK, our supporters would understand and fully support the move. The aim 
was not to mislead people as to our intentions, but to get people talking about 
the renaming of the stadium and to raise as much interest as possible ahead of 
this announcement.

“Given the statistics, there’s every chance that by helping to increase the 
awareness of this disease and the charity, that someone’s son, father or 
grandfather could be helped by spotting the signs early and seeking help.

“This is a first for Luton Town and a first in football and we are delighted 
to be teaming up with a charity which has supported the game, in particular 
supporters and players past and present, so well.”

Prostate Cancer UK’s director of fundraising, Mark Bishop, said: “The power of 
sport – and in this case football – has helped us reach out to men and their 
friends and families … we thank the club’s players, staff and supporters on 
behalf of the 300,000 men living with prostate cancer in the UK.”
 