
Australia’s Mack Horton called his stunning Rio Olympic 400m freestyle win 
over China’s controversial Sun Yang a “win for the good guys”, as Australia 
came away from the pool on the opening day of action with two gold medals 
thanks to another victory – and a world record – in the women’s 4x100m 
freestyle relay.


Horton, 20, became the first Australian since Ian Thorpe (2004) to claim the 
Olympic 400m freestyle crown, clocking a personal best three minutes, 41.55 
seconds to seal the stirring win ahead of defending champion Yang and 
third-placed Gabriele Detti of Italy.

Hannah Miley misses 400m medley bronze on mixed day for GB swimmers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/hannah-miley-max-litchfield-adam-peaty-swimming-rio-2016>
Yang controversially served a three month ban for testing positive to a banned 
stimulant in 2014 and Horton had no regrets about calling him out.

“I don’t think it is a big statement because it is true, he has tested 
positive,” he said. “No athlete has really come forward and said it. It 
wouldn’t have felt right if I raced against someone who had tested positive and 
didn’t bring it up. Hopefully others will follow.”

Horton tried to play down a rivalry with Yang but clearly there was no love 
lost. “Definitely a win for the good guys,” he told Channel Seven. “Don’t know 
if it was a rivalry between me and him, just me and an athlete who has tested 
positive I guess.”

Horton had taken aim at Yang after the morning heats, claiming he had no 
respect for the “drug cheat”. Both camps had earlier this week played down a 
report that Yang tried to “taunt” Horton in the Rio training pool.

In the final race of the night, Australia’s women, led by strong swims from 
the Campbell sisters, Bronte and Cate, secured gold in a world record time of 
three minutes, 30.65.


The Campbells, along with Emma McKeon and Brittany Elmslie, beat the United 
States and Canada to retain the title they won in London four years ago and 
send Australia to the top of the medal table after day one of the Rio Games. 
Along with the two swimming golds, Australia’s archery team secured bronze 
earlier in the day.

The opening day’s haul marked a dream start for the Australians after a 
disappointing London Olympics four years ago when they slumped to their worst 
medal haul in 20 years.

After one day of competition in the Rio pool, Australia have already doubled 
their tally of golds from London.

“Definitely my favourite race ever: in an Olympic final with my sister and two 
girls I have known since I was 12, 13 years old – and a gold and a world 
record,” said Cate Campbell, who set the world record for the individual 100 
freestyle last month.

“You can’t ask for more. Every kid dreams of it, it’s what we always hoped 
for.”

The Australian women won by an emphatic 1.24 seconds from the American team of 
Simone Manuel, Abbey Weitzeil, Dana Vollmer and Katie Ledecky.


“I think the swim team is in a very good place – doubled medal tally from 
London,” Horton said. “The youth of the swim team brings a lot of potential, I 
think that’s why we’re in such a good place.”

The Americans had led at half-way, but Bronte Campbell overhauled Vollmer on 
the third leg and handed over a lead her sister never looked like surrendering 
to Ledecky.

Canada’s Sandrine Mainville, Chantal Van Landeghem, Taylor Ruck and Penelope 
Oleksiak took the bronze ahead of London silver medalists the Netherlands, who 
were anchored by triple Olympic champion Ranomi Kromowidjojo.

The Dutch team’s third leg was swum by Inge Dekker, taking part in her fourth 
Olympics, who was diagnosed with cervical cancer in February and underwent 
surgery in March.
 