
A single dose of psilocybin, the active ingredient of magic mushrooms, can 
lift the anxiety and depression experienced by people with advanced cancer for 
six months or even longer, two new studies show.

Researchers involved in the two trials in the United States say the results 
are remarkable. The volunteers had “profoundly meaningful and spiritual 
experiences” which made most of them rethink life and death, ended their 
despair and brought about lasting improvement in the quality of their lives.

The results of the research are published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology 
<http://jop.sagepub.com/content/early/recent> together with no less than ten 
commentaries from leading scientists in the fields of psychiatry and palliative 
care, who all back further research. While the effects of magic mushrooms have 
been of interest to psychiatry since the 1950s, the classification of all 
psychedelics in the US as schedule 1 drugs in the 1970s, in the wake of the 
Vietnam war and the rise of recreational drug use in the hippy counter-culture, 
has erected daunting legal and financial obstacles to running trials.

“I think it is a big deal both in terms of the findings and in terms of the 
history and what it represents. It was part of psychiatry and vanished and now 
it’s been brought back,” said Dr Stephen Ross, director of addiction psychiatry 
at NYU Langone Medical Center and lead investigator of the study that was based 
there.

Tiny minority of people with depression get treatment, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/minority-depression-treatment-study-finds>
Around 40-50% of newly diagnosed cancer patients suffer some sort of 
depression or anxiety. Antidepressants have little effect, particularly on the 
“existential” depression that can lead some to feel their lives are meaningless 
and contemplate suicide.

The main findings of the NYU study, which involved 29 patients, and the larger 
one from Johns Hopkins University with 51 patients, that a single dose of the 
medication can lead to immediate reduction in the depression and anxiety caused 
by cancer and that the effect can last up to eight months, “is unprecedented,” 
said Ross. “We don’t have anything like it.”

The results of the studies were very similar, with around 80% of the patients 
attributing moderately or greatly improved wellbeing or life satisfaction to a 
single high dose of the drug, given with psychotherapy support.

Professor Roland Griffiths, of the departments of psychiatry and neuroscience 
who led the study at Johns Hopkins University school of medicine, said he did 
not expect the findings, which he described as remarkable. “I am bred as a 
sceptic. I was sceptical at the outset that this drug could produce 
long-lasting changes,” he said. These were people “facing the deepest 
existential questions that humans can encounter - what is the nature of life 
and death, the meaning of life.”

But the results were similar to those they had found in earlier studies in 
healthy volunteers. “In spite of their unique vulnerability and the mood 
disruption that the illness and contemplation of their death has prompted, 
these participants have the same kind of experiences, that are deeply 
meaningful, spiritually significant and producing enduring positive changes in 
life and mood and behaviour,” he said.

Patients describe the experiences as “re-organisational”, said Griffiths. Some 
in the field had used the term “mystical”, which he thought was unfortunate. 
“It sounds unscientific. It sounds like we’re postulating mechanisms other than 
neuroscience and I’m certainly not making that claim.”

Ross said psilocybin activates a sub-type of serotonin receptor in the brain. 
“Our brains are hard-wired to have these kinds of experiences - these 
alterations of consciousness. We have endogenous chemicals in our brain. We 
have a little system that, when you tickle it, it produces these altered states 
that have been described as spiritual states, mystical states in different 
religious branches.

“They are defined by a sense of oneness – people feel that their separation 
between the personal ego and the outside world is sort of dissolved and they 
feel that they are part of some continuous energy or consciousness in the 
universe. Patients can feel sort of transported to a different dimension of 
reality, sort of like a waking dream.”

Some patients describe seeing images from their childhood and very commonly, 
scenes or images from a confrontation with cancer, he said. The doctors warn 
patients that it may happen and not to be scared, but to embrace it and pass 
through it, he said.

The commentators writing in the journal include two past presidents of the 
American Psychiatric Association, the past president of the European College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology, a previous deputy director of the Office of USA 
National Drug Control Policy and a previous head of the UK Medicines and 
Healthcare Regulatory Authority.

The journal editor, Professor David Nutt, was himself involved in a small 
trial of psilocybin in a dozen people with severe depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/17/magic-mushrooms-lift-severe-depression-in-clinical-trial>
 in the UK in May. The ten commentators in the journal, he writes in an 
editorial, “all essentially say the same thing: it’s time to take psychedelic 
treatments in psychiatry and oncology seriously, as we did in the 1950s and 
1960s.”

Much more research needs to be done, he writes. “But the key point is that all 
agree we are now in an exciting new phase of psychedelic psychopharmacology 
that needs to be encouraged not impeded.”

The studies were funded by the Heffter Research Institute in the USA. “These 
findings, the most profound to date in the medical use of psilocybin, indicate 
it could be more effective at treating serious psychiatric diseases than 
traditional pharmaceutical approaches, and without having to take a medication 
every day,” said its medical director George Greer.
 