
Just after Magnus Carlsen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnus-carlsen> 
had defeated Sergey Karjakin to retain his world chess championship, at 1am UK 
time on Thursday morning, I looked at the Guardian home page and was astonished 
and delighted to see that the liveblog on the world championship was the 
third-most read item on its website. For a moment chess – ignored, 
marginalised, even derided by some – finally had its place in the sun.

The four rapidplay tie-breakers which decided the match, after 12 classical 
games had finished all-square, were one of those rare moments when all the 
stars aligned, creating a truly memorable event. It was Carlsen’s 26th 
birthday; rapidplay – where each player has about half an hour for all his 
moves – is fast enough to be exciting but provides sufficient time for “proper” 
chess to be played; Karjakin defended doughtily in a terrible position in game 
two and the Norwegian missed a win; and then, best of all, Carlsen found the
most beautiful checkmate in the final game 
<http://www.chessgames.com/perl/chessgame?gid=1848607> to secure the title.

Magnus Carlsen retains world chess title after quickfire tie-breaker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/magnus-carlsen-retains-world-chess-title-after-quickfire-tie-breaker>
That coup de grâce contained something that is akin to the holy grail in chess 
– a queen sacrifice. Except it wasn’t quite a sacrifice because the Russian, 
realising the game was up, didn’t take it. He resigned instead, shook Carlsen’s 
hand, and in the press conference that followed said that at 26, he was far 
from done in his pursuit of the world title.

I tweeted immediately after the game that Carlsen’s beautiful move would be to 
chess what Ian Botham’s heroics at Headingley in 1981 were to cricket: an 
indelible memory, something that makes you continue to believe in the sport 
even in the bad times. Carlsen was already winning the game and only needed to 
draw to keep his title, having already won game three of the tie-breakers. He 
could have played safe and ground out a draw. But he looked deeper and found 
this lovely move, calculating – despite having just two minutes left on his 
clock – that mate was inevitable. It was bold, brave, brilliant.

This world championship has offered some hopeful signs for chess. The fact 
that it was played in New York rather than Siberia – often the default position 
for major tournaments if no sponsors can be found – helped to increase media 
interest. The digital revolution has also aided the sport: moves are played out 
in real time online, both on the official Fide site and on a host of others, 
giving immediacy to the coverage.

Magnus Carlsen defeats Sergey Karjakin to retain World Chess Championship – as 
it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/30/carlsen-karjakin-tiebreaker-world-chess-championship-tie-breaker-live>
Fide, the world governing body, is still trying to restrict the rights of 
rival sites to cover moves in real time, but it will have tofind a compromise 
on this <https://chess24.com/en>.  <http:>Chess 24’s surreal coverage, with the 
grandmaster commentators Peter Svidler and the intellectually freewheeling Jan 
Gustafsson (give that man a TV show), was curiously addictive. Every website 
brings something different.

The Carlsen-Karjakin match also established rapid chess – and even the 
ever-shorter tie-break variants that would have followed if the rapidplay games 
had been drawn – as a legitimate part of deciding the world title. It would 
have horrified the purists of old – world champions such as the great Soviet 
player Mikhail Botvinnik derided blitz as chess for chancers. But times change; 
grandmasters – now aided, of course, by computers – are steeped in ever more 
opening theory; and fast chess introduces an element of randomness that helps 
counteract home preparation.

Short time controls may to some extent compromise the great player’s perpetual 
search for the “truth” of a position, but they are a supreme test of rapid 
calculation and sheer nerve. There may even be a case for combining classical, 
rapid and blitz, and coming up with a winner based on an aggregate score. What 
is unquestionably the case is that fast chess is great for spectators, both at 
the venue and following online.

Where chess goes from here is, despite the green shoots visible in New York, 
far from clear. On the plus side, Carlsen is a great champion with the ability 
to reach beyond the chess fraternity. He does not have the magnetism (or the 
madness) of aBobby Fischer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bobby-fischer>, 
but he will do to be going on with.

There are plenty of players ready to challenge him from his own generation, 
and also a new generation of players emerging, many of them from India and 
China, the new hotbeds of chess.

The Guardian view on world chess rivalries: no return to the cold war | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/the-guardian-view-on-world-chess-rivalries-no-return-to-the-cold-war>
They include Praggnanandhaa Rameshbabu 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/sports/sport-others/im-praggnanandhaa-worlds-youngest-ever-chess-international-master-2828111/>
, an 11-year-old who is an international master and may soon eclipse Karjakin 
as the youngest ever grandmaster.

But mention of Praggnanandhaa (a headline writer’s nightmare if he ever does 
become world champion) brings us on to the downside for chess. He will be in 
London next week for the LondonChess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> 
Classic, the biggest and best annual tournament in the UK, bringing together 
many of the world’s elite players and a host of us British amateurs. The 
tournament might get a bit of extra attention in the afterglow of the world 
championship, but it is unlikely to amount to much. The sport – and it really 
is a sport, whatever the detractors say – faces a perpetual struggle for 
attention.

Chess used to command a lot of column inches. The world championship matches 
in the 1970s and 80s between Anatoly Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi and, later, 
Karpov and his bitter rival Garry Kasparov produced acres of coverage, both the 
subplots involving alleged underhand tactics by the Soviet authorities and the 
games themselves. Chess was part of the mainstream, a topic of conversation, a 
subject of general interest. At some point it became a niche pursuit.

It happens to sports. Showjumping and horse racing have suffered a similar 
fate, and Formula One could go the same way if it doesn’t remould itself to 
increase the degree of competition. Even cricket, by taking the Sky shilling, 
has allowed its role in national life to be significantly reduced. Sports can 
die. Who now recalls that speedway used to get crowds of more than 60,000 at 
Wembley?

Can chess flourish again? As an eager, though pretty hopeless, player, I would 
like to believe so. Martin Amis’s short story Career Move imagines a world in 
which the status of screenwriters and poets is inverted. Poets are given vast 
fees by international conglomerates for their latest eclogues, while 
screenwriters live in poverty, paid a pittance for their largely ignored 
outpourings. I like to imagine the same happening to footballers and chess 
players, with Carlsen and Karjakin playing in stadiums filled to overflowing, 
while Rooney and Co play in local parks in front of a handful of ageing 
spectators clutching plastic bags. It is a pleasing fantasy.

Chess masters show virtues of a slower pace of sport | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/chess-masters-show-virtues-slower-pace-sport>
Chess still has many problems: it is short of money and sponsors; mainstream 
media coverage is limited (oh for a TV programme along the lines of The Master 
Game, which ran on the BBC for seven years in the late 70s and early 80s); 
Fide’s operations remain opaque; its Russian president, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, has 
been in post for far too long; computers have demystified the all-seeing 
grandmaster and, who knows, may eventually “solve” chess as they have with 
draughts, demonstrating how perfect play makes victory inevitable.

At that point chess would have to add more squares, more pieces or more 
dimensions, and start all over again. But for the moment we celebrate what we 
have: a great champion; a resilient challenger whose pro-Putin views were not 
used against him too much in a faux attempt to recreate chess’s Cold War 
narrative; a contented – if exhausted – set of aficionados who revelled in the 
three-week battle; and a flicker of interest in the wider world, which at last 
recognises that beyond the eccentricities of many of the game’s practitioners 
lies the most fantastically exciting and demanding of sports. Career move, 
anyone?

• The Rookie by Stephen Moss is published by Bloomsbury. To order a copy for 
£14.00 (RRP £18.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free 
UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 