
Twenty days ago, on the eve of a world championship match that would prove 
more gruelling and arduous than many observers had expected,Magnus Carlsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnus-carlsen> described his forthcoming 
title defence against Russia’s Sergey Karjakin in pugilistic terms.

“For me, it’s a matter of when I get the chance, I’ll try to punch him until 
he finally knocks over,” Carlsen said.


Magnus Carlsen defeats Sergey Karjakin to retain World Chess Championship – as 
it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/30/carlsen-karjakin-tiebreaker-world-chess-championship-tie-breaker-live>
For nearly three weeks, Carlsen tried and tried, but made little progress 
against the painstakingly resolute defensive play of his Russian rival, who 
time and again was able to salvage results from seemingly impossible positions.


But then on Wednesday, the 26-year-old Russian finally toppled to the canvas.


The world’s top-ranked player saw off his dogged challenger to retain his 
world title after winning Wednesday’s four-game rapid playoff with victories in 
the third and fourth games following draws in the first two.


There had been nothing to separate champion and challenger after 12 classical 
games in the purpose-built soundproof studio at the Fulton market building in 
lower Manhattan. The first seven ended in draws – with Karjakin coming back 
from the brink in the third and fourth – before the challenger drew first blood 
in the eighth. That left Carlsen more vulnerable than he had ever appeared 
during his three-year championship reign, with any false move all but 
precluding his hopes to retain.


Carlsen v Karjakin: it's sudden death in World Chess Championship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/carlsen-v-karjakin-sudden-death-climax-looms-in-world-chess-championship>
But Carlsen, also 26, levelled the match with a stirring victory in game 10 on 
Thanksgiving Day, before a pair of draws set the stage for Wednesday’s 
four-game rapid match, in which each player had 25 minutes to complete his 
moves.


The players fought to a forgettable draw in Wednesday’s opener before Karjakin 
managed one last daring escape in the second game, clawing back to salvage a 
draw despite a wildly inferior position and a perilous time disadvantage.


Carlsen had missed a move that surely would have led to victory, a blunder 
that enabled Karjakin to escape with the tie-breaker series still level.


“I had all sorts of negative thoughts in my head,” said Carlsen, who will 
bring home 55% of the roughly $1.1m prize fund – and not the originally 
contracted 60% winner’s share – because the match went to a tie-breaker. “It 
was very difficult to settle down.”


But Carlsen, who is also the world’s top-ranked rapid player, recovered 
admirably playing as black in the third game. He build up positional and time 
advantages to pressure Karjakin, who resigned after an inexplicable blunder.


That left Karjakin in need of no less than win with the black pieces to keep 
his flickering title hopes alive. He opted for the Sicilian defence, to cheers 
from more than 600 spectators in the gallery, but couldn’t overcome Carlsen’s 
tactical aptitude and unwavering positional advantage. A queen sacrifice by the 
Norwegian caught the challenger’s king in a mating net, allowing the champion 
to finish off the championship defence in style.


It marked the first time New York had played host to a world title match since 
1995, whenGarry Kasparov retained his title against Viswanathan Anand 
<http://www.chessgames.com/perl/chess.pl?tid=55522> on the 107th-floor 
observatory deck in the south tower of the World Trade Center.


A generation later, it offered a venue for a player regarded by some as the 
best ever to grind out a victory when he wasn’t as his best – the litmus test 
of any great champion.
“I’m very happy that at the end of the match I managed to find joy in 
playing,” Carlsen said. “Today, it was fun to play.”
 