
The Maidenhead manager, Alan Devonshire, was “over the moon” after the 
substitute James Mulley secured the part-time side a draw atPort Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale>.

The 94th-minute equaliser sparked joyous celebrations among the 379 travelling 
fans, who can now look forward to afirst-round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/nov/07/football-league-fa-cup-first-round-your-thoughts>
 replay against the League One side and Monday’s second-round draw.

Port Vale’s fans booed their players after the 1-1 draw but stayed to applaud 
Devonshire and the Maidenhead team as they eventually left the pitch.

“That was just luck,” Devonshire said, having brought on Mulley to replace 
Harry Pritchard in the 76th minute. “Sometimes substitutions come off and 
sometimes they don’t. All I know is we got what we deserved and I can’t praise 
the lads highly enough.

“We’ve got a young, part-time side but their spirit and character is 
unbelievable. They kept going right to the end and got their just deserts. Vale 
were trying to keep the ball in the corners in the last 15 to 20 minutes and 
that showed how well our lads were playing. I’m not singling anyone out because 
every one of them was fantastic.

“Our keeper has made a couple of saves but we’ve had chances ourselves. I’m 
just delighted for my players and with the effort they put in. Football fans 
aren’t stupid and we appreciated the reception we got from the Vale supporters 
at the end. It was a nice gesture and of course well deserved.

“The replay is another game and Vale have seen us now and will know what we 
are all about. I’ll be just thinking of Saturday’s game against Havant & 
Waterlooville first. We are going well in the league and it’s one game at a 
time.”

The visitors from the National League South – three rungs lower on the league 
ladder – held their own for the opening 20 minutes before Vale stepped up a 
gear and began to take charge.

Louis Dodds and Colin Daniel had shots well saved by Carl Pentney before Byron 
Moore opened the scoring in the 31st minute. However, the visitors piled on the 
pressure in the closing stages and Mulley’s shot from 12 yards nestled inside 
Jak Alnwick’s right-hand post to send the visiting supporters into delirium.

Vale’s manager, Rob Page, pulled no punches afterwards, labelling his team’s 
performance “totally unacceptable”.

“Me and my coaching staff couldn’t have been any clearer in our instructions 
through the week,” he said. “Maidenhead had won their last six games and were 
unbeaten in eight. Our very clear message was not to underestimate them.

“It’s unprofessionalism at the end of the day. Some of our players were a bit 
arrogant and the second-half performance was totally unacceptable all round. 
The only positive we can take is the fact we are in the hat for the 
second-round draw.”
 