
The Mainz midfielder Elkin Soto, who was due to be out of contract at the end 
of the season, suffered an horrific knee injury during his side’s 2-1 defeat to 
Hamburg on Sunday and was immediately offered a new contract by the club in 
order to cover his recuperation period.

Mainz had not intended to renew Soto’s contract in the summer and the player 
had planned to return to his native Colombia in order to finish his career 
there.

But after his 33rd minute injury – which was caused in a collision with 
Hamburg’s Rafael van der Vaart – he faces a substantial period out of action 
after suffering a total dislocation of his knee in which the anterior cruciate 
ligament, medial collateral ligament and meniscus were all torn away from the 
articular capsule.

Immediately after the match, the Mainz director of football, Christian Heidel, 
said the club planned to offer the 34-year-old midfielder a one-year contract 
extension. Soto has spent eight years at Mainz after joining them from 
Ecuador’s Barcelona Sporting Club.

“Initially he wanted to return at the end of the season to his home country,” 
said the club. “But from Mainz this deserving professional can expect full 
backing. Before the prospect for a new contract can become reality it is all 
about Soto’s recovery.”

“As soon as his operation is done, he could sign a new contract with us, 
immediately,” added Heidel.

Hamburg took the lead four minutes after play resumed following Soto’s injury, 
before his replacement Yunas Malli scored an equaliser 14 minutes from time. 
Hamburg’s Gojko Kacar then scored his side’s winner in the 86th minute.

“It was a very unfortunate incident,” said the club’s manager, Martin Schmidt. 
“We’re hoping that it won’t end Elkin’s career. You could see the effects of 
the incident during the game. Up until then we were playing well but after that 
we lost our rhythm. We talked about the injury and wanted to turn the game 
around for Elkin. We wanted more after levelling the score at 1-1 but then lost 
it all in the 86th minute. We didn’t have any reply to that.”

Hamburg’s manager, Bruno Labbadia, also wished Soto a good recovery.
 