
They had never performed together. They didn't know the lyrics to the song 
they were supposed to sing, let alone how to play their instruments. By way of 
performance, they just plodded around mechanically, like the sorry stiffs in 
Madame Tussauds Rock Circus. The miming? Easily worse than Milli Vanilli's 
actual singing. But within a couple of chords the crowd were on their feet, 
screaming, baying, clapping. Even Katrin Müller-Hohenstein was breathless, her 
voice tinged with the girlish excitement usually reserved forschmelzkäsige 
<http://norma-online.de/_a_/_sortiment_/_nimm~s-leicht_/_detailansicht-888_> 
post-match one-on-ones with Oliver Kahn. "Das aktuelle Sportstudio presents: 
Die Bruchweg Boys!", exclaimed the host of the show. Then the director had 
mercy and cut the gig short after 30 seconds.

Seeing Adam Szalai (22, drums), André Schürrle (19, guitar) and Lewis Holtby 
(20, vocals) play is much more enjoyable than hearing them, but in that respect 
they don't differ much from any other mega boy-band. "I prefer Take Mainz as a 
name," said Holtby, the giggling, Facebooking, high-on-life leader of the pack 
with dubious musical tastes. Asked how he would react to a call from Fabio 
Capello (or his hand puppet Franco Baldini), the son of an English serviceman 
and German mother shook his head. "I'd tell him very politely that I want to 
play for Germany," said the Under-21 captain. "When I heard the national anthem 
for the first time on the pitch, I fell in love with Germany."

The feeling's mutual. Beating Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> on their home patch, in the 
midst of Oktoberfest, the beer festival that supposedly renders them 
invincible, is always guaranteed to be looked upon kindly outside Bavaria. 
Topping the league with six wins from six, having a squad that costs a grand 
total of €17m (£14.5m) in wages and being led by a smart, genial manager in 
Thomas Tuchel, 37, has made little Mainz 05 every neutral's favourite. They 
play the kind of fast, passionate, highly tactical football that TSG 1899 
Hoffenheim employed to such devastating effect two years ago, but crucially, 
they play it without Ralf Rangnick's propensity for one-upmanship and the help 
of a billionaire benefactor. "We don't feel bigger than we are", said Tuchel 
after notching up another well-deserved victory on Saturday. "But that's not to 
say that the players aren't allowed to go beyond their limits and think big."

Louis van Gaal had been warned. "We will play our usual game, we won't hide, I 
can assure him," 05's general manager Christian Heidel had said on Friday, when 
Süddeutsche Zeitung put to him that the Bayern manager was expecting a 
defensive performance from the visitors. But Mainz turned up and strangled the 
dear life out of the champions with pressing that started deep in the Bayern 
half. They hassled their opponents like 10 love children of Ivica Olic and Dirk 
Kuyt would do and ran as if the fitness coach of the South Korea World Cup team 
from 2002 had worked his magic. "Our mission was to put on pressure and to 
destroy their passing into the centre," explained the Hungary striker Szalai. 
"We wanted to force them to play it via the full-backs. When the ball was out 
wide, one of our holding midfielder moved out. That worked well." Indeed it 
did. Overrun, Bastian Schweinsteiger and Mark van Bommel were pinging balls 
into touch with alarming regularity, and the few chances Bayern did create were 
wasted by Miroslav Klose.

Mainz had only travelled to Munich on the morning of the match – there were no 
hotel rooms available – and arrived fairly late to the Allianz Arena after 
getting stuck in a traffic. They still looked better prepared. On the counter, 
Holtby isolated the oafish Daniel van Buyten in the box and went past him with 
a simple drop of the shoulder. His precise cross found Sami Allagui, who 
back-heeled the ball beyond Hans-Jörg Butt. Fifteen minutes were gone at this 
stage. Mainz looked a little exhausted – their pace was impossible to keep up – 
but Bayern, bereft of their star players Arjen Robben and Franck Ribéry, 
couldn't take advantage. Their strikers have yet to score a goal in the league. 
Thus, poor Bo Svensson had to help out: the Mainz defender got into a horrible 
kerfuffle with his goalkeeper Christian Wetklo and inadvertently headed the 
ball in from well over 20m shortly before half-time.

It didn't seem to matter. Bayern enjoyed more possession after the break but 
good ideas or breakthroughs proved elusive. "We had the courage to defend on 
the front foot and to stop Bayern's positional play," said Tuchel. The fact 
that they managed to win the game with a "lucky punch" – as Tuchel described 
Szalai's thunderous half-volley into the corner of the net on 77 minutes – was 
almost irrelevant to his overall satisfaction. "We didn't set a target in terms 
of results," he said. "But we stressed that we wanted to make our [footballing] 
aims visible on the highest level, in order that one could see what's behind 
it, and for us to try to stay true to ourselves and be the best we can be."

With eight points from six games Bayern are 10 adrift of the top and even 
further away from the best they can be. "We couldn't cope with them," said van 
Gaal, too tired to talk about missed opportunities for a change. "I can't keep 
saying we don't take our chances, otherwise I'll go crazy and the supporters 
will too," said the Dutch maestro, whose wilful restraint in the transfer 
market has left Bayern far behind the music and is threatening another loud 
autumn of discontent. Defeat away to FC Basel in the Champions League on 
Tuesday would really bring the noise.

Talking points

• The German international Piotr Trochowski was the main culprit for Hamburg's 
2-3 defeat in the "Nordderby", at least as far as HSV manager Armin Veh was 
concerned. The 80th-minute substitute got a right ear-bashing on the pitch 
after the final whistle for giving the ball away prior to Hugo Almeida's winner 
after 85 minutes. "This is [meant to be] professional football here, I can't 
accept that," thundered the 49-year-old. "It was a stupid mistake," concurred 
'Troche', who was not to blame for Veh's strange selection – no Mladen Petric, 
no Jonathan Pitroipa, Eljero Elia as a No10 – or his side's total inability to 
defend, however. FewBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> teams boast a better 
squad, fewer still are so maddeningly bad at fulfilling their potential. But 
when you're playing Werder Bremen, being fairly bad can sometimes be good 
enough. Hamburg had more opportunities than the lethargic hosts in the first 
half, but still found themselves trailing 2-0 at half-time. The roles were 
somewhat reversed after the break, with Ruud van Nistelrooy and Pitriopa, now 
on as a substitute and screaming one in beautifully, levelling the score. Then 
Trochowski tried to dribble when a simple pass would have sufficed.

• The great derby was tragically overshadowed by some horrific scenes after 
the final whistle. A mass panic among Hamburg fans who were kept back in the 
stadium by police resulted in serious injuries when those at the back started 
pushing. One supporter is currently in a coma. The police insist the problems 
were caused by a small group of 20 people, but even a cursory glance at the 
disturbing YouTube footage suggests that something more fundamental had gone 
seriously wrong.

• In happier news, Borussia Dortmund continued their excellent run with a 3-1 
win away to St. Pauli. They would be in top spot if it wasn't for Mainz. "It's 
the only way I can accept this situation in the table," said the Dortmund 
manager Jürgen Klopp with a smile. Mainz are his former team. Two goals from 
the excellent Kevin Großkreutz and Shinji Kagawa's fourth strike of the season 
secured the points for Kloppo, who also won a €50 bet with sporting director 
Michael Zorc when 05 beat Munich. "I wanted to put on more, but Michael doesn't 
like to pay money," explained the coach.

• "We need to wake up, we're in a relegation battle," said Serdar Tasci after 
VfB Stuttgart's 4-1 defeat at home to Leverkusen. The Swabians are bottom of 
the table again, stuck in their traditional first-half-of-the season-rut. The 
manager, Christian Gross seems as puzzled as anyone by his men's loss of 
confidence. The good news is that there are only 12 more rubbish performances 
to go before Stuttgart can start their traditional rally up the table in the 
new year, with a new manager.

• The managerial problems at Wolfsburg and Schalke are thankfully little less 
pressing these days. Steve McClaren has turned things around by keeping things 
simple: a switch to the 2009 champions' preferred 4-4-2 formation with a 
diamond has got them going again. Grafite, back from a two- month slumber, 
scored two against hapless Freiburg on Saturday. In the Veltins-Arena, Felix 
Magath got at least 50% right. His team have started scoring – Raúl got off the 
mark to rescue a point three minutes from time against Gladbach – but their 
openness at the back still compares badly with four thousand holes in 
Blackburn, Lancashire.

Results: Köln 1-1 Hoffenheim, St Pauli 1-3 Dortmund, Frankfurt 2-0 Nürnberg, 
Schalke 2-2 Gladbach, Bremen 3-2 Hamburg, Stuttgart 1-4 Leverkusen, Bayern 
Munich 1-2 Mainz , Wolfsburg 2-1 Freiburg, Kaiserslautern 0-1 Hannover.

Latest Bundesliga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 