
This Monday one new manager, Ralf Rangnick of Schalke, will be introduced at a 
press conference, and two others – Jupp Heynckes, Leverkusen; Robin Dutt, 
Freiburg – are expected to confirm their departure at the end of the season. 
This takes the week's tally of managerial changes to a modest six in total, 
since Felix Magath pulled off the feat of getting fired by Schalke and hired by 
Wolfsburg in the space of two days – a move that cost Pierre Littbarski his 
job. "The Bundesliga merry-go-round is spinning out of control," wrote 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung but the situation is probably best understood as 
a game of "Reise nach Jerusalem" (musical chairs), played to thesound of some 
choice German Happy Hardcore <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=erMPrw70SEI> . 
Blink once, and someone else is in your seat.

Nuts. That's the only way to describe it, especially in light of Neven 
Subotic's painful experience on Saturday, a real blow that might yet turn the 
whole season on its head.Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> were leading 1-0 
against Jürgen Klopp's former team Mainz 05 with two minutes to go when Florian 
Heller's pass was unwittingly intercepted by the nether regions of the Serbian 
defender. While Subotic lay on the ground in agony, Borussia striker Zidan 
launched a counter-attack. Mainz soon won the ball back, however, and ignored 
Subotic's predicament. Marcel Risse crossed the ball to Petar Sliskovic, who 
scored the late equaliser.

On the touchline, Klopp went bananas. He sarcastically applauded the 
opposition bench, raised an ironic thumb, pointed fingers. "I'd be slightly 
embarrassed to score such a goal," he chided Thomas Tuchel in the post-match TV 
interview. "Your whole bench saw what was going on and still you played on. You 
didn't give a shit." Borussia's CEO, Hans-Joachim Watzke, went further. "This 
is an unbelievable disgrace," said the 51-year-old. "I would have been shocked 
if we had acted in this manner and told our boys, too. Fair play is getting 
trampled on here." The fact that Risse pleaded ignorance ("there were 80 000 
people in the ground, I didn't see Subotic and didn't hear any shouts to stop 
play") only enraged Watzke more. "That's a lame excuse. Everybody saw it. If 
that's how it is, we're really in the Wild West, then we don't need any of that 
fair-play propaganda."

Tuchel held his ground. "You're insinuating that we saw what was happening, 
that's not OK," he told Klopp. "You had the ball and didn't kick it into touch. 
I don't see why you're taking the moral high ground." One or two Mainz players 
did admit some unease about the manner of the late strike. "You'd expect the 
referee to stop play when someone's down for so long," said the full-back 
Christian Fuchs. But the question of who had seen what didn't really matter all 
that much in the end, as the referee Dr Felix Brych, a trained lawyer, 
helpfully faced the media to explain his decision and smother the controversy. 
"Play must only be stopped if there's a serious injury," he said. "That plainly 
wasn't the case here. Subotic was able to play on quite quickly."

To his credit, Klopp didn't take long to concede that Mainz had come away with 
a deserved point. "The draw is fair," he said. "We had more chances and shots 
on goal but didn't score the second goal. That's why we can't complain. Mainz 
are very strong opponents. They've won nine away-matches this season." The 
43-year-old was wise to stress the visitors' qualities, because the match had 
posed one or two inconvenient questions about his side, too. Why, for example, 
didn't they appoint a new penalty taker? Nuri Sahin, who is currently 
struggling with his form, was allowed to miss his fourth spot-kick in a row 
after Christian Wetklo had clattered into Lucas Barrios. "That's it for me", 
said the Turkish international ruefully.

Have, as TV pundit Franz Beckenbauer suggested, elements of carelessness and 
convolution crept into Dortmund's game? "They might have watched too much 
Barcelona," said the 65-year-old in view of the team's tendency to 
over-elaborate matters after taking an early lead through Mats Hummels.

Can they cope without Barrios? It was noticeable that Dortmund's intensive 
running game was lacking an outlet up front as soon as the Paraguayan made way 
with a Wetklo-induced rib injury (31'). The subtlety of the Japanese midfielder 
Shinji Kagawa was also missed.

And, most crucially: are Dortmund starting to second-guess themselves? One 
point from six in their last two matches has enabled Leverkusen (2-0 winners 
over Schalke on Sunday) to close the gap ever so slightly to seven points. 
"Crisis, what crisis?" said Marcel Schmelzer rather angrily, "we played well."

"I can't take any one serious who thinks we'll lose our nerve now. We won't," 
insisted Klopp. The international break has nevertheless come at a bad time for 
a team whose brilliance is rooted in their non-stop approach. Pausing will 
throw up an uncomfortable thought: one small kick in the goolies for Subotic 
could turn out to be a giant one for Dortmund.

Talking points

• Back in January, Felix Magath made a joke so sarcastic and bitingly 
brilliant that it took the German public a full two months to get it. The 
then-Schalke manager had criticised the "mercenary attitude" of someBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> players, some of 
which "carried on as if contracts don't matter". Wonderful stuff. On Friday, 
Magath a veritable loyalist and one-team coach who is only on his ninth job in 
16 years, unexpectedly returned to VfL Wolfsburg after losing his post with the 
Royal Blues due to "irregular transfer dealings". Schalke have since declared 
an amnesty for his various misdemeanours in a deal that saw Magath forsake 
compensation. One day before the 57-year-old returned to Lower Saxony, VfL 
interim coach Littbarski had told reporters that his predecessor had destroyed 
all structures in the club and left a messy dressing room. But the bosses felt 
that more autocratic rule was the best way to stave off relegation. They 
brought Magath back and showed sporting director Dieter Hoeness the door before 
the away game at Stuttgart. The ploy worked almost immediately, almost. The 
visitors took the lead through Grafite's strike but conceded an equaliser 
(Georg Niedermeier) deep in stoppage time. Magath typically threatened a 
punishing training regime that will take in his very own "Mount Magath", a 
series of concrete steps. "Physically, they don't look in good shape, there's 
nothing there," he said. If he does keep them up, club-owners Volkswagen have 
promised to gift him a Bentley.

• Hamburg are back. Freed of Armin Veh's defeatism, the northerners had fun 
picking apart a sorry Köln. Six-two was the final score, but it could have been 
double figures. Veterans Ze Roberto and Ruud van Nistelrooy and hat-trick hero 
Mladen Petric were especially good in a side that had looked hopelessly 
disjointed a mere seven days before. New coach Michael Oenning was modest: "It 
all came from the players themselves, we only had to channel it." Lukas 
Podolski, on the other hand, was scathing in his appraisal. "We failed 
completely, from the beginning to the end," he said.

• "Scheiß FC Köln" was not an unreasonable comment on the club's performance 
but perhaps Michael Ballack shouldn't have made it with a megaphone in his hand 
in front of happy Leverkusen fans on Sunday. The (former) Germany captain will 
probably be fined for his indiscretion. Never mind though: Bayer's 2-0 win over 
Schalke kept them well-placed to fend off the ambitions of Hannover (2-0 
against Hoffenheim) and Bayern (lucky 2-1 winners away to Freiburg) on second 
place. But they will lose their manager Jupp Heynckes to Bayern, so agents of 
Premier League managers with ideas above their station will be forced to 
concoct other imagined offers in weeks to come. As expected, Freiburg's Robin 
Dutt will take over in the BayArena at the end of the season.

Results: Gladbach 0-1 Kaiserslautern, Hamburg 6-2 Köln, Freiburg 1-2 Bayern, 
Nürnberg 1-3 Bremen, Hannover 2-0 Hoffenheim, Frankfurt 2-1 St Pauli,Dortmund 
1-1 Mainz, Leverkusen 2-0 Schalke, Stuttgart 1-1 Wolfsburg.

• Latest Bundesliga standings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/bundesligafootball/tables>
 