 We constantly read about hygiene in the garden as a kind of cure-all. Thus, of 
hellebores, we 'need to be fastidious about general hygiene', otherwise, we may 
expect them to make their exit through the black death, black spot or something 
equally nasty.
 At the same time, any enthusiast writing about hellebores wants to convey the 
impression that they are easy: 'They do not require a great deal of attention,' 
to quote another authority.

 To practise general hygiene fastidiously doesn't guarantee success. For one 
thing, it is always a bad idea to build up a collection of any one plant, as it 
is an open invi-tation to all the pests and diseases that affect that plant. 
Hellebores, for example, have their own special fungus, Coniothyrium hellebori, 
that acts as the agent for black spotting, which spreads from leaves to stems 
to flower buds. Young tissues are especially vulnerable, and are most evident 
in the early months of the year, when the majority of hellebores perform. Wet 
weather promotes the disease's spread, so if the early months are dry, your 
troubles are likely to be minimised.

 It is the same with the fungus that causes peach leaf curl, which strips 
outdoor peaches of their young leaves in April and May, and means that the 
weakened plant has to summon up the effort to put out a new crop. If the winter 
was dry, the trouble will be minimal, without any effort on our part. 
Alternatively, as you will see if you examine the outdoor, wall-trained peaches 
at Wisley, you can construct them a shelter from rain, so that they will not 
suffer.

 In respect of hellebores, you can remove all the old foliage on the 
herbaceous types in the autumn - or even now, if you've not yet got around to 
it. The sooner the better, as it can become rather too easy to remove young 
flowering shoots by mistake. Taking away the old leaves will not materially 
weaken the plants, and will spruce them up a treat and remove the potential 
source of fungus spores at the same time. And you will be earning brownie 
points by being fastidiously hygienic.

 But is this enough? In mixed plantings, where lots of different genera 
abound, it often is. You may find that certain hellebore species are 
particularly susceptible to leaf spotting in your garden, and are therefore 
better not grown; after all, there are plenty of other things to use instead. 
But if you really hanker after a nice lot of healthy hellebores, you may - 
unless your principles are against it - decide to apply protective anti-fungus 
sprays in winter, especially after heavy rains. We do as much for our peaches 
from autumn to March, when they start flowering. The spray does not actually 
kill the fungus, but acts as a barrier to its entry into the plant. A systemic 
spray will do this even more effectively than one that just protects the 
exposed areas it touches. And if you vary the spray, using ones with different 
active ingredients at each application, you will prevent the fungus from 
building up resistant strains.

 All this presupposes that you can be bothered with the extra work. But then, 
that applies to all gardening: it's up to you to decide where it's worth taking 
the trouble and where not. So how much will it matter if you don't? Clearly, in 
certain operations, hygiene genuinely is of the essence. If, for instance, you 
are sowing fern spores, which are minute and can be squeezed out by larger 
organisms, you must always sterilise the compost with boiling water well in 
advance. If it were generally realised that, with just a little care, ferns are 
not too difficult to raise in satisfyingly large numbers, this approach might 
be more widely practised.

 But how much hygiene do we really need in our borders? I dislike seeing all 
debris cleared away in autumn. Where new plantings are needed, yes. Otherwise, 
plant skeletons are a pleasure to the eye. But doesn't that encourage slugs and 
snails? Not the latter, for they congregate in large hibernaculums during 
winter, clustered together.

 If you can find where these are - usually in a snug spot between the stones 
in a retaining wall, say - a great many can be gathered and destroyed in one 
go. Slugs tend to remain active in winter, but they love dead plant tissue as 
much as live, and so will feed on that more than on your delphinium shoots 
(though you'd still be well advised to surround these with coarse grit).

 Anyway, if there is plenty of varying organic matter around, as in an 
uncleared border, destructive organisms tend to disappear. When I grew a lot of 
roses all together, I used to mulch the beds with lawn and meadow mowings, and 
I was scarcely bothered by black spot. The fallen leaves were disposed of by 
the mulch and the worms in it. Had I insisted on a bare-earth policy, this 
would not have been the case. The benefits of hygiene have their limits.
 