
Even in the machine age, you are liable to be thrown on your own resources at 
short notice. This week, thousands of people in the flooded areas have been 
washed out of the security of their own homes and have had to be provided with 
somewhere to sleep, regular meals, and often extra clothing.

It is a testing time for the local organisations which have sprung up in a 
matter of hours and taken over schools, halls and holiday camps to help the 
homeless, but to an even greater extent it is a test for the adaptability of 
the people themselves in seeing what they make with the "bare necessities".

To try to find out what the Englishman is like without his luxuries, you 
choose a rest home in the flooded area in Norfolk. "This is heaven, mate, 
compared with the Army during the war," says a rosy man, whistling cheerfully 
as he tries to pound a blanket into the shape of a pillow.

But many of the dispossessed are too old or too young to have been groomed in 
the forces for this kind of life. The matron needs all her tact to persuade 
some of the "aristocrats" to sleep on their grey blankets, only a few inches 
from another bed.

"Used to Privacy"


"I'm used to privacy," snaps a man in striped trousers, but a few minutes 
later he is allowing a Salvation Army officer to tuck him in. Another man takes 
his time about stripping off his six waistcoats. "I'd better shout when you've 
taken enough off," she tells him.

All the lights have to be turned off, and the men made to promise to shut 
their eyes before some of the women overcome their reluctance at sleeping in a 
mixed dormitory. And there is almost a revolt in the early morning when several 
sleepers begin to snore, but the matron suppresses it by going round and 
squeezing their noses. Then a little boy walks in his sleep - "I'm going to my 
mummy's beautiful drowned house" - and has to be guided gently back to bed.

Greatest Test?


Perhaps the greatest test for resourcefulness, however, comes in filling the 
empty period between tea (school meals service) and supper (tea and 
sandwiches). The teenagers promptly solve it by going to the cinema, but there 
is not escape for most of the adults, and most of them do not need one. A few 
are obviously lost without television sets or radios, and dodge restlessly in 
and out of magazines.

But the majority easily amuse themselves with songs at the piano - an erratic 
solo of "Don't Forsake Me, Oh My darling" by a man with an impenetrable local 
accent is something to remember - or by making paper figures out of newspapers, 
by cutting each other's hair, by playing with lost animals or simply by telling 
each other "how it happened".

Only one man, who is lying on his bed with a book, seems to take the flood 
serenely, as though it is only a minor matter, and when he turns a page you see 
he is reading John Nersey's "Hiroshima". In an atomic age, he seems to say, 
reprovingly, one should take floods in one's stride.
 