
As far as sports go, rugby league is one of the most adversarial, most 
gladiatorial around. There is no place to hide, no quarter given and, 
unsurprisingly given its physical nature, the game manages to throw up some 
classic rivalries and grudges that endure both on and off the field.

South Sydney v the Roosters, NSW v Queensland, Benny Elias v Mario Fenech, Ray 
Hadley v Andrew Voss, Bob Fulton v Bill Harrigan, Manly v Parramatta, Manly v 
Souths, Manly v Western Suburbs, Manly v everyone, Paul Gallen v Cameron Smith, 
Brett Stewart v David Gallop. On and on it goes.

Rugby league Four Nations: team-by-team guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/rugby-league-four-nations-team-by-team-guide>
Rugby league <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugbyleague> embraces the hate 
like no other. Russell Crowe even created his own Book of Feuds when he bought 
the Rabbitohs, as he sought to pluck controversial moments from the club’s long 
history to help motivate their current players.

And alongside this tradition is a new rivalry that is rapidly gaining momentum 
– Wayne Bennett v Mal Meninga, the master against the apprentice, England’s new 
coach against Australia’s new coach.

Bennett and Meninga’s relationship goes back more than 40 years, back to when 
Meninga was just a 15-year old in Brisbane joining the Queensland police 
academy. There the future rugby league legend was scouted by one Wayne James 
Bennett, then a police officer and former Kangaroo, who later became arguably 
the greatest coach the game has seen.

Meninga and Bennett as a partnership of player and coach reached great 
heights. They won a premiership together with Souths Magpies in the Brisbane 
competition in 1985, reached a grand final with Canberra in the NSWRL in 1987 
and won five Origins together with the Maroons.

Five debutants picked for Australia's Four Nations opener against Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/five-debutants-picked-for-australias-four-nations-opener-against-scotland>
As two of the biggest names in rugby league, these two forces of nature only 
really came up against each other in the NRL from 1997 to 2001 with Meninga’s 
brief reign in charge at Canberra. The younger man then took the reins at 
Queensland, and would go on to usurp Bennett as the Maroons’ most successful 
Origin coach.

But four decades of friendship seemed to take a permanent back seat last year 
when Meninga and Bennett were in contention for the Kangaroos job. Both wanted 
to be Tim Sheens’ replacement, the campaigning grew competitive and the harping 
in the media constant. Meninga won out in the end and Bennett responded by 
taking the role as the new coach of England, putting him directly up against 
his former charge. Talk about irony.

Since then Meninga has taken every opportunity when presented to take a shot 
at his former coach in the media. Upon landing at Manchester airport last week 
in anticipation for theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>, the 56-year old said: “He 
wants my job. He wants my job but he hasn’t got it. So obviously he’ll be 
trying his damnedest to usurp me. We’ll see what happens.”

England’s Wayne Bennett names six uncapped players in squad for France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/england-wayne-bennett-france-rugby-league>
So far Bennett has refused to take Meninga’s bait. The England boss told 
reporters at the Four Nations launch in Liverpool on Monday when pressed that 
he was “very happy with the English job right now”. “I’m just happy with what 
I’m doing,” Bennett told the assembled media pack, while Meninga sat a few 
metres away visibly chuckling. “I’m very pleased with the decision I’ve made.”

So is it all mind games? Just a bit of fun to help sell the Four Nations and 
international footy in general? Meninga has certainly publicised his role as 
also being an ambassador for the international game and not merely as just a 
coach, both inside Australia and out. When cornered him this week on the issue, 
he was adamant that the media posturing with his fellow Queenslander was all 
light-hearted.

“It’s just banter,” Meninga told Guardian Australia. “Everyone knows that 
Wayne coveted the job as well at the beginning of the year, and he mentioned 
just recently that he’d love to coach the Australian side again in the 
Australian media down the track. So it’s just a bit of tongue-in-cheek stuff. 
But I think it’s really great Wayne’s involved and coaching at this level so we 
need people like him to help promote the international program, that’s where 
were at with all that…. We go back a long way.”

Rivalry solved? Not quite. One Kangaroos official said that despite denials to 
the contrary, there is “no love lost” between the pair. Another source, who 
knows both men well, says the animosity is real, not imagined. “Wayne wanted 
the Australian job and campaigned hard for it. Mal was also disappointed Wayne 
told the Queensland Rugby League not to get Kevin Walters as Queensland coach. 
They haven’t been close since the 1980s.”

Whatever the source of the feud, it just adds another edge to what promises to 
be an engaging Four Nations series. The Kangaroos are seeking to claim back the 
trophy they lost in 2014 and their No1 world ranking that went to New Zealand, 
while England are bolstered by the return of their prodigal son Sam Burgess. 
The battle on the benches in London on 13 November, when Mal’s Kangaroos meet 
Wayne’s Poms, will be well worth watching – and not just for the action on the 
pitch.
 