
Barring a huge upset against England in London next weekend, Australia have 
booked their place in theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> final with a 14-8 victory over 
New Zealand.

Who can stop this Australia side? Since Mal Meninga has come on board the
Kangaroos have romped to four straight wins, three over the Kiwis and one over
minnows Scotland. They have racked up 110 points and conceded just 26 in a
number of dominant performances in both hemispheres.

Australia defy New Zealand grandstand finish for Four Nations triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/new-zealand-australia-four-nations-rugby-league-report>
At a cold Ricoh Arena they looked imperious for 40 minutes, Michael Morgan and
Jonathan Thurston running rings around the opposition, Blake Ferguson and
Valentine Holmes terrorising the flanks and big boppers David Klemmer, Matt
Scott and Shannon Boyd causing mayhem in the middle.

At 10-0 at the break in Coventry the Kangaroos were flying. The second half was
a different story, and it should have been a comfortable victory if not for the
magical wand of Shaun Johnson. The Warriors playmaker set up one brilliant try
and almost scored one on the hooter, which would have snatched the unlikeliest
of draws. But it would have been an underserved result as Australia dominated
most of the match and went into cruise control in the final quarter.

The contrast between this Four Nations and two years ago could not be greater.
In that tournament the green and gold were knocked off twice by New Zealand,
in the first match of the competition and again in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/15/four-nations-final-new-zealand-australia-report>
. They came into it
missing a host of players but were still confident, arrogant even, they could 
get the job done with a second-string side. They had smashed the Kiwis at the 
World Cup at Old Trafford – Sonny Bill-Williams, Johnson, Kieran Foran, the lot 
in 2013. One year later, how much could change?

How wrong they could be. In both matches two years ago they were outplayed
and out-enthused by the Kiwis. The bigger Kiwi pack beat up the Aussie
forwards. Johnson dazzled. The loss of the Four Nations title spelled the end 
of
Tim Sheens’ reign as coach and started some soul-searching in Australia rugby
league. Were the Kangaroos no longer the best team on the planet? Was their
divine right to the mantle as the world’s best no longer warranted?

Defeat in the Anzac Test at Suncorp in 2015 launched even more questions. The 
Kiwis had beaten Australia three times in a row, the first time in a whopping 
62 years. Phil Gould opined that New Zealand were now the preeminent force in 
international footy and would be for years to come. He called for a speedy 
rejuvenation of the ageing Aussie lineup, a time for the veterans to be cleaned 
out and new blood to be thrown in.

Out went Sheens and in came Meninga, fresh from his stint as State of Origin’s 
most successful coach. The man who went on more Kangaroo tours than anyone else 
promised to bring the passion and pride back into the national team. Origin had 
stolen the focus, the spotlight, the prestige, hell even the money from the 
international game. No longer, said Big Mal.

Less than a year after his appointment and four games in, Meninga’s methods are
clearly working. The Origin tensions, supposed divisions between those players
from NSW and Queensland who try to rip each other’s heads off in an intense
three-game series every year, seems to be gone. The team is united, content and
together. The rookies have stepped up from NRL to Test level seamlessly. The
Kangaroos’ tremendous depth in every position is causing the opposition
nightmares.

James Maloney had to wait to the age of 30 to get his first cap for Australia, 
but
the five-eighth has never played better footy in his life than right now. 
Valentine
Holmes might only be 21 be he looks like he’s been playing international rugby
league for years. In Coventry Ferguson went up another level, claiming the man
of the match award, while Morgan was outstanding as Thurston’s halves partner.
The absent Cooper Cronk, the joint winner of the 2016 Dally M award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/cronk-taumalolo-share-nrl-dally-m-medal>
, was not missed.

Confident, committed, ruthless and ridiculously talented, this Australian side 
will
take some stopping. They can play in second gear against the team currently
ranked number one in the world, an outfit than can boast stars like Johnson,
Jason Taumalolo and a brutal forward pack, and still win. Worryingly for the 
rest
of the world, they also remained grounded and humble. After the game, both 
Meninga and captain Cameron Smith were quick to remind the media that the 
Kangaroos weren’t at the best, and of the danger of their trans-Tasman 
neighbours. Smith reckons his side was at “75% to 80%” of its capabilities.


That begs the question – how good can they be? How much improvement do they 
have left in them? This is a squad that left out Andrew Fifita, Corey Parker, 
Paul Gallen, Semi Radradra and overlooked a number of others – Jarryd Hayne, 
Anthony Milford and more. It’s one that possesses at least three future 
Immortals and others who have already achieved everything possible in the game. 
Comparisons with the Invincibles from 1982 might be folly, a stretch or just 
plain wrong. That Aussie team of Wally Lewis, Peter Sterling, Brett Kenny, 
Wayne Pearce, Meninga and the rest changed the way rugby league was played, it 
revolutionised the sport. There will probably never be another Kangaroo squad 
like them in the years to cone.

But this 2016 edition is fearsome, freakish and downright fantastic. At their 
best
they are a sight to behold. All signs point to a comfortable win over in 
England in
seven days time and then a final victory over New Zealand at Anfield. Big Mal 
is
emboldening this team with that awesome spirit of their forbearers. Only to 
what lofty heights the 56-year old will take them remains to be seen.
 