
A son murdered his elderly mother with a chainsaw at the home they shared and 
initially told police she had fallen on to the tool as he cut up pallets for 
their wood-burning stove.

Robert Owens killed 75-year-old Iris Owens, a retired history lecturer and 
charity worker, in the garden of their home in Caerphilly, southWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

 Cardiff crown court was told that Owens, 47, dialled 999 after the attack, 
and when paramedics arrived they found Ms Owens lying on her back and her son 
with blood on his hands.

She had a laceration to her neck and head and a black eye. There was also 
blood on a wall and on a tree stump.

 Christopher Clee, prosecuting, said Ms Owens had been spotted hanging out her 
washing in the garden just after 5pm on 3 May. A neighbour then heard the sound 
of a chainsaw. Owens called for an ambulance at 5.21pm, claiming: “My mother 
went mad. I was chainsawing some wood and my mother went mad.”

 She was pronounced dead 20 minutes later. Owens was arrested on suspicion of 
murder at 6pm. He said: “I know, I’m going to jail. I can’t believe this has 
happened. I was just chopping wood. Why did this have to happen?”

 The prosecutor said he later told officers: “I didn’t mean to kill my mother. 
I was chopping wood pallets and she fell off on to my saw.” But at a hearing in 
September he admitted murder. As well as attacking her with the chainsaw, Owens 
strangled and kicked his mother.

 In witness statements read to the court, Owens was said to be close to his 
mother. One woman who knew them said he seemed “odd, but not scary odd” and 
sometimes acted “like a child who wanted attention”.

 The court was told they began to live together after Ms Owens’ husband died. 
Owens had a drug problem and was found to have had heroin and cocaine in his 
body at the time of the killing.

 Simon Laws QC, defending, said: “He accepts he used the chainsaw to strike 
his mother. There’s no attempt to minimise what he did, he is responsible for 
these injuries.

 “He is devastated by what happened in those few moments of anger in the 
garden and must live with the consequences.” Laws said the relationship between 
mother and son had been “close, loving and supportive”.

 The judge, Mrs Justice Nicola Davies, said she would retire to think about 
the case, and would sentence Owens on Tuesday.
 