
Sky Deutschland were berated for showing “a lack of respect” at the weekend 
and it was hard to disagree: inflictingthe heinous Heino 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eh6Myl_O9Kg> as a guest on the unsuspecting 
viewers of its Sky90 talk show on Sunday night must rank as an all-time low for 
German football television (althoughthis cringe-tastic aberration 
<https://youtu.be/g6oZqtSa3fw?t=1m22s> cannot be far behind).

Robert Lewandowski sinks Schalke to push Bayern Munich closer to title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/bayern-munich-schalke-bundesliga-match-report>
Schalke 04’s sporting director, Horst Heldt, who accused the TV channel of 
being out of order live on camera, did not have the patently clueless 
77-year-old “singer” roped in to promote his new album in mind, however. Heldt 
was instead having a go at the Sky reporter Ecki Häuser for asking the manager, 
André Breitenreiter, about his widely reported sacking at the end of the season 
beforethe 3-0 defeat at Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/bayern-munich-schalke-bundesliga-match-report>
 on Saturday. “You asked him five questions about that before kick-off and you 
couldn’t think of anything else,” Heldt confronted Häuser in a post-match 
interview, “you hardly asked anything about the game. You’re being 
disrespectful, to be honest.”

Breitenreiter, who has been under fire for weeks, was perhaps not the best 
person to be quizzed about the strong rumour that FCAugsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> miracle worker Markus Weinzierl 
is about to take over from him at the end of the season (“it’s a fact,” Häuser 
insisted). Understandably, the 42-year-old coach threatened to walk out of the 
interview. Heldt, too, was right to defend his man against the incessant 
speculation, claiming that the debate was “poisonous” in terms of Schalke’s 
attempt to push into Europe in the next four weeks. On Monday, Clemens Tönnies, 
the chairman of the advisory board and de-facto club boss, voiced his 
disapproval, as well. “We won’t let outsiders pretend that there’s a disquiet 
[in the club]. Sky were disrespectful, their so-called facts don’t exist. We’ve 
told them that. And we won’t take part in a debate about the manager, simply 
because the public expect that, either,” he told Neue Ruhr Zeitung.

Text-book circling of the wagons, you might say. But this goes deeper than 
that. As Heldt himself explained, the media were not the only ones causing 
trouble here. As ever, Schalke were doing a very fine job plunging themselves 
into chaos. Heldt grumbled he did not know who he was leaking the Weinzierl 
story to and complained that “others, who are not yet at Schalke, are always 
talking about Schalke – that’s not OK. They should keep quiet, and not talk 
about their contract starting on 1 June or being in charge ofSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> from 16 May.”

The “others” implied here is Christian Heidel, the 52-year-old Mainz 05 
official who will succeed Heldt next season. The mentor of Jürgen Klopp and 
Thomas Tuchel last week confirmed that he would stop working for 05 after the 
last league game on 15 May. Heldt took that to mean that the new man would rock 
up immediately after the final, final whistle and was not best thrilled. “My 
contract runs until 30 June and no one has told me otherwise,” Heldt said, “I’m 
angry. It won’t happen that he’ll sit on my lap in my office.” To raise the 
awkward level even further, Heidel is the one behind Schalke’s attempt to sign 
Weinzierl, which makes Heldt’s position almost as untenable as Breitenreiter’s. 
Quite a few people continue to wonder why the former Stuttgart midfielder has 
not walked away already. “Gardening leave” is yet to become a thing in the
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>.

Bundesliga still lags behind, despite Premier League's underperformance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/bundesliga-still-lags-behind-despite-premier-leagues-underperformance>
According to Heidel, the latest Royal Blues irritation is a misunderstanding. 
“I didn’t say I would take over on 16 May,” he pointed out. But even Heidel 
cannot deny that the transition towards a new regime has been extremely messy. 
“We are not helped by sniping from the sidelines,” Heldt said, “the future 
should be dealt with in the future, at least publicly. What’s being discussed 
behind closed doors has to stay there.”

In Gelsenkirchen the concept of closed doors and secrecy is yet to take hold, 
though. While Schalke are undoubtedly right to try somebody new to improve on 
the inconsistent Heldt years and his plethora of underwhelming coaching choices 
– Jens ‘The Jumper’ Keller, Roberto ‘Happy’ Di Matteo and now the dynamic but 
somewhat hapless Breitenreiter – there is less confidence that Heidel will be 
able to change Schalke before the club, Germany’s most rudderless by a mile, 
will change him. The way things have been going, it looks as if he has already 
begun to show mild symptoms of Schalke-itis, the highly-contagious, compulsive 
disclosure of sensitive information, a full month in advance of his first day 
at work.

Augsburg will fight for a hefty compensation for releasing Weinzierl, the most 
in-demand man on the German managerial market, from his contract three years 
early. And the Bavarians are not in the mood to expedite proceedings while they 
are still fighting against relegation. Breitenreiter, who has been unable to 
demonstrate that the can mould one of the league’s most expensive squads into a 
functioning team that would befit their ambitions and financial status – they 
were the 13th richest club in Europe last season, with revenues that exceeded 
those of Milan, Internazionale or Roma – will thus continue to coach as the 
lamest of lame ducks over the next four crucial weeks. Yes, it is another fine 
mess, or you might say: peak Schalke. They get it wrong even when they get it 
right.

Results: Hannover 2-0 Borussia Mönchengladbach, Bayer Leverkusen 3-0 Eintracht 
Frankfurt, Augsburg 1-0 Stuttgart, Werder Bremen 3-2 Wolfsburg, Darmstadt 2-0 
Ingolstadt, Bayern Munich 3-0 Schalke, Borussia Dortmund 3-0 HSV, Mainz 2-3 
Köln.
 