
“We are Yeovil Town, ooh arrr!” went the chorus of Yeovil True, the song they 
once took to No36 in the charts. The supporters here had queued up to 17 hours 
for a ticket, including one who had flown in from Brisbane especially for the 
occasion, and for over an hour they might have looked atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and dared to think 
they could be ripe for an upset.

There were the three occasions inside the opening 16 minutes when the most 
expensively assembled group of footballers to roll into town resorted to 
safety-first football and lumped the ball over the stands. There was the 
inexplicable moment when Wayne Rooney could be seen putting a straightforward 
pass out for a throw-in. Once again there were long passages when United’s 
football seemed strangely aimless and Louis van Gaal must have been alarmed by 
the way his team struggled to keep the ball.

Yet they were wonderful goals with which Ander Herrera and Ángel di María 
removed any danger of United being taken to a replay or worse against the team 
that is propping up the rest of League One. Herrera took his shot on the turn, 
letting fly with his right foot to hook a bouncing ball over Jed Steer from 
more than 20 yards. Di María’s was from closer range, running clear a minute 
from the end of normal time, and his delicate little chip carried a level of 
expertise that would rarely be seen in English football’s third tier.

In those moments United did at least remind everyone of the gulf between the 
two sides. At other times, however, it was laboured in the extreme. Yeovil had 
matched them for 64 minutes leading the public address to announce the 
man-of-the-match award as “the entire team” and Gary Johnson, the manager, to 
talk about having given their opponents a “real fright”. His team gave 
everything and they certainly did not look like a side that had just lost three 
on the bounce to Colchester, Bristol City and Leyton Orient.

What they lacked was the refinement in attack to threaten a historic result 
during those spells when their opponents were struggling for any real momentum. 
The spearhead of their attack came in the shape of Kieffer Moore, standing 6ft 
5in tall with a bandage around his head after a collision that also left Paddy 
McNair patched up for three-quarters of the match. Moore’s first contribution 
was to leave his shoulder on De Gea as United’s goalkeeper collected a cross 
but, at the risk of being slightly cruel, the rest of the striker’s performance 
brought back memories of Alan Cork’s complaints to his Wimbledon team-mates 
that he did not want the ball at his feet.

Moore had the ingredients to be the classic FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> hero with his background at 
Dorchester Town and Truro City but, when he had Yeovil’s best chance 10 minutes 
into the second half, he never showed conviction from only eight yards out and 
his shot was tame, to say the least. The same player also had an opportunity in 
the first half to send Kevin Dawson behind the opposition defence but took too 
long to release the ball and the danger was cleared.

Not that it was much better from United at times. The only moment throughout 
the opening half when the 11-times winners showed superstar status came from 
Radamel Falcao nonchalantly putting Joe Edwards in his place with a beautifully 
delivered nutmeg. Otherwise they plodded through the first period.

It would be exaggerating to say there was ever a point when United looked 
rattled but they certainly did not look comfortable. By half-time the 
supporters who had filled the home stands over two hours before kick-off were 
entitled to be encouraged. Steer had barely had to make a save.

Van Gaal’s alterations during the interval initially gave the impression 
United’s manager was dissatisfied with what he had seen. It turned out that 
Rafael da Silva had fractured his cheekbone and Luke Shaw had an ankle injury, 
in keeping with a season when United’s defence has been repeatedly destabilised 
by injuries.

The irony is that it worked in United’s favour once the changes compelled Van 
Gaal to abandon his 3-4-1-2 system in favour of a flat back four and a midfield 
diamond, with Juan Mata brought on to play alongside Herrera. Jonny Evans came 
on to partner Chris Smalling in defence and McNair and Blackett, also 
centre-backs by trade, were moved to the full-back positions.

Yeovil’s attitude was epitomised by the number of times Edwards could be seen 
snapping into tackles in midfield and when he swapped shirts with Rooney 
afterwards he did so with an apology. “I said to him: ‘I know I have been 
annoying you all afternoon,’” the home team’s captain said.

Edwards could also reflect on that moment, Yeovil’s only clear opportunity to 
make it 1-1, when he launched himself at the ball in the penalty area only for 
Di María of all people to clear it from in front of De Gea’s goal-line.

Di María’s arrival an hour in, replacing Falcao, had brought a collective gasp 
inside Huish Park and, when he raced on to Rooney’s incisive through-ball, he 
supplied a finish to justify the crowd’s awe.

Man of the match Joe Edwards (Yeovil)
 