
On this evidence Pep Guardiola has considerable work to do before Manchester 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> play Sunderland in 
their opening Premier League game. “We are far away from where we want to be 
but people can’t imagine how hard it is – at the end we’re going to get there,” 
said Guardiola, who was phlegmatic when asked if City may be undercooked. “In 
football the season starts when the last one finishes. You don’t have time to 
rest. We’re going to kill our players. We can give them two or three weeks but 
the schedule is the schedule. We start in two weeks. We try to organise. We 
trained really well in Manchester.

Pep Guardiola’s pizza ban could be the topping on a title for Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/27/pep-guardiola-pizza-ban-manchester-city>
“I know we’re going to play not with the level I want in February, March and 
April but it is what it is. OK, we will play two more friendlies before 
Sunderland and we’ll see how the condition of the players is and we’re going to 
decide.”

One player Guardiola wants to add, however, is John Stones. City and Everton 
remain in talks with the Goodison Park club holding out for £50m. “Everyone 
knows we are going to try,” said the manager. “We will see what happens.”

Guardiola admits some of his squad may be struggling to grasp what he wants 
from them. “I don’t know, some players get it immediately and the other ones 
never,” he said. “Some of them I can tell a lot and they understand the process 
immediately. And for some of them one session is enough. So that’s when we 
speak we have to meet each other. It’s for a good reason. I can handle and see 
how they react and how they play.”

There was no place for Samir Nasri, who was overweight when he returned for 
pre-season. Guardiola, who will not let overweight players train with the first 
team and has banned some foods, including pizza, said: “Sami arrived a little 
bit overweight but he’s much better now. Still there is a little bit of weight. 
Last season he was injured and we want to avoid that. The players that are on 
the pitch they are fit, their weight is in the right place.”

This was Borussia Dortmund’s sixth pre-season outing to City’s second and many 
of Guardiola’s star players did not start, so a penalty shootout win over a 
side who defeated Manchester United 4-1 last week in Shanghai is hardly shabby.

Borussia Dortmund 1-1 Manchester City (5-6 on penalties) – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jul/28/borussia-dortmund-v-manchester-city-international-champions-cup-live>
The half-empty view is that City lack rhythm, desperately need more game time 
and, certainly before the break, showed an inability to heed one of Guardiola’s 
prime demands: not to hoof the ball goalwards. The requirement for more action 
is why an extra friendly will be staged next week – it may be against St 
Johnstone – to compensate for the derby with United in Beijing on Monday being 
cancelled.

Guardiola sent his team out with a three-man defence featuring Nicolas 
Otamendi, with Aleksandar Kolarov to his left and Tosin Adarabioyo the right. 
The wing-backs were Gael Clichy and Jesus Navas, a midfield trio of Fernando – 
the least advanced – Fabian Delph and Ferdandinho, with Oleksandr Zinchenko, a 
kind of floating No10 behind Kelechi Iheanacho.

City’s opening was scrappy. Willy Caballero made a number of mistakes that 
were a mix of poor clearances that went straight to Dortmund, and insecure 
goalkeeping that allowed one Marcel Schmelzer cross to squeeze under him.

Guardiola was not pleased. During a drinks break the manager headed straight 
for Oleksandr Zinchenko to tell him off. This may have been about the pass the 
Ukrainian failed to make to Jesus Navas when the Spaniard had a chance to shoot.

With Eliaquim Mangala, Bacary Sagna and Kevin De Bruyne not here because of a 
post-Euro 2016 rest, Guardiola chose to leave David Silva, Sergio Agüero, 
Raheem Sterling, Yaya Touré, Samir Nasri, Nolito, and Wilfried Bony from the 
XI. They were on the bench, while Joe Hart and Pablo Zabaleta were not, though 
it is understood neither player is injured.

After a first half that featured none of Guardiola’s trademark slick style the 
question was whom he might introduce. The answer was Agüero, Silva, Bony, 
Touré, Aleix García, Jason Denayer, Pablo Maffeo and Angus Gunn for Caballero.

This made eight changes, only Fernandinho, Adarabioyo and Kolarov remaining. 
As Toure played in the defeat at Bayern, of Guardiola’s A-listers this was the 
first action for Silva and Agüero.Bony with Agüero to his left and Silva to his 
right comprised City’s second-half attack in a 4-3-3. They carried a threat 
previously absent and the Ivorian latched on to one Silva pass and worried 
Roman Buerki, in goal, with the attempt.

As with the United-Dortmund match the crowd was disappointing: the venue 
appearing to have filled only a third of its 60,000-capacity. What did not 
disappoint was City’s willingness to try to ensure Gunn’s goal was not 
breached, Maffeo making one impressive clearance.

Then came Agüero’s 79th-minute opener, from a Silva pass. Towards the end the 
replacements Touré and Bony were themselves replaced, by Sterling and Nolito. 
With virtually the last kick Christian Pulisic equalised to take the game to a 
penalty shootout which City won 6-5. But what matters is the work between now 
and 13 August.

Manchester City (3-5-1-1): Caballero (Gunn, ht); Adarabioyo, Otamendi 
(Denayer, ht), Kolarov (Celina, 78); Navas (Maffeo, ht), Delph (Touré, ht, 
Sterling, 85), Fernando (Aleix Garcia, ht), Fernandinho, Clichy (Agüero, ht); 
Zinchenko (Silva, ht); Iheanacho (Bony, ht, Nolito, 85).

Borussia Dortmund (4-4-1-1): Buerki; Ginter, Papastathopoulos, Bartra, 
Schmelzer; Leitner, Sahin, Rode, Dembélé; Mor; Ramos.

Referee: Fu Ming.
 