
Manchester City refused Borussia Mönchengladbach’s request to reschedule 
Tuesday night’s openingChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group game at 6pm on 
Wednesday evening, with the match now set to take place at the standard 7.45pm 
kick-off time.

A torrential thunderstorm saturated the pitch at the Etihad Stadium in the two 
hours before the scheduled kick-off and made the surrounding areas dangerous. 
The postponement came just 20 minutes before the match had been due to start 
and was met by boos from the 1500 travelling fans.

It is understood the decision was taken because of safety concerns around the 
ground rather than the pitch being unplayable. Uefa officials were due to reach 
a decision over when the match could be rescheduled within two hours of the 
postponement, but that was delayed after issues emerged with supplying enough 
stewards. Gladbach had initially urged the game to go ahead with an earlier 
kick‑off, although they later agreed to wait until the standard 7.45pm kick-off 
time.

“We asked Uefa and Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> play at 6pm because for 
sporting reasons we wanted to fly back to Germany,” the club spokesman Markus 
Aretz said. “That was important for us, but City could not make that possible. 
I don’t know the reasons why, they said we had to play at 7.45 like today. So 
Uefa had to make the decision to play at 7.45. We are not happy with that, but 
we have to take it like it is. City offered us to spend the next night in the 
academy. That was no help because a hotel was not a problem. I think it is 
always a disadvantage when you have to stay one day longer than planned. I 
think for the away team it is a disadvantage, without fans.”

The Gladbach defender Oscar Wendt said: “It’s hard for us because we prepared 
for this match, but it’s harder for our supporters because they had a long 
journey here and bought their tickets.”

PSG v Arsenal: Champions League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/13/psg-v-arsenal-champions-league-live>
From late on Tuesday afternoon thunderstorms engulfed the Etihad Stadium to a 
degree that caused large puddles to form on the surface. As kick‑off neared 
Bjorn Kuipers, the match referee, led a Uefa delegation plus City’s head 
groundsman, Lee Jackson, who inspected the playing area. This included the 
bouncing of a ball into the worst areas which resulted in it sticking in the 
water.

Around 40 minutes later the match was called off despite the surface having 
drained well and the conditions improving.

“Around 90% of our supports have to leave tomorrow so they can’t see the 
game,” Wendt said. “It’s not our decision, we don’t have any influence, so we 
have to take this decision.”
 