
As the arch winner José Mourinho will be disappointed with this defeat, though 
a game played in stifling heat was never really about the result.

The Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
manager said beforehand the priority was for his new team to start the process 
of gelling, with zero focus on the opposition. This opening International 
Champions Cup game was in part, therefore, an exercise in searching for clues 
regarding the Portuguese’s thinking.

Manchester United v Borussia Dortmund: International Champions Cup – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jul/22/manchester-united-v-borussia-dortmund-international-champions-cup-live>
Was there anything, then, in Antonio Valencia being asked to captain the side? 
Or Juan Mata being positioned at No10 and Henrikh Mkhitaryan, who was in that 
role against Wigan Athletic, being on the left? Or Daley Blind, a centre-back 
for most of last term, playing in midfield? Maybe, maybe not: to guess would be 
akin to tea-leaf reading at this nascent stage of Mourinho’s tenure.

What is clear is the quality Mkhitaryan possesses. It was displayed on 
Saturday atWigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/16/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-wigan-special-one-football-friendly>
 and the way the 27-year-old pinged one early pass down his corridor showed 
again why Mourinho bought him.

This bright start was halted when Thomas Tuchel’s side went ahead. Sam 
Johnstone, the goalkeeper, might have done better with the speculative 30-yard 
free-kick hit by Pierre Emerick Aubameyang. Instead it was spilled, Ousmane 
Dembélé hit one follow-up attempt beaten out by the goalkeeper from close in 
but, when the ball finally fell to Gonzalo Castro, he finished.

From here the contest meandered for a while on a Shanghai night becoming ever 
more sultry. Mourinho had pointed out that Dortmund were well advanced of 
United in their preparations, having played four matches already, and it 
showed. Tuchel’s men were sharper and stronger and by the 35th minute were 2-0 
ahead.

As United’s manager said: “At the moment the engines are completely different. 
Formula 1 against Formula 3. They are much sharper and you can see that easily, 
so it’s difficult to judge my players.”

United were breached down their left and, when a cross came in, Aubameyang’s 
overhead kick was mishit, Valencia handled and the referee, Wang Di, awarded 
the penalty. Aubameyang slotted easily past Johnstone, who went right and saw 
the ball go past him down the middle.

Aubameyang was running United ragged whenever the ball came near him. He 
slipped beyond Phil Jones and chipped Johnstone but the keeper recovered and 
made the save. By the end of the half Mourinho had switched Mkhitaryan and 
Jesse Lingard but the Portuguese, standing in the technical box, was witnessing 
a mismatch.

“After 10 minutes we know that one team started training 10 days ago and 
played one match, and the other team started one month ago and played already 
four games,” he said. “It’s so easy to see the difference of intensity and 
sharpness. For us it was very difficult.”

For the second half Jones, Lingard, Johnstone and Memphis Depay went off and 
Sergio Romero became the new keeper, joined by Marcos Rojo, Ashley Young and 
Marcus Rashford. The latter’s introduction received a cheer from the crowd and 
the young forward was instantly involved in a United move, turning the ball 
into Luke Shaw’s path. The left-back was clear and had Young for support but he 
overran possession and the danger fizzled out.

Rojo’s first act before his new manager was hardly impressive, as he was 
fooled by Dembélé before the Dortmund No7 made it 3-0.

United’s shape had become fluid; Rashford and Mkhitaryan switching at times 
between the left forward and No9 berths. It was from a ball through the middle 
the Armenia captain pulled one back, tapping home a Mata pass after lurking 
near the penalty spot.

By the close Adnan Januzaj and Andreas Pereira were on for Valencia and Blind. 
Januzaj sparkled here and there but, as Castro added his second and Dortmund’s 
fourth towards the end, the Belgian’s intermittent threat could be viewed as 
the United display in microcosm.

Mourinho continues to target Paul Pogba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/paul-pogba-mino-raiola-record-breaking-transfers>
 or another midfielder to complete the four major signings he wants. “When we 
sign one, that crucial [player] work will be done,” the 53-year-old said. “Then 
the market will be open until 31 August. Sometimes things happen that you are 
not expecting and we have to react.”
 