
Floyd Mayweather Jr stopped by to see an old foe, and Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> tried his best to give him a 
show.

With Mayweather watching intently from a ringside seat, Pacquiao dropped 
Jessie Vargas in the second round and bloodied his face Saturday night on his 
way to a lopsided decision that gave him a piece of the welterweight title once 
again.

Manny Pacquiao v Jessie Vargas: WBO welterweight championship – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/05/manny-pacquiao-jessie-vargas-fight-live>
Pacquiao won on all three ringside scorecards – 118-109, 118-109 114-113 – to 
take the piece of the title Vargas won in his last fight. The Guardian scored 
it 118-109.

It was vintage Pacquiao at times, even though he couldn’t stop Vargas like he 
desperately wanted to. And with Mayweather at ringside it certainly will stir 
talk of a second fight between the boxers who went at it last year in the 
richest fight ever.

That, of course, would depend on Mayweather coming out of retirement and 
Pacquiao being able to fight while still attending to his duties as a senator 
in the Philippines. Mayweather did not answer questions about a possible return 
to the ring shouted at him by writers at ringside.

“I came to take my daughter to the fights,” Mayweather said, with his daughter 
sitting next to him.

Just before the bell rang to start the fight, Pacquiao smiled and waved a fist 
at Mayweather. He then came out aggressive, trying to walk down Vargas and make 
it a short night.

But Pacquiao, who has not knocked out an opponent in seven years, wasn’t going 
to stop the younger Vargas in his hometown. Vargas had difficulty dealing with 
Pacquiao’s speed, but was more than willing to trade punches to try and lure 
him into a brawl.

In the eighth round he succeeded at doing that, hitting Pacquiao with a big 
right and punching his gloves together as if to tell him to stand and fight. 
Pacquiao went right back after him and they traded punches before staring at 
each other when the bell sounded to end the round.

Vargas was cut over the right eye by an accidental clash of heads in the 
eighth, and blood trickled into his eye but it didn’t seem to be a factor.

The taller Vargas landed some good right hands of his own, but they were 
infrequent and he rarely followed up on them. Still, they were enough to keep 
Pacquiao away at times and offset some of his advantage with speed.

Mayweather took a ringside seat alongside his daughter to watch the man who 
helped make him untold millions when they fought in 2015. Mayweather won that 
fight, and Pacquiao’s performance was largely panned, though he claimed to have 
an injured shoulder.

Pacquiao, fighting in his 22nd title fight in a pro career that stretches back 
to 1995, trained at night in the Philippines in the weeks leading up to the 
fight so he could tend to his day job as a newly elected senator. With the 
senate out of session, he was back in a more familiar place, with a crowd of 
some 16,132 nearly filling the UNLV campus arena to watch him take on Vargas, 
who was in only his second title bout.

Pacquiao, who earned a reported $100m to fight Mayweather in the richest fight 
ever, was guaranteed $4m plus a percentage of the revenue of the fight. Vargas 
got $2.8m.
 