
If it was indeed the final fight of an unforgettable career that launched him 
from unspeakable poverty in the rural Philippines to worldwide fame and 
fortune, thenManny Pacquiao <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> 
went out with the crowd-pleasing brio that was his calling card.

The fighting congressman from Sarangani province dropped Timothy Bradley in 
the seventh and ninth rounds en route to a unanimous-decision victory on 
Saturday night at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. All three ringside judges scored 
it 116-110, as did the Guardian. Afterward he confirmed the central selling 
point of the promotion: that it was his last fight.

Manny Pacquiao v Timothy Bradley III – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/09/manny-pacquiao-timothy-bradley-fight-live>
“Yes, I am retired,” Pacquiao said. “I want to go home to my family and serve 
the people.”

Pacquiao’s first outing since coming up short against Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/floyd-mayweather-beats-manny-pacquiao-on-points-to-remain-unbeaten>
 more than 11 months ago found the fighter at a curious point. The ill will 
left over from an underwhelming showing in the fight of the century and the
anti-LGBT rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/18/manny-pacquiaos-anti-gay-rhetoric-permanently-mars-a-hard-won-legacy>
 that cost him an endorsement deal with Nike had cast him, to some extent, in 
the unfamiliar role of heel. Instead it seemed the moment was there for 
Bradley, whose own Hall of Fame career was for so long obscured by their first 
fight, ahighly disputed split decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/10/timothy-bradley-manny-pacquiao-split-decision>
 that went to the American, to step up and finally claim the respect he 
deserves.

It wasn’t to be. Instead Bradley found himself in with the same nightmare 
matchup he’d struggled with in two previous meetings: a puncher just as fast 
and better defensively.

“He was a step ahead of me,” Bradley observed afterward. “I was supposed to be 
a step ahead of him.”

Pacquiao (57-6-2, 38 KOs) appeared eager to be the aggressor when the opening 
bell rang but the first round soon became a tactical clash that saw the 
fighters pawing with jabs and taking the other’s measure. Even when both men 
opened up by the third, the action came in bursts.

Bradley (33-2-1, 13 KOs) enjoyed his best moments early in the fifth, backing 
Pacquiao up along the ropes and connecting with a chopping right early before a 
left-right combination upstairs. But Pacquiao immediately responded in kind and 
the pair traded hellfire in the center of the ring with the Filipino getting 
the better of the exchanges. For a moment it was the Pacquiao of old. When the 
bell rang Bradley’s trainer Teddy Atlas had climbed through the ropes and 
berated his fighter before he could even take his stool.

“When he hurt his opponent he want after him and he did what he was supposed 
to do,” Pacquiao’s longtime trainer Freddie Roach said.

By the sixth Pacquiao had found his range – a dangerous prospect for Bradley 
given his hand-speed disadvantage – and in the seventh he dropped the American 
with a short right hook. It was a flash knockdown near the end of a strong 
Bradley round that might have been ruled a slip, but referee Tony Weeks’ ruling 
that his glove had touched the canvas stood. Far more convincing was the 
counter left in the ninth than landed flush and sent Bradley clattering to the 
deck, where the momentumcarried him into a reverse somersault 
<https://vine.co/v/iThx1HeiEXO>.

“Manny was luring me in,” said Bradley, who connected on 99 of 302 punches 
(33%), compared to 112 of 439 (28%) for Pacquiao. for Bradley according to 
CompuBox. “He was waiting on me, to commit, to lunge in, so he could counter. 
Then in spots he would attack. He was being the ocean tonight.”

By then Bradley seemed to know he needed a knockout to win, which made him 
more vulnerable than ever. He reverted to circling around Pacquiao and pawing 
with the jab precisely when he needed to step on the gas. The crowd rose to 
their feet for the final minute, perhaps the last of Pacquiao’s career, before 
the bell sounded on the 36th round of the trilogy.

“I did everything I could to get him to come to me,” Bradley said. “He was 
just super smart tonight. He was the smarter man. He’s the best fighter I’ve 
ever faced in the ring.”


Added Atlas: “I don’t think my fighter came up short, I think I did. Give 
credit to Manny, Manny was terrific. We wanted to take a little more advantage 
of his preliminary movement before he exploded forward. I think we had 
opportunities to do that, but I don’t know that I pushed the right buttons to 
make it happen.”

The malleability of retirements in boxing is their essential quality, but 
Pacquiao’s promoter seemed to accept this was the end. “As far as I am 
concered, until I hear differently, Manny Pacquiao has retired from the sport 
of boxing,” Top Rank CEO Bob Arum said afterward.

No one does a nostalgia act like Las Vegas. Over the past few years there’s 
been none bigger than Pacquiao. At 37, he is still a world class operator, one 
of the sport’s top welterweights capable of beating nearly anyone put in front 
of him. But for years he’s been marketed as the one-man wrecking crew whose 
concussive knockout power felled a parade of bigger, stronger opponents.

In reality it’s been seven years since he stopped an opponent inside the 
distance, a recession attributed to both his ascent to welterweight and the 
encroachment of Father Time. If Saturday’s fight is his farewell, it’s as good 
as place to walk away as any. He’s got plenty to fall back on, not least the 
forthcoming senatorial election on 9 May in his native Philippines, an office 
he’s expected to win that will consume far more time than his current duties as 
a congressman.

“My heart is 50/50,” he said when pressed. “I might enjoy my retired life or I 
might want to come back. It’s hard to say because I’m not there yet. But right 
now my decision is to retire.”
 