
Manny Pacquiao’s impact only begins with what he’s accomplished as a 
prizefighter. As he racked up world championships across a record eight weight 
divisions, he made it a personal mission to combat the very poverty that he 
fought his way out of years ago. That quasi-messianic calling has propelled him 
into politics and to the verge of election to thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> senate in May, which many 
believe could position him for a run for the presidency in 2022.

This week Pacquiao described same-sex marriage as “mas masahol pa sa hayop” – 
worse than animals. “It’s just common sense,” he said. “Have you seen any 
animal having male-to-male or female-to-female relations?” But it’s unlikely 
those remarks will derail his political career. Not in the Philippines, one of 
the only countries in the world where Catholicism is still growing and where 
acceptance of same-sex marriage is still far behind other parts of the world. 
Having covered him intimately for nearly a decade, I can attest he is a man 
driven by a desire to promote what he sees as goodness and harmony.

Manny Pacquiao’s Instagram account calls for gay people to be put to death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/manny-pacquiao-boxing-gay-people-instagram-nike>
But it’s hard to see how this won’t permanently mar his legacy around the 
globe.

The fallout redoubled on Wednesday when Nike unceremoniously dropped the 
Filipino boxer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/17/manny-pacquiao-gay-comments-nike-boxing>
, terminating an endorsement partnership that began eight years ago. Hardly a 
brave move from the shoe giant, who were happy to ignore previous statements 
from Pacquiao on the topic that were both less direct and less publicized when 
he wasn’t near the end of his fighting days.

Forget for a moment that Pacquiao’s science is categorically wrong morally as 
well as scientifically: cases of homosexual behavior in animals can be seen in 
many species, most commonly as methods of conflict resolution and stress 
management. Pacquiao’s is a dangerous line that can undermine self esteem and 
result in violence.

Normally the personal views of athletes would not carry so much influence, but 
Pacquiao is no normal athlete. His inspirational rise from waif-thin boy from a 
cardboard shack in General Santos City to one of the world’s highest earning 
sportsmen has captured the imaginations of millions the world over. We’ve held 
him up as the most socially important boxer since Muhammad Ali – the sacred 
foil to the profane, profligate Floyd Mayweather.

The 37-year-old has always self-identified as Catholic, making the sign of the 
cross before his fights and promoting Christian values with a well documented 
largesse and compulsive philanthropy that’s come at no small cost to his 
personal wealth. But since he became born again after his third fight with Juan 
Manuel Marquez in 2011, many within his inner and outer circles have expressed 
concern that his spirituality had been hijacked by evangelicals.

Some have attributed a downtick in performance to the shift. He suffered his 
first loss in 11 years after the reawakening – albeit a highly controversial 
split-decision loss to Timothy Bradley – before a knockout loss to Marquez in 
their fourth and final meeting. Whispers that Pacquiao’s hunger and taste for 
the fight had been replaced by a thirst for spiritual fulfillment were not 
uncommon. Yet the transformation outside the ring has been even more stark.

The stain of Pacquiao’s remarks now threatens to color a hard-won boxing 
legacy. He apologized within hours – although comments on Thursday thatpeople 
“are alarmed by the truth” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/manny-pacquiao-says-people-alarmed-by-the-truth-about-gay-marriage>
 may well have made matters worse – but it will take more than words to atone 
for the wounds these comments have caused. Only a demonstrated move towards 
understanding will begin to suffice. Given his beliefs it is highly unlikely he 
will decamp from the wrong side of history.

These are the statements of a man so ignorant he doesn’t understand the impact 
of his own rhetoric. And that can be even more insidious than bigotry with 
explicit intent. Words carry a lasting power greater than even Pacquiao’s most 
devastating left hand. While these remarks will never undo his many good deeds, 
redemption in the public eye could remain forever out of reach.
 