
The Manny Pacquiao <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> who 
entered the congested dressing room on Thursday morning at Madison Square 
Garden, smartly clad in a glen plaid suit and Louis Vuitton sunglasses, with a 
pair of iPhones in hand, might have seemed an imposter a decade ago. The much 
improved English, polished look and improbable punctuality would have been 
unrecognizable from the unkempt bantamweight who turned up at Hollywood’s Wild 
Card Boxing Club in search of a trainer back in 2001, a free-swinging, 
free-spirited southpaw no one could imagine would soon become the face of the 
sport.

On the tiles with Tyson Fury: my heavyweight night out in New York
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/11/xx> 
To his right was longtime trainer Freddie Roach, the straight-talking boxing 
lifer on whose doorstep Pacquiao serendipitously landed all those years ago. 
Their rapport frequently resembles a buddy film after 15 years together – 
“Longer than most marriages,” Roach quipped – a partnership that rates with 
Ali-Dundee, Louis-Blackburn and Frazier-Futch among prizefighting’s most 
storied trainer-fighter tandems.

Pacquiao, the two-term congressman from Sarangani province, was here to 
formally announce his forthcoming rubber match with Timothy Bradley on 9 April 
at the MGM Grand, a fight that’s been received with a collective yawn in the 
weekssince it was made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/31/manny-pacquiao-april-fight-timothy-bradley>
 despite Pacquiao’s insistence it will be his final professional bout. Bradley 
is one of the finest of his generation, a probable Hall of Famer and genuinely 
good person who gets a fraction of the appreciation he deserves. But the 
consensus is there’s nothing left to decide between the pair, Pacquiao having
won their second fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/13/pacquiao-bradley-welterweight-points-win-mayweather>
 convincingly after ahighly disputed split-decision loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/10/timothy-bradley-manny-pacquiao-split-decision>
 in the first.

The 37-year-old insists he’s not walking away because he can no longer 
compete, but because of the forthcoming senatorial election on 9 May in his 
nativePhilippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, an office 
he’s expected to win that will consume far more time than his current duties as 
a congressman. From there it is believed that Pacquiao, long driven by a 
quasi-messianic desire to stamp out the very poverty that spat him out, could 
make a serious run for the presidency in 2022. The guaranteed $20m purse he’s 
due for April’s fight will no doubt boost his war chest.

On Thursday he was introspective about his accomplishments, taking measure of 
a career that’s included titles in a record-breaking eight different weight 
classes while becoming a transcendent figure the world over, cracking the 
mainstream like no other Asian-born athlete in history and becoming the most 
socially important boxer since Muhammad Ali.

“Before when I was young I didn’t really know boxing, what is boxing,” he 
said. “I got into boxing to help my mother and to help my family. Now the funny 
thing is I end my boxing career because I want to help the countrymen, my 
fellow countrymen.”

Pacquiao was at ease as he issued assessments on topics from professional 
basketball (favorite players: Stephen Curry, Chris Paul and Derrick Rose) to 
Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump (a “friendly guy” who “speaks 
not like a politician, he’s direct, to the point”). Yet as secure as his sense 
of purpose does seem as he readies to life after boxing, a persisting sense of 
unfinished business from hisdefeat by Floyd Mayweather Jr in last year’s 
super-fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/floyd-mayweather-beats-manny-pacquiao-on-points-to-remain-unbeaten>
 clearly tugs at both fighter and trainer. It didn’t take long for Thursday’s 
conversation to pivot in that direction.

During the first three rounds Pacquiao struggled to negotiate his way inside 
the accurate, punishing right hand of Mayweather, who made full use of his 
five-inch reach advantage. But midway through the fourth, Pacquiao connected 
with a straight left that snapped his Mayweather’s head back, one of the rare 
moments the American has appeared vulnerable in his career. Instinctively, he 
went in for the kill, pouring on rapid-fire combinations into Mayweather’s 
turtle-shell defense.

That’s when he felt it, Pacquiao described on Thursday, snapping his fingers 
for emphasis.


“When I backed off,” he recalled, “I felt like I lost my right hand.”

The shoulder injury, which he says was initially suffered in a jet ski 
accident in 2009, had been a non-issue throughout training. Five days later 
Pacquiao underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair a torn rotator cuff by Dr 
Neal ElAttrache, whose patients have included Tom Brady and Kobe Bryant. This 
week ElAttrache gave him a clean bill of health, which Pacquiao’s longtime 
advisor Michael Koncz said was one of the prerequisite requirements for 
licensing by the Nevada Athletic Commission.

On Thursday, Roach made it clear that if Pacquiao wins convincingly against 
Bradley, a push should be made to make a rematch with Mayweather.

“That fight really bothers me,” Roach said. “I haven’t even watched it again 
because I’m so pissed off about the first one, because I thought Manny could 
have made that fight much easier than he did. Manny thought he won the fight 
anyway, but I think he could have done a lot more. When he came back after the 
fourth round and he said my shoulder’s shot, I said do the best you can. He 
still thinks he won the fight but I don’t.

“It was a big event, but it didn’t turn out to be a big fight. I know Manny 
can do a lot better than he did and make it a much more exciting fight. I’m not 
going to blame the arm completely because in the dressing room it wasn’t a 
problem at all.”

Pacquiao said on Thursday that he’s watched the fight several times and scores 
it seven rounds to five in his favor, believing his role as the aggressor 
should have carried more weight from the ringside arbiters. “I’m throwing a lot 
of punches, he threw a few punches,” he said. “I respect the decision of the 
judges. That’s boxing. But if you ask me inside my heart, I believe I won.”

Four months into his rehabilitation, Pacquiao said he decided this would be 
the last fight of a career that’s spanned 419 rounds since he turned pro as a 
106-pounder in 1995. A list of six prospective opponents was settled on: 
Mayweather, Bradley, Danny Garcia, Adrien Broner, Amir Khan and Juan Manuel 
Marquez. He said Mayweather was the preferred choice, but was ruled out after 
he announced his own retirement following aSeptember win over Andre Berto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/floyd-mayweather-finishes-up-unbeaten-after-one-sided-victory-over-andre-berto>
.

Roach, when asked privately on Thursday, said he “would not be surprised” to 
see either Pacquiao or Mayweather fight past their self-proclaimed retirements.

“The way they both spend money, maybe they will fight again,” he said. “Manny 
is running for senator and that’s going to cost him a lot of money. That’s how 
votes go in his country: you pay for votes.”

He added: “You get really addicted to the sport, and it’s very hard to retire. 
It’s very hard to realize that you’re all done. I remember when it happened to 
me. It should have happened a little earlier. It’s a very addictive sport.”

For now a desperately hungry Bradley, who teamed with trainer Teddy Atlas last 
year, is the focus. A seven-week training camp will convene on 2 February for 
three weeks in the Philippines before relocating to the Wild Card for the final 
month. Among the sparring partners handpicked by Pacquiao is Frankie Gomez, a 
Roach prospect he’s tabbed as a future world champion.

“When he picks someone like that,” Roach said. “[I know] he still wants his 
sparring partners to be real fighters and not washed up guys that he can just 
beat up.

“When I see him in the gym he still has that work ethic. He works really hard. 
He still has it. He’s asked me in the past many times, ‘When I’m shot will you 
tell me?’ and I tell him I’ll be the first one to tell you. ‘Will you retire 
when I tell you?’ and he says, ‘Of course I will.’ But he’s not shot yet.”

 * This article was changed on Friday January 22 to correct the name of 
Pacquiao’s sparring partner. He is Frankie Gomez, not Freddie.  