
José Mourinho came down the steps of the bus, walked into the Molinón flanked 
by four security guards and made his way to the VIP box, a safe distance from 
the touchline where his nemesis was prowling. Outside, an angry mob abused him. 
He couldn't hear them from behind the glass but, glancing across at the 
banners, he couldsee what they were saying – in graphic, if badly drawn, 
detail. But he just gazed out, impassive, making notes, occasionally reaching 
for the walkie talkie. At half-time, he was led down the stairs, along the 
corridor and into the dressing room. At the end, with Madrid having beaten
Sporting Gijón <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> 1-0 thanks 
to an 82nd-minute goal, he was escorted back to the team coach.

Where, back behind the glass, he raised two fingers.

He had won the battle. Cristiano Ronaldo complained of "anti-football" but 
although it was a fast, tough game, it was not the violent encounter those who 
seem to want every side in Spain to roll out the red carpet for Madrid and 
Barcelona have decried. Not least because Sporting played much as Sporting 
normally play at the Molinón. And the way that Ronaldo reacted to the last of 
the six fouls on him, leaping to his feet, puffing out his chest and shouting 
"¡más! ¡más!", suggested that maybe he had even enjoyed it.¡Más! ¡Más! Bring it 
on! <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NZHM8PKtu14>

Sporting brought it on. But it ended with another Madrid victory, a sixth in a 
row. Ronaldo, though determined and impressively resolute, was unable to make 
much impact; Mesut Ozil was anonymous; and even Angel Di María, so impressive 
lately, made way early. Yet Karim Benzema again came on to change the match – 
his header, saved by Juan Pablo, fell at the feet of Gonzalo Higuaín, enabling 
the man who never scores important goals to score another important goal. 
Immediately, Iker Casillas dived to stop David Barral header. It was his second 
save –the first was a neat catch on a sandwich thrown his way 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zISRWtWc8UA> – and it secured victory, taking 
Madrid back on the top of the table and leaving Sporting only one point off the 
relegation zone.

Madrid had proven themselves resilient, competitive, aggressive. A team in 
Mourinho's image. But it was still not over and if Madrid had won the battle, 
it wasn't clear that Mourinho had won the war. Maybe Manolo Preciado had.

For those who don't know him, Preciado has the most magnificent moustache 
known to managers. The kind of thick, bushy facial foliage you could hide a 
family of badgers in, a tache that completely covers his lip. And that's saying 
something because the Sporting Gijón coach has alot of lip. He's also got a lot 
of heart; he probably would hide a family of badgers in there if he thought it 
would help. He could hardly be earthier if he swallowed soil daily, lighting up 
a crafty fag on the back row of the dugout before steaming up and down the 
touchline like a wind-up toy, punching the air. But not before he's turned it 
blue. And this weekend he helped turn it bluer than ever before.

Preciado is like a Cantabrian Ian Dury, a people's poet and street philosopher 
with the deep gravely voice of the chain-smoker, floor vibrating with every 
word;the man who promised he would "bite" David Villa if he came too close to 
his touchline during one game but gave him a cuddle afterwards 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2009/apr/13/david-villa-sporting-gijon-valencia-sid-lowe>
, claimed that Joaquín was "as dangerous as a monkey with a gun", and, after a 
good run followed a terrible one, insisted that: "We're not Bayern Leverkusen 
now … and back then we weren't the last crap Pontius Pilate ever took." The man 
who claimed that: "This is a cheap team but it's one with a pair of bollocks 
like General Espartero's horse."

He could have been talking about himself. Preciado certainly has a pair. A 
widower whose wife died from cancer and whose 15-year-old son was killed in a 
car crash, he says he had two choices: "I could have shot myself or I could 
have carried on." He chose the latter. A former Racing Santander player and 
lifelong fan, he became their coachjust as Dimitry Piterman took over 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2003/jan/29/europeanfootball.sport> – "I 
moved into my dream home but a pigeon flew by and shat on my roof" – but he 
couldn't be more loved by fans 160 kilometres along the coast. He brought 
Sporting back after 10 years, kept his best players – one told him he would 
only stay if Preciado did – and kept his side up. His other son travels 
everywhere with fans and he clearly cares. When his side performed pathetically 
at Getafe, he declared himself "as overheated as a hippy's motorbike".

And that's pretty overheated. But nowhere near as overheated as Preciado got 
this week.

It all started on Friday afternoon. Well, actually, it all started back in 
September when Sporting travelled to the Camp Nou to face Barcelona and rested 
a number of starters. It didn't matter that they made life difficult for Pep 
Guardiola's side, who could win only 1-0, Mourinho was furious. Asked how many 
points his side would need to take the league off Barça he replied "the league 
is theirs". Sporting had gifted the win. "If that happens a lot," Mourinho 
said, "it will be very hard." At first, Preciado was prepared to let it go – he 
even told one interviewer "I like Mourinho" – but the Madrid coach repeated the 
accusation on the radio late on Thursday night and insisted that the decision 
should be punished. Suddenly, Mick McCarthy was known in Spain.

Preciado was listening, heating up like a hippy's motorbike. "In September I 
thought he'd just got it wrong but then I hear him again and not only does he 
not take it back, he goes and extends it. If no one atReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> is going to tell this bloke 
how to behave, I will," Preciado spat. "Who the fuck does he think he is to say 
things like that? Who does he think he is to say that about a team like us: a 
humble side that fights to the very last to stay in the top flight? Well, we 
might be poor but we're not idiots. He is a bad colleague, egotistical."

"He is a canalla."

Now canalla is not easy to translate. Some dictionaries will tell you it's 
swine or rotter, but it's not really. Even Marca decided it was necessary to 
offer a translation: a low person, callous or mean, despicable. Depending on 
its stress, it has connotations of grubbiness, of a lack of morality; in 
certain circumstances in plural –as the world's great ever book underlines on 
pages 19, 84 and 119 <http://www.sussex-academic.com/sa/titles/history/lowe.htm>
 – it would be a rabble, hoards, scum. Roughly, Mourinho was a lowlife, a 
scumbag.

It was, in short, pretty strong. Marca insisted that Preciado had gone too 
far. And yet, strikingly, almost everyone else was behind him. Many blamed 
Mourinho. He had got a taste of his own medicine; he had deserved it. He who 
sows winds reaps storms, as the phrase goes. Across the country, coaches were 
asked what they thought; most said Preciado had been entitled to defend 
himself. Privately, one coach admitted he would have loved to have said the 
same. Preciado, already hugely popular, his often funny foul mouth lauded, 
somehow emerged even more popular. Mourinho, already disliked beyond Madrid, 
got insulted and somehow emerged less popular. Mourinho had been suspended 
after telling a referee where to go in the previous game: when Preciado said 
that, rather than give him a VIP box, Sporting should stick him in with the 
hardcore Ultra Boys, most thought it funny.

Sporting's fans knew whose side they were on. The stadium that, in 1979, 
invented the now infamous "¡Así, así, así, gana el Madrí!" chant – the "that's 
how Madrid win" mantra that accompanies perceived acts of cheating of 
refereeing favours – was ready. Whistles and boos greeted Mourinho, along with 
chants of "Ese portugés, hijo puta es", while Ronaldo, his representative on 
the pitch, got the kicks they wanted to give him. The banners were out in 
force. "You might have millions, but you've got no bollocks," ran one. "You're 
only in this division because of your wallet," said another. A third, in 
Asturian, said: "Mourinho, don't you come here and wind people up." Another 
seemed to be drawn up by a bunch of bored schoolboys in a science class. "Mr 
Mourinho," it said, ever so politely "sit here". "Here" was a roughly drawn 
penis with hairs spouting out of its sack.

Meanwhile, the ultra boys chanted: "Mourinho, sit with us. Mourinho, sit with 
us. Mourinho sit with uuuuuuuuus!"

Instead he sat silently in his box. And, victorious, on his bus. Inside, 
Preciado was talking to the media. "Maybe I went too far in the way I said it, 
because I'm a bit of a brute," he conceded. "But not in the point I was making: 
I am very proud of what I said. I'd say it all over again; maybe in a different 
way but I would. I think the best way to say some things, the best way to 
defend yourself, is out loud." And with that, he got up and walked to his car. 
As he made his way across the car park, Mourinho waved two fingers his way – "I 
don't know if it was a V for victory or a 2 for the Second Division, but I can 
imagine," Preciado said. He didn't need to imagine. Someone came down the 
stairs of the Madrid bus and started shouting about how Sporting were going 
down.

And maybe they are. But not without a fight.

Talking Points

• Well, that's that sorted then. La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> is a two-horse race – but 
definitely not because the third horse is a donkey. Saturday night at 10pm was 
set up as the game that would test the theory that it's only about the Big Two. 
AS called it the "bipolar test", which sounds like something else entirely, 
while Marca mumbled something about an attack on the "duopoly". Barcelona 
versus Villarreal at Camp Nou. Second versus third. Barcelona against the only 
side to take points from them at home last year – a side that had gone three 
years unbeaten at the Camp Nou.

And Villarreal were great. Thing is, Barcelona were greater. It finished 3-1 
with two for Leo Messi, one for David Villa and one for Nilmar. Forget the 
flatness of recent weeks; forget the imbalance; forget the rubbish games; and 
forget the whinging and the whining, the crying and the conspiracies – although 
it is hard to when El Mundo Deportivo manages to give over half of their match 
report to a long bout of chip-on-shoulder blubbing. Forget the forgetfulness – 
"Mourinho gets a cold and it's bigger news than us going nine weeks unbeaten," 
said Santi Cazorla, quite rightly. Forget all that. Because this was a game to 
restore your faith. It was absolutely stunning, proper fun with a proper 
atmosphere and proper football.

"Most teams go to the Camp Nou and change their game," said Borja Valero. "But 
we won't." He was as good as his word. Villarreal attacked Barcelona. And 
Barcelona attacked them back. It was precise, fast, intense and technically 
impeccable. The kind of game where you feel like giving three out of three to 
every player. Villarreal were beaten but they had proven a point and could be 
hugely satisfied. Cazorla was still grinning after the game. (Mind you, he's 
always grinning). "They're the only team I have seen come and play just like 
us," said Dani Alves. "But we've got Messi." Villa scored a sensational first. 
Barcelona then got a second which was wrongly disallowed and immediately Nilmar 
clipped in an equally sensational equaliser. Then Messi, who later added the 
third, made it 2-1, playing two, first time one-twos with Pedro before lifting 
it over Diego Lopez from a tight angle.

Ping-ping-ping-ping … pop!

• Messi's goal might not have been the week's best. And not just because 
Villa's and Nilmar's might have been. Royston Drenthe scored a blinder of a 
free-kick to clinch a victory for Hércules, while Tino Costa smashed a proper 
rocket for Valencia against Getafe – on the chest, on the volley, back of the 
net. Oh, OK, let's face it, Messi's goalwas the best.

• Jari Jarosik, a man who really shouldn't be playing top-flight football any 
more and may not be for much longer even if he does stay at Real Zaragoza, blew 
it. Really blew it. He tried to perform a back-heel even though he was the last 
man and it was the last minute. The result was depressingly predictable: Alvaro 
Negredo took it off him, ran through and scored to make it 2-1 and leave 
Zaragoza at the bottom of the table and coach José Aurelio Gay desperately 
clinging to his job.The headline on AS's website <http://bit.ly/bFwiSY> after 
the game read: "Gay: 'we do things we shouldn't do'." Which provokes one very 
important question: who was on the desk last night, Jan Moir?

• Athletic Bilbao beat Almería 1-0 despite missing a penalty. Diego Alves 
saved the spot kick from Mikel San José to keep up a ridiculously good record: 
he has now faced 14 penalties in Spain and conceded only four. But in the end 
that wasn't the story on Saturday night. What was was the fact that Athletic 
Bilbao beat Almería 1-0 dispite being down to nine man after having both of 
their left-backs sent off (on the day in which their first-choice left-back was 
suspended). Only they didn't. Not according to Iker Muniaín. "It was 11 against 
40,000," he said. "We were never going to lose." The man bought down was 
Almería's Henok Goitom, whose shirt seemed at first to have come out the tumble 
dryer funny. Or maybe there had been a printing error. In fact, he had written 
his name in Tigrinya, the language of Eritrea. "Eritrea is a small country and 
a new one: they need all the help they can get and it's my heritage, that's why 
I did it," Goitom explained.

• That broken heart just doesn't mend, does it? Jilted lover Marca is still 
hopelessly bitter; the hate still flows freely. According to their online match 
report, which always has a "Best" and "Worst", the worst thing about Málaga's 
game against Levante was Manuel Pellegrini. So what did the Chilean do? Send 
out a dreadful side? Get his substitutions all wrong? Screw up his tactics? 
Throw away a lead? Lose again? Or did he, in his first ever game in charge, 
take Málaga to a first home win of the season and take them off the bottom? See 
if you can guess.

Results: Athletic 1-0 Almería, Atlético 3-0 Osasuna, Barcelona 3-1 Villarreal, 
Zaragoza 1-2 Sevilla, Hércules 2-1 Real Sociedad, Racing 0-0 Espanyol, Malaga 
1-0 Levante, Mallorca 0-0 Deportivo, Sporting 0-1 Real Madrid, Valencia 2-0 
Getafe.

Latest La Liga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=29&CPID=68>
 