
Export orders have picked up for the first time in 18 months and shoppers have 
returned to the high streets, raising hopes that the worst of the economic 
slowdown may be over.

 While the manufacturing sector is still contracting, according to the latest 
survey from the Chartered Institute and Supply, activity in March was the 
highest for 10 months. The news failed to help the pound which fell to a 
two-week low against the euro and its weakest in nearly four weeks against the 
dollar, undermined by expectations that British interest rates will be cut next 
week.'The pace of decline indicated by the Purchasing Managers Index has eased 
sharply in recent months, largely as a result of stronger demand for exports,' 
the institute said. The survey recorded a significant improvement in demand 
from Europe, the US, and East Asia, while the fall in the value of the pound 
over the last year was reported to have helped boost demand overseas.

 'Today's report reinforces the view that the [decline in the] manufacturing 
industry is bottoming out,' said David Coleman from CIBC World Markets. 
'Overall the survey suggests that the weakest sector of the British economy is 
coming back to life.'The more upbeat reports from manufacturers were echoed by 
separate figures released by the Confederation of British Industry which showed 
that high-street sales increased at their fastest pace last month since 
September.

 The CBI's monthly survey of distributive trades sector showed that 41 per 
cent of retailers reported higher than normal sales while 27 per cent said they 
were down, giving a positive balance of 14 per cent. In February the balance of 
optimistic firms was only 2 per cent. The confederation warned, however, that 
the sales pick-up was patchy. While chemists, grocers and shoe shops reported 
strong sales increases, furniture, carpet shops and clothing stores recorded 
falls.

 'The willingness of consumers to spend remains rather weak and together with 
the evidence of weakening in wage and price pressures across the economy, 
supports the CBI's view that a further cut in interest rates should be made 
next week,' said Alastair Eperon, head of the CBI's Distributive Trades Survey 
Panel.

 The pound fell to $1.60 against the dollar at one point, more than a cent 
down on Friday's high and its weakest since March 8. The euro gained more than 
1 per cent against sterling, finishing at 0.67 from 0.66p at the start of the 
day.
 