
The British economy is beginning to fire on all cylinders, with manufacturing 
bouncing back from recession to record the strongest growth for 18 months, 
according to a survey published yesterday. The turnaround is combined with 
continued expansion in the services sector.

Manufacturing has been contracting for more than a year as the strong pound 
hammered exports. Meanwhile the service sector has benefited from the less 
depressed domestic market. The monthly snapshot of industry by the Chartered 
Institute of Purchasing and Supply suggests the two-speed economy will soon be 
a problem of the past. Manufacturers' order books strengthened in July for the 
fourth month running, with exports hitting a record high and domestic demand 
being bolstered by growing consumer confidence.

Exports were hit by the strength of the pound compared with the euro but 
sterling's recent weakness against the dollar has improved the competitiveness 
of British goods in the US and there has been a marked improvement in demand 
from recovering Asia, said the CIPS. "UK manufacturing appears leaner and 
fitter, with reduction in turn-around between purchasing, through production, 
to sale," said Roy Ayliffe, of the CIPS.

However, employment contracted for the 17th month in a row and there was a 
further fall in prices, though the rate of deflation was the weakest for 3 
years because of rising oil prices and generally higher dollar-denominated 
commodity prices.

A separate survey of eurozone manufacturing, compiled by NTC Research, showed 
a sharp acceleration in inflation pressures last month. Analysts said the 
surveys pointed to higher interest rates in Britain and the euro zone. The City 
is anticipating an increase in the Bank of England's repo rate from 5% to 6.5% 
by the end of next year to contain upward price pressures, though Michael 
Saunders, UK economist at Salomon Smith Barney Citibank, said with inflation 
undershooting the government's 2.5% target, a long period of borrowing cost 
stability was likely.
 