
What a difference a week makes. Seven days after Garry Monk lambasted his 
players for an “unacceptable” home defeat that lacked heart or desire, the 
Leeds manager found himself hailing a performance that brought back the pride 
in a derby victory at Hillsborough.

Monk, whose job security has come under scrutiny since an opening 3-0 defeat 
at QPR, was able to say: “We were the better team against a very good Wednesday 
side that is one of the benchmarks in this division.” Nor was he wrong. Leeds 
thoroughly deserved the first win of the season that came via goals from the 
strikers Marcus Antonsson and Chris Wood.

The former Swansea manager has been around long enough to understand the ebbs 
and flows. “We’re still not the team we want to be,” he said. “We’ve got a long 
way to go but we’re improving with every game. This performance will give them 
belief. You can see the potential but this league is unforgiving and there will 
be setbacks.”

Monk refused even to consider the effect on the club’s owner, Massimo Cellino, 
who is notoriously trigger-happy – “I’ve a year’s contract and I’m very focused 
on my job – I’m trying to develop them as quickly as possible but it takes 
time” – and insisted the day belonged to the players who celebrated with Leeds 
fans at the end.

In fact the stage had been set for a triumphant return of Wednesday’s 
prodigal, with their favourite son, Fernando Forestieri, reinstated after going 
awol, but instead it belonged to Antonsson, the 25-year-old striker signed from 
Sweden this summer, and Wood, who shrugged off the jeers that followed his 
substitution in last week’s defeat by Birmingham.

Forestieri, the player they call the Little Maestro around Hillsborough, was 
back in the team after last week’s unedifying episode and looking like a man 
keen to make up for lost time.

Burnley v Liverpool, Watford v Chelsea and more: football clockwatch – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/20/burnley-v-liverpool-watford-v-chelsea-and-more-football-clockwatch-live>
Having refused to travel to Norwich, with rumours rife about strong interest 
from Newcastle and Derby, Forestieri, told that he was going nowhere by the 
owner, Dejphon Chansiri, sat on the naughty bench in midweek to watch the 2-1 
defeat at Burton.

If there was any suggestion he might have fallen out of favour with 
supporters, that was dispelled by the cheer that greeted his name when the 
teams were announced and he set about reassuring any wavering hearts with a 
typical performance.

That he was not rewarded with a goal for his first-half efforts was down to 
the Leeds centre-half Liam Cooper, who headed off the line when Forestieri 
rounded the goalkeeper, Rob Green, before shooting from an angle, as much as 
his own wayward finishing when he side-footed past a post after Charlie 
Taylor’s mistake let him in.

The Leeds fans’ taunting chant of “Forestieri, he doesn’t want to play” soon 
disappeared but so too did Wednesday’s dominance as Leeds came into the picture 
after an anxious opening 20 minutes.

Ronaldo Vieira, unlikely ever to live up to his illustrious football mash-up 
name, did his best to engineer a Leeds lead but his fine through-ball found 
Hadi Sacko only for the Frenchman to steer past Keiren Westwood at a pace that 
left him unable to keep it in play. Vieira also played Antonsson in for a 
reasonable chance a minute later only to see his team-mate fire wide in haste.

In the end it was Wednesday who almost went into the interval ahead, with 
Daniel Pudil’s carefully flighted free-kick from outside the box clipping the 
top of the crossbar five minutes before the break.

Carlos Carvalhal, the Wednesday manager, sent on Gary Hooper, a player with a 
good scoring record against Leeds, but it was Monk’s side that eventually broke 
the deadlock, turning defence into attack on 63 minutes, with to work the ball 
upfield following Taylor’s initial break from the last third, until Sacko’s 
cross reacheding the unmarked Antonsson for a diving header at the far post 
that he could hardly miss.

Leeds, superbly led by captain and centre-half Liam Cooper, sealed their 
victory on 84 minutes when the substitute Kemar Roofe crossed for Wood to 
finish clinically in front of the Leeds fans massed on the Leppings Lane end.
 