
Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 
experienced a rollercoaster of emotions before completing victory over Mainz 05 
on Friday, a first home win of the year that moved them out of the Bundesliga 
relegation zone.

Last season’s runners-up were indebted to Marco Reus, who this week extended 
his contract with the club until 2019, as the German international scored one 
goal and set up another to lift them into 14th spot with 22 points.

The visitors shocked Dortmund in the first minute when the goalkeeper, Roman 
Weidenfeller, failed to clear after a mistake and Elkin Soto lobbed the ball 
into his unguarded net from the edge of the penalty area.

“Their lead was slapstick. Terrible goal,” the Dortmund coach, Juergen Klopp, 
said afterwards. “We were unlucky to hit the post but we knew we would get our 
chances if we kept up the pressure.

“If we stay compact we are brutally strong. Then we scored the goals and 
everything was fine.“

Dortmund, despite having their backs to the wall after a dismal first half of 
the campaign, kept their cool and Reus almost equalised a minute later in a 
furious start to the game as his powerful shot rattled the goal frame.

Mainz’s reserve keeper, Stefanos Kapino, making his first Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> start, then did well 
to deny Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang.

Dortmund finally struck five minutes after the restart when Neven Subotic beat 
his marker to head in a corner and spark wild celebrations among the home fans 
who had jeered the team off at half-time.

The hosts, who take on Juventus in the Champions League last 16 later this 
month, then turned the game round with Reus charging through to beat Kapino 
after Kevin Kampl’s fine assist.

Mainz, who are 13th, bounced back as the Lebanese Yunus Malli beat 
Weidenfeller, who has struggled this season and briefly lost his place, to 
equalise in the 56th minute and stun the 80,000 crowd.

Reus, though, came to the rescue for Dortmund by delivering a superb curling 
pass with the outside of his boot to beat the offside trap and send Aubameyang 
through to make it 3-2 in the 71st minute.

Nuri Sahin’s 78th-minute goal sealed Dortmund’s second consecutive victory in 
the league and hauled them out of the relegation zone for the first time since 
early December.

On Saturday the leaders Bayern Munich will try to protect their eight-point 
advantage against Hamburg SV while second-placed VfL Wolfsburg take on Bayer 
Leverkusen.
 