
Marco Fu lost his cue tip but not his nerve as he levelled his World 
Championship semi-final againstMark Selby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mark-selby> at 8-8.

Fu had started the afternoon trailing 5-3 but outplayed the world No1 and was 
looking to take the lead in the 15th frame when the unthinkable happened.

While chalking his cue and glancing at the table mid-break, Fu nudged the tip 
off and joined the Crucible crowd in shock as he realised what had happened.

BBC television analysts Stephen Hendry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stephen-hendry> and Steve Davis, owners of a 
combined 13 world titles, were equally surprised and suggested the incident 
could upset Fu’s progress in the best-of-33 encounter. But, after an interlude 
for running repairs, he showed no concerns with his amended equipment and 
closed out the frame with a break of 81.

Selby, who had been short of his best throughout, won the last frame to ensure 
they would resume on Saturday with nothing between them but not before both men 
made glaring errors.

Fu looked to have it won before he botched the final red, a mistake his rival 
then matched before a sloppy safety shot from Fu finally settled matters in 
Selby’s favour. He finished with a break of 81, his best of the day compared 
with a pair of centuries from Fu, who made 135 and 114.

In the other semi-final the former world No1 Ding Junhui manoeuvred himself 
close to the finishing line against Alan McManus as he moved 14-10 clear, 
having been seven balls away from a maximum in the 20th frame.

The 29-year-old from China was nudging towards a 147 break and it began to 
look a formality until he tripped up on position and over-cut the 15th black to 
stall on 113.

Had he made that, and added the colours, it would have been an 11th maximum at 
the Crucible. It would also have been the first since Hendry achieved the feat 
against Stuart Bingham in 2012, and worth £30,000 in bonuses to Ding.

He received a consolatory standing ovation having posted his sixth century of 
the match to equal the tournament record, set previously by Selby and Ronnie 
O’Sullivan.

It also earned Ding and McManus an entry in the history books all to 
themselves, with their nine centuries in the contest placing them one ahead of 
the previous high mark, which had been achieved five times previously.

McManus earlier savoured an ovation of his own during a startling scoring run 
as he reeled in Ding from 9-3 to 9-8, before the momentum switched. At 45 
McManus is the oldest man to reach the last four at the Crucible since Ray 
Reardon in 1985 and he made breaks of 107, 136 and 125 during a mesmerising 
morning session.

The crowd, with many Scots populating the arena, roared on McManus throughout 
the evening but Ding refused to yield as he improved the prospect of an 
arguably overdue first final appearance in Sheffield, his adopted home.
 