
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, who 
has died aged 87, was a political phenomenon. She was the first woman elected 
to lead a major western power; the longest serving British prime minister for 
150 years; the most dominant and the most divisive force in British politics in 
the second half of the 20th century. She was also a global figure, a star in 
the US, a heroine in the former Soviet republics of central Europe, a point of 
reference for politicians in France, Germany, Italy and Spain.

In Britain, the Thatcher years were a watershed. After them, the ideals of 
collective effort, full employment and a managed economy – all tarnished by the 
recurring crises of the 1970s – were discredited in the popular imagination. 
They were replaced with the politics of me and mine, deregulation of the 
markets and privatisation of the state's assets that echoed growing individual 
prosperity. Thatcher did not cause these changes, but she legitimised and 
embedded them. Her belief in the moral authority of the individual and the 
imperative of freedom of choice led left as well as right to reappraise the 
welfare state. Her perception of economics, society and Britain's place in the 
world continue to shape British politics.

It is often claimed that she gave no warning of the revolution she was about 
to unleash when she won her first majority in 1979. In fact, although the 
official manifesto was opaque, her speeches in the years between defeating
Edward Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives> 
for the leadership of the Conservative party in 1975 and coming to power laid 
out the ideology that underpinned her policies over the next 11 years.

Thatcher was pragmatic about her methods but constant in her targets: 
socialism, the Labour party and above all the collectivist state that Labour, 
abetted by one-nation postwar Conservatism, had constructed. She believed that 
the state was a burden on private enterprise. Its cost was crippling the 
economy and overloading it with debt. Vested interest had been allowed to 
flourish, most notably in the trade unions but also in the nationalised 
industries of coal, steel and telecommunications.

Many others shared her analysis. The strength of her beliefs gave her the 
courage to push on where others might have conciliated. She came to ignore 
criticism with a ruthlessness that was in the end her undoing.

She was not the only person who saw a world divided between good and evil. 
What marked her out was a willingness to say so, abroad as well as at home. 
Soviet leaders, after years of detente, were startled to find their regime 
denounced as the embodiment of inhumanity, bent on military expansion. Before 
she had won a general election vote in the UK, Thatcher had won the sobriquet 
overseas of the Iron Lady.

Only an outsider could have given birth to an ideology as iconoclastic as 
Thatcherism, and Thatcher always regarded herself as a challenger of the status 
quo, a rebel leader against established power. What mattered to her was less 
the breadth of her support than the depth of her convictions.

In time, there grew around her a mythology that rooted her absolute faith in 
the individual in her upbringing above the grocer's shop in the Lincolnshire 
town of Grantham. She was the second of two daughters of Alderman Alfred 
Roberts and his wife, Beatrice. The two girls were educated at Kesteven and 
Grantham girls' school, and at 17 Margaret won a place to study chemistry at 
Somerville College, Oxford, where she was tutored by the future Nobel 
prizewinner Dorothy Hodgkin (with whom she remained on respectful terms, 
despite Hodgkin's passionate opposition to nuclear weapons). She graduated in 
1947.

Less than two years later she was selected to contest the hopeless Kent seat 
of Dartford, despite the reservations of some party activists who were appalled 
at the prospect of a 23-year-old woman as their candidate. She contested 
Dartford in both the 1950 and 1951 general elections.

It was at a social function after her first adoption meeting that she met 
Denis Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jun/26/guardianobituaries.past>, a 
businessman with a passion for rugby who had earlier rejected the chance of 
fighting the seat himself. Denis drove the candidate back to London. Well-off, 
divorced and amiable, Denis ran his family paint firm, which was later absorbed 
into Burmah Oil. They were married in December 1951. In 1953, their twins, Mark 
and Carol, were born. Denis, it was claimed, spent the day at a cricket match – 
Carol later called their marriage "a partnership of parallel lives" – and while 
still in the maternity hospital, Margaret signed up to study for her bar 
finals. She was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1954.

For a young woman with a new family, to become an MP was unprecedented. But in 
1958, she was selected for the rock-solid north London constituency 
of Finchley, the seat she represented from October 1959 until she retired 
at the general election in 1992.

In October 1961, after only 20 months on the backbenches, the then prime 
minister, Harold Macmillan, made Thatcher a junior pensions minister (a job she 
later gave to her own successor, John Major). It would be nearly 30 years 
before she returned to the backbenches. In 1967, with her party in opposition, 
she was promoted to the shadow cabinet by the new party leader, Heath, and when 
he won the election of June 1970, she became education secretary, the only 
woman in the cabinet.

Here, her public reputation was made as "Thatcher the milk-snatcher", the 
minister who cut spending by ending universal free milk for primary school 
children. It was a defining moment, but also a rare breach of the 
Conservatives' unwillingness to disturb the postwar consensus. Much more in 
keeping was her continuation of Labour's plan to replace grammar schools with 
comprehensives.

But she was at the ringside as Heath's experiments in monetarism and 
industrial relations legislation crashed and burned. Heath resumed 
the interventionist policies of the 1950s. In February 1974, as a miners' 
overtime ban prompted power cuts and the introduction of a three-day working 
week, Heath asked: "Who governs Britain?" He lost the general election. 
Thatcher later claimed she had always been uncomfortable with Heath's 
consensual approach. At the time, however, she was silent and loyal.

However, after Harold Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1995/may/25/obituaries> narrowly won a 
second election victory in October 1974, Thatcher was among the embryonic new 
right preparing to challenge Heath. Its intellectual leader wasKeith Joseph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1994/dec/12/obituaries>, but his chance 
of leading the party vanished with a notorious speech, claiming that the poor 
had too many children. Thatcher decided she would put her name forward for the 
contest. "Someone who represents our viewpoint has to stand," she told Joseph. 
Denis told her she was out of her mind, a view echoed in every newspaper. To a 
party that could not decide whether it was worse to be female or to be 
suburban, she appeared entirely unelectable.

Yet she defeated Heath in the first ballot and four other contenders in the 
second. The beaten favourites includedWilliam Whitelaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/jul/02/guardianobituaries.obituaries>, 
the man who was later her indispensable deputy. She won in an ambush that 
capitalised on discontent with Heath rather than positive enthusiasm for her. 
As a result, she was never sure of her party: "Is he one of us?" became the 
defining question of the next 11 years. Many of her backbench colleagues shared 
the prevailing view in the Labour government that Thatcher's leadership made 
the Tories unelectable. She worked assiduously to meet a barrage of criticism – 
criticisms that often focused as much on attributes of gender as on matters of 
policy. Her hair, her clothes and particularly her voice were attacked. 
Politics remained a largely male preserve, about the strength to confront, 
whether it was trade union power, economic crisis or Soviet threat.

Thatcher's only cabinet-level experience had been in a relative backwater. She 
had always conformed to the norms of a woman in public life. Engaged in 
discourse largely with men, she observed the conventions, flirted, sometimes 
shouted and occasionally wept. Her advisers emphasised the feminine, softened 
her appearance and lowered her voice. Yet she was always most authentic when 
she was defiant. If a single phrase captured her political identity, it was 
from her 1980 party conference speech: "This lady's not for turning." She 
played by the rules that demanded that she present herself as soft and 
yielding, but by her diligent attention to detail, the concentration of her 
focus, and her appetite for conflict, ultimately she subverted them.

Thatcher drew up a new settlement with the welfare state, and organised labour 
and the City in a way that rewarded enterprise and individual effort over the 
collective and the communitarian. She regarded group interests, from trade 
unions to the professions, as protectors of privilege.

Although monetarism had already been forced upon the preceding Labour 
government by the International Monetary Fund, under Thatcher it was presented 
as a crusade, until it was discreetly abandoned in the mid-1980s.As the global 
slump reached its nadir in early 1981, she and her chancellor, Geoffrey Howe, 
defied all appeals for Keynesian-style reflation. In the first budget of the 
administration, VAT was nearly doubled to 15% while personal taxes were slashed 
– the top rate of income tax from 83% to 60%, and the standard rate from 33% to 
30%. Over the next 10 years, the standard rate came down to 25%, and the top 
rate to 40%. Interest rates were to be the principal method of controlling the 
money supply. Removing exchange controls was the first symbolic piece of 
deregulation. In September 1982, unemployment – which became the de facto 
weapon against the trade unions – reached 3 million.

A series of employment acts were introduced which ended trade unions' 
traditional show-of-hands votes and brought in secret pre-strike ballots as 
well as decennial votes on the political levy. Wages councils were constrained. 
In a second tranche of legislation in the late 1980s, the closed shop and 
secondary strike action were outlawed.

Thatcher thought the government had no role to play in public sector pay 
negotiations or in seeking to secure industrial peace. The steelworkers were 
the first to clash, and although, in 1981, planned pit closures were aborted to 
avert a miners' strike, by early 1984 the government was prepared – literally – 
for what was to be the last stand of the old trade union movement in its heavy 
industry heartland: the year-long showdown with the miners that culminated in 
mass closures and ultimately privatisation.

Thatcher shrugged off record personal unpopularity and relished facing down 
her critics. But she would not have survived without the crisis on the left 
which led to the formation of the breakaway Social Democratic party. In 1981 
there were riots in Brixton, south London, Toxteth in Liverpool and 
Manchester's Moss Side. From March 1984, striking miners and police were in 
frequent, violent confrontation. In 1985 Brixton erupted again, and there was 
rioting too in the Handsworth area of Birmingham. In the same year PC Keith 
Blakelock was murdered during disturbances on the Broadwater Farm estate in 
Tottenham, north London.

Privatisation <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/privatisation>, which came 
to be a fundamental of the Thatcherite mission, was only hinted at in 1979, and 
in the depression of the early 1980s caution prevailed. When the ailing 
nationalised motor manufacturer British Leyland ran into trouble in early 1980, 
Joseph, then Thatcher's industry minister, bailed it out like a Heathite. 
Nonetheless, in 1980-81 more than £400m was raised from selling shares in 
companies such as Ferranti and Cable and Wireless. Later came North Sea oil 
(Britoil) and British Ports, and from late 1984 the major sales of British 
Telecom, British Gas and British Airways, culminating at the end of the decade 
in water and electricity. By this time these sales were raising more than £5bn 
a year.

Conflict was at the heart of Thatcher's style. But it is a myth that she never 
ducked a challenge. Ever a pragmatist, she was astute in the fights she picked. 
The battles during her first term, from 1979 to 1983, ranged across 
a forbiddingly wide terrain and set the tone for the years to come. Not all of 
the challenges were sought: the IRA was behind many of them. In August 1979 
Lord Mountbatten and 18 soldiers were murdered in separate attacks. In April 
1980, she authorised the SAS to launch their live-on-TV rescue of 19 hostages 
from Iraqi-trained terrorists in the Iranian embassy siege. The following year, 
she refused to intervene to prevent the deaths of Bobby Sands and nine other 
republican hunger strikers in the Maze prison in NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

The IRA's mainland bombing campaign that ensued added to the impression of a 
government under siege. Airey Neave, who had run Thatcher's leadership 
campaign, had been assassinated by the Irish National Liberation Army just 
before the 1979 election. She lost another intimate,Ian Gow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1990/jul/31/obituaries.jonathanaitken>, 
at the hands of the IRA 10 years later. On 12 October 1984 the Provisionals' 
campaign nearly claimed Thatcher herself. Five people died in the bombing of 
the Grand hotel during the Conservative party conference in Brighton. Others, 
including the cabinet ministers Norman Tebbit and John Wakeham, were seriously 
injured.

The prime minister responded with resilience. Betraying no sign of shock, she 
delivered her speech to the conference later the same day, as planned. She was 
already negotiating with Dublin what was to become a year later the Anglo-Irish 
agreement, an attempt to improve security co-operation for which she faced down 
her Ulster Unionist friends and conceded the acceptance of an Irish dimension 
in the affairs of Northern Ireland. She did not seek a settlement, but with 
hindsight the agreement can be read as a major step in the peace process.

The conflict with which she was most closely identified, and the one that 
arguably rescued her from being just a one-term wonder, was the Falklands war. 
On 2 April 1982,General Leopoldo Galtieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jan/13/guardianobituaries.argentina> 
invaded the islands in the South Atlantic. Discussions about a leaseback and 
the removal of a naval patrol vessel had been misread as a sign that Britain 
was ready to abandon its distant colony. Thatcher, ignoring the initial advice 
given to her by much of her cabinet – and inspired by the First Sea Lord,
Admiral Sir Henry Leach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/apr/26/admiral-of-the-fleet-sir-henry-leach-obituary>
 – took the extraordinary risk of dispatching a taskforce to retake the 
islands. While negotiations for a peaceful outcome stuttered on through the US 
secretary of state,Alexander Haig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/feb/20/alexander-haig-obituary>, the 
Royal Navy steamed south. On 21 May the British landed and on 14 June the 
Argentinians surrendered. Less than a year later, the Conservatives were 
returned with a majority of 144 over a divided opposition.

Thatcher's years in office were bookended by two defining events of global 
significance. On Christmas Day 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. Ten 
years later, theBerlin Wall <https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlinwall> came 
down, heralding the collapse of the Soviet empire. The invasion of Afghanistan 
reinforced Thatcher's belief in the expansionist intent of the Soviet empire. 
She became the evangelist for America's ambition to upgrade its own and Nato's 
nuclear defences with Cruise and Pershing missiles. In 1980 she announced 
Cruise would come to Britain. As a result, the perimeter fence around the RAF 
base at Greenham Common, Berkshire, became the centre for a decade of 
anti-nuclear campaigning by women's groups. She negotiated to upgrade Britain's 
independent nuclear deterrent by acquiring Trident II, at a cost of £7.5bn.

Yet for all the attention to hardware, Thatcher always believed its citizens 
would be the ones to destroy the Soviet empire. Visiting the Berlin Wall in 
1982, she prophesied that it would be brought down by the "anger and 
frustration of the people". She promoted co-operation and fostered relations 
with Poland and Hungary, encouraging their leaders to imagine a world after 
communism. At the same time, she sought out modernisers in the Soviet Union and 
brought Mikhail Gorbachev, when he was still a relatively minor figure in the 
Politburo, to the attention ofRonald Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ronald-reagan> as a man "to do business 
with". She made a triumphant visit to Russia in 1987 where she was mobbed by 
the public and took the argument against communism direct to live television, 
"as if she was fighting a byelection in Moscow North," this paper's 
correspondent wrote. If her subsequent reluctance to accept German 
reunification suggests her belief in the people was less deep-rooted than she 
would claim, she was a leading force in undermining the power of the Soviet 
Union.

In her battle against communism, she marched in step with the US. She and 
Reagan were in particular sympathy (sorely tested when, in October 1983, the US 
invaded the Caribbean island of Grenada, a Commonwealth member), although she 
disagreed strongly with his dream of major nuclear disarmament. That, she 
considered, was a threat to European security.

The Westland affair early in 1986 marked the beginnings of Thatcher's break 
with Europe. She preferred to see the ailing British helicopter company merge 
with the American Sikorsky rather than accept the European solution that her 
defence secretary and leading critic, Michael Heseltine, had wanted. He 
resigned. In the ensuing row, Thatcher came close to being implicated in the 
deliberate discrediting of her rival. Her protege, the trade secretary Leon 
Brittan, was forced to resign. Her pro-Americanism was sealed in April 1986 
by her support, alone in Europe, for the US bombing raid on Libya.

Thatcher had originally been a supporter of Britain's membership of the Common 
Market and Labour's complete rejection of it after the successful referendum in 
1975 only strengthened its appeal to her. However, she was elected in 1979 on a 
promise to seek a budget rebate, a preoccupation that dogged every summit for 
her first five years until she reluctantly agreed a settlement at Fontainebleau 
in 1984.

A period of relative calm, during which Thatcher advocated speeding up the 
single market negotiations followed, until the passage of the Single European 
Act in 1987. At that point, she realised that her ideal of Europe as a trading 
partner, a market for British goods and services where remaining trade barriers 
would wither away, was at odds with the vision of closer political integration 
shared by the European commission president, Jacques Delors, and most other 
European nations. Her battles against it became one of the deadly fissures in 
her relations with her cabinet.

It is one of the paradoxes of an era that will be remembered for its hostility 
to the EU that in the Single European Act (which led to the Maastricht treaty), 
Thatcher ceded more control over British affairs than any prime minister 
before, while in sponsoring the Channel tunnel, she established a permanent 
land route to the continent.

In 1988, she made a speech in Bruges attacking "creeping Euro-federalism". 
Throughout the following year, her chancellor, Nigel Lawson, fought for a date 
for sterling to join the exchange rate mechanism (ERM), to which the UK was 
committed and which would allow interest rates to fall. Thatcher was determined 
that the value of the pound should not be pegged to European currencies. 
Protesting at the influence of the economistAlan Walters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jan/06/sir-alan-walters-obituary> as 
a rival centre of advice, Lawson resigned.

Thatcher's desire to build a free-market Europe was matched by her attempt to 
strengthen the role of the individual against the state at home. The election 
of June 1987 produced another landslide, her third election victory. It 
heralded a programme of radical public sector reform intended to assert the 
power of the consumer and bring market discipline into schools and hospitals.

The 1988 Education Act brought in city technology colleges and 
grant-maintained schools, free of local authority control. Housing action 
trusts further limited local councils' room for manoeuvre. A purchaser-provider 
split was introduced into the NHS. The rhetoric of public spending cuts 
continued, although the records show that public spending rose every year in 
her time in office, declining only as a share of GDP.

Local councils, particularly Ken Livingstone's Greater London council, were 
among Thatcher's most effective critics. Her response was the poll tax, 
properly known as the community charge, levied on an individual basis that 
would link council spending to local taxes. She ignored advice that such a tax 
would be impossible to collect and that it was also severely regressive. In 
March 1990 there were protests and riots in a mass rejection of an unjust tax.

Meanwhile the party splits over Europe were reaching a climax. Geoffrey Howe, 
an early and loyal Thatcherite, had supported Lawson over Britain's membership 
of the ERM. Only the threat of their resignation had forced her to agree to 
join. In revenge, Howe was sacked as foreign secretary and made leader of the 
House and deputy prime minister. In October 1990, as Thatcher stood at the 
dispatch box after the Rome summit (where she had been ambushed with demands 
for further integration) dismissing, it seemed, any progress at all with "No! 
No! No!", Howe finally resolved to resign.

The defiance that had once so impressed her party, and many in the country, 
now sounded dangerously deluded even to some of her closest supporters, 
especially those in marginal seats. It took less than 10 days – from 13 
November when Howe made his resignation speech to 22 November when Thatcher 
announced her resignation – for Conservative MPs to eject her.

At the 1992 election, Thatcher retired from the Commons and took a seat in the 
Lords. Powerfully affected by a sense of injustice, she found it hard to desert 
the field of domestic politics. Her only consolation was that in ensuring the 
accession for her favourite, Major, she denied it to Heseltine. But she was 
soon letting it be known that Major was not, after all, one of us. After his 
defeat in May 1997, his successors – with the exception of Iain Duncan Smith – 
were found to be disappointments too.

The first of her two volumes of memoirs, The Downing Street Years, appeared in 
1993, followed two years later by The Path to Power. She also established the 
Thatcher Foundation, which, funded by the large fees she could command for 
public speaking in the US and Japan, was intended to promote her ideas, not 
least in the emerging democracies of eastern Europe. In March 2002, after a 
series of minor strokes, she gave up public speaking.

Thatcher broke the pattern of postwar politics and changed its nature. Labour 
accommodated rather than reversed her attack on the welfare state and left her 
employment legislation almost untouched. When the Conservatives finally 
returned to power in May 2010, in coalition with the Liberal Democrats, David 
Cameron andGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> 
shared her priorities and used her language. So complete, it seems, was her 
undermining of the role of the state that even the catastrophic failure of 
deregulated markets has yet to trigger a reappraisal.

It is a paradox of her period in office that, while seeking to limit the scope 
of government, she introduced a style of command and control, top-down, 
centralised authority that strengthened it and has proved hard for her 
successors to resist. It has leaked into the way political parties are managed, 
so that they struggle to regenerate a spirit of local activism. Some of the 
most valuable institutions of civil society from the churches to the trade 
unions have been scarred by her attacks on collective enterprise.

Denis, to whom Thatcher had awarded a baronetcy in her resignation honours, 
died in 2003.

She is survived by Mark and Carol and her two grandchildren, Michael and 
Amanda.

• Margaret Hilda Thatcher, Lady Thatcher, politician, born 13 October 1925; 
died 8 April 2013
 