
For months Grimsby's season appeared to be going for a Burton so there is a 
delicious irony that their great escape can now be completed in the midlands 
town. A pulsating victory over their direct relegation rivalsBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> has taken the fight for Football 
League survival to the final day.

A team that went winless for 25 League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> matches over the 
winter has been transformed thanks to a raft of loan signings intent on keeping 
these ancient Mariners – original members of the Second Division in 1892 and 
absent from the league ranks for only one season after failing re-election in 
1910 – afloat. In contrast Barnet are in freefall.

While this was Grimsby's sixth success in 12 matches, Barnet have now lost 
half a dozen on the trot. The latter's chairman, Tony Kleanthous, dispensed 
with his manager, Ian Hendon, last week and reappointed Paul Fairclough, who 
took them back into the League five years ago, in temporary capacity.

Here Fairclough, clipboard in hand on the touchline, cajoled those around him 
at every turn, leading an elaborate warm-up of his players in front of the 435 
travelling fans, whom he then implored for vocal backing. He got a response 
both on and off the pitch but could not halt the slide.

Rob Atkinson's sublime volley and Mark Hudson's drive three minutes into 
stoppage time – the second goal marked by a mass pitch invasion – settled what 
should have been a thud-and-blunder affair.

It was far from it and left both managers talking up their chances. If Grimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> beat Burton, Barnet would have 
to defeat promoted Rochdale to avert the drop. In that instance Cheltenham 
would also be vulnerable but only via home defeat to Accrington and a six-goal 
swing.

"Six weeks ago we would have just accepted taking it to the final game of the 
season and still be in with a shout," said Grimsby's manager, Neil Woods. "Now 
we are more than in with a shout." Equally bullish, Fairclough said: "We will 
win next week. I have come back to keep us in the Football League and we have 
to make sure that is what we do."
 