
“Only vicar’s daughters become naturalists.” This was the response of Stan 
Micklethwaite when his young daughter Mari (my future wife) declared her life’s 
ambition. Stan spent most of his working life weighing wagons of coal at the 
pithead of Barrow colliery near Barnsley, yet his many active leisure pursuits 
included beekeeping and gardening, with Mari always at his side, eager to 
learn. Neither Stan nor Mari’s mother, Nellie, lived to hear of the fame that 
Mari, who has died aged 80, went on to achieve in her adult career as a 
wildlife writer, illustrator, broadcaster, conservationist and storyteller. No 
doubt they would have been surprised as well as very proud.

Mari and I met in 1954, as chief bridesmaid and best man at a cousin’s 
wedding, and we married two years later. It was only after our four children 
were all at school in Warwickshire that Mari was able to enrol in classes at 
local colleges to learn more of botany, horticulture and ecology, writing 
copious notes with cross-reference to multiple sources as well as her own 
careful observations of the natural world around her.

When we moved to London in 1987, Mari started to lecture in botany and ecology 
to classes of eager adults at Morley College in Lambeth. Three years later, we 
moved north to a solid stone house on the edge of the moors above Bradford. We 
soon discovered that nearby Shipley Glen had been a treasured rural retreat for 
Bradford’s millworkers and their families since Victorian times. Before long we 
secured a modest grant to convert a derelict cafe building in a corner of our 
garden into the Bracken Hall Countryside Centre, which we started to run 
together as an independent venture.

While I looked after the business side, Mari used her considerable artistic 
talents to create exhibitions which linked ecological, archaeological and 
historical themes. She would stand for hours in our small wildlife room facing 
the garden, telling colourful stories about the life cycles and 
interdependencies of the small native creatures that she nurtured in tanks – 
insects, water spiders, newts and freshwater fish. An observation beehive stood 
there in pride of place; and our centre soon became a magnet for families and 
school outings.

Mari’s next breakthrough came when we moved to the Derbyshire Peak District. 
Here she met an enthusiastic literary agent who took her first beautifully 
illustrated manuscript Small Wonder to the Frankfurt book fair in 1990. She 
returned with a contract to publish through Cassells, with translations into 
French, Dutch and Swedish. There followed promotional tours throughout the UK 
and Ireland; and in 1992 she was awarded the national Sir Peter Kent 
conservation book prize.

Mari’s influence continues to spread through her publications; through the 
enthusiasm oflocal volunteers  <https://www.friendsofbrackenhall.org.uk>who 
worked hard to reopen our Bracken Hall Centre this year following its closure 
though local government cuts in 2013; and through the many families who 
remember Mari as a teller of intriguing stories about the wonders of the 
natural world.

She is survived by me and by our children, Theresa, Jo, Rob and Dave, seven 
grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.
 