
Mark Warburton has warned Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> his Brentford side are 
never more dangerous than when their backs are against the wall. The Bees will 
head to the Riverside for the second leg of the Championship play-off 
semi-final this Friday trailing 2-1.

The first leg looked to be heading for a draw after Andre Gray cancelled out 
Jelle Vossen’s first-half header for Boro, but Fulham loanee Fernando 
Amorebieta hit a stoppage-time winner to give the visitors a slender advantage. 
However Warburton, who is leaving at the end of the season, remains convinced 
he can still bid farewell toBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> by reaching the Wembley final.

“The character of this group has been without question,” he said. “They have 
shown time and time again what they are made of. We have won at tough venues, 
scored late goals and got out of difficult situations. There is unity in the 
dressing room and we have to rely on that next week. Everyone seems to think we 
are out of this now. That is when we are at our most dangerous. There are 90 
minutes left and we have to win. We are a goal down in a cup tie. It will be a 
great occasion and we have to go there and maximise it.”

Boro have a formidable home record having lost only once since August, but 
their captain Grant Leadbitter is taking nothing for granted. “It was good to 
win but we know next week is going to be really tough,” said the midfielder. 
Brentford are good side and a good possession team. We’ve got the advantage but 
we know next week is going to be just as tough, so we have to come out of the 
blocks just as quickly. We knew it was going to be a 180-minute game so we go 
into next week knowing we’ve got to be wary because Brentford are a good team - 
but we’ll be full of confidence.”

Meanwhile, the Stevenage manager Graham Westley predicts his side’s League Two 
play-off semi-final with Southend will not be for “the faint-hearted”. The two 
sides meet this evening withStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> looking to take a giant step 
towards an immediate return to the third tier following relegation last season 
against a Southend side that only missed out on automatic promotion on the 
final day. “Play-off semi-finals are brilliant games. High-octane, 
high-pressure situations, they are not for the faint-hearted,” Westley told the
Hertfordshire Mercury.

“I’m sure there will be full houses in both grounds for both occasions. The 
real positive from our point of view is that we will take a really strong 
travelling support away for the second leg as well as there being a packed 
house for the first game.”

Stevenage are certain to make changes having rested plenty of players on the 
final day. Dean Wells, Bira Dembélé, Jerome Okimo, Dean Parrett, Tom Pett and 
Chris Beardsley are all set to start.
 