
Mark Allen said he knew his 147 break was on from an early stage and has 
described how he held his nerve to make his first tournament maximum at the UK 
Championships in York.

The Northern Irishman’s clearance came in the seventh frame of his 
second-round match against Rod Lawler, putting him 4-3 up. After leaving the 
arena to compose himself he went on to complete a 6-4 victory.

Allen, a beaten finalist at the Barbican five years ago, came close to a 147 
in 2010 at the World Championship, potting 15 reds and 15 blacks before missing 
the green. He thenwent on to make a 146 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/apr/22/mark-allen-snooker-146> in the 
same competition.

However, the world No10 had been eyeing up the possibility after potting six 
balls.

He said: “It was a big buzz because I’d never made one on tour. The balls were 
sitting so nice from 24. The reds were all sitting, none on the cushions, and 
you can only mess it up from there. It was relief when the black went in. I was 
nervous and I was shaking. I was thinking ‘just please pot it because if you 
miss now you look silly’.

“I went to the toilet afterwards to calm myself down and take deep breaths, 
control the breathing and take the shakes away. Then I was ready to start the 
next frame and ready to win the match because you know your opponent is going 
to make it tough, no matter how well you’re playing.”

Allen felt the scoreline flattered his opponent a little and felt his margin 
of victory should have been wider.

“It was a weird match because I felt I played much much better than 6-4,” he 
said. “Rod won a couple of very close frames when he had a better run of the 
balls. I honestly could’ve won 6-1 or 6-2 the way I played but he just hangs on 
and hangs on. I’m feeling my game is in good shape and I’m confident and 
confidence is massive in our game.”

Earlier in the day, the five-times champion Ronnie O’Sullivan cruised into the 
third round with a 6-0 win over Rhys Clark. The young Scot’s nerves got the 
better of him in the opening frame and O’Sullivan capitalised in ruthless 
fashion, taking a 4-0 interval lead with breaks of 112, 79 and 82.

After closing out the encounter with a stylish 131 clearance, O’Sullivan 
remained philosophical about his chances of equalling Steve Davis’s six titles 
but admitted there are positive signs that he is rediscovering some of his best 
snooker.

“I feel like my form is coming back a little bit but it’s not the be-all and 
end-all,” he said. “’I’m happy with five but if another one comes along then 
I’ll take it. I need to be thinking I want it because if you don’t have that 
ambition and drive then you’re not going to win. It’s about finding that 
balance between being care free but also being competitive. I’m playing 
alright. If it comes it comes, if it doesn’t it doesn’t..”

Judd Trump became the latest big-name casualty as he lost 6-2 to Oliver Lines 
in York.

Lines, ranked 61 in the world, potted bravely, if perhaps a bit naively at 
times, but also showed he had the safety game to trouble Trump, who was 
uncharacteristically shaky.

Lines, whose father Peter earlier this week knocked out defending champion 
Neil Robertson, registered a 62 break in the opening frame before taking a 3-0 
lead, with Trump reducing his arrears heading into the interval.

The world No3 and 2011 winner of the UK Championship then took the next frame 
after the break but it would be the last he would win as Lines reeled off three 
in a row again to claim a famous victory.
 