
Cheltenham v York; genteel Town v twee (according to the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/oct/29/lonely-planet-whats-so-great-about-yorkshire>
) City; jump racing v flat; refined Robins v mild Minstermen; GCHQ v Menwith 
Hill, recalling perhaps football's deliberations in the 1870s: "Shall we have 
hacking?"

In the event there were no secrets between the clubs, pottering together in 
the bottom half ofLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> as if not sure whether 
they want anything to do with the moneyed monster that professional football 
has become, with its hyping, sniping and griping. Naturally the match was 
drawn, 2-2. "It was a good, honest game," said York's manager, Nigel 
Worthington. Nothing less would have been expected at Whaddon Road.

This is not to say the contest was meek. Challenges were as fierce as the wind 
that drove veils of rain downfield towards Cleeve Hill and often curled 
clearances back towards where they came from. Low stands give little protection 
and the fine stand of trees at one goal-back were at the wrong end to help. "We 
showed the character and resilience we've got," said Worthington. "It was a 
fair result."

Mark Yates, his opposite number, was more disappointed. "I'm sick of people 
coming in and saying sorry," he said, while giving players credit for admitting 
mistakes. "Defenders completely switched off. We need to be more ruthless in 
both boxes." He had called for "a killer edge". Twice they shot themselves, 
albeit in the foot. "Goals give the other side a lift. They took the wind out 
of our sails," he said.

The wind, of course, was impartial but equally influential. Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> had it first at their backs 
and swung set-piece kicks into the danger area. From Matt Richards' early 
corner the ball went in off Byron Harrison, who probably knew more about his 
five previous league goals this season. In no time, though, Ryan Bowman 
equalised, unmarked for a far-post header, also from a corner. Yates was 
entitled to his grievance. Worse was to come.

He had paid tribute to Worthington beforehand, remarking how he had "managed 
at international level, so they [York]know the time of day". It was 3.47, last 
minute of the first half, when Richards pumped a free-kick forward, Troy Brown 
emerged from the ruck alone but onside in front of the goalkeeper, Michael 
Ingham, and the ball flew on into the net. In nine minutes of the second half 
Sido Jombati panicked under a cross that Scott Brown was set to catch 
unchallenged, Bowman had his second gift and Yates further grounds for "gloom 
and doom".

Worthington is not a boat-rocker among managers. He had six harmonious years 
at Norwich and four and a half with Northern Ireland before he arrived at York 
in March with 10 games to go and 11 without a win and spared them a swift 
return to the Conference with four wins in their last five. Wise clubs give 
sound managers a fair chance, sometimes including funds.

Cheltenham enjoy similar stability with the unsung Yates, virtually a two-club 
player and manager. As a midfielder he had five seasons each with Kidderminster 
Harriers and Cheltenham, narrowly failing to get into the League with the 
former before achieving it with the latter in 1999, with whom he rose to the 
third tier. He has managed them in the same order, each for over 200 games, and 
is nearing four years at Whaddon Road. They reached the play-offs in the last 
two years and he said challengingly on Saturday: "We can be wherever we want to 
be." While 28 points cover League One, only 18 cover League Two. Cheltenham, in 
18th, are seven points from the play-offs, 11 from the top.

They looked the likelier team here for progress, tacking into the wind through 
Sam Deering, David Noble and Russell Penn, with the wandering minstrel Jamie 
Cureton, new at the club, sharing the most sparkling moves. At 38 he has played 
723 games and scored 250 goals, second among playing goalscorers to Kevin 
Phillips. The Robins' ruby and white strip could lift anyone with its class. 
But the crowd of 2,500 home fans out of 16,000 on Facebook confirms that 
football is not a priority in the town, just a good place for a happy few. The 
caterers caught the spirit with Yorkshire pudding filled with best beef. For 
Bury it will probably be tripe.
 