
Mark Selby won a tense encounter against John Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/john-higgins> in York to reach the Betway UK 
Championship semi-finals. He eventually closed out the match to win 6-5 after 
five hours of captivating snooker climaxed in a nail-biting deciding frame in 
which there were a number of shifts in momentum.

Selby is attempting to end the year in which he landed his second world title 
by also lifting the UK trophy for a second time and he looked to have his work 
cut out against the in-form Scot.

Higgins had made a sluggish start and was looking like being cut adrift when 
Selby made breaks of 119, 63 and 67 to surge 3-0 in front, so he was relieved 
to grab a frame before the interval to gain a foothold.

The match then swung the Scot’s way and the next three frames took him in 
front at 4-3. Selby would not be shaken off, though, and the match went all the 
way to the colours in the decider.

The tension inside the Barbican could hardly have been greater before Higgins 
fluked the yellow and had a priceless opening but then failed to cut back the 
green into its own pocket and Selby capitalised.

“I’m gutted,” Higgins said. “I’d rather lose 6-0 than lose 6-5.” When it was 
pointed out he had shown great fight, he said: “Who cares? You show fight but 
you still lose. It’s still gutting to lose a tough match.”

Selby will face Shaun Murphy on Saturday for a place in the final. Murphy, the 
2008 UK champion, swept into the last four with a 6-1 victory over the Belgian 
Luca Brecel.

Ronnie O’Sullivan stayed on course for a record-equalling sixth UK 
Championship title as Mark Williams became the latest victim of his relentless 
march in York. The former world champion Williams kept pace with O’Sullivan 
early on before being cast aside after the interval as the title favourite 
completed a 6-2 victory.

It will be a ninth semi-final appearance at snooker’s second biggest ranking 
tournament for O’Sullivan on Saturday.

Breaks of 64, 60 and 78 carried O’Sullivan, who turns 41 on Monday, to a 
comfortable victory. He has dropped only five frames in five matches so far as 
he aims to match Steve Davis’ record haul of UK triumphs.
 