
Mark Selby <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mark-selby> fended off a late 
charge from Ronnie O’Sullivan to land his second UK Championship title and 
remove any lingering doubts about his right to be world No1.

In a match that produced a remarkable stretch of play in the evening session 
that included three consecutive total clearances Selby triumphed 10-7.

Mark Selby clinches second world title with 18-14 win over Ding Junhui
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/02/mark-selby-world-championshp-ding-junhui>
As he lifted the trophy at the York Barbican, the 33-year-old from Leicester 
became the sixth player to secure the World and UK Championships in the same 
calendar year. He joined illustrious company in O’Sullivan, Stephen Hendry, 
Steve Davis, John Parrott and John Higgins and, as champion, collected £170,000.

Victory also meant he is now a multiple winner of all three of the game’s 
Triple Crown events – after two Crucible triumphs and three Masters successes.

“To win the three majors is a great feeling but to do it twice is even 
better,” Selby said. “If I never won another tournament, I’d be happy with my 
achievements.”

By the end of the match there was no doubting Selby’s relief, after his lead 
had been cut from 7-2 to 8-7 during a spell of vintage O’Sullivan 
break-building.

The five-times UK champion built breaks of 56, 80, 134, 130 and 82 to throw 
down the gauntlet to Selby, who made a rousing response.

O’Sullivan’s two centuries in that streak had come either side of a 137 from 
Selby, with all three being total clearances.

The next came from Selby, though, as he made 134 to power one frame away from 
the winning line. And after a cagey start to the 17th frame, Selby slotted a 
long red to set up a match-clinching 107.

Selby said: “He put me under pressure, asked the questions and I was really 
pleased with how I held up at the end. I tried to stay in the moment, not get 
too far ahead of myself.”

A 95th consecutive week at No1 begins for Selby on Monday and this was his 
10th ranking title. He is almost certain to remain at the top through to the 
World Championship in April, even if he fails to win another match before then.

O’Sullivan said: “It’s a fantastic night for him. I scored all right but I 
missed too many easy balls. I think I did all right considering he’s world No1 
and so far ahead of everyone else.”

Damien Hirst, the Britart multi-millionaire and friend of O’Sullivan, arrived 
after the third frame of the afternoon. But Hirst, who has watched many of 
O’Sullivan’s greatest wins, this time had to sit and suffer with fellow 
supporters of the ‘Rocket’.

Selby promised to celebrate long into the night, just as he did on landing his 
first UK title four years ago.

“I’m having flashbacks to 2012,” Selby said. “I strolled out of the 
after-party at 7.30 in the morning, went back to the hotel and went and had 
breakfast with nine or 10 other families, then went back to the room to get two 
hours’ sleep.

“I woke up at 10 o’clock and thought, ‘I’ll go down for some breakfast,’ and 
the woman in the dining room told me I’d already been down and I didn’t believe 
her. It may be similar tonight.”
 