
Given a choice between Kris Boyd and Kenny Miller, Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> supporters have made it 
perfectly clear which striker they would rather have.

A season filled with more sources of intrigue than is customary north of 
Hadrian's Wall closed on Saturday with one of the biggest puzzlers of all. 
Despite two more goals, making it 25 for the season for Boyd, and another 
starring appearance in a Rangers cup final win, the former Kilmarnock player 
has still not yet apparently convinced Walter Smith. The manager's predecessor, 
Paul Le Guen, did not fancy the robust Ayrshireman much, either.

Those in the stands forcefully warned Smith against any move for Miller, the 
forward who will leave Derby County soon after a troubled campaign at Pride 
Park. That the 28-year-old is most recently remembered for playing little more 
than a season at Celtic, let alone scoring only four league goals since moving 
south, must have contributed to the fans' ire.

Boyd's future, meanwhile, is somewhat less certain. "I'm going away now to 
have a long, hard think about it over the summer and we'll take it from there," 
he said, rather ominously.

Smith's body language alone suggested he would not be distraught if a 
reasonable offer came in for Boyd. "I don't know [if he will leave]," said the 
manager. "I've not heard anything about that so far.

"He is an excellent goalscorer, with a lot of aspects to his play which aren't 
up at the same level as his goalscoring. That is just something I think he'll 
always have."

By Smith's own admission Boyd has suffered as a consequence of Rangers 
operating for much of the season with only one striker. Birmingham City and 
Alex McLeish will be among the interested parties if the player's patience runs 
out.

"Like every other player, he'll want to play more regularly than he has this 
season," added Smith. "But it's just the way that I feel is the best way for 
Rangers to play. I don't see it as a big problem. But I know what the problem 
is from his point of view, which is that he wants to play more than he has done 
this season."

The Boyd scenario aside, this was an understandably tame finale for Rangers 
and for a period in the second half it almost descended into disaster.

Having watched a possible quadruple trophy haul vanish within six troublesome 
weeks, players and supporters alike did little more than go through the motions.

A fierce Boyd drive from 22 yards and a goal from DaMarcus Beasley, making his 
first starting appearance for six months after knee surgery, handed Rangers an 
apparently unassailable lead by the interval butQueen of the South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> rallied. The First 
Division team restored parity through Steve Tosh and Jim Thomson but a Boyd 
header 18 minutes from time secured Rangers' victory.

Underneath their frustration that Celtic have claimed a third championship in 
succession lies bitterness about the level of fixture congestion suffered by 
Rangers at the climax of the season.

"I think we lost the league because we had to play too many games in a short 
space of time," said the striker Jean-Claude Darcheville. "It was very 
difficult for us to accept the lack of help from the national associations when 
we went for the Uefa Cup. In other countries there would have been help."

Queens have no such European issues after their maiden Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final appearance. The 
Dumfries side, who were cheered on at Hampden by 16,000 supporters, will take 
their place in next season's Uefa Cup. "It would have been interesting if we 
could have taken it to extra-time - that would have been a test for Rangers," 
said their manager, Gordon Chisholm.

Man of the match Kris Boyd (Rangers)
 