
It’s often supposed that a fashion designer is extravagant, flamboyant and 
extrovert. You have to present a certain energy. I’m quite shy, so it’s a skill 
I’ve picked up. Over time I’ve become capable of engaging and talking about my 
work.

The word “boho” is overused. To me, bohemian means a leftfield woman, with her 
own nonconformist agenda. But it has been shortened to boho, which just refers 
to a peasant dress or a girl in beads. I hang on to the real meaning of the 
word.

I crave experiencing other cultures and countries. I’ve never really been away 
for months on end, but I’d love to spend three months in Bali. I’d do nothing, 
just absorb the atmosphere. It’s exotic, clean and beautiful, and there’s 
something very serene about the people there.

I’ve been on more planes than I can bear to think about and I loathe the 
journey from my door to the final destination. But no pain, no gain.

People from overseas say: “Oh, it’s so crazy, so eccentric, the way the 
British dress.” I get the idea that we’re a bit more haphazard and we like to 
mix and match. I love the way Europeans dress, and they largely have the luxury 
of heat. It’s easy to run to your black jacket and grey scarf when it’s cold, 
but I’m a strong believer in mood-enhancing colour. Why wouldn’t you want to be 
the girl in the bright pink dress?

A few years ago there was a lot of my stuff copied in a certain high street 
store and I was whingeing about it. My business partner Joseph said: “You’d be 
whingeing if they didn’t copy you.” It’s actually quite flattering.

It’s hard to maintain a meaningful friendship. I’ve curated an inner circle 
that I can count on one hand.

Sienna Miller is a true friend: she’s got the most lovely way about her. About 
10 years ago, I saw a picture of her the size of a stamp in a magazine and 
pinned it behind my desk because I liked the colour of her jacket. My sales 
director at the time knew her so we met for tea.

I can handle insects, spiders, lizards, the lot. It’s just rats I can’t do. 
I’m not wild about cats either. I think one jumped on me when I was a kid and 
it stuck with me that he wasn’t my friend.

Male and female designers work differently. A woman is the embodiment of her 
brand, whereas a male womenswear designer is somewhat detached. It’s a shame 
that you can’t try a dress on to check the fit, but it frees you from 
insecurities that you may have as a woman.

If you want to live off lettuce and pulses, fine by me. My body is such that 
I’m lucky, I can eat what I want. I’m northern and quite straightforward when 
it comes to food.

Students I’ve spoken to are often so unsure of what they’re doing. You need to 
get to that point where you’re like: “I’ve nailed it, I’m clear, and now I’m 
ready.” You’ve got to really believe that it’s good. It’s a hard discipline, to 
knock out stuff you don’t love.

Matthew Williamson has collaborated with Balthazar restaurant in Covent Garden 
to create an afternoon tea inspired by his S/S 2015 collection (
balthazarlondon.com <http://balthazarlondon.com/>)
 