
The eyes of the world were glued to the greatest sporting event of them all 
and the carnival atmosphere pulsed. Welcome back, English football, you have 
been missed. This was the night when Rafael Benítez andNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> were supposed to flex 
their muscles and show their Championship-winning intent. Instead, it was one 
in which they endured what the manager described as a “wake-up call”.

Newcastle were second-best in all areas to Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> and Benítez was not about to 
complain about the non-award of two strong penalty appeals for handball. He 
criticised his team for their inability to keep the ball up front or win the 
second balls in midfield and his parting shot summed things up: “We have to 
realise there is work to be done.”

Fulham 1-0 Newcastle: Championship season opener – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/05/fulham-v-newcastle-championship-season-opener-live>
The Spaniard had included five of his eight new signings, while there was no 
place for Moussa Sissoko, with the official explanation being that he lacked 
match fitness, rather than the desire to play on for the club in the face of 
transfer interest surrounding him. It was Fulham that brought the strongest new 
look. Slavisa Jokanovic included all eight of his own summer signings and, 
inspired by one of them, the quick and direct striker, Sone Aluko, they earned 
a deserved victory.

The London club had stood as something of a cautionary tale to Newcastle. 
Since their relegation from the Premier League, they had finished 17th and 20th 
at this level. It should not go unnoticed that they had lost their best two 
players from last season – the strikersRoss McCormack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/04/aston-villa-sign-ross-mccormack-fulham>
 andMoussa Dembélé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/celtic-sign-moussa-dembele-fulham-brendan-rodgers>
 – but Jokanovic could end the evening by talking of having seen a “serious 
football team” come together.

Fulham reminded their visitors of why this division is such a cut-throat place 
with a performance of grit, organisation and energy, garnished by flashes of 
exuberance, particularly from Aluko. There was also the jaw-dropping piece of 
skill on 81 minutes from the Belgian right-back, Denis Odoi, which epitomised 
their rising levels of confidence. He spun and used the back of his shoulder to 
flick the ball around Paul Dummett before running on to it and away.

On what became a pulsating occasion, Matt Smith scored the winner with a 
powerful header from Tom Cairney’s outswinging corner in first-half stoppage 
time. The Newcastle inquest will centre upon why the striker, who is hardly 
difficult to spot inside the box, was granted such space. He was Jamaal 
Lascelles’s man but, perhaps, Dummett’s slip provided a distraction. Jokanovic 
was also delighted by the clean sheet. Fulham had found them difficult to come 
by last season.

It was not Newcastle’s night. Despite the best efforts of Matt Ritchie, they 
could not find a way to goal and they were left to lament the waving away of 
their penalty shouts. The first one in the 35th minute was clearcut. Ritchie 
stood a high cross back from the left and when Ryan Tunnicliffe leapt to block 
with his arm, the Fulham midfielder felt the ball hit his hand.

The second came in the last minute and, again, Ritchie was involved. His shot 
was goal-bound only for Tomas Kalas to fling himself in front of it. There 
appeared to be contact with the Fulham player’s hand. “The first one was 
clear,” Benítez said. “The second one depends on the referee, but no excuses.”

Burton living the impossible dream as patience and ambition stoke flames
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/burton-albion-championship-first-season-nottingham-forest>
Fulham could point to their own penalty appeals, although they were less 
wholehearted. Both of them involved Aluko. He was caught by Grant Hanley in the 
first half, with the Newcastle defender appearing to have got something on the 
ball first, while after the interval Hanley seemed to nudge him as he bore down 
on a Smith knock-down.

Fulham made it a blood and thunder kind of occasion and for many of the 
Newcastle players, who might have been used to the Premier League, it was a 
jolt. Time on the ball was at a premium – just ask Ayoze Pérez. For much of the 
first half, it had felt like a question of waiting for a football match to 
break out but, amid the intensity, there were moments of composure from Cairney 
and his towering midfield colleague, Kevin McDonald.

Newcastle went close on 53 minutes when Vurnon Anita crossed and Ritchie drew 
a reflex save out of David Button and the game’s final quarter was studded with 
action at both ends. Ritchie worked Button from distance and Rolando Aarons, 
the substitute, miskicked when well placed while Scott Malone shot wide and 
Floyd Ayité was denied by Matz Sels after tricking his way through.

The Sky TV cameras were all over Benítez, shadowing him on the long walks 
between the tunnel in the corner of the stadium and the bench on the far side. 
He is the biggest name not only at Newcastle but in the division. On this 
occasion, they captured his frustration.
 