
A New York couple has recalled in court the horror they endured when the former
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> NRL prop Matthew 
Lodge allegedly broke into their apartment and went on a violent rampage in 
front of their nine-year-old son.

Joseph Cartright, Ruth Fowler and a third victim in the 16 October attack, 
German citizen Carolina Dekeyser, have filed a $US2m-plus civil lawsuit against 
Lodge in the US district court in Manhattan.

Cartright told a hearing on Thursday Lodge threatened to kill him.

“The first thing he said to me was, ‘This is the night you are going to die’,” 
Cartright told judge Ronald Ellis. Later Cartright said Lodge savagely beat him.

“He had me in a headlock and threw me across the foyer as if I was a ball,” 
Cartright said.

The court heard that Cartright and Fowler had never met Lodge, who allegedly 
accosted Dekeyser and her friend outside at a taxi and followed them to the 
building at about 4am.


The hearing was held without Lodge in court or a lawyer to defend the rugby 
league forward. The court was told Lodge, who is believed to be in Australia, 
had failed to respond to the lawsuit since it was filed last December.

The victims’ lawyer, Renan Varghese, said Lodge did call their office two 
weeks ago to say he did not have a lawyer, was not working and did not have 
money to pay a judgment.


“Whether or not he can pay the judgment, I will enter a judgment,” Ellis told 
the court.


Lodge has entered a guilty plea to a separate criminal misdemeanor reckless 
assault charge and will be sentenced in December.


Cartright and Fowler described to Ellis the financial and emotional distress 
Lodge, a 21-year-old, 193cm tall, 110kg prop forward had caused their family.


They told the court that their young son, who hid behind a bed and in a 
bathroom during the alleged incident, has had to have therapy, has trouble 
sleeping and suffers night terrors.


Cartright testified how the incident began at 4am when he answered a call on 
his apartment’s intercom from Dekeyser and a friend who were desperately trying 
to get into the building.

Cartright said he went to the foyer and let them in but Lodge, who he did not 
see, burst through the door. Lodge forced his way into Cartright’s apartment 
where Fowler and his son were in separate bedrooms, the court heard.

“This guy was massive,” Cartright said.


The court heard Lodge locked Cartright outside and while inside the unit did 
about $US4,500 ($6,000) damage to furniture and smashed other items, including 
plates.


He allegedly threw a wine bottle at NYPD officers when they arrived, which the 
court heard terrified Cartright because he thought the police, who drew their 
guns, would shoot Lodge in front of his son.


Ellis said he would give Lodge 30 days to respond to the proceedings.


Wests Tigers sacked Lodge shortly after the New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> incident but he is reportedly 
hoping to return to the NRL.


Varghese said his clients intend to pursue any judgment against Lodge in 
Australia.
 