
A north Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
mayor has come under fire over a $1.3m contract his council awarded to a quarry 
linked to his cousin, the Indigenous leader Gerhardt Pearson, which then hired 
his nephews on his recommendation.

The Hope Vale Aboriginal shire council mayor, Greg McLean, is locked in a 
bitter dispute with a rival quarry operator owned by local traditional owners, 
who claim they were excluded from the council’ssecond most lucrative contract 
<http://www.hopevale.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/CONTRACTS%20REGISTER%20May%202016.pdf>
 in a process that was “biased and unfair”.

The supply of gravel for council roads had been a source of royalties and jobs 
for Dhuppiwarra and Thiithaar traditional owners since their Nambal Resources 
and Quarries took over two quarries less than 10km from Hope Vale in 2015.

But last May the council overlooked Nambal in favour of a quarry 120km away at 
Lakeland 
<http://www.hopevale.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/Minutes%2018%20May%202016.pdf>
, which is partly owned by Cape York Aboriginal Corporation Pty Ltd, of which 
Gerhardt Pearson is a director.

Gerhardt Pearson’s brother, Noel Pearson, is a former shareholder, however he 
resigned three years ago. Noel Pearson said that it was unfair to link him to 
Cape York Aboriginal Corporation. Guardian Australia does not suggest thatNoel 
Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/noel-pearson> had any link 
to the quarry deal.

A Nambal director, Harry Bowen, said his company had been forced to sack and 
lay off workers, and the loss of council supply work had been a “very 
significant” blow to local traditional owners, who had hoped to earn millions 
in royalties in the coming years.


Noel Pearson says release of confidential school audits ‘unlawful’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/noel-pearson-says-release-of-confidential-school-audits-unlawful>
Bowen said the process represented “a personal attack from the mayor”, whose 
family links to the rival gravel business showed it was “totally unfair”.

“That negotiation with the contract should have been awarded to us because we 
were the closest company,” he said. “We had the resources, the machinery, the 
men – we would have got the job done.”

He said he did not understand why a company associated with Cape York 
Aboriginal Corporation would compete with local traditional owners for the work.

McLean and the council’s chief executive, Steven Linnane, defended the tender 
process, saying Nambal’s bid was ineligible because it missed the deadline by 
half an hour.

The mayor conceded he should have declared a potential conflict of interest 
over his cousin’s link to the Lakeland quarry when voting to award the 
contract, but said he had not done so because he did not know about the 
connection.

“I’m honestly going to tell you that I didn’t know they had a share in this – 
and I’ll be talking to Noel on Friday so this is one of the things that I’ll be 
bringing up with him,” McLean said. “Without a question, I would have vacated 
[myself from the council vote] … I would have declared my interest, like all my 
decisions in council.”

McLean said he had remained unaware of that family link even after Gerhardt 
Pearson contacted him to seek recommendations for two workers at the quarry. 
“Who would have thought that they got a share in that? And how come they’re not 
bloody employing me out there? I’m entitled to a bloody second job too.”

He put forward his nephews Dylan Nipper and Cheston McLean, who began work at 
the quarry on 31 July.

Asked about the perception of personally arranging positions for relatives 
just months after the quarry became a major council contractor, McLean said: “I 
treat everyone the same even if they are my relative – if they’re looking for 
work, I give them work.”

Rumours about Pearson’s link to the quarry surfaced in the months after the 
contract was awarded. But McLean and Nambal said they had been unaware of the 
exact trail of ownership until Guardian Australia confirmed the link this week.

In August, Gerhardt Pearson emailed the then council chief executive, Ross 
Higgins, to deny “allegations that I, and or my family have material interest 
in the Lakeland Downs Quarry business”.

“I confirm this is not the case. An Asic [Australian Securities and 
Investments Commission] search will put this to rest,” he said.

Asic searches by Guardian Australia show the quarry is run by Jones Mobile 
Crushing & Screening, which is part-owned by Cape York Aboriginal Corporation, 
of which Gerhardt is a director Cape York Aboriginal Corporation is trustee for 
the Cape York Aboriginal Charitable Trust, the main non-profit arm in the group 
of Cape York companies.

Gerhardt Pearson told Guardian Australia that shares in the trust were 
“non-beneficial, which prohibits individuals to hold shares for personal 
benefit”.

“Our work is precisely to advantage people to get jobs and greater access to 
enterprise opportunities,” he said.

Nambal is considering taking legal action over the contract, citing legal 
advice that the tender process breached a local government regulation dictating 
a 21-day window for big contract bids.


But Linnane has rejected this, saying a state ombudsman and lawyers from 
Queensland’s department of local government have assessed the matter and 
accepted the council’s position. He says the council would be vulnerable to 
legal action by other bidders if it had accepted Nambal’s “non-conforming” bid.

McLean has gone further, slamming Nambal’s tender bid as “not even fucking 
professional”.

Noel Pearson says 'soft bigotry' of the left the biggest challenge to 
Indigenous reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/noel-pearson-says-soft-bigotry-of-the-left-the-biggest-challenge-to-indigenous-reform>
“Of course, if they’d put it in on time, we would have favoured it by far,” he 
said. “If they were on time, mate, I would have given it in a damn hurry. They 
would have got it.”

But now, “I’d have to die for them to get a contract anywhere in Hope Vale, 
while my black arse points to the ground, mate,” he said.

He indicated that he was furious at Nambal for questioning the council 
decision, including a complaint to Queensland’s local government minister, 
Jackie Trad.

He described Nambal representatives as “fleas on a dog”, challenging them to 
“grow some fucking balls” by speaking to him directly.

In McLean’s time as mayor, the council has fought previous legal battles with 
the traditional owners group behind Nambal, the Hopevale Congress Aboriginal 
Corporation.

It took the corporation to the supreme court 
<http://apps.courts.qld.gov.au/esearching/FileDetails.aspx?Location=CRNS&Court=SUPRE&Filenumber=234/09>
 over the transfer of local land to the traditional owners’ charitable trust in 
2009 and lost, and the council was ordered in 2011 to pay about $200,000 in 
legal costs.

Cape York Aboriginal Corporation owns 10% of Lakeland quarry, and the rest is 
held by a Sydney-based company, Hastings R E Pty Ltd.

Its beneficiary, the Cape York Aboriginal Charitable Trust, funds programs to 
support small business development, land tenure resolution and job skills 
training in remote Indigenous communities across the Cape.

• This article was amended on 7 January 2017 to clarify the nature of the 
relationship between Noel Pearson and Cape York Aboriginal Corporation.
 