
Boxing fans have rarely felt more short-changed. The sense of disappointment 
that stretched from the MGM Grand Garden Arena around the world afterFloyd 
Mayweather skittered and poked his way to victory over Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/floyd-mayweather-beats-manny-pacquiao-on-points-to-remain-unbeaten>
in Las Vegas this month was immense – and the repercussions might ripple for a 
while yet. We waited six years for that?

Certainly there is little interest in a rematch, even when the Filipino’s 
right shoulder heals over the next 12 months or so. Both will be a year closer 
to 40 and retirement and the suspicion of cashing in will drown out even Bob 
Arum’s best shot at chutzpah. They are all wounded – and richer – beasts, one 
way and another.

Fight of the Century? It wasn’t even the Fight of the Night, that honour going 
to Vasyl Lomachenko’s virtuoso performance in stopping Gamalier Rodriguez in 
nine rounds. The Ukrainian featherweight, who dazzled his opponent to the point 
of embarrassment and resignation, fairly lays claim to Mayweather’s crown as 
the best pure boxer on the planet. What a shame they are not closer in weight.

So, to erase the ennui emanating from the main event, what fights do we want 
and what are the chances of getting them?

So what do we want?


Top of my personal list is a catchweight superfight between Mayweather and the 
Kazak wizard Gennady Golovkin, Lomachenko’s middleweight equivalent. If any 
fighter can drag a proper fight out of Floyd – the A game we have yet to see – 
it is the artful, hurtful Golovkin, who has so completely destroyed his 32 
opponents, 29 of them failing to finish, that he carries the invaluable aura of 
invincibility known only by a few, Mayweather included.

Golovkin, who fights Willie Monroe Jr (the great nephew of the eponymous 
“Worm”, who beat Marvin Hagler) in California on Saturday, is willing – very 
willing – to meet Mayweather at light-middle. It won’t happen.

After that? From a British perspective, Mayweather bouts against either Amir 
Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> or Kell Brook would sell big. 
The odds are long on Khan getting the gig, longer on Brook – although Kell has 
the Eddie Hearn connection (more of which later). The alternative to either is 
staring everyone in the face: Khan-Brook. My guess is it will happen next year 
after both have explored other options.

Who wouldn’t want to watch the KO king Deontay Wilder and long-time 
heavyweight champion Wladimir Klitschko go at it? There is a decent chance of 
this one coming off – if Tyson Fury, Klitschko’s mandatory challenger, doesn’t 
upset the entire world order of the division, and who’s to say he can’t do it?

Klitschko did not look at his best in beating the novice latecomer Bryant 
Jennings in New York two weeks ago.

Domestically the bout the fighters, the public, the rival TV stations and even 
their stubborn promoters want is Carl Frampton against Scott Quigg. If someone 
could lock Barry McGuigan and Hearn in a room until they reached an agreement 
or ran out of food, we might see it later in the year, or in 2016.

Right now, it is the British Mayweather-Pacquiao stalemate – and neither of 
them is likely to be around in six years.

Again, for a British audience, there is genuine hunger for a rematch between 
Billy Joe Saunders and Chris Eubank Jr. Theygave us a tense, raw struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/30/chris-eubank-jr-billy-joe-saunders>
 the first time and there are good judges who reckon the result might go 
Eubank’s way next time. Negotiations, however, will always be tough when 
Eubank’s dad is involved. Still, it has to happen.

At some point, Anthony Joshua will put himself in the frame for a shot at the 
world title, be it held by Klitschko, Wilder (or, who knows, Fury).

Meanwhile, a punching shootout with David Price appeals as a contest where the 
final bell will be redundant. Doable.

The standout champions of the light-heavyweight division, Adonis Stevenson and 
Sergey Kovalev, would provide one of the loudest collisions in boxing.

Kovalev, so dominant against Bernard Hopkins, will waste more time in July on 
Nadjib Mohammedi, while Superman waits in his phone box.

Lee Selby is already moving at elite level and if he keeps winning there are 
great matches to be made in a division where Nicholas Walters has aroused a lot 
of interest since winning the WBA’s “super” version of the featherweight title. 
If the Welshman beats Evgeny Gradovich at the O2 Arena on 30 May, he will have 
the IBF belt to use as bait for the Jamaican. And nine stone is where the WBO 
champ Lomachenko roams, of course.

Amir Khan ticks over against Chris Algieri on 29 May and waits still for a 
call from Floyd; but a return with Danny García, who ripped his 140lb belts 
from him in 2012, would be just as exciting at 147lb – especially as the 
Philadelphian looked vulnerable beating Lamont Peterson last month. One day, 
also, Khan might gain revenge against Peterson.

Saúl Álvarez apparently was awesome destroying James Kirkland in three rounds 
at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/09/canelo-alvarez-dispenses-of-james-kirkland-with-highlight-reel-knockout>
; a Latino battle with Miguel Cotto would not have a pretty ending. And from 
there, we are drawn inevitably back to Golovkin.

One of the most exciting fighters in the business does not appear above: David 
Haye. And he has only himself to blame. The interest in the inactive former 
world heavyweight champion has waned. If he is playing the long game, it is a 
very long one. And not that clever. Talk about missing the boat.

Moneybox 

A question left in Money Mayweather’s inbox, meanwhile, on behalf of all 
boxing fans – does he consider he has a greater genius for boxing, or for 
making money? – will probably remain unanswered, although his latest 
performance confirms the suspicions of nearly everyone worth listening to that 
the latter is true.

His victory over Pacquiao was as calculated as his business deals. “I always 
find a way” Floyd did what he had to do in unifying the WBA, WBC and WBO 
welterweight titles. Then, as the star client of Al Haymon, the Scarlet 
Pimpernel of boxing who has about as much regard for the governing bodies as 
most fans, the new champion duly announced his intention to throw the belts in 
the trash can.

Mayweather, as ever, boxed by numbers: in and out, roll the shoulder, crack 
the right counter on to Manny’s chin, the long left lead to the body to put him 
out of his rhythm, shift and away. Simple. What clearly concerned Mayweather 
more than the titles or pleasing the bloodlust of the wealthiest crowd seen at 
a boxing match were his unbeaten record and the bucks.

Check the numbers that matter to Floyd. He has career earnings of $410m over 
nearly 19 years, with $180m of it arriving from one night’s work. Of the 10 
highest-grossing fights of all time, Mayweather has been in four of them: 
against Álvarez, Oscar De La Hoya, Cotto and Pacquiao, the grand daddy of them 
all. It might never be matched.

Mayweather has also generated five of the greatest top 10 pay-per-view numbers 
– and the latest hit might even go as five million, another record beyond the 
reach of anyone currently at work in the business.

Hearn happy for Haymon 

Eddie Hearn can hardly believe his luck. Having struck up an informal working 
relationship with Al Haymon, he discovers that the new Don (King) of boxing has 
a war chest of $200m to spend on challenging the sport’s established elite.

On Saturday, Hearn sent his Matchroom fighters Ricky Burns and Jamie McDonnell 
to the State Farm Arena in Hidalgo, Texas, to share in some of that largesse 
and perform on a show bearing Haymon’s PremierBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Champions imprint – although 
officially promoted by the Floridian Leon Margules - and shown on national 
network television there, and Sky Sports here.

There will be more such transatlantic expeditions as this interesting 
partnership unfolds. Hearn last year flagged his intention to expand his 
operation in the US and this would appear to be only the beginning.

It would be interesting to know, meanwhile, what the well-travelled WBA 
supervisor Carlos Chávez thought when McDonnell, his organisation’s 
bantamweight champion, was announced as the points winner of his 12-rounder 
against the unbeaten Tomoki Kameda.

“And still bantamweight champion … ” said the announcer, ignoring the WBA 
altogether. And so it has been on all PBC shows since Haymon struck deals this 
year with NBC and CBS, as well as smaller outlets, to show his fights, 
deracinated of the old interim, silver, super and best-in-my-street titles – 
not to mention the sanction fees – and taking the business in a completely new 
direction.

Haymon is steadily marginalising the world governing bodies – and nobody is 
losing sleep over that. Where he takes the sport from here is less clear but 
Hearn looks as if he is going along for the ride.

Part of Haymon’s multi-year deal with NBC is for six Saturday shows a year 
starting at 5pm ET, 10pm BST. Now that’s handy synchronicity for Sky Sports: 
quality US boxing at a reasonable hour.

McDonnell, incidentally, boxed with his trademark grit, coming back from a 
third-round knockdown to take a close points decision over a dangerous 
opponent. Burns also turned in a wholehearted performance, finishing with 
energy and spirit but not doing quite enough over the distance to spoil the 
unbeaten record of former world champion Omar Figueroa.

The Scot is as obdurate as Nicola Sturgeon. This was his second loss in three 
fights since losing his WBO lightweight title to the estimable Terence Crawford 
in March last year but he looks rejuvenated at last, certainly sharper than in 
his marking-time points win over Alexandre Lepelley in Leeds last November. He 
has been through hell in the ring and, recently, the courts, where litigation 
has put a serious hole in his finances. But he never stops smiling – or 
punching. There could not be a more stark contrast with Money Mayweather.
 