
Mike Phelan urged Hull City to show more commitment after they slipped to 
another damaging defeat. His side giftedWest Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> two goals in a 3-1 loss at The 
Hawthorns, their ninth game without a win in the Premier League.

Chris Brunt, Gareth McAuley and James Morrison capitalised on poor defending 
to seal Albion’s comeback win. Robert Snodgrass opened the scoring, but Hull 
fell apart after allowing Brunt a free header to equalise four minutes after 
half-time.

Hull are second-bottom in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> table, three points from 
Crystal Palace in 17th, and Phelan, the manager, said: “We have to be more 
courageous and braver and sometimes take a knock.

“You can’t just be a pretty boy, you have to get your body or something on it. 
When it is a one-on-one situation you have to carry out that duty. For 45 
minutes that was probably as good as we have played. We got the goal and we 
were in control, but the game doesn’t last 45 minutes and we suffered again. 
You can’t win games by playing nice neat football, you have to do the dirty 
bits at the other end. There’s only so much we can prepare and the staff do it 
really well and the players are aware of that. After the game it’s annoying 
they didn’t carry those bits of detail out.”

Romelu Lukaku blasts home to secure Everton win over Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/everton-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
Hull are without an away win in the league since August, with Snodgrass’s goal 
their first in the top flight outside the KCom Stadium since October, and 
Phelan knows he needs reinforcements. “I’ll be having those conversations 
again, we have to look at it, we are now into the month so hopefully we’re not 
waiting until the 28th or 29th to do our business.”

Albion are eighth and have their second‑best points haul, 29, after 20 Premier 
League games. This victory followeda 2-1 win at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/southampton-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday and Tony Pulis, the manager, rejected any talk of players being 
tired after two games in 48 hours. “If you tell people they’re tired, they’ll 
be tired – you don’t have to do too much to convince them,” he said. “Two games 
in three days playing professional football, for the money they get?

“Go and ask their grandfathers what it was like working seven days a week down 
the pit, 12-hour days, they never got tired. We have done it right, but never 
mentioned they’d be tired.

“Have a look around, a couple of our big [local] rivals have lost in the 
Championship, so don’t take anything for granted. As soon as you take your foot 
off the pedal, apart from the top six, the rest of us have to be on it every 
game to get a result.”

Jonny Evans sustained a calf problem and with Allan Nyom joining up with 
Cameroon for the Africa Cup of Nations, Pulis admitted the injury may change 
his transfer policy. “I don’t want to bring players in for the sake of it 
although looking at Jonny, and Nyom going away, we might have to get a couple 
of defenders in which we weren’t expecting to do.”
 