
Melbourne blew a golden chance to move into the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> top four with a shock loss to cellar 
dwellers Newcastle.

The Storm could have moved above Souths and the Sharks into fourth with a win 
over the Knights but instead delivered one of their worst performances of the 
season in the 20-6 loss at AAMI Park.

It is the third time this season they have lost to the side sitting on the 
bottom of the NRL ladder.

Their first half left Melbourne coach Craig Bellamy breathing fire with his 
team missing 16 tackles and only completing 11 of 18 sets, with just 39% of 
possession.

South Sydney's Greg Inglis to undergo operation on troublesome knee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/24/south-sydneys-greg-inglis-to-undergo-operation-on-troublesome-knee>
The Knights set the tone early, scoring through skipper Kurt Gidley in the 
sixth minute with the Storm not even touching the ball prior to that.

When they did get their hands on it they made it count with fullback Cameron 
Munster spinning out of a tackle to touch down.

But that was all the Melbourne faithful had to cheer about in the first half 
as Newcastle scored another two tries, through second-rower Tariq Sims and then 
an intercept effort by halfback Tyrone Roberts.

With the Knights returning to AAMI Park for the first time since Alex McKinnon 
suffered a tragic spinal injury in a tackle on the ground early last season, 
Sims paid tribute to McKinnon after scoring his try.

Up 18-6 the hungry Knights continued to probe the Storm defence in the second 
half as the home side struggled to find their rhythm.

Winger Akuila Uate missed a chance to put Melbourne away in the 50th minute 
when he dropped the ball over the line and he attempted to ground it.

But the heavy defensive toll from the first half took its toll on the Storm 
and they were unable to conjure a comeback.

An error with seven minutes left on the clock from Storm skipper Cameron Smith 
typified their night when he kicked a 20m restart out on the full, resulting in 
a penalty, that Roberts nailed for the match-winning margin.
 