
Melbourne have outgunned Cronulla 26-6 to win the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> minor premiership and set up a 
qualifying final against defending premiers North Queensland.

With the two top teams battling for the J. J. Giltinan Shield at AAMI Park, 
the clinical Storm steamrolled the Sharks to win the trophy for the first time 
since 2011.

NRL minor premiership: Melbourne Storm v Cronulla Sharks – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/03/nrl-minor-premiership-melbourne-storm-v-cronulla-sharks-live>
On the back of the loss, the Sharks could fall to third, with Canberra a 
chance to leapfrog them with a win on Sunday over the Wests Tigers. Regardless 
of the outcome of the Leichhardt Oval clash, the teams will meet next weekend 
in the second qualifying final.

The Cowboys earlier cemented fourth spot and a meeting with the Storm at AAMI 
Park with a 32-16 win over Gold Coast.

While centre Cheyse Blair scored a try in each half, Melbourne’s stoic defence 
was key to their victory, repelling the Sharks’ attacking threats to keep them 
tryless until the 69th minute.

Rugby-bound winger Marika Koroibete showed what a loss he will be to the NRL 
with some scintillating runs and bone-crunching defence.

Centre Will Chambers, who missed three months with a fractured foot, also 
looked back to his best, while the Storm pack gave the Sharks no room to move.

Cronulla, aiming for their first minor premiership since 1999, threw 
everything at Melbourne but never really looked like getting the better of 
their opponents.

They suffered a setback in the first half losing two forwards in Chris 
Heighington (concussion) and Joseph Paulo (knee) as the Storm went up 10-2 at 
the break.

The Sharks could have further worries with a late hit by hooker Michael Ennis 
taking out Storm five-eighth Blake Green as he put Blair through for his first 
try.

Melbourne coach Craig Bellamy said winning the minor premiership was extra 
special given the torrid injury run his team had gone through during the season.
“It means a fair bit for us,” Bellamy said.
“It’s a symbol that you’ve been the best team in this competition for seven 
months.
“It doesn’t mean you’re going to be the best for the next month but to finish 
at the top of the heap of this competition isn’t easy to do.”
Cronulla coach Shane Flanagan said his team created plenty of opportunities 
but couldn’t finish them off to put pressure on the Storm.
“In the second half, the line breaks were five-three to us so we broke their 
line a couple of times but balls didn’t go to hand and there was an intercept 
there,” Flanagan said.
“We had our opportunities and, if we’d have taken them in the first half, it 
could have been a different story but typical Storm – they held in there.
“We weren’t at our best and they deserved the win.”
Flanagan said he believed Heighington would be fit to face the Raiders, while 
Paulo would be sidelined for a few weeks with medial ligament damage.
 