
 Mervyn King, the deputy governor of the Bank of England <>, yesterday 
dismissed the notion that the internet was transforming the performance of the 
British economy,

 While insisting he had an open mind about its potential impact, Mr King said 
there was little hard evidence to conclude that net had improved the underlying 
growth rate.

"Don't jump to conclusions, just because some people are starting to use the 
internet, that this is a dramatic change," said Mr King. Rejecting the argument 
that the economy had entered a new commercial era, Mr King said: "We are not 
living on a different planet."

American economist Paul Romer first floated in 1983 the "new growth theory" 
which recognised that tech nology - and hence new ideas - was a force 
comparable to labour and capital that could be cultivated to increase growth.

In America, new economy gurus claim the net has boosted productivity, allowing 
the economy to grow much faster without running into the buffers of inflation.

But Mr King said there had been no comparable rise in productivity in the UK 
to justify a looser monetary policy.

He said it was possible retail margins would be squeezed by the extra 
competition associated with the net, but there was nothing to suggest that this 
would be a lasting effect.

Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> booksellers tended 
to be cheaper than those in the high street, but once post and packaging was 
taken into account there was not much differ ence in price. Moreover, high 
street booksellers had the advantage of selling on demand, whereas net 
customers had to wait for purchases to be delivered.

On productivity, Mr King said it could be that the UK was lagging three to 
four years behind the US because net usage was less widespread, or productivity 
gains were restricted to small sectors of the economy and did not show up in 
aggregated data. "We don't know the answers to these questions," said the 
deputy governor. He said the internet was not the only innovation that we had 
seen in the past 100 years. There had been many; each one unique - factories 
had had to be redesigned before electrification had its full effect.
 