
For 730 days there was something missing from Michael van Gerwen’s life. He 
won 43 tournaments in the two years after being dethroned as world champion – 
but not the one he really wanted. Before every single televised match he had to 
listen to the same piercing introduction: “The world No1 – and the former 
champion of the world.”

There were concerns that Van Gerwen might want – need – to win it too much 
this year. Instead his desire was an endless source of fuel that catalysed some 
of the greatest darts ever seen. His journey culminated with an emphatic 7-3 
victory over the reigning champion, Gary Anderson, in the final at Alexandra 
Palace: his 44th tournament win in two years, and his crowning glory.

Gary Anderson v Michael van Gerwen: PDC World Darts Championship final – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/02/gary-anderson-v-michael-van-gerwen-pdc-world-darts-championship-final-live>
There were cathartic tears from Van Gerwen at the end of the match, and even 
more during a moving embrace with his wife, Daphne, moments later. It was one 
of many feelgood images from an exceptional match, played at blistering speed 
by two geniuses with enormous mutual respect. At the end, during the 
presentations, they stood laughing and joking like two old mates in the pub.

Van Gerwen averaged 108.06 and Anderson 104.93. In years to come the 
tournament may look processional – Van Gerwen lost only nine sets in seven 
matches – but he was pushed seriously hard. Three of the four highest losing 
averages in the history of the world championship, including Anderson, came 
against Van Gerwen in this tournament.

The more he was pushed, the harder he pushed back. He averaged more than 100 
in every game, and ended with a preposterous tournament average of 107.06. He 
is a formidable, borderline unbeatable fusion of divine talent and intimidating 
mental strength, and an authentic superstar. After the match, his press 
conference was interrupted because of a call from the Dutch prime minister, 
Mark Rutte.

Michael van Gerwen: I can come back from any position to win | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/09/michael-van-gerwen-darts-world-championship-pdc>
Before the tournament, Van Gerwen said a year in which he won 25 trophies – 
including all televised ranking events and the Premier League – would be a 
“disaster” if he did not win the worlds. “I put so much pressure on my 
shoulders because I wanted to win so much,” he said after beating Anderson. 
“This means everything to me.” The Sid Waddell Trophy weighs 25kg, yet Van 
Gerwen held on to it throughout his post-match interview on stage. “I’ve waited 
a long time for this. I’ll probably sleep with it tonight.”

His win over Anderson followed a very similar pattern to the semi-final 
dismantling of Raymond van Barneveld a day earlier, in which he shattered the 
record for the highest average in a world championship match. Both games were 
2-2 before Van Gerwen went into overdrive. To complete the sense of closure, 
Van Barneveld and Anderson were the people who knocked Van Gerwen out in the 
past two years.

The start of the final was an unyielding struggle, with each of the first four 
sets going to a last-leg decider.

Van Gerwen was a break down but hit a crucial double 7, last dart in hand, to 
make it 2-2 rather than 3-1 to Anderson. His raucous celebration told how 
important it was, and it sparked a brutal surge in which he won 14 legs out of 
16 to go 6-2 ahead in sets.

It’s often said that the Van Gerwen surge, in which he reels off leg after 
leg, hurts less in set play. That is true – but not when you extend it for as 
long as he did here. Anderson’s aura of invincibility, built up over 17 
consecutive wins in the world championship, was obliterated. Not even he could 
live with Van Gerwen. Not even a robot could have lived with him. The only 
thing that delayed the Dutchman was a stage-crasher who tried to present him 
with the trophy before the match had finished.

That led to an unexpected encore, in which Anderson came to life and both 
players hit a barrage of 180s. The eventual total of 42 maximums smashed the 
world record of 34 in one match, set during last year’s final between Anderson 
and Adrian Lewis. Van Gerwen’s moment finally came when he hit the bullseye to 
break Anderson and win 7-3.

It was the biggest win in the final in five years. Van Gerwen is so good that 
he made a virtue of an anti-climax. This was not the dream, last-set thriller 
that everyone hoped for, but it was an exhibition of greatness that will take 
out a lease in the memory bank.

Not least because of what it meant to Van Gerwen. As he lifted the trophy on 
stage, the new darts anthem, Freed From Desire, blared out for the final time 
at this year’s world championships. Van Gerwen was free from his own desire to 
win the title again. Moments before that he was reintroduced as the “two-time 
world champion”. He has waited a long time to hear those words.
 