
When I was at drama school, I remember there being two different classes 
involving improvisation.

One was based on a very structured, analytical, rule-based form that developed 
out of the teachings of an American theatre practitioner namedUta Hagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jan/17/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
.

The other was a rule-free, very fluid, anarchic form that had been developed 
out of the work of a British improv group calledTheatre Machine 
<http://www.keithjohnstone.com/>. Two very different paths to unlocking 
creativity and exploring freedom from the constraints of a pre-existing text.

'By God, believe in something,' Michael Sheen tells politicians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/02/michael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians>
It was fascinating to see how we, as students, responded to these two 
confrontations with freedom and the possibilities inherent in entering the 
unknown.

The whole concept of improvisation seems to suggest utter freedom of 
imagination and infinite possibility in exploring what is spontaneous and of 
the moment. Yet, the most common result in both, very different classes, was a 
sort of leaden stultification and a parade of one empty cliché after another.

In the Uta Hagen “method” class, the sheer weight of methodology and feeling 
of looming judgment if you strayed off the path of rigorous authenticity seemed 
to crush all spontaneity and rob the whole process of any joy or excitement.

Whereas, in the other, unstructured class with no rules and nothing to 
constrain our unfettered imaginations, we would just stand there, blinking in 
the dazzling light of total freedom, totally immobilised by the lack of any 
structure and groping for anything familiar to hang on to. This most often led 
to a terror-fuelled clinging on to the most hackneyed and superficial of 
elements, like drowning bodies clutching at any passing piece of driftwood in a 
desperate attempt to stay afloat.

Very occasionally, in one class or the other, a glimmer of something vital and 
truly alive could thrillingly and seemingly out of nowhere suddenly come into 
being and the sheer exhilaration of possibility would momentarily electrify the 
room, but that was almost always the exception to the dull and lifeless rule.

We would just stand there, blinking in the dazzling light of total freedom

What both classes shared was a tangible sense of fear. Not just the 
nervousness and anxiety that inevitably accompanies any kind of performance, 
especially one relying so much on the unknown.

This was different.

On the one hand, there was the terror of knowing that, in our desperate 
attempts to gain the favour of whichever priest or priestess of the “method’ 
orthodoxy we were being cruelly scrutinised by that day, we would inevitably 
break one or other of the endless, barely understood rules and that our 
transgressions would lead us to being shamed before our peers and punished for 
being an example of bourgeois fakery and vacuous superficiality. Judged as 
unworthy, traitorous and empty.

Selfish, vulgar, infantile displays of power-grabs and status battles would 
play out, greedy and ugly and animalistic. Often violent and slapstick cruel.

We were encouraged not to self-censor and for those observing not to judge. 
This primal crudity was necessary to purge through in order to get to the real 
creative gold that might lay beneath. Well, the veins were mighty hard to find 
but the journey was certainly instructive about what can happen when the 
shackles of regulation are removed.
 Rehearsals for Belarus Free Theatre’s production Price of Money. Photograph: 
Georgie Weedon 
Those two classes that I took almost 25 years ago now have remained with me. I 
am reminded of them whenever I come across any discussion of the concept of 
“freedom”.

And they are always useful in reminding me of some of the more surprising 
aspects of the realities of it, at least in my very limited and privileged 
experience of it.

Ex-president of the United States Ronald Reagan said: “Man is not free unless 
government is limited.” He advocated deregulation of the financial markets and 
allowing capitalism complete freedom to self-regulate society.

Nobel prize-winning economist Alvin E Roth said: “When we speak about a free 
market, we shouldn’t be thinking of a free-for-all, but rather a market with 
well-designed rules that make it work for all.”

If I ever come across an improvisation class created by Roth, I’m signing up.

 * On Freedom: Powerful Polemics by Supporters of Belarus Free Theatre 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368542/> is published 
by Oberon Books.Win a copy of On Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2015/oct/21/on-freedom-win-one-of-four-copies>
.  