
Oxford United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united> wasted 
their third penalty out of four on Saturday on their way to a 0-0 draw with 
Morecambe at the Kassam. Kemar Roofe won it and fluffed it midway through the 
second half. In conjunction with other results it means the clubs sit side by 
side, sixth and seventh, in League Two, five points off Portsmouth at the top, 
one above Exeter in the bottom half.

With the season not quite a fifth over it is too early to count the cost and 
too simplistic to measure the damage by adding a goal to Oxford’s score in the 
relevant matches. But on the face of it they may see it as three dropped points 
– two from this game and one from the 1-0 defeat at Northampton, when Danny 
Hylton was the culprit. Alex MacDonald’s failure was against Notts County, whom 
they beat 3-1 anyway. The one they did convert was by Roofe, giving them a 1-1 
draw with Mansfield, who had just missed one themselves.

Michael Appleton, Oxford’s manager, was philosophical. “It’s a little bit of 
an achilles heel at present,” he admitted. It has been a sore point for him 
since pre-season when Hylton, last season’s taker, missed his own third in four 
attempts. He recalled then “someone 10 times more experienced than I am saying 
that once someone has missed three he shouldn’t be given the ball again”.

Appleton, a midfielder with Preston and West Brom whose career was cut short 
by injury at 27, is at last getting the chance of good experience himself. His 
first journey in management wasas haphazard as a hitchhiker’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/15/michael-appleton-blackburn-rovers-arsenal>
: points-deducted Portsmouth, then two months at each of unsettled Blackpool 
and Blackburn. Understandably he needed a year off. Oxford, who engaged him in 
July 2014, have offered him the lift he looks to have deserved.Last season was 
a struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2014/aug/24/oxford-remain-pointless-despite-dominant-display-against-portsmouth>
 until eight unbeaten games at the end lifted them from anxiety. They have lost 
only once in nine this season and Appleton, appreciating the ground improvement 
from London Welsh’s departure, is forging a side after his own heart, enjoying 
what Stuart Lancaster would call front-foot ball.

Roofe, signed from West Brom, showed a deft touch in the No10 (fly-half?) 
role, matched either side by Callum O’Dowda and Danny Rose. George Baldock, a 
right-back on loan from MK Dons, added to the momentum. Notably all 11 starters 
are English, as were nine of Morecambe’s, though O’Dowda, locally born, has 
played Under-21 games for the Republic of Ireland. There could be a Jack 
Grealish moment in the offing.

Morecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> were wise to the 
threat. Having lost 4-2 at home to Northampton the previous week, they were 
well prepared to resist. Jim Bentley, their manager in his fifth year (Oxford, 
take note), was delighted they “bounced back in the right manner off the back 
of an alarming game”. Appleton saw it as a compliment that “teams coming here 
show us a lot of respect”.

Bentley conceded Oxford had “the lion’s share of the game” while Appleton said 
“we came up against two stern centre-halves” in Ryan Edwards and Alan Dugdale. 
Both made crucial blocks in front of Barry Roche in the final siege, though 
both almost sliced into their own goal around the interval with Kevin Ellison, 
who earlier skimmed a header on to Oxford’s bar, shepherding the first against 
a post with a suspicion of hands.

Appleton was “frustrated” but not complaining. “My players did a lot of really 
good things,” he said, looking forward to two games in the north this week, at 
York and Accrington. Oxford, who have been in the Conference more recently than 
Morecambe, are celebrating 30 years since their first season in the top tier. 
Their first victory was on the equivalent Saturday, 1-0 against Manchester 
City, won with a penalty by John Trewick. Appleton, spared the task at Preston 
and West Brom by Graham Alexander and Neil Clement, said he might have to take 
them himself with his “five-out-of-five record in shootouts”. Meanwhile perhaps 
they should have a hash tag.
 