
Michael van Gerwen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-van-gerwen> is 
arguably the most dominant sportsman in the world, yet he is not world champion 
of his own sport. That paradox dominates the buildup to the PDC World 
Championship, the festive jamboree that begins at Alexandra Palace on Thursday 
night. In the past 12 months the Dutchman has seen his own 2015 brilliance and 
raised it by winning a staggering 25 tournaments, including nine of the 10 that 
have been televised live. But it is three years since he won his only world 
title.

If there was any doubt how much the tournament means to him it disappeared 
during his forlorn interview <https://youtu.be/btfV-S5sdk8?t=1h18m55s> after he 
lost an epic third-round match to Raymond van Barneveld last year. Van Gerwen 
won 18 tournaments in 2015 but ended a staggering year on a crushing low. “I 
want to win this one,” he said. “I want to throw all the other titles in the 
bin for this one.” When he was asked: “What next for you?” a solemn Van Gerwen 
replied: “Not much.”

Phil Taylor: ‘Players today are different. What are you on about? Snapchat?’ | 
Donald McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/phil-taylor-darts-interview> 
Three years without a world title are worth an aeon in Van Gerwen years. If he 
does not win this time, an oddity will start to look like something more 
serious. But Wayne Mardle, the Sky Sports commentator and four-time world 
championship semi-finalist, does not think there is a danger of Van Gerwen 
wanting it too much.

“He’s such an instinctive player and has a style that doesn’t allow him to 
tighten up – his brain works so quickly,” says Mardle. “I believe Michael likes 
being under pressure. The fun for him is the journey to get to the winning 
double. I don’t think he’ll be pent-up at only winning it once. He’s so 
dominant that he thinks if he plays well he wins. And I think he’s right.”

Whereas many of his tournament victories in 2015 were achieved in close 
matches, often courtesy ofan exhilarating surge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/09/michael-van-gerwen-darts-world-championship-pdc>
, most of his wins in 2016 have verged on the processional. He has a 
preposterous win percentage of 91, including 27 in a row going into his 
first-round match against Ross Snook or Kim Viljanen on Saturday, and has 
become such a name that this week the New York Times published a profile “The 
Michael Jordan of darts 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/sports/michael-van-gerwen-darts-championship.html?_r=0>
”. In October, after a majestic 5-2 win over Gary Anderson in the World Grand 
Prix final, he received the highest praise from another sporting genius. 
“Michael and Usain Bolt are the two top boys in any sport worldwide,” said 
Ronnie O’Sullivan. “Van Gerwen is amazing. He’s unbelievable. I think he is the 
best sportsman on the planet of any sport and he’s even quicker than Usain 
Bolt.”

As if his fusion of mental strength and natural talent was not formidable 
enough, Van Gerwen has started to time his big scores and especially his big 
finishes to achieve maximum psychological damage. This was perfectly 
demonstrated in November’s Grand Slam semi-final: with Peter Wright waiting on 
25 to lead for the first time in the match, Van Gerwentook out 139 in the blink 
of an eye <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WXo1upWgItEt=33m30s>. Wright, who 
would have a very different mantelpiece but for Van Gerwen, was broken in more 
ways than one. From 8-8, he won only two of the final 10 legs.

“He’s got that Phil Taylor-like mentality: ‘Oh yeah, this will hurt my 
opponent,’” says Mardle. “He so often takes out big finishes and then starts 
the next leg with a 180. And he does it so quickly that it puts your head in a 
spin.”

A few have tried gamesmanship against Van Gerwen this year, with no success, 
and Mardle thinks the best way to beat him is to follow the Van Barneveld 
template from a year ago. “With the format of sets rather than legs, it really 
is all about timing,” says Mardle. “You need to reverse the roles, basically, 
and take out big finishes when Michael is waiting on a double like Barney did 
last year.”

The focus on Van Gerwen is such that the reigning champion Gary Anderson, who 
is aiming to become only the third man after Taylor and Eric Bristow to win 
three in a row, can sit in the background – at least until Thursday night, when 
he plays Mark Frost in the third match of the tournament. “He’s slightly under 
the radar because Michael has been so good,” says Mardle. “He’s in the right 
half of the draw – all the other previous winners are in the top half. I 
certainly wouldn’t rule him out.”

Anderson, reluctant for so long to play in glasses because it might impede his 
throwing action, was left with no choice because of his worsening eyesight and 
has adjusted smoothly in the past two months.

Everyone has their own preparation for the big one. At 56, Phil Taylor has 
reduced his schedule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/phil-taylor-darts-interview> in 
an attempt to win a 17th world title. “I think Phil’s been playing OK,” says 
Mardle. “The ability is just as great but the consistency and composure are 
slightly lacking. Phil’s giving his opponents hope, whereas before he would 
beat you mentally long before the match was over.

“It’s the romantic in me, but I’d love Phil to retire on the spot if he won. 
Your last competitive dart is double 16, you become world champ for the 17th 
time and then you pack it in. How good would that be?”

Adrian Lewis, brilliant and erratic but always invigorated by Ally Pally, is 
scheduled to meet Taylor in what would be a monstrous quarter-final, though to 
get that far he will probably have to beat Van Barneveld, whose deceptively low 
ranking makes him a dangerous floater. “You’ve got to get the right seeding to 
become world champion,” says Mardle. “You need to be in the right half of the 
draw. Adrian has suffered because he’s dropped from No3 to No5.”

The reverse is also true. The ultra-consistent Wright, who is now world No3 
and has a better draw as a result, may find that a good ranking perpetuates 
itself. James Wade, Dave Chisnall and the eccentric Austrian Mensur Suljovic 
make up the top eight. “Dave Chisnall, at 33-1, is a good each-way bet to reach 
the final,” says Mardle “If he can hit his doubles anywhere near to 40%, he’s 
got a great chance. There are so many people I’d love to see win it. There can 
only be one, so I’m going for the most likely: I think Michael will beat either 
Gary or Chizzy in the final.”

If he does, world darts domination will be complete.

The draw

The second quarter of the draw is the toughest. Only one of Phil Taylor, 
Adrian Lewis and Raymond van Barneveld can reach the semi-finals – and the 
reward for that is likely to be a match with Michael van Gerwen. In the bottom 
half, Gary Anderson and Peter Wright could meet in an all-Scotland semi-final. 
If all goes with seeding, the quarter-finals will be: Van Gerwen v Mensur 
Suljovic, Taylor v Lewis, Anderson v Dave Chisnall and Wright v James Wade.

Five contenders

Michael van Gerwen The world No1 has won a staggering 25 trophies in 2016 and 
also broke the world record for the highest average. He looks unbeatable yet it 
is three years since his only world title.

Gary Anderson Anderson, who has won the last two World Championships, is an 
understated genius who makes 180s seem effortless. Has had a mixed year but has 
become a master of peaking at Christmas.

Peter Wright Wright’s fluorescent hair and clothes are eye-catching but his 
game is far less flamboyant: he is an admirable model of consistency who 
routinely reaches the later stages of tournaments. Yet to win a major but 
reached the final of the worlds in 2014.

Phil Taylor The 16-time world champion has played better in 2016 than results 
suggest, but the longer format of the worlds does not favour 56-year-olds. Will 
take heart from winning his last three matches against Van Gerwen and six of 
his last seven against Anderson.

Raymond van Barneveld Van Barneveld’s reduced schedule, and consequently lower 
ranking, makes him a dangerous floater in every World Championship and usually 
guarantees a heavyweight clash in the last 16: this year it could be Adrian 
Lewis.

• 

The William Hill World Darts <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darts> 
Championship from 15 December – 2 January will be shown live on Sky Sports Darts
 