
Michael van Gerwen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-van-gerwen> 
showed some of his best form as he reached the quarter-finals of the PDC World 
Championship with a 4-1 victory over Darren Webster at Alexandra Palace.

Starting at a frantic pace, Webster hit 100 and 68 finishes to match his 
formidable opponent to go 2-2, and by doing so nearly took the opening set with 
two darts at doubles, but failed to convert. The Dutchman duly obliged by 
taking the first and then the second set.

Daryl Gurney reaches world darts championship quarter-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/daryl-gurney-world-darts-championship-mark-webster>
It was one-way traffic from then on, with Van Gerwen rattling off the next 
three legs with finishes of 74, eight and 32 to go 3-0 up before a dazzling 170 
checkout broke Webster in the first leg of the fourth set. Webster fought back 
with checkouts of 96 and 84, helping him get on the board with a deserved set 
to trail 3-1, and he took the first two legs in the fifth set. But Van Gerwen 
responded by hitting 88, double 20 and 62 to seal the last three legs, thus 
confirming his place in the last eight.

Phil Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-taylor> also made the 
quarter-finals after fighting off a mini-revival from Kim Huybrechts to secure 
a 4-2 success over the 13th seed.

The Belgian hit a 106 checkout to start the match, but quickly went down 3-0, 
leaving Taylor needing just one leg to secure a whitewash victory. However, 
Huybrechts came back with a 106 checkout followed by a scrappy final leg to win 
the fourth set and stay in the match.

He then maintained the momentum to earn two breaks alongside a 109 finish to 
reduce the deficit to 3-2. But Taylor took three of the last four legs to 
scrape into the next round.

Meanwhile, Peter Wright averaged more than 103 on his way to a comfortable 4-1 
win over Ian White to set up a quarter-final clash with James Wade, who 
recovered to beat Michael Smith 4-3, while earlier in the day Daryl Gurney 
reached the quarter-finals for the first time after overcoming Mark Webster in 
a topsy-turvy 4-3 win.

Elsewhere, Dave Chisnall held off Jelle Klaasen to earn a 4-2 victory and 
advance to the next round.
 