
It is the best part of 30 years since Tranmere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tranmere> Rovers last sat on the bottom 
of the Football League. If Micky Adams needed solace after watching the side he 
has been charged with lifting from the dreaded 92nd spot comprehensively beaten 
by the team who began the weekend in 91st, he could take it in the knowledge 
that the man in his position back in 1987 has a stand named in his honour.

Those in the Johnny King Stand have seen good times and bad since King led 
Rovers to three successive play-off campaigns in the second tier in the mid 
1990s, but the club’s current predicament – duly beaten 2-0 at Oxford on 
Saturday – is comfortably their lowest ebb. Relegation from League One on the 
final day of last season meant Rob Edwards’ side kicked off this campaign in 
the bottom division for the first time since 1988-89. Edwards, a first-time 
manager appointed in the summer after impressing in his coaching role at Exeter 
City, paid the price for a start where Rovers won just twice in 12League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> games. Adams watched 
from the stands at the Kassam as Oxford ensured that record now reads two wins 
in 13.

The Tranmere player-caretaker, Matt Gill, admitted that “people should be 
concerned” by Rovers’ position but clearly has plenty of faith in the Adams 
rescue operation. “The change has been made and the new boss will know exactly 
how to deal with this situation,” he said. “He’s a very experienced manager. 
There’s loads of time left but obviously we need to turn things around as 
quickly as we can.”

Adams’ record suggests that it is not blind faith. In his 18-year managerial 
career he has had six full seasons in the fourth tier and can boast an 
impressive 50% promotion strike rate: with Fulham in 1996-97, Brighton & Hove 
Albion in 2000‑01 and most recently Port Vale in 2012-13. Tranmere’s chairman, 
Mark Palios, felt the club needed “someone with a track record of success who 
understands the territory he will be operating in”. There is no doubt that 
Adams fits those specifications.

Saturday’s defeat displayed both the potential in the squad he inherits and 
the fragility. For nearly half an hour Tranmere looked anything but a side 
destined for the Conference. Jason Koumas and Max Power were neat and tidy in 
central midfield, while George Donnelly and George Barker buzzed brightly on 
the wings. It took a superb save from Ryan Clarke in the Oxford goal to deny 
Power after a beautifully incisive move that was worthy of a much higher level.

But all the vim and vigour, all the inventiveness and charm, disappeared once 
Tyrone Barnett had given the home side the lead after 28 minutes. The visitors’ 
response was initially frazzled, panicky, then resigned and sluggish, and the 
only surprise was that it took United, who came into the game on the back of a 
5-1 shellacking at Cambridge United, until the 73rd minute to double their 
advantage.

Adams does not take official charge until Monday, with his first game 
Tuesday’s home fixture against Mansfield. He was in the dressing room before 
the game and at half-time, though he could not prompt an immediate response 
from his new players. Clean slates all round might help.

“Obviously all the lads know they need to impress the new boss,” said Gill. 
“There’s a line drawn under what’s gone and it’s an opportunity for everyone. 
The lads that haven’t played, the lads that have been playing, everybody needs 
to do more and I’m sure the new manager will get that out of us.”

Palios has insisted that he “remains committed to the vision of playing 
free-flowing and skilful football”, an ideal that, for all his qualities, has 
not necessarily applied to some of Adams’ teams in the past. But while Palios 
can have his “vision” and continue to make improvements off the field (he has 
brought in “some of the successful techniques that have seen our Olympic teams 
thrive in recent years” to improve coaching at the club 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/new-tranmere-rovers-owners-looking-7836682>
), a bit of on-pitch pragmatism might be what is required. The Micky Adams 
stand might be a long way off, but it will be enough for now if he can just 
give those on the Prenton Park terraces something to smile about.
 