
My friend and brother-in-law Mick Curtis, who has died aged 84, created 
award-winning TV commercials which became news stories in themselves.

Mick’s career in film-making was driven by his determination. He was born in 
Newquay, Cornwall, to Leslie Curtis, a mechanic, and his wife Phyllis (nee 
Challenger). Growing up in the second world war years, Mick moved from school 
to school. Leaving at 14, he started work at a Bata shoe factory in Essex, 
where his natural manual dexterity was deployed. To extend his horizons he 
ventured to London, soon becoming a cinema projectionist. In 1945 he was called 
up into the RAF, training and testing as an aircraft controller. He remembered 
his three years in the RAF with pride.

Back on civvy street, he was a milkman until he found work as a projectionist 
again, first at Crawford’sAdvertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Agency, then at the British 
Council, and Independent Television News.

Returning to Crawford’s in 1955, Mick gained expertise in all areas of 
film-making (including editing and directing), rising over 15 years to director 
of television and then to associate director. He was behind some of the most 
memorable, ground-breaking and award-winning TV commercials, often featuring 
connecting stories, and sometimes with the most eloquent and extended shots. 
These included commercials for Martini and the Milk Marketing Board.

In 1970 Mick left Crawfords to be closer to his mother in Canvey Island, 
bought a grocery store, and concentrated on raising a family with his wife, 
Sheila (nee Shead), whom he had met at Crawfords and married in 1963. Seeking 
more regular hours to be close to his family, Mick became an assistant manager 
of a supermarket and then despatch manager for a hat manufacturer before 
finding both satisfaction and much appreciation over eight years teaching craft 
skills to people with disabilities.

In retirement Mick used his manual skills – in painting, marquetry, pottery, 
glass engraving, and photography – to create treasured works for his children 
and grandchildren. The Roman Catholic faith was important to him and his family.

Mick is survived by Sheila, three daughters, Sally, Joann and Nicola, a son, 
Owen, 11 grandchildren, and five great-grandchildren.
 