
Micky Adams has stepped down as the manager of Port Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale>. Adams’s second stint in charge 
at Vale Park ends after just under three and a half years at the helm, 
following a miserable run of six straight defeats in all competitions.

The 52-year-old has made the decision to leave after discussions with the club 
chairman, Norman Smurthwaite, on Thursday morning.

He said via a statement on the club’s official website 
<http://www.port-vale.co.uk/news/article/20140918-adams-steps-down-1925785.aspx>
: “It is with great sadness that I have decided to leave Port Vale but I 
believe I am leaving the club in a stronger position than when I joined.

“I have spent five years in Burslem, punctuated by a spell at Sheffield 
United, and although the role of a football manager brings with it a 
roller-coaster of emotions, I will never forget my time at Vale and the many 
happy memories I will take away with me.

“This has not been an easy decision to make, which has been made even more 
difficult by the strong relationships I have forged during my time at the club.

“I would like to thank my immediate team, all of the staff at Vale Park and 
the many players I have worked with throughout my two spells. I have met some 
truly fantastic people.

“In addition, I would like to thank all of the Port Vale fans for their 
fantastic support. I hope that the club has only bright times ahead.

“I believe now is the time for another manager to take the helm and I would 
like to thank Norman Smurthwaite and his wife Lorraine for their fantastic 
support. I wish the club every success for this season and the future.”

Adams first became Vale manager in the summer of 2009 but in December the 
following year the opportunity to take charge at his boyhood club Sheffield 
United was too good to turn down and he left Vale Park for Bramall Lane, with 
Vale second in the League Two table.

His stay in South Yorkshire was shortlived and Adams was sacked at the end of 
the 2010-11 season following the Blades’ relegation from the Championship. He 
immediately returned to Vale and got the club promoted in 2013.

Vale finished a respectable ninth during their first campaign back in League 
One but their start to this season has brought only one league win.

After a 2-1 loss to neighbours Crewe last weekend, Adams said he knew “the 
consequences of losing too many games.” A 3-0 home defeat to Bristol City 
followed on Tuesday night, prompting Adams to consider his future and 
ultimately call time on his stay at Vale Park.
 