
A furious Aitor Karanka tore into his Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> players and aimed a swipe 
at Boro supporters after squandering the opportunity to go top of the 
Championship table at Blackburn.

Boro would have moved ahead of leaders Burnley and Hull with a point at Ewood 
Park but with Sean Dyche and Steve Bruce watching on from the stands, they 
froze and were undone by two players they used to employ.

The Boro academy graduate Jason Steele made three fine saves from the former 
Blackburn striker Jordan Rhodes and, after Hope Akpan had given Rovers the 
lead, Danny Graham, another who spent the formative years of his career at the 
Riverside, doubled the advantage.

Adam Forshaw pulled one back late on but it did not improve Karanka’s mood. 
“It’s taken for us 75-85 minutes to wake up,” he fumed. “It’s really difficult 
for me to understand why a team like Blackburn, who are in the middle of the 
table and who had played five games in the last two weeks, had players who 
wanted it more than us. Their players are jumping more than us, they were 
quicker than us, even when they were winning 2-0 they were desiring to score 
the third one. When we are playing to get promotion, or at least to be in the 
play-offs, it is difficult to understand.”

The manager offered a sarcastic riposte to the Boro supporters who have spent 
large parts of the season querying why they have not deployed two out-and-out 
strikers.

Rhodes, signed for £9m from Rovers last month, started along with David 
Nugent, although the latter seemed to be deployed in a more withdrawn role.

“Today everybody will be happy in Middlesbrough because everybody wanted to 
play with two strikers,” Karanka said. “We played today with two. Maybe 
everybody’s happy even when we’ve lost the game.

“The main thing for me is to win the games. I decided to play with two because 
I felt it was the best thing and we are going to play more times with two. 
Again, if I made the people happy playing two strikers here when we’ve lost the 
game, it’s good for them.”

Paul Lambert had declared Blackburn were a “stronger unit” after offloading 
Rhodes, even though the striker scored 85 times in three-and-a-half years at 
the club.

He believes Boro may be feeling the pressure down the stretch after losing the 
play-off final last season. “They’re a top side,” he said. “What happens when 
you see the finishing line, to try to get out, sometimes nerves come into it. 
Whether that happens to them again, I don’t know.

“You’d like to think they will see it through this time because of the 
disappointment of last year. You will tend to find between now and the end of 
the season it will be pretty twitchy.”
 