
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have been shunned in 
their attempts to sign Alessio Romagnoli after Milan rejected an offer 
potentially worth £35m and insisted the player is not for sale at any price.

Eager to add to their central defensive options, Chelsea had turned to the 
Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> 21-year-old after failing 
to agree a deal with Napoli for their Senegalese defender Kalidou Koulibaly. 
Napoli fended off interest by insisting the player would cost £60m, a price 
Antonio Conte admitted was over the odds.

The left-footed Romagnoli had appeared to represent a more realistic target. 
He arrived at the San Siro from Roma for around £20m last summer and is 
contracted to 2020, earning around £35,000-a-week. Chelsea offered around £30m 
up front with further fees based on honours and appearances, only for their bid 
to be knocked back.

“Milan have received a very lucrative offer from Chelsea for Alessio 
Romagnoli,” the Serie A club saidon their website 
<https://www.acmilan.com/it/news/prima-squadra/2016-08-25/ac-milan-comunicato-ufficiale>
. “The player, however, is untransferable and therefore this offer will not be 
accepted. We thank Chelsea, a club Milan always have had the best of 
relationships with.”

Confirmation of the rejection may force Chelsea to revive interest in Torino’s 
Nikola Maksimovic, who had been interesting Napoli while they were expecting to 
lose Koulibaly earlier in the summer. Conte has only four fit senior defenders 
– John Terry, Gary Cahill, César Azpilicueta and Branislav Ivanovic – and has 
made clear Chelsea should make defensive recruits a priority in what remains of 
the window.

They also have an interest in the Swiss full-backs Ricardo Rodríguez of 
Wolfsburg and Juventus’s Stephan Lichtsteiner. The midfielder Mario Pasalic is 
joining Milan on a season-long loan in a separate deal that has not been 
affected by the Romagnoli negotiations.

Chelsea have secured the goalkeeper Eduardo Carvalho, 33, from Dinamo Zagreb, 
with the Portuguese to work as the backup to Thibaut Courtois and Asmir 
Begovic. “I am leaving Dinamo with the club qualified for the Champions League 
and I am thrilled with that success,” said Carvalho. “I hope people remember me 
in Zagreb as a person who always gave his best for the club and the fans, and 
that everyone will keep a nice memory of me.”

Chelsea have reopened talks with their young forward Dominic Solanke to 
resolve a long-running contract dispute that had threatened to leave the 
England Under‑21 international in limbo. The 18-year-old has entered the final 
year of his deal and had requested, via his stepfather, new terms worth around 
£50,000-a-week at the end of last season, as well as guarantees of senior 
football.

The club were unwilling to loan out Solanke before he had agreed a long-term 
deal, as has become policy in recent years. He scored seven goals in 26 games 
for Vitesse Arnhem in the Eredivisie last season. Yet the striker was on the 
substitutes’ bench against Bristol Rovers in the League Cup in midweek with 
talks having resumed aimed at reaching a compromise. Two other forwards at 
Chelsea, Loïc Rémy and Patrick Bamford, are expected to leave on loan before 
the 31 August cutoff.

Premier League: transfer window summer 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/aug/23/premier-league-transfer-window-summer-2016-interactive> 