
Jason Price, signed by Millwall on loan from Doncaster on Thursday, made a 
stunning impact on his Lions debut atCrewe. Brought on as a substitute for Neil 
Harris, he boosted their automatic-promotion hopes by scoring the stoppage-time 
goal which gave them a 1-0 win. Following Peterborough's earlier success over 
Leicester, Millwall, who have played one match fewer than Posh, reduced the gap 
between the two teams back to five points.

Millwall's opponents for their match in hand at home on Tuesday, Colchester, 
suffered a depressing afternoon in losing 3-0 atScunthorpe. Gary Hooper scored 
the first two goals to bring his total for the season to 29, three short of the 
tally with which Billy Sharp helped propel Scunthorpe to the League One title 
two seasons ago. It is some record for a player who managed only four goals in 
41 games for his previous club, Southend, before his move toScunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scunthorpe> last summer.

Yeovil's hopes of avoiding relegation were boosted by a surprise 1-0 win over 
Swindon – their first victory in eight matches following the appointment of 
Terry Skiverton as player-manager. The only goal came from 18-year-old Jonathan 
Obika, who is on loan from Tottenham Hotspur.

Wycombe, having slipped out of the League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> top three following 
last Saturday's 1-0 defeat by Rochdale, dropped another two home points as they 
allowedShrewsbury to come from behind to hold them to a 1-1 draw. They could 
easily have been two or three down before an excellent Gary Holt chip from 
outside the penalty area put them ahead. Ben Davies's late equaliser was no 
more than Shrewsbury merited.

The point for Wycombe initially put them third in place of Gillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> on goal difference. But with 
Gillingham drawing 1-1 at Brentford and Bury beating Bournemouth (which enabled 
Bury to join Brentford and Rochdale in the top three at Gillingham's expense) 
they now stand fifth.

Shrewsbury, in the fourth play-off position, were luckier, in that Bradford 
City, the team immediately behind them – and, like Wycombe, another side who 
have been struggling to cope with the high expectations and hopes surrounding 
them -could only manage a goalless draw atChester.

Wayne Rooney's 18-year-old brother, John, scored his first senior goal – from 
20 yards – forMacclesfield in the 2-1 defeat at Dagenham and Redbridge. 

There was another stirring performance from the bottom team, Luton, who warmed 
up for their Johnstone's Paint Trophy final against Scunthorpe next Sunday by 
coming from behind for a 2-1 win atMorecambe – the Lancashire team's first 
defeat in 13 matches. Unfortunately for Luton, though, the third-from-bottom 
team,Grimsby, also collected three points in overcoming Aldershot 1-0.
 