
Something of a theme has emerged in recent Open Door columns, which have 
looked at the way in which the Guardian describes minority groups, and 
furthermore what members of those groups think of that language. Sometimes 
the complaints are substantial; sometimes a word here, a phrase there, causes a 
spasm of irritation rather than full-blown rage.

One error that seems ever more important to correct in the light of the debate 
about the age at which state pensions are to be paid is the misuse of the word 
“elderly”.

A story published on the Guardian’s website on 17 February (One of three 
hillwalkers found after going missing has died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/17/one-of-three-hillwalkers-found-after-going-missing-has-died>
) began: “One of three elderly hillwalkers who had been missing overnight in 
Dumfries and Galloway has died...” It went on to say that the three walkers 
were aged 64, 73 and 74. A second man later died.

A reader wrote: “I’m 64, in my last year at uni, and although I am happy to be 
considered as older, I am not ‘elderly’.

“I think reporters (which I was for 44 years) should be careful about using 
the term elderly in the same way they are careful about LGBT or race issues. 
Elderly is not a good description, especially when readers can make their own 
judgment because the ages are given.”

The story contravened the Guardian style guide, which rules: “‘elderly 
people’: do not use to describe anyone under 75”.

As well as exercising caution around language, journalists increasingly have 
to be sensitive to the needs of readers who are affected by the issues being 
reported on or discussed.

On 3 February the Guardian published a story on its website with the headline “
Man suspected of killing estranged wife had been jailed for assaulting her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/03/man-suspected-killing-estranged-wife-two-children-jailed-assault>
”. It gave some background to a tragic story about a man who was found dead 
after his wife and two children had been murdered.

The story began: “A man suspected of killing his estranged wife and their two 
children was jailed in 2013 after being convicted of assault against her, it 
has emerged.

“Geraldine Newman, 51, was found dead with her son and daughter by a concerned 
friend. Police investigating the murders said on Tuesday that they had 
discovered the body of the suspect, Paul Newman, 42, on cliffs in South Stack 
in Anglesey, 180 miles away.”

It is now our standard practice when a story involves suicide to print contact 
details for the Samaritans in a footnote, as we did on this occasion.

Several readers were puzzled by the decision: “I was surprised to see, at the 
end of your report on the identification of Geraldine Newman’s estranged 
husband as the murderer of her and her two children, a link to the Samaritans. 
I do understand there being an editorial policy in place that requires this to 
follow any article dealing with a suicide, but when reporting the case of a man 
previously convicted of assaulting his wife going on to kill her, their 
children and later himself, it seems misplaced. Perhaps a link to Women’s Aid 
and similar organisations internationally would have been more appropriate? It 
strikes me that the Guardian is recognising the wrong victim here.”

Another reader wrote: “The story concerns the horribly frequent tragedy of a 
woman and her children murdered by her partner/their father. He has committed 
suicide. While I can see a case for providing a link to sources of support for 
people affected by the story, surely the top priority should be to help people 
affected by domestic violence to get to safety? Linking to just the Samaritans 
seems to make the man’s suicide the main focus of the story.”

I am sure that no judgment was intended, but I understand the points made by 
these readers. I don’t think one set of contact details should be dropped for 
another, as there may well be people who would benefit from counselling or help 
in all of these circumstances. On this occasion two sets of contact details 
would be the answer – at least on the web where there is the space. But it is 
an ethical consideration that even five years ago I am sure most journalists 
would not have expected to encounter.
 