
A Mitchell Moses masterclass has propelled the Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> to a nail-biting 34-26 NRL win 
over a spirited Warriors outfit on Saturday. In a see-sawing match, the Tigers 
looked to have the game in the bag after Moses guided them to a 28-4 halftime 
lead at Campbelltown Stadium.

Raiders overcome NRL's Panthers as heat, injuries take toll on both sides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/raiders-overcome-nrls-panthers-as-heat-injuries-take-toll-on-both-sides>
However the Warriors stormed back into the contest, putting on three tries in 
nine minutes to reduce the margin to two with 12 minutes to play as five-eighth 
Shaun Johnson sparked his side to life. The Warriors had their chances in the 
dying stages before a James Tedesco try in the last minute killed off the game.

The often-maligned Moses was superb, having a hand in three of the his side’s 
five first-half tries to seal a memorable win to open their season. Playing 
without the injured Robbie Farah and suspended halfback Luke Brooks, the Tigers 
showed their intention to throw the football around and play enterprising 
football. The result will heap pressure on Warriors coach Andrew McFadden after 
they suffered their ninthNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> loss in a 
row dating back through last season.

“Mitch has worked so hard at it and he was such a rookie this time last year. 
He’d only played a handful of games,” Wests coach Jason Taylor said. “He played 
every minute of every game last year. We made it hard for him early on because 
he wasn’t getting to play the footy that he really likes but he earned the 
right to do that and he’s doing that now.”

While it was a positive start for the Tigers following their horror 
off-season, Taylor would still have his concerns. The Shaun Johnson-led 
Warriors stormed back into the contest, at one point piling on three tries in 
nine minutes to get within two before a last-minute Tedesco four-pointer sealed 
it.

The recruitment of internationals Issac Luke and Roger-Tuivasa Sheck was 
supposed to herald a new dawn for the infamously inconsistent Warriors but 
under-fire coach Andrew McFadden conceded they were still lacking a winning 
mentality. “It’s a mindset thing – it’s a more-aggressive approach,” McFadden 
said. “We’ve got some momentum now and momentum at this time of year is pretty 
critical. Once we got going, it was pretty hard to stop - just like they were 
in the first half.”

In further bad news for the Warriors, luckless back-rower Ben Henry suffered a 
likely season-ending dislocated kneecap. The one-time Kiwi Test representative 
twice underwent knee reconstructions on the same left leg over the past three 
years and McFadden said his prognosis was looking grim.
 