
There’s no shame in MK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> 
being defeated easily by the reigning Premier League champions, but this was a 
ludicrously poor defensive performance from the home side. An alarmingly open 
shape without possession invited wave after wave of Chelsea attack, with Cesc 
Fàbregas, Oscar and Eden Hazard allowed to amble forward without any opposition 
pressure whatsoever.

MK Dons are a decent footballing side with technical talents in midfield, and 
Karl Robinson understandably wanted his side to play their natural game. The 
opposite approachcan be equally disastrous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/mk-dons-chelsea-fa-cup-match-report>
: earlier in the day, the Carlisle manager, Keith Curle, dropped his best 
attackers forthe visit of Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/carlisle-everton-fa-cup-match-report>
, concentrated on defence, but then found his side 1-0 down within two minutes, 
and the game plan was ruined.

MK Dons were not about to replicate that strategy but even when attempting to 
play positive football, there must be defensive discipline. The home side’s 
defensive transitions were appallingly slow: when they lost possession high up 
the pitch, the attackers and midfielders wandered back halfheartedly into 
position, seemingly relying on the back four to regain the ball.

That is simply not viable against attacking midfielders as talented as Hazard 
and Oscar – the latter managed three first-half goals, and yet, as he headed 
for the dressing room at half-time, may have been disappointed he did not score 
more. He missed two other good chances and was denied the chance to convert an 
open goal when Diego Costa attempted to pinch the goal for himself. The duo 
laughed at the missed opportunity, safe in the knowledge there would be plenty 
more chances. While it was impossible to ignore the home side’s 
disorganisation, Chelsea’s combination play in the final third was excellent, 
especially when Fàbregas or Baba Rahman raced forward to join the party. The 
latter was particularly useful here – a more attacking alternative to César 
Azpilicueta.

Oscar’s hat-trick goal was the most obvious example of the home side’s 
tentative defending. He collected the ball on the left touchline, then was 
allowed to jog forward in possession until he was on the edge of the box, 
before bending the ball majestically into the far corner. He had run 40 yards 
and needed to evade only one half-tackle, with the MK Dons midfielders standing 
around like concrete cows.

Chelsea’s defensive shape was not much better. An early surge through the 
centre from Josh Murphy, which ended with him drawing a foul on the edge of the 
box from John Terry, showed Chelsea’s lack of bite in midfield. The home side’s 
somewhat undeserved equaliser arrived after Fàbregas pulled out of a 50-50 
tackle with Dean Lewington, then Nemanja Matic’s lazy attempted block of Darren 
Potter’s shot sent the ball looping over Thibaut Courtois and into the net. The 
rested Mikel John Obi, a favourite of Guus Hiddink since he replaced José 
Mourinho shortly before Christmas, is sure to regain his place for Wednesday’s 
trip to Watford.

Otherwise, Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> had very 
little to worry about. Hiddink lifted the FA Cup during his spell as caretaker 
manager in 2009 and it feels like this competition could save Chelsea’s season. 
They will not enjoy any more matches as easy as this.
 