
Pete Winkelman, by his own admission, had bottled it. The MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> chairman, persuasive frontman and 
driving force has not done that too often, if at all, during the soap opera 
that has been his club’s 12 years of existence but a few weeks ago, with the 
stress levels over-running his mind, he reached for the panic button.

The Championship is an unforgiving league and it is often said that it is the 
most difficult in Europe to get out of. There is an easy way, however, and it 
was that which was giving Winkelman the sweats.

“The horror of being relegated is the biggest horror and I suffered that in 
our second season [in 2005-06],” Winkelman says, of the drop into League Two. 
“That memory, it was terrible and feeling responsible for the hopes and the 
dreams of the city … that’s really, really hard. It was getting to me.”

After they were promoted from League One last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/03/league-one-mk-dons-promoted-preston-yeovil-colchester-notts-county-crawley-leyton-orient>
, at the seventh season of asking, the Championship has brought a reality check 
– the Dons are locked in a dogfight down towards the bottom, as they break for 
Sunday’s glamour FA Cup tie at home to Chelsea – and Winkelman could see only 
one solution, even though it went against the grain.

It involved a gamble: the early release of funds earmarked for next season to 
hand to the manager, Karl Robinson, for squad strengthening this month. 
Winkelman is an earnest preacher of sustainability, of living within the club’s 
financial means, of never spending tomorrow’s money. “But I’d lost my bottle,” 
he says. “I so didn’t want to get relegated and I was feeling the pressure so 
hard.”

MK Dons earn home FA Cup tie with Chelsea after beating Northampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/milton-keynes-dons-northampton-fa-cup-match-report>
What happened next was remarkable. Robinson and the chief executive, Andy 
Cullen, told him to get a grip and keep the money in the bank. Most managers 
always want one more player but Robinson, aged only 35, can see the bigger 
picture. “I just said to him: ‘It’s important we remember about the 
sustainability in football now,’” Robinson says. “There was a controversial 
element to the club’s birth, as you well know, and it’s important we have a 
sustainability to ensure we are here for many more years because, if we don’t, 
it will look silly.”

If anything were to derail them now, it would be more than that and many fans, 
particularly those of the old Wimbledon, would delight in applying the more 
colourful descriptions.

MK Dons come with baggage. They are Franchise FC, football’s illegitimate 
club, the one, critics say, that was wrongfully transplanted from Plough Lane 
in south-west London to be rebranded and reupholstered in Milton Keynes and, 
however desperately they want to move on, there is the awareness that 
forgiveness might never be granted.

“I have always said that you can’t blame somebody’s son for the father’s 
actions but it’s still something that is there, through media and through 
fans,” Robinson says. “Would I like my club, Liverpool, to be moved when I was 
a young boy? I would have found that difficult. But I know the full story and 
it’s a bit different from what people see.”

The full story is heavy on the extremes of emotion and as the man who took a 
stricken but much-loved club away from its community, Winkelman knows that his 
part is that of villain; the war of words will rumble on. “It won’t go while 
I’m here, although I do think in the future it might be different,” Winkelman 
says.

It is practically impossible for him to talk about the saga without picking at 
the scars, even when he expresses admiration for AFC Wimbledon and happiness at 
how they are closing in on a return to Plough Lane. Formed by supporters out of 
Wimbledon’s ashes in 2002, they started in the ninth tier of English football 
but have risen and, as of 2011-12, they have played in League Two.

“I think that they have made my bad move right,” Winkelman says. “I hope they 
do well. The better they do, the less pressure there is on me. It’s fantastic 
news that AFC have got development permission on Plough Lane. Go back to 1991, 
10 years before I had anything to do with anything and you’d never imagine 
Merton council supporting the football club back into the city. They were so 
pleased to see the back of it.

“I’m hoping that when I’m gone in 20 years, MK is MK and nobody will remember 
[all of this]. The Wimbledon story is about ending up with two legacies – AFC 
back in Plough Lane and us in MK.”

AFC have come up the hard way while Winkelman and his Dons have found that 
there is no quick route to the Premier League, which has always been the dream. 
Having initially played at the National Hockey Stadium, they moved into the 
new-build stadium:mk in 2007 but the construction of a match-going fan culture 
has been just as painstaking a process.

It is “generational”, to borrow the word that Winkelman and Robinson use, and, 
like the club’s approach to their balance sheet, it must be underpinned by cool 
heads and realism. Slow and steady is the mantra. At the Hockey Stadium 
Winkelman says there were a couple of thousand home diehards while he puts the 
figure these days at 10,000. When the away fans are factored in, the club’s 
average attendance this season stands at a little over 13,000.

But the spick and span stadium:mk, with its executive-standard padded seats 
throughout, holds 30,000. There is still a long way to go and the hope is that 
the Chelsea game, like last season’s4-0 Capital One Cup win over Manchester 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/26/mk-dons-manchester-united-capital-one-cup>
, can attract new supporters. The club are working hard in the local community 
and they offer free tickets for the under-12s. As with United, the Chelsea tie 
is a sell-out.

Robinson is working with the smallest budget in the Championship and, if this 
does not bother him – he is all about coaching better, working smarter and 
getting the maximum out of young players, of whom the club have developed 
plenty, including Dele Alli, Brendan Galloway and Sheyi Ojo – then the 
situation with the training ground does.

The club train on a council-owned facility and so, when the pitches are not 
playable or there are other things on, they sometimes have to look elsewhere to 
stage their sessions. A local school came to their rescue before the Bolton 
Wanderers game last weekend but it is, quite frankly, a shambles. Winkelman had 
one word for the Bolton preparations: “Comical.”

He is eager to develop the club’s own training ground and to the same standard 
as the stadium – the contrast between the everyday and match-day facilities is 
jarring – but Winkelman has encountered resistance. He has bought land outside 
Milton Keynes and still nothing promises to be straightforward. “We’ve got a 
long way to go to have the villagers [outside Milton Keynes] accept us,” he 
says.

The long-game; acceptance; patience. They are themes of the MK Dons journey. 
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will seem like a day in 
the sun. The tests of nerve, however, are remorseless.
 