
The British government is to sell off almost a tenth of its defence sites 
worth up to £1bn by 2040, with the estate currently too large and costly to 
maintain, the defence secretary has told MPs.

Michael Fallon said the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> (MoD) now plans to dispose 
of 56 more defence sites, in addition to the 35 sites which it had previously 
announced. The MoD owns around 1,000 sites in total, 91 of which will be sold 
off.

Eight of the sites to be sold are in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, including Fort George, an 
18th-century fort which currently accommodates soldiers from the Black Watch. 
The site was used for personnel training for the D-day landings during the 
second world war.

Three will also close in Wales and three in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, with the rest in England, 
including two barracks in York. More than 32,500 acres of excess defence land 
is being released, including ten surplus airfields and five golf courses.

The plans to sell off the estates are likely to be resisted by trade unions, 
who have warned the plans could put jobs at risk. Mark Serwotka, general 
secretary of the public sector PCS union, said: “We are opposed to these 
closure plans that throw the future into doubt for thousands of staff.

“The MoD has a poor track record on selling off land for homes and this again 
exposes how the Tories are simply paying lip service to the urgent need to 
address the housing crisis.”

Fallon said the government hoped to raise £1bn from the sale of the land and 
save £140m a year in maintenance costs, while releasing enough land to build 
55,000 homes.

“We have been spending billions maintaining a defence estate that doesn’t meet 
the needs of our Armed Forces,” he told the House of Commons on Monday. “This 
plan delivers an estate fit for our forces and their families.

“By putting money where it is needed, we will provide better facilities to 
train our armed forces and deliver more stability for military families.”


Fallon said the current defence estate which made up 2% of the UK land mass – 
or an area three times the size of Greater London – needed to adapt to changing 
needs.

“While the size and structure of our armed forces have changed to meet 
different threats, our estate has failed to adapt,” he said. “It is too 
inefficient, it costs £2.5bn a year to maintain, and 40% of our built assets 
are more than 50 years old.

“It too often fails to meet the needs of our armed forces and their families, 
with capabilities spread across small, remote sites, often far removed from 
population.”

Nia Griffith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nia-griffith>, Labour’s 
shadow defence secretary said there was a need to ensure the changes did not 
“cause undue challenges for our forces and their families” and asked what the 
government would do to minimise disruption.

Griffith said the closures would affect communities which had long-standing 
links with military bases. “Servicemen and women and their families will be 
required to move and civilian staff will face redeployment. Many face gnawing 
uncertainty as the exact relocation of their base has not yet been decided.”

Fallon said the MoD’s choice of sites was based on military advice on the best 
use of resources and how military families could be better looked after, in 
locations with more job opportunities for spouses.
 