
If there’s one thing the lovely team here at Awesomely Alicia and Totally 
Tallulah agree on, it’s we heart, heart, HEART Christmas. Except for just one 
thing: so-called “festive” food and drink, laden with fat and sugar and gluten 
and all the processed nasties we’ve trained our bods to live without! Know the 
feeling? We’re here to help! There’s no reason not to stay clean just because 
everyone else is stuffing their faces withChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> toxins and drinking like 
fishes. Bleugh!

Loads of your festive favourites can be “cleaned up” – we call it awesomeified 
– by replacing them with yummy, guilt-free superfood. Instead of champagne, 
we’ll be serving steaming glassfuls of our signature bone broth and St John’s 
wort toddy, infused with night-gathered Himalayan ginseng for improved 
serotonin uptake! With a little forward planning, and a few hints from Alicia 
and Tallulah’s Real Food Clean Xmas Detox, you swerve the pre-Christmas stress 
of worrying that you’ll end up tired and bloated for literally years to come, 
and survive the occasion with glowing skin and your colon feeling more toned 
and alert than ever, promise!

Modern tribes: the media boycotter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/modern-tribes-newspaper-boycotter>
Best of all, if you serve Tallulah’s pumpkin, chia and toadstool faux-turkey 
porridge with hemp’n’baobab dumplings and lashings of our luxurious wild 
liquorice, turmeric and seaweed molasses, you’ll be giving your guests the best 
present of all: the gift of wellbeing!

And if you’ve got kids, don’t worry, they’ll adore our delish raw apple slices 
with fermented acorn butter to nourish self-esteem. Our three-day detox will 
put your little ones back on their fitness journey! Awesome!

What about gingerbread houses, we hear you say! No problem! Sign up for an 
Alicia and Tallulah Xmas superfood workshop (£750, including unlimited flaxseed 
crackers), and you will learn to make our awesome rice cake mega-basement (you 
guessed it, modelled on chez nous) sprinkled with yummy quinoa “snow”, for 
enhanced bone structure, and beet “candy”, for vibrant intestinal fauna. Gift 
them this Xmas and, trust us, your friends will never forget!
 