
A golden goal for a team in gold: thus did Mohamed Diamé send Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> back to the Premier League with 
a strike worth millions deep into this pulsating play-off final that ended with 
a deserved winner and the swaths of blue and white from south Yorkshire mulling 
over what might have been.

Hull City v Sheffield Wednesday: Championship play-off final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/28/hull-city-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-final-live>
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> 
came here in numbers and did their club proud but in the end Keiren Westwood’s 
admirable resistance was not enough. The Wednesday goalkeeper was finally 
beaten in the 72nd minute of this £170m match and, if ever there was a goal 
worthy of the riches that will befall Hull, then this was one.

Diamé’s wonderful effort that curled into the top corner came after concerted 
pressure throughout this dramatic denouement to theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> season. In truth Wednesday 
barely tested Eldin Jakupovic in the Hull goal and, despite dreams of a 
top-flight return after 16 years away, they were undone by a superior side that 
had an undoubted edge in quality.

Hull finished nine points above Wednesday in the Championship table and, for 
all the effort that Carlos Carvalhal’s side exuded, they were second best here. 
Credit must go to the Owls’ supporters, who made this an afternoon to remember 
and continued singing after the final whistle even when crestfallen.

“I thought their support was absolutely magnificent,” said Steve Bruce, the 
Hull manager. “I thought the support was going to take them over the line, to 
be honest. I don’t know what they’re singing but they were terrific.”

It was blue and white that dominated the Wembley panoramic but ultimately 
their team came up short. Diamé proved the difference but Hull were marshalled 
well at the back by Michael Dawson and Curtis Davies, while Abel Hernández was 
a regular threat and Tom Huddlestone dominated midfield.

Westwood had made numerous saves before the decisive blow and Wednesday could 
not muster a real fightback despite a late handball shout against Dawson. 
“Diamé has produced that bit of magic and I am pleased for him because it has 
been tough for him with a serious knee injury,” said Bruce of the match-winner. 
“He has been up and down a little bit. I’m delighted.”

There were chunks of empty seats in the Hull end at Wembley but the noise 
inside the stadium was tumultuous, an indication of the stakes at hand. For 
both these sides this was the culmination of an arduous season and the 
resulting tension perhaps accounted for a relatively mild pace in the opening 
20 minutes.

But Westwood’s goal soon came under pressure. Hull won their first corner in 
the 29th minute and Robert Snodgrass’s outswinger was met by Hernández’s 
powerful header. The ball arced towards the bottom corner but Kieran Lee was 
there on the line, chesting down and desperately clearing in unorthodox fashion.

Tom Lees then missed an interception on Diamé’s fizzing through-ball to 
Hernández, who bore down on Westwood and poked an effort towards goal only to 
be brilliantly denied by a fine reflex tip over the crossbar.

Sheffield Wednesday bring the noise but fall short of Premier League return| 
Alan Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/28/sheffield-wednesday-premier-league-carlos-carvalhal>
If that was good, Wednesday then rode their luck before half-time. Diamé was 
given licence to drive into the penalty area down the left and, although the 
Senegalese appeared to have little room in which to work, he got the ball out 
from under his body and unleashed a powerful left-footed shot that rattled 
Westwood’s right-hand post.

Wednesday began the second half with renewed intent but again Westwood was 
required to come to his team’s aid. Snodgrass, so dangerous with his 
left-footed delivery, lifted a deep cross over the waiting bodies in the 
opposition penalty area and Dawson – still up from a recent corner – found the 
ball at his feet at the far post. He fired in low but the goalkeeper was there 
once more.

Soon, however, Hull were in front. It was always going to take something 
special to beat Westwood in this form and so it proved. Snodgrass received the 
ball in the 72nd minute and laid it off for Diamé, who touched it inside and 
curled a beautiful effort with his right-foot into the top corner. Westwood got 
the faintest of touches but the strike was unstoppable.

Wednesday’s dreams turned to tears, yet the Owls fans remained to applaud 
their team’s efforts. Carvalhal said: “We played against a very strong team 
with players from the Premier League. I think Hull City deserved to win the 
game. We didn’t play today like we usually play.

Steve Bruce dedicates Hull City’s play-off victory to Assem Allam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/steve-bruce-hull-city-assem-allam-premier-league>
“I think we must talk about two different things: the season that we had and 
the expectations. We were in the play-offs; at the beginning we were in 19th 
position.

“After the game the emotion between the players and fans was a very good sign 
that all of us are happy and proud of the season. Sheffield Wednesday will be 
more respected in the future. The way the fans applauded our players at the end 
and the way the players applauded the fans is a strong sign for the future. We 
have created a good base.”
 