
A High Court registrar has been told of “concerns” that cash from money 
laundering might have found its way intoBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> FC. The issue was raised in a 
preliminary hearing in a bitter legal battle between the League One club’s 
owners, the Oyston family, and its president, Valeri Belokon, a Latvian 
millionaire.

Blackpool’s Bloomfield Road ‘too toxic’ for testimonial, says Brett Ormerod
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/04/brett-ormerod-blackpool-bloomfield-road-testimonial>
Lawyers for the Oystons said it had come to light that Latvia’s financial 
regulator, the Financial and Capital Markets Commission (FKTK), recently 
imposed a heavy fine of more than €1m (£780,000) on Baltic International Bank, 
which is owned by Belokon.

The fine was imposed for “repeated violations” of money laundering rules and 
“transactions that subjected the bank to a significant money laundering risk”, 
said Eric Shannon, representing the club owner, Owen Oyston, and his son Karl, 
the chairman, and their company Segesta Limited.

Belokon’s company, VB Football Assets, is pursuing a claim for “unfair 
prejudice” against the Oystons and accusing them of stripping the club of funds.

Shannon told the registrar, Sally Barber, in a case management session at the 
Rolls Building in London that an application might have to be made to amend the 
Oystons’ defence in the light of the new information in order to allege that 
funds put into Blackpool by Belokon “one way or another were the proceeds of 
crime, or probably the proceeds of crime”.

Shannon suggested there should be a stay of the legal proceedings for one 
month “so that the parties can talk behind the scenes in an atmosphere of calm”.

The suggestion was opposed by Fraser Campbell, appearing for Belokon, who 
said: “They are making wild and extremely serious allegations which we have 
responded to in a detailed letter setting out precisely the source of the funds 
involved.”

Campbell said a stay was opposed because of the delay it would cause, adding: 
“We are very keen they should put up or shut up. We do not wish to have another 
month of having wild allegations thrown about before being brought before the 
court while the respondents sit on information.”

Shannon said they were not wild allegations but based on what the Latvia 
financial regulator had found.

Refusing to order a stay, Barber told Shannon: “If you are going to take this 
anywhere you should get on and do it. There is an element of grand-standing.”

The hearing covered a number of issues, including an application by the 
Oystons for the legal proceedings to be transferred to Manchester, which was 
adjourned.

Belokon and his company VB Football Assets paid £1.8m in July 2006 for 20% of 
the club shares and then caused £2.7m of loans “on highly generous terms” to be 
advanced to Segesta and the Oystons.

According to VB Football documents before the court, it was envisaged by the 
parties that the loans would in due course be converted into a further 30% of 
shares for the company after tax losses had been used by Segesta. On the 
understanding that both sides would enjoy an equal quasi-partnership, Belokon 
made available further substantial sums to buy players. The result was that 
Blackpool were promoted to the Championship and then, in 2010, to the Premier 
League.

The documents state: “Promotion to the Premier League produced unprecedented 
revenues for the company, particularly in respect of television rights.

“However, instead of investing those funds in, for example, a strengthened 
playing squad, or using them to pay dividends to shareholders, the respondents 
[Segester and the Oystons] caused enormous sums to be transferred to themselves 
and their associated companies.

“Perhaps the most egregious example was a payment to [83-year-old Owen 
Oyston’s] personal service company of £11m in the 2010-2011 financial year as 
‘director’s emolument’.”

The alleged “cash stripping” undermined the club in footballing terms and it 
lasted only a single season in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/may/22/ian-holloway-blackpool-relegated-premier-league>
. The documents also allege thatthe relationship between the Oystons and the 
club’s supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/02/blackpool-fans-suspend-game-pitch-invasion-protest>
 “has become so toxic as to result in match-day violence, libel suits and a 
boycott of the club”.

Segesta and the Oystons are fighting the claims and deny unfair prejudice.
 