
For the second game running at the Globe Arena the League Two leaders came a 
cropper. A fortnight ago Morecambe beat Crawley Town 6-0, an improbable 
demolition that seemingly delighted the division and took them top instead. On 
Saturday they were the victims, beaten 3-2 in an act of piracy.Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> were worthy winners of an 
entertaining match, though Jim Bentley, Morecambe's manager, was entitled to 
think "we didn't deserve to lose".

It was a close-run thing with five first‑rate goals before Laurance Wilson, 
the Shrimps' left-back, hit a Rovers post, then headed an inviting corner over 
and Jason Price, in added time, shot at Scott Bevan in Rovers' goal with time 
to pick his spot and winkle out a point. Against that, before any goals, the 
referee, James Adcock, twice spared Barry Roche, the other keeper, ruling out a 
goal team-mates did not dispute and ignoring his gathering of a pass back under 
pressure.

After Roche tipped over Cian Bolger's strong header at a corner the 
centre-back made no mistake with the instant repeat andMorecambe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> were held at bay until after 
the interval. Two goals in seven minutes altered that. A dashing run and 
flashing cross by Danny Carlton led to Price tucking in at the near post before 
Kevin Ellison found a hole in the wall and cashed in with his free-kick. In 90 
seconds, though, Scott McGleish drilled in a shot on the run to level before 
Joe Anyinsah turned on the left, twisted his way through the defence and 
finished with finesse from close in.

"We'll dust ourselves down, look at the video and be ready to go again," 
Bentley said. Torquay is where they are going next. "We'll pick the bones out 
of it, especially that third goal." Beforehand he had noted that in 11 games 
they had conceded only one goal inside the 18-yard box. Here there were two 
besides their let-offs.

"Looking at our defensive record," he had said, "it's a defence I would love 
to play in." Two seasonss ago, when Morecambe lost in the play-offs to Dagenham 
& Redbridge, he generally did. Last season he became player-coach.

In May, after the club finished 20th, he stepped up to manager in succession 
to Sammy McIlroy, who had lifted them out of the Conference in 2007. He retains 
the No5 shirt. Bentley, born in Liverpool, played well over 300 games for them. 
Shrimps are in his blood. He scored their first goal as a Football League club, 
in the League Cup at Preston. Peter McGuigan, chairman and owner, called him "a 
natural born leader".

The club have settled into the league as easily as into their compact new 
ground, which they first envisaged in 2007 and kicked off in last season. It 
was a delicate operation. Joseph Christie, a Manchester merchant and benefactor 
of the 1920s, gave the previous ground, Christie Park, on condition that "it 
should be used by Morecambe FC for as long as they existed and, if the club was 
ever disbanded, it should become a playground for the children of Morecambe". 
No doubt the latter can scoot down the aisles of the supermarket. The sale to 
Sainsbury's funded the £12m Globe, which houses 6,476 with room still for a 
stand to match the full-length main one. Christie will be smiling in his grave.

Saturday's crowd of 2,583 raised the average to 2,473. They could do with 
drawing Blackpool in the Cup. Morecambe had 11,000 supporters when they beat 
Exeter City at Wembley in the Conference play-off final. There is a community 
to be tapped and a pie to tap it with. In June's British Pie awards Morecambe 
FC's £2.50 chicken, ham and leek was supreme champion.

Pride and stability radiate through the Arena from McGuigan downwards. Like 
Christie his business is Manchester based. Having rescued Umbro, he became 
chief executive of Americana, the name behind Bench and Hooch. Not only the 
substitutes have Bench on their tops.

Bentley was pleased that the crowd "clapped his players off. They could see 
the hard work," he said. None epitomised it more than Price, an old-time 
itinerant of 34 who joined this month on a four-month deal, having helped to 
inflict on Morecambe their only previous league defeat, 1-0 at home to Barnet 
on the opening day; mid-season moves can carry peculiar regrets. His height 
should help the alert Carlton if he stays. Paul Buckle, Rovers' manager, said: 
"The big balls up caused problems," not apparently hyphenating.

"The players will come in smiling again on Monday," said Bentley confidently, 
and so they should. Thanks to Southend, who won 4-0 at Rotherham to go third, 
Morecambe are still top. On 15 October they go to Roots Hall – Shrimpers v 
Shrimps. The Shrimps won both times last season.
 