
More than a million UK homes are unable to get fast enough broadband for 
modern families’ needs, including watching streaming services such as Netflix 
and video-calling friends.

Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> has revealed that 5% of UK 
homes and offices, or 1.4m properties, cannot access broadband speeds over 10 
megabits per second.

However, the number of homes without 10Mbps broadband has fallen 42% in the 
past year. In its 2015 report Ofcom found 8% of properties, or 2.4m, were 
unable to gain access to 10Mbps-plus broadband speeds.

Is Theresa May serious about sorting out rural broadband?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/is-theresa-may-serious-about-sorting-out-rural-broadband>
This is the speed the media regulator says is the minimum to meet a typical 
household’s digital needs, which it says includes film streaming in HD or 
viewing Amazon and Netflix TV, watching catch-up TV services like the BBC 
iPlayer, video calling and even basic web browsing.


“Too many people and businesses are still struggling for a good service,” said 
Steve Unger, group director at Ofcom. “We think that is unacceptable.”


Ofcom’s annual Connected Nations report into the state of the UK’s telecoms 
and mobile networks did find that there has been a significant year-on-year 
improvement in enabling the digital “have-nots” to join the high-speed 
broadband revolution.


The digital and culture minister, Matt Hancock, said: “We have made good 
progress but more needs to be done to help make sure we build a country that 
works for everyone. We are driving up mobile coverage and the Universal Service 
Obligation we are taking through parliament, alongside the £1bn for full fibre 
and 5G in the autumn statement will do exactly this, by further boosting mobile 
coverage and delivering fast, reliable broadband to people struggling with slow 
speeds.

“High speed broadband and good mobile connectivity are no longer a nice to 
have but a modern necessity and we will not rest until they are delivered.”

The Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Service 
Providers Association, which represents companies including BT, Virgin Media 
and Sky, said that rolling out faster broadband to all households comes with a 
significant costs.


“As an industry, we understand the frustrations of those who still receive 
slow speeds,” said an ISPA spokesman. “Our members have worked hard to reduce 
the number of premises with speeds of less than 10Mbps. However, reaching the 
final 5% requires significant additional investment.”

ISPA warned that based on Ofcom research it could cost up to £1.1bn to enable 
faster speed services to reach all households, which could see household bills 
rise by £20.

Ofcom’s 2016 report also found that UK consumers are embracing superfast 
broadband, the proportion of homes with 30Mbps or more internet speed has grown 
from 27% to 31% year on year.


As a result broadband download speeds have jumped 28% from an average of 
29Mbps to 37Mbps.


However, Ofcom painted a mixed picture of the progress on the 4G mobile phone 
coverage.


On one hand, the proportion of premises that can now receive a 4G mobile 
signal indoors from all four networks – EE, Vodafone, O2 and Three – has risen 
from 28% to 72%.

However, availability of 4G coverage geographically across the UK overall 
remains low.


Many people in rural areas, as well as those travelling by car and train, 
continue to suffer from poor mobile signals.


Total geographic 4G coverage, where the signal is available from all four 
operators, is still only available across just over 40% of the UK. This is, at 
least, up from the 8% recorded in 2015.


For voice calls, across 34% of the UK, largely in rural areas, there is not a 
signal available from all four operators.


“We’re challenging mobile operators to go beyond built-up areas and provide 
coverage across the UK’s countryside and transport networks,” said Unger.






 