
A surge of activity in the services sector powered the economy to its fastest 
growth rate for two years in the third quarter, extending Britain's longest 
period of expansion on record to more than seven years, according to official 
figures published yesterday.

The 0.9% increase in gross domestic product was in excess of City forecasts 
and renewed speculation of a further increase in interest rates at next month's 
meeting of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee.

But a leaked copy of the Confederation of British Industry's quarterly pay 
survey, due out on Monday, showing a fall in pay settlements in services to 
3.1% from 3.6%, left open the question of whether the committee would move on 
interest rates.

Following publication of minutes of September's meeting earlier in the week, 
showing the committee taking a relaxed view of the inflation outlook, some 
analysts said it might give growth a chance.

The data from the office for national statistics disclosed the strongest 
quarterly growth rate since the second quarter of 1997.

It compared with 0.6% in the previous three months and took the annual rate of 
expansion to 1.8% from 1.4%.

Powering the economy's advance were services, which recorded growth of 1%, up 
from 0.6% in the previous quarter.

The production and construction industries, which include manufacturing, also 
expanded at a similar rate.

Within the services, retailing and catering picked up from a period of 
sluggishness and there was continued strong growth in post and 
telecommunications, which includes internet and mobile telephone usage.

Output of the post and telecommunications sector is now 50% bigger than it was 
four years ago.

Computing and other business services, including law, accounting and 
advertising, which suffered a marked slowdown around the start of the year, 
also returned to stronger growth in the third quarter.

Michael Saunders, UK economist at Salomon Smith Barney Citibank, said the 
gross domestic product figures fitted in with the general European pattern, 
showing a sharper than expected rebound from last year's bout of financial 
turmoil.

He said the main reason for the V-shaped upturn was that the recent slowdown 
was narrowly concentrated in exports and stocks, while consumer spending, 
fuelled by falling interest rates, had remained steady.
 