
The number of Britons developing the two most common forms of skin cancer will 
increase as a direct result of people getting tans on foreign holidays and in 
salons, experts are warning.

Scientists closer to understanding why red hair genes increase skin cancer risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/12/scientists-closer-to-understanding-why-red-hair-genes-increase-skin-cancer-risk>
The number of people diagnosed with non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) will rise 
from the 213,217 seen in 2010 to 380,002 cases a year by 2025, according to a 
study in a medical journal.

That predicted 78% increase could also see the NHS’s costs of treating the 
disease rise to as much as £465m a year.

The British Association of Dermatologists (BAD) said the greatly increased 
number of people with NMSC would be mainly due to prolonged exposure to UV rays 
causing cancer years afterwards. “There is no single cause [of NMSC]. But the 
UK has an ageing population and as we get older skin cancers become common, 
particularly NMSC, which is largely caused by cumulative sun exposure,” said 
Nina Goad, a spokeswoman for the BAD.

“More affordable foreign holidays, the widespread desire for tanned skin and 
increased use of sunbeds have all had an impact and we are paying the price now 
for decades of excess sun exposure.”

NMSC does not usually claim lives, although they did account for 781 deaths 
UK-wide in 2014, figures suggest.

The new estimates for future cases of squamous cell carconoma (SCC) and basal 
cell carcinoma (BCC), the two cancer types that together are known as NMSC, are 
contained in new research in the British Journal of Dermatology.

On current trends cases of BCC across the UK will rise from 180,725 in 2010 to 
298,308 in 2025, the researchers say. It is the commonest form of NMSC but is 
usually non-fatal. The number of diagnosed cases of BCC rose by 133% between 
1980 and 2000, coinciding roughly with the British boom in foreign travel.

Similarly, cases of SCC are expected to increase from 32,492 to 81,694 over 
the same period, according to Dr Peter Goon and colleagues who included Dr Nick 
Levell, the president of the BAD. SCC is much less common than BCC and is the 
second most dangerous form of skin cancer after melanoma, which the study did 
not look at. Melanoma is much less common but much more deadly than SCC or BCC. 
Mortality rates from it have increased by 156% since the early 1970s.

A Public Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England spokesman 
said: “There are simple steps you can take to reduce the risks from sun 
exposure in the summer months or on holiday. These include seeking shade, 
covering up and wearing sunscreen.”
 