
Adam Johnson and Steven Fletcher may have cost a combined £24m but James 
McClean is not the shy, retiring, type and he simply refused to be eclipsed by 
his expensive new team-mates.

McClean's two goals, both created by the impressive Johnson incidentally, 
ensuredSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> a safe 
passage into the third round against a Morecambe side whose slick passing 
cameos at times belied their League Two status.

"I thought Morecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe> played 
very well," said the Sunderland manager Martin O"Neill. "But Adam Johnson was 
outstanding, he was terrific, he's an excellent player. I was pleased with 
Steven Fletcher too. I'm excited."

A dry, hazily sunny, day on Wearside ensured that the drainage problems which 
had caused Sunderland's freshly laid pitch to become waterlogged in the face of 
persistent but hardly torrential rain last Saturday did not re-occur.

Informed partly by the knowledge that Morecambe had won away at Blackpool in 
the previous round, O'Neill's line up was close to his strongest available XI. 
Equally importantly, it also permitted Johnson and Fletcher to get their debuts 
over with.

If Fletcher's performance at times reminded everyone that an ankle injury has 
restricted the former Wolves centre forward to little more than a few days full 
training this summer, Johnson swiftly made his presence felt.

Deployed in a flexible right-sided role which promises to make Sunderland 
considerably more fluid, the former Manchester City winger asked Morecambe a 
barrage of awkward questions and, appropriately enough, it was a Johnson corner 
which finally prompted a breakthrough.

The new boy's left footed, in-swinger from the right picked out McClean at the 
near post and the winger unearthed from the reserves by O'Neill last December 
directed a glancing header beyond Morecambe's Barry Roche.

With Andrew Wright proving stubbornly effective in a quasi-sweeping role in 
front of the visiting defence, Morecambe creditably refused to surrender. 
Sunderland's Jack Colback was required to excel out of position at left-back 
and home fans were treated to the depressing, if not entirely unfamiliar sight, 
of Lee Cattermole being booked – for a foul on Gary McDonald – before McClean 
cut a more inspiring pose.

Exhibiting splendid close control, he received possession from Johnson about 
20 yards out, dodged a couple of markers and, advancing, defied Roche, courtesy 
of a fine angled shot.

At least Jim Bentley, Morecambe's manager, had the consolation of seeing Louis 
Saha – "a hero of mine" – subsequently step off Sunderland's bench. "It's nice 
to pit our wits against the best," said Bentley.
 