
Moussa Dembélé’s second-half penalty gave Celtic a dramatic draw at Borussia 
Mönchengladbach <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> 
which kept alive their slim hopes of qualifying for the Champions League 
knockout stages.

In a spirited performance by the visitors Scott Sinclair crashed a shot off 
the post in the 23rd minute before the Mönchengladbach captain, Lars Stindl, 
who had opened the scoringin his team’s 2-0 win in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/celtic-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
, volleyed the Bundesliga side into a half-time lead.

André Hahn hit the woodwork for the home team after the break but in the 76th 
minute Julian Korb was shown a straight red card for pulling Dembélé down in 
the area as he shaped to shoot. The French striker slotted in the penalty, to 
leave Brendan Rodgers hailing his ability.

Arsenal’s fightback from two down at Ludogorets eases them into last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/arsenal-ludogorets-razgrad-champions-league-match-report>
“He is a very good penalty taker and he showed great composure against a 
top-class keeper,” Celtic’s manager said. “I thought he was immense tonight, 
for a 20-year-old boy to perform like that. He started loose but his presence, 
quality and strength really disturbed their back four.”

Rodgers thought his side should have won the game, but was delighted with way 
they fought back after going behind. “I thought we were the best team. I am 
really proud of the team tonight,” he said. “The personality we showed in the 
game was outstanding.

“We were very brave on the ball, opened up the pitch to play, secured and 
built the game, created chances, with speed on the counterattack and we had 
chances to win. They stayed calm, passed the ball and it keeps us in there 
fighting.

“We always knew it was going to be a difficult group but to come here and make 
that result – and more importantly for me, the performance – made me very proud 
and it is another step forward for this team.”

The Scottish champions finished the game looking for the win but had to be 
content with a point which takes them on to two in Group C, with two matches 
remaining against Barcelona and Manchester City. City are five points ahead of 
the bottom-placedCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, with 
Mönchengladbach remaining in pole position to qualify for the Europa League 
knockout stages at least.

Rodgers’s side survived several corners in the opening stages against a home 
side who took control without looking as purposeful as they had done a 
fortnight ago.  Celtic soon began to edge forward with growing confidence. 
However, when they lost possession high up the field in the 20th minute, 
Mönchengladbach broke with pace and Craig Gordon had to race from his goal to 
block a low drive by Tobias Strobl.

Manchester City turn on style to stun Barcelona in Champions League victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
Three minutes later, the Bundesliga side enjoyed some luck when Sinclair’s 
curling shot from just inside the box beat Yann Sommer but rebounded off the 
inside of the post.

As Borussia struggled to hit top gear the anxiety within their fans grew but 
when Thorgan Hazard got beyond the stand-in left-back Emilio Izaguirre once 
more Celtic were made to pay, his cross finding the incoming Stindl who sent a 
right-footed volley past Gordon from 10 yards.

The Parkhead side started the second-half confidently enough but were cut open 
again in the 52nd minute by Hahn but this time Stindl did not connect with his 
shot properly and the ball trundled through to Gordon.

Opportunities presented themselves at both ends but when Dembélé was hauled to 
the ground inside the area by Korb as he skewed his shot wide of the target the 
referee pointed to the spot and the striker stepped up to earn what could be a 
crucial point. 
 