
Twenty people were left stranded at the top of a 32 metre rollercoaster that 
stalled atGold Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> 
theme park Movie World on Wednesday.

The patrons were trapped after the Arkham Asylum rollercoaster malfunctioned 
just before midday, with firefighters called to help stage a “vertical rescue”.

The incident follows the deaths of four people on the Thunder River Rapids 
Ride at Dreamworld in October, which prompted a sweeping Queensland government 
safety audit of local theme park rides. Movie World rides were cleared by 
WorksafeQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> in 
November.

Helicopter footage by Channel Seven showed the marooned patrons sitting 
upright with legs dangling near the peak of the 32 metre-high rollercoaster.

A Queensland fire and emergency services spokeswoman said all 20 patrons were 
rescued from the stalled ride by 1.30pm.

Sixteen of those were able to get down from the ride through standard park 
management procedures, while the remaining four required “technical assiatnce” 
from fire rescue crews, the spokeswoman said.

Some of the patrons were stuck on the ride in the midday sun for almost 90 
minutes.

The Queensland Ambulance Service senior operations supervisor, Paul Young, 
said some had been rescued by the fire crew’s “extension cherry picker”, while 
the rest “walked down the stairs beside the ride”.

“They all looked a little bit flushed, a little bit hot as you would imagine, 
being in the sun,” he said. “But they’re all fine. No one actually required 
intervention or transport to any hospital.”

Young said the oldest patron was about 50 years and the youngest about 10 
years.

It follows the rescue of 16 people who become stuck for 30 minutes on another 
Movie World rollercoaster 
<http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/queensland/reports-of-ride-being-stuck-at-movie-world-20161120-gstdff.html>
, the Green Lantern, in November because of a “computer fault”. In 2015, six 
people had been trapped on the same rollercoaster for three hours.

Movie World describes the Arkham Asylum rollercoaster as the “first of its 
kind in the world”, with patrons offered a “360-degree virtual reality 
experience” through headsets that cover their eyes “with technology seamlessly 
syncing the movement of the coaster with the visual effects”.

Ambulance officers were on standby at the scene but there were no reports of 
injuries.

Movie World is owned by Village Roadshow, Dream World by Ardent Leisure.
 