
 MPs are demanding urgent government action to tackle a “shocking and 
unacceptable” rise in workplace discrimination in the UK against expectant and 
new mothers over the last decade.

A report published by the women and equalities select committee called for 
Britain to put in place protection similar to that in Germany, where pregnant 
women can only be made redundant in certain circumstances.


The MPs also expressed concern for casual, agency and zero-hours workers, who 
they said were more likely to report risks to their health and safety, and more 
likely to leave their employer because of those risks not being resolved. The 
government should review the maternity and pregnancy rights of this group, they 
said.

The report, published on Wednesday, recommended individual risk assessments, 
to help reduce the number of women, 25%, who left their jobs because health and 
safety concerns regarding pregnancy and maternity were not met.

Workplace discrimination: when a pregnant pause becomes more long-term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/12/discrimination-work-pregnant-new-mothers-forced-out-jobs>
The committee chair, Maria Miller, said: “The arrival of a new baby puts 
family finances under extreme pressure yet, despite this, thousands of 
expectant and new mothers have no choice but to leave their work because of 
concerns about the safety of their child or pregnancy discrimination. 
Shockingly, this figure has almost doubled in the last decade, now standing at 
54,000 each year.

“There are now record numbers of women in work in the UK. The economy will 
suffer unless employers modernise their workplace practices to ensure effective 
support and protection for expectant and new mums.”


She criticised the government’s response to its own findings in March, which 
showed that pregnancy discrimination, which is illegal, was worse now than in 
2005.

“The government’s approach has lacked urgency and bite,” Miller said. “It 
needs to set out a detailed plan outlining the specific actions it will take to 
tackle this unacceptable level of discrimination. This work must be underpinned 
by concrete targets and changes to laws and protections to increase compliance 
by employers to improve women’s lives.”

Currently, 77% of pregnant women and new mothers experience discrimination at 
work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/22/fifth-of-women-harassed-at-work-over-pregnancy-or-flexible-hours-report-finds>
, compared with 45% 10 years ago and 11% lost their jobs, according to the 
study by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, and the Equality 
and Human Rights Commission in March.


“We find it shocking that the number of new and expectant mothers feeling 
forced out of their job has nearly doubled in the past decade,” the report on 
Wednesday said. “It is difficult to accept the EHRC’s characterisation of this 
as solely an issue of misinterpretation of the law.”


The report recommended greater protections, including changes in the law, paid 
time off for antenatal appointments for all workers, and a reduction in the 
current fee of £1,200 to take a case to a tribunal, which discourages those 
discriminated against to seek justice.

In Germany, a dismissal ban prevents redundancies for pregnant employees 
except in rare cases, such as gross misconduct by the worker, or the employer 
getting into severe financial difficulties resulting in multiple job losses.

Pregnancy <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pregnancy> discrimination 
in the UK is present across all industries and income brackets, studies have 
found. However, differences do exist. For instance, those on low incomes tend 
to face discrimination when pregnant, while those on higher incomes tend to 
experience discrimination on their return to work.

A recent survey of Mumsnet users found a fifth of mothers had been asked at a 
job interview how they would manage childcare 
<http://www.mumsnet.com/jobs/the-employers-who-wont-hire-women-mumsnet-survey-women-attitudes>
 if they got the job.

Rosalind Bragg, the director of Maternity Action, who gave evidence to the 
committee, described the report as a roadmap to help tackle the issue.

 Implementing its recommendations could “reverse the increase in 
discrimination” and move towards a situation where pregnancy discrimination was 
rare, she said.

Elizabeth Duff, a senior policy adviser for the National Childbirth Trust, 
said: “Women in the 21st century should never fear making the choice between 
having a career and a family. Action to address this mistreatment is long 
overdue.”

Catherine Rayner, of the Discrimination Law Association, told the committee 
the rise in the number of women in casual, agency and zero-hours work might be 
one reason for the doubling of discrimination.


“There are huge swaths of women, particularly in some of the caring 
industries, who are treated not as employees but as workers and therefore do 
not necessarily access the (same) rights.”

The birthrights organisation said poorer women were at the greatest risk of 
having a stillbirth, dying in childbirth or suffering complications.


“It is vital that the law protects these women – some of whom are in casual, 
agency work or on zero-hours contracts where they are unable to access 
protected time for vital antenatal appointments.


“If vulnerable women cannot attend antenatal appointments because of concerns 
about missing work, this may put them and their babies at serious risk.”

The EHRC’s deputy chair, Caroline Waters, said the commission was pleased the 
committee had adopted its recommendations to improve access to justice, 
“calling for an extension on the three-month time limit for tribunal claims, 
and tackling the barriers caused by high tribunal fees”.

In her response to the committee’s report, Business Minister Margot James 
stressed that discrimination in the workplace is illegal.

James said: “It is completely unacceptable that pregnant women and new mothers 
are apparently being forced to quit their jobs because of outdated attitudes.

“Tackling this issue is a key priority of mine and this government and I would 
like to thank the committee for its important work. We will consider its 
recommendations carefully and respond in due course.”

‘It came as a complete shock’


Rebecca Raven was sacked from her £21,000-a-year job teaching art at a private 
school after telling the headmistress she wanted to take maternity leave.

An employment tribunal later ruled that Raven, who was represented by the 
Association of Teachers and Lecturers, had been unfairly dismissed by Howell’s 
School, in Denbigh, north Wales. In 2012 the school was ordered to pay Raven 
£34,000 in compensation, but she said that, so far, she hasn’t seen a penny.

The 36-year-old from Wrexham, who now runs her own business, said: “There is 
discrimination law and equality law, but employers are getting away with 
flouting it.”

She recalls being told by one of the school trustees that they did not want to 
“waste money on maternity pay”.

“I was very clued up. I had been previously self-employed and I knew my 
rights. But I was made to feel like a criminal. It came as a complete shock. 
When you are pregnant, you are emotional anyway, but the whole thing put me 
under a lot of pressure.”


She welcomed the report’s findings, in particular the recommendation for a 
reduction in tribunal fees, which have risen in recent years.
 