
My first medical on-call shift was on the evening of Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Day. Wary of what to 
expect, I joined my family for an early dinner with a cloud of trepidation 
hanging over it. The post-food cosy daze that everyone has after their 
traditional meal turned into the pre-work tetchy panic that every doctor has 
before a night shift.

I arrived at the hospital at 9pm to find remnants of Christmas cheer lingering 
on every ward. Boxes of half-eaten chocolates, needles starting to drop from 
Christmas trees, tinsel becoming unstuck and dangling from the walls, and 
families trickling away from the hospital after spending the day with their 
loved ones – it’s like you’ve arrived late at a party after everyone has left.

For the first few hours I was strangely enjoying my first medical on-call 
shift. It was a refreshing break from the daily grind of writing in patients’ 
notes what my consultant says on ward rounds and typing discharge summaries. I 
was reviewing and managing unwell patients, which is what I had been trained to 
do.

Everyone in the NHS dreads working at Christmas – but it fills me with pride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2014/dec/22/nhs-staff-dread-working-christmas-fills-pride>
Fuelled by adrenaline, excitement, and those half-finished boxes of chocolates 
on the ward, I was in full flow. Please review this patient who is not 
producing enough urine: “urine problems – I remember the causes and treatment 
in a kidney lecture”. Please review this patient who’s got a temperature: 
“review patient, check the nursing observations, take some bloods, do I need to 
start some treatment straight away?”. Please review the ECG of this patient 
who’s developed chest pain: “reading ECGs – let’s decipher these squiggly lines 
step by step”.

I had just managed to clear the backlog of jobs when my bleeper barked into 
life: “Cardiac arrest, ward x. Cardiac arrest, ward x”. I immediately got off 
at the next floor and ran to the arrest call. By the time I got there, CPR had 
already started and my medical registrar arrived 20 seconds after I did. It was 
my first arrest call.

I took over doing compressions. Crack, one rib broken. Crack, another rib 
broken. At least I was doing good compressions. The consultant asked: “Can you 
get a blood gas from the patient?” Stab, the needle goes into the groin, 
nothing. Someone else has got it already. He continued: “Can you get the 
results please?” pH 6.9, lactate 11 – not good. I ran back to find the 
patient’s heart had successfully restarted.

At this point, a medical TV drama would cut to another scene. In reality, the 
patient’s heart was restarted but they were intubated and unconscious. The 
family later arrived and decided it would be in the patient’s best interests 
not to continue further care. I later certified death, feeling particularly 
poignant as it was Christmas, a time of celebration for a birth and new life. 
As I wrote the last entry in the medical notes, I saw the patient’s distraught 
family walk away from the ward, feeling their sadness as I signed my name and 
wrote the letters RIP.

With those swirling thoughts, I was no longer a doctor, but a ​person​ 
mourning the loss of another

Unyielding and relentless, I was bleeped again. My steps towards the next job 
got slower and slower as my brain swirled with thoughts of that arrest, that 
patient, and that family. The arrest call itself is a paradox – laid bare it is 
the most human act done in the most inhumane way. The act of trying to save 
someone’s life, of you pumping your fellow human’s heart, touches on the very 
essence of humanity’s common bond. The process, however, is as savage and 
barbaric as it is life-saving.

As part of the arrest call team, I was focused on my job of restarting the 
patient’s heart. That focus strips away the humanity of the patient, reducing 
life to lines on a screen and numbers on a chart. With each passing cycle, the 
focus intensifies until it changes into a mix of desperation and willpower – 
willing the tube to go in the lungs, the blood to flash back into the syringe, 
the pulse to return. And when it’s suddenly over, the humanity returns.

With those swirling thoughts, I was no longer a doctor, but a person mourning 
the loss of another. I stopped, turned around, sat in a quiet room and had a 
chat with one of the nurses who was also at the arrest call. We talked about 
anecdotes from the patient’s stay in hospital and our own lives. It felt 
refreshing to talk about the life that was lived in the face of the sadness of 
a life that was just lost.

Mentally and physically exhausted, I was glad to hand over the on-call bleeper 
at the end of my shift to the next bearer of that cross. As I walked out of the 
hospital, I reflected on every job I’d had during the night, still wondering 
how the family of the patient who died was coping and what the diagnosis would 
be of one patient I asked my registrar to review.

Nights are said to be one of the best learning experiences. At the end of my 
set of nights, I was comforted not only by the wealth of skills and knowledge I 
could take into the new year, but by the care I had given to my patients to 
make their Christmases that little bit better.

Everyone takes something different away from their medical on-call experience. 
I will always remember that behind every patient and medical diagnosis there 
lies a human connection that binds us all together.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 