
“Look at this.”

My dad handed me an information leaflet open on a page titled Sex after major 
heart surgery.

“It says I can’t put weight on my arms!”

“Right.” I said, not even sure what the joke was, and refusing to engage in 
any discussion.

Dad was due for major heart surgery. He’d recently been rushed to hospital 
with breathlessness, and a couple of hours later I was at his bedside adjusting 
to the new perspective of family member. His heart was struggling and it was 
serious; he needed a complicated, life-threatening operation. The operation was 
just before Christmas; I would be in hospital every day over the festive 
period, alternating between working as a junior doctor and visiting my father. 
As a comedian, I also had a few gigs in London lined up one evening.

I learned the hard way that medicine can be humiliating and incestuous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/aug/18/learned-medicine-humiliating-incestuous-junior-doctor>
Beforehand, humour kept things light. He joshed avidly with my brother that he 
wouldn’t be “following the light”. But below the surface we were suffering. 
Christmas was cancelled, no big celebration, retail and decorations stripped 
down to minimum. As the date grew closer we all noticed subtle changes; every 
hug goodbye a bit tighter, every moment as a family more appreciated.

On the morning of the operation I drove in at 6am and sat with dad until he 
was called to theatre. I’d never been to the hospital he was in, and although 
as a doctor I knew what the signs meant and where things were, I felt a 
stranger in the place. I walked down the corridors and passed the discharge 
lounge and superstitiously thought that might be a good sign. I then turned a 
corner and passed the bereavement lounge and, amazed at how close they were, 
decided not to be superstitious. I sat and chatted until he was called to 
theatre, then we hugged goodbye and I walked down the corridor.

I left. I got into my car and cried. I was so tired, and the weeks of holding 
it together had built up. As I sat with his phone and glasses in my hands, my 
feet crunching against empty sandwich packets from last-minute meals before 
hospital shifts and comedy gigs, I saw all the unread well-wishing messages 
flash up, including mine.

When you work in a hospital you are so consumed by the job, so busy working 
out what the patient needs, that it’s almost impossible to take time to 
consider what the family has already been through. For families it all starts 
much earlier: the initial concern, the anxiety, the waiting, the unknown 
outcome.

In the days that followed, while working I was acutely aware of this when 
seeing families of patients. As family, you are a team for that one patient, 
every waking moment is about them, everything is time critical. When working as 
a doctor you have to care for many people, so you do the best you can for every 
patient you see and prioritise. Communication is paramount. I suddenly saw 
myself in the families’ shoes and empathised more than I’d been able to 
previously.

After dad’s operation, the surgeon and nurses were cautious – there were 
complications, but it had gone as well as expected and he wouldn’t be waking up 
today. My brother and I went to see dad in intensive care, we were asked to 
come back in 30 minutes. We returned and were told the same, returned a third 
time and told again at which point we panicked and asked what was happening. 
Was he in trouble? It turned out they meant “at least” 30 minutes and they were 
just getting routine things ready. A stark reminder of how communication is so 
important, how timely and accurate information is essential.

Working in hospital was a strange relief; a juxtaposition of doing a job but 
being constantly reminded of what was happening by familiar tests, results, and 
medications. I was reassured by all the brilliant staff I work with – doctors, 
nurses, healthcare assistants and more – all of them professional and caring, 
consoling me that dad was surrounded by similar people.

Ed Patrick is a junior doctor who’s finding the funny side | Sarah Johnson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/ed-patrick-junior-doctor-funny-side-edinburgh>
The evening after the operation complications arose that the intensive care 
team were struggling to sort out. I discussed with them some of the tests and 
instantly realised how serious the situation was; they didn’t know how it would 
go. We called almost every hour for updates – no change. The only reassurance 
was in talking to nurses and doctors who were calm and in control. They’d 
contact us if he deteriorated further – so we barely slept. By morning 
everything had changed and dramatically improved, with the previous 12 hours 
seeming like a nightmare.

That morning I walked in and saw him awake, I felt an overwhelming sense of 
relief. “Bloody hell dad, you scared the crap out of us.”

“But I told you I wouldn’t go towards the light,” he said wearily. 

By Christmas day he had been moved to a ward, almost out of the woods. 
Yesterday he was discharged into my mum’s exhausted but delighted arms.

After dad heard how serious the situation was, he called and told me he’d 
asked a nurse overnight: “Did you know how serious it was for me?” The nurse 
smiled, put her arm round him and said: “Yes we all did. You, sir, were our 
Christmas miracle”.

Comedian and doctor Ed Patrick is performing his debut show Junior Optimist 
across the UK. For tickets and locations visitwww.edpatrickcomedy.com 
<http://www.edpatrickcomedy.com/>

If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 