
I blame The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
. If we hadn’t been so keen to see theStar Wars movie the day after it opened, 
we’d never have ended up in the Everyman Cinema on Baker Street. And if we 
hadn’t gone to the Everyman my then six-year-old son, Oisín, would never have 
seen the trailer forCreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/17/creed-review-life-in-the-old-punchbag-yet-sylvester-stallone-rocky-balboa-michael-b-jordan-adonis>
. He’d never have turned to us with wide-eyed amazement and announced: “That 
looks like the best film ever.”

My son started telling everyone at school he was going to be a boxer

We could have left it there, and perhaps we’d have been better parents if we 
had. But instead we went home, dug out the oldRocky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/19/actionandadventure> movies and 
Osh began a marathon viewing of the first four films, swiftly followed byCreed 
when it arrived online.

I expected his excitement to dim. Like most six- year-olds he was prone to 
sudden enthusiasms – pirates,Furbies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/dec/21/furby-shortage-despair-christmas-shoppers>
, football cards – which swiftly fade to be replaced by the next equally 
thrilling thing. But something about boxing took hold.

And it wasn’t just the Rocky films. Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> died and he lapped up the 
tributes to the Greatest. He watched documentaries on the best boxers and held 
enthusiastic conversations with his bemused older sister about whether Barry 
McGuigan was better than Prince Naseem. We would come downstairs at weekends 
and find him rewatching the end of Rocky 3 or cheering along with the climax of 
Creed. In a burst of fitness fervour my husband had bought himself a punchbag 
and hung it in the garage. Yet it was Osh who used it, sneaking in after 
school, trying on his father’s boxing gloves and swinging at the punchbag.
 The Greatest: Muhammad Ali at Gleason’s Gym, in training for the third Ken 
Norton fight, August 1976. Photograph: Staff/Mirrorpix 
He started telling everyone he was going to be a boxer – when a well-meaning 
father at school, who had some experience with the sport, pointed out that it’s 
not much fun being hit, my usually cheerful and polite son threw a water bottle 
at his feet and stormed off in a sulk. (He came back and apologised, but 
insisted he still wanted to learn the sport.) We were due to be in America when 
Osh turned seven and his talk was all of going to Philadelphia,running up the 
Rocky steps 
<http://www.visitphilly.com/museums-attractions/philadelphia/the-rocky-statue-and-the-rocky-steps/#sm.00001obk6vsw3udtpst65wk7i1q9t>
, and, most of all, getting into the ring.

My mind was full of serious injuries from concussion to brain bleed, fractures 
of the skull to shattered eye sockets

By now I was worried. This didn’t seem like a passing fad. Yet I really didn’t 
want my son to box, not now, not when he was older. My mind was full of serious 
injuries from concussion to brain bleed, from fractures of the skull to 
shattered eye sockets. But at the same time I wondered whether my resistance to 
the idea of him boxing was making me a hypocrite.

For like Oisín, boxing once ruled my world. As a teenager AJ Liebling 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._J._Liebling>’s The Sweet Science fascinated 
me. I devoured non-fiction on the subject by Jimmy Breslin, Joyce Carol Oates, 
Hugh McIlvanney and Norman Mailer, and fiction by Dashiell Hammett, Damon 
Runyon and PG Wodehouse. I studied old footage of the fights between Marvin 
Hagler and Tommy Hearns and queued in New York in 1996 to catch Leon Gast’s 
superlative documentaryWhen We Were Kings. If I never considered fighting 
myself, it’s only because 25 years ago it was an unheard of idea for a girl.
 Get your flipping gloves up: Sylvester Stallone stars in Rocky (1976). 
Photograph: Allstar 
So instead I did the next best thing. I became a boxing correspondent, first 
in New York forDaily News and then later in England for Sport First. I sat 
ringside covering fights from Prince Naseem v Kevin Kelley to Lennox Lewis’s 
bouts with Evander Holyfield, collected quotes for theDaily News’s irascible 
chief boxing writerMichael Katz 
<http://www.ibhof.com/pages/about/inductees/observer/katz.html> and interviewed 
Joe Calzaghe and David Izon, who fought a memorable bout against Lou Savarese 
at the Harlem Apollo that saw the noisy audience yell for the famous hook to 
take the Bronx boxer away. Best of all I spent time with theObserver’s boxing 
correspondentKevin Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevinmitchell> 
and the wonderful (and sadly gone) Irish boxing writerHarry Mullan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/may/24/guardianobituaries.johnrawling>, 
who was always gently encouraging of my chosen career at a time when women 
sports writers could not attend the British Boxing Writers’ Club Dinner 
regardless of how often they wrote about the sport. Towards the end of my time 
covering boxing I even interviewed a female boxer, Ali’s daughter Laila, who 
was just at the start of a career that would see her fight 24 times, winning 
them all.

Boxing is the toughest and loneliest sport in the world
Frank Bruno 
And I loved every minute. The tense feeling I’d get before the start of a 
bout, the pre-fight match-ups with their braggadocio and verbal jabs as 
well-placed as any punches in the ring, the way the best fights were half 
dance, half brawl. I loved the atmosphere of the New York gyms and the raw 
pride of the amateur bouts, in which impassioned families yelled their hearts 
out for fighters from all over the five boroughs. Frank Bruno once called 
boxing “the toughest and loneliest sport in the world”. He was right, but at 
its best it also feels like a club to which you’re lucky to belong.
Mother’s boy: Lennox Lewis with his mum, Violet, having defeated Evander 
Holyfield in Las Vegas, November 1999. Photograph: Laura Rauch/AP 
Given I remembered that thrill, did I have any right to deny it to my son? Is 
it really acceptable to praise boxers in print then turn around and tell Oisín 
that it wasn’t for him? In mitigation many professional boxers feel the same 
way – when I interviewed Laila Ali she admitted her father had been very 
unhappy that she’d chosen to box, while Lennox Lewis has said he would have 
“mixed feelings” about his son Landon boxing.

The American Academy of Pediatrics and the Canadian Paediatric Society 
recently put out a jointstatement 
<http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/128/3/617.short> opposing 
children participating in boxing, noting: “Although boxing provides benefits 
for participants, including exercise, self-discipline and self-confidence, the 
sport of boxing encourages and rewards deliberate blows to the head and face. 
Because of the risk of head and facial injuries, [we] oppose boxing as a sport 
for children and adolescents.”
Daddy’s girl: Laila Ali who won all 24 of her pro fights. Muhammad was unhappy 
that she’d chosen to box. Photograph: Joe Traver/Camera Press 
At the end of last year the British Medical Association and brain injury 
charityHeadway <https://www.headway.org.uk/> also condemned the sport after the 
death of 25-year-old Scottish boxerMike Towell  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/boxer-mike-towell-suffered-headaches-in-weeks-before-fatal-fight>
following a serious head injury sustained in a bout against Dale Evans. “As 
long as boxing is allowed to continue more and more young lives will be damaged 
or lost as a result of opponents deliberately trying to cause neurological harm 
to each other,” said Headway’s chief executive Peter McCabe.

There is a huge difference between fighting professionally, as Towell did, and 
learning the rudiments, as Osh wants to. Yet even before the young boxer’s 
death I was uneasy. It felt like bad parenting to allow my child to box. On the 
other hand both he and his sister have played rugby since they were six, with 
Ruby, nine, moving up from tag to contact this year.

If you want to get your child concussed, let them play rugby or take up horse 
riding
Mike Loosemore 
“If you want to get your child concussed, let them play rugby or take up horse 
riding,” says Dr Mike Loosemore, who is the chief medical officer forEngland 
Boxing <http://www.abae.co.uk/aba/>, the sport’s amateur wing. “You can sustain 
spinal fractures playing rugby or break your neck and back horse riding, but 
they’re also very middle class sports and therefore understood by doctors, many 
of whom have personal experience of them. Boxing by contrast tends to be 
misunderstood by those who have never spent any time with the sport, but simply 
condemn it outright.”

Loosemore, who has worked for two decades examining concussion and brain 
injuries within the sport – research which lead to the recent decision to 
abandon head guards in amateur boxing “because they were shown to increase 
rather than prevent brain injuries” – stresses that boxing is highly regulated, 
particularly at the amateur level and says he would have no problem allowing a 
child of his to box.
Legend: Jake LaMotta limbers up at Gleason’s Gym, 1949. Photograph: 
Keystone/Getty Images 
In the end I decide the only way to deal with my mixed feelings is to be 
honest. I tell Osh that I’m not keen on him boxing, but that while we’re in New 
York in the summer we can go to the city’s most famous gym,Gleason’s 
<http://gleasonsgym.net/index.html>. It has had several locations since it was 
founded in the Bronx in 1937, but since 1984 it has been hidden in a once 
rundown but now prime location in Brooklyn’s Dumbo (Down Under the Manhattan 
Bridge Overpass). Gleason’s is part of New York boxing legend. It’s where Jake 
LaMotta and Carlos Ortiz trained and where Ali prepared for his first fight 
against Sonny Liston, back when he was still called Cassius Clay. Barry 
McGuigan, Tommy Hearns and Larry Holmes are among those to have passed through 
its battered doors, as have actors from Robert De Niro to Wesley Snipes.

I don’t think there’s any problem with starting young. They’re not fighting in 
the ring, they’re training
Coach Mike Kozlowski 
These days Gleason’s also offers boxing classes for kids at the weekends. 
Taught by Michael “Coach Mike” Kozlowski, a Russian American who coached UK 
Olympic champion Luke Campbell to European Gold and won the 2012 Golden Gloves 
“Coach of the Year”, the classes aim to hit the sweet spot between fun and 
inspiring.

“I don’t think there’s any problem with starting young,” says Kozlowski. 
“They’re not fighting in the ring, they’re training.” The classes are split by 
age and it’s certainly true that the youngest children are having a lot of fun, 
hopping across the room, working on their jabs, trying out the punch bags. “At 
that age it is about trying it out,” Kozlowski says. “But some of them stick 
with it. I have kids in this class who have been coming here for years, some 
move up and keep coming back to the gym. Some have real talent, others are here 
to sweat a bit and have fun.”
 Charismatic: Nicola Adams at the Rio Olympics where she won gold. Photograph: 
Peter Cziborra/Reuters 
Youth boxing is big news in America. Clubs across the US offer similar 
sessions to Gleason’s and children’s classes are becoming increasingly popular 
in the UK as well. Growing numbers of young women are getting involved, a 
factor that can possibly be attributed to the success of the charismaticNicola 
Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/nicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview>
, who won gold medals in both London and Rio. Mark Collings, a boxing coach 
with the Limehouse Boxing Academy, agrees. “There’s definitely a feeling that 
the sport is more inclusive and has a more wholesome image than before,” he 
says. What does he attribute that to? “It’s partially the success of someone 
like Nicola, but it’s also that boxing clubs now offer a relatively well 
ordered and safe environment. In our club there are Bengali kids, Irish 
traveller kids, Romanians, Caribbeans, Africans… and that mix is a great 
benefit. Our club is one of the few places an Irish traveller kid would meet a 
Muslim kid and vice versa. That’s a great thing.”

You learn how to trust yourself and hold your nerve and have a positive 
mentality
Danny Davis 
Danny Davis, who won the National Junior Development title last year at just 
15, adds that one of the sport’s strongest selling points is the discipline it 
imbues in young fighters. “Before I started boxing I wasn’t that involved in 
school, but after I started boxing I started concentrating more.” Davis even 
credits the sport with improving his GCSE results. “It gives you a mindset 
where you learn how to trust yourself and hold your nerve and have a positive 
mentality.”

So should I let go of my motherly fears and let Osh learn to box? Danny’s 
mother Kim admits she still struggles when her son gets in the ring. “It 
terrifies me in all truthfulness. When I first watched Danny I was shocked at 
how brutal it was even with these young kids. I was praying at the side of the 
ring, ‘Don’t let my son get hurt.’ Even now when he’s doing so well, I’m still 
full of nerves before every fight although I try not to let him see it. I have 
to keep reminding myself that he’s done the correct preparation and he has the 
skill and stamina to get through.”

Did she ever think about trying to stop him?
 Small but fast: Oisín Hughes and his mother Sarah, author of this piece. 
Photograph: Christopher Lane/Observer 
“So many people have said to me, ‘How could you let your son do that?’ but 
Danny was 12 when he decided to box and he went to the gym off his own back 
without telling us – it was his decision and I know how important choice is to 
teenagers, so I think that it’s my job as a parent to deal with that and 
support him. I say to myself I will deal with the fear as and when it happens 
because he’s living his dream and I do have so much pride in how well he’s 
done. The pride outweighs the fear.”

Collings agrees that it’s not an easy decision to make. “Look, I’ve got a 
little girl and I’d be lying if I said I wanted her to take up boxing. But if 
your son stays interested, then there are some really positive things to take 
from boxing. It’s a great confidence booster, the club can be almost like a 
really weird extended family. There’s a lot of support. It also has enormous 
benefits just as an aerobic exercise – there’s a growing number of non-contact 
boxing schemes in schools which cater to those who want to keep fit.”

The key phrase here is ‘stays interested’. “Officially the starting age is 
11,” says Collings. “By that age you know your own mind. Start too young and 
you’d lose them – imagine being 19 and having already boxed for 10 years.” In 
other words it’s time for Oisín and I to compromise: if he still wants to box 
when he’s 11, he can try it. Until then it’s back to watching Adonis Creed on 
repeat.

 * This article was amended on 6 January 2017 to clarify that the New York 
boxing gym Gleason’s has had several locations since its inception in 1937.
 