
Nadeem Aslam turned 50 last year, and in 25 years of fiction writing the 
Pakistan-born author, who lives in Yorkshire, has taken on subjects such as the 
war on terror and migrant communities in the UK. His new book, The Golden 
Legend, is a love story set in a contemporary Pakistani city inflamed by 
religious intolerance

Where did the idea for The Golden Legend come from?
Simmering away in the background for the past five years has been this 
constant conversation about refugees and the hatred of strangers. It’s now 
become part of public life. I kept hearing: “Why are these people coming? What 
are they fearing?” And I wanted to say: “This is why.” Nobody leaves their 
house, their country lightly. You don’t wake up one day and think: “I’ll just 
get on this boat and make a crossing.” 

You’re wryly scathing about religious intolerance in Pakistan…
That was the starting point. Pakistan’s draconian blasphemy laws aren’t 
concerned with blasphemy at all, but based on earthly greed. Then it became a 
book about the powerful and powerless. I was in Pakistan and I met this young 
man who had come from Kashmir to train as a guerrilla fighter, because his 
sister was beaten so severely by an Indian soldier that her baby was born with 
a broken arm. But he was shocked at how callous his fellow fighters were. So he 
walked away… but he was drifting in Pakistan. He was the seed for Imran in the 
novel. 

With all these subtexts, how hard do you have to work on narrative?
First and foremost I am a novelist, and I wake up every day approaching life’s 
problems through fiction. The novel isn’t a political puzzle to be worked out; 
the main thing is: “Is this a gripping story? Are you involved with the lives 
of these people?” Yes, there’s a little boy maimed by a drone strike, but he 
isn’t simply my attempt to draw attention to how bad drones are - he’s also 
delightful, irrepressible even.

Which book changed your life?
A biology textbook. In Pakistan, they didn’t get introduced until I was in 
junior school and the religious teacher at my school resigned, outraged at the 
idea that something other than his version of how the human race came into 
being was presented. In that moment I saw the idea of evolution that was more 
akin to my sensibilities.

Does Yorkshire feel a long way from the events in your book?
I’m surrounded by farmland and orchards, which I work in. And these are the 
same fields my father walked around in the 1950s, when he fled the dictatorship 
in Pakistan. Actually, going for a walk in Yorkshire, for me, is like walking 
in Pakistan – it feels far away from the centre and makes me very aware of what 
passes for beauty in the margins.

Your writing has always had that keen sense of beauty amid fear and 
intolerance.
I do hope my delight in the world comes across in my novels. Being alive is 
such a beautiful phenomenon, and I want to observe intensely everything that is 
around me with what the poet Wallace Stevens called the “hottest fire of sight”.

How do you feel about Pakistan in 2017?
I would like to think I have a very strong emotional relationship with 
Pakistan. But any moral dilemma you’re faced with is so huge there. 
Discrimination is so blatant: a teacher can ask a Christian student to stand up 
and justify taking the place of a Muslim in a class.Bishop John Joseph  
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/commentandblogs/2014/05/06/bishop-john-joseph-a-sacrifice-never-to-be-forgotten/>
killed himself in Faisalabad in 1998 in a protest over blasphemy laws. I don’t 
need to make these things up. Yet there is so much in Pakistan that is 
beautiful and extraordinary. 

There’s a line where one of your characters muses on the survival of the human 
race…
That’s what the book is about. Earlier this year I saw a man wearing a T-shirt 
that said: “Welcome to Britain, now fit in or fuck off”. That awful idea of 
only one God, one religion, one nation, one language that I explore in this 
book… well, it goes against everything I hold dear. 

What do you hold dearest as a novelist?
In a way, this book is an attempt to understand Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> before they happened. Our 
principles are being tested. I feel like I have to keep an eye on all of this 
through my writing. But in the end, my main theme is love. It’s certainly the 
most interesting thing that happens to us.

• The Golden Legend by Nadeem Aslam is published by Faber (£16.99). To order a 
copy for £14.44 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/golden-legend-463958.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 