
French clubs are used to playing second fiddle to their all-conquering 
national side, but last night fans of the beleaguered Le Championnat had cause 
to celebrate - and it came from the most unlikely source.

Nantes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nantes>, bottom of the French 
league and with just one win in 12 games, put their domestic travails behind 
them to secure qualification for the second stage with a 1-0 win over Lazio. 
Victory guaranteed the French champions a lofty finish at the top of Group D 
while condemning the Roman giants to the bottom, denying them the consolation 
of an extended run in the Uefa Cup. Poor Jaap Stam.

"Before the first match Lazio were the favourites and tonight the standings 
are the other way round," said Raynald Denoueix, the Nantes coach. "It's hard 
to realise what we have achieved."

Out-of-form striker Pierre Yves Andre scored the decisive goal with a 
72nd-minute lob, only his second since joining from Bastia in the summer, and 
after the game he rounded on the club's critics. "The team has been strongly 
criticised recently, but it was far too much," Andre told Le Parisien. "They 
should not have tried to shoot a man when he is down, but they will try to 
shoot us again if we lose in Le Championnat."

Lazio President Sergio Cragnotti was surprisingly stoical, but cast a bitter 
eye back to the days of Dino Zoff, saying: "We were not knocked out of the 
Champions League tonight. The damage was done a long time ago." New manager 
Alberto Zaccheroni will be given time to make amends, and hauling the 2000 
Scudetto winners from their current position fourth from bottom of Serie A is 
his priority.

Group A winners Real Madrid lost their unbeaten record in Moscow, enabling 
Lokomotiv to progress to the Uefa Cup, but the most dramatic events of the 
evening occurred on the flight home when their aeroplane's engine caught fire 
after colliding with a flock of seagulls. Squad members Ruben and Sousa noticed 
the flames and raised the alarm which culminated in a safe emergency landing, 
but defender Ivan Helguera still described the scare as "the worst moment in my 
life."

Real director Jorge Valdano said: "The burning made us all extremely nervous 
and you realize it only takes a minute for everything to end. It just gives you 
time to say goodbye to yourself."

Though all on board escaped unharmed, the Real team - without Zinedine Zidane 
and Luis Figo but including a host of internationals including Steve McManaman 
and Fernando Morientes - were severely shaken. They remained stranded in Moscow 
this lunchtime, hardly the best preparation for Sunday's visit of Barcelona in 
Primera Liga.

Galatasaray, quarter-finalists last year, emerged triumphant from a 
winner-take-all clash with PSV Eindhoven in Istanbul. Sergen Yalcin and Arif 
Erdem scored the goals on a nervous night for the Gala fans, who have been 
instrumental to their team's remarkable record of having lost just one home 
European game in three years.

PSV will now bolster the western European presence in the eastern 
bloc-dominated Uefa Cup, qualification for which was the central issue on a 
night when most other matters had been resolved. Boavista claimed the second 
Champions League place in Group B despite losing 1-0 to Dynamo Kiev, with 
Borussia Dortmund having to content themselves with Europe's secondary 
tournament, much to the chagrin of goalkeeper Jens Lehmann. "I hear that the 
Uefa Cup is a great competition," he said after defeat at Anfield. "If we play 
like this we'll fly out straight away."

With Arsenal and Panathinaikos having already secured qualification there was 
little to decide in Group C, though Real Mallorca made certain of a Uefa Cup 
place with a 1-0 win over the Greek champions courtesy of a 57th-minute goal 
from Leo Biagini.
 