
Nathan Cleverly is ready to face Jürgen Brähmer in a rematch after winning the 
WBA regular light-heavyweight title when the Germanwithdrew with a suspected 
broken elbow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/nathan-cleverly-wba-jurgen-brahmer>
 before the start of the seventh round of their fight in Neubrandenburg on 
Saturday.

The fight came five years after they were first scheduled to meet, and though 
defending champion Brähmer appeared to be winning at the point of his 
withdrawal, Cleverly is ready to honour the rematch clause in their contract.

“If he wants the rematch as per the contract, he can have it,” Cleverly said.

“I don’t know that he’ll want it, he’s 37 now and it would only go the same 
way, a Nathan Cleverly stoppage, but this time in Wales. I wanted to break him 
up in the first half of the fight and that’s what was happening. I felt him 
wince and wheeze in the sixth round when I was hitting him to the body and 
there was little coming back – the fight was only going one way.

“When I boxed [Andrzej] Fonfara, I had a busted nose, my ear was gone, and I 
carried on – the full 12. Brähmer pulled out in the seventh because I broke 
him, injury or no injury. It’s a 12-round fight – you fight the whole fight.

“This was my destiny - he didn’t want to fight me five years ago and now we’ve 
finally got it on and I felt I would have too much for him.”

Victory has revived the 29-year-old’s career after three losses from his past 
six fights. It was widely thought he may never fight again if he suffered 
another defeat, particularly after an unsuccessful move to cruiserweight.

“I’m so grateful to be world champion again,” Cleverly said. “I worked so hard 
after losing my belt in my sixth fight and now I’m a two-time champion. I was 
so young first time around and maybe it was too early for me at 24.

“I had six defences and lost it in devastating fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/18/nathan-cleverly-beaten-sergey-kovalev-cardiff>
 against a pound-for-pound elite guy in Sergey Kovalev, and since then this has 
been my goal and I’ve made it. I’m so proud for my country. We all have highs 
and lows in boxing and right now I’m just on cloud nine.”
 