
Europe’s wild bee population is in dramatic decline with nearly one in 10 
species facing the threat of extinction, according to the first ever assessment 
of all the continent’s nearly 2,000 bee species.

Another 5.2% of bee species are likely to be threatened in the near future, 
while more than a quarter of species such as the European bumblebees are at 
risk of dying out, saidthe study by the International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) 
<http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/erl_of_bees_low_res_for_web.pdf>.

Population trends for 79% of the continent’s pollinators – mostly wild 
honeybees – are still unknown, but over a third of bee populations for which 
data was collected were shown to be in decline.

 “This report should be a wake up call to the ecological disaster that is 
unfolding in Europe’s countryside,” Ariel Brunner, the head of EU policy at 
Birdlife told the Guardian. “It’s very clear that something is going horribly 
wrong with our agricultural practices which are the main driver of these 
declines, whether it is increased pesticide use, the destruction and conversion 
of grasslands, or the loss of natural vegetation and intensified farming 
methods.”

 The IUCN paper said that sources of food and forage for pollinators have been 
hit hard by intensive silage production at the expense of hay-cropping. The 
widespread use of insecticides and herbicides has also reduced the availability 
of flowers and promoted rank grassland, which is low in flowering plants and 
legume species.

Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> has 
been another factor in the dip in bee numbers, the report said, because heavy 
rainfalls, droughts and increased temperatures can alter and reduce habitats 
that species have adapted to over many generations.

Of 1,965 bee species in Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
, the EU-funded paper found 9.2% were threatened with extinction, 12.6% of 
species were stable and 0.7% were increasing. But the peer-reviewed research by 
more than 40 experts was constrained by a lack of verifiable data, and the true 
number of bees at risk could be higher.

 “This assessment is the best understanding we have had so far on wild bees in 
Europe,” said Jean-Christophe Vié, the deputy director of IUCN’s Global Species 
Programme. “However, our knowledge about them is incomplete as we are faced 
with an alarming lack of expertise and resources.”

Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> play an essential role in 
sustaining ecosystems and pollinating crops and the IUCN is calling for urgent 
investment into new research on ways of reversing the decline.

The EU’s environment commissioner Karmen Vella described the study’s findings 
as “very worrying”.


 “Our quality of life – and our future – depends on the many services that 
nature provides for free,” he said. “If we don’t address the reasons behind 
this decline in wild bees, and act urgently to stop it, we could pay a very 
heavy price indeed.”

 However, Brussels has been criticised for the application of measures to 
‘green’ its Common Agricultural Policy, which were intended to make farmland 
management across all 28 EU states more sustainable.

 “It is shocking that just a couple of weeks ago, the commission accepted a 
French implementation of this ‘greening’ which recognises maize monoculture as 
green,” Brunner said. “Monoculture is about the most unfriendly thing you can 
do to biodiversity in general and pollinators in particular. In the name of 
greening the CAP, we are actively fomenting this crisis with public policies.”

The annual value of global crop pollination by bees has been estimated at 
€153bn globally and €22bn in Europe.

More than a third of global agricultural volumes come from crops supported by 
bees, while 84% of crops grown for human consumption require insect pollination 
to enhance product quality and yields.
 