
All through this summer the best birdwatchers around have alerted me to the 
appearance of asparrowhawk 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/s/sparrowhawk>
 in the neighbourhood. Had I been a small bird I would have died eight or nine 
times since March, for, each time, I failed to see the predator coming.

It happened again the other morning in the market square: the tip-off came, as 
surely and identifiably as a personalised text message call on a mobile, a 
clear high volley oftick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick calls.

The ear begins to understand starling speak by the speed of the ticking off, 
and, by dint of experience, I have come to work out that two ticks a second 
means there is a cat or magpie about. The scolding notes are repeated for up to 
half a minute, a steady and relentless signal that might be saying: “I can see 
what you’re up to.”

This call was much faster. Many birdwatchers know the starling alarm that 
tells of a threat from the air; the speed of the invader matched by the urgency 
of the response. And so, when the still air was pierced with a brief burst of 
chipping, at six or seven ticks a second, I looked up and around at once.

And there, directly overhead, was a sparrowhawk, wings swept back, giving me 
the eye, a hard, impassive, appraisal from a creature that seems to have no 
expression, a yellow-eyed stare which sets the pulse racing. It is a look that 
both thrills and chills.

Reliant on stealth and surprise this hunter, this time, had been rumbled. Its 
pursuers, a trio of starlings, weaved around it with a mixture of courage and 
caution, diving at its flanks almost within talon range. Only when the hawk was 
quite visibly in retreat did they peel off, as if veering into the exit lane of 
an exceedingly dangerous road. They melted away between the rooftops.

Like a Darth Vader out of costume the sparrowhawk and its menace had 
evaporated. It had become just a bird on the move. A few flaps, a 
straight-winged glide, it was heading elsewhere, maybe hoping that the next 
neighbourhood watch would not be as vigilant.


 