
Just when Lucas Neill seemed to have confirmed his status as the local 
villain, Blackburn's right-back confounded his critics by claiming a 
stoppage-time winner to leave Mark Hughes's stuttering side top of qualifying 
Group E.

By letting David Bentley's cross bounce before half-volleying it into the 
bottom corner, Neill - who has made it clear he wants to leave Ewood Park next 
month - ensured Rovers will avoid teams dropping out of the Champions League in 
tomorrow's draw for the knock-out stages.

Until then, AS Nancy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nancy> had been the 
better side, with only Robbie Savage really impressing for a Blackburn ensemble 
struggling after losing six of their last eight Premiership games.

"We left it late but it was a great finish," admitted Hughes, who has been 
criticised for allowing Neill to retain the captaincy. "We found it difficult 
to get much momentum because their game-plan was to slow things down, get men 
behind the ball and hit us on the break. We found them very difficult to break 
down."

There was also a breakdown in relations between the managers with Pablo 
Correa, Nancy's Uruguayan coach, refusing to shake Hughes's hand. "I was 
insulted by him but I cannot repeat what he said," explained Correa. "I told 
him to sit down and be quiet and there may well have been a little industrial 
language," conceded Hughes. "He was a little upset but he shouldn't be so 
precious."

Blackburn's back line had looked as uncomfortable as Correa when an injury to 
the recalled Andy Todd - hitherto frozen out by Hughes after a dispute in 
August - merely emphasised the dangers of Kim's startling counter-attacking 
pace. Andre Ooijer found himself wrong-footed and overtaken by the quick Nancy 
striker but, fortunately for Rovers, Issiar Dia proved unequal to Kim's ensuing 
centre.

There was controversy when Dia was booked for diving after Neill had appeared 
to pull his shirt and haul him down in the penalty area. "I am angry we were 
not given a penalty," said Correa. It certainly seemed a lucky escape for 
Hughes's men, who enjoyed an even greater reprieve shortly before half-time 
when Kim left Neill trailing in his wake after skipping the Australian's tackle 
before his shot hit a post with Brad Friedel beaten.

A crowd of only 12,568 turned up on a wet and windy east Lancashire evening 
and those who made the trip were becoming more than a little impatient with 
Blackburn. By now even Hughes was cutting a disconsolate figure down in the 
technical area as Savage was forced to extinguish too many midfield fires.

Even so, Bentley hinted that there might be a surprising denouement when his 
shot from the edge of the area looked to be destined for the top corner but was 
brilliantly diverted by the novice Johan Lapeyre. The goalkeeper would later 
have no answer to Neill's strike, thereby vindicating Hughes's decision to 
stand by his captain. "Lucas's critics should remember what he has done for 
this club," he said. "But I'm still hopeful he'll still be here for the next 
round in February."
 