
Israeli prime minister Binyamin Netanyahu lashed out at Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/apr/25/iran-russia-israel-tehranbureau>
 on Sunday for staging a Holocaust-themed cartoon contest that mocked the Nazi 
genocide of 6 million Jews during the second world war. The Islamic Republic 
was busy planning for another one, he said.

A US state department spokesman, traveling with secretary of state John Kerry 
in Saudi Arabia, expressed US concern about the contest, saying it should be 
“condemned by the authorities and civil society leaders rather than encouraged”.

Iran has long backed armed groups committed to Israel’s destruction and its 
leaders have called for it to be wiped off the map.Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> fears that Iran’s nuclear program is 
designed to threaten its very existence.

But Netanyahu said Israel opposed not only Iran’s belligerent policies, but 
its values.

“It denies the Holocaust, it mocks the Holocaust and it is also preparing 
another Holocaust,” Netanyahu said at his weekly cabinet meeting. “I think that 
every country in the world must stand up and fully condemn this.”

State department spokesman Mark Toner said the US was concerned the cartoon 
contest could “be used as a platform for Holocaust denial and revisionism and 
egregiously antisemitic speech, as it has in the past”.

Israeli prime minister rejects French peace conference initiative
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/israeli-prime-minister-binyamin-netanyahu-rejects-french-peace-conference-initiative-palestinians>
“Such offensive speech should be condemned by the authorities and civil 
society leaders rather than encouraged,” Toner said. “We denounce any Holocaust 
denial and trivialization as inflammatory and abhorrent. It is insulting to the 
memory of the millions of people who died in the Holocaust.”

The denial or questioning of the genocide is widespread in the Middle East, 
where many regard it as a pretext Israel used for its creation and to excuse 
its actions toward the Palestinians.

“Holocaust means mass killing,” said contest organizer Masuod Shojai 
Tabatabaei. “We are witnessing the biggest killings by the Zionist regime in 
Gaza and Palestine.”

He said the purpose of the Tehran event was not to deny the Holocaust but 
rather to criticize alleged western double standards regarding free expression 
– and particularly as a response to depictions of the Prophet Muhammad by the 
French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo and others.

The exhibit featured some 150 works from 50 countries, with many portraying 
Israel as using the Holocaust to distract from the suffering of the 
Palestinians, and others comparing Netanyahu to Adolf Hitler.

Others depicted Palestinian prisoners standing behind concentration camp-style 
barbed wire fences and a Jerusalem mosque behind a gate bearing the motto 
“Arbeit Macht Frei”, which appeared at the entrance to the Auschwitz death camp.

The contest was organized by non-governmental bodies with strong support from 
Iran’s hardliners. A previous contest in 2006 got a boost from then president 
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, a hardliner who referred to the Holocaust as a “myth” and 
repeatedly predicted Israel’s demise.

• This article was amended on 16 May 2016 to correct the name of the state 
department spokesman Mark Toner.
 