 THE Welsh Secretary, Ron Davies, moved last night to quash fresh controversy 
over voting in last year's devolution referendum which could further undermine 
the legitimacy of the narrow majority.
 As the Conservative constitutional spokesman, Michael Ancram, joined calls 
for full disclosure of details surrounding the counting of votes in Mr Davies's 
own Caerphilly constituency on the night of September 18, the Welsh Secretary 
dismissed complaints as 'technical matters' which did not mean that the result 
was flawed or improperly achieved.

The row was triggered by publication in the Scotsman newspaper of documents 
which have been circulating in South Wales since October. They list 11 points 
of procedural concern by observers of the count made by Labour activists in the 
Caerphilly council area - which delivered 6,000 votes for the pro-devolution 
camp which won by just 6,700 votes overall, or 0.6 per cent, acrossWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> .

 Lengthy correspondence was quoted by the Scotsman, notably from Derek Lamb, 
the Caerphilly constituency secretary. At least one local activist resigned 
over the issue, not least because Mr Davies had boasted at Labour's Blackpool 
conference a few weeks later that Caerphilly's result had made the difference 
between defeat and victory in Wales .

 The most sensitive of Mr Lamb's candid comments was that any formal 
complaints would be tricky. 'Ultimately the buck stops at the Welsh Office, and 
we realise that politically we have to be extremely careful because of Ron's 
position.' That refers to Mr Davies's turbulent past as an anti-devolutionist 
who is still seen in Downing Street as an Old Labour bruiser - who could be 
purged by the Blairites.

 Citing a subsequent investigation by the local returning officer, Mr Davies 
yesterday told Radio 4's World at One that he had 'made it absolutely clear 
that each and every question had been fully investigated and properly responded 
to . . . There was no question of either improprieties or any question that the 
vote itself . . . was flawed'.

 Most Welsh Labour MPs and party officials support his assessment. But the Yes 
camp won such a tiny majority on a turnout of only 50 per cent that No 
campaigners in all parties are hardly likely to ignore an embarrassing leak 
from inside Mr Davies's own backyard - even though the disputed procedures seem 
largely to concern the way votes were counted and observer access to them.

 Unfortunately for critics, the Referendum Act specifically precluded legal 
action to get courts to overturn the result - unlike normal elections - though 
Mr Ancram's Welsh deputy, Jonathan Evans, last night warned that a cover-up 
would undermine the future use of referendums in Britain, such as May's vote on 
a mayor for London.

 Mr Ancram yesterday said that the leaks raised questions about 'the veracity 
of the Secretary of State' and spoke of 'a distinct smell of cover-up'.

 'It is vital that this whole matter is publicly cleared as soon as possible 
by full disclosure . . . anything less leaves a dangerous question over the 
Caerphilly result and the post of the Secretary of State,' Mr Ancram said.
 