
Sarah Todd always sensed a gap in her ability to offer all-round care to 
residents in the nursing home where she works. As a senior care worker, she 
knew what to do if somebody had a stroke or heart attack, but she sometimes 
felt at a loss with routine nursing care, like changing a dressing or giving 
medicines.

“I did the best with the training that I had and what you think you should be 
doing,” says Todd. “But I would have to ring the district nurse for advice and 
they can’t always come in there and then.”

But all that has changed since Todd qualified as a nursing assistant – a new 
hybrid role which sits between senior care assistant and registered nurse. 
Today her new skills include giving medicines, checking blood pressure and 
replacing simple dressings. Nine months after completing her training, she has 
been promoted to nursing home manager.

“Usually it’s nurses who become managers, but after this extra training I felt 
confident enough to look after a home – I know what the nurses are talking 
about and I feel confident if I have to challenge them. I just wouldn’t have 
felt I could do that before as a senior care worker.”

Todd’s experience illustrates the success of the care worker development 
programme designed by her employer, care home chain HC-One, to respond to the 
national shortage of nurses, the more complex clinical needs of residents and 
the desire to establish a proper career path for its care workforce. It now has 
213 qualified nursing assistants and another 165 either in training or 
completing pre-training modules.

Former social workers come back to the fold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/01/former-social-workers-come-back-to-the-fold>
According to HC-One managing director Liz Whyte, who heads the nursing 
assistant programme, the aim is to have nursing assistants in most of its 
nursing homes. “We can’t do anything about the national shortage of nurses, so 
as an organisation we came up with our own solution,” she says. “It’s done a 
lot for the status of carers – it’s given them confidence and also improves the 
quality of care we can give residents.”

Nursing assistants are joining the care workforce as the government pushes 
ahead with plans to create a new national role of nursing associate – another 
bridging role between senior care assistant and registered nurse. The first 
1,000 trainees will be recruited by the end of the year, with another 1,000 to 
follow in a second cohort. Training is expected to take two years.

Todd predicts that most of these associates will go to the acute sector, doing 
little to lift the pressures in homes. “I think the role may be more geared 
towards acute trusts. Care is a different environment to health and maybe we 
need a different approach. It’s also going to take some time [for this new 
role] to reach fruition. The problem is facing us here and now and we can’t 
wait for other people to come up with solutions.”

New career paths are also being developed for care and support staff working 
with children and families. A new level 4 advanced apprenticeship, creating a 
children, young people and families practitioner, is due to be launched next 
spring. Workplace training will take two years, with practitioners qualified to 
work in a variety of services, including children’s centres, alongside 
qualified social workers and in residential children’s homes.

The 'three conversations' model: turning away from long-term care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/01/the-three-conversations-model-turning-away-from-long-term-care>
The new apprenticeship is an attempt to guarantee national standards and offer 
career progression for this support workforce. “There is a lot of movement 
around generic roles that cross health and social care, such as care and 
nursing, but it’s happening more in adult care than in children and families,” 
says Rachael Wardell, chair of the workforce development policy committee of 
the Association of Directors of Children’s Services. “But there is scope in 
children and families for non-qualified social work practitioners.”

The new apprenticeship comes as a national return-to-practice social worker 
scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/01/former-social-workers-come-back-to-the-fold>
 – backed by the government and the Local Government Association – also gets 
off the ground. The initiative is the latest attempt to address the continuing 
crisis in social worker recruitment which is still dogging both adult and 
children and families services. Local councils continue to offer golden hellos 
or retainers to attract or keep staff.

Wardell reports that the £15,000 “golden handcuff” on offer to social workers 
who stay with her West Berkshire authority for three years is paying off. “Our 
agency rate is down to the lowest it’s been for three and a half years,” she 
says. “But it’s still at 15%, which isn’t nothing.”

Memoranda of understanding agreed by some neighbouring councils to help keep 
expensive social worker agency fees down is also playing a part. “More of them 
are now in place across the country and we are seeing them have a greater 
impact,” says Wardell. “But the issue is how many social workers do we need to 
meet demand – we could fill all the vacancies, but still not have enough.”
 