
When Sarah Long graduated from Essex University with a degree in European 
Studies, she had no idea that her first job would spring from an activity that 
she had always considered a hobby. A keen traveller in her student days, Long 
spent a year in Spain followed by an extended tour of Central America, so she 
was well qualified for a job with the travel guide publisher, Lonely Planet. "I 
applied for loads and loads of jobs, but didn't really get much of a response 
so I thought I might as well concentrate on the people I really wanted to work 
for and started sending off speculative letters." Lonely Planet was top of her 
list and luckily they were looking for an office junior at just the right time.

 Long dealt with the publisher's bulging mail bag for six months until 
publicity and promotions manager Jennifer Cox's assistant announced she was 
leaving and Long applied for the job. It is company policy to recruit from 
within wherever possible and so the ambitious office junior was soon promoted. 
These days she has expanded the role beyond simply being Cox's assistant to 
running press and promotion campaigns of her own and has even taken on some 
public speaking assignments on behalf of the company.

 The work is never boring and can sometimes take surprising turns. Earlier in 
the year she found herself being driven round London on a rickshaw accompanied 
by a large dreadlocked poodle. The book she was promoting, Chasing Rickshaws by 
Australian photographer Richard I'Anson, had attracted the attention of some 
East End rickshaw owners who turned up to the author's bookshop appearances in 
the capital. "They took us for a rickshaw drive around Brick Lane. It was quite 
mad." Then there are the strange and bizarre requests from journalists that 
seem to come in daily. "I think we're a victim of our own success sometimes in 
that we provide all this information and people automatically think if they've 
got a tricky assignment, Lonely Planet can help them."

"I've had some crazy requests," says Long, "like 'We're making a programme on 
Iranian women playing football. Have you got any information on that?' or 'I'm 
doing a piece on head-hunting tribes, can you give me some pointers?'" Of 
course part of Long's role is to coordinate her exuberant boss's hectic 
schedule: "Jennifer does loads of interviews herself on all aspects of travel. 
She's the presenter of Global Update for Radio 1, does talks around the country 
and writes lots of articles so it's really a case of juggling her schedule and 
making sure that she does, occasionally, come into the office so I can fill her 
in on what else is going on."

 Cox's high-octane enthusiasm is something that Long has learned to contain 
over the past couple of years: "She'll never say no to anything, so I sometimes 
have to nicely remind her how busy she is," she explains. But Long is full of 
praise for her boss from whom she has learned huge amounts, particularly on the 
writing side. "Jennifer writes a lot and so I've had training in that respect. 
I write my own press releases and give them to her and we change things 
around." The Lonely Planet assistant now writes copy for the STA brochure and 
has done a sample chapter on her home town of Swindon which could lead to 
further writing assignments for the guidebooks.

However, she isn't ready to become the next Bill Bryson just yet. "It's just 
an idea, but I would always want to do it alongside this job so I'd try and fit 
it in around my holidays." Long is just back from Bangkok which has widened her 
horizons still further. Although very much encouraged to continue travelling, 
not all Lonely Planet employees get to go abroad as part of their day-to-day 
duties. However Long did manage to wangle a trip to the company's head office 
in Australia last year for the annual marketing conference.

 It sounds like the perfect job, but it is not your basic nine-to-five 
commitment, particularly when a new guide is being launched, and yes, Long does 
have to do all those dull admin jobs like mail-outs and answering the 
constantly ringing press office telephone.
 