
A London teenager whose quick thinking helped save the life of a 19-year-old 
youth he found stabbed and beaten in the street is among the youngest 
recipients in theNew Year honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/new-year-honours-list>.


Jeremiah Emmanuel, 17, an A-level student and anti-violence campaigner, drew 
on life-saving skills learned as an army cadet to stem the victim’s bleeding by 
improvising with T-shirts, belts and hoodies before emergency services arrived 
at the scene of the attack near Emmanuel’s home in Brixton, south London. The 
victim of the attack, whom he did not know, made a full recovery.

Almost three-quarters (74%) of the New Year honours are for local community, 
charity or voluntary work by the “ordinary people doing extraordinary things” 
highlighted in the Queen’s Christmas broadcast.

Emmanuel, who receives a BEM (British Empire Medal) and is recognised for his 
anti-violence community work among young people following the loss of a friend, 
has now started a campaign with the young man who was stabbed to introduce 
lessons in life-saving skills to secondary schools.

“I hope it can inspire people to go into their communities, get involved with 
organisations and charities, and give back to other people,” said Emmanuel, who 
has been involved in community work since the age of four, encouraged by his 
mother “who taught me to give back to others, not necessarily to think about 
yourself, but to think of your community and the people around you”.

Others honoured for their inspiring community work include solicitor Saba 
Nasin, a volunteer cricket coach from Redbridge, who receives a BEM for her 
work encouraging girls to get involved in the game. “It’s been great to use 
sport to drive change in the local community,” she said.


Manisha Tailor, a qualified headteacher, changed career to become a football 
coach in London, inspired by her brother who suffered a breakdown. She said she 
wanted “to raise awareness of social inclusion and mental health”. She receives 
an MBE for services to football and diversity in sport.

Samaritans volunteer and former teacher Alan Woodhouse, 83, from Merseyside, 
who has been helping people for 57 years, said his MBE “is not about me, it’s 
about recognising the work of Samaritans volunteers throughout the decades”.

The oldest recipient in this years’ honours is 94-year-old Janet Gillespie, 
who is given the BEM after 60 years volunteering with Poppy Scotland. This year 
also sees the first ever honour for services to glass blowing. Thomas Young, 
79, from Bridge of Allan, Scotland, has been making glass by hand using 
traditional methods for almost 60 years. He said of his MBE: “I’m overwhelmed, 
humbled and very grateful for this award, which I never expected to receive and 
had no idea I had been nominated for.”
 