
The data revolution has seen the job of data scientist elevated to one of the 
most important within many organisations – such as Facebook’s army of analysts. 
As councils look more to their data for help to do things better, whether it’s 
protecting vulnerable children or supporting local businesses, they will need 
skilled data professionals. But where are they going to find them?

Our research 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/skills-datavores-talent-and-data-revolution>
 shows that even in the private sector there is a severe shortage of skilled 
data scientists. For councils, down to their bare bones financially and 
restricted by national pay bands, it is harder still to find the right talent.


In Wise Council 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/wise-council-insights-cutting-edge-data-driven-local-government>
, a research report with the Local Government Association, we argue that the 
government digital service (GDS) should spend just 1% – £4m – of its £450m 
annual budget embedding data analysts and scientists in councils. This modest 
outlay would fund around 50 data scientists a year to work in pairs across 25 
local authorities and rigorous evaluation of their impact would help to make 
the case for data specialists becoming the norm rather than the exception in 
local councils.

Any such scheme should focus on colocating specialists within teams, from 
frontline staff to senior management. Our research found this can help data 
scientists spot ways that analytics can help solve problems, speed up work or 
provide better quality information for decisions.

In Newcastle, for example, data analysts work with social workers, testing the 
best way to support vulnerable families – for instance, finding that there is 
an increased chance that a child at risk of physical abuse will have a parent 
with a personality disorder, requiring a different kind of intervention.

Data specialists can also pull information from a range of different sources 
to provide deeper and more coherent insights. In Manchester, integrating data 
about vulnerable families from the police, schools, housing, and social care 
has saved each social worker two weeks a year by making assessment quicker, 
easier and more informed.

In London, Camden used data analysis to determine what part of the housing 
repairs service was resulting in dissatisfied customers, helping them to change 
the process, improve customer satisfaction and reduce the number of repair 
orders by nearly 3,000 a year. Data can also be actively generated by citizens, 
providing insight into their needs, preferences and challenges, such as 
Bristol’s damp-sensing frogs project which reported damp problems to landlords.

Analytics can also be used to predict the likelihood of future events and 
identify opportunities for preventative action. In the US teams aretrialling 
the use of predictive algorithms 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/can-big-data-save-these-children/>to 
identify children most at risk of physical abuse, so support can be provided 
earlier.

With data scientists becoming increasingly important, this could be the time 
to consider whether a scheme similar to the education sector’s Teach First or 
social care’s Frontline is needed to recruit the brightest and best new 
graduates into data scientist roles. Both were developed to bring 
high-potential graduates into important roles which lacked prestige and 
attracted few students from top universities. These programmes have been highly 
successful at creating a pipeline of talent and something similar for data 
specialists could be of real benefit to councils.

Councils are facing formidable challenges. Data and analytics are not the 
complete answer, but it’s hard to see how they are going to navigate a period 
of cuts and increasing end-user demand without getting a better grip on their 
data. The huge amounts of locally collected data are a potential goldmine of 
insights. With central government support, councils can bring in the data 
specialists needed to find and act on them.

Tom Symons is principal researcher in government innovation at Nesta 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/>

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 