
Twickenham's fears of another summer mired in legal challenges to its rules 
receded tonight whenNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> comfortably collected a 
nine-point cushion from the first leg of the promotion play-off. Bedford have 
to travel to Kingston Park next Wednesday, a ground where Dean Richards's side 
have been beaten only once this season.

Newcastle's overall control of the game and Jimmy Gopperth's boot will also 
make them favourites to bounce back into the top flight of English rugby at the 
first attempt, with Richards repeating the success he had with the Premiership 
champions, Harlequins, seven seasons ago. Were that to be, it would spare 
Twickenham the embarrassment of a re-run of last summer's London Welsh saga, 
which ended with the Exiles winning in court and taking their place in the 
Premiership despite failing to meet criteria regarding their ground.

Last month Bedford were similarly told their ground, which holds only 5,000, 
was not up to scratch. They did not appeal the decision, but their chairman, 
Geoff Irvine, has since suggested he too might go to law should they win this 
play-off.

However, last night the only law being enforced is the one of might being 
right with Newcastle far too physical for a side they had already beaten three 
times this season.

Not that Bedford were ever going to go quietly. Armed with their local 
knowledge about the slopes at their Goldington Road ground, Bedford (they run 
north to south as well as east to west) put on early pressure and went ahead 
when Newcastle were caught offside in front of their own posts. Alex Tait also 
had to deal with a few high balls falling out of the overcast sky, but after 15 
minutes the first scrum in the Bedford 22 suggested how things might go.

Bedford's pack went backwards, conceding Gopperth's second penalty of the 
night and with it the lead. When the New Zealander banged over his third – from 
40 metres and into a growing breeze – things were starting to look a little 
ominous, especially when the home pack went into reverse again on the stroke of 
half time.

Again Gopperth was on the mark and Bedford faced a second half starting nine 
points behind and with the rain and the slopes against them. They wriggled and 
fought but with each Gopperth penalty the noose got tighter and the blazers can 
(probably) sleep in comfort.

Bedford Ransom; Stephenson, Burke (Dodge, 67), Atkinson, Short; Dorrian 
(Sharp, 69), Baldwin (Veenendaal, 60); Reeves, Cochrane, Boulton (Seal, 48), 
Howard (Barrell ,65), Tupai (Gulliver, 53), Gillanders, Fox, Fenton-Wells.

Pens Dorrian 2, Sharp.

Newcastle A Tait; Cato, Hufanga, Powell, Shortland; Gopperth, Fury (Lawson, 
50); Shiells (S Wilson, 60) Vickers, Tomaszczyk, Del Fava, MacLeod, M Wilson 
(Tuifua, 60,) Welch, A Hogg.

Pens Gopperth 6.

Referee: Luke Pearce (RFU). Att 4,588.
 