
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> laid 
down a Championship marker as they blew away Queens Park Rangers on a 
sweltering night in west London in a victory so comprehensive that Rafael 
Benítez was forced to warn against complacency.

Two-nil up at half-time thanks to goals from Jonjo Shelvey and Ayoze Pérez, 
Newcastle went on to crush Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s side in a result that 
matched their biggest league away win and QPR’s biggest home defeat. Yet after 
the match Benítez remained poker faced, surely aware that theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> has the capability to 
stymie his side yet.

“We have to make sure we concentrate for every game,” Benítez said. “It 
doesn’t matter if you get six goals, enjoy yourselves for a couple of days, 
sure, but then you have to focus on the next one. It’s a very difficult 
competition.”

Benítez was full of praise for his forward pairing of Pérez and Aleksandar 
Mitrovic, who ran a merry dance through QPR’s disorganised defence and 
highlighted the wealth of Newcastle’s attacking options. “I’m very, very happy 
with the strikers,” Benítez said. “Today was a difficult decision for me 
because Daryl Murphy was training very well and to play Mitrovic rather than 
Dwight Gayle was difficult but we have a good squad.”

Newcastle’s early play was notable for its assertiveness and physicality. In a 
contrast to many pre-match expectations, they muscled the home side out of 
possession on several occasions. In the eighth minute one such turnover sent 
Mitrovic free behind the exposedQPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> 
captain Nedum Onuoha. Outrunning Steven Caulker, his cut-back found Shelvey 
whose shot deflected over Alex Smithies and into the net.

Time and again Newcastle laid waste to QPR’s right flank and in the 30th 
minute the lead was doubled. This time Matt Ritchie provided the run, squaring 
up against Onuoha before fizzing a beautiful low ball across goal. Pérez was 
sharpest to the ball and while Smithies saved his shot, the keeper could only 
palm the ball back to the Spaniard who did not need another invitation.

Within three minutes of the restart the game was over as Pérez was allowed to 
control a long ball on his chest and into the path of Shelvey. The England 
international was not in the Newcastle team at the start of this season but 
showed no doubts in his ability as he took a touch and curled a perfect 25-yard 
shot into the top corner.

Newcastle then ran rampant. Ciaran Clark scored the fourth, heading in at the 
far post from a corner. Minutes later the substitute Christian Atsu’s low shot 
was deflected into the path of Mitrovic who passed the ball into the net for 
his first goal of the season. The rout was completed by another sub, Grant 
Hanley, whose right-foot effort was again deflected past a beleaguered Smithies.

Hasselbaink did his best to put a brave face on the result afterwards, 
claiming his team had “lost together” and observing that his opponents had a 
“£100m squad”. But the Dutchman will not have been deluded that his team played 
well on the night and look in serious need of organisation. “We were very 
stretched and it was easy for them to counterattack,” he said. “It was easy for 
them to get in behind us even though we were quite deep. I might start looking 
at the videos tonight, because I know I’m not going to sleep.”

Sunderland players talked out of provocative derby T-shirt, book claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/agent-sunderland-newcastle-derby-fans-t-shirt> 