
Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> and Gateshead have been 
chosen to host the Great Exhibition of the North, a huge exhibition showcasing 
art, design and innovation in the north of England.

The £5m, two-month exhibition will be staged in the summer of 2018. Plans were 
first announced by the then chancellor, George Osborne, last November as part 
of his“northern powerhouse” initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/may/14/george-osborne-northern-powerhouse-devolution-manchester>
.

How should the Great Exhibition of the North celebrate the region?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/11/how-should-the-great-exhibition-of-the-north-celebrate-the-region>
 The Newcastle area was chosen from a shortlist of four – which included 
Sheffield, Bradford and Blackpool – to host the event, inspired by the 1851 
Great Exhibition, which sought to showcase the best of technology and culture 
from Britain and its empire.

The government is contributing £5m towards the exhibition and a further £15m 
into a legacy fund, which will be open to cultural organisations across the 
north.

Announcing the winner, the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, said the 
exhibition would “showcase the dynamic arts, cultural and design scenes in the 
city and across the whole of the north”.

She said: “It’s so important that, regardless of where you’re from in the 
country, everyone is able to enjoy and access great culture. This cultural 
investment will bring enormous benefits to the region, including regeneration, 
increased tourism and cultural engagement.”

Newcastle and Gateshead’s bid said: “Inspired by the trailblazers of the 
north, the exhibition will have several cross-cutting themes for all to respond 
to, showing how the north’s fires of invention continue to transform our world.

“Crucially, we will connect artists with scientists and inventors to work 
closely together, to create new artworks and respond to the great innovations 
of our time. Arts will meet industry in powerful and memorable ways.”

Plans for the event include three walking circuits around Tyneside focusing on 
arts, design and innovation; an exhibition hub at Great North Museum: Hancock 
and an extensive programme of new artistic commissions.

Carol Bell, the director of culture and major events at the marketing agency 
NewcastleGateshead Initiative, which led the development of the bid, said it 
was looking forward to working with partners across the north “to shine a 
spotlight on our collective cultural assets and strengths”.

“Together we will develop and stage an event that the whole of the north can 
be proud of and which we hope will have far-reaching benefits for culture, 
communities, tourism and businesses in 2018 and beyond,” she said.
 