
Roy Keane's nightmare start to the season at Ipswich became even worse as his 
team's defensive frailty was exposed again. This time, it wasNewcastle who did 
it, with Kevin Nolan scoring the first hat-trick of his career to help steer 
them to a 4-0 win.

What made it particularly embarrassing for the home team was that this match 
was the focal point of a celebration of the late Bobby Robson's Newcastle and 
Ipswich careers. Ipswich's North Stand was officially renamed after him and the 
host of his ex-players involved included the members of his Ipswich teams who 
won the FA Cup and Uefa Cup. They appeared on the pitch at half-time, raising 
the thought that Ipswich – 3-0 down at that stage, having conceded all the 
goals in the space of four minutes – could have done with them there earlier. 
No Newcastle players emphasised their superiority more than Alan Smith, Nicky 
Butt and Nolan in midfield. Nolan, in particular, looked a class above anyone 
in the Ipswich line-up.

Ipswich are one of only two teams without a Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> win this season. They will 
hit the bottom of the table if the other side in this category, Plymouth, beat 
Nottingham Forest today. In contrast, Newcastle have taken over the leadership 
fromWest Bromwich Albion, whose hopes of equalling a club record by increasing 
their unbeaten league start to the season to nine matches were shattered in a 
shock 1-0 home defeat toCrystal Palace. Albion, the Football League's 
highest-scoring team, were not allowed many chances this time. Palace 
deservedly seized control when Alan Lee flicked on a Danny Butterfield 
free-kick and their 19-year-old French midfielder Alassane N'Diaye coolly did 
the rest at the near post to claim his first goal in senior football.

Sheffield United also suffered a surprise defeat, at Swansea. Few can have 
anticipated it when, 13 minutes from the end and with United having come from 
behind to make it 1-1, Swansea's Jordi Gomez was sent off. But the Swansea 
substitute Thomas Butler put them back in front with a superb shot from 25 
yards, and although Swansea had another man sent off – Nathan Dyer – it came 
too late for United to be able to capitalise on it. Still on the subject of 
surprises,Blackpool, 2-0 winners against Peterborough, are now fifth.

Among the best individual performances, apart from Nolan's, was that of 
Sheffield Wednesday's Dutch winger Etienne Esajas, who scored their first goal 
and set up the two others in the 3-1 home win overCardiff. Coventry's Leon Best 
created one of their goals and scored the other as his side drew 2-2 against
Middlesbrough after being 2-0 behind, and there was also much to admire in Akos 
Buzsaky's two-goal first-half display inQPR's 5-2 win over Barnsley.

In the League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
match of the day,Leeds maintained their unbeaten start to the season with a 1-0 
win atMK Dons. Though the Dons had Jason Puncheon sent off for a two-footed 
tackle on Michael Doyle just before half-time, it was not until stoppage-time 
at the end that Leeds got their noses in front. They did so with a Robert 
Snodgrass header from a Bradley Johnson free-kick.Charlton also kept up their 
unbeaten run, with a 2-1 win overExeter.

Darlington, languishing at the bottom of League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and sharing with 
Ipswich and Plymouth the unhappy distinction of not having gained any league 
wins so far this season, parted company with their manager, Colin Todd, after 
the 1-1 draw againstGrimsby. Todd has hardly had the easiest of jobs since his 
appointment four months ago, having had to assemble a playing squad virtually 
from scratch after the mass exodus of staff provoked by the club going into 
administration. However, although Darlington's chairman, Raj Singh, said last 
night that he had been "delighted" with Todd's work, he added: "We have to do 
something to turn things around and Colin is experienced enough to appreciate 
this." Todd said: "It was agreed before today's game that if we didn't win then 
I'd be leaving. At certain levels you're dictated by results, and although the 
time factor sometimes isn't long enough, you have to take the rough with the 
smooth."
 