
What an enduring enchantment is Newcastle United's Joe Kinnear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/joe-kinnear>, whose newspaper epithet is 
"controversial director of football". I like "controversial director of 
football" as a description, it being one of those sparse pieces of phrasing 
into which whole volumes of meaning have been telescoped. I think we all know 
where we are with it – it's a bit like that other euphemism "strong-willed 
diva", traditionally applied to the more monstrous female elements of the music 
industry, whose dressing-room riders stipulate things such as dalmatian-fur 
bogroll and 36 giant white candles borne by 36 black dwarves.

Anyway, this week our business is with Newcastle United's controversial 
director of football Kinnear, the club's owner,Mike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, the Port Vale chairman, 
Norman Smurthwaite, and all the titanic football club personnel who regard 
banning journalists as the cornerstone of a civilised footballing society. And 
yes, there will be room for the daddy of them all, recovering generalissimo Sir 
Alex Ferguson, who was finally pulled up on his practice by Jon Snow last week 
in the course of promoting his book, and failed to muster up a defence a 
12-year-old could be proud of. Largely because there isn't one. This country 
has the most draconian libel laws in the free world: if a damaging untruth 
really has been printed by a paper, why not send a lucrative legal letter 
instead?

Forgive the return to an issue covered here before, but football's banning of 
journalists has not been retired with Ferguson. It lives on in the likes of 
Port Vale's Smurthwaite, who has banned the local Sentinel newspaper from Vale 
Park, after one of its reporters asked when fans could expect delivery of some 
£55 shirts they paid for months ago. If only that were it. But apparently keen 
to stake his claim as the most extravagantly fatuous man in the English game – 
and what a field that is – Smurthwaite now demands the Sentinel pay him £10,000 
a year for the privilege of coveringPort Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale>. Arrogant? He doesn't think so. 
"IF THAT IS ARRAGORANCE," Smurthwaite tweeted, "I WILL ACCEPT THAT BUT NO MORE 
FREEBIES END OFF" (all spellings very much sic).

As for Newcastle's current bans, instigated by Ashley and Kinnear, they were 
made in the wake of the local Chronicle reporting a supporters' protest march, 
and extend "indefinitely and with immediate effect" to that paper's sister 
titles, the Journal and the Sunday Sun. They also, ambitiously, extend to away 
grounds at which Newcastle are playing, with the club's press officer cutting 
off journalists who tried to question Alan Pardew at the Stadium of Light after
Sunday's Wear-Tyne derby defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/27/sunderland-newcastle-premier-league-match-report>
. The closest analogy would appear to be that of a foreign embassy, with the 
presence of Pardew anywhere effectively making that place Newcastle United 
soil, over which the club has total jurisdiction.

Ashley has reportedly banned 10 hacks in six years, perhaps inspired by 
Ferguson's record – which itself was perhaps inspired by what the former 
Manchester United manager refers to as the "despots section" of his library. Or 
perhaps the "famous Voltaire quotes section" of his library is just empty. Not 
that he hesitated to call out others for tinpot dictatordom. "Whether he is 
getting too old I don't know but these things can happen to people in power," 
Fergie once opined of some nonsense uttered by Sepp Blatter. "Look at some of 
the despots in Africa." As for Real Madrid, he pointedly stressed that "as 
General Franco's club, [they] had a history of being able to get whomever and 
whatever they wanted before democracy came to Spain."

Democracy? Come come, Sir Alex. What does football want with democracy? Not a 
lot, reflected Channel 4 News' eminently well-travelled chief correspondent 
Alex Thomson a few months ago . "After Syria, corrupt West African despots and 
so on," he lamented, "I see something similar in the way big British football 
handles its craven media." This is the sort of arragorance with which the 
Smurthwaites and the Ashleys and the Kinnears of this world must contend, and 
we can only wish them all the best fighting the good fight.

Poor old Lewis Hamilton


A reader is good enough to draw my attention to Lewis Hamilton's BBC Sport 
column <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/formula1/24663755>, in which the Formula 
One driver turns his laser-like focus to the problem of poverty.

Inspired by the inequities on display in India, where last weekend's Grand 
Prix was held 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/27/sebastian-vettel-formula-one-legend>
, Lewis explains that the race "raises awareness of the country" – a slightly 
odd perspective, casting as it does India as an obscure backwater which needs a 
philanthropist such as Bernie Ecclestone to get it a bit of coverage.

But it is on the injustice of poverty in the modern age that Hamilton is most 
exemplarily persuasive. "It is disgusting the way that this can still happen in 
today's world, when society has achieved so much with technology, communication 
and intelligent thinking," he opines. "It makes me wonder how we – the human 
race – can continue to neglect the neediest people in society and what we need 
to do to change things. I'd like to help in any way I can."

Well, of course he would. I can just picture Lewis, pacing the corridors of 
his mansion in the land to which he has exiled himself – Monaco, having 
decamped there from Switzerland – wondering how he could possibly contribute 
more to society.

If he ever puts his finger on the answer, I do hope he lets us know.
 