
This ended up a memorable night for the Ameobi brothers, who managed two late 
goals between them to produce a scoreline that flattered Newcastle and was 
downright cruel onMorecambe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morecambe>, 
but it was hardly a great advertisement for Premier League standards. Even if 
Newcastle did have the reserves out.

While Morecambe were playing in front of a record crowd of 5,375, you would 
never have guessed Newcastle regularly perform before 10 times as many.

Until Alan Pardew made a telling substitution at half-time the home side had 
made most of the chances, and for at least an hour it appeared only weak 
Morecambe finishing would come to Newcastle's rescue. In the end it was Shola 
Ameobi who did that, and his younger brother Sammy who added a second right at 
the end that the visitors barely deserved. That's cup football though, and it 
was certainly a rousingly old-fashioned knockout tie.

"It's going to raise everyone's spirits in the first team," Pardew said. "It's 
taken a little bit of pressure off them, the first goals, the first win. Let's 
hope on Saturday we get a win and then you would have to say that is a start we 
can accept because four points out of those three games is OK."

Morecambe's Andy Parrish was gutted. "We are convinced one of our first-half 
efforts crossed the line." Goalline technology make take a while to reach the 
Globe Arena but the home side had the first serious attempt on goal, Andrew 
Fleming bringing a save from Rob Elliot after seven minutes. The Newcastle 
debutant Curtis Good had to make a timely clearance on the six yard line as 
Morecambe piled on the pressure, and from the resultant corner it took a 
clearance off the line from Dan Gosling to prevent Mark Hughes's far-post 
header creeping into the bottom corner.

Newcastle were barely recognisable as Newcastle, though with Sammy Ameobi the 
closest thing to a first-team regular that was only to be expected. Newcastle 
are often unrecognisable even when they have their best players on show, and 
Pardew was playing a dangerous game in the present climate by risking an early 
exit. Plenty of Newcastle fans had made the relatively short journey, and they 
were soon chanting their displeasure with Joe Kinnear in the absence of 
anything positive to get excited about.

Ryan Williams's delivery from corners was troubling the visitors, who needed 
another clearance off the line to keep out a Padraig Amond header before 
Gosling registered Newcastle's first chance on the half hour, bringing Barry 
Roche into the game for the first time with a header.

Morecambe had two golden opportunities to take a lead before the interval, 
with Amond twice being foiled by reaction saves from Elliot. The first, in 
particular, was a fine stop to keep out a shot that deserved a goal, though 
even so Morecambe really needed to be converting such clear-cut chances.

Pardew sent on Shola Ameobi for the second half and he immediately missed the 
best chance of the game after doing most of the hard work by beating the 
offside trap. The elder Ameobi also had a hand in the move that sent Paul 
Dummett to the left hand byline shortly afterwards, only to put in a low cross 
much too close to Roche.

It was clear Newcastle were in more determined mood for the second half, 
though when Sylvain Marveaux also blazed over the bar from an excellent 
shooting position it began to look as if Newcastle might not have the firepower 
to put Morecambe in their place until another of Pardew's substitutes, Hatem 
Ben Arfa, fed Shola Ameobi whose shot found the net with the aid of a 
deflection. With the home defence inevitably stretched in injury time, Sammy 
Ameobi's solo run finally produced an emphatic finish.
 