
Bullying <https://www.theguardian.com/society/bullying> is a pernicious 
problem in the NHS. That’s the stark finding from exclusive research by the 
Guardian. The online survey of more than 1,500 doctors, nurses and other health 
workers in hospitals, primary care and community settings, found that 81% had 
experienced bullying and for almost half of them (44%), it is still ongoing. 
Close to nine out of 10 bullying victims who responded have been left with 
their cases unresolved.

Although the survey on bullying was self-selecting, the findings underline the 
results of the official annual NHS staff survey. The2015 survey 
<http://www.nhsstaffsurveys.com/Page/1006/Latest-Results/2015-Results/> of 
nearly 300,000 healthcare professionals across England found that a quarter of 
staff in NHS trusts had experienced bullying, harassment or abuse in the 
previous 12 months.

Some 87% of respondents to the Guardian survey, carried out between August and 
September, think bullying is a big problem within the NHS, while almost 
three-quarters said they felt the health service did not take bullying 
seriously. “The culture is driven by exerting undue pressure on others to get 
things done. If you don’t, you are targeted and eventually you end up with 
stress and depression,” oneNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
manager said.

Respondents who have been bullied take on average 108 days off work and a 
third have contemplated leaving their jobs

“The organisation becomes defensive and takes the corporate line to protect 
themselves from a legal challenge and puts it down to your perception. You are 
then managed out of your job through contrived actions designed to make you 
leave. All this leaves you broken and with no strength to fight. You go if you 
can find another job. Otherwise you suffer in silence.”

The devastating impact of bullying is all too apparent. A third of victims 
said they had been pushed out of their jobs, with many developing serious 
mental health problems as a result, while almost three-quarters reported 
increased stress and panic attacks. As a result, some 41% said they needed 
counselling or treatment after being bullied. The survey also shows the adverse 
impact of bullying on the NHS, with those respondents who have been bullied 
taking on average 108 days off work and almost a third (31%) saying they were 
signed-off sick. A further third said they had contemplated leaving their job.

Sue Covill, director of development and employment at NHS Employers, (the 
employers’ organisation for the NHS in England) admits the results are 
worrying. “Bullying is completely unacceptable and the ongoing work to tackle 
it is vital for all NHS organisations, leaders and staff,” she says. “To 
improve the working lives of our staff and deliver the best possible care to 
patients, we need to create supportive, positive, open and collegiate cultures 
in our organisations across the health system.”

'It's ruined my career': accounts of bullying in the NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/26/nhs-bullying-ruined-career-healthcare-professionals>
According to the 1,355 anonymous survey respondents who said they had 
experienced or witnessed NHS bullying, the most common forms of abuse are 
undermining behaviour and persistent criticism. Just over a third said they 
were persecuted through fear or threats, saying their career was deliberately 
sabotaged. One in 10 bullying victims was subjected to violent behaviour and 
aggression.

Asked if a particular incident triggered the bullying, 55% said raising a 
concern prompted the abuse. Fear of reprisals means that only 54% reported the 
bullying. For the 43% who chose not to report it, two-thirds felt scared that 
to do so would make things worse. Of those who did report their bullying, 44% 
said it persisted afterwards, sometimes for as long as a year.

“My experience left me feeling as though I had been manipulated, that I was a 
liar and had made it all up,” said one NHS administrator. “I had a meeting with 
my bully and came away from it feeling worse than before. I’m now left feeling 
desperately unhappy in a job I now despise.”

Only 17% of those who reported bullying said they received pastoral support 
from their organisation – and less than a quarter of these were satisfied with 
the result.

A YouGov survey commissioned last year by the TUC  
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-issues/health-and-safety/bullying/nearly-third-people-are-bullied-work-says-tuc>
showed that nearly a third of people had been bullied at work.

Concerns have been raised by health professionals and academics that the 
hierarchial structure of the NHS facilitates a culture where bullying can 
flourish.

“Medicine is a hard taskmaster but made worse by those around you who see you 
as a threat that rocks the hierarchy where everyone should know their place,” 
an anonymous hospital consultant says in response to the results of the 
Guardian survey. He warns: “It may well impact on patient care if those who 
perpetuate the abuse look for an opportunity to trip you up and blow any minor 
omission out of all proportion.”

Dr Anthea Mowat, chair of the British Medical Association’s representative 
body, says the survey results should act as an urgent wake-up call to 
employers. “If more staff are to speak out, they must be able to raise concerns 
without fear of being harassed or victimised, and there need to be clear and 
supportive systems of reporting in place,” she says. “We need to put an end to 
the climate of fear that has built up in the NHS over a number of years, with 
those in senior positions in the NHS leading by example to make this a reality.”

The survey, by the Guardian’s Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network>, was sent out to network 
members via an email newsletter. It was also promoted via Twitter and Facebook. 
Network readers were also invited to take part through the website.

Nurse who left the NHS: the loss of my role was like a bereavement

I was an experienced nurse working in a fantastic team of staff. Following a 
reshuffle, our ward manager was replaced by someone who was known for being a 
bully. She frequently made comments and used language inappropriate for the 
role. Her victimisation of me began immediately. On one occasion, due to staff 
sickness I was expected to do the jobs of four other people and was reprimanded 
when I objected. I was expected to attend meetings on my days off. I was 
constantly ridiculed and told that medical staff had criticised me even though, 
when questioned, they quite clearly had not. On one occasion I was physically 
pushed out of the way. This went on for over a year and, along with the 
treatment of me that followed, had a devastating effect on my psychological 
health. I was having panic attacks and suicidal thoughts.

I took out a grievance and was immediately moved to an area where I had no 
previous experience or expertise. Unable to continue working I was signed off 
sick with work-related stress. My bullying complaint was not investigated 
properly and not upheld. I believed that I had been targeted as I had 
previously raised concerns about patient care. I appealed against the decision 
and with the support of a union representative and witnesses, I won. But the 
bully remained in post and I was offered a job in another area, at a lower 
grade. I was advised by my union that I was being constructively dismissed and 
not to return to work. I negotiated an exit strategy with payment of a tax-free 
lump sum under one of the now-outlawed compromise agreements. I am now in 
receipt of an NHS permanent injury benefit which guarantees me a tax-free 
income, in excess of what I was previously earning, for the rest of my natural 
life. I now work for a private company in a non-clinical setting. The loss of 
my clinical role has been like a bereavement and not a day goes by when I do 
not think about the injustice of my case.

NHS manager: the bullies have wrecked my career

There is an endemic culture of bullying at the hospital trust I work at. 
Colleagues have been suspended for raising concerns over unsafe patient care 
and allegations of abuse towards patients. One colleague had to leave her job 
after whistleblowing and is undergoing counselling for post-traumatic stress 
disorder. In my case, the bullying was incessant – my line manager would call 
me in the evening at home telling me to take time off work and encouraging me 
see my GP as, in her opinion, I was unwell – I wasn’t. She insisted that I had 
to contact her every morning to tell her where I was, even at work. Other 
senior people soon started to target me and I would be admonished for the 
smallest of errors and for things I hadn’t done. Because of the seniority of 
these people, other members of staff began to pull away, and I soon became 
isolated. By this time, I had gone to see my GP who had diagnosed me with 
severe depression. I have had suicidal thoughts – occasionally I still do. I’ve 
been demoted and moved into a job where I have no experience and I’ve been 
offered no training; I’m being set up to fail. I’m resigned to the fact that I 
will have to leave the trust at some point, as I can’t carry on. The bullies 
have wrecked my career in the NHS, and my confidence in my ability has 
evaporated. The whole experience has had a profound effect on me – cheerful 
confidence has been replaced by paranoia and distrust; I will never be the same 
person again. To this day I do not know what I did wrong – if anything.
 