
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is set to overhaul services 
for women who develop mental health problems around childbirth in a bid to ease 
the suffering caused by postnatal depression and reduce the number of new 
mothers who kill themselves or their baby.

NHS England is putting £40m into new specialist treatment centres for the one 
in five women whose pregnancy, birth or experience afterwards triggers serious 
psychological problems, including anxiety, depression and psychosis.

Claire Murdoch, its national mental health director, said these centres would 
end a “postcode lottery” in which two in three women currently affected missed 
out on vital help. While 14,000 new mothers each year received specialised 
support, the planned expansion of care would enable another 30,000 to do so by 
March 2021, said Murdoch, a former mental health nurse who also runs the 
Central and North West London NHS foundation trust in London.

“It’s self-evidently true that the current provision of these services is 
inadequate. There is a big postcode lottery. Some areas just do not have 
specialist community perinatal services available,” she added.

The money will be put into new community mental health units solely for women 
with perinatal mental health problems in 20 parts of England. They will be 
staffed by consultant psychiatrists specialising in such conditions, nurses 
with experience in the field, occupational therapists, psychologists and 
nursery nurses. Each will also run a buddying service in which women who have 
already experienced childbirth-related mental health problems will support 
those going through that or at risk of that.

Pregnancy and mental health: the hidden pain of giving birth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/pregnancy-mental-health-birth-childbirth>
Childbirth-related mental health conditions are estimated to cost the UK 
£8.1bn a year, or about £10,000 per birth.

Prof Lesley Regan, the president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists, said: “Around one in five women develop a mental illness during 
pregnancy or in the first year after delivering their baby, and one quarter of 
all maternal deaths between six weeks and a year after childbirth are related 
to mental health problems.

“Despite these alarming figures, in almost half of the UK, pregnant women and 
new mothers have no access to specialist maternal mental health services and 
only 3% of [NHS] clinical commissioning groups [in England] have a maternal 
mental health service strategy,” she added.

The Royal College of Midwives backed the move but said that every maternity 
unit needed to have a specialist maternal mental health midwife on staff to 
help women in sometimes desperate need.

“We cannot continue to read the constant reports of the number of women 
killing themselves because they were not identified earlier and treated or 
because of the lack of trained staff or as a result of lack of services. It’s 
heartbreaking and we can do better as a country,” said Janet Fyle, the 
college’s professional policy advisor.

The NCT, the parenting charity, welcomed the NHS’s “positive plan” but warned 
that even if all 20 units were set up by 2021 as promised, there will still be 
“a long way to go” before all mothers who need help get it, said Elizabeth 
Duff, its senior policy adviser.

“There are nearly150,000 women in the UK each year who suffer from mental 
health problems postnatally or when pregnant and the funding aims to reach 
30,000 women in 20 areas, so there’s still a long way to go,” she added.

NHS England is also pledging to spend another £120m putting psychiatrists and 
specialist nurses into A&E units so that patients undergoing a mental health 
crisis when they turn up at an emergency department get better help.

NHS England plans to introduce new waiting-time standards to ensure that any 
such patient is seen by a mental health specialist within an hour of their 
arrival in A&E and also given a plan for their care within four hours.

• This article was amended on 28 November 2016 to correct a figure included in 
a quote from the NCT. It advised us after publication that each year nearly 
150,000 – not 300,000 – women in the UK suffer from mental health problems 
postnatally or when pregnant.
 