
Dozens of hospitals in England have had to declare a black alert – a status 
that means its emergency care facilities and beds are under extreme pressure – 
this weekafter becoming so overcrowded that they could no longer guarantee 
patient safety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-crisis-20-hospitals-declare-black-alert-as-patient-safety-no-longer-assured>
.


It follows a warning from the British Red Cross that the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is facing a “humanitarian crisis” 
this winter, claims that have been denied by Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary. 
We asked for your stories of the health service over the past few weeks. Here 
are a few of the responses we received:


Sylvie Newman, 63, Worcester: ‘A trolley isn’t the right place to put a person 
having a heart attack’

My husband got into bed at midnight on New Year’s Day and had trouble 
breathing. He also felt a tightness in his chest. He has a family history of 
heart disease so we called 999. We live in a rural part of Worcestershire but 
the paramedics were with us within 10 minutes. After their usual checks they 
said he needed to be admitted to hospital. We arrived there 20 minutes later.

My husband was wheeled into A&E on his ambulance trolley, and he stayed on 
that trolley for the next 12 hours.

The NHS staff there were working flat out to deal with the patients around 
them. While the staff were cool and collected there was chaos all around: 
patients on trolleys and ambulances arriving with new people. Three local 
hospitals had been diverting patients because they were swamped too. But there 
was no space here either – I saw an ambulance unable to unload a patient 
because of overcrowding. I counted 24 other ambulance trolleys around the 
corridors. There were a lot of older people around and everyone who was there 
looked like they needed to be there.

After five hours they said my husband wouldn’t be going home and that he’d had 
a heart attack. It was another seven hours before he went upstairs for an 
angioplasty and a stent. The A&E staff were under immense pressure, having to 
deal with far too many patients, but they did an amazing job.

Related: GPs working longer hours won’t ease the pressure on the NHS | Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/15/gps-working-longer-hours-wont-ease-the-pressure-on-the-nhs>

It was shocking to find out he’d had a heart attack. That was a scary thing 
because you don’t know how it will end. The wait was worrying. We hadn’t gone 
to bed that night because he couldn’t rest on a trolley. It wasn’t the right 
place for a person in the middle of a heart attack.


I want to emphasise that the NHS staff were brilliant and reassuring; they 
kept us informed of progress the whole time. However, they are under 
unsustainable pressure and I fear for the future of our health service.

Robert Woodbridge, 57, Kent: ‘My wife had just had a stroke, but there were no 
beds and specialist staff to help’
 Robert Woodbridge 
My wife went outside to put the bin bags out when she got a headache on 5 
January. She seemed disorientated, so I sat her down and then she started 
having a stroke. I immediately called 999. It took 30 minutes for the 
paramedics to get there but when they arrived they were brilliant.


The challenge came when we arrived at A&E. We had to wait in the ambulance 
because there were no beds. This meant the ambulance staff were forced to stay 
with us for three hours. During that time my wife got a CT scan. Eventually she 
went into accident and emergency in the middle of the night. It wasn’t until 
the next day, at 5pm, that she was placed on a ward.

My wife wasn’t comfortable at all during her trolley wait, but there was 
nothing anyone could do. It was so busy I thought something out of the ordinary 
had happened but staff said it was like this all the time.

My emotions were, and still are, all over the place. I don’t think I will 
relax until my wife is back home with me. While I was waiting with her I felt 
so helpless. In that situation all you want is for your loved one to be seen 
but help wasn’t forthcoming. Most of our stay that night was on a trolley in a 
room usually reserved for gynecology patients. It’s lucky there was no one 
there that needed the space.

I don’t want to blame the paramedics or any staff at the NHS. They do a 
wonderful job and do their best to take care of patients when they arrive. But 
the issue is with the government and the lack of funding to our healthcare 
services. The state we are in is because of policy decisions coming from higher 
up.

Barbara Procter, Wales: ‘No one as frail as my mum should lie on the floor for 
eight hours waiting for help’


On 5 January my 82-year-old mother had a fall and we had to wait eight hours 
for an emergency ambulance to arrive. She was in pain and lying on the floor. 
We couldn’t move her as we thought she had broken either her leg or hip. That 
was at 7.15pm and the ambulance turned up at 3.25am. She left for hospital at 
4.45am. I sat next to her on the floor in one of the longest nights of my life.

I want to say now that paramedics, dispatchers and A&E staff were all 
excellent but resourcing was clearly the issue. Ambulances were in a queue at 
the hospital as there was no room in A&E. My mum was taken from the ambulance 
to get an x-ray and then back to the ambulance again. It wasn’t until later 
that they found her a space in accident emergency assessment.

Luckily my mother hadn’t broken any bones but she had badly sprained her knee. 
She is back home now. Nobody as frail as my mum should have to lie on the floor 
for eight hours waiting for an emergency service. How is that acceptable?

Related: Ministers can’t silence NHS concerns because people can see it 
unravelling | Gaby Hinsliff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/ministers-silence-brexit-fears-nhs-unravelling-simon-stevens>

Andrew, 37, Wickham: ‘My frail mother was in the A&E unit for over 24 hours’

My mother was taken into hospital on 1 January. She had been complaining of 
serious chest pain, so an ambulance visited her care home – it took them four 
hours to arrive – and took her to our local A&E department.

My mother suffers from Alzheimer’s and upon arriving at hospital she was seen 
by the cardiac nurse before being moved to a corridor under the supervision of 
a nursing assistant for seven hours. There she waited for an assessment bed to 
become available. She became extremely agitated during this period. She had 
another ECG which showed a change to her sinus rhythm, which she received 
medication for. Finally, after 9pm an assessment bed was found and we left her 
in the care of the hospital in the understanding that she was being moved to a 
ward. But when I followed this up in the morning it turned out she hadn’t been 
moved because there was a lack of beds. They said she would be moved to a bed 
during the day as the consultant wanted to see her later. Reassured (but not 
entirely happy) I left, but when I called up in the afternoon I was told was 
she was being discharged that day. They said there weren’t any beds available 
in the hospital so they sent her back to the care home with tests not 
completed. My frail mother was in the A&E unit for over 24 hours. The staff 
even forgot to give us her discharge paperwork. I believe that the staff helped 
as much as they could but they are completely overworked.


Susan Perkins, 62, Hampshire: ‘We waited 13 hours to get on a ward. I was 
worried he’d have another stroke’

On Saturday my husband started to feel unwell and he described the symptoms of 
a minor stroke. He rang the 111 number and they said they would call him back 
but after two hours he had still not heard anything. I thought his symptoms 
sounded very worrying and that he needed medical attention quickly if it was a 
stroke. So I rang the 111 number again insisting we get help and they 
eventually called back an hour later.
 A woman protests outside the Department of Health in in London on 12 January. 
Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
 We were then given an appointment to see the out-of-hours GP located at our 
nearest hospital. We were there at 3.30pm. The GP ran tests and said she also 
was concerned my husband had suffered a minor stroke. She rang the medical 
registrar who said to send us straight through.

We thought the next stage would be quick, but we had a huge wait – it wasn’t 
until 9.15pm that someone saw us again. I complained twice that we got seen. 
They kept saying they were waiting for a doctor to see us but it just didn’t 
happen. This seemed odd as the medical registrar was supposed to be expecting 
my husband – it later transpired that the real reason for the delay was there 
was no cubicle for my husband to be seen in. During this time I was sick with 
worry that he could have another stroke. For two hours we were repeatedly told 
that he was next on the list.

My husband decided he had enough of waiting (after five hours in A&E) and 
decided to leave. I went to the reception desk and told them that my husband 
had insisted I take him home, that I didn’t think this was a good thing to do 
but I couldn’t persuade him to stay. This prompted some action and about five 
minutes later a doctor came out and helped to persuade my husband to go back in 
and be seen.

When a doctor came and we found out that he had most likely had a minor 
stroke, things sped up and he was admitted. He had a CT scan and an ECG later 
that evening, followed by an MRI on the Sunday and an ultrasound on the Monday. 
We would have been waiting even longer if we hadn’t complained and said we were 
leaving.

Tom Lawrence, 25, London: ‘My lung abscess was misdiagnosed. NHS staff make 
mistakes when overworked’


Around Christmas I developed a fever and pain in my chest. I was coughing up 
little bits of blood and when I was examined in A&E – because my lungs were 
clear – I was diagnosed with muscle pain. I was advised to get paracetamol and 
ibuprofen for the fever.

But it felt like it was more serious than that. I developed pneumonia and a 
lung abscess this time last year and it felt similar to that. So I waited a day 
and made my way back to hospital. When I arrived it was very overcrowded. The 
reception said there were no doctors and advised me to visit another A&E in 
London. I decided to wait another day, telling myself that I would go to my GP 
in the morning and get a referral. Unfortunately the next day my surgery was 
closed so I called 111 who arranged an appointment for me at another hospital.

Related: The Guardian view on NHS politics: a truce is necessary but not 
inevitable | Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/the-guardian-view-on-nhs-politics-a-truce-is-necessary-but-not-inevitable>

They listened to my chest, also said it sounded clear, but that given my 
history it wasn’t worth taking the risk and would be best if I had an x-ray. 
When that came back the doctor said they had seen something they “didn’t like 
the look of” and I gave me a prescription for five days of amoxicillin, which 
she said would clear my infection up. I was due to travel the next day to 
Amsterdam to visit family for Christmas and was told that I could do so. But 
when I left the country my condition worsened and I went to the GP who called 
the lung specialist at one of the hospitals in Amsterdam. They arranged for me 
to go and have an x-ray and a CT scan. At hospital I was diagnosed with a lung 
abscess and was admitted into care. The doctors there were surprised that it 
hadn’t been spotted in the UK and that they had let me travel.

I suspect I slipped through the net because I’m young and the likelihood of 
lightening striking twice is slim. Most of the hospitals I visited were 
completely overrun. When there are too many patients for doctors and the 
medical staff are overworked mistakes are bound to be made.


Dr Liam Brennan, president, Royal College of Anaesthetists: ‘These are no 
longer winter pressures, but perennial pressures’

In my 34 years as a frontline doctor I have never seen the breadth and scale 
of the relentless demands across the whole health and social care system that I 
see today. These are no longer “winter pressures”, but perennial pressures. I 
fear these are indicative of a system too often at breaking point, in urgent 
need of additional funds and reform. All too often there are simply not enough 
beds, staff and other resources to go around.

All healthcare professionals are finding it harder and harder to deliver safe 
and effective patient care. Many of my colleagues are distressed, demoralised 
and exhausted, physically and mentally, as they battle every day to do their 
best for patients in an increasingly beleaguered system.

The UK is spending less of our national wealth on our healthcare needs than 
most comparable nations. At this existential point in the NHS 69-year history, 
we desperately need an urgent injection of funds to alleviate the immediate 
crisis followed by a national conversation involving patients, healthcare 
professionals and politicians about the future of our NHS.

Without these actions and as someone whose family relies heavily on the NHS, I 
fear for the future.



 