
It is 26 years since Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> 
last won eight league matches in a row. The Bangles topped the charts with 
Eternal Flame at that point; Scottish football was in a period where meaningful 
title races were commonplace and its top teams could compete strongly in Europe.

It remains far too early to suggest Aberdeen’s charge for the championship is 
a serious one, despite optimistic claims to the contrary. Celtic are by far the 
favourites to retain theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> and rightly so 
given the resource at their disposal. Yet Derek McInnes and his players are due 
immense credit for at least maintaining their prominence. There is plenty to 
admire about Aberdeen and their manager.

This victory matched that Aberdeen eight game winning run. They have not lost 
a league goal since a 2-1 loss to Celtic in early November. In topping the 
table, Aberdeen now lead the Glasgow side by four points, albeit with two games 
more played.

It would raise the odd smile if Celtic’s current jaunt to Gran Canaria to play 
two friendly matches, a ludicrous scenario to be sanctioned by a supposedly 
serious football league such as Scotland’s, returns to somehow haunt them. 
Aberdeen’s consistency and momentum are worthy of admiration; they garnered 
more of the latter despite horrible Paisley conditions. Still, though, they 
refuse to publicly discuss a title tilt; a stance which is obviously deliberate.

“I thought St Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> had the 
better of the opening period and we played our own part in that with our own 
sloppiness,” said McInnes. “Once we got the opening goal, we managed the game 
very well. It was a very mature performance. I would have taken 2-0 coming 
here. I’m delighted with that.”

This success was wrapped up before half time. It included that vital commodity 
for any successful team; luck. St Mirren, who are now at the foot of the 
league, had arguably started as the better side but were undone as a Niall 
McGinn cross from the left flank somehow deceived Mark Ridgers in the home 
goal. Ridgers could perhaps use the gusting wind and a deflection as a 
mitigating factor but it looked a glaring error.

McGinn was to excel from then on. The Northern Irish man triggered a brief, 
and needless, flurry of attention at the start of the week after being 
photographed amongst the Celtic support during their win at Kilmarnock. Nobody 
watching this encounter could be in doubt as to McGinn’s focus.

The second goal owed more to creative design. Jonny Hayes played a terrific, 
fierce cross across the front of the St Mirren goal with Shay Logan on hand to 
drill home at the back post. Within two minutes, Aberdeen had fatally wounded 
St Mirren’s already fragile confidence.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the second half proved tame. Adam Rooney should have 
extended the Aberdeen lead further but somehow missed a free header from 
McGinn’s free-kick. Ridgers atoned in part for his earlier mistake with a smart 
stop from McGinn. St Mirren’s finest opportunity fell to Lewis Morgan, who 
forced Brown into an excellent save.

St Mirren’s dismal season therefore continues. The club’s decision to part 
with Tommy Craig made perfect sense but more curious has been the time that has 
lapsed, now a month, without a permanent successor to the manager being named.

“We have got to stick together,” said the caretaker manager Gary Teale. 
Aberdeen are a fine example of what can happen when you do precisely that.
 