
The Rangers striker Nicky Clark says his team will not fall for Queen of the 
South’s set-piece tricks on Sunday, as his sdide defend the 2-1 lead they 
claimed in last Saturday’s Scottish Premiership play-off quarter‑final first 
leg. Stuart McCall, theRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
manager, was unhappy with the Doonhamers’ goal at Palmerston, claiming Chris 
Higgins was guilty of blocking his centre-back Darren McGregor before Derek 
Lyle headed home from a corner, but Clark believes his side will be ready for 
anything in the return.

He said: “We can prepare for it because they got a goal from it last week and 
we know what they will try to do. They might change it this week and not try 
it, we don’t know. We will just need to wait and see.It’s part of football 
these days. You work on these things in training and hope they come off in 
games. Luckily for them it did.

“We will try to make the referee aware of it because it helps if he can see 
the block and give us a free-kick. But if we score with a free-kick at the 
other end it will be good play from us, so you can look at it both ways.”

Rangers have reduced ticket prices for the match to just £5 across the board 
and with the game looking set to be a sell-out, Clark hopes the faithful will 
pump up the noise levels. He said: “It will make a massive difference. The fans 
have been great through everything we’ve been through and they’ve stuck by all 
the players and backed us. It would be great to see Ibrox full again as it 
gives you an extra 10 to 15% in the game.

“Cammy Bell said it during the week. It makes you run quicker and jump higher 
and stuff like that, so it would be great to see it full.”

Stevie Smith swept Rangers ahead last week with a stunning free-kick before 
the side showed character to bounce back after Lyle’s leveller to snatch an 
advantage with Shiels’ header.

McCall set his team up in a 3-5-2 formation and it produced a marked 
improvement on the two previous performances in Dumfries which saw Gers ship 
five goals without finding the Queens net. But Clark knows the job is not done 
yet. The former Queens front man said: “We done well down there, the gaffer set 
us out in a way to play and it worked well for us and we got the result.

“I think it did help, obviously we changed from what we done the last time we 
went down there and I think they were a wee bit surprised with the way we set 
up.

“We got to them and stopped them playing. It worked well as we got the 2-1 
victory.

“It is only half time though and we know what we need to do on Sunday. The 
gaffer will make sure we are ready for it.

“When I was there a few years ago we had a good squad and they’ve kept most of 
it together. They all know each other really well and their performances have 
been really good. Even last year they got to the play-offs and they’ve done it 
again this year.

“Are we favourites to go through? You could say that but we don’t look at 
anything like that. We know what we need to do and the gaffer knows what we 
need to do to get through the game.”
 