
An extra £1.25bn will be spent on mental health services over the next five 
years to help more than 100,000 young people,Nick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> has said.

The deputy prime minister, who made the announcement on Saturday on a visit to 
Clock View hospital in Liverpool, said the way children had been treated before 
was an “institutionalised form of cruelty”.

The funding, which amounts to £250m a year, will be confirmed in the budget on 
Wednesday.

Mr Clegg, who is in the city for the Liberal Democrat spring conference, said 
an average of three children in every classroom had mental health problems that 
were not being properly identified or supported.

He said: “It’s an institutionalised form of cruelty, the way we allow 
vulnerable children with mental health problems to basically have to fend for 
themselves at the moment.”

Clegg announces extra £1.25bn for child mental health services at Lib Dem 
conference: Politics Live blog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/mar/14/nick-cleggs-qa-at-the-lib-dem-conference-politics-live-blog>
The money will help children with conditions such as depression and those at 
risk of self-harming or committing suicide. It will provide therapy sessions, 
family support work, better training for clinicians and improved online help.

Clegg added: “It’s all part of a journey where we start, as a country, lifting 
the stigma that has surrounded mental health and making sure that we treat 
mental health in the same way as we do people with physical health problems.”


The NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens, said: “This much-needed 
investment will kick-start a multi-year upgrade in care for younger people and 
their families. NHS nurses, therapists and doctors will use this funding to 
benefit families in every part of the country.”

The additional funds will also help improve support for new mothers, who had 
previously struggled with a “second-class mental health service”, Clegg said.

He added: “It is terrifying to think that in this day and age some new mothers 
are having to travel miles for treatment and others are even being separated 
from their newborn child. This has to stop.”


The chief secretary to the Treasury, Danny Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander>, said the financial 
support for British veterans would be doubled, funding 10 specialist mental 
health teams that will treat servicemen and women with some of the most complex 
needs.



The announcement comes just days after the mental health charity Combat Stress 
revealed that the number of British veterans of the Afghanistan conflict 
receiving treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder has increased from 102 
in 2010 to 945 in 2015.


Securing more money for mental health has been a key goal for the Lib Dems.

The chancellor, George Osborne, will set out his spending plans on Wednesday 
in the Commons in what will be one of the final acts of the current coalition 
government, with parliament due to be dissolved at the end of the month.
 