
Nicola Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicola-adams> has been left 
out of the Great Britain squad for the European championships in Bulgaria later 
this month and is set to turn professional. The 34-year-old double Olympic 
champion has been in talks with promoters in both Britain and the US and while 
a deal is yet to be struck, a decision is believed to be imminent.

Anthony Joshua vows to humble Eric Molina in IBF title fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/anthony-joshua-eric-molina-ibf-title-boxing>
Adams has been given time off from the Great Britain squad since claiming her 
second gold medal in Rio this summer and is not among the seven-strong team for 
the tournament in Sofia, which starts next Monday.

The GB performance director, Rob McCracken, told Press Association Sport: 
“Nicola is currently having a look at all her options and what is available to 
her, and that includes professional boxing. She’s the double Olympic champion 
and she deserves time to make up her mind.

“It would be great to keep on the programme and I am sure she could go to 
Tokyo in 2020 if she had the motivation. But when you have won two gold medals 
the motivation could be a factor and my gut feeling is she will probably look 
at those other options and give professional boxing a go.”

If Adams does decide to turn professional she will join her fellow Olympic 
champions Claressa Shields and Katie Taylor, both of whom have declared their 
intention to quit the amateur ranks since Rio.

Under new eligibility criteria, Adams could conceivably turn professional then 
recommit to the GB ranks at a later date in order to pursue a third consecutive 
Olympic gold medal in Tokyo. But such a possibility would depend on a number of 
factors, including GB’s ability to find a 51kg replacement for Adams, and that 
prospect is not currently forming part of the Leeds fighter’s long-term plan.

The double Olympian Savannah Marshall is also out of the European 
Championships following recent shoulder surgery, although the Hartlepool 
fighter is expected to rejoin the squad in due course.

Adams’s absence gives another chance to the former world silver medallist Lisa 
Whiteside at flyweight, while Sandy Ryan (60kg), Chantelle Cameron (64kg) and 
Natasha Gale (75kg) will also compete.

In addition, England Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> have 
selected three fighters who are not currently part of the GB programme: 
Demie-Jade Resztan (48kg), Ramla Ali (54kg) and Raven Chapman (57kg).
 