
Mark Yates had a long chat with Harry Redknapp come the final whistle of their 
FA Cup outingat White Hart Lane, and the subject of their conversation was the 
quality of Tottenham Hotspur's players. This, remember, was a lineup almost 
completely changed from the XI used in the last league win – against West 
Bromwich Albion.

But Yates was staggered to see the football of the Spurs second-string close 
up. "Niko Kranjcar …" said theCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> manager, with the look of a 
teenaged groupie.

The Croatia midfielder was also singled out for his own manager's praise. "He 
was class," said Redknapp. "He hit one volley that was out of this world, the 
most unbelievable ball. He's a fantastic footballer and a great boy as well."

It must be hard sometimes for managers to deal with players they clearly like 
and respect but for whom they can seldom find a spot on the team-sheet. 
Kranjcar has started only four Premier League games for Tottenham this season. 
He has been hampered by a thigh problem, but even though he is now fit, the 
route to a starting place is beset with obstacles.

Redknapp obviously has a high enough regard for the player to have signed him 
twice, first for Portsmouth, and then bringing him to Tottenham two and a half 
years ago. But opportunities to play in midfield are limited.

"With Lennon, Modric, Parker, Sandro and Bale, it's difficult to get in the 
team," said Redknapp. Bale's status has made life particularly hard, as he 
occupies Kranjcar's favoured position.

Is 90 minutes every now and then enough? "Of course not," Kranjcar said 
afterwards. "I had a bad season injury‑wise. I just want to get back fit. I 
want to have a month or two of training and staying sharp and hopefully getting 
some more minutes on the pitch. I'm blessed to be doing a job I love."

Kranjcar still believes Tottenham is the right place for him to be, even if he 
has not played as regularly as he would wish, and he is motivated to relish the 
rest of the season for club and country. "This squad is definitely the equal of 
anyone's," he said. "We had a second-string team out but still had six or so 
internationals on the pitch. That shows the strength of the squad. I don't know 
what the future will bring. I know the next few months I want to stay here, get 
in shape and hopefully have a good Euro 2012."

If the Cheltenham game was an opportunity for some of the fringe players to 
remind Redknapp of their worth, then Kranjcar's creativity and willingness, 
even while lacking match sharpness, suggested he can be a valuable asset in the 
second half of the season. The same cannot be said for Giovani dos Santos, who 
gave a glimmer of what might have been with stylish input in all three goals, 
but whose future looks to be elsewhere, with a January move on the cards.

Other players who really benefited from an outing were Michael Dawson and 
Aaron Lennon, both returning from injury, and Steven Pienaar, who like Kranjcar 
might have expected more game-time when he signed for the club. Dawson was 
another who could not disguise his eagerness to be more involved. "It's an 
exciting time," the defender said. "The position we're in at the moment, long 
may it continue. The lads have earned the right to be where they are and they 
thoroughly deserve it. I watch them and they're flying, so I'm looking forward 
to being part of it again, injury-free."
 