
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> 
conceded two late goals to draw 2-2 at home with Caen as injuries forced them 
to finish the match with nine men in a testing warm-up for their Champions 
League game against Chelsea.

The French champions, who take on the London club at the Parc des Princes in 
the first leg of their last-16 tie on Tuesday, missed out on going top and are 
third in the table with 49 points from 25 games. They trail theLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> leaders, Lyon, who travel 
to Lorient on Sunday, by one point.

The PSG coach, Laurent Blanc, will have injury concerns for the Champions 
League game, however, as the midfielder Yohan Cabaye and the centre-back 
Marquinhos were both substituted. The full-back Serge Aurier could not finish 
the game either, limping off the pitch in the 71st minute, eight minutes before 
Lucas also left the field with a groin problem.

With Blanc having already made three substitutions, it meant that PSG finished 
the game with nine men.

Caen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/caen>, who were 2-0 down after 
first-half goals by Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Ezequiel Lavezzi, made the most of 
their numerical advantage and levelled with goals by Emiliano Sala and Hervé 
Bazile in the 89th minute and the second minute of stoppage time.

Ibrahimovic, who has been far from his brilliant best this season, showed a 
glimpse of his talent when he tapped home from Aurier’s cross in the second 
minute but was shown a yellow card for celebrating by taking off his shirt. It 
was Ibrahimovic’s third yellow card in 10 matches, meaning that he will be 
suspended for the Ligue 1 game against Monaco on 1 March.

Adrien Rabiot replaced Cabaye in the 16th minute after the latter sustained a 
thigh injury.

Lavezzi made it 2-0 six minutes before the break, firing home a low shot from 
the edge of the box past Rémy Vercoutre after being perfectly teed up by Lucas.

David Luiz replaced his fellow Brazilian Marquinhos at half-time after he also 
picked up a thigh injury.

PSG came close to a third, but Vercoutre made a superb save to stop Lavezzi’s 
header.

After Aurier and Lucas sustained injuries, Caen continued to push and reduced 
the arrears through Sala, three minutes before Bazile curled a superb shot into 
the top corner.
 