
You’re up to it, even if you don’t think you are. “Do you fancy doing the last 
three months?” asked my partner before our daughter had even arrived, and after 
therule change permitting fathers to share parental leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/nov/29/jo-swinson-conflict-jobs-family-life>
. “Twelve weeks pottering about at home? Are you joking?” I’m a pretty slapdash 
person. Could I really be trusted to wipe a bottom properly? But if I can do 
it, anyone can.

I love my son but, wow, babies are boring. How does my wife do it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/08/i-love-my-son-but-wow-babies-are-boring-how-does-wife-do-it>
Childcare is like anything. If you do it a lot, you get better at it. The 
fundamentals of keeping a baby alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/08/i-love-my-son-but-wow-babies-are-boring-how-does-wife-do-it>
 and healthy are, it turns out, fairly straightforward: keep them away from 
heights, anything sharp, hot or poisonous. Then keep their bottoms clean and 
their tummies full. And, finally, pick them up occasionally. The rest is adding 
your own flourishes: the odd session reading a book together, a quick tour of 
the garden. You can be as protective or as laissez-faire as you like.

It can be boring, but it doesn’t have to be. I like routines (getting up at 
10am; watching Game of Thrones over lunch). So does my daughter (getting up at 
6.30am; demanding my undivided attention during lunch). But babies’ routines 
tend to be a bit fixed. Also, early on I wasn’t too keen on taking her out of 
the house that much. But then you realise that several months of being holed up 
is a first-class recipe for cabin-fever (for both of you). After a couple of 
weeks of establishing, mostly for my own benefit, that I could keep my daughter 
alive and healthy, we had an excursion to a local museum. She seemed to like 
it; we went to the British Library, the Science Museum, the Natural History 
Museum. Taking a baby out of the house is akin to planning a military 
operation, but it was fantastic. It almost felt like a bit of guilt-free 
personal time.

Use support networks – but manage your expectations. The other revelation for 
me was the vast numbers of baby groups out there. I went to a baby sensory 
class once a week (a bit of music, some balloons) and a local authority “busy 
babies” class, where you chat and your babies bang drums, play with sand and 
hopefully tire themselves out in time for your afternoon nap. Usually, I was 
the only man there (if there was another dad around, he was usually sitting at 
the back playing on his phone); it was nice on one level to be a bit of a 
novelty, although I did start referring to “busy babies” as “gossipy mums”. If 
there was one thing that was a bit dispiriting about taking parental leave, 
it’s how mumsy these classes tend to be. I did feel rather like an interloper.

If you’d asked me if we had bonded during my time off, I’d have said: no idea

I’m not entirely sure what bonding is – but something happened. If you’d asked 
me if we had bonded during my time off, I’d have said: no idea. My daughter and 
I saw a lot of each other. Frankly, she seemed to be pretty relaxed about who 
was around as long as she got what she wanted. But what was striking was when I 
went back to work and she went back to nursery, and I saw her for 20 minutes in 
the morning and 10 minutes in the evening, it felt absolutely dreadful. We were 
a team, for goodness’ sake. Clicking back into caring mode in the evenings is a 
breeze; I already know there’s nothing that can faze me.

Afternoon naps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/23/the-secret-of-power-napping>
 really are one of life’s greatest joys. Babies love afternoon naps. Which 
turned out to be ideal, because I love afternoon naps. (Though perhaps it’s 
worth keeping quiet about it to your partner.)

There’s a difference between childminding and childcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/24/thousands-miss-out-on-free-childcare-as-local-authorities-struggle-to-fund-places>
. It’s easy to skimp if you want – but you have to make an effort if you want 
you and your child to get the best out of it. Being inherently lazy and prone 
to spending two hours mucking around on my phone, I set up various daily 
targets: 15 minutes with a book, at least one excursion a day. I also had the 
advantage of a generous retired neighbour who would take my daughter off my 
hands for an hour a couple of times a week. A nice change of scene for her; 
another episode ofGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> for me.

You end up going a bit mad. Your contact with the world comes via other 
parents of young kids and your partner, who’s exhausted, stressed and not 
really that interested in the latest Game of Thrones. I had a meltdown about 
two weeks before my paternity leave ended when I explained to my partner in 
overly forthright terms that I “wasn’t being respected as a person”. Now I’m 
thinking: what? I really said that? Accept that your perspective is going to 
get a bit odd.

You’ll regret it if you don’t do it. It’s an odd journey: liberating, 
frustrating, disorienting, but ultimately priceless. I can’t imagine not having 
done it.
 