
Many of the world’s companies pay no attention to how their supply chains are 
damaging forests, the Prince of Wales has warned as he urged action to stop 
deforestation.


Speaking at the UN climate talks in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
, Charles also called for large-scale restoration of forests, warning the world 
would need much more forest “as all the horrors” of global warming started to 
bite.

On the issue of saving the forests, he told a packed audience, which included 
the King of Sweden, Carl XVI Gustaf, that “there can be no room for failure”.

Protecting forests from being cut down is a key part of tackling climate 
change, he said.

“It is very simple: we must save our forests, for there is no Plan B to tackle 
climate change or many of the other critical challenges that face humanity 
without them,” he urged.

While some companies had taken steps to transform their supply chains so they 
did not damage forests, he urged a redoubling of efforts to ensure a shift in 
global markets.

“Encouraging though the progress made to date has been, it remains the case 
that many of the world’s largest companies - and their financial backers - pay 
scant, by which I really mean no, attention to the deforestation footprint of 
their supply chains.”

This was especially true in markets with limited pressure from consumers to do 
the right thing, he said.

All companies should be committed to stopping destruction of forests, with 
zero net deforestation becoming the norm rather than the exception, he urged.

The prince was speaking at an event at the UN climate talks, where 195 
countries are attempting to hammer out a deal to help prevent global 
temperatures rising more than 2C above pre-industrial levels, to avoid the 
worst impacts of climate change.

Preventing the destruction and degradation of forests is a key part of 
tackling climate change, as the UN estimates the loss of around 12 million 
hectares a year is responsible for around 11% of global greenhouse gas 
emissions.

Charles also called for action to to bring about large scale forest landscape 
restoration, pointing to the need for such a move in the face of the loss of 
500 million hectares (1.2 billion acres) of tropical rainforest since 1950.

It should be an equal priority to halting deforestation, not an afterthought, 
he said.
And he warned: “As all the horrors of even a 2C warmer world bite - and bite 
they will - we are going to need a lot more forest, not a slight reduction in 
the existing rate of attrition.”

As well playing a key role in carbon storage and climate change, the world’s 
forests are directly relied on by around one billion people for their 
livelihoods, while everyone relies on services they provide such as regulating 
rainfall and supplying commodities.

Charles called for support for indigenous communities and those who live in or 
alongside forests.

“All our efforts should in the first instance be guided by the people whose 
lives are so much more intimately intertwined with the forests than our own; 
and that the approaches we take should both recognise and protect their rights, 
and draw on their wisdom, their perspectives and, of course, their hopes for 
the future,” he urged.

At the start of the two-week conference, leaders from 20 countries including 
the UK and major forest nations such as Brazil, Indonesia and the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, put out a joint statement recognising the “essential” role 
forests play in protecting the planet and avoiding dangerous climate change.


“We are committed to intensifying efforts to protect forests, to significantly 
restore degraded forest, peat and agricultural lands, and to promote low-carbon 
rural development,” they said.

A number of new initiatives have been announced, including a partnership by 
Colombia with Germany, Norway and the UK to back the Latin American country’s 
efforts towards green growth and to reduce deforestation in the Amazon.

The UK has also announced an aim with Germany and Norway to provide $5bn by 
2020 to countries if they pursue ambitious schemes to cut deforestation and 
degradation, improve sustainable management, conservation and carbon stocks in 
forests.

The move forms part of a climate programme, known as Redd+, to provide 
financial incentives for developing countries to protect their forests by 
putting a value to their carbon stores and other natural benefits.

In his speech, the Prince of Wales said he was “heartened” to see the focus at 
the climate talks on supporting forest conservation, but said international 
frameworks could give even more consideration to the role of forests and land 
use in both cutting climate change emissions and coping with its effects.
 