
ITV is mulling over a return to boxing and, more significantly, putting the 
best fights on a pay-per-view outlet, perhaps in collaboration withFloyd 
Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> and his 
business associate, Al Haymon, the mystery man of the American fight game who 
has already put roots down in Britain.

It is a development welcomed by Eddie Hearn, whose Matchroom operation stands 
tall over Europe, with Sky funding.

“The more the merrier,” was Hearn’s response to the news, arguing that 
anything that raises the sport’s profile is good for everyone else. Well, 
maybe. What we don’t know is how far ITV is prepared to go with pay-per-view, 
because that is the only sustainable model in elite boxing – given that 
BoxNation is a subscription service, so not entirely free-to-air.

Carl Frampton alive to dangers of Scott Quigg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/20/carl-frampton-alive-dangers-scott-quigg>
Frank Warren, whose start in the business he owes to ITV, will also be keeping 
a keen eye on the comeback from his BoxNation headquarters. He is an admirer of 
Haymon’s and reflects the growing trend in the UK to cooperate with rival 
promoters, ignoring old boundaries – which is palpably not the case in the 
United States, where Haymon is at war with Bob Arum and Oscar De La Hoya.

If pay-per-view spreads across the boxing spectrum in the UK, fans will 
inevitably grumble about having to shell out again and again for fights they 
figure they have already paid for through signing up to Sky Sports or BoxNation.

There are two strands to this debate, both grounded in nostalgia. One is that 
the sport has become marginalised since it left free-to-air broadcast in the 
“good old days”, when even your grandmother knew who all eight world champions 
were; the other is the power of the market, which never really changes. What 
Haymon is doing now is trying to dominate his field.

When Muhammad Ali mesmerised the entire globe, he did so through the more 
primitive version of television that prevailed in the 60s and 70s. All we had 
to do was get off the couch, walk over to the TV set in the corner of the room, 
turn the knob and he would magically appear. For free.

But imagine Ali in today’s environment. He would be off-the-scale as a 
pay-per-view attraction – way more so, I would contend, than Floyd Mayweather 
has been. His charisma would overpower the medium – which is, of course, the 
message, as Marshall McLuhan told us in 1964, the year Ali announced his 
arrival in our lives by beating up Sonny Liston.

It might not be solid boxing text, but McLuhan’s Understanding Media: The 
Extensions of Man, could tell us a thing or two about how sport, specifically 
boxing, and television have interacted with their audience.

TV, he said, was “a cool medium” because it did not require intense 
concentration like, say, being entranced by a film in a cinema.

We watch sport now in a distracted way. It is aural and visual wallpaper, 
always on, always over there. The zapper is never far away and our 
concentration span seems to dwindle accordingly.

What has this got to do with ITV and pay-per-view? Just this: boxing’s 
audience has shrunk over the years not because the quality of the product has 
necessarily diminished (although there is an argument for that), but because we 
are spoiled for choice. We have just about everything delivered to us, for a 
price admittedly, but we hardly know which way to look.

Take Sky Sports. On a tablet on the run, or on your high-tech flat screen on 
your living room wall or hotel room, it serves up a 24-hour diet of non-stop 
sport, as convenient as room service. On any given day all around the clock, it 
pumps out quality coverage of sports news, darts, golf, cricket, tennis, 
fishing, football, formula one, skiing, rugby league and union … professional 
kabaddi. The list is as long as it is eclectic.

Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> is not just competing with 
football for our attention; it is competing with what’s left of our brain 
cells. This is sports overload gone crazy.

So, good luck to ITV. Lovers of boxing will welcome another platform, which 
can only be good for boxers too, the vast majority of whom operate in isolation 
in small halls all over the country with little or no television profile. If we 
have to pay extra for some of it, there is always a solution: Put your coat on 
and go down to the venue, hand over probably the equivalent of a pay-per-view 
ticket, or more, and enjoy some proper live sport. Just like the “good old 
days”.

British buzz


And how good is ITV’s timing? Boxing in these islands has rarely been 
healthier. There are 13 British passport-holders with claims to versions of 
world titles and even allowing for the seriously reduced currency of some of 
those belts, that is at least a barometer of the quality across the weights.

The fighters with something to sell are Lee Haskins, Jamie McDonnell, Lee 
Selby, Liam Smith, Scott Quigg, Carl Frampton, Terry Flanagan, Anthony Crolla, 
Kell Brook, James DeGale, Billy Joe Saunders, Ola Afolabi and, on top of the 
mountain, Tyson Fury.

Fury rides high at heavyweight – although who knows when and where he will 
collide with Wladimir Klitschko again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/02/wladimir-klitschko-tyson-fury-rematch-boxing>
? Anthony Joshua has an excellent chance to join him on the board in his IBF 
title challengeon 9 April against Charles Martin  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/14/antony-joshua-charles-martin-ibf-title-april>
(a fighter he airily dismissed as a no-name before the American was gifted 
Fury’s belt recently).

At cruiser, Afolabi puts his lightly regarded IBO championship up against 
Marco Huck in Halle on Saturday, a fight that should be better than the title 
on offer.

The IBF super-middleweight champion DeGale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/23/james-degale-ibf-title-andre-dirrell>
 is as good as any of the champions in his division. Certainly you would back 
him against Arthur Abraham, Giovanni Di Carolis, George Groves’s conqueror 
Badou Jack (and in a rematch with Groves) or the toweringly obscure Australian 
Zac Dunn.

At middleweight, Gennady Golovkin is supreme – but sooner or later, the WBO 
champion Saunders will have to test himself against the best fighter in the 
world (the brilliant flyweight Román González notwithstanding).

Smith has arrived at light-middleweight (or super-welterweight as some 
organisations insist on calling the 11st division) for the WBO, leading his 
extraordinary Liverpool siblings to highest honours.

There is the gifted and patient IBF welterweight champion Brook, ticking over 
with a defence on 26 March against Kevin Bizier, after being shunned by Amir 
Khan, ludicrously, as the Bolton man over-reaches against Saúl Alvarez for 
unlikely middleweight glory.

Manchester’s “Turbo” Flanagan defends his WBO lightweight title against Derry 
Mathews in what should be an explosive north-west showdown in Liverpool on 12 
March. Mathews, by the way, has held the WBA’s interim belt, but that 
organisation is so chaotic it is hard to know who it regards as its champion in 
any division. There is no doubt about Crolla’s regular WBA crown, which he 
emphatically claimed bystopping Darleys Pérez in five rounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/anthony-crolla-darleys-perez-wba-world-title>
.

Selby, the WBO featherweight champion, shares space with two outstanding 
title-holders in that division: Leo Santa Cruz, who gives the former champ Kiko 
Martínez another shot on Saturday, and Vasyl Lomachenko.

The biggest “little” British world title fight in a long time takes place on 
Saturday, between the IBF’s Frampton and Quigg, whose “super” status at 
super-bantam with the WBA is typically confused, but who is a legitimate 
claimant none the less.

We have two champions at bantamweight, as well, McDonnell on behalf of the WBA 
and Haskins, who holds the IBF’s bantamweight title, to round out a pretty 
impressive class photo at the start of 2016.

They might not all be in place by the end of the year, or a few others could 
have stepped up: most probably Joshua and the Liverpool super-middle Callum 
Smith, brother of Liam, Stephen and Paul. And, improbably, James “Jazza” 
Dickens, who embodies all that is wonderful about the boxing dream: taking on 
the untouchable Cuban super-bantamweight genius Guillermo Rigondeaux (stripped 
of the WBA title held by Quigg) in front of his Liverpool fans on 12 March. You 
can only wish him luck.

No wonder ITV are interested in boxing again.
 