
For Anthony Joshua <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anthony-joshua>, the 
easy nights are over. His third‑round blowout of the reluctant Eric Molina in 
Manchester on Saturday night to retain his IBF world heavyweight title, while 
again disappointing fans who want to see him in a proper fight, has 
nevertheless thrust him into boxing’s stratosphere.

Doc Holliday, a seasoned boxing face from America who accompanied Molina in 
the absence of the Texan’s promoter, Don King, predicted Joshua would “earn a 
billion” from boxing. Well, extrapolating from the £15m he andWladimir Klitschko
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> might have earned had 
the Ukrainian been his opponent on Saturday night (as originally scheduled), 
their showdown at Wembley Stadium in front of 90,000 fans on 29 April could 
bring them between £30m and £40m apiece.

Related: Anthony Joshua dominates Eric Molina to set up Wladimir Klitschko 
showdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/anthony-joshua-eric-molina-third-round-wladimir-klitschko>

As the champion’s promoter, Eddie Hearn, confirmed later: “There will be no 
steps back. Once you have a fight against Wladimir Klitschko and you earn what 
you earn in that fight, you can’t go back to a voluntary defence against 
somebody, or even a [sub-standard] mandatory. It will be very difficult to 
maintain all the belts.”

That is good news for fight fans – who will hope this extravaganza does not 
collapse the way Klitschko’s rematch with Tyson Fury did, or fail to 
materialise like Fury’s two big fights with David Haye. They are getting sick 
of being promised the earth and ending up with Willesden.

There are reasons to be confident Hearn will deliver. For a start he trusts 
Klitschko’s man, Bernd Bönte – certainly more than some British promoters, 
managers and fighters, who have found him and the Klitschko brothers difficult 
negotiators. In the mayhem of the press conference brawl in Munich four years 
ago that followedDereck Chisora’s brave losing effort against Vitali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/19/dereck-chisora-vitali-klitschko>
, Haye, stirring from the cheap stalls for a shot at the champ, and his then 
coach and manager, Adam Booth, had a memorable exchange with Bönte.

It led to a wild brawl that swirled around your humble correspondent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2012/feb/19/dereck-chisora-david-haye-brawl-video>
 for several minutes. That’s no way to do business. So Hearn is taking a softer 
route. He revealed the Klitschko deal was brokered two weeks ago, finalised 
shortly before Saturday’s show and Joshua signed his contract as soon as he 
left the ring.

The fight will be for Joshua’s IBF belt, the vacant WBA title (as Klitschko 
insisted on), the peripheral IBO championship and probably The Ring magazine 
trophy. Tickets will go on sale before Christmas, although the wolves of the 
secondary market will be lurking. Hearn said: “We’re looking to go to 90,000, 
if the Mayor can improve it from 80,000. He said at theBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Writers Club dinner how much he 
wants to bring major fights to London.”

Sadiq Khan’s brother, Sid, incidentally, trains the Olympic super‑heavy silver 
medallist Joe Joyce, a close friend of Joshua’s, so that path could be 
smoothed. But it is Bönte with whom Hearn has had to do the main business – 
and, predictably, there is one unticked box. “We haven’t announced the US 
broadcast partner yet, but obviously we’ve been working with Showtime, and they 
work with HBO,” Hearn said. “We’d like to continue our relationship with 
Showtime. It will be something we work on together with Bönte. They’re not 
difficult to deal with, but obviously they’ve been burnt, so they’re very, very 
diligent, and that’s why it took so long.

“I feel sorry for Klitschko. He’s wanted to fight since the Fury fight was 
cancelled, but he hasn’t been able to [because of injury]. He seems hugely 
excited and he’s been very friendly. But that’s a trap Josh mustn’t fall into. 
He’s got to have the same ruthless streak he’s had against everyone else. But 
he’s a ruthless individual, so I don’t see that being a problem. I don’t know 
how Molina got up.”

A ludicrous suggestion was doing the rounds on social media on Saturday, 
incidentally, that Joshua would leave Hearn after the Klitschko fight. 
Seriously?

For a start, their contract has two years to run. Also, Joshua has in Hearn a 
promoter and negotiator who has a strong grip on the Sky boxing contract and, 
whatever the fighter’s growing international appeal, the big money is still 
made at home. Hearn acknowledges Joshua has global sponsorship deals that 
underline his marketability – especially if he flattens Klitschko – but he has 
done everything he’s promised him so far.

There is another reason Joshua would be ill-advised to leave. “After Klitschko 
it is Deontay Wilder,” Hearn said, in reference to the American holder of the 
WBC belt who also boxes on Showtime. That fight can be done in a phone call.

Meanwhile Joshua and Klitschko, who exchanged pleasantries in the ring after 
the fight on Saturday night, will meet again in London this week for the ritual 
launch of their multi-belt spring showdown. What could possibly go wrong?

Parker solid but not spectacular

Andy Ruiz Jr did not look anything like a professional athlete when he stepped 
through the ropes in Auckland at the weekend to contest the vacant WBO version 
of the heavyweight title with local favourite Joseph Parker.

Junior’s pale white back shook like jelly, a belt of flab circled the top of 
his shorts and the tattoos spread across his upper torso might have been a thin 
wire bra.

You finally get your shot, in a diminished market, you fly 6,500 miles across 
the Pacific Ocean and you perform in front of a hostile audience.

But here’s the thing: Ruiz finished way stronger than Parker, the 24-year-old 
unbeaten aspirant who has the sheen and mien of a dedicated champion, which he 
now is after a close points win.

Ruiz has impressively quick hands and occasionally exposed the supposedly 
fitter Parker. Had he been able to move his feet, Ruiz could have gone home 
with the belt. Inside every fat heavyweight is a potentially decent 
cruiserweight. Ruiz could easily shed two stone, and fit that bill.

Parker looked OK: well schooled, solid chin and heavy hands but he’s a 
box-by-numbers fighter. As his trainer, Kevin Barry, said later: “He followed 
the game plan.”

Joshua would not be drawn when asked about the winner’s showing. “He’s a 
champion,” he said. “Not for me to judge.” That was the faintest of praise.

I could not see Parker getting past halfway against Joshua. Ruiz, though, 
might get into the later stages. Certainly he is a better heavyweight than the 
polite but hapless Molina.

Chisora and Whyte all right on night

Finally a word or two on a couple of fighters for whom subtlety is a foreign 
concept. Dereck Chisora and Dillian Whyte will never be friends but, for 36 
minutes of relentless punch-swapping on the Manchester undercard, they entered 
into a unique bond only boxing provides.

They were not fighting for Whyte’s British title because he played his part in 
the pre-fight table-throwing that cost Chisora a two-year suspended sentence 
and £30,000 in fines and costs. What they were fighting for was, as Whyte said 
the morning after, “pride and London bragging rights”.

It was one of those rare occasions, a contest that took every ounce of spirit 
the combatants could muster and brought long-time villain Chisora something he 
might have thought he’d never get in his adopted country: the love of the fans.

They might do it again: perhaps on the Joshua-Klitschko undercard. “It was one 
of the best heavyweight fights I’ve ever seen,” Hearn said. But Chisora could 
yet get squeezed. Hearn also likes Whyte against Wilder or David Price. 
Whatever the sentiment on the night, it’s business in the end.
 