
Step into a typical charity shop, and the first thing you notice is the smell 
of musty old cupboards. On first encounteringMary Portas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/mary-portas>, retail expert and the 
face of a new charity shop revolution, the nose also twitches: she smells 
divine. Her flirty, feisty warmth commands total attention. Though you probably 
wouldn't want to get into a slanging match with her: the person you see on TV, 
tongue as sharp as her shoulders, seems pretty much the real Mary.

In many ways Portas is an unlikely figurehead for charity shops. Formerly 
creative director at Harvey Nichols, she went on to found Yellowdoor, a retail 
and communications agency. Her first TV series, Mary Queen of Shops, was such a 
success that it turned her into a cult fashion figure. When we meet, she looks 
typically immaculate in a grey, sleeveless, silk, tunic dress, cinched at the 
waist with a wide belt, skin-tight black leggings and flat sandals. She likes 
Richard and Judy - she's doing their show later - though it's Sir Alan Sugar's 
job on The Apprentice she quite fancies. Having spent the morning with her, it 
is easy to imagine Portas waggling a bejewelled finger at the sorry candidate, 
announcing, with a flick of her strawberry blonde fringe, "I'm sorry, my 
darling, you're fired."

In the meantime she is leading a charity shop revival. Her new series, Mary 
Queen of Charity Shops (the first episode of which was screened on BBC2 this 
week), sees Portas on a mission to transform the dowdy British charity shop; 
she sets up camp at a branch of Save the Children in Orpington, Kent. But she 
faces an uphill struggle due to poor-quality donations: "People think of 
[charity shops] as a dumping ground."

She says she loathes Primark ("cheap landfill") and thinks fast fashion has 
taken away the joy of a new season. "I think delayed gratification is one of 
the most important things we have in life. Now there is this sense of newness, 
newness, newness, all the time. And cheap-newness. And copy-newness, all being 
shoved down our throats."

She rails against our current "gain and greed" mentality and the MPs' expenses 
debacle at Westminster with passion. "This isn't a rant on not wanting people 
to buy new," she says, "but people are starting to rethink how they live their 
lives, and I want to create something that feels more relevant today."

The Orpington shop is in dire need of help. Donations are so hideous that they 
have to be picked out of carrier bags with a litter-pincer. The army of veteran 
volunteers are set firmly in their ways. Portas admits that she thought the 
task would be easy; and that she was wrong. Yet she may have laid the 
groundwork for innovation in the sector as a whole. In a later episode, viewers 
will see her persuade staff at British Gas to bring in unwanted goods to sell 
in the Orpington shop, with winning results. Now Save the Children is planning 
to roll out this initiative of hooking up with big businesses, she says.

More innovations are on the way. Portas's vision for a new generation of 
charity shops comes to life this month at her Living & Giving shop at Westfield 
shopping centre in west London. (She persuaded the centre to provide her with 
retail space this month.) For the opening, she has called in favours from 
fashion pals and Grazia readers to ensure the store is stocked with 
high-quality merchandise - Manolo Blahnik heels, Marc Jacobs handbags and 
high-street gems. The store took £4,000 in the first hour of opening yesterday. 
"I gave 18-year-old kids a stall," she says, "so instead of selling on eBay, 
they sold their frocks on a table. They took 50% of the profits, they've mixed 
in with the old dears, and it's win-win. I just want it to be a different 
business model - nobody has done that."

Portas's zeal taps into a charity shop renaissance. A few miles east, in 
Camden High Street, celebrity stylist Fee Doran, aka Mrs Jones - the designer 
behind Kylie's white hooded dress from the Can't Get You Out Of My Head video - 
is spearheading Oxfam's new DIY project, which includes customising workshops, 
a festival circuit tour, and a sewing machine in the Camden store. "If it's got 
a hole, put a sequin on it!" is Doran's fashion philosophy.

I try on an old navy Austin Reed suit which has been turned into a jumpsuit - 
the sleeves are cut short while the jacket and trousers are fused together with 
a ribbed panel. I love it, but it doesn't fit. Mrs Jones reaches for a pair of 
Ralph Lauren navy cords complete with embroidered red lobsters. I'm excited. 
She's going to dress me as Chuck Bass from Gossip Girl - brilliant. But these 
trousers are also massive. Eventually, I find myself in a pair of Hermès 
electric blue jodphur-leggings, a slogan T-shirt, a silk Ralph Lauren scarf, 
and a navy blazer with college-style badge and gold buttons.

"This project is really tapping into the energy and creativity that has gone 
around Oxfam shops for years," explains Sarah Farquhar, head of retail at 
Oxfam. "Stylists, designers, models and art students have always used our 
shops." Farquhar also believes there is a backlash within fashion. "The high 
street is starting to look the same. Charity shopping taps into a growing 
consumer awareness of where things come from, and it's a green and sustainable 
way to buy."

Portas wants us to "shop neutral" - so when we buy something, we offset it by 
donating something we no longer wear. As we sit admiring her new Westfield 
store, two women stroll pass, asking about the shop. Portas explains, then 
trills: "Come back on Thursday, but you've got to be shopping-neutral, ladies, 
so you've got to bring something to donate." She pauses as they consider this. 
"You don't have to. But I'd like you to," Portas smiles. Totally charmed, one 
of the women raises an eyebrow and says, simply: "That shouldn't be difficult." 
Portas's point exactly.

Mary's donation tips

• If you are donating torn or stained clothing, mark it "for rag". The charity 
will get money for a bin-liner of rags.

• With clothing, think about the quality of what you are donating and ask 
yourself if you would pay a fiver for it.

• Look round your home. Are there things you no longer love? If so, donate 
them.

• If you've got the time to tell the charity shop where and how much you paid 
for an item you are donating, it might help the staff with pricing.

• Using a bin liner will make you associate your donations with rubbish. Put 
your donations in a decent carrier instead.

• For more information visit: Oxfam.org.uk/diy <http://www.Oxfam.org.uk/diy>; 
Savethechildren.org.uk/maryportas <http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/maryportas>
;twitter.com/Queenofshops <http://www.twitter.com/queenofshops>
 