
“Shanghai, Mumbai, Dubai or goodbye”: remember the phrase? It denoted the 
world of stateless spivs who would travel from one mega-metropolis to the other 
in search of deals. Or to put it another way: globalisation, the “end of 
history” and the victory of unbridled free markets.

Now that so much of this appears to be in tatters – I won’t say “is” for 
reasons I’ll explain – I wonder whetherDaniel Levin <http://daniellevin.com/>’s 
journey hasn’t suffered the fate suffered by some unlucky nonfiction books – 
that of being overtaken by events. (Reading at the same time Alain de Botton’s 
book on the power of global news organisations,The News: A User’s Manual, I had 
the same sneaking suspicion, but at least that was published in early 2014.) A 
lawyer and adviser (a term that means everything and nothing), Levin has 
written a series of accounts based on his experiences that are in turns 
hilarious and painful. From the Bible-basher looking to revive a small-town 
university in Texas to the Russian faux oppositionist who turns out to be a 
Putin stooge; from the Chinese state bully businessman who doesn’t realise his 
vintage bottle of Chateau Pétrus has gone off, to uppity African officials at 
the UN, the common characteristics are hubris and dodginess. To the victors the 
spoils, no matter how the victory was achieved.

Levin draws attention to the good guys, too, the ordinary people he saw 
fleeced, or the corporate types involved in some of the chicanery but who at 
least had a basic sense of right and wrong. The most unprepossessing members of 
this rogues’ gallery are the politicians in Washington and their many advisers 
and assorted hangers-on.

The trivial is the most telling – the insolence of the secretaries, the 
unsolicited calls made by congressmen, during which the receiver is ordered to 
hold for 30 minutes. I would have told them to get stuffed. Yet Levin keeps on 
going back, waiting in five-star hotels around the world, asking for more.

In my various travels, I too could tell similar tales: the creepy European who 
claims he has special access to Sheikh Mohammed, the ruler of Dubai, or the 
sinister government official in Angola. As for Russians eating breakfast on the 
veranda of a hotel in Cap Ferrat, that is such a common sight it’s hardly worth 
noting.

Which brings me to two essential weaknesses of this book: I keep on wondering 
why the author is so surprised or even upset by his interlocutors. What was he 
expecting? Maybe I have a tendency to misanthropy, but I work from the 
assumption that the people who operate in these kinds of networks do not have a 
finely honed sense of ethics or humility.

The bigger question lurking in this otherwise entertaining account is whether 
this circus denotes a particular moment in history, the decade or so either 
side of the millennium. And if so, did the financial crash of 2007-8 mark the 
first dent, which was followed up by Brexit, Trump and the other associated 
shocks about to befall us?

Last autumn, Theresa May stated in her party conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-treads-the-brexit-path-of-empathy-and-righteousness>
: “If you believe you’re a citizen of the world, you’re a citizen of nowhere.” 
Some saw this as a rebuke to the connected, environmentalist, European 
internationalist, and a return to the flag-waving little Englander. However, 
there is a more positive aspect to this: the first challenge since the 
financial big bang to the worldview that drives the subjects of Levin’s book. 
Even if it is mere rhetoric, just the fact that politicians are talking about 
the “divided society” and the “left behinds” and wondering out loud about the 
excesses of the nomadic super-rich is progress.

And yet no sooner do I write this then I think of the incoming US president; 
he would have felt exceedingly at home in the pages of Levin’s lunch companions.

• Nothing But a Circus by Daniel Levin is published by Allen Lane (£20). To 
order a copy for £15.99 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nothing-but-a-circus.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99
 