
Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> 
ended a run of six Championship games without a win in beating Birmingham City 
at the City Ground.

The Forest manager, Philippe Montanier, had one of the best seats in the house 
as he sat out the first of a two-match touchline ban by watching from the 
directors’ box, and will have been delighted with what he saw.

Eric Lichaj gave the hosts a half-time lead before goals from the substitutes 
Apostolos Vellios and Hildeberto Pereira came either side of a Lukas Jutkiewicz 
header that had briefly given the visitors hope.

Oliver Burke: ‘England tried a cheeky one but no way! I love playing for 
Scotland – goosebumps’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/oliver-burke-england-scotland-rb-leipzig-nottingham-forest>
Gary Rowett, on the other hand, will have been frustrated after seeing 
Birmingham’s eight-match unbeaten streak away from home end.

It was Forest who were the first to threaten, with Henri Lansbury trying his 
luck from the edge of the box in the first minute, with the Birmingham 
goalkeeper Adam Legzdins spilling and holding only at the second attempt, just 
as Ben Osborn threatened to pounce.

Legzdins was looking nervous and, when Lansbury fired in a free-kick in the 
ninth minute, he beat the keeper inside his near post with a low shot, after 
initially shaping as if he would cross.

But, after some delay and a long conversation with his assistant, the referee 
Jeremy Simpson disallowed the goal, apparently for an offside spotted within a 
packed penalty area, which Lansbury had threaded the ball through.

Forest continued to carve out chances from set pieces, with Nicklas Bendtner 
looping a header just wide following an Osborn free-kick, while Lansbury forced 
another save from Legzdins with yet another free-kick.

When the Forest goal came, it was from open play, however. Bendtner’s fine 
pass picked out Lichaj on the right-hand side and the American controlled on 
his chest before lashing an unstoppable shot across goal and inside the far 
post. By the interval the Forest goalkeeper Vladimir Stojkovic had not had a 
save to make.

Forest suffered a blow when Bendtner had to be carried off injured after 
Michael Morrison had gone through the back of him, with the referee failing to 
award a free-kick.

But the man who replaced him, Vellios, was soon in the thick of the action as 
Forest doubled their advantage in the 63rd minute. When Lansbury fired in a 
cross from the left, the Greece international was quickest to react, sliding 
home a simple finish from close range.

Birmingham pulled a goal back in the 72nd minute when Ryan Shotton whipped in 
a cross from the right and Jutkiewicz nodded home.

But the substitute Pereira had an almost immediate impact, carrying the ball 
half the length of the pitch from inside his own penalty area before feeding 
Osborn down the left. Pereira continued his run and, when Osborn picked him out 
in the centre, slotted home a composed finish seven minutes from the end.
 