
Given Nigel Clough’s generally cautious managerial nature, and the word used 
to describe Philippe Montanier, the newNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> manager, in pre‑season 
was “patient”, those at the City Ground may well have braced themselves for a 
quiet afternoon. Seven goals later, most of those present went home thoroughly 
entertained.

This was a rare game in which one team won, but more or less everyone seemed 
satisfied. Forest with their win, andBurton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burton-albion> playing their first ever 
game in the second tier of English football with a fine display and one that 
could very easily have ended in at least a point.

“It was a very interesting victory, because we won, but with difficulties,” 
Montanier said after the game. “It’s always a good thing to work and to learn 
about our mistakes. We can analyse this, but it’s only the first day.”

Norwich City hit their stride as Jacob Murphy sets up rout at Blackburn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/blackburn-rovers-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
And quite a first day it was. Britt Assombalonga turned out to be the 
difference, scoring twice, admittedly from a cumulative distance of around two 
yards, but goals that were greeted with fervour and relief by the home crowd. 
Assombalonga missed most of last season with a dislocated kneecap, a 
significant factor in Forest’s paltry goal tally: only the relegated three 
teams scored fewer, but their defending rather than attacking was problematic 
this time.

Asked if he was happy with Forest’s defending, Montanier replied: “Of course, 
no, we conceded three goals! We can’t score four goals every game, but you know 
that. We have to improve. We didn’t manage the end of the match very well. I’m 
not surprised because the team is very young.”

He was not kidding. Burton were the better, more assured side in the first 
half, possibly because their players could all get into a bar without being 
asked for ID. Forest’s 10 outfield players had an average age of just under 22, 
included three teenagers and five products from the club’s academy. Perhaps 
that contributed to a frantic last few minutes, after Forest had gone 4-2 up, 
but Burton scored with a Tom Naylor header, then missed a golden chance with 
just seconds remaining.

By that stage Forest had a cushion thanks to a fine performance by the rapid 
Oliver Burke, the 19-year old winger who was a terror all afternoon and who was 
identified by Clough, the Burton manager, as Forest’s most dangerous player. 
Burke scored Forest’s third, volleying home after a Pajtim Kasami shot had been 
deflected into his path.

That was the second time Forest had taken the lead, the first through 
Assombalonga, after which Burton scored twice in quick succession. A corner 
from the left was swung to the back post and was eventually smuggled home by 
Lucas Akins, then they went ahead after Lloyd Dyer smoothly steered a shot 
across Stephen Henderson and into the bottom corner.

Henderson was on the pitch because Dorus de Vries, Forest’s starting 
goalkeeper, went off on a stretcher after just 18 minutes, after going up for 
an aerial ball with Akins and seemed to jar his knee on landing.

Montanier did not think the injury was particularly serious but the manager 
spoke to the referee at half-time about the challenge, which he deemed illegal.

The debutant Thomas Lam scored Forest’s other goal, an effort from the edge of 
the area that crept through a crowd of defenders and snuck past the keeper Jon 
McLaughlin’s near post. That was one of four shots on target for the home side, 
and for that reason Clough was fairly phlegmatic after the game.

“I’m not too upset because I don’t think we deserved that,” Clough said, and 
there was certainly plenty in Burton’s performance to suggest they will be fine 
this season. By the end, Forest were showboating, step-overs and flick-ups 
aplenty, and while this young team will face much sterner tests as the season 
goes on, this victory in the August sun was a splendid start.
 