
Notts County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> demand to be 
congratulated, not castigated. This victory secured promotion for a club who, 
according to their rivals, have benefited from breaking the rules. However, the 
County chairman, Ray Trew, says that to see his club's success as the result of 
cheating is to indulge in sour grapes.

The oldest club in the league have been one of the least popular since details 
of their extraordinary financial contortions emerged this season. After being 
taken over last summer by a company called Munto Finance, County hired 
Sven-Goran Eriksson as director of football and lavished extravagant contracts 
on players, most famously a £40,000-per-week deal for Sol Campbell.

Envy turned to outrage when it transpired that Munto Finance did not have the 
money necessary for such deals and the club were, therefore, guilty of 
shattering theLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> salary cap, under 
which expenditure on wages must not exceed 60% of revenue. A transfer embargo 
was imposed but other clubs are angry that, though Campbell has left, the likes 
of Kasper Schmeichel, the goalkeeper who is earning £15,000 per week, have been 
allowed to remain. County, claim the critics, have not been effectively 
punished.

Trew denies this. In an open letter to League Two chairmen , he explains that 
since saving the club from extinction in February he has injected enough funds 
to allow County to comply with the salary cap, claiming the wage bill now 
stands at 54.9% of total income.

"Such a dramatic shift from being outside Football League rules to being 
comfortably within them, without the need for placing the club into 
administration, represents the ideal way for a club in similar circumstances to 
handle our predicament within the current rules," Trew tells his fellow 
chairmen.

"In spite of the well-documented troubles that we have had to contend with at 
the club and even with the restriction of a transfer embargo, the maximum 
sentence agreed upon by the Football League's member clubs for exceeding the 
salary cap, being in place, we have still managed to maintain a fantastic run 
of form on the pitch which has seen us climb to the top of the League."

Trew is under no illusion that his letter will extinguish the complaints, 
especially if County beat second-placed Rochdale tomorrow and take a step 
closer to the title. "I'm sure if we're crowned champions there'll be some 
clubs still bleating, but with no justification," he says. County's future 
looked bleak when he took over but he says it is now bright. "When we came in 
the debt was £7.3m, now it is well below £4m and I envisage that by the end of 
this year we will be debt free," he said.

Success on the pitch has not, he claims, alleviated the financial pressure. 
"Quite the contrary," he said. "Not going up would have been much less of a 
financial burden because our promotion bonuses are quite substantial." 
Nevertheless, he said County will give transfer funds this summer to their 
manager, Steve Cotterill, who has taken 11 wins and two draws from 13 games 
since arriving on a short-term deal in February. "He has identified six 
positions he wants to strengthen and we'll be doing our best to help him," Trew 
said, which rather suggests that Cotterill, whose contract expires in the 
summer, is planning to stay at the club even though he has so far refused to 
commit.

Munto Finance kicked off this season claiming County would be in the Premier 
League within five years. Trew said: "Our target is the Championship."

Man of the match Lee Hughes (Notts County)
 