
Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> 
suggested life is not going to be dull under Philippe Montanier as they beat 
Wigan Athletic to register their second 4-3 win of the season on home turf.

Marcus Antonsson makes his mark for Leeds in win at Sheffield Wednesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/sheffield-wednesday-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
Wigan thought they had snatched a point when Will Grigg’s second of the game 
saw them equalise for the third time in the 86th minute but the defender Thomas 
Lam, who the Wigan manager Gary Caldwell thought should have been sent off, had 
other ideas with an injury-time winner.

Caldwell thought Lam deserved a red card over a clash with Grigg, when the 
defender was on a yellow card at the time. The two players were involved in a 
wrestling match on the side of the pitch that resulted in a caution for Grigg 
for taking his protests too far. A frustrated Caldwell said: “All four goals 
were avoidable but Thomas Lam should have been sent off as well. He should not 
have been on the pitch to score the goal. The linesman can see what happened. 
We just wanted the referee and the linesman to do their job.”

Britt Assombalonga had put Forest in front, before Michael Jacobs equalised 
for the first time. Oliver Burke scored two well-taken goals to twice put 
Forest in control, with Grigg adding two of his own, both finished from close 
range to level – but Lam had the final say as Montanier’s side carried on the 
high-octane form showed during the4-3 win over Burton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/nottingham-forest-burton-albion-championship-match-report>
 on the opening day of the season.

“We left it too open for Wigan to come back three times,” Montanier said. “I 
can accept that happening once but to repeat it again and again … we will give 
ourselves more problems in the future if we do that.”

An error at the back from the visitors after six minutes was roundly punished. 
Dan Burn’s backpass was woefully short of pace, allowing Assombalonga to stride 
clear and slot a low finish beyond the advancing Adam Bogdan in the Wigan goal.

Forest’s lead was to last five minutes before some poor defending cost them. 
Lam failed to close down Alex Gilbey as he angled into the box from the Wigan 
right and he used the space to cut the ball back for Jacobs to slot home from 
10 yards.

Assombalonga was forced off after 15 minutes with what looked to be a 
hamstring problem and was replaced by Apostolos Vellios but Forest still almost 
added another goal as Matty Cash bent a first-time, 20-yard shot against the 
post, with Bogdan recovering to deny Pajtim Kasami from the rebound.

Vellios almost got himself a goal with one of his first touches as he attacked 
an Osborn cross with a volley at the near post, but Bogdan saved well. The 
Wigan goalkeeper had to be at his best again after Chris Cohen sent Burke 
skipping clear down the middle, but the Hungarian stopper closed the angle 
well. Burke’s superb pass to Osborn then carved out another chance but his low, 
angled effort rolled the wrong side of the post.

Forest finished the half looking the more likely to score, with Kasami bending 
a shot inches wide of the upright in injury time.

It took only eight minutes of the second half for them to take the lead for a 
second time. A superb crossfield ball from Chris Cohen was well controlled on 
the chest by Burke before the 19-year-old finished confidently to make it 2-1.

Forest should have killed things off when a Craig Morgan foul on Cohen earned 
them a penalty but Bogdan dived to his left to save from Vellios. Five minutes 
later, when Luke Garbutt’s cross was deflected, Grigg nipped in at the near 
post to head beyond Stephen Henderson and make it 2-2.

There was more drama to come, with Cash picking out a perfect pass to send 
Burke into the box from the right and the winger produced another composed 
finish, slotting a low shot inside the far post.

Still the twists kept coming, as Forest defended a Garbutt throw-in poorly to 
allow Grigg time to make it 3-3 only for Forest to take the lead for the fourth 
time in the 93rd minute when Hildeberto Pereira made his way beyond three men 
down Wigan’s right before cutting the ball back for Lam to drive home 
emphatically. 
 