
Manly continued Newcastle’s miserable start to the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> season by inflicting a 26-10 victory at 
Hunter Stadium on Anzac Day. Playing their first game in 11 days, and first in 
Newcastle in four years, the Sea Eagles celebrated the return of halfback Daly 
Cherry-Evans by pocketing two valuable competition points.

Newcastle’s sixth loss of the season, and fifth straight to Manly, was 
compounded by the loss of experienced playmaker Jarrod Mullen to a suspected 
torn hamstring in the 67th minute. It was rough day on the injury front with 
Mullen joined by Peter Mata’utia (knee) for Newcastle while Brett Stewart 
(hamstring) and Tom Trbojevic (ankle) were replaced during the match for Manly.

Panthers lose another thriller as Cronulla win five in a row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/24/nrl-round-eight-sunday-roundup> 
Though not at his best, Queensland and Australian playmaker Cherry-Evans added 
spark to the Sea Eagles attack and created a try for Tom Trbojevic in the 60th 
minute to give Manly a decisive 20-6 lead.

In a bizarre turnaround Newcastle scored from the restart, Tyler Randell 
crashing over to make in 20-10 after Jamie Lyon sloppily batted back a short 
Dane Gagai kick-off. But any slight hopes of a comeback were put to bed when 
lock Jake Trbojevic scored a converted try in the 78th minute.

Manly had taken a 10-6 lead to the break when prop Brenton Lawrence crashed 
over to score in the final seconds of the first half. Replays showed the ball 
rolled loose as Newcastle defenders tried to halt Lawrence’s progress but 
review official Ashley Klein could not find enough evidence to overturn referee 
Gavin Badger’s on-field ruling of a try.

The Knights had no such luck earlier in the half when wingers Nathan Ross and 
Aku Uate were both denied tries by the bunker. Little seemed to go the way of 
the home side with prop Sam Mataora reported in the 65th minute for a possible 
crusher tackle.



 