
Rugby league’s player’s union has hailed the NRL’s reduction in the number of 
five-day turnarounds next season as a win for player welfare that will also 
improve the game as a spectacle.


In announcing the 2017 season draw on Thursday, the NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> made good on its promise to reduce the 
dreaded five-day turnarounds between matches – cutting them from 31 this year 
to 19 next season.


NRL and clubs fail to reach funding deal as chairmen walk out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/nrl-and-clubs-fail-to-reach-funding-deal-as-chairmen-walk-out>
In fact, NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg over-delivered after vowing to cut 
the number by 25 per cent.


Last year, Greenberg earned the wrath of the Rugby League Players Association 
which was angered over lack of consultation on the draw.


The RLPA argued that five-day turnarounds placed an unfair and dangerous 
strain on the players and chairman Clint Newton said the reduction next season 
would not only help players but prove a boon for fans.


He argued there would be a marked improvement in the quality of play because 
players would have more time to recover from their bumps and bruises.


“I certainly think it’s going to help (the quality of the game) and offset 
some of the issues which were around last year,” Newton said.


“By giving players time to prepare and recover, it’s going to add to the 
competition. It’s also going to ensure players play as best they can for as 
long as they can.”


Greenberg said the NRL had been mindful to include the RLPA in putting 
together the draw and hoped to further reduce five-day turnarounds in 2018 when 
the governing body takes full control of scheduling from the TV networks.


“We’ve made a really strong statement today that player welfare is very 
important for us,” Grenberg said.


The season will kick off on Thursday March 2 with premiers Cronulla hosting 
Brisbane at Southern Cross Group Stadium.


The grand final rematch between the Sharks and Melbourne will be played in 
round six at AAMI Park.


The NRL has introduced a new timeslot for Friday night games, with one match 
starting earlier at 6pm and the other at 7.50pm.


Canterbury face Melbourne at Belmore on that first Friday night with South 
Sydney playing Wests Tigers at ANZ Stadium later in a game that will see 
Rabbitohs recruit Robbie Farah face his former side for the first time.


The season also includes the World Club Series, Auckland Nines, All Stars 
clash, the final Country-City match on May 7, the State of Origin series on May 
31 in Brisbane, June 21 in Sydney and then back in Brisbane on July 12.


The year ends with the home rugby league World Cup.
 