
Matt Cecchin has been appointed to referee Sunday’s NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> grand final despite a complaint made by 
Melbourne in the aftermath of their preliminary win over Canberra last week.

Cecchin came under fire from both the Storm and referees boss Tony Archer on 
Monday after Melbourne captain Cameron Smith was made to take a conversion 
attempt from an incorrectly wide position last Saturday.

Kieran Foran's return to NRL to hang on integrity unit investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/kieran-foran-nrl-integrity-unit-investigation>
However Archer still named Cecchin as lead referee, partnering him with the 
experienced Ben Cummins for the Melbourne-Cronulla decider at ANZ Stadium.

Archer said the officials team needed to better look after Cecchin last 
Saturday.

“We’ll put our hands up when we do make a mistake,” Archer told AAP.

“For us, it was a bit of a team letdown. Obviously it was unique 
circumstances. A try was scored, he had to check it and there was also a fracas 
that happened behind him.

“He came out physically to clear it but didn’t go back to the original 
position. we need to look after him better as a team and not allow that to 
happen again.”

Cecchin, who will officiate just his second decider, admitted feeling nervous 
over a possible axing over his embarrassing gaffe, but promised not to make the 
same mistake.

“That’s never happened before, officiating over 400 games,” he said.

“The sequence of events and the way that that try unfolded, no one knew that 
that had happened. But because we learn – and I do learn from my mistakes, 
that’s one thing I can promise you. It won’t happen on the weekend.”

Archer said Cecchin and Cummins, who were the lead referees in both 
preliminary finals last week, were the form officials in the NRL.

“They’ve both been there before, they know what to do. But they’ve performed 
really well in the semi-finals so I’m taking in the two form referees in that 
grand final,” he said.

The Sharks are undefeated in four games refereed by Cecchin this year, while 
the Storm have split their six games under his watch.
 