
Rugby league <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugbyleague> star Semi 
Radradra faces arrest again after he failed to show up to a domestic violence 
hearing at a Sydney court because he was in Fiji. A clearly displeased 
magistrate Greg Grogin revoked the Parramatta player’s bail and said a warrant 
for his arrest would be released on Thursday unless a satisfactory explanation 
was given.

The 24-year-old was supposed to attend a one-day hearing at Parramatta local 
court on Monday but flew to Fiji last Wednesday due to his father’s illness, 
according to lawyer Murugan Thangaraj. Thangaraj provided a letter from a 
doctor in Fiji, which said Radradra’s father suffered from asthma and pulmonary 
tuberculosis and required further medication.

But Grogin was unconvinced, saying the father had clearly been on treatment 
for some time. “There’s nothing in [the letter] to indicate any reasons for 
non-attendance,” he said. “Certainly nothing which could justify sudden 
departures from Australia.”

Semi Radradra taken into custody after domestic violence allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/01/semi-radradra-taken-into-custody-after-domestic-violence-allegations>
Grogin demanded more compelling evidence by Wednesday or Radadra’s arrest 
warrant would be released. “At all times the bail Mr Waqavatu [Radradra’s birth 
name] entered into requires his attendance today,” he said. “He knew how 
serious the matter was,” the magistrate said.

Radradra pleaded not guilty in July to two counts of common assault and one of 
assault causing actual bodily harm, all domestic violence-related charges. The 
charges relate to alleged attacks on his estranged partner, Perina Ting, in 
December 2014 and May 2015.

Prosecutors initially tried to postpone Monday’s hearing because two of their 
witnesses would be at a conference in Victoria. Radradra’s legal team opposed 
that application, and it was refused last Tuesday – the day before the winger 
flew to Fiji.

His bail conditions were eased on 11 October to allow overseas travel for work 
and family commitments, but that freedom expired on Monday, the court heard. 
His hearing was postponed until February, with the case to return to court in 
December.
 