
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> star Robbie 
Farah has asked for a release from the final two years of his contract at the 
joint venture with the Sydney Roosters emerging as a shock contender for his 
services.

The Tigers released a statement on Saturday confirming the request was made by 
Farah’s management. It’s believed the remainder of Farah’s contract is worth 
around $1.9 million and he wants to be paid out completely.

Panthers and Roosters circling Jarryd Hayne in case of NRL return in future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/19/panthers-and-roosters-circling-jarryd-hayne-in-case-of-nrl-return-in-future>
Tigers boss Justin Pascoe said the club would work with Farah’s 
representatives to ensure the terms of the release were agreeable to both 
parties. 

“Any decision taken in regards to this release will consider the club’s 
responsibility and commitment to ensuring this club transfers itself into a 
strong position for a sustainable future,” Pascoe said. “As such, Robbie will 
remain a part of his this club until such an agreement is reached.”

The Tigers media release came a few hours after reports surfaced that Farah’s 
manager Sam Ayoub emailed the club on Friday night asking for the 31-year-old 
hooker to be released.

Tigers’ 238-game stalwart Farah has also been linked to Penrith, Manly, South 
Sydney, St George Illawarra before the Roosters emerged from the pack. 

Fairfax Media said on Saturday Farah was in secret talks about moving to the 
Bondi Junction club who already boast an outstanding hooker in Jake Friend. 
It’s believed Farah is viewed by the Roosters as being a valuable addition to 
the squad and wouldn’t be bumping Friend out of his current role.

Farah had been heavily linked with the Dragons and his former Tigers team-mate 
and now St George Illawarra playmaker Benji Marshall would love to see him in 
the Red V. “Absolutely I would,” said Marshall on Friday. 

“He is a class player. The problem is we have a class hooker in Mitchell Rein. 
So if Mitch is at the club, I think he has a great future, he is a future 
Origin star, and if Robbie joins the ranks that is another extra hooker on the 
books.”

The latest development in the Farah saga comes after Tigers coach Jason Taylor 
said earlier this week he was confident the veteran would stay at the club. 
Farah was given permission by the Tigers to talk with other clubs in August 
after being told he would play reserve grade if he remained at Concord.
 