
Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> on Friday was forced to 
denounce inflammatory remarks made by his pastor, who has railed against the 
United States and accused its leaders of bringing on the September 11 attacks 
by spreading terrorism.

Television networks have aired footage of his pastor's sermons likening the 
Democratic frontrunner to Jesus and declaring: "God damn America." In the 
sermons, Reverend Jeremiah Wright, who presided over Obama's marriage and 
provided the title of his book "Audacity of Hope", condemns what he describes 
as a systemic effort to keep black people in poverty.

"I categorically denounce any statement that disparages our great country or 
serves to divide us from our allies." Obama said on Friday. "I also believe 
that words that degrade individuals have no place in our public dialogue, 
whether it's on the campaign stump or in the pulpit. In sum, I reject outright 
the statements by Reverend Wright that are at issue."

The strong language and the accusations of racism have proved embarrassing to 
Obama, who has based his candidacy on a message of unity. In his sermons Wright 
reportedly refers to America as being under the influence of the Ku Klux Klan 
and describes black Republicans as sell-outs.

"The government gives them the drugs, builds bigger prisons, passes a 
three-strike law and then wants us to sing 'God Bless America'. No, no, no, God 
damn America, that's in the Bible for killing innocent people," he said in a 
2003 sermon which was reviewed by ABC television.

"God damn America for treating our citizens as less than human. God damn 
America for as long as she acts like she is God and she is supreme."

Obama has been a member of the congregation of Wright's Trinity United Church 
of Christ in south side of Chicago for nearly 20 years, and he drew the title 
of his book from one of his pastor's sermons.

The pastor's sermons are available for sale at the church and both ABC and Fox 
News reviewed the addresses.

Obama wrote on the Huffington Post that he never heard Wright say any of the 
statements that are "so contrary to my own life and beliefs", but they have 
raised legitimate questions about the nature of his relationship with the 
pastor and the church.

He explained that he joined Wright's church, Trinity United Church of Christ 
in Chicago, nearly 20 years ago. He said he knew Wright as a former Marine and 
respected biblical scholar who lectured at seminaries across the country.

"Reverend Wright preached the gospel of Jesus, a gospel on which I base my 
life," he wrote. "... And the sermons I heard him preach always related to our 
obligation to love God and one another, to work on behalf of the poor and to 
seek justice at every turn."

He said Wright's controversial statements first came to his attention at the 
beginning of his presidential campaign last year, and he condemned them. 
Because of his ties to the 6,000-member congregation church - he and his wife 
were married there and their daughters baptised - Obama decided not to leave 
the church.

"With Reverend Wright's retirement and the ascension of my new pastor, 
Reverend Otis Moss, III, Michelle and I look forward to continuing a 
relationship with a church that has done so much good," Obama wrote.

In January, Wright spoke from the pulpit in praise of Obama's leadership and 
comparing him to Jesus's struggles under the Romans, according to Fox 
television. "Barack knows what it means living in a country and a culture that 
is controlled by rich white people," Wright said. "Hillary would never know 
that."

He went on: "Hillary ain't never been called a nigger. Hillary has never had a 
people defined as a non-person."

Wright also took issue with the idea that Bill Clinton had been a friend to 
African Americans. "Hillary is married to Bill, and Bill has been good to us. 
No he ain't! Bill did us, just like he did Monica Lewinsky. He was riding 
dirty."

On the Sunday immediately following 9/11, Wright described the attacks as 
retribution for the bombing of Hiroshima, America's policy in the Middle East 
and apartheid era South Africa. Obama has told reporters he was not in church 
on that Sunday.

However, it is the inversion of the line "God Bless America" that may expose 
Obama to the greatest criticism. Last month, his wife, Michelle, was criticised 
by rightwing blogs and indirectly by the Republican nominee, John McCain, for 
saying she had not been proud of being an American for most of her adult life.

In a meeting with Jewish leaders in Cleveland earlier this month, Obama 
compared Wright to an "old uncle" who said disagreeable things. He went on to 
add: "I suspect there are some of the people in this room who have heard 
relatives say some things that they don't agree with, including, on occasion, 
directed at African Americans."

The latest focus on Wright comes at a potentially volatile stage of the 
campaign with a hiatus of several weeks before the next primary in Pennsylvania 
on April 22.

The lull between major contests has led to a series of rows between the 
Clinton and Obama campaigns over race and gender. Last week, Samantha Power, a 
foreign policy adviser to Obama, was forced to resign after calling Clinton a 
"monster". This week, Geraldine Ferraro, who was the Democrats' 
vice-presidential candidate in 1984, was forced to stand down after claiming 
Obama would not be leading the race if he weren't black.

Nor are such culture wars exclusive to the Democratic race. McCain has come 
under pressure to repudiate a televangelist supporter, the Reverend Rod 
Parsley. Parsley, who is from Ohio, has spoken of a clash of civilisations 
between Islam and Christianity.
 