
For some reason, at the beginning of every working year, instead of deciding 
to make life a little bit easier, we start making all sorts of impossible 
resolutions. If you want to keep resolutions, it's really best not to make them 
on January 1. Psychologically, that is when you are at your lowest ebb, when 
you've eaten, read or broken all your Christmas presents, fallen out with your 
family, and all the work that you left in the office on Christmas Eve is 
beginning to appear in your dreams. Far better to make your resolution in 
spring, when your sap is rising and you're more optimistic about everything. 
Plus, there's the fact that you only have two thirds of the year left to keep 
them.

 Resolutions are normally made in January because people want to put Christmas 
behind them. Subconsciously, everyone resolves not to eat turkey or see their 
family again for a year, and no one has any trouble keeping to those. For some 
reason, people always make negative resolutions - such as giving up cigarettes, 
alcohol, shoe shopping or chocolate. Instead, you should focus on positive 
resolutions, like being able to breathe, have a clear head in the morning, walk 
normally and keep all your teeth. That way, you won't feel you're losing 
something; rather, you'll feel you're gaining something - though, let's face 
it, if you're the sort of person who can pull off that sort of mental 
gymnastics, you're not going to be the sort of normal, weak-minded person who 
smokes, drinks, and guzzles boxes of chocolate in the first place.

 People tend to be over-ambitious with resolutions, like learning a new 
language, doubling your salary, running a marathon, fostering six problem 
children and giving up smoking. There's no point in being unreasonable. Get rid 
of the smoking one and think about the others while you have a good long drag. 
Naturally, the best resolutions are the ones you don't tell people. They're the 
ones that work, especially if they involve plans to get married, set up your 
own company or pack it all in and become a druid. If they don't work, no one 
will know any different.

 If you know you have the resolve of a bin of slime, but still like the idea 
of making a New Year's resolution, try resolving to do something you've already 
done - like getting your weight down to 12 stone when you're already 11 stone, 
or giving up cigarettes when you don't smoke. You're bound to achieve it, and 
this will make you feel better all year. On the other hand, if you suddenly 
balloon in weight and find yourself smoking 20 a day, you'll feel twice as bad 
as you would anyway.
 