
The Oldham Athletic owner, Simon Corney, is prepared to sell the club just 
days after deciding against signingChed Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans>, saying “enough is enough” 
after 12 years in charge of the League One side.

Speaking to the Oldham Evening Chronicle 
<http://www.oldham-chronicle.co.uk/news-features/8/news-headlines/89814/latics-owner-ive-had-enough>
, Corney said he does not “have the same interest any more” and would be 
interested in selling to the right person.

He added that he was “completely over” the Evans saga, which led to the club 
doing a U-turn when it came to offering the convicted rapist a contract 
following sustained pressure from sponsors and a petition, signed by over 
60,000. Corney maintains that signing Evans would have been the right thing to 
do.

Corney clarified his comments on the club’s official website 
<http://www.oldhamathletic.co.uk/news/article/personal-message-from-simon-2200815.aspx>
 following the Chronicle interview, saying: “We have come through an 
extraordinary period in our club’s history. There is no doubt that people’s 
relationships with the club have been affected and a level of trust lost. For 
this, as chairman, I take responsibility.

“My commitment to the club, its fans, staff and sponsors is total and my 
desire to ensure that the new North Stand development is completed remains as 
strong as ever.

“We continue to face significant challenges but I am genuinely excited about 
the future prospects for our club and the plans we have put in place to ensure 
its long-term future without the need for further investment.”

Despite that, he reiterated that if an approach was made by a potential buyer, 
he would consider selling as long as the new owner had the club’s best 
interests at heart. He added: “Of course, as I have always said, if a buyer for 
the club comes forward who is able to take things on to another level then I 
will consider selling. That buyer has to be the right person and have the best 
interests of the club at heart.

“It is now time to draw a line under the events of recent weeks and move on. 
We have a club to run and goals to achieve and the board, staff and I are 
determined to see this great club prosper.”

He had told the Evening Chronicle:  
<http://www.oldham-chronicle.co.uk/news-features/8/news-headlines/89814/latics-owner-ive-had-enough>
“I’ve had enough and it’s no secret. Where does it all end, in 15 or 20 years’ 
time? I’ve been here for 12 years and I just don’t have the same interest any 
more. I love the club and love the game but enough is enough.

“I would like to find a buyer. Hopefully it will be a lot more sellable with a 
new stand there. And I would want it to go to the right person.”

Corney, who is based in the US but will be at Oldham’s games against Fleetwood 
and Rochdale on Saturday and next Tuesday, said that as far as he is concerned 
the Evans issue has drawn to a close but admitted the club underestimated the 
anger provoked by the potential signing of the 26-year-old.

“I’m completely over it,” he added. “It came and it went, that was it. I was 
over here [in the US] when it was all going on and it grew to be a lot bigger 
than I thought.

“But once the answer became a no, that was that. I still think the right thing 
would have been to take him, I really do. But in the end it wasn’t to be. We 
underestimated the attention and fury.”
 