
On Thursday afternoon I was at work when I received a phone call from my 
13-year-old son: “Great news, Oldham aren’t signingChed Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans>.” He sounded delighted. Was I?

I have supported Oldham Athletic for 32 years and during this time I have had 
some amazing experiences and some less so. I have travelled the country 
following the team, first as a child with my dad and then as a parent with my 
three sons. I now live in the south of England but still go to matches when 
possible. Oldham can be a difficult place to say you come from as it doesn’t 
always have the best media coverage but I have always felt proud when telling 
people I supportOldham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> Athletic. 
It is known as a friendly, family club that is at the heart of its community.

This is why I could not accept the signing of Ched Evans. He hasn’t served his 
full sentence and doesn’t believe he did anything wrong.He’s shown little 
remorse or contrition for his actions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/08/ched-evans-apologises-rape-victim-oldham>
. It makes a mockery of everything I thought the club stood for.

I have three sons and, despite having grown up in the south of England, they 
support Oldham Athletic. They wear their Oldham shirts to football training, 
where they stand out among the sea of Premier League kits. My sons are proud 
they have been to watch actual football matches live; most of their friends 
cannot afford or even get access to tickets to Premier League grounds. My 
favourite photo was taken before the four of us set off to watch Latics knock 
Nottingham Forest out of the FA Cup two years ago, all of us in Oldham shirts. 
How could we have worn those shirts if the Evans deal had gone through? My 
family don’t want to be associated with a rapist.
 Becky Kerfoot and her family of Oldham fans. Photograph: Becky Kerfoot 
This is what I don’t think the Oldham board understands. Being a football 
supporter defines you, it tells people about who you are. I don’t wish to be 
associated with a club that could even consider employing someone such as 
Evans. I can’t imagine my sons want to run the gauntlet and risk the possible 
name-calling that would go along with this.

I know this doesn’t matter to the club though. Its decisions have not been 
about what the fans think or how the club is seen in the wider community. 
Sadly, it is driven by money. During a recent conversation with my 13-year-old 
he said: “They’re taking advantage. They’re trying to get a good footballer 
cheap but he raped someone, he shouldn’t be allowed.”


I thought about this and we talked about what had happened with Evans. I 
wanted my son to know the truth of the case so we looked it up. He was 
horrified: “How could he do that? How could anyone do that to someone who was 
so drunk they couldn’t stand up? How could he think she could agree if she was 
that drunk? He doesn’t deserve to be a footballer, he’s not even sorry.” He 
went on to tell me how he admired other footballers and how he could never look 
up to Evans but some would.

It would have been a short-term gain for Oldham. Yes, they might have done 
quite well with a good striker but they would have lost my boys. My sons would 
not be buying shirts that would associate them with a rapist and they wouldn’t 
want to go and watch him play. This is not a huge financial loss, for now, but 
my boys are the future of a club like Latics. The club would be losing its 
children and its children’s children. The long-term future of the club was put 
at risk. Young fans would have been lost to the lure of Premier League clubs.

I felt heartbroken that Oldham were about to sign Evans and that a club I had 
spent most of my life following was making it impossible for me to continue 
that relationship. The only thing that was shining out from this sorry 
situation was the discovery that my boys – although less than hygienic, messy 
and constantly arguing – are good people. They know right from wrong; they will 
grow up to respect women; they will be good people; and, above all, if they 
ever become the chairmen of football clubs, they will never sign the likes of 
Evans. They will choose to do the right thing, because doing the right thing is 
a choice.

It seems that Oldham Athletic have finally made the right choice but not 
because they listened to their fans or thought about the impact this move would 
have had on the wider community. They made a decision based on money and the 
pressure put on the club from the outside. It should never have come to that.

So, am I delighted like my 13-year-old son? I’m relieved and sad. Sad that I 
thought my club was better than this. Sad because I fear that the name Oldham 
Athletic has been tarnished. Some of the damage that has been done by this 
whole circus may be irreparable. I hope the club and board will now work hard 
to undo some of the damage that has been done to its fans and the wider local 
community.

I’ll be whispering my allegiance to Oldham Athletic for a while yet but I hope 
one day I’ll feel proud to associate myself with them again. My boys will keep 
wearing their shirts to training and coming to matches with me. For they are 
the future of our club.
 