
Darren Kelly has been sacked by Oldham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> following their 5-1 home loss to 
Peterborough on Saturday.

The 36-year-old Northern Irishman was hired to his first senior managerial 
post just 131 days ago as the Latics sprung a surprise with a left-field 
appointment. Kelly admitted he would have to prove himself to supporters on 
taking up the position and, after one win in nine games, he had done little to 
win them over.

The home thrashing at the hands of Posh, who are managerless themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/06/peterborough-united-sack-manager-dave-robertson>
, proved to be the final straw and Oldham issued a statement after the game 
confirming they were moving on from Kelly, who leaves them 19th in the League 
One table with seven points from as many games.

A statement on their official website read: “Oldham Athletic (2004) AFC 
Limited can confirm that first-team manager, Darren Kelly, is no longer in 
charge of first-team affairs at the club. The board of directors would like to 
place on record their thanks to Darren for his contribution to the development 
of the club during his tenure and wish him well for the future. The club will 
not be seeking any applications for the role of first-team manager at this time 
and can also confirm that all the current coaching staff will remain in their 
respective roles.”

The assistant manager Dean Holden, who had been in charge at the back end of 
last season when Lee Johnson left for Barnsley, conducted post-match press 
duties following the Peterborough loss. “What the board decide is up to them, 
but all the staff will keep giving everything and I don’t think our commitment 
can be questioned,” he said. “We’ve spoken to the players in no uncertain terms 
because that game was a good thrashing, there’s no getting away from it.

“This isn’t a time for finger-pointing, it’s a time for everyone to look 
themselves in the mirror and ask whether they are doing enough.”
 