
The Oldham chairman, Simon Corney, believes Paul Scholes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-scholes> will manage the club one 
day but admits it will be difficult to tempt him to take the vacancy at the 
moment.

The former England and Manchester United midfielder, 40, was linked with his 
boyhood club when the Football League’s third youngest manager, Lee Johnson, 
left last week to join League One rivals Barnsley.

The romantic notion that Scholes would take his first managerial position with 
Oldham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oldham> appears fanciful but 
Corney does think he could take over one day.

Speaking on a BBC Radio Manchester phone-in alongside the director Anthony 
Gee, who suggested that the Oldham job may interest Scholes at some point, 
Corney said: “We speak on a regular basis and Paul occasionally comes down and 
does training sessions. He’s a friend of the club. We know what Paul’s all 
about, he’s very low-key, he doesn’t make a big deal about things. He turns up 
at the games – never turns up at the directors’ box – he turns up with his two 
lads, flat cap down and you wouldn’t even know he was there.

“I’d love to have him on board but it’s difficult. Again, you have to ask 
would Oldham be the right club for somebody like Paul? It’s not just about us 
wanting Paul, it’s also would it be the right thing for him? I think Anthony’s 
right that one day he will come and manage the club but it’s all about timing 
with him.”

Gee also confirmed Scholes, who has media commitments with BT Sport, had not 
applied for the position but that they did intend to hold talks with him in the 
near future.

The two Oldham board members also touched on the club’s controversial move to 
attempt to sign the convicted rapistChed Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans> in January, a signing they 
pulled out of in the face of overwhelming pressure from sponsors promising to 
withdraw their support, while staff members were also subjected to abusive 
threats.

The club had originally indicated they had no desire to acquire Evans back in 
December, but Gee revealed they returned to the possibility in the new year 
when Johnson told the board of directors he had changed his mind.

“We did a hell of a lot of due diligence,” added Gee. “We met with the player 
on two or three occasions and if you remember when we were first linked with 
him, the manager actually said to us that he’d rather pass. We pulled our 
interest immediately.

“It was when the manager came to us the second time and said: ‘Actually, maybe 
I’ll go and have a chat with him’, that we rekindled our interest which led to 
all the scenes that you remember in January.

“If I was put on the spot and asked would I do the same thing again? I think 
the truth of the matter is I probably would. I’m also a firm believer in the 
rule of law. If we don’t have the rule of law and we don’t have rehabilitation 
in society then I don’t know what sort of society we have.

“Whilst his crime was very serious there are other people out there playing 
football who have killed people. We’ve had a similar case at Oldham with Lee 
Hughes. If I’m asked whether I regret it? No. Do I understand how difficult it 
was for the fans and the community? Yes. It was hard for us as directors as 
well. We always had the best interests of the club at heart, even if it’s hard 
to believe.”
 