
Australia’s women beat New Zealand in the inaugural final of the rugby sevens 
tournament to add the Olympic title to their burgeoning palmarès.

Having secured the world series crown as part of their preparations for Rio, 
Tim Walsh’s side confirmed their status as the best team on the planet with a 
24-17 win over their trans-Tasman rivals in the gold medal match at the Deodoro 
Stadium.

Australia in good shape to land more gold on day three of Rio Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/australia-in-good-shape-to-land-more-gold-on-day-three-of-rio-games>
“It was really well deserved and I’m so happy for the girls,” Walsh said. “We 
knew that if we performed we were going to win and they performed.”

Australia had to come from behind after a strong opening from the Kiwis, 
responding well and going on to score four unanswered tries to give them what 
proved to be an unassailable lead.

Charlotte Caslick stood out for the Australians in the four-tries-to-three 
victory, scoring one and having a hand in Ellia Green’s second-half try. Emma 
Tonegato and Evania Pelite were also on the scoresheet.

The turning point came when New Zealand’s Portia Woodman, the top try scorer 
in the tournament with 10, was sent to the sin-bin for a deliberate knock down 
with her side ahead through Kayla McAlister’s opening try.

Down a player, New Zealand conceded just before half-time when Tonegato scored 
her seventh try of the tournament.

Australia had started to find holes in the New Zealand defence and Pelite and 
then speedster Green benefited from the extra space to give the women in green 
and gold a 17-5 lead just after the break.


Caslick then nipped over for another converted try to further extend 
Australia’s lead and although McAlister grabbed her second try, two converted 
scores for New Zealand in little more than a minute was always going to be a 
big ask.

Woodman did finally weave her way over to score under the posts but the hooter 
had sounded and Australia were already well into their celebrations when Tyla 
Nathan-Wong took the conversion.

Earlier, Canada claimed the bronze medal with a comprehensive 33-10 win over 
Great Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/australia-rugby-sevens-olympic-gold-great-britain-bronze>
.

Rugby was last included at the Olympics in Paris in 1924 when the United 
States beat hosts France in the final of a men’s 15-aside tournament.

 * Reuters contributed to this report  