
James 'Chunky' DeGale had no sooner won Olympic gold - against a Cuban, no 
less - and 'put myself in the history books', as he shouted into the Beijing 
night, than he started dreaming. Dreaming of doing it all over again in London 
in 2012. Dreaming of a knighthood. And how they would like that back in 
Harlesden.

But why not? Because the fast-talking, fast-moving southpaw from north-west 
London did more than take the biggest prize in his sport in the Workers 
Gymasium here last night. By holding off the awkward, desperate Emilio Correa 
Bayeaux in the final round to win 16-14, DeGale has, in all probability, saved 
British amateur boxing from being thrown into chaos.

He might also have saved the job of the head coach, Terry Edwards, who has had 
to endure a clumsy, hurtful whispering campaign by critics back in the UK, 
rivals who resent his methods, philosophy and success to the point of briefing 
against him and the team in their finest hour.

There will be an inquest into the civil war when they get home. For now, the 
22-year-old winner and the 65-year-old trainer he calls Dad wanted to savour 
the moment.

DeGale won ugly. As ugly as he can ever have done in a boxing ring. But he 
could not care less. Correa was docked two points in the first round for biting 
DeGale on the chest, although the Cuban dismissed the penalty lamely, saying he 
merely had his mouth open when it came into contact with the Briton.

DeGale boxed beautifully to win the first round 6-1, but thereafter it was a 
dogfight of the first order. Both boxers lost their rhythm completely, falling 
to the floor several times. The second round went DeGale's way and he led 10-4. 
He was docked two points in the third and then the contest descended even 
further into mayhem. Correa edged the round 6-2, but looked spent.

The fourth was such a mess, it could have gone either way. The score remained 
agonisingly close in DeGale's favour: 12-10, 12-11, 13-11, 14-11, 14-12 (with a 
minute to go), 15-12, 15-13 (30 seconds), 16-13 and, at the last gasp, at the 
very end of everyone's nerves, 16-14.

'I'm gold medallist - still can't believe it,' DeGale said. 'But I'm not going 
to stay around for 2012 and after two years they come to me and say, no, 
there's someone else new. There will never be, next four years, nobody as good 
as me, trust me. They should never try to do that to me, otherwise I'll go pro 
and get £1m. But deep in my heart, 2012, that's me. Terry stays, everything's 
nice, everything's cushty, Commonwealth Games, 2010, everything should work out 
nice. I've thought about this already. Everything's nice, I'd be knighted, 
that's me. We'll have to see.'

There will be big offers on the table for him from the professionals. It would 
be very sad, though, if amateur boxing lost another star when the sport is on 
such a high. 'I'm going to go home, speak to my family. Sometimes it's hard to 
say to no to £1m. But if they come back with something sensible that I could 
sign for four years, I could be a little superstar in amateur boxing and earn 
some decent dough. If I won another gold medal in 2012, in my home city, 
imagine that. To be the face of 2012, that'd be unbelievable.

'Haven't seen my mum for ages - she's my life, she's my world. I'm going to 
Cyprus for five days, soon as I get back. She's out there now. Just enjoy my 
gold medal, the time off, whatever - six, seven weeks. Then I want to get back 
in the ring. That's me, that's my life, that's what I do.'

And his father, who likes a bet, will be glad he knew what he was doing in 
that frantic final round. 'That won my dad £11,000,' DeGale revealed. 'At 80-1 
[before the tournament].'

Now DeGale wants the nation to believe in him too. If the Amateur Boxing 
Association come up 'with some sensible cheddar', by which he means a four-year 
contract and more than the current £1,500 a month he gets, the attraction of 
defending the gold in his home town should be enough to persuade him to stay in 
the crazy world of amateur boxing.

Edwards, meanwhile, has the small issue of a minor insurrection to deal with. 
Despite bringing home a gold and two bronze medals for Great Britain, with a 
centrally funded programme that has revolutionised the sport, he has had to 
endure without much retaliation comments in the papers in the past week that 
suggest he cannot control his lively young squad of scallywags.

Edwards said: 'I'm a very simplistic person anyway, but I really don't 
understand it. What more do they want? That now, hopefully, secures funding 
going forward to 2012 and maybe involves the programme. People all around 
Britain will have been watching that and hopefully now the profile of amateur 
boxing within Great Britain is going to be raised.

'I shall face the music when I go back and answer all the allegations, but one 
thing's for certain: if I were to go forward for the next four years, I 
wouldn't put up with the crap that I've suffered in the last four years, that's 
for sure.

'I've been passionate about it. I've believed that with the UK Sport money and 
the structure that I've put in place we could actually achieve this at the
Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. If we can keep 
that funding in place and actually secure a little bit more sponsorship to 
retain some of these boxers - what James is talking about - I really believe 
that in 2012 we can be the new Cuba. I don't know what more they want of me.'

Perhaps the most straightforward observation on the whole fiasco came in the 
uncomplicated argot of a bright-eyed jack-the-lad from north-west London, still 
clinging to his gold medal: 'All the stuff he's been getting at home, all the 
bullshit, it's not nice, man. He don't need this shit in his life. Look what 
he's produced, three medals. He must be doing something right. We've all got 
respect for him. If they had brought anyone else, we'd probably have taken the 
piss out of him or whatever. We've got respect from him, trust me.'
 