
Olympic javelin athlete Kim Mickle has signed with AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> club Fremantle for the national women’s 
league and is expected to be ready for pre-season training despite her post-Rio 
Games shoulder reconstruction.

The 31-year-old Commonwealth Games gold medallist joins priority picks Ebony 
Antonio and Kirby Bentley and fellow rookie Gabby O’Sullivan in signing onto 
Fremantle’s squad for the league’s inaugural season in 2017 in February to 
March.

Impressive viewing figures for exhibition match at odds to paltry women's AFL 
pay | Craig Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/impressive-viewing-figures-for-exhibition-match-at-odds-to-paltry-womens-afl-pay>
Mickle dislocated her already-repaired throwing shoulder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/kim-mickle-has-no-olympics-regrets-despite-dislocating-shoulder-again>
 while competing in the qualifying round at the Rio Olympics last month. She 
played mixed football as a junior but pursued athletics after her mother became 
worried she would get injured playing against boys.

“I’ve always wanted to play football but it wasn’t available back then...it’s 
cool that it has sprung up and become an elite sport,” Mickle said. “I can’t 
wait to give it a go.”

Fremantle’s national women’s league, academies and community manager Wade 
Spilcker believed Mickle’s experience in elite level competition would have her 
well placed to meet the demands of an AFL player.

“Kim not only brings existing football skills with her but the desire and 
competitiveness of a professional athlete that will be of great benefit to the 
entire team,” Spilcker said.

Fremantle’s two priority picks come from strong football backgrounds, with 
both Antonio and Bentley playing under Fremantle coach Michelle Cowan in the 
women’s exhibition series.

Two-time WAWFL premiership player Antonio only returned to football in 2015 
after winning a Women’s National Basketball League title with the Bendigo 
Spirit in 2013.

Bentley also has a diverse sporting background as an AIS netball scholarship 
holder as well as having the Kirby Bentley Cup, which provides young Aboriginal 
girls with an opportunity to display their football skills, named after her.

The utility, who is returning from an ACL injury, represented Melbourne for 
three seasons.

O’Sullivan, 22, returned to Perth in June after graduating with a bachelor of 
science from the College of Coastal Georgia in the United States, where she had 
a basketball scholarship.
 