
Double Olympic decathlon champion Ashton Eaton has announced his retirement 
from top-level athletics – and his wife Brianne Theisen-Eaton, a two-time 
heptathlon world silver medallist, has decided to quit too.

Rio 2016: amid the politics Olympics were a kaleidoscopic fortnight of sport | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/27/rio-2016-amid-politics-olympics-kaleidoscope-fortnight-of-sport>
The husband-and-wife team confirmed on Wednesday that they were retiring from 
athletics with immediate effect. Theisen-Eaton said her passion for track and 
field had waned, and admitted: “I can’t advance any further in the sport.”

Eaton, who won gold in London 2012 and retained his title in Rio last year, 
said he had given everything he could to decathlon. The 28-year-old became only 
the third decathlete ever, and the first since Daley Thompson in 1984, to 
repeat as champion in the Olympics’ most demanding physical test.

On Twitter, Eaton wrote: “I gave everything to the decathlon. I did all I 
could. Thank you for making it the best time of my life. I’m retiring.”

On the personal website he shares with his wife, Eaton wrote: “Frankly, there 
isn’t much more I want to do in sport. I gave the most physically robust years 
of my life to the discovery and pursuit of my limits in this domain. Did I 
reach them? Truthfully, I’m not sure anyone really does. It seems like we tend 
to run out of time or will before we run out of potential.”

Theisen-Eaton, also 28, reached the medals podium in Rio, taking bronze in the 
heptathlon. The Canadian was also twice a silver medalist at the world 
championships, finishing runner-up at the 2013 worlds in Moscow and again two 
years later in Beijing.

At the world indoors last year in Eaton’s hometown of Portland, Oregon, the 
pair claimed a golden double, each topping the podium in their event.

The couple, who married in 2013, had hoped to repeat the feat at the Rio 
Olympics, but Theisen-Eaton was forced to settle for bronze behind Belgium’s 
Nafissatou Thiam and Britain’s Jessica Ennis-Hill. Theisen-Eaton won gold at 
the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow.

Theisen-Eaton said on her website: “I gave the last four years everything I 
could. I put my life on hold. Track and field was the priority before 
everything else.

“But I’ve done it. I no longer have the passion for track and field or the 
heptathlon that I used to because I know I can’t advance any further in the 
sport; I’ve given it all I can, and I refuse to come back and half-ass it 
because I love and respect this event and sport too much.

“With that, I’ve decided to retire.”
 