
Cast against a lengthening Eddie Hayson-sized shadow, rugby league delivered 
two semi-finals of welcome purity this weekend.

Sold-out crowds greeted the contenders, each of whom can reflect on displays 
underpinned by raw aggression and desperation. One match will be remembered as 
an epic; the other a possible glimpse into rugby league’s next evolution: a 
refocusing on attack underlined by ball-movement, limited ‘block-plays’, and 
intelligent, if sometimes improvised, football.

Wherever you sit on rugby league’s cynic-to-kool-aid spectrum, it’s fair to 
say these contests were memorable for the right reasons. They were won, rather 
than lost; they threw up more protagonists than antagonists; and in a cool 
change to last week’s heat, we do not have to talk about referees.

Raiders book NRL grand final qualifier against the Storm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/nrl-semi-final-canberra-penrith-match-report>
And so we now enter that time of year when garish scarves, flags and newspaper 
lift-outs adorn shopfronts and housefronts alike. They’ll be most prominent in 
Townsville and Canberra, whose teams delivered a display of such ferocious 
ball-running that it’s hard to recall back-to-back club fixtures with such 
wince-inducing collisions.

But wild barbarity this wasn’t. In Jason Taumololo and Junior Paulo, viewers 
witnessed the personification of a controlled, ballistic missile. When players 
wreak this kind of destruction at this time of year, we’re led to believe that 
their next opponents, whose ‘feet are up’ at home, watch with glee as both 
teams obliterate each other.

An alternative read, and probably more accurate, is that both players are in 
enormously good form, and should be rightly feared by their opponents this 
weekend.

Where one JT destroyed, another delivered. For rational minds, the concept of 
a ‘match-winner’ is troubling: technically every play contributes to the end 
result, not just the last one. But you know it when you see it, and Johnathan 
Thurston won that match for North Queensland on Friday night.

Most have accepted his belonging in conversations about ‘the game’s greats’, 
but is that enough? What if he wins another premiership with this team? His 
legend is not already defined – it is still being chiselled. Many are saying 
they’ve run out of superlatives to describe him.

In a match that almost felt like a showcase of everything Queensland rugby 
league stands for, here’s another: is he the greatest player Queensland has 
ever produced?

Whereas Thurston is a confirmed champion, Canberra, on the other hand, still 
has the whiff of a contender. For long periods in their match, the eerie rhythm 
of the Viking clap failed to elicit the sort of rhythm Canberra can 
occasionally produce.

They brutalised Penrith in the game’s early exchanges for disproportionate 
reward, and many would have been forgiven for sensing similarities with last 
week’s performance against Cronulla. But while Cronulla capitalised on 
Canberra’s profligacy, Penrith squandered their chances.

Thurston's Cowboys beat Broncos in thrilling extra time NRL finals win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/thurstons-cowboys-beat-broncos-in-thrilling-extra-time-nrl-finals-win>
In many ways the spectacle was richer for it. Conventional rugby league 
thinking dictates that when the stakes are high, caution rules. But Penrith, 
18-0 down, were prepared to chance their arm, and in doing so produced the 
passage of the match – a Matt Moylan cut-out pass skipping six players before 
landing on the chest of Tyrone Peachey who duly finished in the corner.

Earlier, Joseph Leilua produced another piece of magic, further confirming his 
emergence as one of the competition’s elite weapons.Rugby league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugbyleague> players tend to be big, fast or 
skilful – but it’s rare to be all three. In setting up Jordan Rapana, Leilua 
shrugged off the first defender, sped past the second, and combined imagination 
with dexterity to manufacture a perfectly-weighted grubber with the outside of 
his boot to increase the Raiders’ lead. In Hollywood terms, he’s a 
triple-threat. The Storm’s left edge will have their hands full next week.

The implications are different for both vanquished sides. Whereas Penrith’s 
premiership prospects appear bright, Brisbane’s is a little less certain. The 
Broncos were typically resilient, but for the second time in as many years were 
rendered second by a superior playmaker. After the dynasties of Lewis, Langer 
and Lockyer, it feels strange that they don’t have a talisman conductor for 
these situations. Their nominal leader, backrower Corey Parker, now departs the 
arena. Brisbane will probably be fine.

In a week where the code contemplated issues of integrity off the field, it 
found no shortage of salvation on it. Rugby league headquarters must dream of 
an uninterrupted week of pure anticipation, fuelled by storylines of tactical 
battles, departing warhorses, legends defining their legacy and the unfulfilled 
dreams of certain regions of the Shire.

We are increasingly conditioned to understand the game as a TV product, but 
the weekend showed just how redeeming the live experience is. Two grounds with 
supposedly modest capacities (approximately 25k each), completely full and 
emitting a feverish intensity. They looked like the sorts of events where you’d 
prefer to be there than watching it on the box, and not just because the TV 
advertisements repeatedly insist that you want to drink, punt, and have more 
hair. You want to be there because the stakes felt high, and that so much 
collective desire in the air usually leads to something special.
 