
The number of millionaires in the UK has shot up by 41% over the past five 
years, with one in 65 adults now classed as having a seven-figure fortune 
thanks to booming house prices and stock market gains.


There are now 715,000 millionaires living in Britain compared with 508,000 in 
2010, with London having the highest concentration of wealthy individuals.

The capital has 191,000 millionaires, followed by the south-east with 157,000, 
according to data from the wealth management arm of Barclays bank 
<https://wealth.barclays.com/en_gb/home/research/research-centre/uk-wealth-prosperity-map.html>
. Wales had the fewest, with 12,000.

But wealth does not correlate with kindness. The region of the UK with the 
lowest average annual pay – Northern Ireland – is by far the country’s most 
charitable, with 45% of households giving to charity, Barclays found. The 
figure for London was just 28%.

Reading is named as the most prosperous town or city outside the capital, 
followed by Cambridge and then Birmingham.

The figures are likely to reignite concerns about the north/south divide and 
income inequality in Britain. Median household incomes havegone up just 2% 
since 2011 <http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7616>, according to the 
Institute of Fiscal Studies, yet the number of millionaires continues to surge.

It was revealed this week that more than £42bn was paid out in bonuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/26/bonuses-return-close-to-pre-recession-peak-on-back-of-uk-economic-recovery>
 in the last tax year, much of it to bankers in the City, where payouts have 
returned to within a whisker of their 2007-08 peak.


Rampant house price inflation in the capital is behind much of the surge in 
London millionaire numbers. One in 45 London residents are millionaires, 
compared with one in 255 in Wales.


Property website Zoopla currently lists about 9,400 homes for sale in London 
for more than £1m, compared with 52 in the whole of Scotland. Aterraced home 
for sale in Leyton 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-51587759.html>, a 
relatively down-at-heel part of east London, is on the market for £1.1m, or 
more than twice the current asking price for a40-bedroom Victorian mansion 
<http://search.struttandparker.com/residential/rosemarkie-fortrose-ross-shire-iv10/49654>
 leading to a beach in Ross-shire, Scotland.

But Barclays ranked towns and cities not just on wealth but also other 
indicators such as business startups, school exam grades and unemployment to 
create a “prosperity map” of Britain.

.The research showed that every UK region is now more affluent than it was 
five years ago, with north-east England enjoying the biggest improvement.

Akshaya Bhargava, chief executive of Barclays wealth and investment 
Management, said: “Although the north-east currently registers low on the 
prosperity index, the region has grown faster than the national average in the 
past five years. The 50% rise in the number of millionaires living in the 
north-east is the joint-largest increase of any region in the UK along with 
Wales. The north-east also has a thriving entrepreneurial scene, second only to 
London.”


Reading is listed second for prosperity in the UK, according to the index, 
with average earnings of £30,562.

The Berkshire town’s fortunes have improved dramatically over the years. It is 
now home to the largest concentration of information and communications 
technology companies in the UK, with Microsoft and Oracle among the larger tech 
firms that have their UK headquarters there.

But not everyone has benefited from Reading’s economic success. It has 
“extremes of both wealth and poverty in very small areas”, and has “some of the 
most affluent and the most deprived neighbourhoods in the whole of the Thames 
valley”, according to a 2014 report into poverty levels 
<http://beta.reading.gov.uk/media/2295/Tackling-Poverty-Needs-Analysis/pdf/Tackling_Poverty_Needs_Analysis.pdf>
 published by its council.


One surprise from the research is that Londoners are far from having the 
highest median wealth levels, highlighting the growing gulf between a 
property-rich minority and growing numbers of residents struggling with high 
rents.


Median household wealth in the capital is £213,000, significantly lower than 
the £309,700 in the south-east and £259,900 in the east of England, and only 
just ahead of the figure for Wales.

But other research suggests the Barclays report may be underplaying the number 
of millionaires in London. WealthInsight, a wealth consultancy, this week 
claimed 
<http://www.wealthinsight.com/pressrelease/london-is-the-most-popular-city-for-millionaire-second-homes-4655046>
the capital was home to 289,500 millionaires – equal to one in every 28 people 
on its streets. It added the figure was even higher if one included those 
wealthy families from other countries who owned second homes in the city.


During July and August, many rich Middle Eastern and African families 
temporarily relocate to the UK capital “to escape the heat in their home 
countries”, said WealthInsight, which has published research showing that 
London is the world’s most popular city for second home ownership, ahead of New 
York, Los Angeles, Monaco and Miami.





It is not just property ownership that is creating more UK millionaires. While 
the TV game show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? was axed in the UK in 2014, the 
National Lottery says it has created more than 3,900 individual millionaires 
since 1994.

Each month sees another two people added to their ranks courtesy of National 
Savings and Investments’ premium bonds, which pay out a total of 24 £1m 
jackpots a year.


But you don’t need to be a millionaire in order for money to buy you 
happiness. Earlier this month, research from financial firm SunLife claimed 
that once a number of other factors that influence happiness are removed, to be 
among the happiest 10% of people in the UK, someone needs £310 spare cash each 
month – equivalent to £71.54 a week.

Cities and towns ranked by prosperity

1 London 

2 Reading 

3 Cambridge

4 Birmingham 

5 Bristol 

6 Leeds 

7 Cardiff 

8 Manchester 

9 Liverpool 

10 Newcastle

 * This article was amended on 28 August 2015. An earlier version said the 
Barclays report named Reading “as the most prosperous city”. While Reading was 
described by Barclays’ report as a city, it is in fact a town, as stated 
elsewhere in the article.
 