
One in four babies born in the UK are not receiving mandatory checkups from 
health visitors during the first two years of their life.

A fifth of babies do not receive the recommended reviews after they turn one, 
and one in four miss out at the age of two, according to the government’s 
commission on social mobility.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> visitors, responsible for 
assessing a child’s early years development, are supposed to carry out checks 
straight after birth, at six to eight weeks, at one year and then at between 
two and two-and-a-half years.

However, the commission found that one in five children had not received the 
mandatory 12-month check by the time they reached 15 months old.

London children were the least likely to receive the right number of health 
visits, the report found, with fewer than half receiving the final two checkups.

A survey of parents found that the vast majority wanted the health visits to 
continue, with just 5% saying they did not feel they required advice during 
their first six months as a parent.

“Despite the conventional wisdom that parents fear interference from the 
‘nanny state’, in reality many say that they welcome advice in the early years 
of their child’s life,” the commission said.

It said it was concerning that one in four two-year-olds did not have their 
health and education needs reviewed by a professional. “Despite this being a 
crucial period for families, there is still too little support for parents in 
the earliest stage of their child’s life. With the socioeconomic gap in 
outcomes emerging early, providing support to parents at this point could reap 
dividends for social mobility later on in life.”

The Conservative party’s 2010 manifesto included a key pledge to increase the 
number of health visitors.NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Digital 
figures show the number of full-time or equivalent health visitors in England 
fell by almost 1,000 between October 2015 and August 2016.

In December a survey of health visitors by the Institute of Health Visiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/babies-missing-out-on-key-checks-after-fall-in-health-visitor-numbers>
 found that 85% of respondents felt their workload had increased in the last 
two years. Some were having to look after between 500 and 1,000 children, when 
the maximum recommended is 250.

Labour said the commission’s figures showed the government was failing to 
invest in early years support. Emma Lewell-Buck, the shadow minister for 
children and families, said: “Becoming a parent for the first time is an 
exciting but scary time and it is shocking that not all parents are getting the 
support they need.

“The Tories promised more health visitors by taking away money from Sure Start 
Centres. Six years later we have lost over 700 centres and we are still waiting 
for the health visitors. The Tories have completely failed to invest these 
crucial early years.”

A spokesperson for Public Health England said: “Ensuring every child has the 
best start in life is one of our key priorities. We are supporting local 
authorities in commissioning services that support families and provide early 
help when needed.

“We are also working with councils to give health visitors professional 
guidance and leadership, as well as evidence of what works, to help them meet 
their public health responsibilities.”

The commission also said parents were finding it more difficult to access 
local children’s centre services, citing a 2015 survey which found more than 
60% of children’s centre managers said they were cutting back on services to 
meet their budgets.

Government figures in December revealed that 156 Sure Start children’s centres 
had closed in England in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/sure-start-closures-almost-doubled-last-year-figures-show>
, almost double the number in the previous year.
 