
A legal dispute between a woman who created a fundraising page for mugging 
victim Alan Barnes and a PR firm appears be at an end after two online 
petitions were set up for her.

Katie Cutler was labelled the “angel of the north” by the press and awarded a 
British Empire medal after her efforts helped the 1.3 metres (4ft 6in) disabled 
pensioner buy a new home with £330,000 of public donations after he was a 
victim of a street attack last year.

Since then Cutler, from Greenside, Gateshead, has been handed a final £6,687 
bill from PR adviser Claire Barber for work said to have been carried out to 
raise her profile.

Cutler disputed the final bill and it was the subject of county court 
proceedings.

But after two fundraising pages raised almost enough to cover the cost, Barber 
said: “I am happy to accept the amount that’s slightly short. I have been 
trying to resolve this for 14 months.”

Appearing on ITV’s This Morning, Cutler said she hoped when her daughter, who 
has just started school, is old enough, she would be able to see the “nice 
things” she had done for others.

Barnes, who was born with disabilities after his mother contracted German 
measles during pregnancy, has been criticised by some people for not helping 
her pay the bill from the money raised for him.

But Cutler told the show: “Alan is a vulnerable adult. That money was raised 
for him, I didn’t expect anything in return.”

Claire Barber PR said: “A full breakdown was provided to Katie Cutler and her 
business adviser last year, however the PR coverage is out there for all to see.

“I am a very hard-working single mum running my PR business and I wish I could 
afford to write it off, but I can’t.

“I would point out that this has already gone to small claims court and 
judgment has been made.

“This has put terrible pressure on my family and it’s time for this to end so 
I can get on with running my business and caring for my daughters.

“Fees were agreed in writing prior to any work being carried out.”
 