
There is a breed of quiz show that enjoys reminding you of your own gasping 
stupidity. Shows such asEggheads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2004/oct/18/features11.g2> and The 
Chase, which literally employ people to intimidate their audiences into 
believing that they’re sloping-foreheaded subhumans who lack the basic 
intellect to put a peg in a cup.

And yet, despite this, Only Connect <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00lskhg> 
stands alone. It is, without question, Britain’s hardest quiz show. It doesn’t 
exist to point out how stupid you are; it already knows that. No, if you’re a 
viewer of average intelligence, Only Connect is determined to utterly alienate 
you.

Quiz show Only Connect reaches its fiendish conclusion in BBC2 final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/18/quiz-show-only-connect-reaches-its-fiendish-conclusion-in-bbc2-final>
Everything about Only Connect seems designed to make you feel uneasy. Its 
theme tune is muffled by nondescript rustling, as if it accidentally 
pocket-dialled you halfway through a hike. Each episode begins not with the 
sound of warm applause, but with a howling silence of withering judgement. 
Conservatively, 90% of each episode is made up of indecipherable muttering. 
Even its title is aggressively abstruse. “This isn’t for you,” Only Connect 
says. “Maybe come back when you’ve read a book.”

And this is precisely its appeal. Only Connect is 11 series old now, and it’s 
only growing in popularity. There are those who see it as a palate-cleanser; a 
small oasis in a television desert of Celebrity Big Brother and Paul O’Grady’s 
For the Love of Dogs. There are those who desperately attempt to play along in 
a doomed bid to justify their own self-worth. If my Twitter followers are any 
indication, there are those who just enjoy being barked at by Victoria Coren 
Mitchell. Me? I tend to let Only Connect wash over me, floored by how 
completely impenetrable it is.

Take last night’s grand final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/18/quiz-show-only-connect-reaches-its-fiendish-conclusion-in-bbc2-final>
, for example. Participants were asked what linked Uralic, Slide Mountain, 
Paleo-Tethys and Panthalassa. They were offhandedly presented with a series of 
backward portmanteaux as if the concept of this alone wasn’t enough to throw 
the majority of the population into weeping fits of frustration. They were 
expected to complete a sequence based on both the atomic number of noble gases 
and the British-language derivation of their names. Meanwhile, on The Chase, 
Bradley Walsh says the word “gusset” out loud and then makes a fart sound with 
his mouth.

Despite sporadic charity one-offs, there will never be a full series of 
Celebrity Only Connect, because who the hell would go on it? Show Arg from 
Towie a bank of hieroglyphs and his brain would explode. No question. He’d try 
to describe the one that looks like an eye with a shoe coming out of it, and 
then there’d be a dull popping noise, and blood would seep from his mouth and 
nose. Then he’d flop over on to the desk and Chanelle Hayes from the 2007 
series of Big Brother would start screaming inconsolably, and that would be it.

No, Only Connect is a show for people who don’t usually get to appear on TV. 
It’s for the nervous and ungainly, for people who’ve never quite managed to fit 
in. It’s for shy glances and problem hair. It’s a safe space, where a very 
specifically talented group of people get to show off in their own understated 
way for an audience of their peers. And this is what makes it so brilliant.

At the end of last night’s grand final, there was no big prize. Nobody went on 
holiday or got to pay off their mortgage. Instead, in the background as the 
lights dimmed and the credits rolled, Victoria Coren Mitchell simply handed the 
three winners a solitary slab of perspex and then just stood there for a bit. 
It was difficult. It was awkward. It was very Only Connect.

• This blog was amended on 19 January 2016. The word “obtuse” was mistakenly 
used instead of “abstruse”.
 