
The Microsoft tycoon Bill Gates and the UK chancellor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, have pledged to fight a 
war on the world’s deadliest disease, malaria, with the aim of eliminating it 
by 2040.

 Speaking at a conference at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, the 
pair announced £3bn in research funding in the UK to combat themosquito-borne 
disease <http://www.who.int/topics/malaria/en/>, which kills one child every 
minute.

Zika virus likely to spread throughout the Americas, says WHO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/zika-virus-likely-spread-throughout-americas-says-who>
 Gates said the disease was holding back development in many countries, 
particularly in Africa. “We had setbacks in malaria where good drugs have built 
up a resistance. Deaths were as high as 2 million a year but to have them down 
to 600,000 a year is an amazing piece of progress.

“We have had this over-60% reduction by using bed nets, and one of the biggest 
projects that our foundation supports inLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> is coming up with new chemicals to 
cover those bed nets that mosquitoes are not resistant to.”

He said the aim was to shrink the area of the globe where the disease is rife. 
“We did get a consensus that we can complete this by 2040,” Gates said. 
“Eventually those 600,000 a year will go down to zero.”

 Osborne has offered £500m a year for the next five years, which will come out 
of Britain’s international development budget. The Gates foundation will put up 
an additional £140m.

 The money will go into the Ross Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/23/uk-sets-up-1bn-pound-fund-combat-malaria-infectious-diseases-aid>
 – named afterSir Ronald Ross 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1902/ross-bio.html>, 
the British scientist who won a Nobel prize in 1902 for proving that mosquitoes 
transmitted malaria.

 The government’s commitment is a significant increase on past expenditure. It 
is part of Osborne’s drive to prioritise aid programmes that may benefit the UK 
– such as by targeting illnesses that threaten to become global pandemics.

 When questioned whether this was the best way to spend British taxpayers’ 
money at a time of austerity, he said both the Ebola epidemic and the Syrian 
refugee crisis had influenced his decision to pledge the aid.

 He said: “Two events in the last year or so have shown the British people the 
value of commitment to tackling big international problems.

“First we had the Ebola outbreak and the second has been the Syrian crisis. If 
we had left Ebola unchecked it would have been potentially overwhelming in 
Europe and causing us all sorts of challenges here at home. Equally with the 
Syrian refugee crisis, you have to provide support to children and families in 
camps in places like Lebanon and Jordan.

“So in both those cases British aid is not just helping to improve our world 
but actually supports national interests, and it is overwhelmingly in Britain’s 
national interest to eradicate malaria.”

 Osborne said eradicating malaria would lead to a more prosperous world, with 
African countries being able to spend money on their infrastructure rather than 
ploughing it into treating malaria cases.

 He pointed out that “several thousands Britons” contracted the disease every 
year and this research would result in fewer cases.

 The tropical medicine school houses the world’s largest mosquito collection 
and has pioneered research to stem the spread of the disease.

 One of the school’s projects involves research into infusing bed nets with 
mosquito-repellent chemicals to make them even more effective in preventing 
children in Africa from being bitten in their sleep.

 “Bill Gates can go anywhere in the world – he is one of the most successful 
people in our lifetime and he has chosen to come here,” said Osborne. “He is a 
smart guy who has chosen to invest in the work that you are doing in Liverpool 
and you should take this as a massive endorsement of what you do.”

Five British universities will be carrying out research for the project.

 During the press conference, the footballer Kolo Touré spoke about his own 
battle against malaria after contracting the disease four times.

Touré, who plays for Liverpool, said he had suffered from the potentially 
deadly illness many times after being bitten by mosquitoes in his home country 
of Ivory Coast.

 The 34-year-old most recently contracted the disease before the World Cup in 
Brazil and said he had been “totally wiped out”. He also told of friends who 
were currently suffering from the disease.

“Malaria is tough,” he said. “It makes you really, really tired. You feel like 
you have no power at all. As a footballer, if you have it, you can lose all 
your fitness in two days. Imagine that for a child, it’s even worse.”

He added: “I have friends right now who are suffering from this disease and I 
am very happy about all this funding. I want to say thank you to all the people 
who are trying to eradicate this disease.”

 The Ross Fund was set up in November to invest in global health research to 
support the fight against the disease and other neglected and emerging 
infectious illnesses.

 At the time Osborne pledged a one-off contribution of £1bn to the fund. That 
undertaking has since been expanded to £2.5bn over five years.

There were 438,000 malaria deaths in 2015, most of them of children aged under 
five, and the majority in Africa, according to the WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation.
 