
In the end even Chelsea’s most scintillating display of a baffling campaign 
was overshadowed by their captain’s post-match desire to get something off his 
chest. John Terry’s contribution had gone almost unnoticed here, a first-half 
booking and some typically robust defending aside, while others dazzled further 
up the field. He would have his moment afterwards with confirmation he is to 
leaveChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in the summer. Up 
to then it had been the creative talents who had dazzled.

This was a brutal reminder of the gulf between the top two divisions, even if 
Chelsea still loiter in 13th in the top flight, withMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> swatted aside with ease and Guus 
Hiddink’s team revelling in the space afforded them by cowed opponents. A 
proper test awaits in the last 16 when Manchester City visit Stamford Bridge. 
“That is already a final,” offered the interim manager on the challenge to 
come. What is encouraging, at least, is that his team have finally come into 
some form. Nine games unbeaten, they can afford to look to the immediate future 
with some optimism.

John Terry to leave Chelsea after refusal of further one-year contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/chelsea-john-terry-not-renew-contract>
This was an occasion for their forwards, granted space and time to revel, to 
showcase their talents. Oscar found the level to his liking, the Brazil 
international running riot to register his first hat-trick for the league 
champions before the break. There was even reward for Eden Hazard, from the 
penalty spot, to end a personal goal drought which had extended over 2,358 
minutes and 30 matches since the header nodded beyond Julián Speroni to claim 
the Premier League title in May: a winner from another era.

Chelsea are starting to recall what it is like to be that dominant again. It 
was their movement which bamboozled their opponents. A defence which has proved 
porous in the Championship simply could not cope as Chelsea poured through them 
at will. The brief period when MK Dons enjoyed parity was deceptive, given the 
sheer number of opportunities they were shipping even then. David Martin 
performed heroically for a while but it was unfair to expect that excellence to 
be maintained.

Eventually Chelsea would find their range and, as it was, Oscar still departed 
at the break having claimed the match ball with all prospect of a shock having 
long since dissipated. The rat-a-tat of chances had the home centre-halves 
wheezing. Martin saved wonderfully well from Diego Costa inside the opening 
four minutes, pushing away the striker’s close-range shot after Hazard and 
Oscar had combined to liberate the striker just outside the six-yard box. That 
combination play became a recurring theme, busy players galloping into space 
with the home ranks outnumbered, outpaced and simply dizzied by it all. “We 
could have been 4-0 down after five minutes,” said the Dons’ manager, Karl 
Robinson. “The only lesson I’ll learn from this is don’t win in the third 
round. We were carved up far too easily. It was scary.”

MK Dons leave themselves wide open to Chelsea’s Oscar in thrashing | Michael 
Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/31/karl-robinson-mk-dons-chelsea>
Oscar twice poked just wide when it seemed easier to score, on each occasion 
the Brazilian’s body shape a little awkward as he struck his attempt, though it 
mattered little while the opportunities kept coming. All three of his goals 
came gift-wrapped, the Dons’ indecision contributing to the third – the most 
eye-catching of his three – which was emphatically dispatched into the corner 
beyond a shell-shocked Martin with no hint of a defensive block after the 
Brazilian had skipped infield across the edge of the penalty box.

Kyle McFadzean suffered at the first two concessions. The centre-half had 
collected a throw-in on 15 minutes and attempted a blind pass infield, only to 
dribble the ball straight to a rampaging Costa. The striker charged into the 
area and drew the goalkeeper before squaring for Oscar to score past Joe Walsh 
on the line. Ruben Loftus-Cheek provided the visitors’ second, sliding a pass 
through the centre for Oscar to collect before McFadzean was aware of his 
presence, the finish crisply clipped into the far corner from an unkind angle.

Throw in a wonderful save from Martin to turn Hazard’s attempt on to the 
woodwork and Costa glancing Baba Rahman’s centre wide with Oscar perfectly 
positioned at his side to tap into an unguarded net and it was hard to fathom 
how, albeit only for a brief interlude, the Dons had once threatened a revival.

Encouraged by Rob Hall’s early dash to the edge of the Chelsea penalty area 
they sensed some vulnerability in the Premier League side’s ranks which Darren 
Potter, courtesy of a deflection from Nemanja Matic’s block, had exploited to 
put the home side level. Yet that was their high point, a brief riposte amid 
incessant pressure. Hazard’s dart into the box induced a foul from Potter early 
in the second period, the Belgian picking himself up to score from the penalty 
spot. He was soon skipping unchecked to the byline once again and pulling the 
ball back for the substitute, Bertrand Traoré, to sidefoot in his first Chelsea 
goal.

Costa, who had made way for the youngster, was busy signing autographs and 
taking selfies with the supporters behind the dugout by that stage. It was that 
kind of stroll.

Man of the match Oscar (Chelsea).
 