
Osman Sow scored a spectacular equaliser as Hearts twice came from behind to 
secure a 2-2 draw against Motherwell. Louis Moult pounced on a dropped cross 
from Neil Alexander to put Motherwell ahead inside two minutes at Fir Park but 
strong play from Sow allowed him to set up Juanma Delgado to level quickly. 
Marvin Johnson fired Motherwell back in front with a well-taken goal but Sow’s 
long-range strike in the 69th minute earned Hearts aScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> point.

Hearts made a sloppy start when a Blazej Augustyn back-pass fell short but 
Alexander did enough to stop Moult capitalising. The Hearts goalkeeper failed 
to deal with a hanging cross from Johnson on his line moments later, however, 
and Moult tapped home after putting in a challenge on the goalkeeper. Alexander 
was booked for protesting that he was fouled but Moult had his arms down and 
there was little argument from theHearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> bench.

Hearts were level in the ninth minute after some weak defending from Kieran 
Kennedy, who was outmuscled during an aerial challenge with Sow. The big 
striker ran towards goal and slipped in Juanma, who got there just ahead of 
Connor Ripley and dinked the ball over.

Kennedy soon nearly gifted Hearts a second when his attempted back-pass played 
in Sow but Ripley came off his line to block.

Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> were looking 
sharp and hustling Hearts and they soon created more chances. Stephen Pearson 
had a shot blocked by two sliding Hearts defenders after a one-two with Johnson 
and Scott McDonald shot into the side netting after Moult’s lay-off.

Hearts threatened from two Danny Swanson free-kicks, Igor Rossi heading a yard 
high and wide before Ripley made a great stop from Callum Paterson’s header. 
Alexander then stopped a McDonald flick on the line after a good move involving 
Moult and Johnson, who soon had a shot saved by the goalkeeper.

The chances dried up as torrential rain and driving wind made life extremely 
difficult for the players but the conditions eased and McDonald had a shot 
blocked by Augustyn and another saved by Alexander.

After Juanma dinked another shot over Ripley but wide of the goal, McDonald 
was involved as Motherwell regained the lead. McDonald helped the ball down the 
left before being clattered by Rossi, but Johnson was away and he turned inside 
and outside his man before firing into the far corner. Again Hearts levelled 
quickly, though, as Sow collected a pass at least 30 yards out and smashed the 
ball beyond Ripley’s reach into the top corner.

The visitors dominated the final 20 minutes but Sam Nicholson sliced their 
best chance wide on the rebound after Ripley had saved from Sow.
 