
Thought for the week

A century in league football could come to an end as early as tonight when 
fellowLeague Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> 
strugglers Barnet visit Accrington Stanley. Should Barnet win, Neil Woods's 
Grimsby will join Darlington in being relegated. Even if they receive a stay of 
execution, Barnet's current four-point cushion and game in hand suggest Grimsby 
– who visit Underhill on Saturday – are seeking a miracle.

The Mariners have cause to regret the appointment of Mike Newell. After 
sacking Newell last autumn the club then became involved in a time-consuming 
legal wrangle with the former Blackburn Rovers striker.

Woods, a former youth team coach at Blundell Park, has struggled to right 
things, dictating that these are lean times for a club who, along with Hull 
City, once enjoyed rare dispensation from the Football League to play games on 
Christmas Day due to the demands of the fishing trade. Even though football 
supporters can still combine a trip to Blundell Park with buying some of the 
best fresh fish and chips in England, the subsequent decline of Grimsby's 
once-thriving trawler fleet means festive fixtures have long since been shifted 
to Boxing Day.

It similarly seems aeons ago since Grimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> attracted the regular 
20,000-strong crowds typical during Bill Shankly's time as manager between 
1951-54. Previously in charge of Carlisle, Shankly arrived after failing an 
interview to take charge of Liverpool – Anfield would come a little later in 
his career. Before becoming disillusioned by the Blundell Park board and 
perhaps showing too much loyalty to certain players, he swiftly revived the 
fortunes of a team who had just dropped from the old first division to the 
third division north.

Significantly this was a time before the 'cult of the manager' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/series/the-manager> had taken a grip on 
English football but, nonetheless, Shankly proved a celebrity figure in Grimsby 
with crowds of 5,000 frequently turning out to watch him keep fit by playing 
the odd reserve game. The bond between manager and fans was built on pride. In 
his autobiography, Shankly wrote: "Pound for pound and class for class my 
Grimsby team was the best football team in England at that time. In the league 
they played football nobody else could play. Everything was measured, planned 
and perfected and you could not wish to see more entertaining football."

If only Grimsby fans could say the same of their side now.

Goals of the weekend

Andy King for Leicester in the 1-0 Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> win at Preston which booked 
Nigel Pearson's side a play-off place. The midfielder struck a fine solo goal, 
his fierce right footed shot from the edge of the area coming after his advance 
from the halfway line.

Mikele Leigertwood's stunning winner in QPR's 1-0 Championship win at 
Barnsley. A goal out of nothing struck with his supposedly weak left foot with 
great power into the top-right corner of the net.

One to watch 

Nigel Adkins Despite boasting by far the smallest budget in the Championship 
at Scunthorpe, Adkins, a former physio turned manager, has defied the odds and 
avoided relegation. Even more creditably this has been achieved against a 
backdrop of Scunthorpe playing good passing football. Hats off.

Huddersfield Town Lee Clark's pleasing side have reached the League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> play-offs using fewer 
players – 24 – than any other club in the Football League this season.

Gordon Strachan as a BBC World Cup pundit. It can only be hoped the 
Middlesbrough manager is considerably more polite to viewers than he has been 
to journalists since arriving at the Riverside. Television executives might 
care to view a tape of Strachan's rudeness towards the excellent BBC Look North 
reporter Dawn Thewlis the day he took over from Gareth Southgate and reflect on 
the hypocrisy of earning extra money from the media while treating them with 
contempt in the course of your day job. It was unacceptable – but Thewlis is 
not alone.

Roy O'Donovan Rubbish at Sunderland, the former Cork City striker has scored 
nine goals in 13 games during a loan spell at Hartlepool. A League One star is 
born.

Games to look forward to

Charlton v Leeds Can Simon Grayson's Leeds cling onto the second automatic 
promotion place? Charlton seem set for the play-offs.

Tranmere v Millwall Are Millwall destined to leapfrog Leeds into an automatic 
promotion place or might Kenny Jackett's team have to settle for a play-off 
place? Millwall were 20 points behind Leeds on Boxing Day it would seem cruel 
if they slipped up now.

Blackpool v Bristol City Can Ian Holloway's Blackpool pip Swansea to the final 
play-off place?

Swansea v Doncaster After spending so long in the top six are Paulo Sousa's 
team destined to miss out at the death? Fading at the last Swansea have won 
just two of their past 10 games and are dependent on Blackpool slipping up.

Sheffield Wednesday v Crystal Palace Relegation tears will be shed in South 
Yorkshire but whose will they be? At least points-deducted Palace have the 
gifted Darren Ambrose in their side.
 