
Oxford United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united> see Swansea 
City as mentors when it comes to club development but the League Two team 
taught their Premier League idols a lesson here, deservedly emerging triumphant 
from a rollicking FA Cup tie.

Michael Appleton’s team outfought and outplayed their illustrious guests, the 
upset all the more admirable because they had to come from behind to pull it 
off. Jefferson Montero put the visitors in front with an exquisite early goal, 
an effort that proved that, despiteAlan Curtis refusing to be shamed by Sam 
Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/sunderland-sam-allardyce-swansea-alan-curtis-fa-cup>
 into naming his strongest available team – he omitted several key players to 
preserve them for Wednesday’s Premier League visit of Sunderland – Swansea 
still boast rich pedigree. So it was immensely admirable from an Oxford 
viewpoint – and “hugely disappointing” from Curtis’s – to see Liam Sercombe 
equalise from the penalty spot before Kemar Roofe secured victory with two 
excellent goals. Bafétimbi Gomis’s subsequent reply was not enough to save 
Swansea.

“It is one thing to beat a Premier League team but more important was the way 
we did it,” said a proud Appleton, who could draw further satisfaction from 
hearing Curtis admit: “We knew Oxford were a good footballing team and we felt 
that might suit us but they had more energy than us, they passed the ball 
better and we did not show anything like what we think we are capable of. Our 
players couldn’t cope with them.”

Oxford United 3-2 Swansea City: FA Cup third round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jan/10/oxford-united-v-swansea-city-fa-cup-third-round-live>
It seemed nonsensical that these teams are separated by 54 places in the 
league pyramid, which is exactly the impression that Oxford players had sought 
to create, several of them starting on a mission to prove that they should 
never have been discarded by clubs higher up. George Baldock and John Lundstram 
were accomplished but Roofe stole the show by taking both his goals expertly.

That brought his tally for the season to 15 and raised questions as to why he 
never made a senior appearance during four years at West Bromwich Albion, who 
instead loaned him out to a succession of clubs, including one in Iceland, 
before he joined Oxford in the summer. “I just never got the chance at West 
Brom,” said the 23-year-old. “I believe I should have had that chance; I did 
all I could. Jamie Vardy started lower and he got the scoring record in the 
Premier League. It can be done given the time and chance.”

For all that, Swansea made the brighter start here. Montero squandered an 
opportunity to seize the lead in the seventh minute, blasting over from 16 
yards after a pull-back from Marvin Emnes. Jonjo Shelvey, meanwhile, repeatedly 
tried to burst the net from way out, the ball whizzing off target by varying 
degrees each time.

Oxford soon found their bearings and began to give better than they got, 
displaying the sort of crisp passing and movement more usually associated with 
the Welsh team. Baldock, the right-back who has excelled this season while on 
loan from MK Dons, was the first to threaten for the home team, racing down the 
flank and crossing for Roofe, whose header flew just over the bar. Oxford then 
went close to opening the scoring, as Kristoffer Nordfeldt was forced to tip 
over a header by Ryan Taylor after an incisive move by Appleton’s team. 
Swansea’s goal in the 23rd minute came slightly against the run of play but 
there was no denying its class. Montero pinged a pass to Emnes on the edge of 
the area and then received a return that eliminated two defenders, leaving the 
Ecuadorian with only the advancing Sam Slocombe to beat, which he duly did with 
a delicious back-heeled finish.

Swansea could have killed the tie five minutes later but Emnes miscontrolled 
when put through by Matty Grimes. Oxford soon made the most of that reprieve. 
Tidily and dynamically they regained the initiative. Swansea began to look 
slovenly. “Some of our players did not do themselves any favours,” conceded 
Curtis. Swansea could not hold out until half-time, succumbing to intense 
Oxford pressure just before the break. After Nordfeldt pushed away a shot by 
Jake Wright, Alex MacDonald retrieved it and tried to dash into a shooting 
position, only to go down under a challenge by Kyle Bartley. Sercombe drove in 
the penalty. “He’s a cool customer,” said Appleton.

Oxford started the second half like a side sensing that glory was within their 
grasp. Some Swansea players did not seem terribly bothered. Within four minutes 
of the resumption Oxford were in front thanks to a wonderful goal by Roofe. 
After collecting a long pass and cutting in from the left, he placed a splendid 
curling shot into the far corner from 20 yards.

Ten minutes later Roofe topped that. As Swansea fought limply to save face, 
Roofe helped clear a corner, joined in a rapid counterattack and raced on to a 
pass from Chris Maguire. Nordfeldt rushed out to confront him but could not get 
a firm enough touch on his shot to stop it bouncing into the net.

Gomis pulled a goal back for the Premier League side with a calm finish in the 
66th minute. “We didn’t even look anything like a team until after we went 3-1 
down,” lamented Curtis. But Oxford defended valiantly and had chances to 
increase their lead on the break. Their historic win was fully merited and 
points towards a bright future for them. Swansea, meanwhile, need to perk up 
fast.

Man of the match Kemar Roofe (Oxford)
 