
Kadeena Cox, Great Britain’s flagbearer at the closing ceremony at the 
Maracana on Sunday, spoke of how she wants her golden feats in athletics and 
cycling to inspire future generations. Ellie Robinson was so captivated by 
Ellie Simmonds at London 2012 that she took up swimming. Now she is a 
Paralympic champion, aged 15.

While it would be overly cynical to play down the 147 medals that put 
ParalympicsGB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympicsgb> second in the 
standings or to dispute the positive effect the Paralympic movement can have on 
wider society, it is hard not to wonder how much of an impact such success will 
have on Britain’s disabled people in light of government cuts to benefits.

Rio de Janeiro returns to normal after marathon of mega events
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/rio-de-janeiro-returns-to-normal-world-cup-olympics-paralympics>
While a recent Scope survey showed 
<https://blog.scope.org.uk/2016/09/05/do-the-paralympics-have-the-power-to-improve-attitudes-to-disability/>
 that more than three-quarters of disabled people say coverage of London 2012 
improved the public’s attitudes to disability, another poll by the charity 
found that one-fifth of disabled people think that Britain has become a better 
place for them in the past four years. The Equality and Human Rights 
Commission, which is planning to release a report on welfare reforms, has 
warned that disabled people arebeing treated like second‑class citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/19/people-with-disabilities-treated-like-second-class-citizens-says-watchdog>
 and there were reports last Thursday of cuts to funding for disability 
supported housing and homeless accommodation.

During an appearance here last week, the UK sports minister defended the cuts 
when it was put to her that the standard of living for disabled people remains 
unsatisfactory. Tracey Crouch, the Tory MP for Chatham and Aylesford,has often 
voted for a reduction in spending 
<https://www.theyworkforyou.com/mp/24871/tracey_crouch/chatham_and_aylesford/votes#welfare>
 on welfare benefits. “I would disagree with that and say that one of the 
things around the reform of the welfare system, giving people their own 
personal budgets enables them to use some of that for sport that they wouldn’t 
have been able to do so before,” she said.

Crouch said that changes to welfare benefits are “not one of the biggest 
issues in my postbag” and that she wants to break down barriers that prevent 
people from taking up sport. Acknowledging that disabled sport participation at 
a grassroots level has remained too low since London 2012, she pointed to the 
strategy for sport she unveiled last year as evidence that the government is 
trying to steer disabled people towards physical activity.

“People sometimes still feel discriminated against in society and feel 
isolated,” she said. “We know there are challenges. Some of those challenges 
can be accessible, some can be financial. Some of it is that people aren’t 
aware that there is a sport they can be doing. We are using theParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> to drive social reform by 
getting people involved in sport.”

It was repeatedly put to Crouch that while the Paralympics do spread a message 
of hope, there is evidence to suggest that disabled people are increasingly 
unhappy with everyday life and that sport on its own will not change that. She 
did not budge from her stance that the Paralympics can inspire social change.

Opponents to the cuts say there is a danger of politicians hiding behind 
ParalympicsGB’s achievements. “This could be the case if the respect for 
athletes with disabilities generated by the Paralympics does not result in 
widespread public opposition to cuts to benefits and other support for disabled 
people,” Clive Efford, the Labour MP for Eltham and a former shadow minister 
for culture, media and sport, told the Guardian.

“The Tories destroyed School Sport Partnerships which were the foundations on 
which future sporting involvement would have been built. We will get the 
participation Tracey is seeking when we empower people at the grassroots to 
decide how to invest resources and organise sport in their communities, which 
is what SSPs were doing. The people who are best placed to use resources 
efficiently for people with disabilities are the disabled people themselves.”

Paralympics 2016: the medal table
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/sep/08/paralympics-2016-the-full-medal-table>
The British Paralympic Association has a part to play in provoking change, 
even though its main priority as an elite sporting organisation is to ensure 
athletic excellence. “Nobody in the Paralympics and the BPA feels that we have 
in any way got the responsibility for everything that is happening in the world 
for disabled people,” Tim Hollingsworth, the BPA chief executive, said. “The 
presentation of the Paralympics can be a catalyst for a more positive agenda 
for disabled people and in society.

“We do believe we can do more to work with those disabled rights groups and 
other organisations who believe they have more of an insight into the everyday 
life for disabled people than we could ever have. That’s an agenda post-Rio 
that we want to pursue.

“Our opportunity – not our job – is to present athletes in the best possible 
way, unashamedly focus on winning. That focus can drive attitudinal change 
which ultimately will drive the wider change we need to see. In some ways that 
true position is felt most keenly around young people who perhaps first 
encountered disability at London 2012 and had a very positive experience.”

Talent Identification Programmes and schemes such as UK Sport’s Paralympic 
Potential can ensure that Britain builds on these Games, while Hollingsworth 
stressed that sport must be for people of all ages and sizes, not just the 
elite few with extraordinary physical capabilities.

What cannot be allowed to happen, however, is for a fortnight of celebrations 
to shift attention away from disabled rights in Britain. Efford said: 
“Politicians like to be associated with success. And our para athletes are a 
tremendous success story.”
 