
Our father, Paul McQuail, who has died aged 82, worked as a civil servant. He 
served principally at the Department of the Environment, under ministers in 
governments of various hues, with diligence and, we imagine, some forbearance. 
He was secretary to the Royal Commission on the Press in the 1970s and chief 
executive of theLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> borough of 
Hounslow in the 80s.

Paul was born in London to Irish parents, Anne (nee Mullen) and Christopher 
McQuail. During the second world war, the family – now including Paul’s younger 
brothers, Denis and Brian – moved to Holyhead, on the Isle of Anglesey, before 
settling in Birkenhead, near Liverpool. After school at St Anselm’s college, 
Wirral, Paul learned Russian during national service and studied English at 
Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, before moving to Hampstead, north London, to 
begin his working life.

He met his future wife, Susan Adler, in a romantic way, on the London 
Underground. After their marriage in 1964 they moved to the house in Peckham 
Rye that they turned into a home distinctively their own, where we were both 
born. They celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary there.

Paul’s career reflected the responsibility he felt to serve society usefully. 
A legacy of his Irish heritage, perhaps, was his identification with the 
underdog, which became apparent in his involvement with Britain’s inner cities. 
After retirement in 1994, he became chair of Alcohol Concern and a director of 
Sustrans, which reflected his enthusiasm for cycling as a regular commuter and 
on pilgrim routes all over Europe.

He liked to indulge his many passions, including books, plays, concerts, the 
cinema, fine art, architecture, foreign travel, hill-walking, wine, good beer, 
good food and good company. He had a talent for making and keeping friends. 
There were few subjects about which he was unable to comment with both wit and 
insight.

He has been described by former colleagues as erudite, professional and 
humane, and by friends as brave, wise and a wonderfully thoughtful companion.

He is survived by Susan, by us and by three grandchildren.
 