
Sometimes it all becomes too much and this was one of those times. On Sunday 
afternoon any last lingering hope thatReal Betis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> Balompié had of surviving in 
the top flight departed and so did their centre-back Paulão, crushed by the 
pain and responsibility of it all. Defeated and depressed, he surrendered with 
a simple gesture that revealed a complex swirl of emotions and pleaded: 
somebody take me out of here. He was not injured and there was still over an 
hour left in the match but Paulão could take no more, so he asked to be 
substituted. Already bottom of the table, virtually relegated after a season in 
which they have lurched from disaster to disaster, the final act was as cruel 
as it was eloquent.

Betis were facing Rayo Vallecano. After 14 minutes, a simple ball from Perquis 
came across the face of the Betis penalty area. Paulão tried to lay it back to 
his goalkeeper Antonio Adán, but the pass was terrible, short and tentative, 
and became the perfect assist instead. Adán was sold, exposed entirely, and 
Ruben Rochina ran past Paulão to finish easily. Twelve minutes later, Anaitz 
Arbilla delivered a cross from the right. Paulão dived in to block it, to the 
right of the penalty spot. The ball looped up into the air off his shin-pad, 
over Adán and into the net. Twenty-seven minutes, 2-0, one gift, one own goal, 
and no hope.

Paulão, who was sent off against Sevilla in the city derby earlier in the 
season, trudging to the touchline in tears,later apologising for his part in 
their downfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/25/sevilla-real-betis-manita-handfu>
, now sat on the pitch where he had landed. He'd joined Betis after a spell at 
Saint Etienne, where he had been unhappy and he had re-found himself, at least 
to start with. But he'd played through injury, struggling with the pain; and 
this weekend he had been included in the side for the first time this month, 
accelerating his return. Now this.

He lay back, his arms outstretched in a cross, sinking. The energy drained 
from him. Captain Roberto Trashorras –Rayo captain Roberto Trashorras – picked 
him up, lifting him to his feet. Team-mates Francisco Chica and Alfred N'Diaye 
approached to pat him on the back. Rayo's defender Nacho approached him too; an 
encouraging hand on the face. But there was no consolation and no reaction, not 
even a flash of recognition. Paulão looked to the bench and rotated his hands.
Make the change. Please. "He couldn't cope with feeling responsible; he 
couldn't carry on after the mistake," the Betis coach Gabi Calderón said.

Three minutes later, off he went: a big, powerful man, muscular and strong, 
6ft 2ins, 12st 10lbs, walking slowly to the touchline, legs heavy, eyes gone, 
lost. On the bench, he sat in the corner, put his head in his hands and cried.

"A defender cannot ask to be taken off in the middle of the storm and thus 
piss onManquepierda, on the philosophy of long live Betis even when they lose! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/sep/26/betis-la-liga>" wrote 
José Antonio Espina in AS, describing the phrase as "more than a slogan, the 
pillar upon which Betis is built, upon which they survived terrible times, like 
these ones now." Betis, he said, had lost the one thing that was left: their 
dignity. Others too questioned the decision; some of the comments were cruel, 
others were crass. In contrast, Adán insisted: "I'd want a team of Paulãos".

This was not the only mistake of the weekend, but none had the impact that 
this did. Vicente Guaita gifted Oriol Riera the opener in Valencia's 1-1 draw 
at Osasuna. Manuel Lanzarote deflected Sergio Canales's cross into his own net 
as Real Sociedad beat Espanyol 2-1. Víctor Casadesús somehow put the ball wide 
of an open goal from three yards in Levante's 0-0 draw with Getafe, Alexis 
Sánchez hit the bar from not much further out during Barça-Athletic and David 
Villa missed a penalty that momentarily looked like it might cost Atlético the 
league title, only for João Miranda and Diego Costa to score in the final 20 
minutes against Elche. At the other end at Vallecas, Joaquín Larrivey's diving 
header went wide from two yards.

And when it comes to self-inflicted wounds, Granada basically scored the first 
two Sevilla goals in a 4-0 loss at the Sánchez Pizjuán … even if Kevin Gameiro 
did sprint and slide to reach the ball on the line making the second goal his 
instead of another own goal, Tiago Ilori adding to the captain Diego Mainz's 
opener.

Yet none had the reaction of the protagonist nor of opponents like Paulão's 
mistake and none felt so definitive. At the same time, though, there was 
something shared in this, something that was hinted at by the reaction of the 
Rayo players. It looks easy, but it's not. Yes, there are players who take it 
in their stride and others who worry little, for whom it simply does not 
matter. There are cynics or worse. Much worse. But many suffer too. One Real 
Madrid player admits he has seen countless talented footballers fail because 
they have not had the temperament, because they could barely bring themselves 
to play. At times, the pressure can be overwhelming and the emotions exacting, 
and all of it played out in front of everyone exposed. Constantly confronted 
with your failings, with no place to hide.

These are times when every mistake feels definitive and Paulão's mistakes 
probably were, even if there were two more goals afterwards, one for each team 
– including Chica's first ever professional goal, empty yet fulfilling too, 
dedicated to Miki Roque and Dani Jarque. Tata Martino described Barcelona's 
victory as being as much a question of "heart and courage" as football. At the 
other end of the table, the tension is greater still, especially now. "We have 
a problem of pressure, of fear," the Getafe coach, Cosmin Contra, says of his 
struggling side. "I promise you, I am doing all I can to try to give them 
confidence. You should see them in training. It's totally different. There, 
they play nice football, they're happy, they work well. But when we go out onto 
the pitch …"

When they go out on to the pitch, it just doesn't happen. Getafe are one of 
the sides fighting against relegation. They have 32 points and they're 18th 
with four games left. Below them, Betis have 22 and Almería 30. Above them, 
Granada have 37, Osasuna have 35 and Valladolid have 32 and a game in hand 
(against Real Madrid).

Above all of them are Rayo Vallecano, the team whose players embraced Betis's 
this weekend 
<https://twitter.com/InsideLaLiga/status/457991361153597440/photo/1>, seeking 
to snap Paulão out of his daze in the 27th minute and comfort their opponents 
in the 90th. They knew it could have been them. Twice this season, Arbilla has 
been on the bench in tears, singled out by coach Paco Jémez, his mistakes laid 
bare in public, and Rayo could have been where Betis are. According to Jémez, 
they had kept "slitting our wrists" early in the season. They had won just six 
times in 25 weeks in February. Now they have lost just once in the last nine, 
and that was at the Bernabéu.

When Rayo lost to Sevilla in February, the fans called for them to come back 
out after the game. We will support you, they sang. It was a turning point. 
They won six of the next nine. On Sunday afternoon, the fans chanted for them 
to come back out once more. This time it was a celebration. Rayo are 11th, on 
40 points. Outside, Rayo's players linked arms and stood before their 
supporters, flags waving. Inside, Paulão and his team-mates were in the away 
dressing room, a second division team sitting in silence.

Talking points

• Celta Vigo moved onto 40 points and to safety with a 4-2 win. They have now 
won seven games away from home, five of them in Andalucía – all five games they 
have played there. Victorious at Betis, Granada, Málaga and Sevilla, this time 
their victims were Almería. "We're thinking of going to Andalucía on holiday," 
said the Celta coach, Luis Enrique.

• Artiz Aduriz produced a brilliant overhead kick only to see his shot fly 
back off the post against Barcelona. He later scored the opener but Barcelona 
played much better with Pedro in the team (funny, that) and two goals in three 
minutes from Pedro and then Leo Messi gave them a victory with the 
Argentinian's 26th goal of the season. That keeps them in with a chance of 
winning the league, four points behind Atlético with Simeone's team still to 
come to the Camp Nou, even if no one really seems to think they have a hope. 
Andrés Iniesta talked about a "strange season" and a "strange situation" and 
insisted that they would keep fighting even if the chances of winning the title 
are "minimal". If the opportunity were to present itself and Barcelona did not 
take advantage it would be "unforgivable," he said.

• Is this a first? Real Madrid fans were cheering for Barcelona last night. 
The last thing they want is Barcelona out of the title race and thus happy to 
lose to Atlético on the final day. Real are six points behind Atlético but with 
a game in hand, which they will play in May. Their run-in is, theoretically, 
easy. Atlético need three wins from the final four games to be champions but 
they still have to play at Valencia and Levante before going to the Camp Nou.

• Forget Bale's run or Neymar hitting the post, to judge by certain media it 
was actually Florentino Pérez who won the Copa del Rey.

• Barcelona president Josep Maria Bartomeu has talked about carrying out "a 
deep renewal of the squad." Like anyone trusts this board to do that right. 
And, anyway, what about the ban? Ah, yeah, that.

Results: Atlético 2-0 Elche, Osasuna 1-1 Valencia, Levante 0-0 Getafe, Real 
Sociedad 2-1 Espanyol, Almería 2-4 Celta, Rayo 3-1 Betis, Sevilla 4-0 Granada, 
Barcelona 2-1 Athletic, Málaga-Valladolid: tonight. Valladolid-Madrid: 7 May.

La Liga table <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball/table>
 