
Paul Gallen has declared he will be “100 per cent fit” for Cronulla’s NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> preliminary final against North 
Queensland on Friday night.

Gallen missed the Sharks’ qualifying final victory over Canberra with a back 
injury a fortnight ago, and has at times struggled to get out of his car or bed 
since pulling up lame from a regular training session before the match.

And while coach Shane Flanagan cleared him on Sunday to return for the 
must-win grand final qualifier, Gallen has confirmed he won’t carry any injury 
concerns into the match.

On-field brilliance gives NRL honchos some welcome finals reprieve | Sam Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/onfield-brilliance-gives-nrl-honchos-welcome-reprieve>
“If nothing goes wrong between now and the game I will be 100 per cent fit,” 
he told Sky Sports Radio’s Big Sports Breakfast.

“I feel fresh, I feel good and I will be fine on Friday.”

After 50 years without a premiership, losing their first grand final 
appearance in 1973, drawing with Manly in the 1978 decider and then losing the 
replay three days later, winning the 1988 minor premiership and then going out 
in straight sets, falling short in the 1997 Super League final - Sharks 
diehards have had to wear a lifetime of heartache and Harold Holt jokes.

Having their inspirational captain back will go some way to lifting confidence 
against a dangerous Cowboys team.

Gallen returned to training on Sunday, completing around half of the session.

He will train the majority of Tuesday’s session, before a rest day on 
Wednesday and the usually light captain’s run on Thursday.

However he said he no fears about a recurrence of the injury, which is 
believed to have originated from a surgery he had on his back a decade ago.

“It’s happened twice in 10 years - it’s a fair way apart,” he said.

“It is a concern that you don’t know when it’s going to happen or why it 
happens.

“But I’ve got no concerns this week that come warm-up or come captain’s run 
that it’s going to go again. I’ll be okay.”
 