
Paul Clement already has a response prepared for the Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> player that dares to show any 
disrespect towards him when they are substituted. Swansea’s new head coach will 
cast his mind back to the day when he was standing in for Carlo Ancelotti and 
hauled off Cristiano Ronaldo at the Bernabéu.

“I actually took him off, would you believe that?” Clement said, smiling. “In 
our very last game at Real Madrid, Carlo was serving a two-game suspension. We 
were playing Getafe and we were going to take off Cristiano in the second half. 
We’d spoken about it at half-time. I said: ‘Cris, we’re going to take you off 
in this minute,’ and he said: ‘Who’s coming on for me?’I actually put on Martin 
Odegaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/23/real-madrid-getafe-martin-odegaard-la-liga-match-report>
 and it was his debut for the club. Is that a claim to fame? I could say to 
some of the Swansea players if I take them off and they shake their head: ‘I’ve 
taken off Cristiano Ronaldo, so I can take you off.’”

Clement delivered that last line with a chuckle. Speaking to the media for the 
first time since replacing Bob Bradley, the 44-year-old came across as a man 
delighted to be managing again and still enjoying the adrenaline rush from
Tuesday night’s 2-1 victory over Crystal Palace 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
. “I felt more excited to be on the touchline than at a Bayern game when you’re 
an assistant,” he said. “You feel a lot more when you’re head coach and that 
win felt very special.”

Paul Clement will bring diligence, pragmatism and patience to Swansea | Stuart 
James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/paul-clement-diligence-pragmatism-patience-swansea>
The easy decision would have been to stay at Bayern Munich, where Clement was 
working alongside Ancelotti for the fourth time, following spells at Chelsea, 
Paris Saint-Germain and Real Madrid. Clement said he “felt comfortable at that 
level”, yet ultimately he wanted far more than to be a No2. “I’ve never settled 
for that; I want to feel the pressure because the worst thing about pressure is 
having none of it,” he explained. “It’s nice to have pressure – it makes you 
feel alive.”

There is no shortage of pressure in the Premier League relegation zone. 
Swansea are second bottom with 15 points from 20 matches and Clement, who had 
eight months in charge of Derby County last season, admitted that keeping the 
club up was the biggest challenge of his career. He hopes to bring in new faces 
this month and has added a few names to the list the board assembled before he 
arrived, with an answer to a question about Frank Lampard’s potential 
availability suggesting that the former England international may well have 
been sounded out without success. “My impression from people close to him is 
that he is going to take a break from the game,” Clement said.

Either way, Clement believes there are solutions to be found on the pitches at 
the training ground and not just via the chequebook. “There are capable and 
able footballers here,” he said. “I think over recent games to ship three 
goals, four goals, five goals – I’m confident in my ability as a coach that 
that won’t happen during my reign. I can’t say 100% it won’t – there is a lot 
of randomness in football. But I’m pretty confident it won’t happen because I 
can get a team organised. With the players that I’ve currently got, I think I 
can get them more organised than they’ve been, give them a bit of solidity in 
the defensive work and that’s the foundation to build what they’ve already 
shown they can be good at, which is the offensive side.”

Swansea job excites Paul Clement: ‘It’s a big task but I think it can be done’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/paul-clement-appointed-swansea-city-manager>
Clement adopted a similarly pragmatic approach at Derby, during his only other 
experience as a manager, but wassacked last February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/08/derby-county-paul-clement-sacked>
 with the club fifth in the Championship. “I often get asked about my time at 
Derby and there’s a lot of contrasting views about what happened, from a harsh 
dismissal or – an interesting one I read the other day – my time at Derby was 
‘an absolute disaster’. The only important thing about that is how I felt and I 
think about it as a positive experience. I learned a lot.”

The only negative aspect to Clement’s press conference surrounded the future 
of Alan Curtis, who has been told he will no longer have a role with the first 
team. Curtis, who had three spells as a player at Swansea and is a club legend 
in the eyes of the supporters, will meet Huw Jenkins, the chairman, on Friday 
to discuss another position. It is understood that Jenkins initially contacted 
Curtis via text and it is hard to escape the feeling that the whole episode 
could have been handled much better. “He won’t be on the training field and 
won’t be on the bench but we want him around and having that communication with 
players,” Clement said. “We respect him and the club respects him for what he’s 
done here. I really hope he finds a role he’s happy with at Swansea.”

As for Clement and his relationship with Ancelotti, there seems little 
prospect of them working together again. “That’s it now,” said Clement, 
smiling, when asked whether he could envisage being reunited with the Italian 
again. “We have not spoken about that and I don’t think we need to. I suppose 
it is never say never, but the chances of that happening are less than before. 
All my focus is on being successful here and not doing that again.”
 