
The extraordinary events at Craven Park last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/hull-kr-salford-red-devils-super-league-million-pound-game-match-report>
 were surreal enough for most of us but stranger still for Paul Cooke, watching 
on TV in Portugal, surrounded by his Leigh Centurions team. Having helped 
mastermind Leigh’s promotion the weekend before, assistant coach Cooke had been 
enjoying the end of season trip until two minutes from the end of Hull KR’s 
relegation decider with Salford. In a Portuguese hotel bar, Cooke watched on 
flabbergasted as his former club, the team he supported as a boy, and the club 
he signed for in one of the most controversial transfer stories of the modern 
era, contrived to concede nine points in three astonishing minutes to exit the 
Super League trapdoor in spectacular fashion.

“I was absolutely devastated for the people at Hull Kingston Rovers,” said 
Cooke, who spent three years at the Robins after that seismic move from bitter 
rivals Hull FC. “I know what the club and Super League means to them. I’m an 
East Hull boy. Hull and rugby league in general will be a worse place without 
Hull KR inSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague>. The 
most gutting thing is you lose the derby: the revenue, the excitement, the buzz 
around the place. And away grounds lose 1,200 to 2,000 fans going away every 
fortnight, so there’s an impact on everyone in the league.”

Salford win Million Pound Game to relegate Hull KR after stunning finale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/hull-kr-salford-red-devils-super-league-million-pound-game-match-report>
Like hundreds of Rovers fans who stood transfixed by the horror show they had 
just witnessed for up to an hour afterSalford had snatched that 19-18 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/hull-kr-salford-red-devils-super-league-million-pound-game-match-report>
, Cooke was gobsmacked and sat starring at the screen while the Leigh players 
scorned his emotional reaction. “I couldn’t quite believe you could lose a game 
with 90 seconds left and eight points up. When Salford got the first try I 
still thought ‘they can’t do it as there’s only more set and it’s difficult to 
go 100m in a set,’ and nothing in the game before then suggested they could do 
that.”

There has been criticism of Thomas Minns for not giving away a penalty on the 
final tackle in regulation time, something that would almost certainly have 
preserved the win Rovers needed to stay up. But Cooke has empathy for the 
former Leeds and London centre. “When a break is made and you make a tackle, 
your natural instinct is to get off, not lie on and give away a professional 
foul. I’m not sure you can train for that scenario. Your body goes into what 
you’ve learned and Thomas has done what he’s been taught to do since he was six 
years old: roll away and get prepared to make the next tackle. Maybe he should 
have done and could have done, but hindsight is a wonderful thing. If I was out 
there, possibly I would have shouted ‘lie on’ and given a penalty away. With 
one play remaining and a 12-man defensive line they wouldn’t have scored but 
Thomas has done what is natural to every rugby league player in the country.”

After a low-profile couple of seasons coaching league and union in Doncaster, 
winding up a rollercoaster of a playing career at Featherstone Rovers, and 
joining Leigh’s staff for their successful Championship campaign, Cooke has 
been back in the limelight this week.His autobiography “Judas?” 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Judas-Story-Paul-Cooke/dp/1785312057>, written with 
TalkSPORT presenter and Hull FC fanaticAdrian Durham 
<https://twitter.com/talkSPORTDrive>, is out this week and has made headlines 
for the stories of alcohol abuse, violence, court cases, loyalty and betrayal. 
Most rugby league fans will find it fascinating, those from the East Riding 
will be transfixed. Now Cooke has found himself coaching the team that has 
taken his boyhood club’s place in the top flight.

So what can Hull KR learn from Leigh’s experiences of being the Championship’s 
tall poppies? “There’s a blueprint from what Leigh have done this year,” says 
Cooke, a decade on from his three England appearances. “They can win in second 
gear and blood some new players. The Championship and the Middle 8s are two 
completely different competitions.Hull KR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hullkr> could fall into a lull of poor 
standards and sloppiness because they won’t need to be at their best to win in 
the Championship but that won’t do them any good come the Middle 8s. You can 
win spending £1.2m and keeping back some money for July and August. We learned 
you need to spend £1.6, 1.7m to bring in Super League quality players for the 
Middle 8s.

“What Leigh did was learn from the first year when they won the league at a 
canter with everyone playing a lot of minutes when they could have rested 
players. They went into the Middle 8s with major players carrying more niggles 
than they could have had. They also learned to shut their mouths! The owner 
Derek Beaumont learned to be quieter and the new coach Neil Jukes went about 
his business really respectfully. I needed to stress to them to leave the 
playing and coaching department to players and the coaches and get your 
chequebook out when it’s needed. We made some higher profile signings towards 
the end. We had a real stab at Jarryd Hayne, which probably would have paid for 
itself, and that was pretty close. That put us on the map and we spent really 
wisely on what we needed for the play-offs. But there’s no guarantee you will 
bounce back next year.”

The future of Hull KR will rely heavily on the financial commitment of owner 
Neil Hudgell. With crowds, sponsorship and central funding all plummeting in 
the second tier, Hudgell and his board will need to have nerves of steel and 
play the long game.

“You can be spending three-quarters of a million of your own money to keep the 
squad together in the first year and it doesn’t work, and all of sudden it’s 
one and half million,” pondered Cooke. “There’s an element of ‘How deep are 
your pockets and how long are your arms?’. You’ve got to be really shrewd and 
smart. The new coach (former Australia head coach Tim Sheens, who agreed to 
join before relegation) will attract players but they will have to give the 
right exposure to their youngsters and overpay the right players to get them to 
play in the Championship. A hundred grand player probably would never drop down 
but an 80 grand player might come down to play in the Championship for a 
hundred grand. They’ve got to balance that out: let those players who don’t 
want to be there to leave before their negative attitudes derail the season, 
and sign players with the appetite to play in the Championship.”

Clubcall: Catalans Dragons

What a difference a year makes. Morgan Escaré was one of the stars of Super 
League in 2015, a thrilling, unpredictable mini-marvel who exploded out of 
full-back for Catalans Dragons. 2016 has been disastrous for him, with no 
explanation.

He lost his place to London Broncos’ flop and converted centre Tony Gigot, 
ended up playing for their reserve team, Saint-Estève, was released by the 
Dragons and now hasn’t even made the France squad to face England in Avignon on 
22 October. Likewise John Boudebza, a real find by Hull KR in 2015, who played 
in the Challenge Cup final but, after an extremely harsh suspension in spring, 
opted to turn down a new deal by the Robins and was axed from the squad. He is 
currently without a club. A third exciting creative Frenchman, Éloi Pélissier, 
is off to Leigh having looked set for a long career at the Dragons or an even 
stronger Super League club. Meanwhile, French teenager Levy Nzoungou is leaving 
St Helens for Melbourne Storm! C’est la vie.

Foreign quota

Surreal goings on across the pond. Last week, centre Akarika Dawn scored the 
opening try on his debut for Canada in their 14-8 defeat to the USA in Toronto 
... three years after playing for the USA against Canada! The Hawks completed 
their Colonial Cup triumph by winning the return leg 20-14 in Delaware on 
Saturday night. Texan Dawn, 32, is a former Colorado University linebacker who 
now lives in Canada.

USA captain and London Broncos forward Mark Offerdahl, who missed the 
double-header with Canada, expects the Hawks to have around 10 Antipodean 
professionals in their 2017 World Cup squad, including several fellow Rugby 
League World Cup 2013 veterans: former Wigan and current Gold Coast Titans prop 
Eddie Pettybourne, Parramatta Eels’ three-quarter Bureta Faraimo, and hooker 
Joel Luani, who spent this season back in rugby union after leaving Wests 
Tigers. Luani has played several times for Tonga since his last USA appearance, 
while US World Cup skipper Joseph Paulo, having been left out of Cronulla’s 
Grand Final team has now also missed selection for his preferred option, Samoa! 
I have no idea why Luani, whose two brothers play American football at 
University of Utah, doesn’t use his real name: Haveatama Sioelipulu Halafungami.

Goal-line drop-out

Does this sound familiar? Excited day-trippers boarding the tube wearing team 
jerseys of every club in the league, descending on the national stadium from 
all over the country on a proud pilgrimage to pay homage to the minority sport 
they love; fans mingling on the walk down Wembley Way, sitting on the grass 
drinking, eating and soaking up the atmosphere. No, it’s not the Challenge Cup 
final, but the opening game of theNFL’s International Series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/jacksonville-jaguars-indianapolis-colts-wembley>
.

Gaelic footballers have shone in the AFL. Will college athletes from the US be 
next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/oct/05/afl-gaelic-footballers-america-nfl-nba-australia>
Pre-match last Sunday reminded me of what the Challenge Cup used to be like, 
as recently as five or six years ago. Unlike our special London day, there were 
far more fans of NFL clubsnot playing than there were Jacksonville Jaguars or 
Indianapolis Colts. The NFL invest heavily and it shows: it’s a remarkable, 
relentless entertainment show, interspersed with bursts of oval ball sport.

Both clubs have a league link. In partnership with local club Jax Axemen, the 
Jags have hosted rugby league on several occasions since Halifax, 
Huddersfield-Sheffield, Leeds and the US all played in the Sunshine State 
Challenge during pre-season 15 years ago. And in 1953, American Allstars 
halfback Gary Kerkorian left his team-mates in Sydney to head to Baltimore to 
sign for the Colts. He went on to win an NFL Championship ring as third string 
quarter-back to Johnny Unitas in 1958.

Kerkorian was one of five Allstars who played rugby and football at Stanford 
Uni, also alma mater of Colts QB Andrew Luck, who showed off some fine rugby 
skills on Sunday with several two-handed lateral passes. When he tried to fool 
the Jags’ defence with a free-form rugby move in the final play of the game, it 
all went oval-shaped.

Fifth and last 

Team talks are a waste of time – and I heard hundreds of them as a professional
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2016/aug/02/team-talks-waste-time-footballer-manager>
It’s not often you get to write about Scarborough and Paris Saint-Germain – 
let alone rugby league and football – in the same article, but our Guardian 
Sports Network colleagues atWhen Saturday Comes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog> gave me that 
rare opportunity in this month’s mag. The feature focussed on football clubs 
who, in the 1980s and 1990s, launched rugby league teams in the misguided 
attempt to broaden their sporting base and appeal. All have failed, some more 
spectacularly than others.

Neil Warnock had just helped Scarborough into the Football League when the 
club’s chairman, Geoffrey Richmond, decided McCain Stadium could do with more 
activity and launched the Pirates. They lasted one dismal season in the third 
tier. Paris Saint-Germain managed two in Super League before finance and French 
immigration pulled the rug. Efforts by Cardiff City (Blue Dragons), Carlisle 
United (Border Raiders), Preston North End (Lancashire Lynx), Maidstone United 
(Kent Invicta) and even Olympique Marseilles under Jean Tigana have been 
equally dire. Only Fulham RLFC, in the guise of London Broncos, lived to tell 
the tale.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 