
Alan Curtis was merely saying what plenty of people had been thinking on 
Saturday evening as the lights went out at the Liberty Stadium in the wake of
yet another defeat and news filtered through that Paul Clement had agreed to 
become Swansea City’s new manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/swansea-city-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
. “He had the security of a top job at Bayern Munich but he wanted the 
challenge,” Curtis, Swansea’s first-team coach, saidafter the win at Crystal 
Palace on Tuesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/crystal-palace-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
. “I told him if I was him I would have stayed in Germany.”

Working alongside Carlo Ancelotti at Bayern Munich, enjoying the view from the 
top of the Bundesliga during the winter break and looking forward to a 
Champions League tie against Arsenal next month sounds like a reasonable gig 
and, on the face of it, a lot more appealing than taking over at Swansea, who 
hadjust sacked their second manager in the space of 85 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
 and were anchored to the foot of the Premier League table.

Yet Clement was never going to be satisfied with spending the rest of his 
career as a No2, no matter how much respect he has for Ancelotti, who has 
become a good friend as well as a mentor. The tall, imposing figure who was 
striding along the touchline at Crystal Palace – “like a boxer about to walk 
into the ring” observed one of his former Chelsea colleagues the following 
morning – is intent on making his mark as a manager,with his harsh dismissal at 
Derby County last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/08/derby-county-paul-clement-sacked>
, after eight months in charge, doing nothing to alter that view.

Derby were fifth at the time, five points off an automatic promotion place, 
when Clement was sacked following a run of seven matches without victory and 
few people within the club shared the view of Mel Morris, the owner, that it 
was the right decision.

Swansea’s Àngel Rangel sinks Crystal Palace to give Paul Clement hope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/crystal-palace-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
Morris said at the time that Derby had not made enough progress under Clement. 
An alternative take would be that Morris was interfering rather than letting 
Clement get on with a job that could still have ended in promotion. Either way, 
the record books show that Derby went on to finish exactly where they were when 
Clement departed and now sit seventh in the Championship.

It is hard to read anything definitive into Clement’s only previous experience 
as a manager, which is why in some respects his appointment at Swansea also 
represents a leap of faith on the part of the Premier League club, not just the 
man who has signed a two-and-a-half-year contract to replace Bob Bradley.

At the same time, it is easy to see why Swansea’s board have always been 
impressed by Clement whenever their paths have crossed. The former PE teacher 
has worked for some of Europe’s biggest clubs, including Chelsea, Paris 
Saint-Germain, Real Madrid and Bayern Munich, and has a reputation as an 
excellent coach, which fits with Swansea’s long-held view that the person 
picking the team should also be taking training in the week.

Those who have worked with Clement talk about his meticulous attention to 
detail – the dossiers compiled on Derby’s opponents brought a new meaning to 
the word thorough – as well as the way he diligently goes about his job, 
placing great emphasis on being organised on and off the pitch.

A quiet man with a big presence, Clement talks in considered but authoritative 
tones – everybody was impressed by the way he spoke at Swansea’s training 
ground on Wednesday before taking his first session – and it is evident that he 
has learned from Ancelotti that patience is one of the most important qualities 
for any coach to possess.

Swansea job excites Paul Clement: ‘It’s a big task but I think it can be done’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/paul-clement-appointed-swansea-city-manager>
There is a story at Chelsea about how one day Clement was furious with José 
Bosingwa, the Portuguese right-back, and ready to take him to task only for 
Ancelotti to put a hand on his assistant’s shoulder, urge him to remain calm 
and keep his counsel. Counting to five has long been one of Ancelotti’s ways of 
dealing with problems that could easily escalate.

Although Clement has talked about sharing the same footballing philosophy as 
Swansea, he is also a pragmatist. Perhaps one of the most relevant aspects of 
Clement’s work at Derby, in the context of the situation he has walked into at 
Swansea, is the way he made the team hard to beat for a period. Derby kept 12 
clean sheets during a 19-game spell when they lost once and climbed to the top 
of the Championship table.

Whether he can do something similar in the Premier League is a different 
matter and down to not just the standard of the opposition and the quality of 
his coaching, but also the ability of players he has inherited. Defensively, 
Swansea have been awful this season, conceding 44 goals in the 19 Premier 
League games before Clement’s arrival, and although there were some positive 
signs in the 2-1 win against Palace, when the new head coach quickly made his 
presence felt, it still feels as though a commanding centre-back is a priority 
in this transfer window.

At least three or four new faces are needed to reinvigorate a squad that has 
been allowed to stagnate and it will be intriguing to see whether Clement 
receives any help from that distinguished list of former clubs, perhaps in the 
form of loan deals for out-of-favour players, and the extent to which he is 
backed by Swansea’s American owners to put his own stamp on the team.

As much as the win at Palace has revived hope that Swansea can still escape 
the drop, Clement could not have picked a more daunting run of games to start 
with. In four of their next six Premier League fixtures Swansea host Arsenal 
and travel to Liverpool, Manchester City and Chelsea, rendering the other two 
matches, against Southampton and Leicester at home, must‑win. Come through that 
lot out of the relegation zone and even Curtis may start to think that Clement 
was right to swap Munich for the Mumbles.
 