
As an advertisement for the Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> manager’s job, this was about as 
damaging as it gets, yet a fourth successive defeat and the prospect of taking 
over the Premier League’s bottom team have not discouraged Paul Clement from 
accepting the offer to replace Bob Bradley.

Clement, Carlo Ancelotti’s No2 at Bayern Munich, has agreed in principle to 
become Swansea’s third manager of the season, with the 44-year-old to be 
appointed in the next 48 hours and expected to meet the players before Tuesday’s
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> game at 
Crystal Palace.

The paperwork has yet to be signed, but Swansea are confident that Clement 
will take a leap of faith and hopefully breathe fresh life into a group of 
players who look resigned to relegation. Totally outplayed byBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth>, Swansea are four points 
adrift of safety and it is difficult so see how Clement could take any 
positives from their latest listless performance.

Willian double sinks brave Stoke and extends Chelsea run to 13 straight wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
First-half goals from Benik Afobe and Ryan Fraser, followed by a late third 
from Josh King, allowed Bournemouth to ease to the most straightforward of away 
wins with Jack Wilshere outstanding in an advanced midfield role.

The margin of victory could have been even wider, such was the gulf between 
two clubs that set out to play the same way but are heading in opposite 
directions. Bournemouth are up to 10th place. Swansea are anchored to the foot 
of the table and staring at the possibility of playing Championship football 
next season unless they can produce an act of escapology to rival just about 
any other that the Premier League has witnessed over the years.

Alan Curtis, who was asked to take charge on a caretaker basis, talked about a 
crisis of confidence, yet there is a glaring lack of quality as well as 
self-belief. Bournemouth were superior in every department, controlling 
possession to such an extent that it felt like they were the home team. 
“Bournemouth were excellent,” he said. “They probably did to us what we used to 
do to teams.”

Next up for Swansea is the trip to Selhurst Park, where Clement is expected to 
watch from the stands. Highly rated as a coach, Clement has worked with the 
world’s top players as Ancelotti’s assistant at Chelsea, Paris Saint-Germain, 
Real Madrid and Bayern Munich. Yet his managerial experience is confined to the 
eight months he spent in charge of Derby last season and he is walking into a 
huge challenge at Swansea.

The club have lost eight of the past 12 games and conceded 32 goals in the 
process. Those sort of statistics will not be turned around on the training 
ground alone. Swansea need new players as badly as a new manager. But how much 
money will the club’s American owners be prepared to throw at what looks like a 
lost cause and, perhaps more to the point, what sort of players could Swansea 
hope to attract?

For the moment Curtis is ploughing on, preparing the team for the Palace game 
and doing his best to sound upbeat. “Naively or what, I still think there 
should be enough there to get better results,” he said. “But confidence in 
football is such a fragile thing. There are good players but once we concede 
you can see the confidence draining out of them.”

Afobe opened the scoring and it was the 14th time in 19 Premier League matches 
that Swansea have conceded first. It was also another piece of awful defending. 
Fraser, released by Wilshere, crossed from the left and Jordi Amat, who was 
surprisingly recalled, miscued, spearing the ball towards his own goal. Lukasz 
Fabianski managed to keep it out but Afobe was there to turn in the rebound, 
pivoting six yards out to sweep a left-foot shot past the Swansea goalkeeper.

Hal Robson-Kanu’s touch of class fires West Brom past Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/southampton-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
Wilshere was also involved in Bournemouth’s second goal, which was brilliantly 
worked and encapsulated what Eddie Howe’s team are all about. Harry Arter, 
Simon Francis and Junior Stanislas also played a part in a slick move down the 
Bournemouth right that ended with Fraser turning home from inside the six-yard 
box in first-half injury-time. “That was the key moment – we were dominating 
but the game’s on a knife-edge,” Howe said. “It was one of the goals of the 
season for us.”

The Bournemouth manager was full of praise for Wilshere, who showed some 
lovely touches and set up further chances for Stanislas and Afobe early in the 
second half. Those opportunities were squandered but the predictable third goal 
arrived two minutes from time when Charlie Daniels released King and the 
substitute sprinted clear before slipping the ball past Fabianski, wrapping up 
three points for Bournemouth and leaving Swansea with one hell of a survival 
battle on their hands.
 