
1. In relation to the following terms and conditions for payment to content 
suppliers, GNM should like to draw your attention to the express terms of your 
agreement to supply services to GNM regarding the indemnity you provide to GNM 
in respect of any claims from any taxing authorities relating to monies paid or 
payable to you by GNM (Status of Contributors and Suppliers as Independent 
Contractors).

2. Editorial desks initiate payments to content suppliers and unless otherwise 
agreed payment shall be made within 30 days of publication of your 
Contribution. It is the policy of GNM to make all payments on a self-billing 
basis and via electronic funds transfer facilities (BACS in the UK) into a bank 
account designated by the supplier. All charges levied by receiving banks to 
process payments from GNM shall be the liability of content suppliers without 
exception.

3. All new suppliers shall be contacted by GNM Accounts Payable to request 
bank account details, and a copy of their UK VAT Registration Certificate if 
appropriate. Suppliers that are US-based or who earn US-sourced income are 
required to comply withIRS guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2012/jul/12/contributor-irs-guidance-us-tax-compliance>
.

4. GNM asks that new suppliers do not submit payment details until such time 
as they are prompted to do so by GNM Accounts Payable.

5. In the event that suppliers notify GNM that they have appointed an agent a) 
to negotiate in all matters relating to their contribution(s); and/or b) to 
collect and receive all monies in respect of their contribution(s), then GNM 
shall be entitled to rely on such appointment being binding on the supplier and 
to conduct all negotiations with and/or to make all payment(s) to the appointed 
agent directly. The supplier hereby declares that the receipt of monies by the 
said agent shall be a good and valid discharge of GNM's payment liabilities.

6. Note for Agents: For UK VAT-registered suppliers represented by an agent 
where the supplier is the principal in supplying goods and services to GNM, in 
line with HMRC guidance notice 700 and in order to comply with self-billing 
regulations the self-billing agreement shall be between the supplier and GNM 
and GNM shall require the supplier's full name and trading name if applicable, 
a copy of their valid VAT registration certificate, their VAT registered 
address, and their UK VAT Registration number.

7. Suppliers shall be deemed to have entered into a self-billing agreement 
with GNM for a period of 12 months from the date of their first self-billing 
invoice. The self-billing agreement shall renew thereafter for further periods 
of 12 months on receipt of successive self-billing invoices from GNM.

8. During the period of the self-billing agreement suppliers agree not to 
raise sales invoices for any transactions between themselves and GNM. For an 
FAQ on GNM's self-bill policy, clickhere 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2010/09/02/SelfBillingFAQ.pdf>
.

9. GNM Accounts Payable may be contacted as follows:

By email: accounts.payable@theguardian.com (general enquiries) or 
supplier.details@theguardian.com (bank account / VAT / IRS details)
By post: Guardian News and Media Limited, Accounts Payable Department, PO Box 
68164, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1P 2AP
By fax: 020 7713 6086
By phone: 0203 353 3127 (general enquiries only)

10. It is in the supplier's interests to ensure that their payment details are 
kept current at all times in order to avoid unnecessary delays in making 
payments. Any difficulties over payment should be reported initially to GNM 
Accounts Payable as above.

11. For all payment of fees in respect of contributions commissioned by GNM 
agents, please follow instructions provided by the relevant agent.

12. Any deviations from GNM's standard payment procedures are subject to the 
prior approval of the Managing Editor.
 