 Alun Michael is planning to offer an olive branch today to rival Rhodri Morgan 
at the end of the intensely-fought Welsh leadership contest.
 Although the final votes will not be counted until this morning, Labour 
insiders predicted last night that Mr Michael will win.

 As leader of the Welsh party, Mr Michael is virtually guaranteed becoming the 
First Minister of the new Welsh Assembly in May.

 Both Mr Michael and Mr Morgan will address Labour candidates for the Welsh 
Assembly today in a hotel in Cardiff where the contest results will be 
announced.

 Mr Michael will ask Mr Morgan to enter into discussions with him about a job 
in the Welsh Assembly. No specific job will be mentioned today. Deputy leader 
would be the logical option, but Labour sources insisted no such post was 
planned.

 Mr Morgan refused to concede defeat last night: 'If Labour members vote in 
their ballot as union members did in their postal ballots, I will come top.'

 Asked about Mr Michael's job offer, he said it was premature to discuss jobs 
as it should be for the Assembly candidates to decide on the shape and timing 
of setting up a shadow cabinet.

 Of the figures announced so far, Mr Michael has won 21 per cent of the union 
votes against 12 per cent for Mr Morgan. The unions make up 33 per cent of the 
electoral college vote: the other sections are made up of constituency members 
and of MPs, MEPs and Assembly candidates.

 Mr Morgan won overwhelmingly where unions held postal ballots but lost out 
where old-style union machine politics came into play. This dependence on the 
union bloc vote, which goes against the grain of Tony Blair's modernisation 
drive, could leave a bad aftertaste and destabilise the Welsh Assembly.

In contrast with the union backing for Mr Michael, Mr Morgan was expected this 
morning to win overwhelmingly in the members' section, a ballot of the 25,000 
Labour Party members inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

 Failure by Mr Michael to win a majority here could leave him open to 
challenges to his legitimacy when the Assembly meets in May, with an outside 
chance of a renewed leadership contest.

 Mr Michael, the Welsh Secretary, was last night confident he will do better 
in the members' section than Mr Morgan has predicted. In an attempt to resolve 
divisions, Peter Hain, Mr Michael's campaign manager, was last night in a 
placatory mood. 'Rhodri will be a terrific asset to Labour's campaign and I 
want him involved,' he said.

 Mr Hain will confirm party support for a Welsh election manifesto promising 
more free nursery places, free bus travel for pensioners and lower hospital 
waiting lists and add that, with a new leader in place, the party should 
concentrate now on the election campaign.

 However, hopes of peace breaking out could prove over-optimistic. Mr Morgan 
last night described the manifesto as 'bland'.

 The Welsh Secretary's leadership campaign was boosted yesterday when he won 
the backing of one of the biggest unions in Wales, the GMB, which accounts for 
6.2 per cent of the electoral ballot. The GMB, in a press release, dressed up 
the result as 24,520 votes for Mr Michael against 11,060 for Mr Morgan. But 
this was misleading as there was no postal ballot, simply a consultation at 
branch level.
 