
They are home to a diverse range of wildlife and up to 8,000 years old. And, 
according to a damning analysis by an independent government advisory body, the 
UK’s upland peat bogs are facing a sustained threat from the shooting classes’ 
desire to bag grouse.

The Committee on Climate Change’s 2015 progress report 
<http://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/reducing-emissions-and-preparing-for-climate-change-2015-progress-report-to-parliament/>
 to parliament notes: “Wetland habitats, including the majority of upland areas 
with carbon-rich peat soils, are in poor condition. The damaging practice of 
burning peat to increase grouse yields continues, including on internationally 
protected sites.”

Burning creates different heather habitats. Young heather is nutritious while 
more established heather provides a place for nesting grouse. Creating a 
patchwork comprising heather of different lengths is a land management tool 
that experienced gamekeepers can use to increase grouse yields.

This is an attractive prospect for the new wave of grouse moor owners bringing 
market forces to the once fusty world of shooting. In the past couple of 
decades, City financiers such as the multimillionaire hedge fund manager Jeremy 
Herrmann, and businessmen such as David Ross, co-founder of Carphone Warehouse, 
have been buying up estates and raising the profile of their shoots.

With clients paying more than £150 to bag only a single brace of grouse, 
estate owners know that delivering a plentiful supply of targets makes sound 
business sense. It also adds to their considerable net worth because the 
capital value of a grouse moor is based on its grouse population. The birds are 
valued at anything between £2,500 and £5,000 a brace.

“It probably is fair to say there has been more burning in recent years 
compared to the preceding decade, and a lot of that is to do with reinvestment 
in estates because new entrepreneurs are coming in,” said Amanda Anderson, 
director of theMoorland Association <http://www.moorlandassociation.org>. “A 
lot of the estates are getting back to their prewar potential. They’re possibly 
at their optimal level now [in terms of burning].”

Estate owners insist they are true conservationists, spending millions of 
pounds maintaining the moors. But the use of fire is deeply controversial. 
Burning vegetation leaves peat exposed. This is a concern for conservationists. 
Not only does peatland provide a home for many different types of wildlife, 
including dragonflies and other insects, help clean water and prevent floods, 
it is also rich in carbon. If it is disturbed and exposed to the air, the 
carbon stored in its soil decomposes and releases carbon dioxide, contributing 
to climate change.

According to the RSPB <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rspb>, some 
76,000 hectares, or 27% of the UK’s blanket bog, have already lost peat-forming 
vegetation due to regular burning. In a briefing produced last year, the 
society claimed: “If we don’t restore upland peatlands, CO2 emissions from 
degraded peatlands are likely to increase by 30% for every 1C rise in average 
global temperature. Peatlands with healthy ecosystems are by contrast expected 
to be relatively robust to climate change.”

Work by scientists at Durham University’s Department of Earth Sciences, funded 
by the pro-shootingGame and Wildlife Conservation Trust 
<https://www.gwct.org.uk>, has been cited to counter some of these claims. One 
paper concluded that “prescribed burning of moorland vegetation had no 
significant effect on DOC [dissolved organic carbon] concentrations in soil 
water or surface runoff water in the years following burning”. Another 
concluded: “It is clear that burn management represents a technique for 
avoiding losses of carbon in Calluna [heather] dominated peatlands.”

However, Pat Thompson, senior uplands policy officer at the RSPB, said there 
was no doubt that burning damaged peatland. “The research that has been done to 
date suggests to us that, when you burn that vegetation off, whether it’s dwarf 
shrubs like heather or mossy vegetation, you are left with a bare peat surface 
that is really vulnerable to drying out. The peat blows away or washes away as 
sediment. Over a period of time, big areas of our peatland have fallen into a 
really poor state. They are carbon rich, they are often at the heart of some of 
our key drinking water catchment areas, and these are nationally and 
internationally important wildlife sites.”

The row between the RSPB and the grouse moor owners has been joined by You 
Forgot the Birds (YFTB) <http://www.youforgotthebirds.com>, a new campaign 
group fronted by the former England cricketer Sir Ian Botham. It claims the 
RSPB is focusing on issues such as climate change at the expense of bird 
protection. But it is unclear who is funding YFTB. On its website, it claims to 
represent gamekeepers, bird lovers and farmers. However, its spokesman, Ian 
Gregory, who works for PR company Centaurus Communications, declined to name 
its funders. This refusal has prompted claims, denied by the YFTB, that it is a 
front organisation for some of Britain’s wealthiest landowners keen to repel 
the environmental lobby.

With grouse moors becoming a battleground in the global warming debate, there 
are now calls for gamekeepers to use alternatives to burning, such as grazing. 
“It’s a question of what’s possible,” Anderson said. “There are places you 
wouldn’t want to drive a tractor or a mower. These are heavy machines on 
fragile surfaces.”

But Thompson said it was time to rethink the burning of Britain’s countryside: 
“It is utterly perverse to me that we are degrading our uplands in a way that 
benefits the minority rather than society as a whole.”
 