
A small dinosaur that scampered across north-western China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 160m years ago boasted a trait not 
seen in any other dinosaur or other prehistoric creature: it was born with 
teeth but became toothless by adulthood.

Scientists said fossils of 19 individuals of a dinosaur called Limusaurus, 
ranging in age from under a year to 10 years, showed that juveniles had small, 
sharp teeth but adults developed a toothless beak.

Only rarely have scientists found fossils of a dinosaur species ranging from 
babies to adults, a sequence revealing anatomical changes that unfold as an 
animal matures.


 Limusaurus was a lightly built two-legged dinosaur with short arms and long, 
slender legs. It may have had down-like feathers covering at least part of its 
body. The largest ones were just under two metres long. This cluster of 
dinosaurs, found in Xinjiang province, apparently became trapped in a mud pit 
and died.

Dinosaur tail trapped in amber offers insights into feather evolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/08/dinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution>
“It probably looked something like an emu with a long tail,” said Joey 
Stiegler, a paleontologist at George Washington University and one of the 
researchers behind the study published in the journal CurrentBiology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/biology>.

 Such tooth loss is called ontogenetic edentulism. Some animals alive today 
have it, including the egg-laying Australian mammal the platypus.

 The adult Limusaurus were found with stones called gastroliths that some 
plant-eating dinosaurs swallowed to grind up plant material in the stomach. The 
babies lacked these.

 The tooth loss and gastroliths indicate Limusaurus underwent a dramatic 
dietary change from birth to adulthood, starting life perhaps eating insects 
and small vertebrates before later turning to plants.

 Limusaurus is a member of the theropod dinosaur group within which birds 
evolved.

James Clark, a paleontologist at George Washington University, said the 
findings suggested species close to the origin of birds might have gone through 
a similar development, and tooth loss might have been gradual during the 
evolutionary origin of birds.

 “This is important in showing that growth and development in dinosaurs was 
more complex than previously suspected, and it provides a model for a stage 
that birds may have gone through in evolving their beak,” Clark added.

Birds <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/birds>, first appearing about 
150m years ago, evolved from small feathered dinosaurs. The earliest ones had 
teeth. Over tens of millions of years, many evolved toothless beaks like those 
in today’s birds. The last birds with teeth died with the dinosaurs, about 66m 
years ago.
 