
The Barcelona coach, Pep Guardiola, paid tribute to his captain, Carles Puyol, 
following his side's 1-0 win overSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>. The versatile Puyol 
filled in at right-back to cover the absence of the injured Dani Alves and 
helped Barça record their fifth successive clean sheet in the league and cup.

"We wouldn't be where we are this season without him," said Guardiola of the 
Spain international. "He's the player who's performed most often and he's 
solving a lot of problems."

Guardiola was also pleased with his side's overall display against Sporting, 
although he felt they could have done better in front of goal. Barça had plenty 
of chances to make the scoreline more comfortable but in the end had to settle 
for Pedro Rodríguez's solitary first-half strike.

"We played well, but we didn't take the right decisions when we should have 
sealed the game. However, I'm very happy with my players' attitude and their 
willingness to work hard," added Guardiola. "We were very solid. We were facing 
very lively opponents with a great home record – not many teams win here. We 
were very strong in defence and they had nothing more than a couple of 
long-range shots."

Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> avoided falling 
further behind in the title race by ending their 18-year winless run at 
Deportivo La Coruña's Riazor stadium. The manager, Manuel Pellegrino, was 
delighted with the result but played down suggestions the 3-1 victory might 
have been their best performance of the season.

No Madrid team had returned from Deportivo's home ground with a win since the 
1991-92 season, and each of their previous six visits to the Riazor had ended 
in defeat. Madrid were also without eight senior players, including their top 
scorers, Gonzalo Higuaín and Cristiano Ronaldo.

After Barcelona's win earlier in the evening, the pressure was on Madrid, who 
had taken just one point from their previous two away games, but they responded 
with a magnificent first-half display that saw them score twice through Esteban 
Granero and Karim Benzema.

Madrid were not as convincing after the break, but still held on to record the 
victory with Benzema netting his second in injury time after fifth-placed Depor 
had pulled a goal back moments earlier through Riki's penalty.

"I'm very happy for the win because traditionally it's a very difficult ground 
for Real Madrid. The team have played a very good game and we are pleased," 
said Pellegrini.

"I think this team has played very good matches throughout the season. 
Honestly I don't think it's been the best game. I think we had as good a game 
in Bilbao [a 1-0 defeat to Athletic in Madrid's previous away match], although 
there we lost. We went out to take the initiative from the first moment."

The Madrid midfielder Guti, whose audacious back-heel set up Benzema for their 
second goal, believes the victory showed they are a great side.

Apart from Higuaín and Ronaldo, Madrid were also without Pepe, Ezequiel Garay, 
Rafael van der Vaart, Lassana Diarra, Fernando Gago and Mahamadou Diarra, and 
Pellegrini was forced to name four youngsters from the reserve side on the 
bench.

"We hadn't won here for many years. We had a great first half, creating many 
chances," said Guti. "We've shown that we are a great team and we are still 
fighting."
 