
“If Real Betis sack me, no problem,” Pepe Mel said, so Real Betis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> sacked him – two years and two 
months after the last time. History repeated itself, that same recurring dream: 
the one that starts with him riding to the rescue, resuscitating them, but ends 
in tears, the hero watching it all slip inexplicably through his fingers. The 
man who saved Betis twice and brought them back twice has now been fired twice; 
maybe next time he’ll think twice. Last time, he didn’t. “Betis is my team, the 
club of my life, where I am happy,” he said. That was December 2014; thirteen 
months on, he’s gone again, the news broken to him by everyone except the man 
who was supposed to break it to him.

Mel watched the end come through a window at the Coliseum. Suspended, he spent 
Saturday night’s game against Getafe in a radio booth at the top of the main 
stand. Down below he saw chances go by, from Alfred N’Diaye in particular, and 
he saw Álvaro Vázquez squeeze in the game’s only goal for Getafe, making it 
eight games without a win for Betis, five without even scoring a goal. “Betis 
have to offer more and the coach is the man with the greatest responsibility,” 
he conceded afterwards. “I know what this world I’m part of is like and if Real 
Betis decide to sack me, no problem.” He knows, alright, and not just because 
of the results. Maybe not even because of the results.

Former Swansea striker Michu rebuilding career in Spain’s fourth tier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/swansea-striker-michu-rebuilding-career-spain>
The writing was on the wall. At the club’s training ground, there was graffiti 
attacking the manager and his “mercenary” players. When he arrived back at 
Santa Justa station, cameras followed him. “I’m so famous,” he smiled, 
sarcastically. The following day a board meeting was called for late afternoon 
and went on for five hours. When finally they’d agreed to sack him, it was 
almost eleven o’clock. They tried to call him, but his phone was off. He found 
out anyway; Mel saw his sacking on Twitter. “I’d like to apologise for that. 
Someone leaked it in the short time between deciding and being able to talk to 
him,” said the president, Juan Carlos Ollero.

And so the circle was completed again: salvation, promotion, the sack. 

Top scorer when Betis won promotion to the first division in 1989-90, Mel 
first became the club’s manager in 2010. Relegated the previous season, they 
were “dead”, in the words of one player. Taken into administration, there was a 
legal battle over shares which is still not resolved - one which has seen them 
have six presidents in six years - and a power vacuum into which he stepped. 
Turning to him had made sense: he was abético with a season ticket at the 
Benito Villamarín, a man who connected with the fans like few others. And above 
all he was cheap. It turned out he was also rather good.

Real Betis sack Pepe Mel after eight games without a win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/11/real-betis-sack-pepe-mel> 
Drawing mostly on young players, Beñat Exteberría, Adrián San Miguel and José 
Cañas among them, Mel took Betis to the title and back to the first division. 
The year after that, they qualified for Europe. But it did not last. Mel once 
claimed that he’d rather his daughter fell pregnant than Betis got relegated, 
and that was becoming a distinct possibility. The relegation, that is. 
Everythingthat could go wrong was going wrong: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/04/la-liga-real-betis-malaga>
 key players were injured or sold, the differences between him and the sporting 
director, Vlada Stosic, and others on the board were increasingly apparent, and 
ultras had invaded training. Results were bad and performances worse.

Mel had rebuilt Betis but he was sacked fifteen weeks into the 2013-14 season 
after three and a half years in charge, with the team bottom. “This is the 
press conference I hope never to have to give,” he said, his voice cracking, 
his eyes stinging as the cameras flashed, getting up quickly and dashing behind 
the sponsors’ backdrop where he could shed a tear in private. Through the 
walls, fans could be heard chanting his name and throwing stones at the 
stadium. The support that had been his great strength had ultimately undermined 
him, serving to make him less popular with some directors, who resented his 
popularity and saw him as a manipulator of the masses. When they could act 
against him, they did.

Fans waited for the manager outside, cheering him as he drove away. 385 days 
later, he drove back again. He’d been toWest Brom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/16/pepe-mel-west-bromwich-albion-real-betis>
 in the meantime. “How have you changed?” he was asked. “I speak a bit of 
English now,” he said. Betis had changed too, or so it seemed: this was a 
different board now, a new president and a new era.

Besides, they needed him. Things had not gone well without him; his departure 
had only made things worse, the institutional crisis engulfing them. Mel’s 
successor Juan Carlos Garrido lasted forty-eight mostly angry days as manager; 
“there are too many fronts open,”he complained. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/20/la-liga-roundup-real-betis-sid-lowe>
 Gabi Calderón followed him and could do nothing to prevent relegation, Betis
surrendering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/apr/21/paulao-real-betis-la-liga-sid-lowe>
 before a disastrous season was out. And under Julio Vázquez in the Second 
Division, there wasn’t much sign of them coming back.

Atlético Madrid beat Celta Vigo to reclaim La Liga top from Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/celta-vigo-atletico-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
By winter 2014, they made a change. Vázquez was sacked, but no one else was 
signed yet. Betis had been looking for a manager for twenty-seven days, a deal 
virtually done with Fernando Vázquez, when they hit upon the idea of calling 
Mel. He was hanging around in the city doing nothing, after all. In fact, he 
was hanging round in the stadium most Sundays. He admitted that the first time 
was “traumatic,” that it had “hurt”, but he was optimistic and he was home. 
“Why had they waited so long?”, he was asked. “Good question,” Mel said. “But I 
want to be positive.”

Interim manager Juan Merino had won four in a row, leaving to applause and the 
bumps from his players and stepping aside for Mel to take over with the team 
sixth, eight points off promotion. “We have to go up, come what may,” Mel said, 
and they did. With two weeks still to go they won the title with a 3-0 win over 
Alcorcón in front of 50,000 fans. They’d racked up eighty-four points. Under 
Mel their record read: won 15, draw 6, lost 1. “I hope this is the last 
promotion we ever have to win,” he said.

It still might be, and not just because of the man who comes in. For now, 
incidentally, it is Merino again, but he is not expected to stay for long. Mel 
has been sacked with Betis fifteenth, five points from the relegation zone and 
three points off the top half, which is not so bad. But things have changed 
since last season, and there has been a sense that things are just not quite 
right. His daughter got married, for a start. Worse, she got married to a
Sevillista - the son of former president José María Del Nido, a board member at 
the Sánchez Pizjuán.

Betis have scored only thirteen goals all season, their plan mostly just to 
give the ball to Joaquín and hope that he can invent something. They have won 
once at home - and that was against David Moyes’s Real Sociedad. They were 
beaten at home by Sevilla in the Copa del Rey, meaning that in all likelihood, 
they will be knocked out tomorrow night. No one has scored fewer goals this 
season. And Mel’s relationship with the sporting director has become tense too. 
Not with Stosic this time but with Eduardo Macià, once of Liverpool. Eight 
players departed, ten arrived. The manager has not been impressed.

In October graffiti at the training ground insisted: “If we have to be 
relegated to the third division, let it be with the man who brought us back to 
the first.” While an opinion is no more valid because the person holding it is 
also carrying a can of spray paint, that message has changed now. On Saturday 
night, fresh graffiti read: “Mel, you don’t feel the colours.” It was quite 
some accusation to level at someone with over three hundred games and three 
promotions to his name, as a player and a manager, and others are firmly on his 
side, the board blamed for another sacking that, on top of it all, was handled 
badly, but it was telling too.

Betis was supposed to be the club where Mel was happiest, where he is most 
loved, but he has not been happy. A few weeks ago, he admitted that there were 
“other reasons” why it wasn’t working, things that he could not say, but 
increasingly he has said so, publicly pointing the finger at the construction 
of the squad. Which is rarely a good way of staying in a job; in fact, at times 
it felt almost like he wanted to be sacked. And on Saturday night, he said it. 
“If Real Betis sack me, no problem,” Pepe Mel said Real Betis did.

Again.

Talking points

• Atlético Madrid are Winter Champions. (Sort of). They reach the half way 
stage of the season, when every team has played every other team once (sort 
of), at the top of the table after a hugely impressive 2-0 victory in Vigo. The 
first, scored by Antoine Griezmann was superb. Atlético stand four points clear 
of Real Madrid and two ahead of Barcelona, who have a game in hand to play, 
against Sporting (hence thosesort of’s). They have conceded just eight goals in 
19 games and are lookingstronger all the time. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/07/atletico-madrid-la-liga-sid-lowe>
 “It was muddy, heavy and it wasn’t easy,” Carrasco said. Asked if Atlético are 
contenders, he replied: “If we’re top ...” pausing to add: “If we can keep on 
like this, we can do something important this year.”

• Krychowiak kicked the floor, flew into the air and got a penalty for it 
Kevin Gameiro scored. It was the second of the game as Sevilla defeated 
Athletic 2-0. There was good news for Athletic, though: Raúl García was carried 
off but tests have shown that his injury is not as serious as first feared.

Football Weekly: Liverpool survive, United bore, but Oxford shock Swansea in 
the FA Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/jan/11/football-weekly-liverpool-survive-united-bore-but-oxford-shock-swansea-in-the-fa-cup>
• Perhaps the week’s best news came down in tercera ... 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/swansea-striker-michu-rebuilding-career-spain>

• Eibar. 30 points. A European place. And deservedly so. Wow. “This is not us 
winning games by the skin of our teeth,” Mendilíbar said, quite rightly. “Of 19 
games, we have probably only had two bad ones.”

• Levante got a huge, huge win over Rayo Vallecano at the Ciutat de Valencia 
and Deyverson celebrated his strike by doing a bit of a Pat Cash, running over 
to the fans, climbing over the advertising boards and making his way through 
the crowd to his family, seven rows up, embracing his dad. It was the first 
time his family have been able to travel to Europe to see him play and it was 
such a special moment that when he got back to the pitch the referee was 
waiting for him too. With a yellow card.

• Villarreal have now won six in a row but they won’t win much more if they 
play like this. That’s what coach Marcelino thinks anyway. “We produced two 
brilliant plays and nothing else,” he said. “If we play like this, we will drop 
a long way down the table.” For now, at least, they are fourth, on 39 points, 
having matched their best ever first half to a season. Roberto Soldado did it 
again. No, not score: assist. No one inLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> has more assists than 
him. “I admit that [the attacking partnership] is the opposite way round to how 
I expected, but he’s playing very well,” Marcelino said.

• Gary Neville’s Valencia were beaten 2-0 at Real Sociedad and are still 
awaiting their first league win under him.

• Gareth Bale took a souvenir home from Zinedine Zidane’s first game in charge:
the match ball. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/real-madrid-gareth-bale-zinedine-zidane-deportivo-la-coruna-la-liga-match-report>
“We feel sorry for Rafa, but you only have to look at the performances, 
really,” Luka Modric said.

• At least someone did. A week on and still no one from Real Madrid has 
bothered to explain the decision to sack Rafa Benítez, or even take 
responsibility for it. The president who called the media in to blame denounce 
a conspiracy against the club and insist that Benítez was not in danger and 
just needed to be “given time”, the president who sacked him just thirteen days 
after going on the radio to insist that he was the “solution”, decided that 
this time he didn’t need to answer questions. And nor, the following day, did 
the institutional director Emilio Butragueño. “That doesn’t matter now,” he 
said. No contrition, just celebration. Barely even a thanks, or a goodbye. 
Certainly no apology. Instead, it is like Rafa Benítez never happened.

“Five coaches since 2009. Is it always the manager’s fault?” Carlo Ancelotti 
said, saying much.

• Messi scored a hat-trick and took home the match ball. Tonight he’ll 
probably take home the golden ball.Etc and so on. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/10/lionel-messi-ballon-dor-neymar-cristiano-ronaldo>

Results: Barcelona 4 -0 Granada, Getafe 1 - 0 Betis, Sevilla 2 - 0 Athletic, 
Real Madrid 5 - 0 Deportivo, Levante 2 - 1 Rayo, Villarreal 2 - 0 Sporting, 
Real Sociedad 2 - 0 Valencia, Eibar 2 - 1 Espanyol, Las Palmas 1 - 1 Málaga, 
Celta 0 - 2 Atlético.
 