
Perpetual Loyal has stormed to victory in the 72nd Sydney to Hobart race and 
posted a new race record in the process.


On her way to glory the supermaxi averaged speeds of 16 knots, dismantling the 
old marker set by eight-time line honours winner Wild Oats XI by almost five 
hours.

“Our navigator picked everything, he did an awesome job,” said skipper Anthony 
Bell – who was celebrating his second line honours triumph after knocking off 
the fleet aboard Investec Loyal in 2011.

The last two outings in the blue water classic had been a perpetual 
disappointment for Bell and his crew – forced to retire from the Sydney to 
Hobart in 2014 and 2015.

Sailor Thomas Coville sets new solo round the world record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/sailor-thomas-coville-sets-new-solo-round-the-world-record>
But it was third time lucky for Loyal, and the crew aboard the towering one 
hundred footer didn’t waste any time celebrating once reaching the dry land of 
Hobart’s Constitution Dock at 2.31am on Wednesday.

At this stage it seems unlikely the boat will return in 2017 to defend her 
crown “With all my heart, no. The boat is a great boat and it needs the next 
owner, someone to jump into it with passion and enthusiasm. It is a boat that 
has just broken a record,” said Bell.

A line honours win over their old rival Wild Oats XI would have been cause for 
celebration – but the fact they obliterated the eight time winner’s race record 
in the process – was the icing on top.

After Wild Oats XI abandoned the race following the first night of sailing it 
became clear that this was Loyal’s race to lose and after boat breakdowns 
hindered their progress in the previous two incarnations of the race you would 
be forgiven for assuming they would try and nurse the boat to the line.

Far from it, with tactics being shouted out by Olympian Tom Slingsby, the 
supermaxi attacked with her bowsprit chasing down a new record to post a time 
of one day, 13 hours and 31 minutes.

It truly was a motoring effort from a carbon fibre yacht that had previously 
competed under the name Speedboat – and it returned the win to Australian hands 
after the American entry Comanche claimed offshore racing’s top prize 12 months 
ago.

New Zealand entry Giacomo couldn’t spoil the New South Wales entrant’s run but 
became the second boat to celebrate crossing the finishing marker. It was a 
dazzling race from winemaker Jim Delegat who was joined on board by his sons 
aged 18 and 20.

The yacht, despite being two-thirds the size of the imposing Loyal, finished 
less than two hours behind the race winner.

The Volvo 70’s rapid run has left her in the box seat to take out the 
Tattersall’s Cup, awarded to the handicap winner – the fastest yacht on 
corrected time.

It will take an equally impressive performance to topple the New Zealand boat 
from her perch – although a host of 52 footers are in contention of doing just 
that – including last year’s handicap winner Balance.

Wild Oats XI pulls out of Sydney to Hobart after leading overnight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/27/sydney-to-hobart-race-leader-wild-oats-xi-pulls-out-for-second-year-in-a-row>
Closing out the top three on line honours was Scallywag. 

The Hong Kong entrant had slid as far back as ninth position after the first 
night but helmsman David Witt showed the experience of 17 Hobart passages in 
his sea boots to throttle the super maxi on the Derwent and into third position 
over the line and hours under the previous race record pace.

At the other end of the speed spectrum NSW entrant Landfall looks like she 
will be the last of the 83 boats in the racing fleet to make it to the finish 
line – sometime on Friday morning.




 