
Collingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> legend Peter 
Daicos hopes the pressure to live up to the family name will drive his son Josh 
to great things in the AFL. The Magpies added to their long list of father-son 
recruits in Friday’s draft, snaffling Josh Daicos and Callum Brown, the son of 
former captain and premiership player Gavin Brown.

Few are more beloved at Collingwood than Peter Daicos, a 250-game premiership 
player and five-time leading goal-kicker whose highlight reel is overflowing 
with freakish goals. But he’s confident the weight of expectation won’t be too 
much of a burden for Josh, who was taken with pick No57.

Gold Coast target 'good friends' in AFL draft strategy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/gold-coast-target-friends-afl-draft-strategy>
“It’s going to earn you a couple of opportunities and it can either be your 
greatest ally or your greatest foe,” Peter Daicos said on Monday. “Pressure 
sometimes is a good thing because it will make you probably work a little bit 
harder to live up to that pressure. I think it can be a good thing for him if 
it’s used the right way.”

A small midfielder who can drift forward and kick goals, the younger Daicos 
has been likened to Western Bulldogs star Caleb Daniel for his clean hands and 
intelligent ball use. But while he’s determined to forge his own identity as a 
footballer, he’s no stranger to his dad’s boundary line heroics.

“I’d be lying if I didn’t show him a couple of the tricks, sitting off the 
boundaries,” Peter Daicos said with a grin. “It’s like any of the kids growing 
up, they want to take the big mark, take the speccy and run to the boundary and 
kick that goal. I think he’s more in tune with football today, contemporary 
football, and that’s centering the ball. That’s something I didn’t think about 
too much.”

Neither Daicos nor Brown will wear the same guernsey number as their famous 
fathers – in line with their requests. Daicos will wear Gavin Brown’s No26, 
while Callum Brown will wear No17. The Magpies were forced to take Brown a 
little earlier than they might have hoped at pick No35 after a bid from North 
Melbourne, ironically the club where his father works as a development coach.

“When I left work (on Friday) they sort of didn’t give me any inclination at 
all,” Brown Sr said. “I thought ‘hang on a minute, that’s North’. It was a bit 
of a shock to be honest.”

The Magpies used pick No30 to take utility Sam McLarty, who was born 
profoundly deaf and wears a bionic ear implant. Collingwood also drafted small 
forward Kayle Kirby, who says he was inspired by the success of other 
Aboriginal footballers. “I didn’t just do it for myself, I did it for my family 
and my mob,” he said. “They’re more proud than I am, to be honest.”



 