
Tired of long hours at the office? Irritated by your colleagues? The end of 
the year is a time for reflection, and if you’re looking back on another 12 
months of feeling fed up with your employer, you’re probably contemplating 
switching jobs. The worry, though, is that any change could simply involve a 
different desk but more of the same.

Consultancy might be one option worth exploring. This could involve providing 
professional services such as doing legal, finance, management or public 
relations work for a company on a short-term basis, providing advice or working 
with a business’s clients. Alternatively, you could be expected to bring in 
your own clients with some sort of fee-sharing deal in place.

But whatever the consultancy arrangement, before you take the leap it’s 
important to think about your contacts and connections. Think about who might 
pass business your way – you will probably need to have a number of potential 
revenue sources in mind rather than planning to rely on income from one or two 
clients, which may be risky. If the business doesn’t materialise or later 
disappears for any reason, you could be left high and dry. Even when the 
consultancy role you have chosen for yourself wouldn’t require you to bring in 
business, it’s still sensible to ask yourself: who can I count on in the 
industry?

When you are planning this move, make sure you are allowed to do this kind of 
work and with the clients you have in mind. Your contract with your current 
employer may include post-termination restrictions that may prohibit you for a 
certain period from setting up in competition, or poaching or working with your 
employer’s clients. The general rule is that the restriction will only be 
legally enforceable if it goes no further than necessary to protect the firm’s 
legitimate business interests.

It would be a mistake to assume that moving to a new job as an employee will 
always be more secure than going it alone

Then there is the issue of financial security. You ought to have some savings 
to tide you over for the periods when you’re building up revenue and for 
between contracts. If you have high fixed costs each month, such as a mortgage, 
think twice before making the move. Also, bear in mind that consultants do miss 
out on certain rights and benefits, which could include paid holiday, sick pay, 
pensions, private health cover and permanent health insurance.

But it would be a mistake to assume that moving to a new job as an employee 
will always be more secure than going it alone. Many employers require staff to 
pass a probationary period during which notice on either side could be just one 
week. And even after making the grade, in the first two years that you are with 
an organisation the employer can normally dismiss you as long as adequate 
notice has been given. Employees with at least two years’ service have the 
general right not to be unfairly dismissed, and then employers must dismiss for 
a fair reason (such as capability, misconduct or redundancy) and follow a 
proper process.

If you are a consultant and only being paid for income generated you’re not a 
fixed cost. Therefore in lean times the business may be less likely to sever 
the relationship than if it had to pay you a guaranteed salary.

You probably have the opportunity to earn more as a freelancer, and there may 
be tax advantages to consultancy, particularly if it’s carried out through a 
service company. Beware of IR35 legislation, though, which is designed to tax 
disguised employment. This is where an individual receives payments from a 
client via an intermediary and the relationship is such that had the person 
been paid directly they would be an employee of the client.

Perhaps the biggest attraction of being a consultant is that it allows greater 
flexibility. There is far more choice in terms of hours and days worked as well 
as where the work is done. While it’s true that all employees with 26 weeks of 
service can request to work flexibly, employers have plenty of scope to refuse. 
Consultants also tend to be able to work for other companies during the 
consultancy, whereas employers are usually stricter about allowing employees to 
work elsewhere. So if you’re feeling boxed in at work, consultancy might be the 
way out.


Matt Gingell is a partner at Gannons Solicitors and specialises in employment 
law
 