
Plymouth Argyle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle> were 
barely recognisable. They still wore their particular green, of course – 
bottle, perhaps, or holly with Mayflower motifs – but six of Saturday's 
starters against Barnet have arrived at Home Park since John Sheridan succeeded 
Carl Fletcher as manager on 7 January and only three were there when the sides 
met in October and Edgar Davids, now player-manager, was just watching. The 
Pilgrims won 4-1 then. A 2-1 win here pulled them off the bottom of League Two 
where they had suddenly appeared, dangling by three points from the body of the 
table.

This was despite markedly improved results under Sheridan. Plymouth had 
averaged less than a point a game (24 from 27). Under him they have gained 12 
from eight, close to play-off form. The 46 with which they andBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> survived last season may not 
suffice this time but statistics show that, while they still lack a cutting 
edge (seven goals in eight), they are tighter at the back (only six conceded). 
They may need to be. Eight of their remaining 11 games are against sides in the 
top half.

The two centre-backs were bought – Guy Branston gung-ho from Aldershot, 
Anthony Charles calmer from Northampton – while in front of them were four 
loanees – interims, to Rafa Benítez – who showed the best and worst of that 
arrangement. Lee Cox, from Swindon, was a conscientious holding midfielder and 
Ronan Murray, from Ipswich, eager on the right but Jason Banton (Crystal 
Palace) and especially Reuben Reid (Yeovil) seemed happy to use unfamiliarity 
as an excuse for holding back. The captain, Conor Hourihane, set a fine example 
in midfield application, followed by Andres Gurrieri and the left-back, Onismor 
Bhasera.

Sheridan said afterwards of Barnet, one point ahead of them, that "they are 
one of the best sides in the division. If you let them pass, they'll pass you 
to death." He was pleased, therefore, that his team "had forced them into 
mistakes", though in truth the early exchanges were all yips and prods, passes 
over- or under-hit, as the significance of the occasion got to both sides. In 
21st place Barnet, serial last-day survivors, looked to be getting ahead of 
themselves. Midway through the first half they got ahead of Plymouth.

Davids, a fortnight short of his 40th birthday and fresh from addressing the 
Oxford Union on self-discovery, found the overlapping Elliot Johnson and the 
cross, with Jake Cole rooted to his line, got Branston in a pickle, living the 
worst nightmare of the Olympic long jump champion, Greg Rutherford, before 
receiving his MBE from the Queen last week. "I did not want to trip over or 
look like a real doughnut," he said. Jake Hyde tapped in.

"It's a good feeling when you go behind," said Sheridan, "then get a 
response." In terms of goals it came from Hourihane, who followed a slick 
one-two with a drag-back on to his left foot and a curling shot that left 
Graham Stack more forgivably statuesque. That was before the interval. Shortly 
after it Murray buried the winner, though it took nifty work later by Cole to 
make it so as a cross reached Iffy Allen at the far post. The keeper's speed 
across goal was lightning, his block unflinching.

Sheridan said: "The support we get for a club at the bottom of the League is 
so great it's scary." Three seasons ago 13,000 saw them lose 2-0 to Newcastle 
United to leave the Championship by opposite exits. This season they average 
half that and administration has hastened their further descent. But on 
Saturday they had 8,210 as their president, Chris Webb, with special offers 
through the local paper, urged fans to get behind the club. For instance, "the 
average punter can step off the street into Home Park for only £10". There were 
some average punters on the field, too. He also said: "The 14th biggest city in 
the UK without aFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> club is unthinkable."

Devon briefly lost its other two clubs, Exeter and Torquay, to the Conference 
this century. James Brent, the Pilgrims' owner of less than 18 months, 
previously had a successful business in surfwear. There is a feeling that, if 
they can weather this season, they may find a wave to prosperity.
 