
Polar bears are losing life-sustaining sea ice crucial for hunting, resting 
and breeding in all 19 regions of theArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> they inhabit, a study warned on 
Wednesday.


As climate change pushes up Arctic temperatures, ice is melting earlier in 
spring and refreezing later in autumn, a team of researchers reported in the 
Cryosphere, a journal of the European Geosciences Union.

Satellite data revealed that the total number of ice-covered days across the 
19 regions declined at a rate of seven to 19 days per decade from 1979 to 2014, 
the researchers said.

Arctic sea ice cover set to be second lowest ever recorded, data suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/arctic-sea-ice-cover-set-to-be-second-lowest-ever-recorded-data-suggests>
“Their dependence on sea ice means that climate warming poses the single most 
important threat to (polar bears’) persistence,” wrote the team.

The global population of polar bears (Ursus maritimus) is estimated at about 
25,000, said the study.

The bears, which have become emblematic of the ravages of global warming, 
spend most of their time on sheets of frozen ocean water, which melt and recede 
in warmer months, and then reform in winter.

When the ice melts, the animals come ashore and survive on stored fat until it 
refreezes - a period that for some has become longer and longer.

Scientists say the Arctic is warming at nearly double the global rate as a 
result of climate change fuelled by mankind’s burning of fossil fuels, a 
process that emits heat-trapping greenhouse gases.

With longer iceless periods, polar bears have to swim further and further to 
find solid ground.

Last year, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) said 
the creatures could see their numbers dwindle by nearly a third by mid-century.

Besieged Russian scientists drive away polar bears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/russian-scientists-trapped-arctic-polar-bears-month-wait-rescue>
Their status on the IUCN’s red list of endangered species is currently listed 
as “vulnerable”.

The bears need sea ice for hunting as they cannot outswim seals, their 
preferred prey.

They get around this by waiting near holes in the ice and ambushing the seals 
as they come up for air.

Male and female bears also meet on ice sheets to mate.

“Changes in sea ice have been shown to impact polar bear abundance, 
productivity, body condition, and distribution,” said the study.

According to environmental group WWF, the retreating sea ice is more 
frequently bringing polar bears into confrontation with humans who live on land.

With more water to navigate, Arctic shipping activities have increased, as 
well as opportunities for oil and gas development, further threatening the 
animals’ habitat.

Experts say Arctic sea ice melt will in turn contribute to sea level rise, and 
feed back into global warming - ice reflects warming sunlight away, while water 
absorbs the heat.
 