
Police are investigating reports that saline bags were tampered with at a 
hospital in Cumbria.

Security has been increased at Cumberland infirmary, in Carlisle, after a 
member of staff discovered last week that a small number of the bags had 
apparently been tampered with.

A spokesman for the North Cumbria university hospitals NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> trust said there was “no indication 
that any patients have been adversely affected” by the apparent breach.

Dr Rod Harpin, the medical director of the trust, said: “I can confirm that 
the trust contacted the police on Wednesday 4 January regarding a small number 
of saline bags at the Cumberland infirmary in Carlisle which appear to have 
been tampered with.

“We immediately implemented our serious incident procedures and there is no 
indication that any patients have been adversely affected but we continue to 
monitor this closely. Patient safety is our absolute priority and we will 
continue to work closely with the police.”

The trust said considerable work had been done since the incident to review 
medicines across the hospital and increase security.

Cumbria police said: “We can confirm that we have been notified by the 
Cumberland infirmary in Carlisle of a number of bags of saline solution which 
have been tampered with.

“The investigation is at an early stage and enquiries are ongoing to establish 
the circumstances and the constabulary is working closely with the hospital.”

In May 2015, Filipino nurse Victorino Chua was jailed for life for murdering 
vulnerable patients by tampering with their saline bags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/19/stepping-hill-nurse-victorino-chua-jailed-for-life>
 at Stepping Hill hospital in Stockport.

Chua was ordered to serve a minimum of 35 years for murdering two patients and 
poisoning 20 others by injecting insulin into saline bags and ampoules.
These were unwittingly used by other nurses, causing a series of insulin 
overdoses to mainly elderly victims.
 