 A genetically modified maize could possibly kill off one of America's most 
beautiful butterflies, according to research published in the magazine Nature 
today.
 Pollen from the maize - engineered with a bacterial toxin to protect it 
against pests - killed larvae of the monarch butterfly in laboratory tests at 
Cornell university in New York state. The crop is known as bt-maize, or bt-corn 
because it has genes from the bacillus thuringiensis spliced into its genes. 
The new maize resists the European corn-borer and has been shown to have no 
effect on useful pollinators such as honey bees or helpful predators such as 
ladybirds.

 However, researchers have found that the bt-maize produces pollen containing 
crystals of toxin from the bacterial genes. Dispersed by the winds, it lands on 
milkweed, the exclusive food of monarch caterpillars and likely to be found in 
or near cornfields.

 Maize is wind pollinated, and the pollen can drift at least 60 metres from 
fields. In the laboratory tests, monarch larvae fed with milkweed deliberately 
dusted with the GM pollen from a bt-hybrid ate less, grew more slowly and died 
more often. Nearly half died, whereas all of a second group fed on leaves 
dusted with non-GM pollen survived. The scientists believe that the toxin 
damaged the grub's gut wall, exposing it to disease-carrying microbes.

 'Monarchs are considered a flagship species for conservation,' said one of 
the researchers, Linda Rayor, a Cornell entomologist. 'This is a warning bell.' 
More than 7m acres of hybrid maize were planted last year in the United States, 
and around 18 different crops have been approved for field tests.

 Although there have been public alarms over the possible effects of GM crops 
on human health in the long term, many scientists and most environmentalists 
have thought that some form of harm to wildlife was more likely. There is 
evidence that transgenic pollen from crops could 'cross' into wild relatives, 
raising fears of superweeds.

 The monarch, an extraordinary migrating butterfly that crosses the corn belt 
from Mexico to the US mid-west every year, was chosen for the US experiment 
because it depends on milkweed. The plant contains toxins which the caterpillar 
builds into its body tissues, making it an untempting target for predators.

 Another entomologist at Cornell, John Losey, said: 'We can't predict how 
serious the risk is until we have a lot more data. And we can't forget that 
bt-corn and other transgenic crops have a huge potential for reducing pesticide 
use and increasing yields. This study is just the first step.'
 