 Voters across Britain give only lukewarm backing to a Scottish Parliament, but 
the referendum in Wales could reject home rule, according to today's 
Guardian/ICM opinion poll.
 A special survey of Welsh voters shows next week's devolution referendum in 
the principality is too close to call. The findings suggest a low turnout could 
see the result go narrowly against the Government.

The poll also unexpectedly shows only mild opposition in Britain to Scotland 
andWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> fully going it alone, with 
surprisingly strong minority backing for the independence option from more than 
one in three mainly English voters.

 In two separate exercises, ICM asked voters across Britain about their 
attitudes to Scottish and Welsh devolution and then asked a 'booster sample' of 
Welsh voters what they intended to do in next week's devolution referendum .

 The ICM poll shows that two-fifths of British voters agree that the Scots and 
Welsh should have their own parliaments but the support is only lukewarm and 
there is no clear majority backing for devolution.

 Attitudes towards Scottish and Welsh devolution among the mainly English - 86 
per cent of those interviewed - voters are remarkably similar.

 In both cases nearly one in three said they opposed devolution while one in 
four were 'don't knows'. Opposition is strongest in the south of England.

 If the poll shows that the British attitude to devolution is only a cautious 
'yes' then when it comes to the question of Scottish and Welsh independence the 
verdict is only a cautious 'no'.

 Nearly two out of five voters across Britain support a fully independent 
Scotland - far higher than the level of support the Scottish National Party 
regularly polls in Scotland. Minority backing for Welsh independence is also 
surprisingly strong.

 The Welsh devolution referendum sharply divides voters in the principality, 
according to a Guardian/ICM poll.

 A low turnout on September 18 could see a Welsh assembly narrowly rejected. 

 The ICM poll shows the Welsh vote to be much closer than recent opinion polls 
which had shown the yes campaign opening up a 20 per cent lead.

 The Guardian poll shows that the yes campaign in Wales commands 37 per cent 
support and the no campaign 36 per cent, with 27 per cent saying they have yet 
to make up their minds.

 The findings confirm the concerns of Welsh ministers that the biggest problem 
they face over the next week is the 'stay-at-home' factor rather than the no 
campaigners. All recent polls in Wales have shown a very large proportion of 
'don't knows'.

 ICM also asked Welsh voters how certain they were to vote in the referendum . 
If there is a high turnout then the Government would scrape home with 51 to 49 
per cent backing for the establishment of a Welsh assembly. These figures 
exclude the 'don't knows' and those who said they were certain not to vote.

 However if the turnout is low - under 50 per cent - then the Government's 
Welsh devolution plans could be in trouble, with 54 per cent opposing the 
establishment of the assembly among those who said they were 'certain to vote' 
and excluding the 'don't knows'.

 There are some variations across social groups in Wales . Women clearly 
support a Welsh Assembly - by 37 to 29 - while men oppose one by 43 to 38.

 There is strong majority support for devolution among those aged 18 to 34, 
while a majority of those voters aged over 65 oppose an assembly.

 Labour voters back Welsh devolution by two to one Conservative voters are 
opposed by eight to one, while Lib Dem voters are opposed by 44 to 32 per cent.

 A poll for the Scotsman newspaper last night showed strong support among 
Scottish voters for devolution (72 to 28) with a clear majority also backing 
tax-raising powers (59 to 41). A poll in The Herald, in Glasgow, showed 61 per 
cent support and 45 per cent in favour of tax powers.

 The Guardian/ICM poll shows that Labour's lead has risen by 10 points to 36 
points over the past month, indicating that voters have strongly endorsed Tony 
Blair's handling of the death of Diana, Princess of Wales . The poll puts 
Labour on 60 per cent, the Conservatives on 24 per cent, the Lib Dems on 10 and 
the others on six.

 ICM interviewed a random sample of 1,208 adults aged 18 plus by telephone 
between September 4 and 8 1997. Interviews were conducted across the country 
and the results have been weighted to the profile of all adults. An additional 
sample of Welsh voters was interviewed to increase the Welsh sample to 502.
 