
Pregnant women and new mothers are suffering increasing levels of unfair 
treatment at work, including cuts in hours, being put on zero-hours contracts 
or even forced out of their job, a report has revealed.

Citizens Advice warned of a growing problem of new and expectant mothers 
facing discrimination. The charity said there had been a 25% increase in people 
seeking workplace advice on pregnancy and maternity issues in the past year, 
with more than 22,000 visits to its website.

Evidence from Citizens Advice included pregnant women and new mothers having 
their working hours cut, being put on to zero-hours contracts, being pressured 
to return to work early from maternity leave and, in some cases,forced out of 
their jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/12/discrimination-work-pregnant-new-mothers-forced-out-jobs>
.

One woman turned to Citizens Advice for help when her employer cut her weekly 
hours by more than half after she told them she was pregnant. Her boss claimed 
there was not enough work available to keep her on her previous hours, despite 
taking on new staff at the same time.

Fifth of women harassed at work over pregnancy or flexible hours, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/22/fifth-of-women-harassed-at-work-over-pregnancy-or-flexible-hours-report-finds>
Another woman contacted her employer to find out why she had not received any 
maternity pay, to be told they had ended her contract while she was on 
maternity leave.


The report is the latest suggestion that pregnancy discrimination, which is 
illegal, is on the rise. In March,government-commissioned research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/22/fifth-of-women-harassed-at-work-over-pregnancy-or-flexible-hours-report-finds>
 warned that three-quarters of pregnant women and new mothers experience 
discrimination at work and one in nine lose their job as a result. The study by 
the Equality and Human Rights Commission (ECHR) suggests that discrimination 
has risen significantly since 2005, when 45% of women said they had experienced 
such discrimination.

The chief executive of Citizens Advice, Gillian Guy, said: “Pregnant women 
should be supported at work, not made to fear for their livelihood. It is 
concerning that more and more new and expectant mums are experiencing 
discrimination issues at work.

“People with a baby on the way will have a lot on their minds already. The 
last thing they need is a threat to their income or job security. All employers 
should respect and uphold the rights of staff who are new parents or expecting 
a baby.”

A government spokesman said: “Discrimination is unlawful and completely 
unacceptable. Attracting and retaining female talent is crucial to economic 
growth and, as well as being against the law, it does not make business sense 
for employers to alienate and discriminate against women in their workforce.

“We are determined to stand up for all workers and are taking action to tackle 
discrimination at work against pregnant women and parents.”

The EHRC has previously called for a number of reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/24/maternity-leave-discrimination-54000-women-lose-jobs-each-year-ehrc-report>
 to give pregnant women more protection in the workplace, including stronger 
steps to prevent employers asking in job interviews about a woman’s pregnancy 
or her intention to have children.


It also suggested ministers could explore the feasibility of a collective 
insurance scheme to help employers from small and medium businesses provide 
enhanced pay and cover for maternity leave, as in Denmark.

The government did not accept the EHRC’s suggestion that employment tribunal 
fees could be reduced, but it has committed to a number other recommendations, 
such as working with businesses to raise employers’ awareness of their legal 
obligations.
 