
To be in the bowels of West Ham’s London Stadium last week was to experience 
the distilled essence of the modern, multi-billion poundPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> behemoth.

Outside, all the talk was of the corruption allegations that had led to a 
fresh wave of hand-wringing over the greed and grotesque sums in the game.

In the stands of the former Olympic Stadium the echoes of the issues caused by 
the club’s move from Green Street to Westfield still reverberated. But on the 
pitch a frenzy of activity is testament to one of the more welcome spin-offs of 
the billions that have poured into the Premier League from the pockets of fans 
paying for television subscriptions, replica shirts and tickets.

Beneath cloudless skies representatives from some of the disability schemes 
funded centrally by a new Premier League initiative were practising a range of 
sports, Michael Owen and Owen Hargreaves were larking about as they prepared to 
play football blindfold and some of the more inspirational characters inside 
those clubs were talking about what they do week in, week out.

You may believe the amount Premier League clubs put into their community 
schemes merely represents the crumbs from the captain’s table. Or perhaps you 
buy the Premier League’s portrayal of a virtuous circle in which the cash 
poured into “good causes” increases as their TV rights bounty goes up and 
everybody wins. What is undeniable is that Paul Kelly, the Manchester City 
disability officer who began volunteering for the club when he lost his job as 
a bricklayer and now oversees a programme that reaches more than 1,000 disabled 
people per month, and many others are doing inspirational work.

From a programme that now reaches 44 special schools in central and greater 
Manchester to representative sides that are part of an attempt to grow disabled 
leagues in the area, Kelly is a persuasive advocate for the power of Premier 
League clubs to reconnect with the communities they sit in.

“It’s amazing and there are still many ways and means it can grow. I’ve got so 
many ideas and sometimes I get pulled back on my lead. You can see what Man 
City has done for the programme and the staff and the participants,” said 
Kelly, who had gone from taking sessions for six kids on tatty, ripped 
astroturf eight years ago to having use of City’s money-no-object Etihad Campus.

“It’s only going to build and get better. We’re still building and still 
developing. We want to grow and do something special with our disability team, 
just as we do with our ladies team and the first team and everything else we 
do.”

The event at the London Stadium was designed to unveil a new partnership 
between BT Sport and the Premier League that will ensure that every club has a 
dedicated disability officer. Many, such as Manchester City, have one already 
but Kelly said the funding would allow him to do more and with greater 
certainty.

When the Premier League unveiled its £8.3bn TV deal it was forced on to the 
back foot by criticism of how much of that cash would find its way to 
grassroots football, to community programmes and to the rest of the game.

Stung by the criticism, it pledged at least £1bn would make its way outside 
the Premier League, though the vast majority of that will go into funding 
parachute and “solidarity” payments to Football League clubs.

Richard Scudamore, watching on, is also right to say the Premier League clubs 
often do not get the credit for the community work they do undertake. Every 
club has several Paul Kellys, going above and beyond to use the power of 
football and the unique geographical position of clubs in the heart of their 
cities to the benefit of their local communities. The question will always be 
whether they could do more and whether those that do less can be persuaded of 
the benefits. “There are only two ways of doing more. You either do more of the 
same or you try and expand the brief and expand the platform,” said Scudamore.

“You know how proud the clubs have been of their Kicks programme, which is our 
social inclusion programme, of their health programme, of Premier League 4 
Sport programmes. If you go back over the last 15 years there is a huge 
layering-up of capacity within clubs to do this kind of work.”

And yet, even as they were launching the new scheme, the minister for disabled 
people was pointing out that only seven clubs had fully accessible toilet 
facilities at their grounds. “It is a simple thing, relatively inexpensive to 
rectify and a barrier that for some of your fans is insurmountable to overcome 
to watch their team play a home game,” said Penny Mordaunt.

Clubs have also come under fire for failing to provide sufficient accessible 
facilities, promising after significant pressure to meet official guidelines by 
the start of next season. “Our clubs are trying to reach that higher standard, 
they’re making huge progress and there’s an enormous amount of work going on. 
Our aim is to get as close to, if not over, those guidelines by next August. 
It’s absolutely the right thing to do,” said Scudamore.

Martin Sinclair, the older brother of Celtic’s Scott, played for Team GB’s 
cerebral palsy side in the 2012 Paralympics and is now working with 
Southampton’s Foundation to establish a local pan-disability league. He says it 
is impossible to overstate the impact Premier League clubs can have, recalling 
how hard it was for him to find a way into the game at the age of seven or 
eight.

“When I walked in no one knew what to do, what to say. Hopefully we can get 
people off their sofas and into disability sport and playing football,” he 
said. “Southampton have workshops to understand what they need as coaches and 
get it across to other disability people, to understand how to get people 
involved.”
 