
Jermaine Beckford may have scored a hat-trick in the victory that secured 
Preston’s promotion to theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> but the striker has given a 
strong suggestion he will not be part of the squad next season.

The 31-year-old took the starring role as Simon Grayson’s team beat Swindon 
Town 4-0 in theLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> play-off final on 
Sunday. The three goals he scored at Wembley took his total to 18 since he 
joined Preston on loan from Bolton in November.

Not surprisingly Grayson has made public his desire to keep Beckford, which he 
feels is feasible given the club’s return to the Championship after a four-year 
absence means they can “compete financially” for the player’s signature. He 
also feels Beckford is enjoying life at Deepdale and, with Bolton having made 
clear their desire not to see him return, this could be enough for him to sign 
a long-term deal at Preston.

When asked after the final if he is sees himself remaining at North End, 
Beckford was noticeably non-committal. “I will tell you what I can see. I can 
see myself enjoying the journey home and enjoying the next couple of days 
because I have not had the chance to embrace that,” he said. Beckford was then 
asked again if he planned on staying at Preston. “I have enjoyed myself 
thoroughly,” he said.

If those responses are a concern for Preston fans they can take encouragement 
from the warm words Beckford had for Grayson, whom he first worked under at 
Leeds and clearly holds in high regard. “I have said many times it is a great 
match-up,” the striker said. “It is something that works for the two of us. We 
understand each other and sometimes that is all you need.”

Having shone at Leeds, Beckford joined Everton in May 2010 but he struggled at 
Goodison Park. And after joining Leicester 15 months later, he fell out of the 
limelight. Beckford’s hope now is that having become only the third player to 
score a hat-trick in a play-off final, following on from Clive Mendonca of 
Charlton and Swansea City’s Scott Sinclair, a wider audience will be reminded 
of his talents.

“That is every guy’s dream in football – to play at the top level,” he said. 
“I have been blessed to have achieved that. If I could get back there it would 
be amazing. If not then I will ride it until I can and until I stop enjoying 
myself. But at the moment I am having a whale of a time.”

The only sour note for Beckford on Sunday – when Preston earned promotion via 
the play-offs at the 10th time of asking – came when he was informed of reports 
suggesting the match shirt he had given to a young fan on being substituted 
after 68 minutes had been spotted on the Gumtree website and was on sale for 
£1,500.

Television pictures showed a woman taking the shirt from the boy immediately 
after he was handed it by Beckford, with some suggestions she is the boy’s 
mother. However, it has also been reported the shirt for sale is a hoax.

Either way, Beckford hopes the story of the top he wore when scoring a 
promotion-winning hat-trick has a happy ending. “I did it [handing over the 
shirt] out of goodwill,” he said. “It was a nice gesture. I assumed it would go 
to a good home from someone who was able to enjoy the game. All I can hope is 
that the money [from it’s sale] goes to charity but the likelihood of that is 
slim. Hopefully it gets back to the kid.”
 