
Preston North End have fined Jermaine Beckford and Eoin Doyle following their 
dismissals for fighting with each other duringSaturday’s defeat at Sheffield 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/preston-pair-sent-off-fighting-each-other-sheffield-wednesday>
 and will use the money to refund the travelling fans.

Beckford and Doyle were both shown straight red cards by the referee Scott 
Duncan in stoppage time following an angry exchange and the team’s furious 
manager, Simon Grayson, promised disciplinary action for both players after his 
side’s 2-1 defeat.

Preston have confirmed they will not be appealing against either red card 
after holding their own internal investigation, while the duo have issued a 
joint apology.

Preston pair sent off for fighting each other in loss at Sheffield Wednesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/preston-pair-sent-off-fighting-each-other-sheffield-wednesday>
The Championship club said in a statement: “After Saturday’s incident at 
Sheffield Wednesday,Preston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> have held an internal inquiry 
and can confirm that they will not be appealing [against] the red cards issued 
to Jermaine Beckford and Eoin Doyle.

“On top of the punishment they will receive from the FA for their sendings 
off, they have also been fined by the club for their actions.

“These fines will be used to repay all Preston North End supporters who 
attended Hillsborough the cost of their ticket money back.”

Both Beckford and Doyle have apologised to the club and their supporters in a 
joint statement.

“We apologise wholeheartedly for our actions at Hillsborough,” they said. “Our 
behaviour was not acceptable in any walk of life, let alone on a football 
pitch. We let down the management, our team-mates and most importantly the 
supporters, who had spent a lot of money to support the team.

“We accept the punishment given to us by the club and the FA and fully support 
the club’s decision to refund the ticket costs to the supporters. We have 
apologised to the manager, the staff and our team-mates and hope that the 
supporters accept our total remorse for the incident.

“It is our intention to now put this behind us and to give our all for the 
benefit of Preston North End going forward.”

Grayson criticised both players after the game and said they had been an 
“embarrassment”.

The former Leeds and Huddersfield manager said: “The fans who travelled to 
Sheffield Wednesday were let down by the actions of Jermaine Beckford and Eoin 
Doyle and it is only right that the fines imposed on the players are used to 
refund the cost of the ticket money for the fixture.

“It has been made very clear to the players and the squad as a whole that this 
behaviour is not acceptable by any employee of Preston North End and a swift 
and strong response was important.

“However, it has now been dealt with and the matter is closed.”
 