
Simon Grayson was delighted for Preston’s match-winner, Jordan Hugill, after 
the forward’s fourth goal of the season helped his side come from behind to 
defeat 10-man Blackburn.

The home side went ahead through Elliott Ward’s first goal for the club, but 
the course of the game was changed midway through the first half when Shane 
Duffy was sent off for handball on the line and Joe Garner punished his former 
club by converting the penalty. Preston completed the turnaround two minutes 
before half-time thanks to Hugill’s cushioned volley.

Despite missing a number of second-half chances, Preston deserved their sixth 
win in 10 games. It was their first Ewood Park triumph since 1979 and manager 
Grayson feels the 23-year-old Hugill has earned his run in the team.

“He’s done well,” Grayson said. “He’s a handful. He knows what he needs to do. 
It wasn’t an easy decision in terms of selection of the team today because I 
had some real options. Jordan’s earned that right and it was a great finish.

“I’m delighted for him. It’s a great ball from Gally [Paul Gallagher]. He can 
put them balls in with great quality. He knows where to put it and the areas 
for people to get into. It wasn’t an easy finish but he’s delighted and we were 
all delighted to see it hit the back of the net.”

The Duffy penalty decision was the game’s main talking point but Grayson was 
in no doubt the right decision was made as his side stretched their impressive 
run to just three defeats in 15 Sky BetChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> outings in 2016.

“I think it was the correct decision. They started the game better than us, 
I’m disappointed we gave away the goal we did but it’s handball on the line and 
the referee made the right decision,” he said.

“We managed to get back into the game and I think in the period after that to 
half-time we controlled the game.

“We started the second half really well and it could have been put to bed a 
lot earlier but as the game goes on, they are going to throw things at you.”

The defeat means Rovers have lost three of their past four games and missed 
out on the chance to climb into the top half of the table. Paul Lambert, 
though, was “baffled” by the refereeing after Danny Graham appeared to be 
fouled in the build-up to Preston’s equaliser.

He said: “I’m disappointed to lose. I can’t fault the lads for the effort. It 
was an absolutely fantastic effort with 10 men. I thought we started the game 
brilliantly, were well on top, got the goal.

“The penalty changes the course of the game but it should never have been a 
penalty. Danny Graham was fouled at the edge of the box so the ball should have 
never been at that end of the pitch, because Danny has nutmegged the guy. You 
can see with Danny’s reaction that he’s definitely been fouled.

“I thought today, he got more calls wrong than he got right. If there’s a 
delegate here or somebody watching it, maybe they might get a phone call in the 
morning.”

The Rovers boss also refused to blame his defender Duffy after his handball 
turned the game on its head. “If you look at it, his back foot has actually 
gone away from him which makes him go to ground. In hindsight, you’re better 
jumping over it and letting it in and you don’t get the red card but listen, 
Shane Duffy has been excellent for me.”” 
 