
Middlesbrough’s mission to go one better and achieve promotion from the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> this season 
started with a 0-0 stalemate at promoted Preston.

Boro were in competitive action for the first time since a 2-0 loss to Norwich 
in the play-off final and there was little evidence on this showing that Aitor 
Karanka’s men, now shorn of the striker Patrick Bamford, are better equipped to 
reach the top table this time around.

Aside from a Grant Leadbitter effort which flew narrowly wide and Albert 
Adomah almost stealing in twice in the second period, they failed to carry much 
attacking threat in the first game since Karanka signed a four-year deal this 
week.

These sides experienced contrasting fortunes in their last outings three 
months ago, with Wembley holding fond memories for North End in comparison to 
the heartache Boro suffered at the hands of the Canaries 24 hours later.

Karanka’s men have retooled since, notably bringing Stewart Downing back to 
his boyhood club, and expectation is high that the Spanish manager can deliver 
a top-flight return for the Teesside club.

Downing was deployed in a No10 role on his second debut for the club, behind 
the striker Kike and ahead of the central midfielders Adam Clayton and 
Leadbitter.

And after Bailey Wright had failed to connect with a header at one end, it was 
Boro’s captain who should have drawn first blood at Deepdale. Leadbitter drove 
into the box via a one-two with Kike and brought himself space by feinting past 
John Welsh, only to drag his effort wide of the debutant Jordan Pickford’s near 
post.

North End were without their injured Wembley hat-trick hero Jermaine Beckford, 
who joined Simon Grayson’s side on a permanent basis after a goal-laden loan 
spell, and that gave the young Manchester United loanee Will Keane a chance to 
impress alongside Joe Garner in attack.

Keane nearly opened his account 28 minutes in, as he prodded towards goal 
after Dimitrios Konstantopoulos failed to clear a Paul Gallagher free-kick, but 
George Friend got himself between the ball and his goal. Konstantopoulos 
continued to look uneasy and he was under no pressure moments later when he 
spilt a routine ball in, recovering to deny a Garner dink after the forward had 
hit the ground following a tussle with Friend. The League One player of the 
year wanted a penalty for that duel and although Friend was grappling with him, 
Garner’s fall appeared manufactured.

Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> were hardly 
living up to their billing as favourites for promotion as headers from Kike and 
Daniel Ayala both fell off target early in the second period.

Preston went through their successful play-off campaign without conceding a 
goal but it took a desperate lunge from John Welsh to deny Adomah when the 
Ghana international cut inside Pickford. Boro lacked a cutting edge, though, 
with Downing largely subdued as he drifted between the lines, only sparking 
into life inside the final 10 minutes to drive over with his right foot.

Tom Clarke hurled himself in front of Adomah as the winger shot and Garner 
failed to connect with a Cunningham cross in the final minute as Boro followed 
the strongly-fancied Derby in producing a goalless draw first up.
 