
After the Uefa Cup final on Wednesday night, a Liverpool fan was talking to a 
Dortmunder. "I feel like I should apologise and say 'well done' to the Alavés 
fans, but you just can't can you?" he said. "You'd feel really patronising - 
and they don't deserve that."

He was right on both counts. Alavés have had their fill of patronising 
reports, particularly from Madrid and England. Trouble is, all those hideous 
clichés - about pride, decency and pluckiness - are true. Alavés are a special 
club and theirs is a sensational story.

Wherever you looked in Dortmund on Wednesday there were contorted alavesistas, 
clutching some awkward corner of their team's cup final shirt, proudly 
displaying their names - that now famous symbol of the bond between club and 
fans.

Well-versed in the ritual, few had any trouble finding their special spot. All 
of them knew exactly where to look - from Alfredo Abad at the neck, to Leticia 
Zuria on the sleeve.

Those who didn't don the cup final shirt wore the club's other strips - blue 
and white, orange or pink (also with the names on) - or traditional Basque 
dress with checked shirt, waistcoat, breeches, long white socks wrapped with 
black laces, and moccasins. Many carried the Basque flag, the Ikurriña, and 
wore hand-written messages pinned to their shirts, in German or English: "I'm 
not Spanish, I'm Basque."

By kick-off, more still wore the red of Liverpool. Shirts, souvenirs and 
addresses were swapped in their thousands. Drinks and photos were taken 
together and one Basque turned his hand at thumping out You'll Never Walk Alone 
on an enormous Alavés drum, while another dropped his trousers to reveal Union 
Jack boxer-shorts.

Some particularly enterprising Alavés fans somehow managed to bring Celedón - 
a life-size doll of a Basque peasant and the star of Vitoria's annual fiestas - 
to Germany. Celedón spent Wednesday winging his way down from a Dortmund bell 
tower on a wire, while the fans below sang "Celedón likes wine" - Rioja 
Alavesa, naturally.

The Alavés fans were simply sensational, a fact which was not lost on the 
Liverpool contingent, who chanted "Al-a-vés, Al-a-vés, Al-a-vés" as Mané's side 
collected their medals. Even at 2-0 and 3-1 down, the 14,000 packed into one 
side of the South stand never stopped singing, bouncing, and banging drums. And 
with Javi Moreno's double strike came the fireworks, decking the stand in 
glowing red.

Their support was well rewarded, of course. Cosmin Contra, Javi Moreno and 
Iván Alonso - a man who (fittingly, somehow) lives with his grandmother and 
takes her to every game - proved that their final appearance was no fluke. They 
were the obvious candidates for Man of the Match, but the whole team did the 
fans proud. Including Delfí Geli, for whom a special cheer was reserved when 
the squad returned to the Basque Country on Thursday.

It was, of course, the archetypal "heroic defeat". Shallow though it usually 
sounds to describe teams as "winners, even though they lost" - as the Spanish 
press has done - this time it was true. Having come from nowhere to put four 
past Liverpool, five past Inter and Rayo and nine past Kaiserslautern, Alavés 
were the undisputed stars of this season's Uefa Cup. With Mané's side down in 
eighth, it may be time to bend the rules - can next year's competition really 
do without them?

We'll see. But for now, Alavés, a final word: eskerrik asko (thank you). 

spanishfootball@hotmail.com <mailto:spanishfootball@hotmail.com>
 