
I have decided to concentrate this January on the New Year resolutions that I 
would like others to make. This isn't because I wouldn't benefit from making a 
few myself - quite the contrary - but even if I were to decide to give up 
smoking and drinking and getting up late in the mornings, or to clean 
meticulously between my teeth with interdental brushes, this wouldn't 
contribute significantly to making the world a better place. And, anyway, I 
attribute most of my own vices to the stress inflicted on me by others. I am 
their victim; and if they were to reform themselves, I would doubtless become a 
better person, too.

 The stress I feel has many and varied causes.

 One is the growing tendency of people to telephone me, put the phone down 
when I answer, and withhold their numbers when I ring 1471 to find out who they 
are. They make me very uneasy indeed. I usually assume that they are burglars, 
checking to see if I am at home, but I am told that telephone sales 
organisations are also to blame. They have banks of phones from which they make 
hundreds of simultaneous calls, but speak only to the handful of people who 
answer immediately.

 It would be pie-in-the-sky to expect burglars to desist from the practice, 
since burgling is their profession and they must take every precaution against 
getting caught. But BT could help by resolving not to connect anyone who 
withholds their number.

 I also urge companies to resolve to stop lying about their reasons for making 
economies. When they replace staff with new technology, they invariably say 
they are doing this to provide a better service for their customers. That is 
always untrue. The ubiquitous replacement of the human telephone operator by a 
recorded voice offering a bewildering array of options for the caller has been 
one of the most frustrating developments of the past two years.

 Another equally depressing tendency is for large companies with many branches 
to direct all incoming calls to one giant telephone centre. If, for example, 
you bank with Lloyds, as I have done for 40 years, you now have to telephone 
Wales to get put through to a branch in London, or anywhere else in the British 
Isles, and you won't be put through at all if you can't remember your account 
number. Again, it would be futile to ask such companies to reverse their 
policies, but it is reasonable to demand that they tell the truth about their 
motives.

 Perhaps some things, though, could be changed for the better by New Year 
resolutions. If Richard Branson, for example, were to resolve not to go up in 
balloons or take his clothes off in public, that would certainly increase the 
tranquillity of the nation. Likewise, if the BBC would stop messing around with 
its programmes, terrorising its presenters, and unsettling the public with 
pointless changes, that would help, too.

 If members of the cabinet would stay in whatever closet they inhabit, and 
journalists resolve not to 'out' them; if Larry Flynt, the publisher of Hustler 
magazine, stopped offering money for information on the sex lives of American 
politicians; if sperm-stained garments or bedding were banned as legal 
evidence; if foreign dictators promised never again to visit Margaret Thatcher 
or Fortnum & Mason; if Tony Blair resolved to keep his hands still and to stop 
emulating Gladstone, and William Hague to stand up straight and to stop 
emulating Churchill; if the press would refrain from settling private scores in 
public - all these things would add to the sum of human happiness.

 But I think the most helpful resolution people could make for 1999 would be 
to stop apologising unnecessarily. During the past decade, this practice has 
grown so much that it is now considered desirable in almost any circumstance. 
The silliest kind of apology is the one political and religious leaders make 
over historical events for which they bear no responsibility - Tony Blair's to 
the Irish for the potato famine, the Australian government's to the aborigines 
for their historical treatment, the Pope's to the French Protestants for the St 
Bartholomew's Day Massacre of 1572, and so on. Such apologies may be made in 
the pursuit of reconciliation, but they are essentially meaningless and just 
generate a clamour for more.

 The same is true of personal apologies of the kind President Clinton has been 
making over his behaviour with Monica Lewinsky. Because they have seemed 
insincere and motivated only by a wish to save his own skin, they have done him 
more harm than good. He would have done better to insist from the beginning 
that his private sins are private, and that he need only account for them to 
his Maker and to those directly affected. I make two exceptions to this rule, 
however. Let General Pinochet and President Saddam Hussein resolve to grovel 
before us. I think they both owe us that.
 