
Rio Ferdinand: I should get started, because I don't want to take up your 
time. I'm a guest editor for Observer Sport Monthly magazine.

Gordon Brown: That's good of you. 

RF: It's nice of them. And obviously I was reading up that you are a Raith 
Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/raith> supporter...

GB: Well, you will know all about our problems then [laughs]. 

RF: When did you start supporting them? 

GB: When I was really little I played football all the time; there was a park 
very near the house. And the football ground was literally round the corner. I 
started selling programmes that was when Raith Rovers were in the top division, 
so they were playing against Rangers and Celtic and Aberdeen and all the top 
teams. The best player we ever had was Jim Baxter, and he then went to Rangers, 
sold for £17,500. People thought that he'd fallen out with the local people 
because they didn't think that was a fair price, they should have got more for 
him . He went on to play for Scotland. But Jim, tragically, had a drinking 
problem . I met him a lot of times later in his life. He thought training was 
for other people [laughs]. He died, Jim, very young. We erected a statue of 
him. He's probably the best footballer to come out of Fife, if not Scotland, 
just an amazing passer of the ball. So that was my introduction to football.

RF: What's the ﬁrst match you ever went to? 

GB: Raith Rovers-East Fife. 

RF: And what was the score? 

GB: I think it was Raith Rovers 2-1. I was sitting there with my father and my 
father had this habit, when the other team played well and did something good, 
he'd clap them as well. And I said, 'Why, how you can do that? We're supporting 
Raith Rovers?' [Laughs] So I went to lots of matches, and I'd loved to have 
played more football, but that's how it is.

RF: Do you play any sports now? 

GB: I did, I played a lot of rugby as well, and I ran in the Scottish 
athletics championships. I played a lot of tennis, a lot of football, a lot of 
rugby, and then I had this eye injury and had to give up.

RF: So if you could have been a professional in any sport 

GB: I think football, to me, is the best sport to watch. But I did play a lot 
of rugby because the only other thing I had was speed. I was quite fast at that 
time. But to be a good footballer you have to have this great balance, haven't 
you, you've got to have this great ability to move.

RF: I think you're either born with it or you're not, the balance. You can't 
learn it.

GB: I don't know if you ever watch rugby? 

RF: I watch rugby a lot. I prefer rugby league myself, to be honest, to watch. 

GB: Well, rugby union is more like rugby league than it was before. Rugby is 
amazing how fast it's become. If you were a forward before you could probably 
get oﬀ without being a great passer of the ball, but you can't now. You must be 
enjoying your football now? Sir Alex is great.

RF: Yeah, I'm enjoying it now. When I started at West Ham ... 

GB: There were some great players there. 

RF: Di Canio… Lampard was there. I never wanted to leave and at the start it 
was really good ... but since I've been at Man United it's been a dream, 
really. To work with the manager is the best thing.

GB: You are having a pretty good season. 

RF: Yeah, we are in a good position now. The Club World Cup was a bit of a 
hindrance but luckily we won it and that instilled a bit of conﬁdence in the 
team again.

GB: You have got such a good squad of players, haven't you? 

RF: The team the manager picked yesterday [when United beat Chelsea 3-0 at Old 
Trafford] – I don't know if you saw it, but no one in the world would have 
picked that team. But he's a genius, he's unbelievable. You would have picked 
Scholes or Carrick, deﬁnitely; both of them were on the bench.

GB:And he picked Giggs and Darren Fletcher. Is Fletcher a good guy? 

RF:Yeah, really nice guy. He's done really well this year, he's probably been 
our best player. He' really up and down, works hard for the team. Typical Scot, 
isn't he? [Laughs.] Works hard.

GB: I saw David Moyes the other day, he played for Dunfermline, but they 
didn't give him the manager's job. Then he went to Preston and Everton. He 
wasn't a brilliant player but he got his coaching certiﬁcate at the age of 22, 
because he decided early on as a player that he wanted to be a coach.

RF: I want to be a coach. A few years yet... 

GB: You will be very good at it. 

RF: I hope so. 

GB: David Moyes said that all the time he was playing he was taking notes from 
every manager he worked with.

RF: I'll tell you who does that – Ole Gunnar Solskjaer. He was doing that when 
he was a player. He works with the reserves now, he's good with the lads, he's 
doing well. He's a proper student of the game, he was always taking notes on 
what the manager said and different methods of training we used to do.

GB: You have got all these diets and nutritional experts now. 

RF: When I ﬁrst started playing, John Hartson's meal on a Friday before a game 
was spaghetti bolognese with a fried egg on top. Now the chef would scream at 
you if you even mentioned fried eggs. Have you been to our training ground?

GB: I was at the training ground with Alex some time ago. It's very impressive.

RF: Yeah, it's beautiful. 

GB: I went to the Emirates Stadium, and the Arsenal dressing room compared to 
the visitors dressing room is just two diﬀerent worlds.

RF: Most dressing rooms are the same. When yougo to see David Moyes at 
Everton, go into the visiting changing room – you can walk through touching 
both walls it's that small and tight.

GB: Arsène Wenger is very big on diet isn't he? 

RF: Yeah, I think he was one of the main reasons why, in this country, it 
changed. He had a lot of diﬀ erent methods and training regimes, diet and 
nutrition, obviously picked up from when he was in Japan. And at Arsenal they 
had a big drinking culture – Tony Adams and Ray Parlour – and he changed it 
dramatically.

GB: And he does specialise in bringing young players on, doesn't he? 

RF: They've got a young lad called Jack Wilshere who's really special. I spoke 
to Wenger about him when he was training with England – he's centre midﬁeld or 
on the left or the right.

GB: And they've got that Welsh guy ... 

RF: Aaron Ramsey. You know he almost signed for us? The manager spoke to him, 
but he eventually signed for them for some reason. The manager won't forget 
that.

GB: He's got most of the people he's gone for ... 

RF: I think Paul Gascoigne is the one – did you watch the programme the 
manager has done? With David Frost, I think. He said that Gascoigne was his 
biggest regret, not getting him.

GB: Because he would have sorted him out. 

RF: Yeah, maybe he could have changed him. If anyone could have, it would have 
been him.

GB: It's amazing he hasn't lost the energy. You could see him yesterday. 

RF: Yeah, the passion's there. 

GB: I hope he might be manager of a British Olympic team ... 

RF: Would he be your choice? 

GB: Yes, I think so. I think he would be everybody's choice, actually. The 
danger in 2012 is that Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland won't participate 
because they think they are going to lose their international status, as in the
World Cup. 

RF: I'd love to play in the Olympics representing Great Britain. How do you 
think we will get on with that?

GB: Fifa has already passed a resolution saying that if Scotland and Northern 
Ireland agree to be part of it, it will not aﬀ ect their status. What Fifa are 
saying is that they will recognise this as a one-oﬀ and not penalise them. So 
now we have to get the Scottish FA and the Welsh and the Northern Irish to 
agree to be part of it.

RF: Have they been a bit oﬃsh about it? 

GB: Yes, and I think it will take a bit of time but I hope we will be able to 
persuade them. The Olympics is such a big event and you guys should have the 
chance to win Olympic gold. You will still be young by then [laughs].

RF: I will be one of the two players over 30. 

GB: It's two over 23 I think. 

RF: Surely I've got to be one of them! I'll be campaigning for that. 

GB: Well, one of them will probably be a goalkeeper, and one of them will be 
you.

RF: Me and David Seaman then. 

GB: Seaman! Bring him back! But Britain's a great sporting nation and I keep 
saying, the next 10 years will be the best years for British sport ever, 
because we've got the Olympics 2012, we've got the Commonwealth Games 2014 in 
Glasgow. We're hoping to get the rugby World Cup 2015, we're oping to get the 
football World Cup in 2018 – so just think of the next 10 years.

RF: They won't give us all that, surely? The powers that be aren't going to... 

GB: We've got the Olympics, and the Commonwealth Games. I think we'll get the 
rugby World Cup. The question is, can we get the football World Cup? Will you 
still be playing?

RF:When's that? 

GB: 2018. 

RF:[Laughs.] That's just past my retirement ... I'll be the manager then. 

GB: I met your brother in the summer ... 

RF: Yeah, he said. 

GB: Did you and your brother play together a lot? 

RF: Yeah, I used to be in goal and make him do little skills and that. 
Obviously I was seven years older than him, so I trained him, so I take all the 
credit.

GB: My older brother is two and a half years older than me and my younger 
brother is ﬁve years' diﬀ erence from me, so my younger brother had seven 
years' diﬀ erence and I think my older brother didn't really take much interest 
in my younger brother.

RF: It was lucky it was just me and Anton, to be honest. I was bored a lot of 
the time so I would just take him out and he had a mate the same age and I 
would make them play against each other all the time, and I'd always let his 
mate win.

GB: So you could be the goalkeeper as well? 

RF: Did you not see me go in goal? It was against Portsmouth in the FA Cup 
last year. I was the worst goalkeeper you've probably ever seen.

GB: You didn't let in any goals, did you? 

RF: The keeper gave away a penalty and I went in goal. It was a poor excuse 
for a dive [laughs]. So I know you are a big sports fan – have you ever 
rescheduled meetings around sporting events?

GB: Oh yeah, all the time. Now you can actually tape these matches which you 
didn't used to be able to do. I mean, I watched theManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> match yesterday at 
about nine o'clock last night because I was working through until nine and I 
was hoping nobody would tell me the score [laughs]. It's not so good if you 
know the score.

RF: Have you ever spoken to any other presidents or anything about teams and 
results?

GB: Oh, all the time, a lot of them are big supporters. The Spanish prime 
minister, [José Luís Rodriguez] Zapatero is a big supporter of Spanish 
football, and the Portuguese PM José Sócrates is a big supporter of Brazil. The 
one country you would think [football] would have taken oﬀ more in is America, 
at the highest level. All the new countries in eastern Europe, a lot of their 
status comes from the international football teams and all the prime ministers 
and presidents are determined that the football team succeeds. So it's quite a 
big thing. And then in Africa, football's really growing, there are some great 
players coming over.

RF: Yeah, deﬁnitely, I didn't realise until I actually went to Uganda and 
Nigeria how much they know. You think it's so far away and their technology's 
probably not as developed as ours, so do they watch the games? But they just 
love it.

GB: We went to Shanghai, and Shanghai's twinned with Liverpool, so we took 
Liverpool and Everton strips to give to the kids that we were meeting in this 
school. Then we arrived and the ﬁ rst thing we're told is that they're all 
Manchester United and Arsenal supporters. The second thing was , because it was 
being ﬁlmed for television, instead of the 12-year- olds we thought it was, 
they'd put on 16-year- olds so they couldn't ﬁ t the strips anyway! [Laughs] 
But that's how big it is in China.

RF: It's massive. The Asian market is the biggest. We go there on tours most 
years; we went this summer just gone, and it's just ridiculous, it's crazy. At 
United, because a lot of our kit gets left over, I've managed to get the kit 
manager to send it out to Uganda or wherever we have a soccer school because 
they appreciate it a lot more than most. Do you think as sportsmen we have got 
a bit of a responsibility to the young children to be role models?

GB: I think I'd put it the other way round: If you decide that you're going to 
help young people, it can make an enormous diﬀerence . I mean some footballers 
don't, but you do, and many others do. And I think it makes a big diﬀ erence 
when you can get people who are role models like you to say things that are 
important – people who wouldn't listen to me might listen to you. I remember 
when I was young we looked up to the footballers in the local team; it's even 
more so now because we never had football on television the way we do now when 
I was young. And now, when you've got a worldwide audience, what you do can 
actually make a difference to loads of young people and how they see 
themselves. Particularly kids that are in care, or kids that are on their own, 
just to make them feel that they've got some talent and they can actually do 
something with it is a really important part of them having conﬁdence in 
themselves

RF: Yeah, deﬁnitely. I always look back at when I was at school, and Paul 
Elliott, who used to play for Chelsea, came in. He talked about certain issues, 
and you hang on their every word . That's what I look back on. You'd get your 
school teacher talking to you about the same subject and after a couple of 
seconds you'd be thinking about something else.

GB: And certainly, what you've done about racism; racism in sport is 
completely unacceptable and it is something that's tarnished the reputation of 
football in many places. The Emile Heskey thing is the most recent worst 
example. Croatia should have been forced to have their games behind closed 
doors or something. They didn't take tough enough discipline with them.

RF: I said that all along, especially after the Spain incident, when they ﬁned 
them about £35,000. Money isn't going to really aﬀect anybody, especially the 
fans. Do you think that the current ﬁnancial state of the world will have any 
bearing on the 2012 Olympics?

GB: No, we're getting on with the construction of the Olympics and we're 
spending the money now when there's less of a demand for construction workers, 
so that perhaps helps us get on with the job. But it's not a good thing to have 
a downturn and we don't want that so we're taking measures. We're building 
schools in the next year, so about 100,000 people will be working on building 
schools.

RF: All over England? 

GB: Yes, we've decided to advance a school building programme, road building, 
railways, hospitals, so in a period where there's fewer houses being built you 
can actually get some of your construction projects moved forward. I was 
opening a school in Swindon on Thursday; there's a lot of schools being opened 
at the moment and a lot of them have great sports facilities. I don't know what 
your sports facilities were like when you were at school?

RF: We used to have to walk to the place where the sports facilities were and 
they weren't the best. Do you agree there should be more sport training in 
schools?

GB: I want ﬁve hours a week. It's only two hours at the moment. We've got 90% 
doing two hours. I think about 10 years ago it was only 25%, so it's gone up . 
And the range of sports is a lot wider so you've got all sorts of things now, 
not just football and rugby and so on. So we want to get that up to ﬁ ve hours. 
Roughly speaking, everybody would be doing an hour a day of sport and that 
would be really good. It makes for more ﬁ tness, it makes you more healthy, it 
makes for more teamwork, it makes more potential in sports being realised, and 
it has an eﬀ ect on the academic studies as well. The Olympics were a huge 
boost, I don't know if you met Rebecca Adlington.

RF: Yeah, the swimmer … 

GB: She's done brilliantly, she's a great role model for girls doing swimming. 
And Chris Hoy's a great guy, the cyclist .

RF: Yeah, it's great, deﬁnitely a massive inspiration, plus with 2012 being 
here, it's something for everyone to work towards. If people think, "Maybe I've 
got a 50% chance to be an Olympian..." they'll work harder.

GB: And we won a medal in Beijing in gymnastics, which was amazing because 
we're starting to get into areas that nobody thought we'd do well in before. 
The TeamGB cycling coach, Dave Brailsford, has done a great job. He says – 
maybe it's true of Manchester United as well – that a big factor in success is 
what he calls the aggregation of minute diﬀerences . So you've got the 
handlebars better designed and he got the ﬁtness improved and the uniform they 
wear … The aggregation of small improvements has put them at the top of the 
league.

RF: That's what our manager believes in, deﬁnitely, small minor details that 
people don't really take care of are the things that take you up to becoming 
the best team. It's hard for people to understand that sometimes, especially 
people involved that are playing

GB: Well, in any team, it's not just the individual player, it's how they work 
together.

RF: Yeah, deﬁnitely. That's another thing that's coming big into football, the 
psychology ...

GB: Mind games [laughs]. Like Rafael Benítez. 

RF: Yeah, he just fell into the hole, I think. One last question: which 
sportsman do you think would make a good politician?

GB: Well, Alex Ferguson would be a good politician. He would do well. Managers 
are good leaders because they've got to bring people together. You've got to 
have a plan. They're leading a team, and in politics I think that's what it's 
about. You've got people not showing their true potential and somehow you've 
got to motivate them to do so. Gordon Banks told me this great story about Alf 
Ramsey, when he was England manager. Ramsey would shake hands with the players 
when they left the Saturday after the match; but he always wanted to keep 
players on their toes so he never wanted to promise them they'd be in the team 
the next time. And Gordon Banks told me he made the mistake of saying to Sir 
Alf as he was leaving after one match, he said, "See you next time," and Alf 
Ramsey said, "Will you?" [Laughs]

RF: That puts you back in your place, that. 

GB:And then I think Ramsey dropped him for the next game [laughs].
 