
Not for the first time the Chancellor of the Exchequer has staffing problems 
at the Bank of England. Last year, the dilemma was what to do with Bank chief 
Eddie George. His contract was up for renewal and Gordon Brown is said to have 
flirted with the idea of replacing him before being persuaded by Tony Blair 
that his re-appointment was essential to retain the confidence of financial 
markets.

Mr Brown has a similar quandary over the jobs of the Bank's monetary policy 
committee's members, Alan Budd and Ian Plenderleith. Both men's contracts 
expire at the end of May. The MPC's system of accountability, in which 
contracts come up for renewal on a staggered basis, means they are the first of 
the nine MPC members to face the ultimate sanction of the sack.

Some trade unionists and industry leaders are certainly in favour of giving 
them their marching orders. Not that they have grudges against them.

The hostility stems from the fact that neither Mr Plenderleith, a career 
central banker, nor Mr Budd, a former academic and chief economic adviser at 
the Treasury, have the sort of hands-on business experience deemed necessary 
for the job.

Although the antipathy has subsided somewhat following the five interest-rate 
cuts endorsed by all the members over the last six months, more economists in 
the mould of De-Anne Julius, former chief economist of British Airways, would 
be appreciated.

She, it is argued, has a much better feel for how the economy is faring - as 
seen in her very early identification of the threat to UK growth from the Asian 
crisis.

It is hard not to have some sympathy with industry's view that the MPC is out 
of touch.

Despite the prevailing sentiment that the economy is heading for a soft 
landing, thanks to the swift response of the MPC to the threat of global 
economic crisis, it is not yet clear that they have reduced rates sufficiently 
to avoid an undershoot of the Government's inflation target. It is easy to 
forget that it is not the global economic crisis alone that has brought growth 
in the UK to a virtual standstill in recent months.

Until late last summer a slowdown in growth was the declared object of 
monetary and fiscal policy. To that end, the MPC increased rates five times 
between May 1997 and June 1998, based not on hard evidence of mounting 
inflationary pressure but on the mistaken assumption that stronger growth would 
result in price-pressures developing, as they have in the past.

They did not do so - and it has not only been the turmoil in world markets 
that has been responsible for lasting low inflation. All the signs were before 
the crisis that there has been a genuine global reduction in inflationary 
pressures - thanks to a host of structural factors ranging from the rise of 
consumer power to the spread of labour-saving technology.

However, ditching Messrs Plenderleith and Budd at this stage would not be 
without complications. For a start, as one of the five bank insiders, Mr 
Plenderleith is the Governor's nominee not Mr Brown's, and it seems unlikely Mr 
George will throw one of his loyal supporters to the wolves.

True, the legislation granting the Bank of England operational freedom states 
that the Governor's nominees have to be endorsed by the Chancellor, but Mr 
Brown will not want to provoke a row with the Governor for fear of waking up to 
headlines about splits between the Treasury and Bank of the kind which 
regularly appeared in the run-up to the Governor's re-appointment last year.

For that reason Mr Plenderleith is likely to stay where he is. Indeed, it is 
possible to say that he will keep his position on the MPC as long as he is 
responsible for the bank's financial market operations. The politics of 
replacing him with someone from within the Bank do not bear thinking about.

The position of Mr Budd is more complex. As one of the four independent 
outsiders on the committee his job is in the Chancellor's gift. So in theory 
the Chancellor could propose a replacement for Mr Budd. But why would he? After 
all, Mr Budd was one of his choices in the first place. Getting rid of him just 
a year into the job would smack of an admission that he picked the wrong man 
the first time around.

Moreover, Mr Budd would have a good case for unfair dismissal, given that it 
takes up to two years for the full impact of rate changes to show in the 
economy.

We seem unlikely to be heading for an inflationary boom but at this stage the 
MPC's hawks - and Mr Budd has been the most hawkish - have to be given the 
benefit of the doubt on their reading of the economy.

None of this precludes Mr Budd stepping down voluntarily. Some observers 
believe he may decide to opt for a quieter life, having just been appointed 
Provost of Queen's College, Oxford. But that may be idle speculation - at the 
moment he does four days a week at the Bank of England, but there is provision 
for MPC members to do less.

The contract of Charles Goodhart, for instance, a Professor at the London 
School ofEconomics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, limits him 
to two days a week. Mr Budd could easily renegotiate his terms to allow him to 
do both jobs simultaneously - just as Mr Goodhart does.

The odds are, therefore, on both Messrs Budd and Plenderleith staying on the 
committee for the time being. But that does not mean that there is not an 
argument for changing its composition.

It would be wrong to bow to the pressure from industry to appoint a token 
business or trade union representative or, indeed, someone from the regions - 
Eddie George was right when he said that monetary policy, imperfect though it 
is, can only be designed for the the whole economy.

The committee's balance would benefit, however, from the addition of further 
monetary policy experts who do have some business experience.

There are no shortage of suitable candidates out there - Andrew Sentance is 
one. With a curriculum vitae including time as chief economist at the CBI, as 
an academic at the London Business School and now as Ms Julius's successor at 
British Airways, he has exactly the right credentials needed for the job.

As a bonus, he is also an extremely effective communicator - a quality not 
shared by all the present MPC members yet sorely needed if the public is to 
share the committee's vision of a Britain with a low-inflation future.

Being known as the author of a book titled The Death of Inflation might not 
seem to be an ideal qualification, but Roger Bootle - until recently the chief 
economist at HSBC and now running his own economic consultancy, London 
Economics - is another name that could be put into the frame.

The former academic is a big thinker, but his years in the City have taught 
him the folly of relying too heavily on models when it comes to monetary policy 
decisions. Far better, he seems to feel, to rely on a combination of academic 
rigor and gut instinct, something which is in short supply in academia.

Another candidate who may fit the mould of future MPC member is Adair Turner, 
who steps down as director-general of the Confederation of British Industry at 
the end of this year.

After four years of after-dinner speeches up and down the country, and of 
heated policy discussion between members at CBI governing council meetings and 
with government, he has certainly developed the necessary political skills.

He has also proved a fair judge of future economic activity; more than a mere 
industry lobbyist who always wants cheaper borrowing.

The next appointments to come up for renewal will be those of Mr Goodhart and 
Cambridge professor Willem Buiter, in May next year. That is when people such 
as Messrs Sentance, Bootle and Turner might get the call.

After Messrs Goodhart and Buiter it will be the turn of John Vickers, who 
joined the Bank as chief economist last year from Oxford, and Ms Julius, whose 
contracts both end in 2001.

But by that time speculation about places on the MPC will be largely 
irrelevant to Britain's economic fortunes. If the Government proceeds with 
plans to join the euro the only Bank of England job that will be worth the salt 
will be the top one - that of the UK's delegate to the European Central Bank in 
Frankfurt.

It is hard not to be sympathetic with the view that the MPC is out of touch
 