
Regarding your article “Britain’s rolling stock is 21 years old on average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/uk-railway-trains-more-than-20-years-old-on-average-analysis-shows>
” (28 December), I would argue that accessibility for disabled people 
travelling on trains is of a similar age. The staff are fantastic but the 
accessibility of the rolling stock is not. I am a wheelchair user who regularly 
travels by train. When I travel, I must book assistance to help me on and off 
trains. At peak times this assistance does not always happen. I mention this 
because in Berlin, much of the rail system provides level access on to the 
trains. This enables wheelchair users who can to use the train independently. 
This is something I hope will be looked at in the new design of trains and 
stations.

I regularly use both the east and west coast mainlines to visit family. My 
partner and I are both in electric wheelchairs and cannot transfer to companion 
seats. Most carriages only have a single wheelchair space so we can’t sit 
together. With innovative design, train companies could have dual-purpose 
spaces that allow for wheelchair users when needed and can also be accessed by 
non-disabled passengers when there are no wheelchair users travelling. This 
would enable multiple wheelchair users to travel together.

The DfT spokesman mentioned the biggest modernisation programme in a century 
to improve the number of seats and Wi-Fi access. It should also address 
disabled access, or disabled people will continue to receive a standard class 
service on what will be a first-class railway system.
Mark Cooper
Edinburgh

• I wanted to take the opportunity to respond to a number of points raised by 
an anonymous Servest employee (I’m a cleaner on GWR trains. We’re striking 
because we’re treated unfairly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/cleaner-gwr-great-western-railway-agency-staff-pay-conditions-striking>
, theguardian.com, 21 December). The work done by Servest teams to make sure 
our trains are clean, presentable and comfortable is very important to us and 
our customers, and is just as important that their staff are properly rewarded 
for the work they do.

The relationship between Servest and its employees should rightly be between 
them but GWR is not an uninterested party here, and we have built a number of 
key protections into our contracts with suppliers to make sure their staff are 
treated fairly and with respect. For example, staff of contractors cleaning GWR 
trains (and any agency staff working on their behalf) must receive the living 
wage – or the London living wage where appropriate – as a minimum standard. In 
addition, they receive at least 28 days’ paid leave a year, zero-hours 
contracts are banned, and we give each of them five days’ free travel on our 
trains a year.

We have been very clear that Servest and the RMT need to work together to 
resolve the current dispute, and we will be meeting with the Servest management 
team in the new year to discuss how we can support any discussions they have 
had with their employee representatives.

We are determined that this action does not impact on our customers’ 
experience and we have worked closely with Servest to put alternative 
arrangements in place should the strike action go ahead.
Andrew Mellors
Deputy managing director, Great Western Railway 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 