
Prostate has long been the Cinderella of cancers, lagging behind others – in 
particular breast cancer – when it comes to diagnosis, treatment and the 
funding that goes into research.


But scientists at University College London have made what they believe is a 
real breakthrough using a drug derived from bacteria found at the bottom of the 
sea,injected into the bloodstream and activated in the prostate by laser beams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/20/prostate-cancer-treatment-laser-activated-drug-a-leap-forward>
. There is also massive excitement from patients, who have been calling UCL 
ever since the news got out.

Laser-activated drug a 'leap forward' for prostate cancer treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/20/prostate-cancer-treatment-laser-activated-drug-a-leap-forward>
The really good news is that this treatment has been shown to kill cancerous 
cells in the prostate without the serious and sometimes life-changing 
consequences of surgery. A radical operation to remove the whole prostate gland 
risks leaving patients incontinent or impotent. That’s why for so many years 
the standard of care has been to operate only on men who are at high risk of 
the disease progressing and becoming a killer. The rest are assigned to active 
surveillance. That means regular testing to ensure the cancer is not spreading 
– but no treatment. Even symptom-free, many men find that psychologically hard 
to live with.

Among those under surveillance are men at very low risk, who are very likely 
to die with their cancer and not of it. But for others at higher risk of the 
cancer spreading, the new therapy could be really helpful.

The study by Mark Emberton and colleagues, published in the Lancet Oncology 
journal, tells us a lot about the promise of this therapy, but does not answer 
all the questions about its future. It could not, Emberton told the Guardian, 
because the authors had to find a design for the trial that would satisfy the 
European medicines regulator but without the advantage of technologies that 
have advanced massively in just the last few years.

“The prostate cancer landscape has been changing so quickly that no trial 
could keep up with the pace of change,” he said. When they started, just five 
years ago, MRI scans were not universally available and they had to guess where 
in the prostate the cancer was. Biopsies are hit or miss.

The researchers focused on 400 men at low risk and treated half with the 
therapy, placing optical fibres into the prostate to carry the laser beam. The 
drug is made from bacteria that live on the ocean floor and are adept at 
converting any light into high intensity energy, which then kills cancer cells 
when activated in the prostate without harming normal tissue. The other group 
were given active surveillance as normal.

At the end of two years, the cancer had progressed in 28% of treated patients 
compared with 58% of those on active surveillance. It was not a clean sweep, 
but, says Emberton, if they were to do the study now, with the help of MRI 
scans, they could hit the cancerous parts of the prostate rather than going in 
blind and the results would be much better. There were side-effects, but mostly 
they had cleared up by the end of the two years.

What nobody can know is whether the cancer will stay away – the treated 
patients will be monitored for years to find out.

Emberton and the charity Prostate Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> UK think the therapy will be most 
useful in patients in the grey zone – between low and high risk – although for 
the purposes of the study they had to do it with those at low risk. It is not 
for everyone. Those at very low risk are still better off with no treatment and 
no side-effects.

The idea of a drug made of harmless bacteria that can be activated by light to 
become cancer killers is not a new one. Photodynamic therapy is already being 
used to treat skin cancer and others where light can easily penetrate. 
Unfortunately, it has also been abused. Quack clinics offer unproven PDT for 
brain and other cancers that lasers cannot reach, taking huge amounts of money 
from families trying everything to save the life of a child.

But this new technology, says Emberton, has been very carefully developed and 
he believes it could have application in other forms of cancer. He hopes it 
will get a licence and be approved for use in the NHS – as early as possible, 
because for now, all they can tell their many callers is that the trial is over 
and the treatment is no longer available.
 