
Is Gordon Brown the most brilliant Chancellor since records began? Is the 
British economy in quite such good shape as most people seem to think it is? 
And if so, why isn't the Iron Chancellor abandoning some of his armour so that 
he can more easily get at his war chest?

These seem to be the key questions puzzling the electorate after a week when 
Brown has received yet another dazzling press for his pre-Budget presentation 
of the the economy and his plans.

Brown has made 'prudence' his watchword. But events have helped. 

A year ago there were widespread fears of a recession; but it did not happen, 
partly due to the swift response of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy 
Committee to what otherwise seemed a dire prospect. And the Chancellor has 
gained credit for this, because the MPC is his creation.

But events in the wider world have also come to his rescue. The US boom has 
continued, and Wall Street has not collapsed - or not yet. The European 
economy, our major market, has picked up. And the worst of the South East Asia 
crisis seems to be over.

Moreover Britain, like other industrial countries, has benefited from a 
disinflationary climate all over the the world. This partly reflects intense 
'globalised' competition, but was given added intensity by the impact of the 
Asian crisis commodity prices. The disinflationary climate enabled the MPC to 
cut interest rates seven times between October 1998 and last June.

As a result, instead of a recession, which would have done the Chancellor's 
reputation little good, the economy paused briefly before growing again, and 
unemployment carried on falling.

Even the Bank's most hawkish inflation fighter, Mervyn King, felt able to 
proclaim last week: 'The happy combination of surprisingly good growth and 
surprisingly low inflation underlines the fact that there is no automatic link 
from faster economic growth to higher inflation.'

The Chancellor took great pleasure in conceding that the Treasury had indeed 
got its forecasts for the economy wrong this year - but not in the direction 
expected by many City analysts and press commentators. After growth of 2.2 per 
cent in gross domestic product between 1997 and 1998, the Treasury had forecast 
a deceleration to between 1 and 1.5 per cent this year. Many observers had 
argued there would be no growth at all, or even outright recession.

In fact the latest estimate is that GDP will have risen by 1.75 per cent 
between 1998 and 1999; meanwhile, the Treasury has raised its forecast for next 
year to between 2.5 and 3 per cent, up from 2.25 to 2.5 per cent. King said: 
'From a gentle take-off, the economy has risen to cruising altitude, or even a 
little above, more quickly than expected.'

How come? The independent National Institute of Economic and Social Research 
says: 'The recovery is being driven by buoyant household and government 
consumption and strong capital outlays.' What economists call 'final domestic 
demand' has been rising at a staggering rate of between 4 and 4.5 per cent this 
year, well over twice the rate at which output has expanded.

As the Bank's latest inflation report explains: 'Final domestic demand can be 
met from domestic production, imports or a change in inventory holdings 
[stocks].'

Thus it is possible for a time for growth of domestic demand to exceed that of 
output when demand is met from stocks held by manufacturers and distributors, 
or when imports are growing faster than exports. In the official jargon: 'Net 
[overseas] trade made large negative contributions to GDP growth between 1996 
and 1998, as exports slowed in response to the higher exchange rate and weaker 
world growth.'

Indeed, exports performed so badly for so long that during the 'recession 
scare' period, Governor Eddie George was effectively saying that, in order to 
achieve the 2.5 per cent inflation target, the MPC was having to stimulate 
domestic consumer spending. Hence the succession of interest rate cuts.

It certainly succeeded. The Treasury notes: 'Household consumption has 
rebounded rapidly from its slowing in mid-1998. Quarterly growth has exceeded 1 
per cent since late last year, well above the Budget forecast... With growth in 
employment remaining robust, real household disposable income is now expected 
to grow by 3.75 per cent in 1999.'

Again, the Bank says: 'The strengthening of consumers' expenditure so far in 
1999 has been underpinned by the past buoyancy of labour income, housing and 
financial wealth... The improvement in confidence since the start of the year 
is likely to have boosted expenditure ... Real earnings growth increased 
through 1998 and has remained high in 1999.'

There has also been an astonishing import boom, which takes some of the gloss 
off the impression of the perfectly functioning Brownian economy. As the 
Treasury's Pre-Budget Report shows, exports of goods and service rose a mere 2 
per cent in 1998 and by an estimated 2.25 per cent this year, while imports 
shot up 8.5 per cent last year and an estimated 6.25 per cent this year.

This is unsustainable, and the Treasury maintains that 'the recent pick-up in 
world growth and fuller adjustment to sterling's earlier appreciation are now 
feeding through to a marked improvement in export performance'. Treasury 
forecasters argue, optimistically in view of the strength of the pound, that 
export growth will suddenly more than match import growth next year, at between 
6.5 and 6.75 per cent, against 6 to 6.5 per cent.

Much seems to depend on what 'fuller adjustment to sterling's earlier 
appreciation' actually means in practice. Companies concede that they have been 
making no money, or even losing it, on exports at this exchange rate. The Bank, 
in its reworked model of the relationship between the exchange rate and 
inflation, has deferred to Sushil Wadwhani's argument that it has been 
overestimating the prospects for the kind of sterling devaluation which would 
traditionally allow exports to 'adjust'.

Economist Peter Warburton of Flemings Research goes so far as to argue that 
this is 'a recovery built on sand'. His research shows that the strong pound 
and higher corporate taxation (which are the reality behind the Chancellor's 
'tax breaks' for entrepreneurs) mean there has been a sharp deterioration in 
the financial health of the corporate sector, 'evidenced by falling profits, 
draining liquidity, de-stocking, stalled investment and a 20 per cent annual 
rise in company failures'.

For all the talk of the wonders of the new, entrepreneurial Labour Party and 
for all the emphasis on productivity and the 'supply side' of the economy in 
the Pre-Budget Report, even the Treasury's own forecasts show a sharp slowdown 
in the business investment which has been helping to drive the economy. Thus 
'gross fixed capital formation' by British business rose 12.5 per cent in 1998, 
and decelerated to 5.75 per cent this year. A rise of as little as 1 to 1.25 
per cent is forecast for next year, and 1.75-2.25 per cent in 2001.

The public sector will be driving investment then. What much of the dis 
appointed comment about the Chancellor's refusal to unlock his war chest 
overlooks is that there are already major increases in public sector investment 
in the pipeline, following the earlier squeeze. The rise in general government 
capital spending is projected as 9.5 per cent in 2000 and 10.75 per cent in 
2001, against 3.25 per cent this year and last.

The war chest reports are much exaggerated. Andrew Dilnot and Carl Emmerson of 
the Institute for Fiscal Studies say that 'as Nigel Lawson found to his cost, a 
big budget surplus can quickly disappear, and the surpluses of £3.5bn this year 
and £3bn next are small relative to overall taxation and public spending of 
around £350bn'.

Much of the speculation about war chests is based on question-begging 
assumptions about Brown's strategy. Certainly he is aiming at the kind of 
macro-economic stability and supply- side incentives which may help to raise 
the economy's long-run growth rate, and hence his ability to achieve a 'fairer' 
society. But this strategy has only just begun, and is a long term one for a UK 
economy whose productivity, performance and standard of living are still poor 
by continental standards.
 