
Paris St Germain are almost certain to retain their Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> title after second-placed 
Lyon’s 3-0 loss at Caen on Saturday left them six points behind with two games 
left.

PSG, who demolished Guingamp 6-0 on Friday, have 77 points and a better goal 
difference (+45 to +38) thanLyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>, 
who were physically overwhelmed by struggling Caen.

The home side’s Nicolas Benezet scored twice in four minutes before the break 
and Sloan Privat rounded off a comfortable win five minutes from time.

Laurent Blanc’s PSG, who need a point to guarantee a third straight title, 
travel to Montpellier and host Stade de Reims while Lyon welcome Girondins de 
Bordeaux and visit Stade Rennes in the last two rounds of matches.

“We deserve nothing, tonight we were devoured by Caen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/caen>,” Lyon midfielder Steed Malbranque 
told Canal Plus. “We started too timidly. For the title, it’s over, now we have 
to focus on retaining that second place,” he added with his side six points 
ahead of Monaco, who play on Sunday.

The hosts were denied a possible penalty in the 27th minute when Lenny Rangis 
was brought down by Samuel Umtiti but the referee, Nicolas Rainville, waved 
play on.

Caen’s goalkeeper, Rémy Vercoutre, made a superb save to keep out Damien da 
Silva’s header from close range on the half hour.

Benezet then opened the scoring four minutes before the break when the Lyon 
goalkeeper, Anthony Lopes, bungled the midfielder’s long-range cross into the 
net.

Benezet doubled his tally on the stroke of half-time with a rising shot from 
inside the box.

Vercoutre continued to shine in goal after the interval, saving from Nabil 
Fekir in the 72nd minute and Mohamed Yattara three minutes later after the 
forward had been set up by Alexandre Lacazette’s brilliant through pass.

Privat tapped in the third after he connected with Thomas Lemar’s cross at the 
end of a counterattack.

Hervé Bazile could have added a fourth for Caen but his angled shot was saved 
by Lopes in the closing stages.
 