
Publishers are rushing out a raft of titles to meet demand among readers 
traumatised by the election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and the aftermath of the 
Brexit referendum. Titles range from humour to protest packs aimed at 
reinvigorating the left as it faces four years of the former TV star in the 
White House.

The books are being turned around in time for Trump’s inauguration as US 
president on 20 January. American writer Gene Stone will publishThe Trump 
Survival Guide 
<https://www.harpercollins.com/9780062686480/the-trump-survival-guide> on both 
sides of the Atlantic 10 days before the inauguration. Billed as “everything 
you need to know about living through what you hoped would never happen”, the 
book will be a serious call to action for Trump dissenters across the political 
spectrum, said publisher Dey Street Press, a division of HarperCollins. The 
author’s earlier books include a satirical guide to surviving George W Bush’s 
presidency.

Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren and Gloria Steinem are among political 
activists, writers and prominent journalists who will mark Inauguration Day 
with a collection of essays entitledWhat We Do Now: Standing Up for Your Values 
in Trump’s America <http://www.mhpbooks.com/books/what-we-do-now-2>. The 
collection comes from activist publisher Melville House, which was founded to 
oppose George W Bush.

Describing the book as a blueprint for moving forward, Melville House 
co-publisher Valerie Merians said: “We know that his vision of the country is 
not shared by a majority of Americans. Our hope is that this book will 
galvanise, and provide a road map to, the millions of Americans who want to 
fight back by standing up for their values.”

In the UK, publishers’ first responses to Trump’s accession to high office 
have been to send him up. Orion has released two Christmas books, Trump Cats by 
Hugh Janus and Where’s Trump? by Anastasia Catris, a Where’s Wally? spoof that 
offers readers the chance to hunt the president-elect among among crowds 
building a wall in Mexico and at a Tea Party rally.

More considered responses are due to appear in spring. Protest!, edited by Ra 
Page <http://commapress.co.uk/books/protest-stories-of-resistance>, is to be 
published by Manchester-based Comma Press. The book pairs authors with 
historians and witnesses of the great protest events of the recent past to 
create “factually informed” short stories that Page hopes will rebalance the 
tendency to blame political upsets on those at the bottom of the social 
spectrum rather than challenging those at the top.

As with the post-Trump US publications, Page’s collection is aimed at 
re-energising and re-enthusing the left in the aftermath of a national vote 
that has left it winded. “The idea of Protest! was to rejuvenate and 
resuscitate the tradition of blaming upwards and speaking truth unto power,” 
Page said of the book, due out in early March. Contributors include the 
historian David Constantine and authors Sara Maitland, Maggie Gee and Frank 
Cottrell-Boyce.

Profile Books, meanwhile, are publishing The Fate of the West by former 
Economist editor Bill Emmott, which takes a serious look at the decline of the 
liberal democracy in the West. “We were originally planning to publish in March 
but it’s moved to late April in order to consider and analyse Trump’s win,” 
said a spokesperson.

Also out in April, from Macmillan int he UK and Riverhead Books in the US, is 
The Knowledge Illusion by cognitive scientists Steven Sloman and Phillip 
Fernbach. Their book looks at how the “hive mind” is vital for a functioning 
society, arguing that better decisions are made when individuals recognise 
their limits of understanding and that, by calling upon the expertise or 
experience of others, we can improve our approach to most complex problems and 
avoid financial meltdown or bad decisions at the polling booth.

A handful of books have been revised and rushed out in the runup to Christmas, 
to meet demand for information in the wake of the Brexit vote. Oneworld, which 
was behind this year’s Man Booker winner, The Sellout, has reissued Colin 
Brown’s Glory and B*llocks: The Truth Behind XI Defining Events in British 
History, with a new chapter, Brexit: The Legacy of a Nation Divided.

It is not expected that any of the books will sell as well as the first book 
off the printing presses following Brexit.Five on Brexit Island 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/london-life/lashings-of-ginger-beer-but-no-eu-bananas-we-imagine-enid-blytons-upcoming-five-on-brexit-island-a3310931.html>
, a spoof Enid Blyton from Quercus, has already sold more than 40,000 copies.
 