
As US president-elect Donald Trump looks to private finance 
<https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/_landings/contract/O-TRU-102316-Contractv02.pdf>
 to spur $1tn in US infrastructure investment, he and his team may want to 
evaluate the benefits – and the challenges – of other countries’ public-private 
partnerships.

One clear lesson is that governments need to pay close attention to contract 
structures to ensure private partners can be held to account.

There are potential benefits for both the state and the private sector from 
such partnerships. In Australia, Melbourne is about to get 65 new metro trains, 
in a contract worth AUS $2bn. It’s the largest single order of new trains in 
the history of the Australian state of Victoria and the state’s first ever 
public-private partnership (PPP) for manufacturing.

Related: Five ways public-private partnerships can build healthier cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/dec/19/five-ways-public-private-partnerships-can-build-healthier-cities>

Unlike traditional contracts, under which the manufacturing location is chosen 
by the supplier, this partnership with the Evolution Rail consortium will 
ensure that 60% of manufacturing will happen locally, creating more than 1,000 
desperately needed jobs.

“These [trains] are about more than just carrying more people, they’re also 
about giving people a good wage and meaningful employment,” says Jacinta Allan, 
state minister for public transport.

Job creation is key. Like the US, Australia has struggled with the decline in 
local production industries, particularly in the automotive sector. Ford closed 
its plant in October 2016 and Toyota and Holden will follow in 2017, leading to 
the loss of thousands of jobs. Not only does the new partnership specify local 
manufacturing, but further partnerships with Toyota and other local 
organisations will ensure that staff from the automotive sector are able to 
move into the growing rail industry.

 The partners in the consortium to build the new trains include local 
companies Downer Rail and Plenary Group, as well as China’s Changchun Railway 
Vehicles Company, which will set up a new regional headquarters in Melbourne. 
Importantly for the state of Victoria, which has conducted 28 PPP projects to 
date, the consortium will face financial penalties if it fails to meet its 
commitments to developing local content.

Penalising private companies for failure to deliver on their contractual 
requirements is an important element of PPPs. At New York’s LaGuardia airport, 
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has embarked upon a $4bn PPP for 
the design, construction, operation and maintenance until 2050 of a new 
terminal building, designed to increase capacity of its existing terminal B 
from 8 million passengers a year to 21 million.

“The challenge in doing this project is that while constructing the new 
terminal everything has to run as normal,” says Magnus Eriksson, vice-president 
for Skanska Infrastructure Development, part of the LaGuardia Gateway Partners 
consortia. The partnership approach has accelerated progress on the project, 
according to Eriksson. “There is a lot of back and forth before getting to the 
point where you can start construction, but in a PPP that all happens in one go 
so we already have the designers, the architect, and the contractors at the 
table,” he says.

Related: Soak it up: China’s ambitious plan to solve urban flooding with 
‘sponge cities’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/03/china-government-solve-urban-planning-flooding-sponge-cities>

 It has led to a more innovative design for the terminal. Bridges inspired by 
the New York skyline will take travellers to two concourse “islands”, which 
will enable more planes to enter and leave the terminal than in the existing 
U-shaped layout.

The local community will also benefit from contracts worth $679m, which will 
be awarded to small companies that qualify as enterprises owned by those with 
minority backgrounds, women, disabled people or veterans. Eriksson describes it 
as the biggest opportunity for small and minority businesses in the city.

Partnerships between public bodies and the private sector can also harness 
innovative new technology. One example is the recent partnership between 
Washington’s District Department of Transportation, Golden Triangle Business 
Improvement District (BID) and UK clean tech company Pavegen. In November 2016 
three arrays of latest generation V3 kinetic paverswere installed on 
Connecticut Avenue 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2016/11/19/new-tiles-harness-the-energy-of-footsteps-in-washington-d-c/?utm_term=.f6103deddffa>
, near the White House, where around 1,000 pedestrians an hour walk over the 
tiles. The system converts their footsteps into electrical power.

Ensuring effective operations is one of the reasons a PPP is to be used for 
waste management in the Brazilian city of Curitiba, where the municipal 
authority acknowledged it needed to be more efficient in managing the city’s 
waste.

 At present, waste is dumped in a landfill site 30km from the city. Now, two 
new contracts will be created, one to collect and transport the waste and to 
treat it, which will probably involve building a new facility. The most 
innovative aspects of the new arrangement is that contractors will be paid 
according to their performance, rather than the amount of resources supplied; 
they will also be required to improve and invest in the city’s eco-citizen 
programme, created in 2008 to provide new opportunities for the waste pickers 
who make a living from landfill sites.

But for public private partnerships to succeed lessons must be learned from 
historic PPP failures. Poorly structured deals using more expensive private 
finance and overly optimistic user revenue forecasts have had disastrous 
consequences. One example is Mexico’s PPP road programme, which left users with 
some ofthe most expensive road tolls in the world  
<http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21602213-need-return-government-road-builder-ppp-traffic-jam>
and ended with the government taking 23 projects back into public sector 
control, along with responsibility for $5bn of debt.

It is a similar story with the South Bay Expressway in San Diego, where the 
private consortium filed for bankruptcy in 2010 andthe highway was taken over  
<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/sdut-south-bay-expressway-traffic-toll-road-sandag-2013aug01-story.html>
in 2011 by the local state planning agency. More recently, Melbourne’s East 
West Link motorway was cancelled by the incoming Labour government in late 
2014, at a cost of AUS $1.1bn, demonstrating the political sensitivities of 
such deals.

If the US, or any other country, wants to benefit from innovative partnerships 
for a new privately financed infrastructure boom it must ensure that benefits 
are realised in the long term and users get the innovation they are paying for.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 