
Every year, we ask you, the members of our network, to help us in our search 
for leaders to shape what we do over the next 12 months. Nominations are now 
open for the 2017 Guardian Public Leaders editorial advisory board.

The past 12 months have been a period of huge turmoil for public services in 
the UK. Here on the network, we have taken an independent view of public 
leadership and policy, guided by the members of our 2016 board, Christian 
Brodie, Anne Byrne, Stewart Carruth, Sherry Malik, Christine Moore, Joe 
Rafferty, Helen Reynolds, Zoe Sweet and Carolyn Wilkins. They have been a 
fantastic resource and have helped us see the Public Leaders Network achieve 
even wider audiences this year. A big thank you to them all.

We’re now looking for nine leaders to join our 2017 board. Once again, we want 
a board that reflects all those who deliver public services, including central 
government, local government and the private and voluntary sectors.

Why become a member of the Public Leaders board?

Guardian Public Leaders is unique in its breadth of public services coverage. 
When someone joins our board, they get a chance to come into the Guardian twice 
a year, to share their experience and catch up with leaders from other parts of 
public service. Former board members have found it stimulating, we hope – and 
of course it helps us ensure that we reflect the real mood of what’s going on 
in public services.

What’s involved?

We know public leaders are busier than ever. So we don’t ask a huge commitment 
from our board. We ask our nine board members to attend two meetings a year, at 
the Guardian’s offices in London. The first will be from 08.45–11am on 
Wednesday 22 February 2017 and the second will take place in June 2017.

At each meeting, we ask every board member to give a brief overview of policy, 
management and leadership issues in their own sector. We then collectively, as 
a board, will consider what the key themes will be for the year.

We also ask our board members to help us disseminate our content via their own 
social channels. They don’t have to write anything for the network – but all 
contributions are welcome.

Who is eligible?

Nominees can work in any organisation and in any role, as long as they have a 
proven role in public services. The final board will be chosen from a shortlist 
decided by the editor, and will represent as far as possible a wide 
cross-section of those planning, designing and leading UK public services, 
including leaders from the private and voluntary sectors.

How to nominate

Before you nominate anyone, please check they are happy for you to do so, that 
they can attend two meetings of the board, and that all their contact details 
are up-to-date. You may not nominate yourself and you must be a member of the 
Public Leaders Network to take part in this election.

Nominations are now open, and will close at midnight on Wednesday 4 January, 
2017. Please provide full contact details for yourself, as a nominator, and for 
the leader you are nominating, including email, phone number, job title and 
organisation, plus a brief sentence on why you think your nominee should join 
our board.

What happens next

Once nominations have closed, the editor will draw up a shortlist and the 
final board members will then be agreed in consultation with members of this 
year’s board.

We will contact all successful nominees by Friday 6 January 2017 and the new 
board will be published on the public leaders network.

Any queries?

Email public.leaders@theguardian.com if you have any queries.

Nominate now

If you’re ready to nominate, you can now make your nomination here:
 