
It is more blessed to give than to receive. This is always a popular sentiment 
in Germany at Christmas time, but never before haveBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> players taken this 
mantra so seriously: matchday 16 was a veritable cavalcade of self-sacrifice, 
with own-goals galore and the ultimate gifted penalty.

Neighbourly love was certainly in the air at the Borusssia Park on Saturday 
night.Gladbach's 5-3 win over Hannover 96 was a classic cavalier affair 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xHuxvROZ03c> – both lines of defences offered 
less resistance than Monty Python's limbless Black Knight – but will forever be 
remembered for an historic feat: the visitors managed to score three own goals 
in one game, the first time that's happened in the 47 years of Bundesliga.

The Hannover "defender" Karim Haggui was the chief culprit with two strikes at 
the wrong end. To be fair, the Tunisian could do little about Gladbach's 
opener: his keeper, Florian Fromlowitz, tried to clear the ball and hit him on 
the shin. Haggui returned the favour shortly before the end, by playing the 
ball back to Fromlowitz, who had unfortunately run in a different direction. 
Hannover's best effort was a sliced Constant Djakpa back-pass outside the 96 
box that sneaked into the corner of the net. The strange beauty of this strike 
was slightly reminiscent of Helmut Winklhofer's "Goal of the Year" from 1985,50 
yards <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ArGtPvyTS68>.

"We score six goals and still lose, that's insane," complained Hannover's 
manager Andreas Bergmann. "After this match, nothing can shock me anymore," 
said a dejected Fromlowitz. In the light of the recent betting scandal, 
Gladbach sporting director Max Eberl jokingly hoped the German FA wouldn't be 
forced to investigate the match, adding "It's impossible to score deliberate 
own-goals in this manner," while theHannover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hannover> midfielder Hanno Balitsch spoke 
for everyone by calling the game "pure slapstick" .

Haggui, who has now equalled Franz Beckenbauer's record of four own goals in 
his career, said "it would be quite funny if it wasn't so sad". The opposite is 
true as well, of course. That none other than Hamburg legend Manfred "banana 
cross" Kaltz is the Bundesliga's most prolific "og" scorer with six goals, 
makes you wonder if there isn't some deliciously dark, guilty pleasure at play 
here. Come to think of it, putting it into your own net is really "giving" and 
"receiving", all rolled into one, isn't it? An unsettling diversion from the 
game's true objective. Italian football hints at the existential-yet-thrilling 
confusion experienced by the Haggui's of this world by ascribing the rather 
sexy term "autogol" to their misdirected scoring activities.

Not to be outdone, Bochum's Mergim Mavraj also volleyed into his own net in 
Bayern's 5-1 cakewalk 
<http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=bochum%201-5%20bayern&search=Search&sa=X&oi=spell&resnum=0&spell=1>
 at the Rewirpower-Stadion but the biggest present of all was handed out by 
Jens Lehmann in Mainz on Sunday. The Stuttgart keeper had already endured a 
busy week that included public criticism of the board – and peeing on an 
advertising board in the Champions League win over Unirea. "He handled it quite 
expertly," was the sporting director Horst Heldt's verdict. Bild, however, 
wondered why the referee hadn't shown the keeper a yellow card. (No pun 
intended, we presume).

Both "Pipigate" and the €40,000 fine for Lehmann's statements paled into 
insignificance in the Bruchweg Stadion. Stuttgart were leading 1-0 with three 
minutes to go and were on course for their first Bundesliga win since 
September. Lehmann, though, had other ideas. The 40-year-old decided to tread 
on the Mainz striker Aristide Bancé's foot with the ball in his hand. Bancé, a 
big, ugly bloke who spends more time on the ground than a good piece of German 
oak parquet, hit the deck in mock agony. The referee awarded a penalty and sent 
Lehmann off. Eugen Polanski scored against Lehmann's deputy, Sven Ulreich, to 
ruin Christian Gross's Bundesliga debut on theStuttgart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart> bench.

One might have thought that Lehmann would have preferred to go quietly into 
the night after winning himself an early Christmas break, but no. Desperate to 
leave the ground, Lehmann got lost and ended up in between ordinary punters. 
One Stuttgart fan approached him and asked "Jens, why can't you be normal?" The 
keeper didn't respond but snatched his interlocutor's glasses instead. He 
walked with them for 10 metres or so, while the fan pleaded with him to give 
them back. Lehmann eventually handed them to another fan, who in turn handed 
them to the owner. After finally finding a taxi that would take him to the 
airport, Lehmann flew back to Munich, where he was met by a TV reporter. Asked 
for an interview, Lehmann asked the man for €5 to get himself some food. "He's 
lost his moral compass,"wrote Frankfurter Rundschau, while bosom buddy Oliver 
Kahn was quick to suggest Lehmann should end his career.

On Monday, it was touch and go whether he would keep his job until the end of 
the season. Gross ("I know the footballer Lehmann, but not the person") 
insisted his No1 should stay, however, and Stuttgart released a statement 
saying that the keeper had been injured by an earlier challenge from Bancé and 
suffered knee damage. They really missed a trick here: reporting a minor head 
injury might have been more advisable.

Talking points

• Armin Veh is under severe pressure following Wolfsburg's Champions League 
exit and 1-3 home defeat to Dortmund on Sunday. Wolfsburg's captain, Josué, has 
promised that the team will play "for the manager" in Frankfurt next Saturday, 
where three points are reportedly needed to ward off his dismissal. The 
champions are stranded in ninth place but Dortmund are sixth; a brace from Luca 
Barrios and all-round good performance from Jürgen Klopp's team away at 
Wolfsburg has the supporters dreaming of European football.

• Leverkusen's tired 2-2 away draw to Hertha was the fifth draw in seven 
matches for Bayer but they remain unbeaten and top of the league, ahead of 
Schalke and resurgent Bayern. Felix Magath's side managed to beat Werder, who 
were unbeaten in all competitions since matchday one, but had no answer to the 
visitors' organised defence and devastating counter-attacks. Magath has done 
more than humanly possible with a squad full of youngsters, slightly past-it 
veterans and Kevin Kuranyi. The ex-Germany striker, who scored the opener and 
made the second goal, is playing disconcertingly well at the moment.

Results: Hertha 2–2 Leverkusen, Bochum 1–5 Bayern, Freiburg 0–0 Köln, Nürnberg 
0–4 Hamburg, Hoffenheim 1–1 Frankfurt 1-1, Bremen 0–2 Schalke, Gladbach 5–3 
Hannover, Mainz 1–1 Stuttgart, Wolfsburg 1–3 Dortmund.
 