
Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink has denied requesting a fee of £55,000 to work for a 
fake east Asian firm seeking to sell players to Queens Park Rangers, but 
admitted he was “naive”.

The Daily Telegraph this week began publishing information obtained during a 
10-month investigation which it claims “separately unearthed widespread 
evidence of bribery and corruption in British football”.

Secretly filmed footage of Sam Allardyce appearing to make a variety of 
controversial comments cost him the England job after just 67 days, while 
Hasselbaink, QPR manager since December last year, is among other figuresto 
have been filmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-denies-55000-fee-allegation>
 by undercover reporters as part of the investigation.

The Telegraph alleges the Dutchman requested a fee of £55,000 to work for a 
fake east Asian firm seeking to sell players to the club, although the former 
striker immediately denied any wrongdoing.

In an exclusive interview with Sky Sports News HQ broadcast on Friday, 
Hasselbaink denied he would ever seek to profit from a player transfer: “No, 
never. I have never been offered any money and I would never entertain that.”

Asked whether he had regrets, Hasselbaink said: “Big time. Big time. You know 
you reflect, you think back and you criticise yourself and you must say, that I 
have been naive. I have been naive.

“But then with everything with it, I have never asked for money for myself to 
take a player or to bring a player to the club. I would never do that.

“That is the painful thing about it. The painful thing about it is that I take 
my job very serious. Very, very, very serious and I want to succeed in this 
business.

“I can’t speak for others, I can only speak for me and this, taking money, is 
not what I stand for. It is not what I stand for, I have never done it and I 
would never do it just to get a player to the club so I can benefit from that. 
No.”

Hasselbaink also denied that the proposed fee was unrealistic for a speaking 
engagement, insisting that such remuneration is not uncommon in football. He 
said: “I understand for the English public, or whatever public, that £55,000 is 
a lot of money. And it is a lot of money. But in the industry that I am in I am 
fortunate that I can make those kinds of figures.

“I was negotiating to go Singapore for a speech. That’s it. That’s it. No 
favouritism, no strings attached. What I would never ever do. Never ever do. I 
would not put myself in that position.”

Earlier on Friday, QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> said they 
are “unable to proceed” with an internal investigation into the conduct of 
Hasselbaink until the Daily Telegraph fully discloses its evidence.

The Championship club pledged a “thorough internal investigation” on Wednesday 
evening but said in a statement that they have yet to receive the required 
information from the newspaper in order to proceed.

The club statement said 
<http://www.qpr.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/qpr-the-telegraph-statement-investigation-update-3337908.aspx#iRoiXu8SVwf0Yw7K.99>
: “We urge The Telegraph to provide full disclosure of all its information 
relating to the allegations, including video footage and a full transcript of 
the discussions that took place.

“The club believes this information should not be provided selectively, but 
unedited and unconditionally, in order for the club to view the full context 
and the sequence of what was said by all parties to include in its 
investigation.

“Once again, we appreciate the QPR fans want this issue dealt with as quickly 
as possible, which is why we request full cooperation from The Telegraph in 
providing us with the aforementioned footage and transcript.

“Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, his staff and the R’s players remain 100% focused 
and committed on the job in hand, and as a club we would encourage our 
supporters to show their passionate and loyal support, as they always do, when 
we play Fulham in the Sky Bet Championship tomorrow [Saturday] lunchtime.”

In the video footage collected by the Telegraph, Hasselbaink appears to be 
seen asking his suitors to “come up with a nice figure” for a role, which the 
newspaper says he is told would involve a number of trips to meet with the firm 
in Singapore.

Hasselbaink says: “You said the word business. That’s all, it’s business, so 
it depends what you put down, you know... at the end of the day, it has to be 
worthwhile to go all that way.”
 