
Queens Park Rangers football club has offered to help bring refugee children 
stranded inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> to the UK.

May declines to make extra commitments to take more Calais child refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/30/therea-may-declines-francois-hollandes-request-take-more-calais-child-refugees>
The Championship club is part of a new plan for more than a thousand refugee 
children that emerged on Monday night.

Before any child can come to the UK they must be assessed to ensure they are 
eligible for sanctuary here. Many children have not yet been assessed so it is 
not known exactly how many will ultimately come to the UK to either be reunited 
with family members or cared for by local authorities.

QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> has put a fleet of coaches on 
standby to go to France to collect the children. And Hammersmith & Fulham 
council – QPR’s local council in west London – says it has volunteer social 
workers ready to travel to France in the next couple of days to assess and 
support the children.

Lord Alf Dubs, who has led plans to bring child refugees to the UK in a 
Kindertransport-style mercy mission, announced the plan in a letter to the home 
secretary,Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd>, and the 
French ambassador, Sylvie Bermann, on Monday.

In his letter, Dubs writes: “I formally request that the French government 
allows us to send in coaches and social workers to collect those refugee 
children that have a right to be here in the UK. We will need assistance with 
travel documents out of France. We have people arranging the coordination of 
this.”

 Dubs added: “I am also writing the British government and hope that this 
intervention can bring the assistance the refugee children so desperately need. 
Given the urgency of this matter I should be grateful for a quick response.”

The home secretary made a statement to parliament 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-on-calais> saying that the UK 
government had only been granted access to the camp by the French authorities 
and permitted to bring over Dubs-amendment children very recently. They are 
children with no relatives in the UK but who are deemed eligible to travel to 
the UK as a result of their vulnerability.

This new rescue mission has emerged amid growing concern for the welfare of 
those still in France. It is not clear whether some of the children have 
already been moved out ofCalais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> to 
other parts of France.

The children have been housed in containers on the site of the former refugee 
camp. Each container has 12 beds but there are reports of 20 children in each 
container with some sleeping on tables and on the floor with concerns raised 
about shortages of food and water.

Efforts to bring some of the children to the UK stalled on Saturday after the 
French authorities reportedly asked the British authorities to suspend their 
work in the Calais camp for several days.

A French embassy source told the Guardian: “Negotiations are still under way 
with the British government in terms of how the children’s applications are 
processed. We don’t know if they will stay in Calais or be sent to other 
centres in France.”

Councillor Steve Cowan, leader of Hammersmith & Fulham council, has been 
working closely with Dubs on plans to rescue the children.

He said: “The situation for the children in France is chaotic, violent and 
dangerous. So many people have come up to me and said: ‘How can we leave 
children in these conditions in 2016?’

“We have social workers on standby ready to go to France as soon as the French 
authorities give us permission to go in and collect the children, and generous 
benefactors such as QPR who are providing us with a fleet of coaches to collect 
the children.

“Lord Dubs has shown the necessary leadership here, first by getting the 
amendment passed in parliament allowing these vulnerable children to be brought 
to the UK and now by writing to the French government asking them to let us go 
to France to collect these children and bring them back here.

“I have no doubt that the Home Office will say yes to Lord Dubs’ proposal this 
evening given the home secretary’s commitment made in parliament last week.”

Alex Fraser, director of refugee support at the British Red Cross, said: 
“Following the operation to clear the Calais camp, it is imperative the process 
of assessing and transferring children to the UK proceeds without delay.

“The job is not finished if children eligible to be in the UK remain in 
containers amid what is left of the ‘jungle’. It’s still no place for children. 
Our message is clear: these children are welcome in the UK and they should be 
brought here as soon as possible.”
 