
Legal action by a Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> community group has 
forced the federal government to stop Santos freely dumping coal seam gas waste 
water in Surat Basin rivers and streams.

A federal court challenge by the Western Downs Alliance has prompted the 
minister for environment and energy,Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, to revamp 
approval of the Santos gasfield development, in what has been hailed as a 
victory in protecting the Dawson river.

The case was set down to be heard by the full bench of the federal court next 
month, in what was to be the first legal test of the “water trigger” in 
Australia’s environmental laws, which requires the minister to consider the 
impact of a resources project on local waterways.

Santos’s 'fanciful' LNG projections 'inflating value of assets by billions'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/santos-australia-fanciful-lng-projections-inflating-value-of-assets-by-billions>
The alliance argued approval of the 6,100-well gasfield south-west of 
Gladstone, by Frydenberg’s predecessor Greg Hunt last March, was unlawful 
because he did not properly assess the impact of releasing millions of litres 
of waste water into the Dawson river and elsewhere.

The Independent Expert Scientific Committee had warned Hunt before the 
approval that there was “considerable scientific uncertainty about potential 
impacts [of this project] on surface water and groundwater and associated 
ecosystems” and that the project’s environmental impacts should be properly 
assessed.

Despite this, Hunt approved conditions that allowed Santos to dump the 
wastewater into local watercourses without further assessment.

However, Frydenberg and Santos then preempted the legal challenge by agreeing 
on 23 December to change conditions of the approval to prohibit discharge of 
wastewater unless the gas giant can gain the minister’s approval by showing it 
has no harmful impact.

The Environmental Defenders Office New South Wales, which acted for the 
alliance, said this settled the case and satisfied its client’s claim.

The alliance secretary, Paul King, said the mining lobby group, the Queensland 
Resources Council, had “scoffed and derided our community when we lodged this 
challenge, even though this was a vital case that has been successful in 
preventing Santos from discharging wastewater into our rivers illegally”.

“We’re proud to have stood up for our precious water resources as a community 
group by taking the federal government and Santos to court to help save the 
Dawson River from being polluted with coal seam gas wastewater,” King said.

These new conditions on the project should be seen as a win for environmental 
protection.

“The big mining lobby should stop deriding Queenslanders and start recognising 
the vital role that communities play in ensuring environmental laws are upheld 
to protect the land and water our regional communities rely on.”

Santos said little had changed from the original approval, the Courier-Mail 
reported 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/western-downs-alliance-in-big-win-over-santos-with-no-waste-to-be-dumped-in-river-without-approval/news-story/ddf3cb07e060fd24ea9cdd3ae40c445b>
.

The chief executive of EDO NSW, Sue Higginson, said while many in the 
community still opposed the project approval over the environmental and social 
impacts, “these new conditions on the project should be seen as a win for 
environmental protection and the integrity of the water trigger, which is an 
important part of Australia’s environmental laws”.

“The community is rightly concerned about Santos’s activities in the Surat 
Basin – in 2013 Santos began discharging CSG waste water generated from its 
existing GLNG Project into the Dawson River after discovering it has no other 
viable means of dealing with the millions of litres of waste water,” she said.

“This case is another great example of the importance of the community’s right 
to be able to uphold Commonwealth laws designed to protect the environment. The 
community’s right to access environmental justice is essential to ensure our 
environment is not irreversibly degraded and our economy grows sustainably.”

A Santos spokesman said the company’s GLNG environmental assessments were 
“comprehensively reviewed by a range of experts at both State and Federal 
levels as part of the rigorous and public approvals processes”.

“This condition is consistent with the approach Santos was planning to 
undertake as per its March 2016 approvals,” he said.

“At all times Santos uses the best available science to explore for and 
extract natural gas safely without adversely impacting the environment, 
including water resources.”

Frydenberg’s office has been contacted for comment. QRC declined to comment 
further.

 * A previous version of this story incorrectly said Josh Frydenberg’s was 
environment minister when the gasfield was approved. It was his predecessor 
Greg Hunt.  