
Rafa Benítez suffered an embarrassing setback in his first La Liga outing in 
charge of Real Madrid when they were held to a 0-0 draw at promotedSporting 
Gijón <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> in their opening 
match of the season on Sunday.

Real’s expensively assembled squad, including the Fifa Ballon d’Or winner, 
Cristiano Ronaldo, and Gareth Bale, the world’s most expensive player, could 
not find a way past Gijón’s determined defence at el Molinón.

The Gijon goalkeeper Ivan Cuellar was on fine form, particularly against 
Ronaldo, while Real’s approach play looked lethargic and too many passes went 
astray.

Athletic Bilbao 0-1 Barcelona | La Liga match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/23/athletic-bilbao-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
Gijon, whose resources are a fraction of those of their illustrious visitors, 
also created chances and when Arnaldo Sanabria headed against the underside of 
the bar in the first half, television replays showed it may have just crossed 
the goal-line.

“The gap between us and Madrid is immense,” Cuellar told Spanish television. 
“They are one of the best teams in the world but humility and solidarity won 
the day,” he added. “Our objective remains very clear though and it’s to avoid 
relegation. I would like to see how many kilometres my team mates ran. What a 
great job.”

Benítez was left bemoaning a lack of shooting accuracy from his players but 
insisted he was still optimistic Real can secure silverware this season. “We 
finished up playing a 4-3-3 formation to try to keep the players who could 
score high up the pitch, have more control in the middle and have the 
full-backs offer width,” he said.


“I think that we managed all that but we lacked precision in the final ball 
and weren’t clinical enough in front of goal. It’s a matter of steadily 
improving our precision, our physical fitness and the way we function as a 
unit.”

The Real captain, Sergio Ramos, said there was no need to worry about the 
recent lack of goals. “Obviously the first half didn’t go well and while we had 
more possession and had more of the initiative in the second, our chances 
didn’t finish in goals and we weren’t able to kill off the game,” the Spain 
international said.

“This shows that there are teams in the first division that fully deserve to 
be here and it is going to be very tough to win at every stadium,” he added. 
“We have to continue improving.”

Ronaldo responded to criticism after the match with a message on his Instagram 
account that read: “Your love makes me strong. Your hate makes me unstoppable.”

Real Madrid’s next La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> outing is at home to Real 
Betis on Saturday.
 