
Rafinha scored the only goal as Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> moved up to second in La Liga 
with a laboured victory against the struggling Granada at the Camp Nou.

The Brazilian struck in the 48th minute, pouncing on a rebound after Neymar 
hit a post, as Barcelona finally made their dominance of possession count 
against the bottom side.

Luis Enrique’s men struggled to create meaningful chances throughout, with the 
normally clinical Luis Suárez enduring a particularly frustrating night. 
Nevertheless, the result was good enough to take advantage of Sevilla’s slip 
earlier on Saturday to move up to second behind the leaders Real Madrid.

‘When I signed Manchester City were more English, now it’s a global club’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/manchester-city-barcelona-denis-suarez-pep-guardiola>
The first half was a tight affair. Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/manchester-city-barcelona-denis-suarez-pep-guardiola>
 controlled most of the ball but were constantly repelled by Granada, whose 
performance was encouraging even though it was lacking in ambition. The hosts 
managed only two attempts on goal before the break.

Both sides were also caught out by offside flags on numerous occasions as the 
game lacked fluency. Suárez wasted a gilt-edged opportunity after being put 
through on goal as he cut inside and allowed Rúben Vezo to make a tackle. The 
former Liverpool striker also slipped attempting a volley, had an effort pushed 
away by Guillermo Ochoa and missed the target with another.

Lionel Messi was well marshalled but did deliver one inviting cross, only for 
Ivan Rakitic to head it wide. Rafinha had a shot deflected away from goal and 
Samuel Umtiti headed another opportunity straight at Ochoa.

The breakthrough finally came after the restart. Messi carried the ball into 
the box and pushed it wide for Rafinha, who in turn slipped Neymar in on goal. 
The Brazil star’s shot struck the woodwork but Rafinha reacted quickly to fling 
himself into the air and score with an overhead kick.

That could have opened the floodgates but Granada refused to crumble and 
dangerous Barcelona breaks remained few and far between. The hosts did create 
another opening after 62 minutes when Sergi Roberto broke clear down the right 
and found Neymar with a deep cross but Ochoa smothered his shot.

Suárez failed to find the target again when he was presented with a free 
header from a Javier Mascherano cross and could only aim straight at Ochoa. 
Messi also had an off-night, hitting a free-kick from a promising position at 
the wall and then scooping a chance well over the crossbar in the closing 
minutes.
 