
Kenny McDowall secured his first win as caretaker manager as Rangers ground 
out a win overDumbarton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dumbarton>.

McDowall was given a painful introduction to the job last week when his side 
were humiliated 4-0 by Hibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/27/hibs-humiliate-rangers-kenny-mcdowall>
 in Edinburgh but they responded to Andy Graham’s opener for the visitors with 
first-half strikes from Jon Daly and Lee Wallace to give McDowall something to 
smile about. Dean Shiels sealed the victory in stoppage time but only after 
Rangers had survived a few harum-scarum moments in their own box late on.

It was far from a perfect display but Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> did show some slight progress as 
they trimmed Hearts’ Championship lead back to 13 points.

A minute’s silence was impeccably observed before kick-off as Rangers paid 
tribute to the 66 fans who lost their lives in the Ibrox disaster, which 
occurred on 2 January, 1971. But there was also an air of expectation around 
the stadium before kick-off followingshare purchases made by Dave King and the 
Three Bears consortium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/02/rangers-board-douglas-park-three-bears>
 of Douglas Park, George Letham and George Taylor. The wealthy supporters face 
a battle in their mission to oust Mike Ashley from Ibrox but the fight to get 
the team back to its former heights could be even tougher.

McDowall dropped Ian Black, Fraser Aird and Nicky Clark following that Easter 
Road defeat but the frailties were still clear to be seen, as Dumbarton proved 
by taking a shock lead after 15 minutes. Chris Turner’s corner was floated long 
to the back post. Either Lee McCulloch or goalkeeper Steve Simonsen should have 
dealt with it but instead and Colin Nish was allowed to nod it down for Graham, 
who forced the ball over the line.

The ragged Rangers defence was all over the place moments later as the former 
Hibernian striker Nish was allowed to go unmarked before heading straight at 
Simonsen – prompting another angry outburst from the home support.

Rangers had not lost to Dumbarton since 1895 and their worst fears were soon 
relieved as Daly levelled. Steven Smith’s low cross from the left clipped off 
defender Lee Mair before cannoning on to Daly’s knee and bouncing past the 
wrong-footed Dumbarton goalkeeper Danny Rogers.

Rangers continued to press but had to wait until three minutes before the 
break before adding a second goal. Having endured so much lifeless football of 
late, the home fans were treated to a beauty of a goal. Richard Foster sent a 
clearance up to Kenny Miller, whose control was perfect before he found David 
Templeton. The winger kept the pace of the move going as he switched the ball 
back out to the left for Smith who drove forward before finding Wallace on the 
edge of the box. The left-back’s first touch set him nicely before he rifled 
his low shot in off the base of the post.

Now in front, Rangers started the second period looking more self-assured. 
Kenny Miller fired just wide after a driving run, while Kyle Hutton could only 
shoot over after some patient buildup play teed him up 25 yards out. A Foster 
cross placed right on to Miller’s head deserved better than to be nodded wide 
just after the hour mark.

Smith was Rangers’ best performer but he was left to trudge off 10 minutes 
from time with a red face. After darting down the left the midfielder was just 
about to pull the trigger when he stumbled forward and landed flat on his face. 
There was no time to redeem himself as he was replaced by Shiels.

The calm disposition of Rangers, however, was shattered in the last few 
frantic moments. First, the substitute Aird had to block Mitch Megginson’s 
close-range attempt before Chris Kane wasted a chance to snatch a point when he 
volleyed over as the match moved into stoppage time. Shiels made sure of the 
win as he slotted home in injury time after Clark – another second-half 
replacement – led a swift breakaway.
 