
Rangers got their Championship promotion bid off to a winning start with 
victory overSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> at Ibrox 
– but only after the visitors’ captain, Stevie Thompson, let them off the hook.

Mark Warburton’s team dominated possession with some cavalier football and 
raced into an early two-goal lead thanks to the captain Lee Wallace’s double. 
But they failed to press home their superiority and were pegged back when 
Cameron Howieson struck for Saints.

Thompson should have squared the match just after the break when Saints won a 
penalty, only for the formerRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> striker to sky his attempt from 
12 yards.

Rangers finally put the match to bed two minutes from the end with the 
substitute Dean Shiels’s scrambled effort.

Calum Gallagher leaves Rangers to join St Mirren on one-year deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/04/calum-gallagher-rangers-st-mirren>
Nine goals in the cup victories over Hibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/mark-warburton-hibs-rangers-six>
 and Peterhead had lifted optimism among the home faithful going into the 
league opener and the fans responded by filling Ibrox with a 49,000-strong 
crowd.

Much has been made this week at the raising of standards both on and off the 
park at the club and Warburton once again gave a glimpse of his demanding 
nature as he dropped David Templeton and Shiels despite both giving effective 
displays in Sunday’s League Cup win over Peterhead.

Jason Holt and the youngster Tom Walsh took their places, while the St Mirren 
manager Ian Murray also shook up his side as Howieson replaced Lewis Morgan.

After walking out to an atmosphere that was more reminiscent of Champions 
League nights of old than last year’s Championship meltdown, Rangers got 
exactly the start they were looking for. Saints survived three early Barry 
McKay corners but from the fourth Danny Wilson headed the ball into a ruck of 
Buddies defenders before Wallace leapt on the loose ball, ramming it high into 
Mark Ridgers’ net after four minutes.

There was more home jubilation on 26 minutes as McKay and Holt combined to 
slice the St Mirren back four in two. Wallace then raced on to the former 
Hearts midfielder Holt’s pass before slotting through Ridgers’ legs.

Rangers were so dominant by this point that St Mirren could only stand and 
watch the ball speed around them. But a minute after going 2-0 down, the 
on-loan Celtic youngster Paul McMullen weighted a perfect through-ball for 
Howieson, who dented the party atmosphere after beating the Gers keeper Wes 
Foderingham.

James Waghorn, Holt and Walsh all posed a threat before the break as the hosts 
again went on the attack but there was not the same snap to Rangers’ play after 
the interval.

And Ibrox was left holding its breath 10 minutes into the second half when 
James Tavernier’s trip on McMullen handed Saints a spot-kick. There was relief 
all round, though, as Thompson ballooned his awful effort.

Despite their narrow lead, Rangers continued to pile forward, leaving 
themselves dangerously exposed at times. But their reward came late on when 
Shiels put the matter to rest as he kneed the ball home at the second attempt 
from his fellow substitute Templeton’s cross.
 