
The former Rangers striker Kris Boyd caused his old side more early-season 
frustration as his goal helped Kilmarnock to a 1-1Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> draw at Rugby Park.

Premier League: transfer window summer 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/aug/23/premier-league-transfer-window-summer-2016-interactive>
The frontman was part of a team the Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> chairman, Dave King, claimed had 
“failed miserably” when they missed out on promotion a year ago.

However, the forward put in a vintage display as he scored his 250th goal in 
British football with the opener against Mark Warburton’s disjointed Rangers. 
James Tavernier did level after the break with a superb free-kick but, even 
though Killie played out the last half-hour a man light after Greg Taylor was 
sent off for a wild challenge on Joey Barton, the visitors could not find the 
winning goal.

That means Celtic can overtake their rivals before next month’s Old Firm 
battle if they beat Aberdeen at Parkhead on Saturday.

Lee Clark – still searching for the perfect Kilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> blend after making 15 summer 
signings – made another six changes for the visit of Rangers, with Gary Dicker, 
Greg Kiltie, Adam Frizzell, Jonathan Burn, Taylor and Dean Hawkshaw all 
recalled.

Rangers were forced into a last-minute swap, with Clint Hill coming in for 
Danny Wilson after the centre-back picked up an injury in the warm-up. The late 
change did nothing to harmonise a team who have struggled for fluency this 
season and that only encouraged a fired-up Kilmarnock.

The hosts had a decent claim for a penalty eight minutes in when Hill stopped 
a Frizzell strike when he raised his hands to protect his face, while Dicker 
rifled just wide.

The travelling Rangers supporters, disappointed not to see the new signing Joe 
Garner in the starting lineup, were made to wait only 15 minutes before the 
£1.5m striker was introduced for the injured Joe Dodoo.

The former Preston poacher’s first touch resulted in him lashing wildly at a 
Barrie McKay corner and he was high again as Harry Forrester picked him out 
soon after.

He was soon shown how it should be done as Boyd did what he does best. The 
33-year-old had come close with a volley soon after Garner’s introduction but 
that effort lacked belief. However, his strike on 29 minutes was reminiscent of 
the days when he used to score on an almost weekly basis during his first stint 
at Ibrox.

Jonathan Burn cut out a McKay pass and immediately fed Kiltie, who in turn 
slotted through for Boyd, leaving Hill in his wake; and Boyd turned back the 
years as he drove the ball past Wes Foderingham.

Tavernier should have equalised 10 minutes later but blazed over after better 
work by Garner.

The striker threw himself down theatrically looking for a spot-kick early in 
the second period after tangling with William Boyle but the referee, Kevin 
Clancy, was not impressed. The official did, though, sanction a free-kick on 59 
minutes when Hawkshaw tripped McKay and the result was a superb Tavernier set 
piece, the right-back sweeping the equaliser over the Kilmarnock wall into the 
top corner.

Clancy then had another decision to make three minutes later when Taylor dived 
in dangerously high on Barton but there was no hesitation as he reached for the 
red card.

With Niko Kranjcar thrown on for Jordan Rossiter, Rangers were finally finding 
their rhythm. But Jamie MacDonald did better second time round as he pushed 
away another Tavernier set piece before keeping out a late McKay effort as 
Rangers dropped points for the second time in four games.
 