
Ally McCoist wants to scratch a Ramsdens Cup itch from last season in Sunday's 
final againstRaith Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/raith> at 
Easter Road, making up for a shock defeat to Queen of the South last season.

The Light Blues looked like they would hold on for a 2-1 win in their 
quarter-final tie against Queen of the South at Ibrox in September 2012, until 
Gavin Reilly forced the game into extra time with a last-gasp equaliser, which 
the home side vehemently claimed was offside. The tie was still deadlocked at 
2-2 after 30 added minutes and the visitors came out on top in the penalty 
shootout, which still irks theRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager.

"We are treating it as a major cup final," said McCoist. "We got enough stick 
last year when we didn't get in it. Actually we are still a bit sore from last 
year, a controversial goal took it to extra time and we lost on penalties.

"I've always said that we want to win every tournament that we enter at the 
club and the Ramsdens final is no different. The lads have done well to get to 
the final, as have the Rovers players, and both clubs are taking it very 
seriously."

McCoist is aware that for many people, a more important game for the League 
One champions is the Scottish Cup semi-final against Dundee United at Ibrox the 
following week. However, the former Rangers striker, with the knowledge that 
his side are odds-on favourites to win the Ramsdens Cup final with all the 
pressure that brings, will not allow his attention to be diverted from Leith 
until Sunday night.

"I don't think we are in a position to look ahead to the following week 
because the next game, being a cup final, is the most important," he said. "We 
will prepare for the Dundee United game after the Ramsdens final.

"A lot of people will see us as favourites in the final which is fine. Many 
would expect us to win the vast majority, if not all, the games that we play, 
so that leaves us open to a little bit of criticism if we don't.

"At the same time it is a completely different situation, one that we haven't 
been in before. We are in the league below the team we are playing. It is a cup 
final involving a Rangers team, which is completely different to previous 
Rangers teams who have been in cup finals.

"We have never won the tournament before and you want to win every tournament 
you enter. I've always said the most important thing is to get out the league 
that we are in, but we have an opportunity to win a cup on Sunday and we are 
not treating that lightly."

Richard Foster will not allow the final against Raith at Easter Road on Sunday 
to be maligned as he looks for his first senior medal in football. The Ibrox 
full-back will be 29 this year but has yet to experience a senior final.

The former Aberdeen defender said: "I played in the Youth Cup final and we 
lost 3-1 to Celtic and that is the last cup final I played in. As a player you 
want to win things, you want to win cups and this is my first experience of a 
final so hopefully I get to play and hopefully we will win.

"You can only win the competitions you are in. It is a massive game for us, 
these are the games you want to play in as a footballer. You want to win things 
so we are really looking forward to it. We have played three or four games 
already and the whole point is to win it and we have a chance to do that. It 
will be an amazing feeling for us if we do win it."
 