
Rangers ended their gruelling season on a high note as they clinched the 
Scottish Cup at Hampden Park, but they were made to toil for the spoils after 
squandering a two-goal lead before eventually overcoming pluckyQueen of the 
South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> in a hard-fought 
second half.

First-half goals by Kris Boyd and DaMarcus Beasley had earned Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> a seemingly unassailable 
two-goal cushion at half-time and the SPL runners-up appeared to be cruising 
towards a comfortable domestic cup double before the Scottish First Division 
side hauled their way back into the match with two goals from Steven Tosh and 
James Thomson within eight minutes of the re-start. Boyd's 72nd-minute header 
put an end to an eventful contest.

The match began in bruising fashion with Queen of the South defender Ryan 
McCann forced to leave the field for stitches to an eye-wound in the second 
minute and Lee McCulloch was booked shortly afterwards for a dangerously late 
challenge on Queens' other full-back Robert Harris, who also came off 
temporarily for treatment before McCann returned to the action.

Despite their baptism of fire the underdogs started the better of the two 
sides, with Stephen Dobbie and Sean O'Connor causing problems for the SPL 
runners-up early on. Tosh also tried his luck but his long-range shot was 
comfortably held by Neil Alexander in the Rangers goal.

As the half wore on, so Rangers began to peg back their opponents and Kevin 
Thomson's ambitious long-range volley, which flew just wide of Jamie 
MacDonald's left-hand post, served notice of the first-half domination to 
follow.

Rangers passed up two glorious chances to take the lead when Boyd sent Beasley 
into the area only for the American to rifle wide. The roles were reversed when 
Boyd met Beasley's cross from the left just eight yards out, and sent his 
downward header over the bar off the Hampden Park turf.

The breakthrough arrived in the 33rd minute when Tosh gave away a free-kick 
for a foul on Beasley 25 yards out. Barry Ferguson played the ball short to 
Boyd and the Scotland striker lashed his shot high into the top corner.

Queen of the South failed in their attempts to win a penalty after claiming 
Steven Whittaker had barged O'Connor off the ball. And their woes were 
compounded two minutes before the break when Carlos Cuellar's header was missed 
by both Thomson and McCann before Beasley popped up to slide the loose ball in.

But if Rangers thought the Cup double was to be a formality, they were sorely 
mistaken as Queen of the South began the second half with purpose. Tosh pulled 
one back on 50 minutes as he bundled a loose ball over the line with his 
midriff following excellent approach play by O'Connor and three minutes later 
Thomson made it 2-2 when he met Harris's free-kick with a firm header.

Rangers could have restored their lead when Jean-Claude Darcheville released 
Beasley and his lay-off to Ferguson was fired straight into the goalkeeper's 
arms by the Gers' captain. However, the CIS Cup holders were back in front on 
72 minutes after Boyd again combined with Beasley, meeting the midfielder's 
cross with a powerful headed winner and allowing Rangers fans to breathe a huge 
sigh of relief.
 