
Rangers moved two points clear at the top of the Championship as they beat 
Queen of the South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> 5-1 
at Palmerston. Goals from Andy Halliday, Jason Holt and Barrie McKay, plus two 
Martyn Waghorn penalties ensured Mark Warburton became the first Gers manager 
since Bill Struth in 1920 to win his first eight games in charge.

James Fowler’s team did pull one back with nine minutes left when Aidan Smith 
ran in to beat Wes Foderingham, but the damage had already been done to Queens 
and their 100% winning league start. Halliday put Rangers ahead on 28 minutes 
but the game turned firmly in their favour just after the break were not 
typically first-half showing was not the kind of swashbuckling in the first 
half butdisplay which has so enthused the Rangers support so far this term but 
therethey still had enough class to cut Queens open as Halliday put them ahead 
on 28 minutes. At the start of the second half that the hosts who saw their 
hopes evaporate following two controversial moments at the start of the second 
half swung the game decisively in Rangers’ favour. First Derek Lyle was sent 
off on 48 minutes after a clash with Rob Kiernan, which was a soft call by The 
forward definitely motioned with his head towards the former Wigan defender but 
it was a soft call by referee Bobby Madden, then three minutes later when 
Rangers won a penalty, as Andy Dowie collided with Dominic Ball andRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were awarded a penalty. Waghorn 
despatched the spot-kick and the game was then rapidly put beyond Queens’ grasp 
as Gers completed the rout. completely on the hour mark as Holt ran on to 
Gedion Zelalem’s pass before finishing at the second attempt.

McKay got the goal his efforts deserved on 65 minutes as he tapped home after 
Miller and Waghorn had played a tidy one-two down the left, while Waghorn 
netted once again from the spot after Iain Russell stopped Halliday’s free-kick 
with a hand inside the box. Smith was then able to at least put Queens on the 
scoreboard as he fired past the hesitant Foderingham after outpacing Kiernan.

Leigh Griffiths helps Celtic survive early scare to beat St Johnstone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/celtic-st-johnstone-premier-league-match-report> 