
It is on afternoons such as this that you question the sanity of thousands of 
people who choose to attend Scottish football matches. Yet in Rangers' case, 
dreadful conditions and only the small chance of free-flowing football matters 
little. They have a championship to defend and, whenDunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> Athletic visited Glasgow, 
had a rot to stop after dropping five points in their two previous league 
outings.

Duly, and unsurprisingly, this was not vintage stuff. A freak own goal and a 
penalty setRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> on course for 
victory, which extends their lead over Celtic to seven points once again. Neil 
Lennon's men must negotiate the hardly insignificant hurdle of a trip to Dundee 
United on Sunday.

An impressive attendance of 47,305 illustrated that a title chase belies 
brutal weather, or is preferable to Christmas shopping. Ally McCoist is keen to 
make some purchases of his own next month, with a striker top of his list. 
Throughout McCoist's team, an element of spark looks to be missing; there is 
also a clear edginess within Rangers' play during home games. The second half 
showing of the league leaders against Dunfermline was especially flat.

Nonetheless, Dunfermline were under siege for the first half an hour. After 
just 30 seconds, Nikica Jelavic clipped a shot wide from Sone Aluko's cross 
with the Croatian striker's next effort – a header – also flying past the 
visitors' goal frame.

By the time Aluko failed to convert a rebound from Gregg Wylde's long-range 
effort, it seemed only a matter of time before Rangers opened the scoring. 
Dunfermline's porous defence has been the key component of their struggles so 
far this season.

When the deadlock was broken, it was comic cuts stuff. The Dunfermline 
goalkeeper Paul Gallacher looked to clear a back pass from John Potter. 
Instead, Gallacher's effort hit the back of his team-mate Alex Keddie and 
looped back into the goal.

There also seemed an element of fortune attached to Rangers' second. Aluko 
tumbled inside the penalty area, claiming he had been tripped by Gary Mason. 
Contact was minimal, if it occurred at all; yet that was of little relevance to 
Jelavic, who converted emphatically from the spot.

If it seemed at that juncture as though Rangers were to be afforded a rare, 
comfortable home domestic fixture, Dunfermline had other ideas. The Fifers 
rallied in the closing moments of the first-half, reducing the deficit in the 
process.

Martin Hardie found Joe Cardle with an excellent, crossfield pass. The young 
winger had barely touched the ball but benefitted from the space afforded to 
him by the Rangers defence. Cardle cut inside Dorin Goian and lashed a low shot 
beyond Allan McGregor.

Jelavic headed narrowly wide of the upright, 12 minutes after the re-start, as 
Rangers sought to close out the match. The introduction of the striker Kyle 
Lafferty, in place of Thomas Bendiksen, further highlighted that sentiment.

After an hour, Gallacher went some way to atoning for his earlier blunder by 
producing an excellent save from a curling Jelavic shot.

Dunfermline's occasional attacking threat came from Cardle. He supplied a fine 
cross to Andrew Barrowman, who failed to divert the ball on target. Given the 
points picked up at Ibrox in this campaign by Hearts, St Johnstone and St 
Mirren, such moments spark ripples of fear in the stands.

Lafferty passed up Rangers' next chance, Maurice Edu this time the creator 
before Dunfermline's removal of Cardle – through basic fatigue, as opposed to 
anything tactical – looked to diminish their chances of claiming an unlikely 
draw.

Still, glorious opportunity was to arrive for the visitors. With two minutes 
remaining, Keddie's free header from a corner flew over McGregor's bar. Ibrox 
drew a collective breath; on this occasion, at least, Rangers did not quite 
live dangerously enough to harm their championship chase.
 