
Chancellor Gordon Brown believes that thanks to the Bank of England's series 
of interest rate cuts, the UK economy will escape recession this year.

 Brown is likely to surprise the City and industry by announcing economic 
forecasts in his Budget on 9 March that are unchanged from last year, despite 
widespread speculation that he would have to revise them downwards.

 He is likely to stick to a forecast of 1 to 1.5 per cent growth for this year 
and 2.25 per cent to 2.75 per cent in 2000. If he is right, the impact of the 
slowdown on unemployment will not be as severe as had been widely feared, and 
he will be able to claim that he has avoided the kind of 'bust' he often rails 
against.

 The Treasury can hardly conceal its delight with the Monetary Policy Commitee 
(MPC), and feels Labour's experiment with Bank of England independence has been 
amply justified.

 In recent months, the consensus City forecast for growth this year had almost 
halved from 1.1 per cent to 0.6 per cent. It is understood that the 
much-questioned Treasury forecast had always been based on the assumption that 
the MPC would bring base rates down to at least 6 per cent this year.

 But given the deterioration in economic statistics and the business survey 
outlook since last autumn, the Treasury was desperate for last week's further 
reduction of half a point to 5.5 per cent.

 In its announcement, the Bank alluded to depressed economic activity abroad 
and low consumer spending at home. It also referred to the trend of low import 
prices.

 It is thought that the Bank's agents have reported negligible upward pressure 
on wages, given the way the economic slowdown and the high pound have affected 
confidence in industry.

 The Bank is expected to reveal in its Inflation Report this week that without 
the rate cuts, inflation would probably have fallen significantly short of the 
2.5 per cent at which it is obliged to aim.

 The economy slowed to an annual growth rate of 0.8 per cent in the fourth 
quarter of last year. But, given the growth that took place over the whole of 
1998, the economy would record year-on-year growth of 0.5 per cent in 1999, 
even if output was flat from now on.

 If the Treasury forecasts are right, the interest rate cuts have set the 
scene for further modest growth over the course of this year.

 The Bank of England has received almost universal plaudits for its latest 
cut, the size of which took many forecasters by surprise.

 Gerard Lyons, economist with DKB International, said: 'It does not now look 
as though we are going to enter recession. Even so, the economy probably needs 
further rate cuts, and I would expect 5 per cent by the spring and 4.5 per cent 
later this year.'
 