
West Ham's fans could have been forgiven for wondering what all the fuss 
surrounding Ravel Morrison was about. It is more than a year since a player who 
was once described as the best talent since Paul Scholes to emerge at 
Manchester United swapped the north-west for east London and he has had to wait 
a while for his first competitive start for West Ham.

Where Morrison is concerned, patience is required. He is certainly a unique 
character. Morrison, who has benefited from a productive year on loan at 
Birmingham City, plays with his first name on the back of his shirt and when he 
was introduced as a substitute against Newcastle United on Saturday, he was 
wearing gloves; he settled for bright orange boots on Tuesday night but scoring 
an excellent winner that took West Ham past Cheltenham Town and into the third 
round of theCapital One Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/capital-one-cup> was a better way to 
announce himself.

Although he was only up against opposition from League Two, it is clear that 
the 20-year-old knows what to do with a football. The only blotch on his 
evening was a booking for diving.

"He is not a bad player, is he?" Neil McDonald, West Ham's assistant manager, 
said. "He has scored some good goals in pre-season and he has continued that 
today. He has got lots of composure, he can see a final pass and he certainly 
makes the final pass as well as score goals.

"As a young kid coming from Manchester thinking that he can walk straight into 
the team, I think that was a big shock to him that he didn't. We have got some 
good players at this football club and he had to earn that respect. He didn't 
do that early on and we sent him out to Birmingham and I think the penny 
dropped there."

Sam Allardyce made 11 changes from the side who drew with Newcastle and West 
Ham were disjointed at first, losing the luckless Alou Diarra to a knee injury 
after 34 minutes.

Until then, Morrison had been invisible in his central midfield role and when 
he did get involved, bursting into theCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> area and falling under a 
challenge, he was booked for diving.

Three minutes before the interval, Morrison tumbled again. This time the 
referee Graham Scott ruled in his favour and Ricardo Vaz Tê, who had spent much 
of the first half troubling the linesman more than the Cheltenham defence, 
curled a magnificent free-kick past Scott Brown and into the top corner from 25 
yards.

It was a timely goal. West Ham were becoming edgy and Cheltenham had gone 
closest to taking the lead when Ryan Inniss's effort from long range whistled 
inches over.

Morrison, playing with an increasing swagger, soon took control of the match. 
The second half was a minute old when he popped up just outside the Cheltenham 
area. He shimmied left, he sashayed right and once he had thrown off his 
marker, he placed the ball expertly into the bottom-right corner from 20 yards 
out. It could be the first of many.

West Ham threatened to run riot, Mohamed Diamé, Vaz Tê and Stewart Downing all 
going close. However, they gifted Cheltenham a way back into the game after a 
bizarre incident in the 59th minute.

Looking to capitalise on a mix-up between James Tomkins and Adrián, who was 
making his debut in goal for West Ham, Sam Deering was fouled by the Spanish 
goalkeeper and Matt Richards scored from the spot.

From there, chances were missed at both ends but no one could steal the 
limelight from Morrison.
 