
Raymond van Barneveld reached the semi-finals of the PDC World Championship 
after a 5-3 win over his old rivalPhil Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-taylor> at Alexandra Palace.

The 77th meeting between the pair was not a classic in terms of big checkouts 
or consistent scoring but it was not short on drama. Van Barneveld, who 
famously defeated Taylor in the 2007 final, got off to an ideal start by taking 
the opening set 3-1 but Taylor soon responded to level the match.

The 16-times world champion then led 2-0 in the third set before his opponent 
mounted a superb rally to take the next three legs to go 2-1 up overall. Van 
Barneveld followed up a stunning 167 checkout with a brilliant 120 finish to 
snatch the next 3-2 and open up a two-set lead but Taylor responded to take the 
fifth 3-0 before levelling up the match in the sixth set.

There were nerves from both players in the seventh set but Van Barneveld took 
it 3-0, while the eighth set went the distance before the Dutchman finished off 
the match in style. His bullseye set up a semi-final on Sunday with his 
compatriot Michael van Gerwen, who powered past Northern Ireland’s Daryl Gurney 
5-1.

Fans in fancy dress at the World Darts Championship – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/costume-and-culture/gallery/2016/dec/30/fancy-dress-world-darts-championship-in-pictures>
Van Gerwen, the 2014 world champion, won the first set 3-0 by averaging 125.3 
but Gurney, in his maiden quarter-final appearance, fought back to take the 
second set.

A 170 checkout gave Van Gerwen the third and, while the 24th seed Gurney 
remained competitive, the Dutchman ultimately eased to a comfortable victory.

Earlier in the day Gary Anderson’s title defence came under a stern 
examination in a thrilling contest with Dave Chisnall.

Anderson is chasing a third successive crown at Alexandra Palace but was 
tested in a 5-3 win as the pair threw 33 maximums between them - one short of 
the record in the history of televised games.

Chisnall was in a great position to go 4-3 up but he crucially missed four 
doubles and Anderson stole the set. He then ran away with the final set to tee 
up a last-four date with Peter Wright.

Wright edged out James Wade 5-3 in the afternoon’s other quarter-final. It was 
another keenly contested game as Wright was one arrow away from landing the 
first nine-darter of the tournament while Wade won one set with checkouts of 
144 and 155. Wright assumed control with back-to-back sets and saw it out.
 