
To collect, consider, investigate, respond to, and where appropriate come to a 
conclusion about readers' comments, concerns, and complaints in a prompt and 
timely manner, from a position of independence within the paper.

To seek to ensure the maintenance of high standards of accuracy, fairness, and 
balance in our reporting and writing.

To create new channels of communication with and greater responsiveness to 
readers, whether by 'phone, email, the internet, surface mail, or through the 
columns of the paper.

To seek the views and where appropriate, the written comments, of journalists 
whose work is the focus of readers' concerns: to take these views into account 
when responding to readers, and to make critical appraisals, if judged 
necessary, on an objective and fully-informed basis.

To look for ways of improving the paper's work and performance, in the 
broadest sense, by collating and analysing readers' concerns, ideas, and 
suggestions and identifying possible new or alternative courses of action 
and/or ways to develop the paper for the benefit of its readers and the paper 
itself

To write a regular - and, where possible - weekly column addressing one or 
several aspects of readers' concerns/suggestions/complaints, the content to be 
determined independently and not subject to prior approval by the editor or 
others on the staff, other than in respect of matters of fact, style, spelling 
and grammar.

To use this column as a platform and forum for readers' views.

To require of the editor that he take steps to ensure that his staff 
co-operate fully and promptly with the readers' editor should they be requested 
to provide assistance in responding to readers' concerns and complaints. 
Similarly, the management and commercial departments of GNL, insofar as their 
activities relate to readers' concerns about editorial content.

In consultation with the editor and/or managing editor, to decide whether and 
when a correction should be published and/or apologies tendered, when deemed 
necessary, insofar as any correction/apology is not the subject of, or may be 
prejudicial to, a current complaint to the press complaints commission, our 
defence of an actual or possible legal action against the paper, or actual or 
possible legal or other action by the affected journalist(s).

In order to keep fully in touch with the workings of the paper, the readers' 
editor should have an established right of access to the editor, to heads of 
department meetings, budget meetings, to daily news conferences, and to other 
relevant forums. The readers' editor should be available to report, on an ad 
hoc, basis, to the editor and to these other groupings. The existence of the 
readers' editor, and how to contact him or her, should be advertised fairly 
prominently on a daily basis in the paper.

The readers' editor can refer to the external ombudsman any substantial 
grievances, or matters whereby the Guardian's journalistic integrity has been 
called into question.

The readers' editor will initially be appointed for two years. He/she can be 
reappointed. He/she can only be removed from the post within two years by a 
vote of the Scott Trust.
 