
A scrappy late finish by substitute Álvaro Morata earned Real Madrid a 2-1 win 
overAthletic Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> and 
sent Zinedine Zidane’s side to the top of La Liga on Sunday.

The former Juventus striker bundled the ball into the net in the 83rd minute 
after Real had squandered several chances to retake the lead following Sabin 
Merino’s equaliser for Athletic that cancelled out Karim Benzema’s first-half 
opener.

Benzema knocked the ball through the legs of the Athletic goalkeeper Gorka 
Iraizoz to put Real ahead in the seventh minute after an impressive run and 
cut-back from Isco.

But Athletic hit back later in the half when Javier Eraso pounced on 
indecisive Real defending to win the ball back in the box, quickly squaring for 
Merino to ram the ball home.

Iñaki Williams skied a great chance to put Athletic ahead at the start of the 
second half although Real did most of the attacking after the break, with 
Cristiano Ronaldo, Gareth Bale and Mateo Kovacic all going close.

The European champions found their winner thanks to the persistence of Morata, 
who followed up after his shot was repelled by Iraizoz to give Real a third 
straight win in all competitions.

Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> lead the table 
on 21 points, while Sevilla are second on 20 after Steven Nzonzi’s second-half 
strike gave them a 1-0 win over 10-man Atlético Madrid, inflicting a first 
defeat of the season on Diego Simeone’s side, who slid to fifth on 18.

Nzonzi skipped past Atletico’s backline to latch onto a through ball from the 
Atlético loanee Luciano Vietto to score in the 73rd minute and seal Sevilla’s 
first win over Atlético in over six years.

The Atlético midfielder Koke was dismissed for a second booking in the 77th 
minute. The visiting side almost snatched a late equaliser but defender Diego 
Godín’s header went straight towards the Sevilla goalkeeper Sergio Rico.

“I’m proud of the team, we had a lot of opportunities and the performance 
makes me very happy about the path we are on,” said the Sevilla coach Jorge 
Sampaoli.

“Nzonzi is not just here to put the brakes on the opposition but to create 
chances too as he did today. Vietto is contributing a lot of assists and we saw 
his contribution with the goal. I’m delighted with them both.”

Elsewhere an injury-time strike from Cedric Bakambu gave Villarreal a 2-1 win 
at home to Las Palmas which put them fourth, level on 19 points with champions 
Barcelona, who are third.

Kevin-Prince Boateng finished a sensational team move with a volley to give 
the visitors the lead in the first half but Italian forward Nicola Sansone 
levelled from the spot in the 64th, before Bakambu slammed in the winner in the 
91st.

Earlier, Celta Vigo beat Deportivo La Coruña 4-1 in a local derby. Captain 
Hugo Mallo put Celta ahead in the 32nd minute only for Raul Albentosa to reply 
in the 37th. Iago Aspas converted a penalty to restore Celta’s lead on the hour 
mark and hit the final goal after standout player Fabian Orellana had struck 
the third. Also on Sunday, Málaga beat Leganes 4-0 to go tenth.
 