
Real Madrid returned to winning ways on Saturday after last week’s drubbing at 
Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/07/atletico-madrid-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 but failed to convince and were whistled by their own fans during a 2-0 
victory at home to Deportivo La Coruña.

Real were looking for an inspiring performance before Wednesday’s Champions 
League trip to Germany to play Schalke and were fortunate not to drop points 
with another drab display following the humiliating 4-0 defeat at the Vicente 
Calderón.

Cristiano Ronaldo and Gareth Bale each struck the crossbar at the Bernabéu 
before Isco curled a shot into the corner of the net to fire the hosts ahead in 
the 23rd minute.

Deportivo, who are 12th in the table after coming back up from the second 
division last season, created good chances and should have levelled four 
minutes into the second half.

The midfielder Celso Borges thumped a shot against the post when well placed 
in the penalty area and Oriol Riera forced a fine save from Iker Casillas with 
a glancing header moments later.

Some disgruntled Real fans, who whistled when the names of the head coach, 
Carlo Ancelotti, and the captain, Casillas, were read out before kick-off, were 
growing increasingly restless before Karim Benzema dinked a shot over Fabri, 
the onrushing Deportivo goalkeeper, and into the net 17 minutes from time.

The victory, in which Real’s new signing Lucas Silva made his debut 20 minutes 
from time, put the world and European champions four points clear of 
second-placed Barcelona, who play at home to struggling Levante on Sunday.

Atlético are three points further back in third before Sunday’s trip to Celta 
Vigo.

“It has been a tough week and it was very important to get the victory today,” 
the Real centre-back Nacho, who with Raphaël Varane is standing in for the 
injured Sergio Ramos and Pepe, told Spanish television. “We played poorly at 
the Calderón and it was necessary to analyse what went wrong,” he added. “The 
team is very united and today we showed that.”
 