
Britain’s ambassador to the European Union, Sir Ivan Rogers, has said it could 
take up to10 years to negotiate a post-Brexit UK-EU trade deal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/eu-politicians-believe-trade-deal-could-take-decade-no-10-is-warned>
– and even then it risks being rejected by national parliaments.


Are trade deals really that complicated to negotiate?

Trade deals are monumentally complex. When Greenland, a country with a 
population smaller than that of Uxbridge and an economy based essentially on a 
single industry (fishing), withdrew from the EU in 1985, it took three years to 
negotiate its future relationship with the bloc.

Ceta, the EU-Canada deal, took seven years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/the-canadian-model-why-ceta-isnt-a-blueprint-for-brexit>
 to negotiate and was about 22 years in the making. But this was a relatively 
simple trade agreement that does not include the services provisions and deals 
on non-tariff barriers that a big exporter of professional services such as 
Britain will almost certainly require.

Deals between larger economies such as the US/EU Transatlantic Trade and 
Investment Partnership (TTIP) and the US/Asia deal known as the Trans Pacific 
Partnership (TPP) proved so complicated and controversial that they have 
collapsed under their own political weight.

Can a future trade deal be discussed during article 50 exit talks?

The two-year article 50 talks, due to begin before the end of March next year, 
deal with the divorce arrangements: the exit bill the UK must pay to cover past 
and future budget commitments; the rights of EU citizens living in the UK and 
vice versa; the fate of the EU agencies located in Britain.

Article 50 says the exit deal must take “the framework of the future 
relationship” into account, so there will need to be some clarity on a broad 
post-Brexit outline. But EU leaders are adamant there can be no concrete 
“shadow negotiations” on trade as part of the article 50 process, and the union 
cannot conclude a free trade agreement with another country while it is still a 
member.

So it seems likely substantive talks on the detail of the new deal will not 
start until at least March 2019.

How long could ratification take?

EU procedures for ratifying trade agreements are much tougher than for 
ratifying the article 50 withdrawal deal, which needs only a qualified majority 
in the council and a majority in the European parliament.

A trade agreement cutting across policy areas in the preserve of member states 
would be classed as a “mixed agreement” and require unanimity in the council, a 
majority in the European parliament, and ratification in all 27 national 
parliaments as well as in some regional parliaments (including that ofWallonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/belgium-reaches-deal-with-wallonia-over-eu-canada-trade-agreement>
, which almost derailed the Ceta deal). That is 36 legislatures, each with a 
veto.


Donald Tusk, the European council president, has said repeatedly the 
negotiation and ratification process could take between five and seven years. 
Brussels insiders, particularly trade specialists, think this is highly 
optimistic.

Wouldn’t it be quicker to start from scratch?

Even the nuclear option – a hard Brexit followed by reliance on existing World 
Trade Organisation (WTO) rules – could take years to achieve. The first, and 
more surmountable, problem is that Britain is a signatory to WTO deals through 
its membership of the EU.

Assuming other WTO members agree to overlook this and transfer existing rights 
to Britain without seeking to unpick unpopular elements, there is an even 
bigger problem. This relates to the import and export quotas shared among EU 
member states. In the case of lamb, for example, the WTO schedule permits 
283,825 tonnes of sheep and goat meat to be imported duty-free into the EU from 
14 countries, ranging down to just 100 tonnes from Greenland.

British farmers would need to fight to secure their share of this existing 
schedule to export into EU and non-EU markets, a fiendishly complicated 
prospect just in one small agricultural category.

What would a transitional deal contribute? 

British business leaders as well as the chancellor, Philip Hammond, have 
argued that a transitional deal will be essential to smooth over the Brexit 
bump, ease uncertainty, and prevent the UK economy plunging off a cliff edge 
should Britain exit the EU at the end of the article 50 process with no future 
deal in sight.

Several EU politicians, including the Luxembourg prime minister, Xavier 
Bettel, have expressed reluctance, saying the union is not prepared to create a 
new status of “‘a little bit member’, ‘pending divorce’, ‘nearly divorced’.”

For the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/uk-will-have-under-18-months-to-negotiate-deal-says-eus-brexit-broker>
, an interim deal would have “some point and usefulness” only once Britain has 
explained exactly what it wants from its future relationship with the EU, and 
the bloc had established what it could accept. At present, it was “difficult to 
imagine”, he said.
 