
Real Madrid turned up the heat on their La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> title rivals with James 
Rodríguez scoring twice, including a stunning volley, in a 4-0 win atGranada.

The champions, Atlético Madrid, stayed hot on the heels of their neighbours 
thanks to an Antoine Griezmann double and goals from Mario Mandzukic and Raul 
García which secured a 4-2 win at home toCordoba.

Real are top on 24 points from 10 matches, two ahead of Barcelona and Sevilla, 
who have played one game fewer. Barcelona host Celta Vigo later on Saturday 
while Sevilla are at Athletic Bilbao on Sunday.

Atlético are second on 23 points from 10 games.

Cristiano Ronaldo set Real on their way in the second minute at Granada when 
he clipped home a Karim Benzema centre, the Portugal forward’s 17th goal in 
nine La Liga appearances this season.

Rodríguez made it 2-0 for the European champions in the 31st minute when he 
crashed a dipping volley into the top corner before Ronaldo’s clever backheel 
sent Benzema clear for a third in the 54th.

Granada squandered their few chances before Rodríguez followed up a scuffed 
Ronaldo effort to score the fourth four minutes from time as Real eased to an 
11th win in a row in all competitions.

“We played with focus and with a lot of work and sacrifice,” the Real coach, 
Carlo Ancelotti, told a news conference.

“If you fight, everything comes off well.” The Italian’s side host Liverpool 
in the Champions League on Tuesday.

“We have to keep going in the same way to maintain our good run. We are 
playing well and winning.”

Cordoba held out until a minute before half time at the Calderón when 
Griezmann struck with a deflected effort.

The visitors surprised Atlético eight minutes into the second half when Nabil 
Ghilas headed in at a corner before Griezmann made it 2-1 with another header 
five minutes later. Mandzukic nodded home Atlético’s third in the 62nd minute.

The substitute Raul García deflected Koke’s cross into the net 10 minutes from 
time and Ghilas grabbed Cordoba’s second with three minutes left after some 
poor Atlético defending.
 