
Reindeer are shrinking on an Arctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> 
island near the north pole as a result of climate change that has curbed the 
amount of winter food available to the animals, scientists said on Monday.


 The average weight of adult reindeer on Svalbard, a chain of islands north of 
Norway, fell from 55kg (121lb) to 48kg (106lb) in the 1990s as part of sweeping 
changes to Arctic life while temperatures rose, they said.

“Warmer summers are great for reindeer but winters are getting increasingly 
tough,” Professor Steve Albon, an ecologist at the James Hutton Institute in 
Scotland who led the study with Norwegian researchers, said.

Nightmare before Christmas: Siberia plans to cull 250,000 reindeer amid 
anthrax fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/nightmare-before-christmas-siberia-plans-to-cull-250000-reindeer-amid-anthrax-fears>
 Less-chilly winters mean that once-reliable snows fall more often as rain 
that can freeze into a sheet of ice, making it harder for the herbivores to 
reach plant food. Some reindeer starve and females often give birth to stunted 
young.

 In summer, however, plants flourish in a food bonanza that ensures healthy 
females more likely to conceive in autumn. The wild herd studied had expanded 
to about 1,400 animals from 800 since the 1990s.

 “So far we have more but smaller reindeer,” Albon said of the animals on 
Svalbard, about 1,300km (800 miles) from the north pole. The rising population 
also means more competition for scarce food in winter.

 Arctic temperatures are rising faster than the world average amid a build-up 
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

 Most studies of global warming around Svalbard have focused on polar bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/19/climate-change-is-single-biggest-threat-to-polar-bear-survival>
 that hunt seals at sea, rather than year-round land residents such as 
reindeer, Arctic foxes and Svalbard rock ptarmigan birds.

 Arctic fox numbers have risen slightly because they thrive in severe ice 
winters by scavenging dead reindeer, said Eva Fuglei, a researcher at the 
Norwegian Polar Institute and the Fram Centre who was not involved in the 
reindeer study.

 “All the weak reindeer die – the sick, the elderly and calves,” she said. But 
that meant foxes struggled to feed the next winter because only the fittest 
adult reindeer have survived.
 