
Rugby league <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugbyleague> will return to 
Anfield for the first time in almost two decades later this year after the 
Rugby Football League confirmed that the iconic home of Liverpool will be the 
venue for the 2016 Four Nations final.

Six venues will be used for the tournament, which features England, Australia, 
New Zealand and Scotland, with the final held at Anfield on 20 November. 
Resistance within certain quarters of the game’s governing body had been 
suggested regarding the possibility of taking the final to Liverpool, but it 
was confirmed on Friday that the sport will return to Anfield for the first 
time since 1997.

St Helens took one of their scheduled home games there during that year, when 
a crowd of 12,329 saw them beat Castleford Tigers 42-16 in Super League. Before 
that, Wigan staged the 1991 World Club Challenge at Anfield, when they beat 
Penrith in front of 20,152 people.

The tournament opens with a game at Hull KR’s Lighstream Stadium on 28 October 
when Scotland play Australia, before Wayne Bennett’s first competitive game as 
England coach the following day, when they host New Zealand at Huddersfield’s 
John Smith’s Stadium.

All four sides then head to Coventry in week two as the Ricoh Arena stages 
international rugby league for the very first time with a double-header, as 
England face Scotland before the Australians take on New Zealand. The stadium 
will host rugby league before that, as the home of Wasps will stage a League 
One game between Coventry Bears and Keighley Cougars next month, as part of the 
city’s plans to make Coventry a “city of rugby”.

The final round of group games sees England return to the Olympic Stadium in 
London, a move that was identified as key by theRFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> following last year’s Test match there 
against New Zealand.

A crowd of 44,393 watched England lose 9-2 to the Kiwis, and although the Four 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> has traditionally had 
its double-header round in London in the past, the decision has instead been 
made to have England face Bennett’s home country, Australia, in the capital.

“I’m excited to begin work with this England team,” Bennett said. “The venues 
selected for our games in the Four Nations tournament are world class and I 
hope that the English fans will be out in force to support us and that we can 
do them proud on the field.”

Scotland’s final group game will be held in Workington when they face New 
Zealand 48 hours before the England-Australia clash, with the decision not to 
take a game to Scotland seen as somewhat of a surprise.

The RFL had considered numerous venues north of the border, including 
Aberdeen’s Pittodrie and Motherwell’s Fir Park, but all seven games in the 
tournament will instead be played in England, a move the Scotland coach, Steve 
McCormack, is content with. “We would have liked to have had a game in Scotland 
but we’re comfortable with the idea of playing where our venues are,” he said.

The Bravehearts qualified for the tournament courtesy of their victory in the 
European Championship two years ago, and after calling on a number of 
high-profile NRL stars for their run to the World Cup quarter-finals in 2013, 
representatives from the SRL have been in Australia recently to try and secure 
the commitments of some major names for the Four Nations.

World Cup stars Kane Linnett, Peter Wallace and Luke Douglas are all expected 
to feature again, while other NRL players such as Euan Aitken have also been 
approached. The Leeds prop, Keith Galloway, is another who could feature via 
his Scottish ancestry.
 