
The Rugby Football League chief executive, Nigel Wood, has unveiled a 
seven-year plan to increase the number of spectators watching the game by 
700,000 and for England to win the 2017 World Cup.

Outlining the RFL’s strategy up to 2021, Wood told a media briefing at Super 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> headquarters in 
Manchester that he wants to see crowds rise from 2.3 million a year to three 
million, the game’s turnover to go up from £118m to £146m and an increase in 
television viewers of five million to 22 million.

Wood has also set a target of acquiring nearly 66,000 participants by 2021, 
compared to 46,636 at present, and wants to see the number of Super League 
clubs making a profit rise from only three to nine over the next seven years.

Top of the list of objectives, however, is for England to end what would be a 
45-year wait by lifting the World Cup in Australia in two years’ time. The 
litmus test for our game is the performance of the national team,” Wood said. 
“I know it is a brave thing to say but I believe we should set the bar high.”

In the wake of the departure of the high-profile players Sam Tomkins and Sam 
Burgess from Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/20/sam-burgess-england-rugby-union-russell-crowe>
, Wood told journalists that the retention of elite talent in the domestic game 
has become a significant issue for the sport.

He made the case for a marquee player allowance but dismissed calls for an 
immediate increase in the salary cap, arguing that clubs already have the 
potential to exceed the £1.85m ceiling.

“There is a case for a marquee rule of some description that will enable clubs 
to retain talent,” Wood said. “I am sure there will be further discussions on 
that. It is important that the cap grows in relative terms to the growth of the 
game and it is worth pointing out that, if a club uses all the allowances 
currently available and wins trophies, it can spend something like £2.5m a 
year.”

Wood, who is also chairman of the international federation, says he would like 
to see the newly expandedWorld Club Series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/21/wigan-brisbane-broncos-world-club-series-match-report>
 strengthened further and for Super League clubs to gain entry to the annual 
NRL 9s in Auckland.

Wood met officials of Toulouse during a trip to the south of France last 
weekend to discuss their interest in joining Catalans Dragons in Super League 
but admits it is unlikely they would be fast-tracked into the elite division.

“They do want to come in but it is dependent on a viable business plan,” he 
said. “We are working with the French Federation to try to deliver the best 
solution for France.”

Wood revealed England would play an international against the French before 
the three-match Test series with New Zealand in the autumn.
 