
Nigel Wood has said there have not been any discussions with the England coach,
Steve McNamara <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-mcnamara>, about a new 
contract but stressed both parties are “at peace” with where they are at the 
moment.

The chief executive officer of the Rugby Football League outlined the strategy 
for the game up to 2021 at a media briefing this week, in which plans for the 
national team were discussed at length.

The RFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> has targeted a World Cup 
victory in Australia in 2017, as well as winning every home series until 2021, 
starting with the three-Test series against New Zealand later this year.

At the end of that series, McNamara’s deal expires. The 43-year-old, who has 
been in the job since 2010, is in Australia at present working with the NRL 
side Sydney Roosters. Wood said that while the RFL is in regular contact with 
the coach there has been no need to discuss contracts just yet.

“Steve and the RFL have a terrific relationship and there’s no intention to 
discuss that with him in the immediate term,” Wood said. “I speak to Steve on a 
monthly basis and both he and I are at peace with where we are at the moment. 
There is going to be mid-season activity and he’s going to be coming over in 
the middle of the year to do something with the squad.”

On the ambitious objectives for the England side, Wood said: “I’ve been 
talking to the chief executive of another sport and of their 21 key performance 
indicators, the one that wasn’t delivering was the national team. If the 
national team is underperforming than that will be used as a stick to beat the 
sport.

“We have to be brave to put these objectives in the spotlight. The litmus test 
for our game is the performance of the national team and it’s a brave thing to 
say but I believe our national teams are performing well and we should rightly 
set the bar high.”

Wood confirmed England will play a warmup fixture with France before the 
autumn series against the Kiwis. The future of the game in France is another 
talking point in itself.

The leading French side Toulouse have indicated they would like to rejoin the 
English league structure, having left at the end of 2011 to return to their 
domestic league. Wood admitted there is an appetite from Toulouse to come back 
but said it is unlikely they would be fast-tracked into Super League 
immediately alongside their fellow French side Catalans Dragons.

“We recognise we need a strong France in this game. One way or another we have 
to try to create in France what New Zealand and Australia have with each 
other,” he said. “Getting international quality opposition at the moment is 
tough, because it involves a 12,000-mile trip. We’re working with the French 
but they have to take responsibility for what goes on in that country.

“Toulouse do want to come in, they’ve made that clear, but in essence it’s 
dependent on a viable business plan. I can’t imagine the circumstances where 
they would come into the top 12 immediately at all.”

Super League is without a presence in the capital for the first time in its 
history this year, afterthe relegation of London Broncos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/13/warrington-wolves-condemn-london-broncos-super-league-relegation>
.

Some club chairmen, notably Wigan’s Ian Lenagan, have been vocal about taking 
a game of Super League on the road this year, withLondon a likely destination 
for any such match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2015/jan/19/rugby-league-london-broncos-wigan-warriors-leeds-rhinos>
, given the absence of a top-flight team in the city.

Wood revealed that while there is support at the RFL for those plans, it is a 
decision and a move that would have to be driven by the clubs, as opposed to 
the governing body.

He said: “That’s a club-instigated initiative and is something that we’re very 
supportive of indeed. I think if you look at what’s gone on in the sport over 
the last few years.

“We wouldn’t compel teams to do it but we’d certainly welcome it. Having a 
strong presence in the capital can only be good for rugby league in all 
honesty.”
 