
In British architecture, Richard Rogers is the establishment. Inside Out, 
the grand exhibition at the Royal Academy in London that celebrates his 80th 
birthday makes this clear. He sits as a Labour peer in the House of Lords, and 
is officially known as Baron Rogers of Riverside – an apt title, given his 
pivotal role in opening up the river Thames to property development. He has sat 
on multiple quangos, most famously the Urban Task Force, and was a close ally 
both of Ken Livingstone and John Prescott before being sidelined by the 
coalition. Rogers had a major part in composing two government reports –Towards 
an Urban Renaissance and its sequel, Towards a Strong Urban Renaissance. Look 
at recent London schemes by Rogers Stirk Harbour, the firm he founded, and now 
takes a backseat role in, and you find theLeadenhall building 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/render.aspx?siteID=1&navIDs=1,4,25,361,366>, a 
skyscraper in the City;Riverlight 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/render.aspx?siteID=1&navIDs=1,4,25,1774,1776>, 
a development of luxury flats in Nine Elms;NEO Bankside 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/work/buildings/neo_bankside/design>, another 
development of luxury flats in Southwark; andOne Hyde Park 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/work/buildings/one_hyde_park/design>, the 
luxury flat development to end all luxury flat developments, a project of such 
spectacular exorbitance that it has been described as the most expensive 
apartment complex in the world. On this evidence, Rogers has a central role in 
a formidable apparatus of authority and capital – the old power of the Lords, 
the governmental power of quangos and government departments, the money power 
of property and real estate.

A 60th birthday exhibition for Rogers, however, would have found few of these 
things. In 1993, he was already a very successful and venerable architect, 
though perhaps a little more respected than gainfully employed, at least in the 
UK. His best-known works at that point were the Pompidou Centre in Paris, in 
collaboration with Renzo Piano (subsequent work suggests it was more Rogers's 
child than Piano's); the new building for Lloyds of London; and theInmos 
microprocessor factory 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/work/buildings/inmos_microprocessor_factory> in 
Newport, south Wales. The diversity of that selection – a vast modern art 
museum, an office block for a venerable imperial financial institution, an 
electronics factory in an industrially depressed area – contrasts somewhat with 
today's record of City skyscraper, luxury flats, luxury flats, luxury flats. 
The extent of Rogers's intervention into politics consisted of co-writing, with 
then Labour shadow culture secretaryMark Fisher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/person/1728/mark-fisher>, a volume prepared 
for the 1992 election entitledA New London, which called for investment in the 
capital's infrastructure and architecture, both almost gleefully neglected 
under Thatcher. So how did the next 20 years transform Rogers's fortunes, and 
the firm's commissions, so comprehensively?
 Lloyd's of London. Photograph: Arcaid Images/Alamy 
It would be unfair to ascribe this entirely to his long-standing Labour party 
membership. There's little clientelism here – Rogers has built nothing in 
Labour's one-party city-states such as Manchester or Glasgow. Rather it has 
something to do with a particular vision of urban architecture. After the Old 
Left's dalliance with industrialised building in the 1960s, the New Left of the 
1970s was sceptical about modern architecture, and even about the modern city 
as such – the logical result was the rehousing programme of militant Liverpool, 
where modern flats in the inner city were demolished en masse, and replaced 
with low-density, low-rise cul‑de-sacs. For Rogers, a figure of theNew Left 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Left>, to the degree that he once quoted 
Herbert Marcuse at a Royal Institute of British Architects conference, 
modernism didn't have to be associated with system-built towers, windy open 
spaces, stained concrete, "social engineering", or all the other shibboleths 
hastily established as common sense in the reaction to the collapse of Ronan 
Point in 1968.

Rogers's work, as seen at the Pompidou Centre, did not evoke a collapsing 
dystopia, but a clean, shiny, optimistic, sophisticated and rather luxurious 
future. This wasn't the guilty, paranoid world that the New Left had bunkered 
itself into on the rare occasions it thought about cities and buildings – 
"defensible space", low-rise/low-density, "vernacular architecture", real 
houses for real people. Rather, Rogers's work seemed to argue, by its very 
exuberance and pleasure, that living in cities could be something to enjoy, 
not something to struggle through – a fulfilled dream of technological 
abundance and leisure, the very things that attracted socialists to modern 
architecture in the first place.

Visual pleasure and variety were always a major part of Rogers's work. His 
buildings of the 1970s and 80s are, in the literal sense of the word, 
spectacular. There would always be functional justifications for what often 
seem like purely visual features; in the case of the Pompidou Centre, it was 
apparently necessary to have the lifts, tanks, pipes and other services outside 
of the building to create the space for large, flexible rooms that could hold 
wide varieties of artworks. At Lloyds, the stated reason for the same feature 
was to make way for The Room, the immense space connected by escalators where 
most of the underwriters' business was done; in Newport, it was to reduce 
encumbrances to a complex production line. Yet plenty of galleries, trading 
floors and factories have managed perfectly well concealing these features, and 
hence saved themselves large maintenance bills for services bared to the 
elements. The reasoning was always best ignored – as the late criticAlan 
Colqhoun 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/daily-news/great-educator-alan-colquhoun-dies-aged-91/8640228.article>
 pointed out, it was implausible that any function would ever really need 
spaces as vast as those of the Pompidou. Their real function was awe and 
spectacle, and nothing much else. The accusation was surely undeniable. What 
the Pompidou Centre, Lloyds and Inmos offered, and still do, is an unrivalled 
sense of the technological sublime – the sheer futuristic joy of watching the 
capsules shuttle up and down the glazed shafts of Lloyds, the intricate 
fascination at the controlled chaos of bulging pipework on the rear facade 
of the Pompidou, the shock of the constructivist skyline of Inmos barging into 
a bland motorway-side landscape.

This was all supposed to be looked at, enjoyed, and also, understood – in the 
old modernist, moralist sense of "truth to materials" and "structural honesty", 
you could always see what the buildings were made of, what held them up, even 
how their circulation, electrical services and air conditioning were provided. 
These esoteric pleasures aside, the buildings worked in the same way as Gothic 
cathedrals and guildhalls – asymmetrical, heraldic, worked into compositions of 
skylines and towers, often crammed ingeniously into tight, constricted sites. 
This anti-classical, multilevel approach was something Rogers had in common 
with brutalists such asRodney Gordon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2008/sep/10/architecture> and Denys 
Lasdun <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2003/nov/29/architecture.art>, 
but here the obsessive attention to detail was bestowed not on cash-strapped 
councils, but on clients who could afford to maintain the buildings' unusual 
finishes – the garish Yellow Submarine colour-world of the Pompidou is always 
painted up, the wilfully sinister greys, silvers and blacks of Lloyds always 
buffed to their ruthless sheen. That two of these became tourist attractions is 
hardly surprising – although the fact that architectural tourism didn't extend 
to the outskirts of Newport should perhaps have been borne in mind. Unlike many 
buildings-cum-tourist attractions, they are also masterpieces, whose 
sophistication and intricacy long outlives the currently all important "wow 
factor".
 Richard Rogers at his studio in west London. Photograph: Eamonn Mccabe for 
the Guardian 
Rogers himself never developed a cult of personality, unlike many in the later 
generation ofZaha Hadid <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/zaha-hadid>, 
Daniel Libeskind 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2007/sep/23/architecture.foodanddrink1> 
at al. His drawings are always rough sketches, nothing more – each of the 
buildings was the obvious result of teamwork. So Rogers's extra-architectural 
influence is as writer, not draughtsman. The idea was always the same, and was 
first developed in a speculative (though not in the financial sense) scheme 
called London as it could be, which entailed building new pedestrian bridges 
and river walks along the Thames. Developed in A New London and in (among 
others)Architecture – A Modern View, Cities for a Small Planet and Towards an 
Urban Renaissance, the idea was as follows: develop the "brownfield" land left 
by the decline of industry, encourage people to move into the inner city, build 
galleries, cafes and museums, build flats and build them high and dense – but 
invest in public transport, public spaces and public facilities. This was in 
part a reaction to the way that the term "inner city" came denote a problem, a 
place depopulated of anyone but the very poor  and very rich, the consequence 
both of deindustrialisation and the private car. Though Rogers's first draft of 
this, the Millennium Dome, was a high-profile disaster, the programme was 
rolled out all over the country, and in some ways we have Rogers to thank, or 
blame, for everything from the Tate Modern to MediaCity in Salford. During this 
urban renaissance, inner-city populations rose in London or Manchester, but 
the results mostly showed that the high-rises of Britain's builders and 
developers were largely as grim as their cul-de-sacs. It also accelerated 
processes of gentrification and expulsion of the poor, as city-centre land 
became more and more lucrative.

Though Rogers was unusual in his era for using "public" as a compliment rather 
than insult, there was a comprehensive refusal in his various writings to think 
about the economy, or what the likely consequences of letting developers run 
riot in the inner city might have been – something he had in common with his 
sponsors, such as Ken Livingstone. Not thinking too much about where your money 
is coming from is, of course, important to any architectural firm that wants to 
stay in business. Although Rogers Stirk Harbour refuses to design prisons or 
work for the military, almost any given project of the last two decades can be 
found to be the exact opposite of whatever Rogers was arguing for at the time 
in his parallel career as urban potentate. Rogers slammed the out-of-town 
shopping centre and then built one at Ashford; advocated low-carbon transport 
and designed Heathrow Terminal 5; critiqued suburbia and designed an exurban 
estate on the edges of Milton Keynes; criticised our barrier-riven cities and 
then provided the required ultra-high-security in the Welsh assembly. No 
surprises there – architecture is usually something between art form, 
profession and business. Rogers's recent legacy is a series of beautiful, 
unique and fascinating machines producing nothing save for money; and a series 
of texts that imagined a better city while refusing to admit that such a thing 
might involve questions of power and conflict. The firm he founded will endure 
as creators of the former, but the real and terrible consequences of the latter 
will not be solved by them.

• Richard Rogers <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers> RA: 
Inside Out opened at the Royal Academy on Thursday. It runs until 18 October.
 