
Portsmouth have had more managers than Christmases in the past decade and half 
as many owners. Richie Barker became the 11th last week, following Guy 
Whittingham and accompanied by Steve Coppell as director of football. Pompey's 
chairman, Iain McInnes, saw it as the "dream ticket" despite the pair's recent 
departure from Crawley after seven league games without a win. At Fratton Park 
on Saturday a 2-0 defeat byNewport County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newport-county> extended their personal 
nightmare run to eight and Portsmouth's to six in League Two.

That, too, is eight counting the FA Cup, which they won in 2008 and used not 
to enter until January, and the Johnstone's Paint Trophy, an opportunity for 
League minnows to experience Wembley. Four years ago on Mondaythey were holding 
Chelsea to 2-1 at Stamford Bridge. Three relegations later they are four points 
above the drop into the Conference after points' deductions in three seasons 
for falling into administration and a series of owners with names approximating 
to Ali Al-Farrago, Ball and Chainrai et alien al.

And yet on Saturday everyone wore a smile. Having survived all this and two 
winding-up petitions, Portsmouth's fans have a major say in the running of 
their club. In April the Pompey Supporters Trust, having raised £2.3m to 
finance a takeover, bought it with a 51% stake and has three members on the 
board. More than 2,000 fans, or syndicates of them taking the total involvement 
close to 5,000, paid £1,000 per share. Other funds came from a few wealthier 
supporters. Together they stand for all to see as representatives of the club's 
best interests – trust indeed and pride restored among staff alongside a 
passion that never died in the dark days and enjoyed good times on bad money.

Signs of the new times are paraded on the approaches. "By the fans for the 
fans," says one. "Welcome to Portsmouth Football Club – Fortress Fratton," 
proclaims another, which may need a rethink if it is not self-mocking. 
Supporters can control the club but not its league destiny.Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> last won at home on 2 
November. Strangely, it seemed, Barker was not given a rumbustious PA welcome 
but he later explained: "I'm not into razzmatazz or arriving by helicopter." He 
arrived mainly through Mark Catlin, the chief executive, who in the same role 
at Bury saw him propel the club out of League Two in his only previous 
managerial post before Crawley.

Barker recognised his new appointment as "a fantastic opportunity". After the 
match he acknowledged: "It looks at the minute as if we are fairly fragile. 
After the first goal the confidence went." The second followed in three 
minutes, before it was restored. "It's a tough job, a big one," he added. Goals 
dried up at Crawley, only one in those last seven games. "The expansive 
football may have to wait," he said, "until we can get clean sheets."

Newport, promoted from the Conference in May, were unbeaten in four league 
games and now lie fourth. Pompey's central defenders, Joe Devera and Sonny 
Bradley, mostly stood up well to their long-throwers, aided by Shaun Cooper in 
a watchful midfield role, while Dan Potts, son of West Ham's Steve and on loan 
from there, provided elegant relief at left-back. Ricky Holmes, with deft runs 
and devilish free-kicks, was home man of the match.

Michael Flynn banged in both goals, the second from Ryan Jackson's long throw. 
It might have been different if, in the first half, Andy Sandell had not 
cleared Patrick Agyemang's shot off the line after David Connolly had drawn and 
beaten the goalkeeper, Lenny Pidgeley; or again if Jed Wallace's bursting run, 
give-and-take and shot had not come back off a post at 0-2.

"We've got to get through this Christmas period," said Barker, "and make sure 
we know on 1 January how good we are, what we've got and what we need." At the 
end of last season they had only three professionals, having dispensed with a 
staff of mostly old lags on high wages they could not pay. Huge debts remain 
but, if the worst comes to the worst in relegation, Newport provide reassurance 
– out of the league in 1988, out of business in 1989 but re-formed and resuming 
four divisions lower. "All the players are lucky to be at a great club like 
Portsmouth," said Barker. The fans, averaging 15,400 at home, only 3,000 fewer 
than in the Premier League four seasons ago, have done their bit.
 