
He may struggle to see it this way as he tends his kind, battered face but 
there is an unavoidable symmetry to Ricky Hatton's career deeply rooted in the 
history of boxing: nearly all his pain, physical and spiritual, arrived in a 
rush at the end.

That he was knocked out in three of his last five fights – finally, on 
Saturday night by Vyacheslav Senchenko – after an unblemished run of 43 wins 
and world titles at two weights placed him in exalted company. Very few world 
champions in a century and more of the fight game have avoided a similar fate, 
and the greatest seem to fall hardest, among them the towering triumvirate of 
Muhammad Ali, Sugar Ray Robinson and Joe Louis.

There is a simple reason they have to endure such a cruel farewell, as Hatton 
acknowledged in the small hours of Sunday. Half an hour earlier Senchenko, a 
tall competent Ukrainian and former world champion, had slipped a hook into his 
thinly protected midsection with all the clinical sweetness of Brutus slaying 
Caesar, and Hatton fell to his knees for the final count. That much we know. 
But why and how?

"Too many hard fights," Hatton mumbled through purpled lips, "burning the 
candle at both ends. It doesn't matter how hard you train, when that bell goes, 
a fighter just knows."

He knows but he cannot say. While there is breath, there is hope. Only when 
there is no more need for innocent lies – to himself, his opponent, those 
asking awkward questions – can a fighter embrace the truth. That is why they 
fall: they are magnificent deceivers. There are few sadder sights in sport than 
a boxer in the aftermath of defeat, physically and spiritually spent, trying to 
rationalise the reality that has just consumed him. Somehow Hatton always 
managed to find the words (perhaps because they came at us like a flurry of red 
leather) to convince us that, whatever the wounds on the outside screamed, 
inside he was OK, thanks very much. After all, had there not been far more good 
nights than bad?

There had. And we wanted to believe him. We believed him, against all better 
judgment, when, putting a cheeky grin on the reality, he told us he "should 
have fuckin' ducked" against Floyd Mayweather Jr in 2007. We believed him, less 
fulsomely, after the trauma of his two-round hell against Manny Pacquiao in 
2009, when he promised us that he'd had enough, there was no more to give, that 
he could walk away. The sight of him sitting in the sun by the pool of his Las 
Vegas hotel, beer in hand, girlfriend by his side, only hours after being 
rendered unconscious at least held out the promise that he would welcome the 
release from his discipline and enjoy what he imagined might be a normal life.

It wasn't normal, of course: not what most of us would call normal. Always the 
most generous spirited of men, Hatton succumbed to the temptations of 
adulation, especially in the city that loved him most. In the bars of 
Manchester and beyond, he played as hard as he worked, drinking himself to the 
precipice of killing himself while strangers slapped him on the back or, in the 
depths of his ordeal, turned the other way, embarrassed. That hurt him more 
than any punch, which is why we found ourselves at ringside again, watching him 
fight for their approval one more time. It is a drug as powerful as heroin, 
boxing.

And how they wanted him to relive the past: Twenty thousand of them, singing 
with the full gusto of any of the 13 previous nights they'd packed the 
Manchester Arena for him.

Those promises and reassurances from the distant and recent past were an 
illusion, a necessary one, perhaps, for the function of the exercise, but 
loaded with danger. "That's what I did three years ago," he said. "I made 
excuses. There's always an excuse to find. But I needed to find out if I still 
had it. And I haven't. I needed to find out if I can still mix it at world 
level. And I can't." He paused, and allowed himself a final indulgence: "But 
I've no complaints. I can look in the mirror and be proud of myself and say I 
gave it my best."

He did that, unforgettably. He can be ranked among the best British boxers 
since the war, in the company of Lennox Lewis, Ken Buchanan, Joe Calzaghe and 
Nigel Benn, (who were there on Saturday night), Lloyd Honeyghan, John Conteh, 
Chris Eubank and Naseem Hamed. Only Henry Cooper on this side of the Irish Sea 
– and Barry McGuigan on the other – generated similar, unquestioning warmth 
among a hard-bitten constituency.

We should remember him for his triumphs – none better than seven years ago 
against Kostya Tszyu – however hard it is to obliterate the memory of that last 
wicked body shot and his sad drift to the canvas. From the moment a boxer pulls 
on gloves for the first time, he is looking for approval, and that insecurity 
haunts all of them until the day they quit. Hatton is no different. He was just 
better than most, at boxing, and, until the end, sidestepping the truth more 
adroitly than he did Mr Senchenko's concluding, merciful blow.
 