
The boxing ring is the ultimate playground of lies. It is there where weak 
smiles and sweating eyes mask trepidation, the armour needed to endure sport's 
cruellest examination. But fighters can only carry off this necessary deception 
for so long.

On the night of 2 May 2009, in the MGM Grand Arena in Las Vegas, Manny 
Pacquiao took a second under six minutes to acquaintRicky Hatton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> with a truth he could no longer 
avoid. His fighting days were over. One final punch to go with the thousands he 
had absorbed during 12 years as a professional boxer was all it took. There 
followed a cocaine-driven spiral that this emotional and sensitive man only now 
has come to terms with, a nose dive of the most literal kind.

Yet nearly two years since he last visited that beguiling battleground, with 
chilling consequences, people close to the former world champion are still 
trying to get him to fight again.

Those who care about Hatton's physical and mental health should be angry with 
Oscar de la Hoya, Ricky's supposed good friend who, as his business partner, is 
the loudest voice urging him to make what would be a doomed comeback. First 
came reports that another fine old pug with more misplaced ambition than sense, 
Erik Morales, wanted to fight Hatton – an event that would add at least £2.4m 
to the Mancunian's bank account, and a good deal more to De la Hoya's, whose 
Golden Boy Promotions is now the financial engine of professional boxing.

De la Hoya's reaction was indecently swift and ill-considered: "Ricky against 
Morales would be a wonderful fight in Las Vegas, a great event, a meeting of 
two real legends of the sport. Fight fans all over the world will want to 
see that."

The unconvincing evidence for such a spurious claim was the Mexican's spirited 
losing effort this month in Las Vegas against Marcos Maidana, the Argentinian 
whom Amir Khan had battered in the same town four months ago. Morales is 34 and 
carries a tell‑tale ripple of immovable flab just above his waistband.

Only a few days before his offer to Hatton, however, the one‑time Hitman said: 
"I haven't coped well with retiring, but you have to hit rock bottom before you 
get back into gear – which is what I've done. It still breaks my heart to think 
I won't fight again, but at least I'm man enough to admit it now." His father, 
Ray, and his solicitor, Gareth Williams, later confirmed there had been an 
offer. No decision had been made, as if there could be more than one.

All of this prompts the suspicion that De la Hoya is as avaricious as any 
other promoter and, in that role, he has a large measure of control over two of 
Britain's four world champions, Khan and David Haye. They are grateful for his 
business expertise – but they are young and at the peak of their powers.

To be anointed by the Golden Boy is to wonder at the power of impossibly white 
teeth and a firm handshake. But his intervention on behalf of Hatton is 
heartless, and wholly at odds with his gleaming image. They called him the 
Golden Boy with good reason. He won Olympic gold at Barcelona, flashed a 
blinding smile across his handsome face and went on to conquer boxing, millions 
of female hearts and all suspicions that boxers leave their brains in the ring 
when they retire. No fighter generated more money from the business – $696m in 
pay-per-view revenue alone, and $70m of that outlandish total arrived in his 
last bout.

It was a farewell performance that should inform De la Hoya's care for his 
fighters, because it was in the same ring against the same man who so 
devastatingly ended Hatton's career five months later. No doubt De la Hoya 
wanted fans to remember his world title triumphs at six weights, his great 
nights against great fighters, such as Julio César Chávez, Pernell Whitaker, 
Héctor Camacho, Ike Quartey and Arturo Gatti, even his losses to Shane Mosley 
but possibly not his one to Bernard Hopkins.

Yet it is the final memory that lingers, the tarnished Golden Boy slumped on 
his stool, unwilling and unable to continue what was a futile exercise from the 
moment he entered the ring, at 35, against a fighter who has a legitimate claim 
to be regarded as one of the best of all time.

Hatton, likewise, would prefer if we forgot his fight with Pacquiao. He spends 
every day trying to do so himself, but it is the unavoidable price he has to 
pay for his participation in a sport that asks more questions about the spirit 
than any other, and lays bare even minor shortcomings. Hatton's preferred dream 
is of the night six years ago when he thrilled his fans in Manchester by 
beating Kostya Tszyu, sending that wonderful champion into retirement.

Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> demands sacrifices of muscle 
and heart that define champions and expose fraudsters. Hatton was never a 
fraud. He was, and remains, as brave as any man who stepped into a ring. But he 
has no need of friends who are prepared to send him back to the 
playground of lies.

Parker or Bale it's Modric for me

Scott Parker has carried West Ham United all winter. But has he had a bigger 
season than Gareth Bale has had for Tottenham at the other end of the Premier 
League? There can't be much in it.

A constituent majority of 350 of my wise friends in the Football Writers' 
Association (quite a few of whom are Hammers fans) disagreed with the game's 
players and voted Parker their player of the year.

I suspect, though, that Parker's fire-and-thunder half-time speech that 
inspired West Ham to come back from 3-0 down and draw with West Bromwich Albion 
in February significantly informed their choice. His team-mate Carlton Cole 
said at the time: "It was inspirational. If you were in there, you'd have a 
tear in your eye." Writers love stuff like that.

It is also a perversity of this job that we tend to go against the grain. I'm 
doing it now. In this instance, though, the FWA ignored the evidence of Bale's 
breathtaking performances for Spurs in Europe and probably regarded his 
flickering influence at home as a negative. Eight of 24 former winners, 
incidentally, went for Bale.

As it happens, I think the writers and players were both wrong; for me, 
Tottenham's Luka Modric, a magical playmaker built in the image of Ossie 
Ardíles, was better than Bale, and just ahead of Nemanja Vidic, who 
demonstrated again that he is surely one of the great centre-halves. But, as 
Kurt Vonnegut almost said, what do any of us know about a hill of beans?
 