
The WBA world super-lightweight champion, Ricky Burns, made a successful first 
defence of his belt against Kiryl Relikh with a thrilling points victory at 
Glasgow’s SSE Hydro Arena.

The 33-year-old from Coatbridge entered the ring with the prospect of a fight 
against the American four-weight champion Adrien Broner on the cards if he came 
through unscathed. Burns struggled at times to get on top of his Belarusian 
opponent during a pulsating battle but won on the judges’ scorecards, 118-110, 
116-112, 116-112.

It was certainly a tough fight for the Scotsman. The atmosphere was electric 
as Burns entered the ring but the relatively unknown challenger started with 
some confidence.

Relikh, under the guidance of the former world champion Ricky Hatton, boasted 
19 knockouts in 21 wins , though here he made the 10-stone weight only at the 
third attempt.

But the 26-year-old quietened the crowd in round one by forcing the pace and 
finding his way through the guard. Burns, whowon the belt in May by knocking 
out Michele Di Rocco in the same arena in eight rounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/ricky-burns-michele-di-rocco-super-lightweight-world-champion>
, had to fight mostly off the back foot in the early stages.

Relikh kept coming forward while avoiding most of Burns’ attempts to counter. 
A straight right by Burns near the end of the fourth got the crowd cheering 
again and he was looking better in the next round when he found the target more 
often.

The fans found their voice again as Burns put some combinations together but 
Relikh shrugged them off and again had his man back-pedalling. It was turning 
into a difficult night for the Scot, who was having to tap into his vast 
experience.

Relikh kept stalking but two stunning rights by Burns in the eighth appeared 
to sow some seeds of doubt in the younger man’s mind. The snap had left 
Relikh’s punches, with the spring appearing to leave his legs, and the champion 
began to impose himself. The Belarusian, however, came back in the 10th with 
renewed vigour, scoring with a big right and a big left.

The men swapped punches in the 12th – the home fighter went to the ground but 
it was due to a slip – before the final bell signalled a successful defence 
which owed much to Burns’ resilience.

Burns has now set his sights on that Las Vegas showdown with Broner. “If the 
money is right, I will fight anyone,” Burns told Sky Sports. “Broner, when he 
is on his game, is a very good fighter. I don’t see the point in going anywhere 
else. At some point I can get a big fight over there.”

On his victory over Relikh Burns added: “In the second round he caught me with 
a couple. He could whack. I know people go on about big punchers all the time 
but there were some punches there. I can hardly lift my hands tonight.

“But we stuck to the game-plan, we stuck to boxing. I got the win and that is 
the main thing. We move on to the next one.”

Tyson Fury is facing his toughest opponent and needs our compassion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/oct/07/tyson-fury-boxing-depression-compassion> 