
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> knows he will 
need more than the roar of the crowd to relaunch his career against Vyacheslav 
Senchenko on what will be an unbearably emotional occasion at the Manchester 
Arena on Saturday night.

The excellent Ukrainian will provide a serious examination of body and spirit 
– and the stakes are higher even than whenHatton beat Kostya Tszyu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jun/06/boxing.rickyhatton> in the same 
arena seven years ago, the last of his 13 appearances here. Then it was about 
glory, titles, money, adoration, excitement; on Saturday it is about survival 
and redemption.

"I'm like you," Hatton says quietly. "I still won't know if I've got it until 
that bell goes but the Ricky Hatton of old will be too much for him."

He is doing this for himself, he says, to restore the pride he shredded in 
tearful excess in bars from Manchester to Las Vegas to Dublin, and, more 
recently, rowing with his father in a car park, their most meaningful exchange 
in two years. His parents will not be there but Jennifer, the partner who saved 
him from suicide, will be – just as she was when she emitted that arena-filling 
scream in Las Vegas three and a half years ago as her Ricky floated to the 
canvas like a spent fiverafter Manny Pacquiao's sickening hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/may/04/ricky-hatton-manny-pacquiao-retirement-boxing>
 to his drained chin.

Jennifer has told him repeatedly that he will eventually have to kick the drug 
that sustains him, fighting, and she believes he was listening when she 
reminded him that reality is not 30,000 travelling lunatics screaming his name 
into the Nevada night; it is the "quiet moments" at home, doing "ordinary 
things".

Whatever the clarity of his convictions on the final leg of his fighting 
journey, Hatton has been in boxing long enough to know that the ring is a 
dangerous place to chase away demons.

Senchenko is a year older at 35, a former Olympian who did not lose until his 
33rd paid bout, when Paulie Malignaggi capitalised on his bunged-up eye to rip 
away his world welterweight title in April. Senchenko is tall and tough with 
quick hands. He is well-schooled and ambitious. Both fighters have weighed in 
at 10st 6lb 10oz. This is no foregone conclusion.

"Let's get this one out the way and we'll have a clear indication just how far 
this comeback can go," Hatton says. "It could be one fight, it could be one 
world title, it could be two fights, three fights. The manner of the 
performance will make it a lot easier for you to write the next day's story."

Hatton is proud of winning world titles at two weights and becoming the 
biggest draw in the history of British boxing, but says: "All those world 
titles mean nothing to me. I'm here to right the wrongs I've done. I know you 
won't believe me, after burning the candle at both ends, after the second-round 
defeat against Manny Pacquiao – no way can he come back the same. Well, I won't 
come back the same, I'm going to come back better."

By such words do fighters triumph or perish. On Saturday night in the arena in 
which he has thrilled the Mancunian thousands who reckoned they owned him, 
Hatton faces a challenge tougher than Pacquiao, smarter than Floyd Mayweather 
Jr, trickier than Senchenko. The opponent coming out of the other corner is 
Ricky Hatton.

If he loses, he will have to dispatch the hero he still talks about in the 
third person to the place all old fighters go: the past. If he can beat 
Senchenko – and I think he may – he has another shot at the big time, although 
it will be tougher than he can imagine. Malignaggi will be there to watch.

Whatever the result, if he can one day live a life more ordinary, as Jennifer 
wants, if he can leave The Hitman in the past, he will be a champion again.
 