
Two wounded men will walk to the ring at a fevered Manchester Arena on 
Saturday night knowing that pain and hope bind them together.Ricky Hatton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> and Bob Shannon, a returning 
fighter and an old trainer, seem made for each other. Their families have been 
cleaved apart and, now, ahead of a wild and fearful night, they need one 
another like never before.

Over the past eight weeks, after his usual early morning workout in 
preparation for his comeback fight against a tough Ukrainian calledVyacheslav 
Senchenko <http://boxrec.com/list_bouts.php?human_id=121754&cat=boxer>, Hatton 
has trained his boxers in Hyde while Shannon has worked as a painter and 
decorator in Wilmslow. It has been different at night. Immersed in their new 
partnership, they have tested each other with tortuous intensity in Shannon's 
gym at the back of an abandoned building in Openshaw. At times, while moving 
from the fighter to his trainer and back again, Manchester has not felt big 
enough to contain their tumultuous stories of darkness and loss.

Beyond the suicidal thoughts, which ruined his three and a half years outside 
the ring, Hatton appears to have lost the parents who were once his staunchest 
supporters. Their only recent contact unfolded on a distressing morning in 
September when his father, Ray, was arrested after assaulting Ricky outside his 
gym.Their argument occurred 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/sep/15/ricky-hatton-dad-arrested-assault> 
the day before Hatton announced his return to the ring. "It was the first time 
in a long time I've seen my dad," Hatton says.

His voice tails away – matching the silence that follows later when, while 
painting a white wall inside a suburban home, Shannon tells me how his only son 
died nine years ago. "We're in this together, me and Ricky," Shannon says. "We 
both know what grief means – and what it means to hope you can get better 
through boxing."

This is more than two parallel stories about a 34-year-old fighter missing his 
father and a veteran trainer mourning the death of his 21-year-old son. Hatton 
mines the depths of his despair while trying to explain why his fight on 
Saturday, which could be a brutal struggle against Senchenko, may offer him a 
way out.
 Hatton in training for his fight against Senchenko. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond 
It's telling that on a quiet Friday morning in Hyde, after training Sergey 
Rabchenko <http://boxrec.com/list_bouts.php?cat=boxer&human_id=374006>, an 
unbeaten light-middleweight from Belarus, Hatton cannot stop himself from 
confronting the old wounds. Having worked Rabchenko hard, in between familiar 
gym banter stretching from Manchester City to masturbation, Hatton unleashes a 
torrent of words about his depression as soon as we reach the black leather 
sofas downstairs.

We're on our own now and a routine first question about him making the 
welterweight limit of 67kg (10st 7lb) opens the door into a bleak place. "I 
could've made the weight four weeks ago so it feels good to be preparing for an 
opponent rather than the scales," Hatton says before plunging straight down 
into his decline. "But it was criminal what I used to do to my body – drinking 
so much between fights and ballooning up in weight. We all laughed at Ricky 
Fatton but it was a miracle I got away with it so long. But I didn't really get 
away with anything, did I? Life kicked my arse with a vengeance.

"It's obvious I was killing myself. My blood pressure was through the roof and 
I was 15st 6lb. My doctor said I was on the verge of a heart attack. What he 
didn't know was how close, or how often, I'd already come to killing myself. 
I've had so many problems withdepression, drugs, drink 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2010/sep/16/police-investigate-ricky-hatton-cocaine-allegations>
, the newspapers, fall-outs. Every fuck-up you could make in life I did it.

"It got to a point where I didn't care if I lived or I died. I'd been this 
working class hero, this down-to-earth Manchester lad, who people liked so much 
that25,000 of them flew to Vegas 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/8030565.stm> to watch me fight, 
singing: 'There's only one Ricky Hatton …' Look what they ended up with? 
Another fucking Ricky Hatton altogether – a drunk crying in the corner of a 
pub. They used to say of me: 'What a fighter! What a cracking lad!' and then 
they saw this weeping wreck."

I cannot remember how many times I have interviewed Hatton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/apr/28/ricky-hatton-manny-pacquiao-donald-mcrae>
 over the years but I have learnt it is often better just to listen to him. 
"I'd go into the pub and start crying even before I'd had my first drink," he 
murmurs. "I was literally thinking: 'I'm going to drink myself to death 
here.' Jennifer [Dooley, his girlfriend and the mother of his daughter Millie] 
would find me there. Or she would get home and see me with a knife at my wrist. 
She would take the knife away and calm me down. That was happening on a daily 
basis at one time – Jennifer taking knives off me or me having panic attacks. I 
hated the person I'd become."

The emptiness a fighter feels when his greatest and most gruelling nights in 
the ring dribble away to nothing is not new. Hatton joins a long line of boxing 
men who discovered desolation in retirement. He may be different in that he was 
loved by so many ordinary people – but the only contrast that now matters is 
whether he can avoid the even sadder fate that usually envelopes a faded boxer 
on the comeback trail. I mention thefrightening scream Jennifer made 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1176786/Ricky-Hattons-fianc-e-Jennifer-collapses-tears-suffers-brutal-knock-Las-Vegas.html>
 when she saw him knocked unconscious by Manny Pacquiao in his last fight, in 
May 2009.

"I don't want Jennifer going through that again," Hatton says. "But I want to 
beat Senchenko and win a world title. That's what I need to do to give myself 
an ending I can accept. But Senchenko is real good. Even the doubters are 
saying I've got a big test. But he's what I need because whatever happens – 
win, lose or draw – I will be able to look myself in the mirror on Sunday 
morning and know I've turned my life around. Jennifer might be worried but she 
also sees the difference. Instead of finding me with a knife in my hand she 
sees me taking Millie to the park. She likes that much happier person."

Hatton's debt to Jennifer is plain even as he opens up the raw hurt with his 
parents, Ray and Carol. His eyes cloud briefly as he says: "Jennifer is the 
only one who has dragged me through the last three years. I'd like to think my 
mum and dad would have been there to help but they haven't."
 More hard time in the gym for Hatton. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
Will they be at the fight? "No," Hatton says. His gaunt and marked-up face 
tightens when asked if there is any chance of reconciliation in a family feud 
over a business deal. "I don't think so. I really don't. It's a shame but I've 
separated myself from my family and I'm trying to move on. All my problems must 
have been upsetting for my mum and dad but you think they would be proud of me 
putting my life back together. But the day before my press conference he chose 
to come have a go at me. It's very sad."

What about his brother, Matthew 
<http://boxrec.com/list_bouts.php?human_id=18454&cat=boxer>, who continues his 
own brave if limited boxing career? "Matthew's all right. He's in the gym every 
day. We don't talk about it but I know it's hard for him. He's piggy in the 
middle but Matthew's great with me. I've got Jennifer and I've now got Bob 
Shannon. Bob's a proper person. He's a family man and 100% decent. He's got my 
welfare at heart."

Shannon used to train Matthew Hatton until he was fired earlier this year. He 
has grown used to fighters breaking his heart and so he shrugs when, in leafy 
Wilmslow, he dips his brush into a pot of white paint. "Matthew phoned me out 
of the blue," he recalls, "and said: 'I've had two losses with you now.' I 
said: 'Matthew, you lost toSaúl Alvarez 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/boxing/9416146.stm> and to Kell Brook 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/boxing/17418872>. Even with Freddie Roach 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2011/may/03/freddie-roach-boxing-pacquiao-khan>
 in your corner you'd have lost to those two. There's no shame in that.' He 
said: 'I don't think so. I'm leaving you.' And he put the phone down. That 
hurt. I thought there was no chance Ricky would turn to me if he ever came 
back."

In the study belonging to Mrs Hills, to whom Shannon was recommended by her 
friend Mrs Williams, the trainer and decorator works steadily. He only puts 
down his brush when his amiable chat turns to his new fighter and his dead son. 
"We always go to the cemetery, me and Jean," Shannon says of the weekly visits 
he and his wife make to Robert's grave. "It might sound strange but I talk to 
Robert …"

Shannon hesitates before resuming, his voice becoming more gravelly with every 
sentence. "I was talking to Robert about all the speculation around Ricky's 
comeback and of my own problems keeping the gym open. I'd given my phone to 
Jean and as I was talking to Robert it rang. Jean said: 'Bob, I can't believe 
this. It's Ricky Hatton.' I finally answered it and Ricky asked if I would come 
see him at his home. Now I'd never been to Ricky's home before. But my two 
brothers had decorated his house. Small world."

Shannon shakes his head at the intimate vagaries of boxing and decorating in 
Manchester. But the words tumble from him as he describes how Hatton convinced 
him that he was returning in an attempt to redeem himself rather than just 
because he needed the money or missed the attention. "He looked like a man who 
deserved a second chance," Shannon says. "And everything he wanted to do for 
himself and his family reminded me of my own hopes. My dad was a boxing trainer 
in Manchester until he lost his life tragically at the age of 44. His death 
devastated me but it was nothing compared to how I felt when we lost Robert."
 Hatton with his new trainer, Bob Shannon. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
Shannon rubs his chest as if he might ease the ache when recalling the night 
his son was killed in a car accident in 2003. "Robbie was only 21," Shannon 
says. "He was a lovely lad. Like me and my dad he was a cornerman and a painter 
and decorator. Robbie always told me: 'Dad, your chance will come.'"

On Saturday night Shannon will get his chance in front of 20,000 raucous 
Hatton supporters. "It's a big moment for me – but I'll also be carrying 
thoughts of Robert. I can't ever forget how I had to tell my wife he had been 
killed. She collapsed. I thought she had died. The shock of it nearly killed me 
too. I couldn't believe it. I still can't. I think about him every day, 
especially when I'm decorating, and then I hear Robbie's voice: 'Don't think 
about it, Dad.' And so I think about boxing and Ricky instead."

Shannon leans against an unpainted wall. "Boxing saved me after I lost 
Robert," he says, his kind old face crinkling. "I couldn't get out of bed after 
he died. I was broken. And then, seven weeks later, my fighters came to see me. 
I looked out of my bedroom window and they were all gathered outside my house. 
I opened the door and they said: 'Bob, we need you back.'"

Tears block his words as Shannon struggles to stop crying. But that reminder 
of being needed soon returns him to his latest fighter. Hatton, clearly, will 
need Shannon to both calm and bolster him tonight. Shannon nods: "It's going to 
be very emotional for Ricky and of course, it's not been a good time with his 
dad. It's affected him. Sometimes he comes into the gym and his head is down. 
He's missing his mother and father. But I say: 'Come on Rick, we've got work to 
do.'

"Most fighters are insecure. So I put my hands on him every night and I tell 
him how good he is – just as I also tell him what he needs to do to get better. 
I know Ricky loves to be liked. He really does. And that's why it's so 
important that he ends this comeback on a winning note. I hope he can go out 
there and beat Senchenko and then win aworld title against Paulie Malignaggi 
<http://www1.skysports.com/boxing/news/12183/8183425/Paulie-Malignaggi-wants-rematch-with-Ricky-Hatton-after-beating-Pablo-Cesar-Cano>
 and then stop – having put all his demons to rest.

"But Senchenko is lively. Ricky wanted him from the word go but I was 
concerned. I said: 'Ricky, you've already sold the venue out – we can start 
with an easier fight.' He said: 'No, I want to prove myself to everyone.' But 
that first round is going to be critical because if I was Senchenko I would 
come out fast and hit Ricky hard. Bam! Senchenko will want to shake him up and 
get inside his head where Ricky has his dark thoughts. That's why I'm working 
Ricky so hard. He has to be ready to go through hell."

Two hours later, in the dingy Openshaw gym Shannon has kept going for 20 
years, a version of hell unfolds. It's a salutary experience, even after 
watching him train so many times before, to see a bruised and pale Hatton push 
his abused body to new extremes. On an old squash court, blackened with grime, 
Shannon wears a body-bag as Hatton tears into him. The fighter's savage punches 
are accompanied by eerie screams and cries.

A wheezing Shannon drags himself off the canvas, winking at me standing on the 
apron of the shuddering ring, as if in reassurance that his wince has been 
slightly embellished to boost his fighter. But there is no refuge for Hatton 
when Shannon takes his revenge on the adjoining court – forcing him through 
three vicious drills of sit-ups and push-ups, jumps and lifts. This is 
redemption at its most battered and cruel.

Afterwards, and with old photographs of Shannon's dead son, Robert, looking 
down on them, the two men part. Hatton sits alone on a hard bench and peels off 
his soaked shirt and damp socks. Shannon, meanwhile, rubs his white hair, which 
resembles a kind of grandad mohawk, with a towel. They are lost in their own 
thoughts about the approaching tumult of Saturday night.

"I've been an emotional wreck the last three years," Hatton says. "Some of it 
has been my fault, some of it hasn't. I'm wrapping all the anger and sadness 
and frustration in a big ball I'm going to throw at Senchenko. Everyone knows 
my story and lots of people have been disappointed in my deterioration as a 
man. But they can see I'm trying to get better. So it'll feel like the roof is 
going to blow off when I walk out there. I'll be thinking of Jennifer and how I 
hit rock bottom. It'll take a massive effort not to give into the waterworks 
but we'll save the bucket and mop for afterwards. I just hope they're happy 
tears."

Hatton smiles as he catches Shannon's eye. "You'll be all right Ricky," the 
old trainer says. "We'll both be all right, won't we?"
 