
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> has every right 
to fight again. Boxing is in his blood and in his bank account. He says he has 
an obligation to do so, an obligation to his fans. But no amount of money or 
spurious attachment to sentiment can disguise the dangers involved in his 
latest enterprise.

The former two-division world champion, who will be 34 in October, announced 
on Friday he will return to boxing after an absence of three years in 
Manchester on 24 November against an opponent yet to be named.

Clearly, there is still good money to be made in the Hatton industry – his 
second career, as manager and promoter, has been financially tough – and there 
is little question he needs a TV deal to bolster a promotional career that took 
a hit when Sky did not renew his deal earlier this year.

But he knows this fight will draw, no matter who the opponent. British boxing 
has never had a ticket-seller like the Hitman. Yet it is impossible to separate 
the business from the many other issues, his health being paramount.

"Too many miles on the clock," was Hatton's assessment after Manny Pacquiao 
knocked him unconscious inside two rounds in Las Vegas in May 2009. "Right 
thing to do," he said of his decision to quit, "rather than lead the fans up 
the garden path."

Hatton sees no discrepancy in insisting he now wants "British boxing to be 
proud of me again. The only way to convince everyone I'm back is by flattening 
someone. It's not about money, it's not about winning a world title".

In the next breath, he says: "I don't want to be fighting at four- or 
six-round levels – I want to fight for world titles." The confusion is obvious.

Hatton strikes a more credible note when he says: "It's more than a comeback. 
I'm fighting to redeem myself."

But all of these are the wrong reasons for a former champion to fight again. 
This plainly is about ego and pride, shrugging off the monkey that has been on 
his back, the monkey that drove him to the depths of despair over the past 
couple of years.

Comebacks happen because fighters spend even their good years telling 
themselves little lies. And the biggest lie is that they never grow old. If Joe 
Louis, Sugar Ray Robinson and Muhammad Ali could not defy time, why does Hatton 
imagine he can? The answer: there are not enough wise voices around him to tell 
him otherwise.

And this is what sets the alarm bells ringing, the confusion. If Hatton wants 
redemption over money, he is in the wrong business. He must know the only way 
he can restore his lustre is to do again what he did then. And then was a long 
time ago. It is not going to happen. There is not the time and there are too 
many good, young fighters out there, with sharper reflexes and colder eyes.

"People say nice things about me," he says, "but they don't know what's been 
going on between my ears."

People do say nice things about Ricky. Whatever his failings – perhaps because 
of them – they love the guy. He has always been someone hardcore boxing fans 
and the people of Manchester can identify with. It was that blind love that 
dragged up to 30,000 of them to Las Vegas to watch his finest nights – and his 
worst.

Barry McGuigan supports his return; so does Nathan Cleverly. They are two 
intelligent voices at either end of the boxing spectrum, the retired world 
champion and the young fighter with his career in front of him. But I can't 
agree with them.

Hatton has only recently got back into decent shape after a honeymoon of 
relaxation, during which he has come through the trauma of alcohol and drug 
use, considered suicide and, to his great credit, kept his promotional career 
on track despite significant pressures. If getting fit has done some good, it 
has restored his self-respect.

Standing outside the ropes, or even banging out a few rounds of sparring, was 
never going to "scratch the itch" as he put it. Hanging around fighters in the 
gym was always going to stir his old instincts. He is the sort of retired boxer 
who punctuates every conversation with little shadow-box shifts and twitches.

He misses the sport desperately, so he takes up the skipping rope. He hits the 
heavy bag. He cuts down on the booze. He gets on the treadmill. But he has no 
rating, just a wonderful past. Now he has to find the hunger to undertake the 
far more rigorous training needed to compete at the highest level.

It is said he wants to fight Paulie Malignaggi, the WBA welterweight champion 
whom he stopped in 11 rounds nearly four years ago. He looked good in that 
fight, which was the second after being laid out by Floyd Mayweather Jr — and 
the last before he got in the ring with Pacquiao.

Hatton may see the light-punching Malignaggi as a soft touch and that is 
revelatory in itself; he does not want to risk another night like the Pacquiao 
disaster. Nonetheless, the boxing landscape has shifted markedly since he 
fought Malignaggi, who has had eight fights in that time. He has a defence of 
his world title lined up against Pablo César Cano in New York next month and 
Hatton could be closer to 35 by the time he puts himself in contention for a 
title shot. So, who will need whom more, by then?

"We saw the best of Ricky when he beat Kostya Tszyu," his one-time promoter 
Frank Warren said. Unless anyone has forgotten, the date of that fight was June 
2005. Hatton was 26.
 