
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton>, who turns 34 
next month and last fought three years ago, is coming out of retirement to 
"redeem" himself. The former two-weight world champion will return to the ring 
on 24 November with a fight at the Manchester Arena against an as yet unnamed 
opponent.

Hatton's last bout was a brutal second-round knockout by Manny Pacquiao in Las 
Vegas in 2009 and he has since overcome drug and alcohol problems. He 
established his own promotions company which ran into problems in May when it 
lost a television deal with Sky.

"It's more than a comeback," Hatton said. "I'm fighting to redeem myself. I 
want British boxing to be proud of me again. The only way to convince everyone 
I'm back is by flattening someone on 24 November.

"It's been well documented what's happened to me since the last time I've been 
in a boxing ring. I've started looking after myself a bit better and getting 
fitter and that's how it started. I don't want to be fighting at four or 
six-round levels – I want to fight for world titles.

"It's about more than money, this comeback. People say nice things about me 
but they don't know what's been going on between my ears."

Talking about the manner of the defeat against Pacquiao, Hatton said: "I 
didn't want my career to end that way. It put me into retirement, which I never 
wanted to do. The manner of that defeat put me into some things which have been 
well documented… my life turned to mush.

"I got back into promoting which I loved, but it didn't quite fill the void. I 
got a huge buzz getting opportunities for my fighters and I was in the gym 
every day of the week passing on the knowledge, but it didn't fill the gap."

The British Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of Control 
has said Hatton will be granted a licence upon completion of a medical.

Hatton, who retired last year with a record of 45 wins and two defeats, held 
the WBA and IBF light-welterweight and WBA welterweight titles.
 