
Ricky Hatton, with the sort of comic timing that punctuates his best stand-up 
routines, has singled out Amir Khan as one of few fighters capable of beating
Floyd Mayweather <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>, who 
might yet grant the Bolton boxer an audience if he gets past Manny Pacquiao in 
Las Vegas on 2 May.

“I think Floyd would run a mile from Amir Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan>,” Hatton said, “not from a fear 
factor, obviously, but styles make fights.

“Lately, Amir’s a lot more disciplined, boxing in and out, not getting 
involved. That style will cause Floyd massive problems. Someone who’s going to 
beat Floyd has to have fast hands, fast feet. He would give Floyd fits.

“But, when you’re the best, pound-for-pound, like Floyd Mayweather – and 
Amir’s as big a name as is out there, he’s beaten pretty much everyone – he 
might be forced to fight Amir Khan. He might be running out of opponents. I say 
this all the time, and everybody laughs at me: I think he’s got a good chance 
of beating him.”And Hatton does not criticiseKhan for rejecting £5 million to 
challenge Kell Brook for his IBF version of the welterweight title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/31/amir-khan-kell-brook-ibf-welterweight-champion>
 in a mega-fight at Wembley this summer, although he appreciates the obvious 
temptation.

“We’ll see what happens after this fight. Whoever wins is the best 
pound-for-pound, and Amir has never shied away from a challenge; he’ll want to 
challenge the best. Let’s not forget, you’re looking at the best payday of your 
life if you can get Manny or Floyd in there. If Kell was in that position, he’d 
probably do the same, really.

“They want to earn and they want to challenge the biggest names in boxing. 
But, if for some reason, a fight with Manny or Floyd doesn’t come off, that is 
the fight Amir should be looking at. That’s the biggest one out there.

“We saw what George Groves and Carl Froch did at Wembley, with 80,000 fans, 
you can’t tell me that Amir and Kell couldn’t do the same.”

Hatton is one of five fighters to have faced both Mayweather and Pacquiao, 
losing each time, so when he says the American will beat the Filipino, he 
speaks through experience more hard-earned than that of any professional critic.

The Mancunian was unbeaten, a two-weight world champion, when Mayweather 
knocked him out in the 10th round of their world welterweight title fight in 
December 2007. And he was pretty much spent at the highest level when Pacquiao 
flattened him so dramatically in the second round of their fight at the same 
weight in May 2009, a defeat that sentHatton into a spiral of despair that 
brought him close to suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/29/ricky-hatton-depression-pacquiao-manny>
. Nevertheless, he has fought hard to rebuild his life after boxing and was 
eloquent and incisive on the biggest fight in boxing probalby since Sugar Ray 
Leonard fought Marvin Hagler.

“Although I think Manny’s got the style to beat him, I’m still going to go 
with Mayweather,” Hatton said.

“He always finds a way to win. He’s a very, very clever fighter, Manny, but 
you’d have to say the cleverest fighter in boxing is Mayweather. He adapts his 
style against whatever opponent he faces. I think he’ll do the same to Manny. I 
can’t for the life of me think Freddie Roach has told [Manny] to jump all over 
him, because everyone’s tried that, me included, and everyone’s failed. It’s 
going to take someone of similar speed – which Pacquiao has got – and someone 
who’s got fast feet, able to get in and out.

“The one [opponent] he fought where he had to be the hunter, if you like, was 
Zab Judah [outpoined in 2006]. He struggled against him. I’d be inclined to 
choose my moment to have it out with him but generally box off the back foot, 
in and out, like Oscar De la Hoya [who pushed him close in 2007].

“Manny shuffles in and out very well, but he needs to throw a lot of punches 
because Floyd’s workrate is not massive. He chooses his moments, when to raise 
it, when to drop it. If Manny gets a high tempo but doesn’t jump down the pipe 
[early on], uses his in-and-out fast hands, straight punches, he has the style 
to beat him, no doubt. But if he tries to just sit on his chest and punch away 
like we’ve all done, I think that plays into Floyd’s hands.”

Hatton offers one caveat: Floyd’s trainer and father, Floyd Sr, who was in his 
camp when he lost to Pacquiao, one of the most disastrous campaigns by a 
British boxer in Las Vegas since Frank Bruno lost to Mike Tyson in 1995.

Floyd Sr, a world-class fighter in his day, did the British challenger no 
favours in that fight, and Hatton has not easily forgotten it.

“When I fought [left-handed] Pacquiao, [Floyd Sr] couldn’t do southpaw pads - 
so it’s interesting to see what they will be doing from that point of view. I 
think that is a massive, absolutely massive thing. Floyd Sr was a very good 
trainer, but for Pacquiao I definitely should have had someone who could do 
southpaw pads. I’m flabbergasted. That should have been a warning sign for me, 
and it wasn’t.”

Hatton agrees the build-up has been strangely low-key, given the extraordinary 
importance of the fight, and the hundreds of millions of dollars involved. And 
he’s not sure why.

“I thought the build-up would have been bigger than what it is. I don’t 
believe Manny’s been looking sensational in the gym, and Floyd’s not been doing 
that much bad-mouthing. Whether or not that’s because he’s nervous...

“He normally likes to get under people’s skin. He says he doesn’t need to 
bad-mouth [Pacquiao] because the fight sells itself, which is a very good point.

“But Floyd normally likes to do that, pissing opponents off, if the truth be 
known. Yet he’s not decided to do it. He could be nervous, it could be the 
respect he has for Manny; he’s taking it a little bit more seriously. I don’t 
know. I just don’t think anyone’s got the edge in the build-up. Having said 
that, they’ve both been in so many big super-fights, does there need to be any 
talking? They’ve seen it all before.”

And they might see it all again. Hatton agrees that if the fight is close, a 
rematch in September is the obvious next move, scuppering any thoughts Khan or 
anyone else might have of getting either of them in the ring before well into 
2016.

“You won’t believe how many people have said to me it could be a draw – and 
they are very evenly matched. But it all depends on how good a fight it is.

“If it’s a fantastic fight, there’ll be massive amounts of money on the table 
to have the rematch. Floyd would love to ease into the fight and do what he 
does best. It could be a real anti-climax, to be honest with you.

“They both have so much respect for each other, it might be a bit of a cagey 
one.

“It all depends on what Manny Pacquiao’s tactics are. If he wants to go for 
it, then obviously it could be a great fight. I think Manny makes it an 
exciting fight, not necessarily Floyd. So, if it is a barnstormer, the clamour 
for a rematch will be massive.”

Except, maybe, from Amir Khan.

Sky Sports Box Office will show Mayweather v Pacquiao exclusively live on 2 May
 - skysports.com/maypac <http://skysports.com/maypac>
 