
A comeback for Ricky Hatton and a fight with Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather> Jr in London next May for 
Amir Khan: they were the two tantalising prospects at the heart of boxing 
speculation here in Las Vegas on Friday night.

If Hatton does decide to return to the ring – and his silence intensifies 
rather than quells the talk reignited recently in a newspaper column by his 
former associate, the world-class trainer Joe Gallagher – only the 
reincarnation of Elvis would excite Las Vegas more.

Back on planet earth, Khan fighting the currently incarcerated Mayweather is 
more realistic – if he beats Danny Garcia on Saturday night to unify the WBA 
and WBC light-welterweight belts, according to Richard Schaefer, chief 
executive of Khan's American partners, Golden Boy Promotions.

"There are going to be many opportunities for Amir at welterweight," Schaefer 
said. "I think that's the most exciting weight class. As a team, we will decide 
to have one fight as an introduction to 147lb, probably here in December, then 
Mayweather next May. But I have to tell you, Mayweather would love to fight in 
the UK. Now, I think he's even more so inclined."

As for Hatton, Schaefer said, "Very few people connected with people the way 
Ricky did. I think those people will be there again for Ricky. I think he could 
recreate those days [when up to 30,000 British fans swamped Las Vegas for each 
of his fights against Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao].

"If they see that he's doing it because he can, if he has the physical and 
mental readiness to do it again, then I think the fans will say, yes, we're 
there with you. If he's going to do it for other reasons, for financial reasons 
– which I don't think will be the case – then fans are smart. They will know 
that. He has to do it only if he knows he can become world champion again.

"Only he knows his body and if he is physically and mentally ready to give it 
another go. I don't know the answer to that. I do think, though, that sometimes 
taking a bit of time off is not a bad thing."

He cited his business partner Oscar de la Hoya, and his return from two 
defeats by Shane Mosley after layoffs, nine months each time, to win again 
(more convincingly when near his peak in 2001 than when starting to decline in 
2006, it should be said).

"He started singing, recorded an album, but then he came back and had some of 
his biggest fights," Schaefer added.

Two of those were lucrative losses to the men who effectively finished 
Hatton's career, Mayweather and Pacquiao, proving again that the event is 
sometimes bigger than the result. Underlining that truism, De la Hoya has 
occasionally been mentioned as a comeback opponent for Hatton, but one look at 
him on the podium at the last press conference for Khan's fight against Garcia 
at the Mandalay Bay on Friday night was enough to suggest that scenario is 
beyond fanciful.

Hatton would have to fight someone credible and for the right reasons, both to 
interest HBO and the fans. But the temptation is real, for all of them. One 
fighter desperate for a rematch with him is Paulie Malignaggi, who has had 
eight fights since losing to him four years ago (including a loss to Khan) and 
recently won the WBA welterweight title. "Bring it on, man," he said this week.

GBP and Hatton made good money together during his serial invasion of boxing's 
capital, notably against Mayweather in December 2007, a fight which generated 
$47m (£30m) in pay-per-view sales; and his sad final effort, knocked cold in 
two rounds by Pacquiao, in May 2009, when Hatton walked away with $8m (£5.1m), 
a blinding headache and bruised pride.

He then fell into a depression driven by drink and drugs, ballooning in 
weight, only to recover as a trainer and promoter, and looks in better shape 
now than he has done for a long time. Is he kidding himself? We will know soon 
enough.
 