
Australia’s dreams of winning an Olympic gold medal were cruelly ended by host 
nation Brazil after a penalty shootout was required to settle the last women’s 
football quarter-final at the Mineirão Stadium in Belo Horizonte.

Brazilian goalkeeper Bárbara was ultimately the hero of the piece, denying 
Matildas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/matildas> defender Alanna 
Kennedy in what proved to be the final kick of the game to seal a 7-6 win on 
penalties after there was nothing to separate the sides over 120 minutes.

Hope Solo calls Sweden 'a bunch of cowards' after USA falter at Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/hope-solo-sweden-cowards-olympics-football-rio-2016>
Australia had the chance to win the game, and secure a place in the 
semi-finals, when Lydia Williams saved from Marta – the first miss on the ninth 
attempt of a well-executed shootout – but the five-times world player of the 
year, and Brazil, were given a reprieve when Katrina Gorry was denied by 
Bárbara on the next attempt.

Tamires then scored and when Kennedy’s effort was repelled by Bárbara, the 
packed stadium was sent into raptures. The host nation will now play Sweden in 
Rio de Janeiro for a place in the gold medal match, while Canada and Germany 
face off in the other semi.

During regulation time, Australia’s Chloe Logarzo came the closest to breaking 
the deadlock when she crashed a long-distance effort against the crossbar, but 
despite other chances falling to both sides, neither could find a way through 
during the first 90 minutes, and then an additional 30 minutes of extra-time.

Several of the Matildas took to twitter after the game to express their 
disappointment, as well as their pride at the team’s performance.

Caitlin Foord described herself as “shattered”, but remained defiant.

“Proud of everyone tonight, we gave it everything. Thanks for all the 
support,” she said.

Co-captain Clare Polkinghorne also took to social media, tweeting: “No words. 
Just proud and honoured to stand beside these amazing footballers.”
 