
New mothers are facing increasing discrimination when they take maternity 
leave including being made redundant and switched to zero-hours contracts.

Citizens Advice has recorded a nearly 60% rise in the number of women seeking 
advice about maternity leave issues this year. Just over 3,300 came to the 
charity with such issues in the year to June compared to 2,099 last year.

The surge in reported problems has emerged after the Guardian revealed that 
Sports Direct workers returning from maternity leave are claiming they were 
moved on to zero-hours contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/12/sports-direct-staff-who-took-maternity-leave-put-on-zero-hours-contracts>
. The claims were made in court documents relating to a breach-of-contract case 
in which workers say they were excluded from the retailer’s generous bonus 
scheme.

Citizens Advice says the introduction of fees for employment tribunals, 
through which workers can challenge poor treatment, has combined with the rise 
of zero-hours contracts, agency work and multiple part-time jobs to make 
employees more vulnerable to sharp practice on maternity rights.

Legally, women are protected from losing their job, having their hours changed 
or their responsibility reduced as a result of pregnancy. While employment and 
sex discrimination legislation offers protection, responsibility for enforcing 
such employment rights is spread across a wide range of agencies, from HMRC to 
the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority, said Gillian Guy, chief executive 
of Citizens Advice.

“This confusing landscape means some bad bosses are getting away with treating 
their employees unfairly,” Guy said. “There is an opportunity for the 
government to consider bringing together the expertise of all current labour 
market enforcement functions into one well-resourced, effective body to 
investigate bad practice.”

Citizens Advice said the most common issue it dealt with in relation to 
maternity leave was being made redundant followed by a reduction in hours, 
including being moved to a zero-hours contract and having a role changed upon 
return to work.

A report into the issue, released by Citizens Advice this week, highlights the 
case of Nadia, who worked as a head chef in a local pub on a permanent 
contract. When she had difficulties during her pregnancy that meant she could 
no longer work in the kitchen she was offered work as a waitress on a 
zero-hours contract.

Another woman, who works for a national retail chain, told the Guardian she 
had her hours cut from about 34 a week to 26 during her pregnancy after she 
arrived late for work on one occasion.

“They said it was for my safety but that didn’t make sense. I was fine,” she 
said. Although she worked regular hours on the shop floor, she was employed on 
a zero-hours contract basis and found it hard to ensure she received any 
maternity pay.

‘When I go to work, my babies are with a man who loves them as much as I do’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/14/shared-parental-leave-mothers-fathers-childcare-paternity-maternity>
Now back at work, she feels under pressure to work even when her child is ill 
or she has given several weeks’ notice that she needs time off because of 
difficulties in finding childcare.

“I don’t really feel secure. Sometimes it feels like I have to go in or they 
will reduce my hours to nothing or I will lose my job. It’s always at the back 
of my mind when my daughter is not very well.”

The research by Citizens Advice supports the findings of a report by the 
Equality and Human Rights Commission into maternity discrimination published 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/24/maternity-leave-discrimination-54000-women-lose-jobs-each-year-ehrc-report>
.

The study estimated that around 54,000 new mothers are losing their jobs 
across Britain every year – almost twice the number identified in similar 
research undertaken in2005 
<http://www.maternityaction.org.uk/sitebuildercontent/sitebuilderfiles/eocpregnancydiscrimgreaterexpectations.pdf>
.

It also found that 10% of women were discouraged from attending antenatal 
appointments by their employers, putting the health of mother and baby at risk.
 