
Throwing around phrases like “chelating agents” and “quantum dots”, Krtin 
Nithiyanandam is confidently explaining his research, barely batting an eyelid 
as the laboratory argot trips off his tongue. The project, an award-winning 
approach to help diagnose Alzheimer’s disease years before the telltale amyloid 
beta plaques appear in the brain, would be admirable in itself. But it is made 
even more impressive by the fact that Nithiyanandam is just 16.

The Surrey schoolboy is no stranger to the press, having scooped headlines 
with his work, and there’s already a hint of the showman about him. “I had 
always wanted to do a research project really just because I thought doing 
something new would be quite cool,” he says. “At school you do experiments, but 
most of the time you are repeating experiments that have been done thousands 
of times before so it is difficult to get excited by it.”

It was some time before Nithiyanandam started to pursue his idea in earnest. 
Playing squash – he is an avid player – he broke his pelvis. Twice. It was a 
calamity, but also an opportunity. Laid off from sports he set to work 
contacting researchers in universities around the country for help with his 
project. “There was a lot of rejection at first,” he says. Eventually, a 
researcher from the University of Surrey offered to give him a hand, leading to 
the development of an antibody that could help detect early signs 
of Alzheimer’s disease. The work earned Nithiyanandam the $25,000Scientific 
American Innovator award at the Google Science Fair last year 
<http://www.suttongrammar.sutton.sch.uk/Krtin-Nithiyanandam-is-awarded-2nd-Prize-in-the-Google-Science-Fair-International-Competition>
.

And there’s more attention coming his way. His latest idea, in collaboration 
with researchers at Cambridge University, is aimed at making hard-to-treat 
breast cancers more receptive to common drugs. The work has already swept him 
to the final of the UK’sNational Science and Engineering Competition 
<http://www.nsecuk.org/> to be held in March 2017. “I’ve been there for the 
last two years as a finalist and haven’t won anything yet, so hopefully this 
year…” he says.

While neither of his parents have a scientific background – his mother is an 
accountant-turned-secretary and his father is an IT consultant – both follow 
his projects closely. His friends offer their own form of support. “There are 
the odd jokes that fly here and there but I think they think it’s quite cool,” 
says Nithiyanandam, adding that he is now part of a small research group at his 
school.

He is currently studying for his A-levels, and thoughts about his career have 
understandably been affected by his success. “I was pretty determined I was 
going to study medicine at university,” he says. “Now I am not sure whether 
I want to go into medicine, research or computer science.”

Ultimately, he says, no one is too young to delve into research. “A degree is 
undoubtedly helpful and so is a PhD,” he says. “But coming up with the idea 
itself, anyone can do that – it is just whether you want to go for it.”

Three more to watch

■ A stem cell scientist at the Francis Crick Institute in London, Dr Kathy 
Niakan 
<https://www.crick.ac.uk/research/a-z-researchers/researchers-k-o/kathy-niakan/>
 made theTime 100 list <http://time.com/4301356/kathy-niakan-2016-time-100/> 
after gaining permission to use genome-editing tool Crispr-Cas9 on human 
embryos to understand early human development.

■ Sheffield teenager Sarah Sobka made headlines after winning the 2015 
National Science and Engineering Competition, earning her the titleUK Young 
Scientist of the Year 
<https://www.thebigbangfair.co.uk/media-press/press-releases/pupils-crowned-uk-young-scientist-of-the-year-and-uk-young-engineer-of-the-year-at-national-science-plus-engineering-competition-finals/>
 for her research into a potential drug for cystic fibrosis.

■ Co-founder, with Joel Gibbard, of Bristol-based robotics company Open Bionics
 <https://www.openbionics.com/>, Samantha Payne is developing low-cost, 
custom-made prosthetics for children using 3D printing. The hands come in a 
range of styles, fromFrozen to Iron Man.
 