
The head of the organisation that protects rugby league players in Australia 
has called for English-based players to form their own union in light of 
comments made by the Huddersfield hooker Luke Robinson in which he described 
the Rugby Football League as being “short-sighted”.

Speaking this week, Robinson called for the salary cap in this country to be 
increased in order to attract the world’s best players and hit out at current 
player wages in the UK, saying: “Everything has gone up with inflation apart 
from our job. I think that needs addressing.”Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> clubs can currently spend up to 
£1.825m on their salary cap, while National Rugby League teams in Australia are 
able to spend upwards of $7m (£3.4m).

South Sydney owner Russell Crowe apologises for Luke Keary tirade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/20/south-sydney-owner-russell-crowe-apologises-for-luke-keary-tirade>
Clint Newton, the chairman of the Rugby League Players Association (RLPA), 
which represents those at both professional and semi-professional level in 
Australia – and a former Super League player himself with Hull Kingston Rovers 
– believes Robinson’s comments highlights the needs for players in this country 
to organise for the sake of their careers.

“It’s crucial to have an association,” he told the Guardian. “It rests 
squarely at the feet of the players; they can say they want better entitlements 
but without the players standing up and reacting as a collective, then it is 
always going to be a case of what’s happening now, which is just players 
venting frustration.

“It’s vital the playing group are doing all they can to ensure the best 
interests of the players at all levels are met.”

Sam Burgess hailed a hero after ‘saving life’ of choking man in Sydney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/22/sam-burgess-hailed-hero-saving-choking-man>
Newton said the RLPA would support the creation of a union for professional 
players in England; the most recent entity, League 13, closed in October, 
leaving professionals without an association. There is, however, a union in 
operation for other levels of the sport.

“We would always offer support to the players in the UK, but it’s vital we 
don’t overreach and we look after our players over here first and foremost,” he 
said. “The player movement on a global scale is one that’s getting stronger and 
the sooner any code around the world has a strong players association, it’s 
only going to create a better game.

“If you’re not listening to your workers in any walk of life – in this case 
the players – then you’re not going to have a true reflection of how things are 
progressing. The fact you’ve got an experienced player like Luke saying this, 
you’ve got to respect his opinion.”

He added: “Realistically the game needs to make sure they’re tracking in line 
with other codes. It’s not just about making sure they’re earning the same as 
footballers or rugby union players in the UK, but they also need to make sure 
they’re keeping up with the demands that are put on the players, and I’m just 
not sure that’s happened.”

The RFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> declined to comment.
 