
Josh Reynolds described Robbie Farah’s head injury as the scariest thing he 
has seen on a football field, as theWests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> hooker’s hospitalisation 
further soured their 36-4 NRL loss to Canterbury.

Farah was recovering at home late on Sunday night after scans cleared him of 
fractures in his head or neck. Hours earlier he had been stretchered off ANZ 
Stadium and will this week undergo concussion tests before being allowed to 
take the field against Newcastle on Saturday.

Cronulla Sharks crush sorry Newcastle Knights in record victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/cronulla-sharks-crush-sorry-newcastle-knights-in-record-victory>
While it’s unknown whether the NSW No9 will be able to play again before the 
June 1 State of Origin series opener, Farah was upbeat about his recovery. 
“Thankfully scans on my neck have come back all clear and I’ve been discharged 
from hospital. Greatly appreciate everyone’s msgs. Thank you,” he tweeted.

After colliding with Canterbury five-eighth Josh Reynolds, Farah suffered a 
worrying head and neck injury and was taken to hospital as a precaution. It’s 
another setback for the Tigers veteran who missed the opening three rounds with 
a knee problem.

“Robbie’s OK, he had a bit of pain in his neck, which is why he’s gone to 
hospital but the doctor says it’s just precautionary,” Tigers coach Jason 
Taylor said. “It was pretty clear it was serious and we were all concerned 
about him. We don’t know 100% one way or another but the doctors are confident 
he’ll be fine.”

Farah was knocked unconscious after running into Reynolds’ hip as the 
Canterbury playmaker put in a kick in the 23rd minute. The force of the impact 
was so great that Reynolds was walking around with an ice pack on his hip 
afterwards.

“It was very scary and you don’t want to see that happen to anyone,” Reynolds 
said. “I’ve seen his his lip moving a bit and it’s probably the scariest thing 
I’ve ever seen on the field.”

The loss – the Tigers’ seventh in their past eight games – reapplied pressure 
on Taylor. The side was struck a blow before kick off when Sauaso Sue was ruled 
out with a rib injury in the warm up while Josh Aloiai did not come out for the 
second half because of a concussion.

The Tigers skipped out to an 18-0 lead before returning Tigers skipper Aaron 
Woods combined with Mitchell Moses to give the home side a sniff. However the 
Dogs’ relentless go-forward proved too much with prop David Klemmer leading the 
way with 196 metres with the victory giving them momentum after being 
inconsistent in the opening rounds.

“We played well in patches and we had to win and win well,” coach Des Hasler 
said. “It’s something that gives us a bit of a platform to build on.”
 