
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> could offer 
Robbie Farah a post-playing career role as an inducement to keep him at the NRL 
club. Farah met with Tigers chief executive Justin Pascoe on Sunday as the 
contract saga between the former skipper and the embattled joint venture spills 
into a fourth month.

The NSW State of Origin hooker has been linked to a surprise move to Sydney 
Roosters. However Pascoe said there had been discussions over a potential 
ambassadorial role for Farah, who played in the club’s only premiership win in 
2005 and is regarded as one of Wests Tigers’ favourite sons, when he retires.

NRL star Robbie Farah asks to be released from Wests Tigers contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/nrl-star-robbie-farah-asks-to-be-released-from-wests-tigers-contract>
“We are looking at a number of options with Robbie, including what role he may 
play with Wests Tigers once he finishes his playing career,” Pascoe said. 
“Robbie is approaching 250 games with Wests Tigers and any club would be open 
to having a player of that experience involved in an ambassador role after 
their retirement.

“We will continue to work closely with Robbie and his management to come up 
with an agreement that meets the needs of both parties. Robbie still has two 
years left on his playing contract with Wests Tigers and at this stage remains 
a part of the club’s plans for the 2016 season.”

It remains to be seen what effect the peace offering from Pascoe has upon 
discussions between the two parties. But the Tigers said speculation that Farah 
had been offered an extended four-year contract was “incorrect”.

According to reports, Farah is demanding a full payout from the remaining two 
years of his contract, worth around $1.9 million, and deferred contract 
payments.

Fairfax Media reported that Farah could even leave the club for the Roosters 
or Super League for a single season and return when Jason Taylor, whose 
relationship with his ex-skipper Farah appears to have become untenable, was no 
longer coach.

Pascoe hurried back from holiday to meet with Farah and his manager Sam Ayoub 
on Sunday. However Ayoub indicated the contract imbroglio between his client 
and the Tigers could last another month.

Pascoe indicated the club was unlikely to cede completely to Farah’s demands 
of a complete payout, an outcome that would place the Tigers in a perilous 
situation as the money would be included in their salary cap for the next two 
seasons.

“We are committed to building a successful and sustainable Wests Tigers both 
on and off the field and this will be taken into account when a decision 
regarding Robbie’s future with the club is made,” Pascoe said.
 