
Robbie Farah looks set to be at Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> next NRL season but, with Matt 
Ballin preparing to put pen to paper, it remains uncertain in what capacity.

As the Tigers took part in day one of pre-season training on Monday, the soap 
opera surrounding the club continued.

While there had been hope of a fresh start, it was the same old story as 
players began arriving at Leichhardt with confusion and controversy reigning 
and a big media contingent buzzing around.

Coach Jason Taylor said Farah was welcome to play at the Tigers in 2016 but 
confirmed the interest in Manly veteran Ballin, who is expected to sign a 
two-year deal in the coming days, putting pressure on Farah to retain the No9 
jersey.

Email to Canadian theatre critic sparks Martin Taupau to Manly NRL rumour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/30/martin-taupau-to-manly-nrl-rumour-sparked-by-email-mix-up>
After Farah was last season told he was free to negotiate with other clubs, he 
said he had been told by management that if he played on, he would be relegated 
to NSW Cup.

And while Taylor said it was “totally Robbie’s call” whether he would remain 
in Tigers colours, he could not guarantee him the starting hooker spot. This is 
despite a Farah being the incumbent NSW State of Origin hooker – a fact even 
Taylor conceded was “unusual”.

Taylor said Farah would have to fight for his position in the pre-season and 
the writing appears to be on the wall with Ballin preparing to arrive at 
Concord. “It’s right that the club is in talks with Matt Ballin, nothing’s been 
finalised there but it’s getting fairly close,” Taylor said.

“It just means that there will be really good competition for positions. I’ve 
talked numerous times about a lack of depth at the club and we’ve worked really 
hard in the past to build on that.”

Farah was among those on hand for the pre-season rollcall, having seemingly 
won his stare down with Taylor, who has consistently encouraged him to look for 
another club despite having two years left on his contract.

There was no sign of animosity as the two worked side-by-side and Taylor 
appearing to concede he would be staying.

Whether Ballin will be ready for round one also remains to be seen – the 
31-year-old suffered a season-ending ACL injury in late August and faced a 
six-month rehabilitation, putting him in a race against the clock to be fit for 
the season start.

Taylor was also forced to defend his relationship with his charges after a 
weekend report painted a savage picture of the club’s treatment of its players.

News Corp reported that the initial findings of an independent report 
commissioned by the Players’ Association found 85% of players at the club 
complained of unacceptable conditions.

Taylor strongly defended his rapport with his troops and the club’s welfare 
record. “I refute that absolutely and that is so far from the mark it’s not 
funny,” he said. “While we haven’t had a great rating as far as our welfare 
goes in the past, and when I say that I mean the 2014 season rating, because the
NRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> look at that with every club.

“We’re confident that we’ve improved that and we’ll improve that going 
forward. As far as my relationship with the players, I stand by that 100 per 
cent and it’s a really strong relationship that I have with a majority of the 
players.”
 