
Just a month after formally requesting to leave the Wests Tigers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers>, former skipper Robbie Farah 
is staying put at the NRL club and has committed to working with coach Jason 
Taylor.


Farah was one of seven players appointed on Wednesday to the club’s 2016 
leadership group, with includes recruit and fellow hooker Matt Ballin and 
likely captain Aaron Woods.


The announcement seemingly brings an end to the saga that has engulfed Concord 
since Taylor told the premiership-winning hooker in August he was free to look 
for a new team, while Farah said he was told he’d be playing reserve-grade if 
he decided to stay.


Farah stood down from the captaincy last month after seven years in charge as 
his contract saga rolled on.


“This club, the playing group and fans mean everything to me and I want to be 
around for what I think is going to be an exciting time for Wests Tigers,” 
Farah said.


Taylor expressed a similar desire to put aside his previous feelings towards 
the NSW vice-captain after a number of constructive chats in recent weeks.


Farah has two more years remaining on his current deal.


“Both Robbie and I have had some really positive private conversations and 
we’re both committed to the success of the club in 2016 and beyond,” Taylor 
said.


Immediately after asking to leave, speculation arose that Farah’s future lay 
at the Sydney Roosters, however now the 31-year-old is likely to finish his 
career as a one-club player.


It is believed former AFL official Shane McCurry played a crucial role in 
helping mend the Farah-Taylor relationship.


Chief executive Justin Pascoe apologised to the joint venture’s fans for the 
manner in which the dramatic stoush played out.


“On behalf of the club I want to apologise to our loyal Wests Tigers members 
and supporters for allowing this to be played out publicly,” he said.


“I am proud of the way that Jason, Robbie and the whole playing group have now 
embraced a new leadership approach that our new appointee Shane McCurry has 
introduced.”


Veterans Dene Halatau and Chris Lawrence, together with prop Sauaso Sue and 
star fullback James Tedesco, round out the seven-man leadership group.
 