
Momentum, rather than points, will be the most significant reward for the 
winners of Tuesday night's Merseyside derby, according toRoberto Martínez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-martinez>.

"Being able to play in the manner that we can do away from home in one of the 
hardest grounds from our point of view would be a massive achievement," said the
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> manager, after watching 
his much-altered side recover from seeing their team-mate Bryan Oviedo suffer a 
double fracture of his left leg early in the game to dismantle their League 
One opposition.

Almost as impressive in what he had to say afterwards as his team had been on 
a soft but not unplayable pitch, Martínez played down an injury list that is 
requiring him to demonstrate the depth of his squad to its fullest.

Oviedo joins Seamus Coleman, Antolín Alcaraz, Ross Barkley, Steven Pienaar, 
Gerard Deulofeu, Darron Gibson and Arouna Koné among those currently 
unavailable but, unlike Liverpool's Brendan Rodgers at Bournemouth earlier on 
Saturday, Martínez was still prepared to rest key players, such as Romelu 
Lukaku. While the bloodied and momentarily dazed Liverpool central defender 
Martin Skrtel was stapled together and sent back out to complete the game at 
the Goldsands Stadium, Martínez felt able to substitute Phil Jagielka at 
half-time as a precaution.

Different opposition of course, and asked whether the fact Rodgers had played 
what amounted to a full strength lineup, with Daniel Sturridge, Luis Suárez and 
Steven Gerrard all completing 90 minutes, meant the Blues might have an 
advantage at Anfield, Martínez shook his head.

"No. I think top players have the mentality to play three games a week. If 
anything there is a risk of injury, that's what you pick up at the end of the 
month, but it's not going to have an effect on the game at all."

To those looking in from the outside, however, Martínez appears to have more 
belief in his fringe players than his opposite number. Sylvain Distin, still 
recovering from a hamstring injury, is considered touch and go for Tuesday, and 
John Heitinga, who came on for Jagielka, is expected to be sold beforehand, but 
Martínez said the 19-year-old John Stones would cope with the occasion.

"When John came to the club [from Barnsley this time last year] he was more a 
right-back, but I always see him more as a centre-half and he's ready now, I 
think his performances against Southampton and Stoke and Norwich made it clear 
he is ready and I wouldn't have a problem with him playing at all."

Lacina Traoré, the tall Ivorian striker whose signing on loan from Monaco 
until the end of the season was completed on Friday, will not figure.

"We'll assess him, but I'm not too worried about him making Tuesday or not, 
more about being able to have him fully fit for the remainder of the season," 
Martínez said. "Especially probably the last nine games, that's where I really 
see him being important, because Romelu Lukaku, obviously he cannot play 
against Chelsea, so it's important [Traoré] is fully fit for that period."

Steven Naismith, who scored Everton's first two goals, was another to 
demonstrate his worth and the quick feet of former Celtic and Spartak Moscow 
winger Aiden McGeady, making his first start for the club, had the Everton fans 
in raptures.

While he is unlikely to get as much room in the Premier League as he did to 
run at theStevenage <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> defence, 
the manner in which he repeatedly left the unfortunate full-back Peter Hartley 
floundering suggests the Republic of Ireland international will add another 
dimension to the Everton attack.

The prospect of Martínez becoming the first manager to retain the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> while managing a different club 
is now a very real one, with a home draw against Swansea City in the fifth 
round to come. "What's important is the group has a real competitive edge and 
the squad is big enough to face the competition," the former Wigan Athletic 
manager said.

"From now until the end of the season, would being involved in every round of 
the FA Cup stop us from being successful in the league? The answer is no. We 
need to go as far as possible in the FA Cup to fulfil our potential in the 
league, that's how strongly I feel that could help us."

Man of the match Aiden McGeady (Everton)
 