
Robert Whittaker moved a step closer to a shot at the middleweight title after 
knocking out Derek Brunson in the first round atUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> Fight Night in Melbourne.

The New Zealand-born Australian, like his American opponent, came into the 
fight at Rod Laver Arena off the back of five straight wins and he was quick to 
extend that run to six, landing a left jab and then a kick to Brunson’s head 
with just over a minute remaining in the opening round.

'Die like a Samurai': Nurmagomedov issues challenge to Conor McGregor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/khabib-nurmagomedov-challenges-conor-mcgregor-ufc>
Whittaker followed with a flurry of blows before the referee stepped in, 
sealing a victory the Australian said would make waves in the UFC.

“I’ve made the whole middleweight [division] notice me,” Whittaker said. “The 
whole division understands that I’m for real and I’m here to stay. And I’m 
hunting. This is my run.”

Middleweight champion Michael Bisping is expected to take on top contender 
Yoel Romero early next year and Whittaker, who was due to fight Bisping last 
year before the Briton pulled out with an injury, said he is keen to meet the 
winner of that contest.

“I thought I could’ve taken it last year as well,” Whittaker said. “It’s a 
fight that I would like to have. When we were set to fight [in Melbourne] I got 
pumped to fight him and things happen.

“He’s not going to miss me forever. It is what it is. I’ll fight whoever they 
put in front of me and this is my run and I’m going forward. I want to fight 
these top-five dudes ... eventually for the belt.”

Earlier in the day, four-time Olympic judoka Dan Kelly had threatened to steal 
the show, when the hometown favourite was judged the winner by unanimous 
decision after three intense rounds against American Chris Camozzi.

Kelly took a brutal elbow to the face from Camozzi in the opening round which 
left the 39-year-old’s face dripping blood for the rest of the bout. But the 
veteran’s superior grappling ability soon came to the fore, allowing him to pin 
Camozzi to the canvas and unleash a flurry of blows to his head late in the 
fight.
 