
“I needed a change because my head was like this,” Roberto Soldado says, palms 
hovering an inch from his skull as if held there by some pulsating force field. 
He had been in London for two years but he could not stay any longer. He sought 
a release, “un respiro” he calls it, the chance to breathe, and Villarreal were 
offering it: £11m for Tottenham Hotspurand a return to Spain for him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/18/roberto-soldado-tottenham-hotspur-villarreal>
, a move to a big club that feels like a small one, the perfect ecosystem where 
he could find himself again.

Eight months on, it’s quiet and sunny at the old orange grove where Villarreal 
train. Four points clear in fourth, they’re preparing for the final three weeks 
of the season and theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> semi-final against 
Liverpool. For Soldado, who made five Real Madrid appearances in the 2007-08 
title-winning season, it would be the second trophy of a career that began with 
him heading in a David Beckham cross 11 years ago; for his club, it would be a 
first ever. “Villarreal have been stopped at the gates three times,” he says, 
referring to 2004, 2006 and 2011 European semi-finals. “Hopefully we can take a 
step further this time.”

Vila Real, population 51,367, is the second smallest town ever to have a team 
in a European semi-final (after Monaco), and this is a club that only reached 
the first division in 1998. “It’s a historic moment and it’s good that people 
thinkLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> are favourites, 
but this is no one-off, it’s not chance,” Soldado says. “Villarreal reached the 
Champions League semi 10 years ago and although they had a difficult year, 
going down [in 2012], they came straight back. Since then, we’ve got into the 
Europa League twice running, and we’re trying to return to the Champions League.

“The key is that the club is very well organised, very stable,” he explains. 
Fernando Roig has been president since 1997, buying the land where Soldado sits 
andbuilding a club virtually from scratch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/apr/06/championsleague200506.championsleague>
. The structure remains stable, the staff the same. From Roig and the 
vice‑president, José Manuel Llaneza, all the way through, there’s a clear 
identity on and off the pitch,a clear community too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/oct/25/villarreal-thrive-perfect-football-ecosystem>
.

After years of work here, Soldado points out, youth-team products are playing 
a more prominent role than ever, supplemented by signings. And although, at 30, 
he is a little different to their usual targets, he fits. “The club hasn’t 
changed model: they know they’re on the right path.”

How? Spanish football is not renowned for its patience, after all, but 
Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> are. “Perhaps in 
part because this is a small town, and fans aren’t as demanding,” he says.

There’s something in that, in the steady tranquillity and comfort of it all, 
which helps explain the attraction for Soldado. Not least because, it is soon 
apparent, he puts enough pressure on himself without others adding to it. 
Soldado is fascinating company, eloquent and analytical, and it is striking how 
deeply he thinks about the game,his game; how much he turns it over in his head 
and how much of it he thinks is in the head. “Psychological work is 
fundamental,” he says.

The head is a recurring theme. “I had the chance to come here and start again, 
which was what I needed: to play where there was not quite as much pressure, 
where I could work in peace, where the dressing room was down to earth with a 
desire to grow together, working to achieve something.” And, with the former 
Spurs striker a key man, they’re doing just that: this seasonthey went top for 
the first time in their history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/villarreal-top-la-liga-first-time-history>
, now they have a semi-final and probable Champions League qualification, while 
not long ago, one radio station asked: should Soldado return to the Spain 
squad? The person who said “no”, incidentally, was Soldado himself.

Yet if Soldado has found himself, it is not exactly the old Soldado he has 
found; nor, in truth, is he exactly the player Villarreal imagined. He has 
changed. He is not entirely sure why or exactly when, but he says the player he 
is now is “nothing like” the player he used to be and had always been. Even 
coming back has not brought back the €30m striker who scored 82 in his last 
three years at Valencia only to leave England with a solitary league strike in 
his final season, six the year before.

Roberto Soldado goes through the motion to bolster Tottenham spirits| Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/aug/25/roberto-soladado-tottenham-future-swansea>
Soldado has five league goals this season, two in Europe, but there’s no talk 
of crisis, just change. The goalscorer has become a provider, the attacking 
roles reversed: he has given more assists than anyone else in the team, with 
eight in the league and three in Europe. “My football now is nothing like what 
it was at Valencia. I was a pure striker who played only in the area and didn’t 
participate in the build-up; now I’m far more involved in the play,” he says.

“At Valencia, we played with a No9 and a No10. Here, we play 4-4-2 and one of 
us needs to drop between the lines. That’s become the job I do. [Cédric] 
Bakambu is very powerful and loves to run in to the space, so I play the other 
role: you have to complement your partner.”

The statistics back him up: it is not that Soldado rarely scores, it is that 
he rarely shoots. He’s averaging just 1.4 per game in La Liga, although the 
total rises to 3.2 in the Europa League. Yet there is no lamenting missed 
chances or wondering where he went – except, perhaps, from Soldado himself. 
“I’m enjoying my football,” he says, drawing out his own internal debate, “but 
it’s also true that I’ve spent my entire career as a No9, scoring goals ... and 
that’s what I love. I have to find a middle ground. Cédric and I are both 
playing well, the coach is happy, but he wants me to score goals. I blame 
myself, I’m critical, I demand more. I’m comfortable further from the area, 
taking part, combining, but I need that aggression to get into the area.”

As Soldado talks, the shift in style is revealed as a process with a momentum 
of its own, one he believes may have begun in England. “I think the change came 
from my time at Tottenham,” he explains. “English football is a lot more 
physical and I knew I couldn’t be as static as at Valencia because I’d get 
overpowered in the physical duels. Maybe it’s because of that – plus the bad 
luck, the misses – that I didn’t score so many. I thought I could achieve more 
avoiding the physical duel with bigger defenders, seeking space elsewhere. And 
I’ve brought that [new] way of playing here with me.

“It’s a manía I’ve been stuck with, a habit I haven’t shaken off,” he says, 
tracing his on-field movements with his finger. “The first thing I do when I 
get home, when the children are in bed and my wife is busy, is watch the game 
again, analyse it. And I realised, after reflecting on all of this, that I’d 
developed this habit of coming to collect to feet or going wide when all I used 
to think about was being level with the last defender, shooting at every 
opportunity. There’s something, maybe subconsciously, that makes me make those 
[new] runs. I can see I’m changing, and that’s good, but I’d like to be more 
vertical, more direct.”

The depth of the analysis, the amount of time that Soldado spends on it, is 
eloquent in itself, painting a portrait of him. The doubts and the dedication. 
Bordering on the obsessive perhaps. Like it must for ever be on his mind, 
eating at him, every decision dissected, every bad moment a beating. “Yes,” he 
concedes “I’m demanding of myself.” So did you go through the same analytical 
process at Spurs, revising matches and mistakes? “Yes.” And what was the 
conclusion? Why didn’t it work out?

Soldado pauses for a moment, leans forward. “I think in the end what let me 
down at Tottenham was my head; for whatever reason, it wasn’t right. Perhaps my 
transfer fee was too big, [or] maybe the expectations I put on myself put me 
over the edge in a sense. I found I was getting easy chances on the pitch and 
I’d miss them; the tiniest things would go against me...”

It wasn’t all bad. In his first season Soldado lived in Hampstead, in his 
second near Regent’s Park. He had Santi Cazorla for a neighbour and support – 
“it’s impossible not to have a laugh with him,” he says – and he insists that 
he liked London, even if he never took to tea, calls the food “different”, and 
laughs at the memory of eggs and beans in the club canteen: “If they saw you 
with that here, they’d shoot you,” he jokes.

He says he left mates behind and there’s a moment when he’s looking back on 
his career and talking about his best friends in football – “Álvaro Arbeloa: 
I’ve known him since I was 17, his wife’s godmother to my children and he 
helped me grow up, telling me to start behaving like an adult and a 
professional” – about how what matters most at any club is the dressing room. 
“It’s important there’s no player that you look at and think: ‘Pffff, that 
guy’s trouble …’” he notes. And when it is put to him that there’s always one, 
he shoots back: “Not here. Not one. Honestly, not one ... And there wasn’t at 
Spurs either.”

The fans, a word he uses in English, supported him too. Maybe they could sense 
that his problem was not that he wasn’t trying; maybe he was trying too hard. 
“I was missing chances, things were going wrong, but no one could say I didn’t 
work. That mattered to me and maybe it’s why people treated me so well, despite 
everything. Even though I wasn’t scoring, I’d go to warm up and they’d sing my 
song,” he says, smiling as he recalls the tune.

But on the pitch, things just wouldn’t go right and the frustration built. “I 
won’t forget their support but it infuriates you more because you get so much 
support and don’t repay it,” Soldado says. He insists that he doesn’t regret 
going at all; but he does regret how it went. André Villas-Boas, the manager 
who signed him, was sacked. Harry Kane was coming through to take his place up 
front. Soldado’s father, a former amateur footballer so important in his 
career, didn’t like flying and rarely went. He also admits: “My family hadn’t 
completely adapted either and when things aren’t going perfectly for you 
professionally and you get home and the family aren’t completely happy either, 
it’s difficult.

“All these little things … it all mounts up and mounts up until you reach a 
point when you say: ‘I can’t do this any more.’ So last summer, I said: ‘I need 
a change, because my head was like this … ’”

Not that Soldado wiped the London years from his mind; a new start didn’t mean 
forgetting. Preparing for Thursday, he admits he hasn’t watched much of 
Liverpool yet, mainly because his little spare time is spent watching Spurs. 
Enjoying it, too. “It’s been a fantastic season,” he says. “You could see last 
year that Tottenham were a very young team that could reach a high level once 
they added a little experience.

“I used to watch Harry Kane train. You’d think: ‘What he lacks will come’; his 
finishing stood out. Every chance ended in the net last season and this year 
that’s been multiplied by two. Maybe some people didn’t see it coming, but he 
deserves it. He has a fantastic attitude, humble. You look at Dele Alli and, 
the truth is, we’ve all been surprised, coming from the lower divisions to play 
so well.”

“After Gareth Bale was sold, Spurs invested in a lot of players – I think 
eight arrived the summer I signed. This year there were fewer signings and 
they’ve benefited from that. The period of adaptation has passed and they’ve 
been left with a very solid team,” Soldado continues. “You have to look at 
Mauricio Pochettino’s excellent work, too. They’ve benefited from Chelsea and 
Manchester United’s inconsistency but what they’ve done is fantastic.”

Even if, he admits, the title looks behind them now, thanks to Leicester. 
“Incredible,” Soldado says. Can it be explained? Could you imagine it happening 
in Spain? “You don’t imagine things like this until they happen,” he replies. 
“Leicester are an example for any club: a small club, certainly in budget, that 
were in the Championship recently and now have the league within in touching 
difference: it’s every team’s dream, proof that with hard work, sacrifice and 
solidarity, with all the values a team should have, game after game, all season 
long, you can do it.”

“They’re example to us all, an inspiration. You look at them and think: ‘If 
they can do it, why can’t we?’ And this season at home we’ve beaten Real 
Madrid, Sevilla, Atlético Madrid, almost Barça [2-2] ...”

And now Liverpool? “Why not? We know it won’t be easy; they’ve improved under 
Jürgen Klopp. They have great quality in attack. They’re an immense club but 
we’ve been strong defensively, conceding few at El Madrigal. This season isn’t 
chance. We’ve beaten big teams here. If we can be successful against Madrid, 
why not Liverpool? It’ll be very competitive, tight, but we’re convinced we can 
go through.”

History awaits, and so does a place in the Champions League. Where, who knows, 
Spurs may be waiting too. “I hope so,” Soldado says. “I’d love to go back.”
 