
Saturday came and went without any answers to the most pressing question down 
at the bottom: who will soon have to drop intoBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 2? Hamburg (4-1 v 
Bayern), Nürnberg (2-0 v Hannover) and Braunschweig (1-0 v Augsburg) all lost 
at home to keep the mood as disheartening – or optimistic – as it was before. 
All three can still be relegated automatically, all three can still give 
themselves another chance in two relegation play-off matches. Hamburg, the 
biggest losers on the day, probably ended up slight winners; they can hold on 
to 16th spot if the hapless remaining trio all manage to come away with no 
points next Saturday.

Relying solely on the weakness of those behind you has been a profitable 
strategy this season.Stuttgart <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart>
, for example, managed to lose yet again, 2-1 at home to Wolfsburg, with some 
calamitous last-minute madness, yet they still ended up celebrating. The three 
clubs in the next three spaces down are so bad that even the fast-sinking 
Swabians couldn't quite catch up with them. So no need for them to kiss their 
top flight membership goodbye just yet.

No need to kiss your wife in the Borussia Dortmund VIP section, either, but 
then that's just how Robert Lewandowski rolls 
<http://www.bild.de/sport/fussball/1-bundesliga/kuesse-und-traenen-zum-abschied-35818754.bild.html>
. On Valentine's Day, in case you missed it, Mr and Mrs "Lewy" had opted for an 
unusual angle (or two) and sent out theirown, sporty greetings 
<https://www.facebook.com/rl9official/photos/a.295391460506249.75449.159093717469358/698192300226161/?type=1&theater>
. The Polish striker was back for more of the same before the 3-2 win over TSG 
Hoffenheim, his last-ever home game for the Black and Yellows.

Thankfully, the latest Premier League trend of inviting your mother to the lap 
of honour round the stadium at the end of the season has yet to catch on in the 
Bundesliga. But the regrettable modern practice to bring your kids and/or other 
halves on to the pitch has become a firmly established ritual in Germany, too. 
Yes, it makes for cute pictures and the kids and Wags undoubtedly enjoy it, but 
something about this wanton mix of football and family has never felt quite 
right. This column would go as far as to describe it as selfish, even though 
few observers would consciously think in those terms and fewer still would dare 
to express them. Rocking up with your reproductive partner and your own flesh 
and blood might be fun for you but it's not for anybody else; you're cruelly 
undermining the impossible but much-cherished illusion that the club and the 
communion with the fans could be, might just be your real and most important 
family, that there's no bigger love and romance for you outside the stadium. Of 
course that's a silly, childish way to think of footballers and clubs but, like 
all unrequited love, it's a powerful fantasy nevertheless. Why disabuse people 
of it, why hurt their feelings?

What's more, seeing a player's cuddly and caring side also runs counter to the 
way fans want to perceive him. Nobody dreams of having the "dad of the year" in 
their ranks (with the possible exception of John Terry's most ardent supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/31/john-terry-england-captaincy>
). Ideally, your player is more of a warrior monk, living a dedicated life of 
near celibacy off the pitch and saving all their physical strength for sticking 
it to the opposition.

But we digress. Lewandowski actually had the good sense to leave his wife, 
Anna, inside the sanctity of the VIP section and accept the best wishes at his 
send-off all by himself on the pitch. "Thank you for four wonderful years," 
said the stadium announcer, and the whole stadium applauded – before, during 
and after the game, when the 25-year-old gave his shirt to a supporter who 
couldn't hold back the tears. It was a rousing farewell for the Bayern-bound 
forward and a testament to the Dortmund supporters' sense of perspective.

"I'm proud that something like that is still possible in the sometimes bloated 
world of football," said Jürgen Klopp. "You look back at the film of the last 
four years and find: yes, he's given his all, that's worthy of applause. Robert 
deserves this outstanding farewell. He's a good guy, a great player and he gave 
everything over the last four years."

Lewandowski was close to tears as well. "What has happened here, what I heard 
here has been incredible," he said. "It's a tough but also beautiful moment." 
Undoubtedly, he was relieved too. He would have expected more negativity.

The crowd's appreciation was in marked contrast to the ugly hostility that 
Mario Götze encountered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/may/18/mario-gotze-borussia-dortmund-bayern-munich>
 after his move to Bayern was announced a year ago. Lewandowski's much more 
drawn-out goodbye – it had been obvious that he would leave since February 2013 
– was one of the reasons and, unlike the German international, he was never 
seen as somebody who betrayed his footballing principles and strong local 
identity. As early as 2012, when he scored two goals in the cup final against 
Bayern, there was a widespread acceptance that Lewandowski would probably not 
see out his career in Westphalia. The Black and Yellows didn't expect undying 
loyalty from him and ultimately didn't begrudge him the move to rivals Bayern, 
either; the fact that he never stopped playing well during the 18-month 
transfer saga made them forgive and forget.

"He came as [a] class striker and leaves as [a] world-class striker," said 
Klopp, beaming with pride. Lewandowski's 81 goals have taken Dortmund to one 
championship, one double and one Champions League final, and he could yet win 
them one more title. A goal or two against Bayern in the DFB Cup final on 17 
May would upgrade him to genuine legend status at the Westfalenstadion.

There were also teary goodbyes in Stuttgart (the striker Cacau), Borussia 
Mönchengladbach (the Barcelona-bound keeper Marc-André ter Stegen) and Werder 
Bremen (the forward Aaron Hunt). Contrary to some wishful thinking in the 
north-west of England, Pep Guardiola has not quite reached the "here's a 
bouquet of flowers, thank you" stage after Bayern Munich's 4-0 defeat against 
Real Madrid just yet. Yet that particular humiliation could usher some other 
high-profile departures. Bayern's Catalan coach has reacted to the bad result 
in a manner not too dissimilar to José Mourinho after Chelsea's loss to 
Atlético: not less, butmore Pep-football, Guardiola concluded, would be needed 
in the future. If he follows through with this process of tactical extremism, 
one or two hitherto untouchables in the dressing room may soon get a call from 
their favourite florist.

The cup final against Dortmund will have a huge bearing on the squad 
composition for next season. Guardiola may yet be convinced that his methods 
are adaptable to the personnel at hand but a heavy defeat would probably see 
him take the opposite view.

Results: Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> 1-4 Bayern, 
Frankfurt 0-2 Leverkusen, Braunschweig 0-1 Augsburg, Nürnberg 0-2 Hannover, 
Freiburg 0-2 Schalke, Stuttgart 1-2 Wolfsburg, Bremen 2-0 Hertha, Gladbach 3-1 
Mainz, Dortmund 3-2 Hoffenheim.
 