
Roberto Di Matteo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-di-matteo> 
shrugged off the post-match jeers from Aston Villa’s travelling supporters and 
insisted he will carry out his pledge of finishing in the top six of the 
Championship if given the chance.

Defeat to Preston triggered an angry response from those of the 5,500 
claret-and-blue clad fans who remained to the bitter end. Patience is clearly 
running thin following three league victories in 48 matches, albeit 
three-quarters of those games predate Di Matteo’s reign. The promotion push 
that £50m of player investment suggested is not materialising and there can 
have been no sorrier display from Villa this season.

Di Matteo sent out his team after showing them a good luck video message from 
Tony Xia, the club owner who appointed him and sanctioned the spending. Xia is 
on overseas business for the next few weeks and missed this debacle. It would 
not be advisable for him to watch the highlights. Villa were torn to shreds in 
the first half.

However, Di Matteo does not fear the sack, despite suggestions he needed to 
pick up at least one victory from games against Barnsley, where they recorded a 
fifth straight draw in midweek, and here.

“I am the first one to take responsibility for it. I take all the blame, and 
that is how it is when you’re the manager. I stand up in front of my players,” 
he said, after goals from Ben Pearson, his first for Preston, and Jordan Hugill 
settled the first meeting of these clubs for 42 years.

“I have total support from the club. There are no other indications, so we 
will have to try to be better after international week and pick up more points 
than we did so far. It is a good team and it will come good.

“I have faith in the team, I believe in it, and come the end of the season 
they’ll be up there. It is still a long season and there are so many more 
points to play for. We are 10 points from sixth place and so it is still all 
possible.”

Villa were anaemic in the opening quarter-hour and could have been three or 
four goals down. As it was, they trailed by one courtesy of Pearson’s composed 
finish after possession was coughed up by the visitors. Then, when Pearson 
picked the pocket of Ashley Westwood in the 39th minute, a Preston counter 
climaxed with Hugill sweeping home.

“It’s certainly a step back compared to previous games. We had the ball and 
gave it on a silver platter for them to score,” said Di Matteo.

The Villa manager also bemoaned a disallowed effort when Jonathan Kodjia 
slipped the ball into the Preston net after the referee, Peter Bankes, had 
blown for an infringement, and pointed to Ross McCormack’s saved penalty five 
minutes into injury time as evidence of a second-half riposte.

It would not have helped the mood of those returning back down the M6 to the 
Midlands that two of Preston’s tormentors were products of Villa’s previously 
heralded youth system. Daniel Johnson, probing between midfield and the forward 
line, was exceptional, and Callum Robinson, darting in from the left, always 
looked likely to increase the home side’s advantage.

Indeed, it would have been an injustice if McCormack had reduced it at the 
death, after his fellow substitute Rudy Gestede was brought down in the area. 
Chris Maxwell threw himself to his left to repel only Villa’s second attempt on 
target. Seconds later, Di Matteo was subject to a cacophony from the stands.

“I lost a game a few weeks ago and people were calling for my head. It’s the 
crazy nature of football,” said the Preston manager, Simon Grayson. “Those of 
us in jobs now want to stay in them and if you’re out of one you want to get 
back into work.”

Idrissa Sylla earns late derby win for QPR as Fulham miss two penalties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/fulham-qpr-match-report-idrissa-sylla>
Hull City 0-2 Chelsea, Premier League and more: Saturday clockwatch – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/01/hull-city-v-chelsea-premier-league-and-more-saturday-clockwatch-live> 