
Only a few weeks ago, Bayer Leverkusen’s results vector was pointing so 
resolutely downward that there was talk of things being over for Roger in the 
cockpit, as experts queued up to explain that the dive down the table was all 
about Schmidt. The coach’s refusal to leave the pitch on the referee’s orders
during the 1-0 home defeat to Dortmund in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/bayer-leverkusen-borussia-dortmund-match-suspended>
 had brought a three-week suspension in the league, two defeats and one draw, 
and a general loss in confidence that also saw the club knocked out of the 
Europa League. His system, dismissed as “brute pressing” by Die Zeit, lacked 
finesse, defensive balance and creativity, the critics sneered.

Bayer’s general manager, Jonas Boldt, was forced to deny that the 49-year-old 
was about to be shown the door at the BayArena. “We never considered parting 
ways with him,” he insisted last month. “When you see his passion day by day, 
his team talks, his practice sessions and the way he improves every player, we 
feel vindicated [in sticking with him].” The Leverkusen official did admit, 
however, that Schmidt had “made mistakes”, hinting at a level of stubbornness 
that didn’t help anyone.

All throughout the first half at the Veltins-Arena on Saturday, the well-known 
failings of Schmidt’s team were being brutally exposed by a Schalke team 
bursting with youthful zest. The Royal Blues scored two goals and even missed a 
penalty – Klaas-Jan Huntelaar failed from the spot for a fifth time in seven 
attempts – while the visitors were disorganised in the middle of the park, 
where Lars Bender’s lack of match sharpness was painfully obvious, open at the 
back and limp up front. In this key match between two Champions League 
contenders, Leverkusen were once again bottling it, Leverkusen-style.

But Schalke’s “appetite for self-destruction” (Der Spiegel) proved much bigger 
than Bayer’s. Schmidt calmly explained to his men during the break that André 
Breitenreiter’s side were always prone to “insecurity” and that the volatile 
mood of the crowd could work in Leverkusen’s favour as well.

And it did: as the rejigged visitors – Stefan Kiessling had come on as second 
striker and Kevin Kampl moved deeper to replace Bender – turned up the pace at 
the restart, Schalke inexplicably fell asleep. “We came over them like an 
intercity express,” said Bayer winger Julian Brandt, the scorer of the
Anschlusstreffer (2-1, 54min).

Just 393 seconds later, Bayer had turned the result on its head with further 
goals from Karim Bellarabi (helped by Ralf Fährmann going down with all the 
agility of a railway gate, to stay with the train analogies) and the 
irrepressible Chicharito. Schalke did raise themselves for a final push at the 
very end but Bernd Leno in the Bayer goal thwarted a fierce Huntelaar shot from 
point blank range.

Wolfsburg hope to rouse themselves for Real Madrid after season of freefall | 
Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/05/wolfsburg-hope-to-rouse-themselves-for-real-madrid-after-season-of-freefall>
“We had the chances to kill the game off but didn’t take them,” said Schmidt, 
“so we had to make sure we didn’t concede another one.” The win, their sixth 
successive in the league, all but confirmed third place for them.Fourth-placed 
Hertha (beaten 2-0 by Bayern) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/23/hertha-berlin-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
 are five points adrift and will probably be overtaken by Borussia 
Mönchengladbach (3-1 winners against Hoffenheim at home); Schalke are consigned 
to another season without the Champions League.

Süddeutsche Zeitung seemed unsure as to the extent of Schmidt’s role in 
Leverkusen’s return to theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> elite (“the quality 
of the team and that of the talent of young players such as Calhanoglu, Brandt, 
Wendell and Tah could be not be doubted, sensibly, but there was a lot of doubt 
about the sometimes cantankerous coach Schmidt,” wrote the broadsheet) but a 
second top-four finish in as many years for the trained engineer from Kierspe 
points at some serious managerial talent.

Leverkusen have always had decent squads thanks to their superlative scouting 
in South America and ability to poach German players close to greatness. At the 
same time, making a functioning team out of professionals who tend to regard 
the BayArena as a gateway to bigger and better clubs has been rather difficult. 
Schmidt’s blueprint of hard-running and pack-hunting was not perhaps the 
obvious fit for this technically gifted side. But it is one that has brought a 
sense of social cohesion and urgency, the odd chaotic spell within some games 
notwithstanding. Class: sometimes it shows in April.

On top of that, Schmidt has succeeded in creating real value, as far as his 
players are concerned. The elegant but lightweightSon Heung-min was happily 
offloaded for €30m to Spurs last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/28/tottenham-sign-son-heung-min-bayer-leverkusen-22m>
after a strong campaign, and half the team would command similar transfer fees 
– if Premier League clubs are doing the buying – today. From relying on 
Kiessling’s goals and Calhanoglu’s dead-balls, Leverkusen have developed into a 
much more flexible side, with their own version of the BBC (Bellarabi, Brandt 
and Chicharito) tearing through opposition defences.

The latter has resurrected his career with 26 goals in 40 games, and the 
19-year-old Brandt has found a consistency that is at last in tune with his 
ability. He has now scored in five consecutive games and is in contention for 
Germany’s Euro squad. “Will the baby-faced Brandt become Löw’s new Odonkor?” 
Die Welt asked on Monday, in memory of the World Cup 2006 supersub David 
Odonkor. Brandt’s a much better player than the former Dortmund winger – who’s 
now in charge of seventh-division TuS Dornberg – even if he’s not quite a 
household name just yet.

Bild, in what must rank as one of those “intensive research” exercises beloved 
by its columnist Alfred Draxler, ascertained thatBrandt Zwieback  
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=brandt+zwieback&safe=off&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj7yJ2FmarMAhUjS5oKHcOXB0gQ_AUIBygB&biw=2173&bih=1280>
 and namesake Willy, the former West Germany chancellor, return more Google 
hits than the former Wolfsburg youth player. A few specious rumour-mill 
mentions will undoubtedly rectify that in no time at all.

For the Bundesliga’s sake, one must hope that Leverkusen will be able to keep 
their team together a little longer, to once again grow into a side that can 
realistically challenge for the title, as they did at the turn of the century.

In the Chilean midfielder Charles Aránguiz, they have certainly imported 
another superstar in the making. One wonders what might have been if the 
27-year-old had not picked up a serious ankle injury at the start of the season 
and only returned to full fitness 10 days ago. He was outstanding at Schalke, 
alongside the “BBC”, gifted sub Benjamin Henrichs (19) and centre-back Jonathan 
Tah.

Leverkusen’s journey to where they were last year and should be in this one – 
just behind Bayern and Dortmund – might have been much rockier than 
anticipated, thanks to Schmidt’s touchline misdemeanour and tactical 
intransigence. But the fact that they are getting there again while so many 
blue-chip clubs are slugging it out at the wrong end of the table, again, 
should still be considered a minor triumph of smart transfer policy and 
coaching.

Talking points

• Borussia Dortmund’s captain Mats Hummels is losing “30 minutes of sleep 
every night” as he ponders a move away from the Westfalenstadion. The CEO 
Hans-Joachim Watzke has vowed to fight as hard as never before to keep the 
German centre-back in a yellow kit next season, but Bayern are reportedly ready 
to re-sign the player they lost for only €5m in 2008, for six times that 
figure. There were times, not that long ago, when Dortmund would have been 
quite happy to do that deal but Hummels’ form this season and his importance in 
the dressing room is such that his departure would be a serious blow. Whether 
the centre-back is merely letting down Dortmund gently or preparing the ground 
for a heroic contract extension beyond 2017 remains to be seen.

• Definitely out, before the season has even finished, is Nicklas Bendtner at 
Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/25/wolfsburg-confirm-departure-nicklas-bendtner>
. The Dane probably lost more than 30 minutes of sleep per night during his 
less-than-happy stay at the Volkswagen-Stadion – he slept through training a 
couple of times – and the Lower Saxons have now decided that they no longer 
wantedto be a House of Lord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/14/zlatan-bendtner-sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-offs>
. “Both Nicklas and ourselves had high hopes of his engagement at VfL 
Wolfsburg, but after two years we have had to realise that the expectations 
were neither fulfilled for him, nor for us, and a continued cooperation made no 
sense for either side,” read a club statement.

• Definitely out, Part II: Hannover 96. The Lower Saxons were relegated for 
the first time since 1989 after drawing 2-2 with Ingolstadt on Saturday. The 
Bundesliga has lost another big(ish) name but sympathy for their plight will be 
in short supply: club president Martin Kind has expended so much time fighting 
skirmishes with the supporters and pushing for a relaxation of ownership rules 
that he neglected the simple things: hiring a decent sporting director and 
manager, for example.

Results: Hamburg 2-1 Bremen, Köln 4-1 Darmstadt, Ingolstadt 2-2 Hannover, 
Stuttgart 0-3 Dortmund, Wolfsburg 0-2 Augsburg, Hertha 0-2 Bayern, Schalke 2-3 
Leverkusen, Gladbach 3-1 Hoffenheim, Frankfurt 2-1 Mainz.
 