
Gerard Deulofeu spared Everton the ignominy of another early exit in the 
League Cup but not from legitimate questions over John Stones’ focus on an 
enthralling night inBarnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley>. 
The Spanish winger produced three assists in a commanding appearance to 
transform a tie that appeared beyond his team at half-time. For Stones, 
however, back at the club where it all began, it was a return to forget.

The England international was vulnerable throughout against the League One 
side, who led 2-0 and 3-2 only to succumb to Deulofeu deliveries from the 
right. The £4.2m summer signing from Barcelona created goals for Steven 
Naismith, Romelu Lukaku and Marc Roberts, with the Barnsley defender’s 
unfortunate own goal handingEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> the advantage in extra time. 
Lukaku sealed matters with his second of the game, capping a fine fightback, 
although Conor Hourihane and Ben Pearson both struck the woodwork as Lee 
Johnson’s men made the visitors fight all the way for a trip to Reading in 
round three.

Everton to reject transfer request from Chelsea target John Stones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/26/everton-john-stones-reject-transfer-request>
There was no faulting the Premier League team’s character under pressure but 
it was the wrong time and place for Stones to produce his first poor 
performance of an already demanding season. Roberto Martínez refused to 
criticise a player who had submitted a transfer request in a bid to join 
Chelsea 24 hours earlier, describing his performance as “exemplary”, but this 
was a nervous homecoming from the 21-year-old. Transfer-deadline day and a 
resolution to a long-running transfer saga cannot come quickly enough for all 
parties.

Stones and Phil Jagielka were Everton’s supposed insurance against the League 
One side, the trusted partnership retained in a team fielding seven changes to 
Sunday’s Premier League defeat by Manchester City. Yet they and the goalkeeper 
Joel Robles were responsible for a weak defensive display that crumbled under 
the slightest pressure from Barnsley in the first half and left the Premier 
League club two goals down inside 28 minutes.

Sam Winnall was first to capitalise on Everton’s subdued defending when a 
routine cross into the penalty area from Marley Watkins sparked chaos. Stones 
failed to clear at the first attempt, Jagielka and Matthew Pennington, making 
his full Everton debut at right-back, got in each other’s way when trying to 
deal with the second ball and it broke loose for the Barnsley centre-forward. 
Winnall’s shot lacked power but rolled under the leaping Stones and nestled in 
the bottom corner with Robles stranded.

Oakwell’s delirium increased with the next attack. Roberts crossed deep to the 
far post after his initial throw-in to the six-yard area was cleared back to 
his feet. Josh Scowen beat Bryan Oviedo to the delivery and when his header 
dropped in front of goal, Watkins was unmarked to force the ball past Robles’ 
pathetic guard from close range. Stones had switched off and allowed Watkins to 
score his first goal for Barnsley since arriving on a free transfer from 
Inverness Caledonian Thistle.

Everton were booed off at half-time, greeted by banners calling for the 
chairman Bill Kenwright and chief executive Robert Elstone to go when they 
reappeared for the second half, and given fresh hope when Kevin Mirallas 
reduced the arrears soon after the restart. The Belgium international produced 
an unstoppable finish into the top corner when Lewin Nyatanga inadvertently 
diverted Oviedo’s cross his way on the penalty spot.

The introduction of Ross Barkley and particularly Deulofeu at half-time 
energised the visitors and they levelled when Naismith met the Spaniard’s 
inviting cross with a fine header. But parity lasted barely 60 seconds. 
Barnsley refused to be cowed and Reece Wabara broke into the area before 
squaring for Dan Crowley to steer his finish into the bottom corner.

Another perfect Deulofeu cross invited Lukaku to sweep home from six yards and 
as both sides exchanged quality attacks, the Belgium striker, Naismith, Barkley 
and Mirallas all went close to sealing Everton’s passage in normal time. Extra 
time finally eased their anxiety while continuing to show Barnsley’s 
fearlessness under Johnson.
 