
With his swivelling hips, wobbly belly, fancy footwork and a grin the size of 
Rio, it's no wonder Ronaldo fits in so well when the carnival comes to town. 
Add to that his penchant for bikini-clad babes, electric blue feather 
head-dresses and the kind of outrageously over-sized shoulder pads normally 
reserved for the heroines of Dynasty, and it's easy to see why the goofy one 
has never missed the Rio carnival.

This year, though, is different - for the first time Ronaldo won't be 
strutting his stuff down Rio way. There'll be a giant goofy model parading 
through the streets and the "Tradición" Samba School will be singing a special 
ode, but the man himself won't be enjoying this veritable cliché fest - 
belly-bopping beauties, samba stars, Jesus on the hill, Copacabana beach and 
er, um, all that other Brazilian stuff. Instead, he's going to stay at home and 
"think about next week's games".

Which isn't much of a trade-off, but Marca and AS are loving it. You see, 
they've interpreted Ronaldo's decision as a victory for Real Madrid. "No to 
Samba, yes to hard work!", shouted the cover of Friday's Marca. Taking its lead 
from the BBC school of stereotypes in TV production, Marca dusted off the 
office copy of Black Magic Woman (is that the only "Brazilian"[?!] song they've 
got?), and cunningly spelt "work" Portuguese style. "For the first time ever", 
it gloated, grinning at Barça fans and shaking its booty, "Ronaldo decides in 
favour of his club and rules out the carnival".

Of course, few really believe that it was Ronaldo's decision. Missing the 
carnival smacks of club rules, ones made with more than a eye on the 
Brazilian's recent "troubles" - troubles which include Franz Beckenbauer's 
attacks on his weight, Del Bosque's admittance that Ronaldo's the only one "not 
integrated in the tasks of the team" (comments which received the Orwellian 
rewriting of history treatment from the club and the press), veiled criticisms 
from team-mates and the hidden camera which caught him boogying away in a 
Madrid night club. All of which, allied to some sluggish performances and the 
emergence of Javier Portillo, left the Samba Star [sic] struggling with the 
horrendously fickle Bernabéu crowd on his back. Now wasn't the time to be 
swanning off to Brazil, however rhythmic his belly.

Luckily, and much to the delight of pun-seekers everywhere, Ronnie hasn't let 
his Spanish house-arrest get the better of his carioca instincts. For on 
Saturday night - carnival in Spain as well as in Rio - Ronaldo hit his first 
hat-trick of the season as Madrid defeated a truly pitiful Alavés 5-1 in a half 
empty stadium, populated mainly by people in fancy dress: there were pharaohs, 
a gaggle of nuns, and pirates aplenty. And three Del Bosques - Alavés coach 
Mané and his number two both came as the Real Madrid manager.

Plus, of course, there was the obligatory clown - Comedy Keeper Richard 
Dutruel. Yep, this column's one-time favourite mirth-merchant, who'd started to 
play reasonably well and thus disappeared from sight, is back. He rekindled old 
times with a display of slapstick genius as Ronaldo filled his boots: AS 
described Comedy Keeper's day as "Horrible. He didn't stop the easy ones or the 
hard ones. Alavés's recent thrashings are no surprise".

But it wasn't really Comedy Keeper's fault. Well, not only his. The major 
culprits were Ronaldo's slinky, snaky, samba hips.

Wearing 11, Ronaldo took Madrid top for the first time in eleven months 
(thanks to Real Sociedad's defeat in Valladolid) with his eleventh of the 
season in the eleventh minute. His wobbly waist multiple step-over left Llorens 
on his arse and Ronaldo free to beat Dutruel thanks to a timely divot. The 
buck-toothed one then did the same to Abelardo in the second half - this time 
courtesy of about sixty-five hip-bending step-overs - and completed his 
hat-trick with 15 minutes left, through Dutruel's legs.

Ronaldo wasn't sambaing alone, mind. Raúl grabbed two, taking him past Hugo 
Sánchez in Madrid's history list, but all the talk was of the Brazilian who had 
celebrated his very own carnival, dancing through the Alavés defence in 
Vitoria. Inevitably, the cheap headlines, cheaper photo-shoots, dodgy puns and 
rubbish jokes - about which, let's face it, this column knows a thing or two - 
have come in as thick and fast as Ben Johnson.

Still, if 'Samba Goal', 'Carnival Dance' and 'Carnival King' were bad enough, 
even more contrived was the "Ronaldo dresses up as a cyclist" headline. The 
Spanish for step-over is bicicleta, you see - clever, huh? Well, no, maybe not, 
but at least the carioca clichés allowed football fans to pretend that last 
night's typically appalling Seville derby never even happened - even if they 
did sit through all sodding 96 minutes of it.

Results: Espanyol 2 - 0 Mallorca

Athletic 2 - 3 Recreativo

Alavés 1 - 5 Real Madrid

Osasuna 2 - 2 Barcelona

Celta 1 - 1 Valencia

Villarreal 2 - 1 Rayo

Valladolid 3 - 0 Real Sociedad

Racing 1 - 2 Deportivo

Atlético 2 - 1 Málaga

Betis 0 - 1 Sevilla


Madrid's greatest restaurant is under threat from council jobsworths. Save La 
Carreta!lacarreta@latinmail.com <mailto:lacarreta@latinmail.com>

Email Sid sidlowe@telefonica.net <mailto:sidlowe@telefonica.net>
 