
In painstaking and at times horrifying detail, Alexis Jay, the professor whose 
inquiry investigated the sexual exploitation of children over 16 years in
Rotherham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/rotherham>, has set out the alarming 
scale and heartbreaking individual instances of the abuse that began in the 
early 1990s.

Barely concealing her shock, the former chief social work adviser to the 
Scottish government, who led the inquiry, describes the "blatant" collective 
failures of the care system, police and local politicians in their response to 
the cases of child sexual exploitation in the Yorkshire town.

The independent inquiry was commissioned by Rotherham metropolitan borough 
council in October 2013 after the conviction of five men for grooming teenage 
girls for sex in 2010.

The inquiry gives a "conservative" estimate of 1,400 children being sexually 
exploited between 1997 and 2013. The children in just over a third of those 
cases were previously known to services because of reports of child protection 
issues and neglect. "The abuse continues to this day," it says. The report 
makes the following conclusions.

Failure to act 


The scale and seriousness of the problem was underplayed by senior managers in 
Rotherham, and police gave no priority to child sexual abuse, regarding many 
victims with contempt and failing to act on their reports of abuse.

"It is hard to describe the appalling nature of the abuse that child victims 
suffered," writes Jay. "They were raped by multiple perpetrators, trafficked to 
other towns and cities in the north of England, abducted, beaten, and 
intimidated."

She gives examples of children doused in petrol and threatened with being set 
alight, threatened with guns, made to witness brutally violent rapes, and told 
they would be next if they spoke to anyone. "Girls as young as 11 were raped by 
large numbers of male perpetrators."

More than 100 people were interviewed for the report, either individually or 
in groups, and a confidential email address and freepost address was set up for 
the public's evidence.

Current abuse 


The inquiry found that such abuse was not confined to the past. In May 2014 
the specialist child sexual exploitation team had 51 cases, with more in hand 
with other children's social care teams. There were 16 children thought to be 
at serious risk of sexual exploitation or who had been exploited in this way. 
In 2013 the police received 157 reports of child sexual exploitation in the 
area.

The report says the council's own report, following its investigation into the 
conviction of five local men for grooming underage girls for sex, was "weak" 
since it examined only one case. "There was also a much wider group of children 
identified in Operation Central who had been sexually exploited, but whose 
cases did not get to court. It would have been appropriate to identify lessons 
to be learned from what happened with this group as well."

Historic abuse 


Several experienced workers told the inquiry that they had discovered examples 
of child sexual exploitation as far back as the early 1990s and that there was 
awareness from that time on that children in local residential units were at 
risk of being targets.

Reports into the extent of child sexual exploitation in the borough were 
published by various bodies in 2002, 2003 and 2006. The report claims that 
these studies "could not have been clearer" in their description of the 
situation in Rotherham, adding that the first of these was "effectively 
suppressed" because some senior officers disbelieved some of its data. The 
other two reports, which described links between child sexual exploitation and 
drugs, guns and criminality in the area, were ignored.

The inquiry also found that seminars were held for elected members and senior 
police officers in 2004 and 2005, which again "presented the abuse in the most 
explicit terms". The report concludes that no one could, therefore, deny 
knowledge of the problem.

Perpetrators 


The majority of the perpetrators were described by victims as being Asian. The 
inquiry found that several staff described their nervousness talking about the 
race of the men "for fear of being thought racist". Others remembered clear 
direction from their managers not to do so.

Councillors did not engage directly with the Pakistani community to discuss 
how best they could jointly address the issue, and some seemed to think it was 
a "one-off" problem.

The inquiry did find there had been council and police improvements over the 
past four years. "The police are now well-resourced for CSE [child sexual 
exploitation] and well trained, though prosecutions remain low in number." It 
added that council funding cuts would "inevitably impact on frontline services".

Recommendations


Of the 15 recommendations, some appear basic for child protection systems. The 
report calls on Rotherham to do more to protect children in care and the most 
vulnerable, to increase collaboration between police and child services and 
enhance long-term therapeutic support for victims. More has to be done to 
tackle under-reporting of sexual abuse in some minority ethnic communities. 
Where race is a factor in the abuse it should be tackled "as an absolute 
priority".
 