
Roy Jones, like Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>, only more dramatically, 
has long since ceased to justify the appellation “Junior”. He is aging before 
our eyes in a business where youth is king, but he seems dangerously reluctant 
to do the mature thing and walk away from the most precarious of undertakings 
while he has a grip on his faculties.

Mayweather picked his moment precisely: 38 years old, unbeaten and at the edge 
of his greatness. Jones, who was Mayweather’s unchallenged predecessor as the 
best pound-for-pound fighter in the world, is 46 going on 50. If Mayweather 
were toconfirm industry suspicions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/08/manny-pacquiao-retire-floyd-mayweather>
 and return in 2016 to reach for his 50th victory, he would still not be in the 
same peril that is rapidly enveloping Jones.

Three days after he fell face-first at the feet of Enzo Maccaranelli in 
Moscow, he has yet to indicate he is inclined to follow Mayweather into 
retirement. The reluctance of a fighter to confront what he knows in his heart 
is true – that he is finished – is one of the saddest spectacles in sport. No 
apologies, then, for repeating Barry McGuigan’s ever-relevant mantra: boxers 
are the first to know when to quit and the last to admit it.

Roy Jones Jr officially becomes Russian citizen with Moscow passport ceremony
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/27/roy-jones-jr-officially-becomes-russian-citizen-with-moscow-passport-ceremony>
It never appears like this to a warrior, but more significant than the public 
humbling and the final acceptance of shredded skills is the threat of 
irreversible degradation of health, the inability to form cogent sentences, the 
loss of balance, the blunting of memory. Layered over that, of course, is the 
dwindling of friends – and that, often, is the spur to fight on.

When skinny kids enter a gym for the first time to test the mysteries of this 
strange, elemental sport, they often bring with them crushing insecurities. 
Many don’t come back. Those who stay do so because they find some facility, a 
knack of getting it right. By the time they become good or excellent, they have 
to confront a new challenge: performance anxiety, boxing in front of an 
audience. And when a few are eventually elevated to elite level, they are 
hooked on the adrenaline of acceptance, the roar of the crowd.

That is what Jones is living for now. Vladimir Putin stroked his ego by giving 
him a Russian passport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/27/roy-jones-jr-officially-becomes-russian-citizen-with-moscow-passport-ceremony>
 when his own sport was quietly looking the other way, hoping he might lie 
down. So he took the bait.

But Jones – like Wladimir Klitschko against Tyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 in Düsseldorf a couple of weekends previously – could not “pull the trigger”, 
to use the sport’s chilling argot, when he needed to in front of his new and 
powerful friends in Moscow. Maccaranelli, who, at 35, himself has survived a 
tough career in which hehas suffered seven stoppages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/sep/19/enzo-maccarinelli-alexander-frenkel-boxing>
, knocked him out almost apologetically.

The Welshman beat him up for four rounds, uppercutting his bobbing head almost 
at will, avoiding his ill-timed counters, and finishing the job with a chopping 
right hand on his slack jaw before stepping back to watch the old man crash to 
the canvas like someone ejected from a nightclub.

Over 26 years, , Jones had imposed similarly conclusive, don’t-get-up 
sentences on opponents 14 times from his 45 stoppage wins. He knows what it 
feels like to stand over a senseless foe. There were so many great nights, too.

His fans – who number in the hundreds of thousands – will prefer to remember 
his victories over Bernard Hopkins, James Toney, Mike McCallum, Montel Griffin, 
Virgil Hill, Lou Del Valle and a late-career Félix Trinidad, as well as his 
progression from light-middleweight to heavyweight, stretching the boundaries 
of the impossible in six weight divisions.

The good times began to draw to a close not with his first loss – disqualified 
in the first of his two 1997 fights with Griffin – but the night in 2004 when 
Antonio Tarver, a very good but not great light-heavyweight, pummelled him in 
two rounds to rip away his three world titles. Four months later, Glen Johnson, 
a similarly formidable but short-of-eminent opponent, knocked him unconscious 
in the ninth round. Jones was unable to leave the ring for 15 minutes and spent 
the night in hospital. The aura had gone forever.

Tarver outpointed him a year later, and the Roy Jones story was pretty much 
done. Joe Calzaghe gave him a payday at Madison Square Garden in 2008 and 
retired undefeated. He thought Jones might join him, but the American fought 
on. Calzaghe will have viewed his compatriot’s destruction of his friend on 
Saturday night with ambivalence.

Jones had long ago compartmentalised his career, preferring to draw on the old 
glories rather than the very bad nights, and his inability to compute the 
relevance of past highs to gathering lows in advancing middle age reflects a 
worrying deterioration in his judgment.

Maccaranelli’s win, meanwhile, was a strange high point for him, with echoes 
of similar endings: Terry Downes guiltily beating 41-year-old Sugar Ray 
Robinson at the Empire Pool, Wembley, in 1962; Larry Holmes reluctantlybeating 
up an old Muhammad Ali in 1980 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/07/boxing.features>, and Trevor 
Berbick doing it again a year later; Rocky Marciano finishing the wondrous 
career of Joe Louis in 1951. There are scores more.

Maccaranelli, one of the sport’s noble participants, had the good grace to 
drop to his knee in a neutral corner and bless himself as the referee tended 
his fallen opponent in an arena five miles from the Kremlin. He cared more 
about Jones’s welfare than he did the victory. It is a shame he is not joined 
by more people in a business that encompasses emotions from touching compassion 
to unremitting coldness.
 