
Roy Keane's frustration over his Ipswich team's surprisingly poor start to the 
season became more even more pronounced when they blew an outstanding chance of 
registering their firstChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> win.

They did what seemed the hardest bit at Doncaster in twice fighting back from 
a goal down to lead 3-2 with 11 minutes to go. But six minutes from the end 
Doncaster's substitute Quinton Fortune – once a Manchester United colleague of 
Keane – curled a delightful 25-yard shot over the head of the Ipswich 
goalkeeper, Richard Wright, to bring the visitors the dubious distinction of 
having equalled their record for their worst start to a season in 45 years.

Peterborough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> produced a 
stirring comeback with a happier ending, recording their first Championship win 
– 3-2 at home toReading – after being 2-0 down. George Boyd scored their third 
goal with a cheeky back-heel in stoppage time. Plymouth, the other team 
searching for their first Championship victory, lost 3-1 atNewcastle.

On a day on which the Championship matches produced a total of 37 goals, those 
of a nervous disposition might have been well advised to stay away fromWatford, 
as well as Doncaster and Peterborough. Watford recovered from 2-0 down against
Leicester to lead 3-2 but, like Ipswich, they also had to settle for a 3-3 
draw. Matt Fryatt had scored the goals that put Leicester ahead and Heidar 
Helguson marked his first match for Watford following his return to the club on 
loan from QPR with the two goals – as a substitute – that put them in the 
driving seat. However, two other substitutes spoilt his day in stoppage time, 
with Dany N'Guessan equalising with a superb header from a cross by Martyn 
Waghorn.

The leading individual performances included that of 20-year-old Jay Simpson, 
who is on loan toQPR from Arsenal. The striker scored his first goals for them 
in the 2-0 win atCardiff City.

While two Rickie Lambert goals gave Southampton their 2-0 win over Yeovil – 
their firstLeague One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> 
victory – the team with which he was the joint top scorer in the Football 
League last season,Bristol Rovers, showed further signs that they could be even 
stronger without him in a 3-1 win atBrentford.

Rovers look better in defence this time, and they are not looking bad in 
attack either, especially after the signing of Chris Dickson on loan from 
Charlton last week. The decision by Charlton's manager, Phil Parkinson, for 
Dickson to go to Rovers was influenced by the belief that, as they had received 
around £1m for Lambert, they would be in a stronger position to buy him in the 
January transfer window than the other clubs who have been interested in the 
player. "He is different from the other strikers we have," said the Rovers 
manager, Paul Trollope, last week. "When it comes to pace and power, and the 
ability to make something of balls hit in behind defences, he is exceptional."

The 24-year-old Ghanaian, who came to the fore with Dulwich Hamlet in the 
Ryman League before joining Charlton two years ago, certainly illustrated the 
point on his Rovers debut against Brentford. He scored their first two goals, 
both through fastening on to passes over the top of theBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> defence. He also produced a 
superb pass to set up Aaron Lescott for their third goal.

It was an unhappy debut, though, for Sol Campbell in the colours of Notts 
County. The former England stalwart, 35 on Friday, is reportedly on a Premier 
League-type salary at theLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> club. However, still 
short of his old match fitness, he had an uncomfortable afternoon yesterday, 
withMorecambe's defender, Jim Bentley, putting them ahead with a header from 
Ian Craney's corner, and their 35-year-old centre-forward, Paul Mullin, 
increasing their lead with a near-post header from a Craney free-kick. It ended 
2-1 – Morecambe's first league win of the season and County's third successive 
away league defeat.

Hereford also achieved their first league victory, in overcoming Accrington, 
but still in the no-win club are Darlington, who lost 2-0 to the leaders, 
Bournemouth.
 