
Australia

Captain Cameron Smith

Coach Mal Meninga

Key man Greg Inglis

Despite being the reigning world champions, Mal Meninga’s Kangaroos arrive in 
England this autumn with an extra incentive to win silverware in theFour Nations
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>. Victory in the final at 
Anfield in November would ensure that they reclaim the No1 spot in the world 
rankings, which they lost last year, at the expense of New Zealand.

Friday’s opener against Scotland will be only their third Test since 
relinquishing the top spot in the rankings, but with Meninga and the captain 
Cameron Smith both saying this week that the Kangaroos need to prioritise 
international rugby over club affairs, Australia appear the most dangerous of 
all four sides. There are all the usual suspects in their travelling party: the 
three-time Golden Boot winner Johnathan Thurston, the superstar Souths 
full-back Greg Inglis and their talismanic captain Smith – making them the team 
to beat at first glance.

England 

Fixtures New Zealand (29 October, Huddersfield), Scotland (5 November, 
Coventry), Australia (13 November, London)Captain Sam Burgess

Coach Wayne Bennett

Key man Sam Burgess

England’s stock has perhaps never been higher but victory in the Four Nations 
– an entirely possible proposition – would raise it even further before next 
year’s World Cup. The headline acts are Sam Burgess and Wayne Bennett, the 
captain and coach who head up the team’s new era. The foundations were 
encouragingly laid last year during the Test series victory against New Zealand 
but the return of Burgess and the arrival of Bennett gives England a fearsome 
look they have not had in decades, if ever. But England fans’ optimism rightly 
goes beyond that pair. There is supreme talent in the back line, and in the 
likes of the NRL-based players such as Josh Hodgson and Elliott Whitehead, 
England have a pack that could provide the catalyst for unprecedented success.

New Zealand 

Captain Jesse Bromwich

Coach David Kidwell

Key man Thomas Leuluai

The Kiwis arrive for the Four Nations as officially the world’s best side but 
recent form suggests they have a challenge on their hands to keep hold of that 
title. An under-strength New Zealand side lost in England last year and 
although some of their big names return for the Four Nations, back-to-back Test 
defeats to Australia this year suggest that New Zealand under David Kidwell, 
who took charge for the most recent of those two games, are very much a work in 
progress. The former Golden Boot winner Shaun Johnson – the scourge of England 
in the World Cup three years ago – makes a welcome return, but defeat in their 
opening fixture against England on Saturday would leave them knowing they would 
have to beat the Kangaroos in week two to stand any chance of making the final.

Scotland

No automatic sin-bin for punching at Four Nations and next year's World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/no-automatic-sin-bin-for-punching-at-four-nations-and-next-years-world-cup>
Fixtures Australia (28 October, Hull), England (5 November, Coventry), New 
Zealand (11 November, Workington)Captain Danny Brough

Coach Steve McCormack

Key man Lachlan Coote

The Bravehearts return to the main stage in international rugby league for the 
first time since their run to the quarter-finals of the World Cup three years 
ago – and they do so this time with their most talented squad in Scottish rugby 
league history. There is an encouraging mixture of top-tier and emerging 
talent, from the North Queensland full-back Lachlan Coote, an NRL winner 12 
months ago, through to Scottish-born players like Dave Scott. Steve McCormack 
has a bigger pool to pick from than any Scotland head coach before him, with 
established names like Matty Russell and Danny Brough joined by new talent such 
as Lewis Tierney, the son of the former dual-code international Jason Robinson. 
Winning one game would constitute a major success however as they prepare for 
next year’s World Cup. But they can cause a few scares along the way.
 