
Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> was buzzing last 
Thursday evening when Leeds came to town. Two hours before kick-off, the Glass 
Blower pub was rammed, not a seat to be had. An hour from kick-off and 
thousands streamed down Wheldon Road and into the Jungle, filling the terraces 
and the bars. Others stopped off at the pub across the road whose car park 
overflowed with customers. This was far more than a just a joust for local 
supremacy: it was the biggest sports event in Britain that day.

“We ‘ate Rhinos,” sang the Cas fans in immediate response to Andy Lynch’s 
opening try, their Brett Ferres-baiting also far outweighing the chants to 
support their own team. The Jungle was bouncing, alive, vibrant. The ground may 
not be there much longer – work on the new stadium is set to start this autumn 
and be complete in 2018 – but it is a fun shed, where a small club put on a 
highly impressive, co-ordinated entertainment show. And when the two teams are 
so well-matched that no one scores for a tense half hour before the home side 
snatch a late win over their Goliath neighbours, the ingredients made a perfect 
dish for the Tigers and the neutral.

Of the capacity crowd of 11,426, maybe as many as 9,000 were Cas fans. 
Assuming most come from the town, that’s 60% of the population. That’s the 
equivalent of 450,000 turning up at Headingley. No wonder Castleford was empty 
when they got to Wembley two years ago.

At the start of the season, the RFL’s head of marketing Mark Foster, who was 
at The Jungle on Thursday,told me they were targeting 10 sell-outs this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2015/dec/21/rugby-league-leeds-kevin-sinfield-christmas-2015>
. They got four in 24 hours last week, averaging nearly 14,000 to see four 
magnificent, extraordinary affairs. Most of Hull seemed to be squeezed into 
Craven Park to see Tony Christie roll out Amarillo before a fierce battle in a 
sun-drenched scene more French Riviera than Humberside docks; Wigan rubbed 
Saints’ noses in it again at a full Langtree Park; and Warrington came from 
behind to leap-frog Widnes (not literally) at an expanded Halliwell Jones 
Stadium filled to a ground-record 15,000.

Our Easter arrangements are antiquated, born in Edwardian times when punters 
needed entertainment on their rare days off and, unable to travel far, were 
rewarded with as many local games as could possibly be squeezed into the long 
holiday weekend. At Easter 1954, Leeds’ trip to Castleford was their third of 
four games in less than four days. The Loiners’ schedule for the final week of 
the season read: Good Friday night at home to Hunslet, Featherstone away the 
following afternoon, Easter Monday at Cas and Easter Tuesday (yes, such a thing 
existed in the West Riding) at home to Bramley. Imagine Tony Smith’s thoughts 
on that.

Now, with a subscription to Sky Sports, league fans from Totnes to Dingwall 
could watch five Super League games over the long weekend and a further eight 
NRL games via Premier Sports*. Most fans could drive to a game: they didn’t 
need one served up on their doorstep and another down the road but league fans 
vote for Easter with their feet.

“Attendances will be very strong this weekend and demonstrate it’s a very 
popular time of year to watch rugby league,” RFL CEO Nigel Wood told me last 
week. “Fans enjoy going to games at Easter. The market says it’s still 
valuable. Ostensibly, if we didn’t play two rounds over Easter we’d need 
another week in the season.”

I’m not sure about that. There were only three true derbies, all on Good 
Friday, with another plum game at Cas, and local clashes at Wakefield, Leeds 
and Widnes. That suggests we could have one round of attractive ties spread 
from Maundy Thursday to Easter Monday, with another round of run of the mill 
fixtures scheduled for a Challenge Cup weekend later in the summer.

*This is not recommended if you wish to retain friends or keep your family 
intact.

Clubcall: Hunslet Hawks

I should think Friday lunchtimes are usually fairly quiet in Hunslet’s Garden 
Gate pub 
<https://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g186411-d2706912-Reviews-The_Garden_Gate-Leeds_West_Yorkshire_England.html>
. Despite being a Grade II listed building and considered one of Britain’s best 
heritage pubs, this Edwardian gem is hidden away in a 1970s housing complex 
just off the A639. You would never find it if you didn’t go looking – and might 
not even if you did. Thankfully, plenty of architecture enthusiasts, real ale 
lovers and rugby league fans do, and as someone who meets all of those 
criteria, it has been on my wishlist for a while.

My Dad and I finally made it on Good Friday, along with a dozen or so Hunslet 
fans before their entertaining game with Keighley a couple of miles away at the 
modernist South Leeds Stadium. My life has been enhanced a smidgen by doing so. 
Putting aside the fine beer (from the host Leeds Brewery, among others), the 
glorious mosaic floor, glazed tiling and extravagant art-noveaux decor, it is a 
shrine to Hunslet RLFC. If you venture to deepest south Leeds, spend an hour 
soaking up their glorious history, determined present and indeterminate future. 
You will not regret it.

Foreign quota

Castleford’s matchwinner last Thursday was Kiwi veteran Jake Webster but it 
could well have been his fellow countryman, Denny Solomona. The former 
Melbourne Storm junior used searing pace to purr through the Leeds defence in 
the second half before making the mistake of heading for the corner flag 
outside Zak Hardaker. “I thought I had him but he’s a world-class full-back and 
he did what he does best,” Solomona told No Helmets after the game. “It was a 
great tackle.”

Solomona gets the Cas fans on their tip-toes with his thrilling runs, and has 
a try record as good as most in Super League. He was a rising star of the 
competition last year, scoring 18 tries in just 15 games in his debut season 
for Cas, something that few predicted after his rookie season for London 
Broncos. There he scored a try every other game but was exposed at full-back in 
a team constantly on the back foot.

“We were just far too young,” said his Broncos captain and current Cas 
team-mate Matt Cook. “You look at Denny and Mike McMeeken here, Olsi [Krasniqi] 
and [George] Griffin at Salford: loads of that Broncos team are in Super League 
still. We had talent but there were too many kids. I could see Denny had 
something, it just needed the right coach to bring it out of him.”

Solomona, now 22, has certainly found that with Daryl Powell. “I don’t play 
any different to what I always have wherever I’ve played,” he claims. “I just 
had a good off-season and pre-season, came into the season and hit the ground 
running.” If he was living in Parramatta rather than Pontefract, perhaps a Kiwi 
call-up would be on the cards.

Goal-line drop-out

Already seemingly set to finish behind at least Warrington and Wigan, Leeds 
are on course for the worst title defence of the Super League era. The lowest a 
champion has finished in the table is fifth, suffered by Bradford in 1998 and 
Leeds themselves in 2012. That was a successive fifth place for the Rhinos yet 
they went on to win the trophy both times. Those remarkable achievements are 
outliers. Super League champions usually finish second or fourth the following 
season. Only Leeds in 2009 and St Helens in 2007 topped the table the season 
after winning the Grand Final. On average, the champions-elect finish second at 
the end of the regular season and fall to third in the defence of their title.


The Rhinos’ struggles are nothing. Finishing mid-table was commonplace for 
defending champions in a far more unpredictable era. After winning successive 
titles, Swinton sunk to eleventh in 1965, as did Wigan in 1953. Salford won the 
title in ‘74 and ‘76 but could were down in ninth in ‘75; Wakefield won the 
Championship Final in 1968, then plummeted to 12th and 21st (out of 30) in the 
next two years; Featherstone got relegated two years after winning the First 
Division in 1976-77.

The strangest title triumph of all remains Leigh’s in 1982. The season before 
they had been ninth, and followed their championship by finishing 10th, 11th 
and 14th! The Leythers’ triumph was the ultimate aberration. Leicester City, 
eat your heart out!

Fifth and last

The Castleford-Leeds thriller went out live on national TV (pay) and radio 
(digital), but Saints-Wigan took centre stage on BBC Five Live on Friday 
afternoon, showing what an open goal football’s international breaks are for 
other sports, ours included. There is a media vacuum to fill and it seems a 
shame that Saturday and Sunday were left blank for club rugby union to exploit.

 I don’t see why our Championship clubs couldn’t have played on Saturday and 
League One on Sunday, given how many blank weekends their clubs have throughout 
the year. Hearing Five Live give Super League comprehensive coverage for one 
afternoon only was a brief glimpse of a rugby league nirvana, or what it’s like 
living in New South Wales or Queensland. Normality resumed on the Beeb on 
Easter Monday when Five Live broadcast a third division football match instead, 
with only occasional updates from Saints-Widnes. That’s more like it.

Finally, this is the 50th No Helmets Required 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required> blog on the Guardian 
Sport Network <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>
. Thanks for reading – with your support we can aim for another half ton.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 