
The Greatest Game has another chance to have greatness thrust on it. Thirteen 
years have passed since England's fourth attempt to host the World Cup turned 
into a damp and miserable squib but the return of the international game's 
showpiece event provides a shot at redemption.

Much has changed since 2000 – then Steve McNamara had just moved from Bradford 
to Wakefield and Martin Offiah was still doing his dancing on the pitch – but 
one thing remains a constant: rugby league, despite growing and developing, is 
still fighting an uphill battle for prominence.

Yet for the game's fervent flock there has arguably never been a better time 
to spread the gospel. Twenty-eight matches across five weeks, played by 14 
teams in 21 locations, represent an opportunity to increase participation and 
draw in new audiences.

"It's certainly going to be a rollercoaster and we couldn't have done anything 
more to make it a success," said theRFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> 
chief executive, Nigel Wood. "The important thing is that we try to make the 
competition as accessible as possible to as many people as possible. It's a 
fantastic opportunity for the sport to showcase the very best of what it has to 
offer."

Wood's optimism may not be shared by the entire nation but there is at least a 
tangible sense of anticipation ahead of this World Cup. Ticket sales have been 
encouraging and with England's matches to be broadcast on the BBC, the number 
of people accessing the tournament could reach a record high.

Organisers have tried to learn from the mistakes of 2000 when a flawed 
strategy of staging a number of games in union's backyard, along with some 
truly inept teams participating and awful weather, contributed to what was 
widely regarded as a disastrous competition.

This time, while the tournament will mostly be played in the game's northern 
stronghold, there has also been a concerted effort to avoid merely staging 
matches in league's traditional sphere. From Cardiff, Neath and Limerick to 
London, Bristol and Avignon, the M62 trophy this is not.

Yet equally there has been a recognition that the heartland should not be 
dismissed and, having had four years to plan the logistics, officials believe 
they have spread the net sufficiently but not excessively. "We put a lot of 
effort and a lot of thinking into where to play games," Wood said. "We've 
concentrated in areas where rugby league is traditionally strong, but not 
exclusively.

"There are two games in France that will sell out, it's the first time that a 
World Cup game will be played in [the Republic of] Ireland but the one 
unashamedly expansive area is in Bristol where the Cook Islands will play the 
United States.

"We set ourselves a number of challenging targets in terms of how many viewers 
we wanted tuning in and how many tickets sold – on both those things we're 
going to be really strong."

England kick-off the competition on Saturday against the favourites, 
Australia, who were surprisingly beaten in the 2008 final by New Zealand. Not 
since 1972 – when Great Britain triumphed in France – has a northern hemisphere 
side secured the title, yet controversy has already dogged England's campaign.

They suffered a woeful warm-up defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/19/england-italy-rugby-league-world-cup-warm-up>
 to debutants Italy last Saturday and have had key players omitted from the 
squad after "breaches of discipline" in the aftermath of that setback – namely 
breaking a ban on alcohol.

A heavy defeat to Australia in the opening match could prove a hammer blow to 
the World Cup gathering momentum. McNamara, now the England coach, appeared a 
man under pressure on the eve of the tournament in Cardiff on Friday, but would 
expect to overcome Fiji and Ireland in Group A even if the first result is 
disappointing.

A defeat would almost certainly lead to a Wembley semi-final against the 
reigning champions, New Zealand, who go into their opening match against Samoa 
in Warrington on Sunday boosted by the presence of the enigmatic Sonny Bill 
Williams.

Whoever wins the final on 30 November at Old Trafford, this World Cup will be 
judged on how it manages to capitalise on the game's greater exposure. Four 
matches will definitely sell out – England against Ireland in Huddersfield, 
Fiji v Ireland in Rochdale, New Zealand's tie with Samoa and their match 
against France in Avignon – while as of Friday lunchtime 45,000 tickets had 
been sold for Saturday's double-header at the Millennium Stadium.

Organisers say 65,000 tickets have been bought for the final and expect it to 
be a full house for the first time in World Cup history, while for 18% of 
spectators across the tournament it will be their first time watching rugby 
league.

Of the two semi-finals to be played at Wembley, 60% of fans will have never 
been to a Challenge Cup final, traditionally held in the capital.

"We're surprised and delighted," said Wood. "If you'd have said to me three 
months ago that England versus Ireland in Huddersfield would have sold out then 
I wouldn't have believed you.

"But this is a fantastic sport, it's appreciated and understood by millions of 
people, this is a major global event with some of the planet's very best 
athletes representing their countries. Anyone who wants to engage in the sport 
with an open mind will only be impressed."

There are myriad Fijian-adopted Lancastrians who are expected to descend on 
Spotland for their opening match with Ireland, or simply the fact that the Cook 
Islands, from the tropical South Pacific, have set up camp in Doncaster and 
will play in Bristol and Neath. "It's quite weird but I heard the people of 
Bristol are stoked to have us and I can't wait to get down there," said their 
forward Zeb Taia.

For the World Cup to be a success then these stories and the game itself need 
to be embraced without cynicism. One hopes the lessons of 2000 have been 
learned.
 