
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
were playing against League One’s bottom side but this game wasn’t entirely 
different from their recent victories over Arsenal, Liverpool and Southampton. 
United were often under pressure and struggled to create chances but ruthless 
finishing saved the day.

The Yeovil Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/yeoviltown> manager, 
Gary Johnson, generally plays 4-4-2 but opted for a more cautious 4-5-1 
formation, ensuring Yeovil could compete in the centre of midfield. Yeovil 
focused on making life difficult for United: energetically pressing high up the 
pitch, shutting off passing options for David de Gea and forcing United’s 
defenders into nervous passes. Chris Smalling was particularly panicky, 
conceding possession readily and thumping clearances into the stands, allowing 
Yeovil to build pressure.

However, the 4-5-1 meant Kieffer Moore was Yeovil’s only target for crosses, 
which was their main route of attack. He found life difficult against three 
centre-backs, and after a nasty collision with Paddy McNair midway through the 
first half, Moore never looked comfortable. He dawdled in possession to waste a 
great counter-attacking situation in first-half stoppage time, then prodded 
unconvincingly at Yeovil’s best chance on 55 minutes.

Set pieces also offered promise for the home side although twice they opted to 
take quick short corners, an unsuccessful strategy intended to surprise United. 
They were better off waiting for extra options in the box and their impressive 
holding midfielder Joe Edwards had a fine headed effort in the second half.

United’s struggles were worrying enough for Louis van Gaal to change his 
system completely at the break, introducing Juan Mata and Jonny Evans for the 
injured wing-backs Luke Shaw and Rafael da Silva, switching to a four-man 
defence (featuring a quartet of centre-backs) and a diamond midfield. There was 
no requirement for a three-man defence against a lone striker and the extra 
midfielder ensured United controlled the match after the break.

Ander Herrera’s superb opener came out of nothing but United’s midfield 
advantage was now obvious: Mata provided quick passing and Ángel di María 
offered the pace Radamel Falcao lacks. Johnson was surprisingly reluctant to 
make changes but deserves great credit – Yeovil created as many chances as 
United.
 