
This tie appeared ripe for an upset from the outset, considering only one team 
in England have scored more league goals thanPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> this season and West Brom 
have struggled to manage a shot on target of late. The reintroduction of Saido 
Berahino, hitting a brace in his first start since October, had Albion in front 
twice but they were pegged back on both occasions and now face a trip to London 
Road to decide who advances to the fifth round.

Peterborough looked somewhat overawed in a first half addled with the most 
basic of errors but by the end were good value for their inclusion in this 
draw. Graham Westley’s young team could easily have been three goals down 
before Shaquile Coulthirst, scoring his first goal for the League One club 
since joining from Tottenham last week, made it 1-1 when capitalising on a 
communication mix up between Boaz Myhill and Sébastien Pocognoli.

Berahino, who is expected to stay at West Brom until the summer despite 
interest from Tottenham and Newcastle, put Albion back in front within five 
minutes thanks to a tidy right-footed finish into the far corner after Craig 
Dawson played him in, but the substitute Jon Taylor restored parity less than 
two minutes after in a wonderful finish to a match that had plodded along for 
75 minutes.

Bournemouth have Marc Pugh to thank after late show sees off Portsmouth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/portsmouth-bournemouth-fa-cup-match-report>
“The most pleasing thing for me is a lot of young players have grown up and 
gained self-belief this afternoon,” Westley said. “We acquitted ourselves well, 
we found our way into the game after a nervy start and we showed a lot of 
character and a lot of determination to find our way back in.”

The result deepens Tony Pulis’s headache. For a team that puts so much 
emphasis on defensive resilience, their marking was uncharacteristically loose 
for both goals. Swansea City and Newcastle United are faced in the next week 
and a failure to win either of those could leave them in a relegation fight 
before renewing acquaintances with Peterborough.

“It’s disappointing but that’s cup football,” the West Brom manager said. “We 
started really well in the first 20 to 25 minutes and the game should have been 
put to bed. One mistake put them back in it – Boaz and Poco have left it for 
one another and their lad has stepped in. I don’t want to discredit 
Peterborough, they were brilliant, but I didn’t see them creating many chances 
before that.”

Having failed to register a single attempt on target against Aston Villa last 
weekend, Berahino converted with Albion’s first attempt. Peterborough, though, 
were the architects of their own downfall after overplaying in midfield, 
allowing Rickie Lambert to pick up the loose ball and stride forward. He fed 
Berahino who steadied before curling into the bottom right corner from about 20 
yards.

“He’s not fit and his sharpness is nowhere as good as last year,” Pulis said 
of the 22-year-old. “But one thing you can’t take away from the kid is when he 
gets in front of goal he is calm and has that wonderful ability to finish.”

The best Peterborough could fashion before half-time was a Coulthirst shot 
that drifted narrowly wide, and they were lucky a smorgasbord of sloppy 
defensive play did not leave the tie out of reach by the interval.

Half an hour in a dodgy backpass from Michael Smith to Ben Alnwick almost saw 
Lambert benefit only for the goalkeeper to recover from his initial botched 
clearance. Soon after James McClean stole the ball from a dawdling Ricardo 
Santos but shot right at Alnwick, while the Republic of Ireland winger also 
struck wide from a promising position after a neat give-and-go with Lambert.

Lambert went close again two minutes after the break when picked out by 
Stéphane Sessègnon on the right after Berahino had stolen possession from Chris 
Forrester deep in the visitors’ half.

Gradually, however, the Posh gained a foothold. Smith spurned a good chance 20 
minutes from the end, shooting straight at Myhill after being played in by 
Coulthirst. The recent signing, though, levelled with a tasty volley after 
Michael Bostwick’s long diagonal pass.

Myhill, back in the team for the first time since Ben Foster’s return from 
injury, was caught in two minds over whether to come out to punch and Pocognoli 
allowed the striker in front of him to finish brilliantly at the near post with 
the goalkeeper backtracking.

Berahino went one step further to rehabilitating his fragile relationship with 
the club by putting Pulis’s side in front again but Taylor, who had slipped to 
allow Berahino an extra yard of space, enjoyed the last word when making the 
most of some ropey defending after Santos’ diagonal pass fell to him on the 
edge of the area. He hooked past Myhill and Peterborough celebrated as if they 
had won.

“Some of our lads will have realised this afternoon, just how good they can 
be,” Westley added.
 