
Sainsbury’s is locked in a legal battle with Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> over its “old-fashioned 
and rather dilapidated sports ground”.

The Conference Premier team are hoping to build a 21,700-seat stadium at the 
University of the West of England’s Frenchay campus in Stoke Gifford, a judge 
heard.

The supermarket chain had agreed a £30m deal to buy the club’s 12,000-capacity 
Memorial stadium in north Bristol, lease it back for a peppercorn rent until 
the new ground was ready, and then redevelop the old stadium as a new store.

But on Friday Sainsbury’s argued at the high court in London that it was 
legally entitled to terminate the contract because conditions linked to the 
agreement had not been satisfied.

Lawyers for the club said that either the contract “is still on foot” or 
Sainsbury’s had breached it. In the next six days, 10 witnesses are expected to 
be called to give evidence to settle the dispute.

The presiding judge, Mrs Justice Proudman, described the case as “extremely 
complex”. Announcing that she would reserve her decision to a later date, the 
judge said: “There is no way I will write the judgment immediately after this 
case.”

The club indicated it was vital that it knew by June whether it could hold 
Sainsbury’s to the deal and keep the university on board with the proposals for 
a new stadium.

David Matthias QC, for Rovers, conceded in court that the agreement between 
Sainsbury’s and the club was “byzantine in its complexity”.

At an earlier hearing he described Rovers as being “in the doldrums” in the 
Conference Premier following relegation from the Football League and said they 
were seeking to boost their fortunes by moving to the new stadium.

Bristol Rovers take on Grimsby Town on Sunday in a play-off to win promotion 
back to the Football League.

Mark Wonnacott QC, for Sainsbury’s, who described the Memorial stadium as 
“old-fashioned and rather dilapidated”, argued that the “structure of the 
contract” meant that conditions had not been met by a cut-off date and the 
contract had been lawfully terminated.

Matthias said: “With respect, my learned friend misunderstands the 
significance of the term ‘cut-off date’ in this agreement.

“There is nothing in this agreement that stipulates, implies or requires that 
the cut-off date will bring about the cessation of any obligations on any 
party.”

In written submissions to the court, lawyers for Rovers describe the Memorial 
Stadium at Filton Avenue, Horfield, as “tired and unfit for purpose”.


Sainsbury’s won a bidding process in March 2012 and entered into an agreement 
to buy the ground, intending to build a superstore and 65 new homes.


The club says money from the sale will largely finance its new stadium - “to 
that extent the completion of the sale of the site is critical to ambitions to 
deliver the new stadium”.


The hearing continues.



 