
George Osborne’s northern powerhouse legacy has been thrown into doubt after 
the government pulled the plug on devolution in the north-east of England.Sajid 
Javid <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sajid-javid>, the communities 
secretary, said the multimillion-pound deal was “off the table” after council 
leaders failed to agree on whether to accept devolved powers in their current 
form.

On Tuesday, council leaders were split by a single vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/06/north-east-councils-vote-against-devolution-sunderland-durham-south-tyneside-gateshead>
 on whether to accept a deal that would include a raft of new powers and £30m a 
year in return for establishing an elected mayor.

The announcement is a blow to Osborne’s northern powerhouse vision, with the 
north-east now cast out of the devolution agenda and two other swaths of 
northern England – North Yorkshire and WestYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> – yet to agree deals with the 
government.

Javid said he was disappointed that council leaders could not agree to proceed 
with this “ambitious and far-reaching” devolution deal. He added: “It is with 
regret that we have therefore withdrawn the legislation that would have brought 
this deal to life, which means local people will miss out on over £1bn of 
investment, and new powers on transport, planning and skills.

“Handing power back to northerners is a key part of our plans to build a 
northern powerhouse, and our focus now will be on working to secure a new 
agreement for residents in those areas committed to progressing with 
devolution.”

While devolution plans have progressed in Manchester, Sheffield and Teesside, 
the proposals have been fraught with difficulty in the north-east. In May, 
Gateshead voted against supporting the devolution deal because of concerns 
about funding and its future. On Tuesday Newcastle,Northumberland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/northumberland> and North Tyneside all 
voted to move forward with the devolution plans, but Sunderland, Durham, South 
Tyneside and Gateshead voted against.

Council leaders who voted against the deal argued that they had not had 
sufficient assurances from Theresa May’s government about hundreds of millions 
of pounds of EU funding pledged before theBrexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 on 23 June.

There were also concerns about increasing council tax to pay for a new 
directly elected mayor, which has proved to be most controversial condition of 
the devolution arrangements agreed by Osborne and a series of “metro” regions, 
including the West Midlands,Greater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> and the Liverpool city 
region. The regions will elect mayors in May 2017.

Ross Smith, of the North-East Chamber of Commerce, said: “We’re at a loss to 
understand why, after a year of negotiations, it’s not been possible to strike 
a deal. It’s extremely disappointing and bad news for the north-east and UK 
economy. We sincerely hope something can be salvaged and will play whatever 
part we can to help.

“It’s positive that a deal is going forward in Tees Valley though, and we look 
forward to continuing our constructive relationship with the combined authority 
there as that’s implemented.”


Alexandra Jones, chief executive of the thinktank Centre for Cities, said 
Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> could break away from its 
north-east neighbours and seek a “Newcastle city region” devolution deal 
similar to the Liverpool model.

She added: “It is disappointing that the devolution deal for the north-east 
will definitely not go ahead as planned, as it had the potential to boost the 
region’s long-term economic prospects.

“But this should not signal the end of devolution in the north-east, and Sajid 
Javid has left the door open for powers to be devolved on a different basis to 
areas within the region.

“While that it is very unlikely to happen in time for May 2017, when the 
original deal was due to come into place, national and local leaders should now 
work together to explore different options, and to ensure that devolution in 
the north-east does not come to a standstill.”

Paul Watson, the leader of the group of seven north-east councils, said it was 
“very disappointing that the government has chosen to end current discussions 
over north-east devolution in this way”.

He said that each council had repeatedly stated their commitment to devolution 
and added: “Although we were not able to reach a majority agreement to proceed 
to public consultation at this present time, we have reaffirmed our commitment 
to working together with the government to achieve the right devolution deal 
for our region.


“Leaders in the north-east will continue to fight for our region, to build our 
economy and create jobs and investment.”
 