
The Salford owner Marwan Koukash is seeking to force a vote of no confidence 
in the Rugby Football League after branding leading officials “not fit for 
purpose”.

The wealthy racehorse owner, whose club was recently docked six points after 
being found guilty of breaching theSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> salary cap, is lobbying fellow 
chairmen to back his call for a special general meeting to bring the governing 
body to book.

Koukash has endured a running battle with the RFL throughout his four years in 
charge of the Red Devils andpromised all-out war with the governing body when 
his club were first accused of breaking the salary cap in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/10/salford-red-devils-marwan-koukash-salary-cap-charges-rugby-league>
.

However, Koukash says his latest action is not connected with his attempts to 
overthrow a points deduction – he intends to unveil his plans for that at a 
press conference at the AJ Bell Stadium on Wednesday – but represents an 
accumulation of dissatisfaction over what he believes is a lack of leadership 
at the heart of the game’s administration.

Jarryd Hayne wanted by NRL trio Newcastle, St George and Gold Coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/17/jarryd-hayne-wanted-by-nrl-trio-newcastle-st-george-and-gold-coast>
“I am in talks with a number of other chairmen to set up a meeting to bring a 
vote of no confidence in the leadership of theRFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl>,” Koukash said. “They are not fit for 
purpose.

“We invest millions into rugby league and want what is the best for the sport. 
I have been in the sport for four years and commercially the game has gone 
backwards in that time.”

The RFL responded to Koukash’s comments, insisting the game is in a stronger 
financial position than it was two years ago and that the governing body is 
always willing to listen to the clubs.

In a statement, an RFL spokesperson said: “As an organisation, we are here to 
work for the clubs and all those with an interest in rugby league. Our 
governance ensures that there is an established democratic process that a club 
can follow to make their voice heard and we will always listen to what they 
have to say.

“Whilst we will continue to work hard to improve the fortunes of all clubs, a 
recent independent benchmarking report has demonstrated that, as a sport, we 
are generally in a stronger financial state than we were two years ago.

“It has already been a remarkable first part of the Super League season and we 
are now focused on what promises to be another fantastic Magic in Newcastle 
this weekend.”

Koukash, an arch critic of the salary cap, believes Super League is falling so 
far behind the NRL that it is in danger of becoming a feeder competition. Last 
year he won a vote to introduce a marquee player exemption but he says the gap 
will widen further with the impact of a new television deal in Australia which 
will result in another significant increase in the NRL salary cap to well over 
£5m, compared to just £1.8m in Super League.

“My biggest fear is that in two years’ time, when the new television deal 
kicks in, the NRL salary cap will be three times that of Super League and I 
hear they will be increasing the size of their squads from 25 to 32,” Koukash 
said.

“That will result in good NRL players who normally come here staying in 
Australia and more of our elite players of the calibre of Elliott Whitehead and 
Josh Hodgson going over there.

“I can envisage Super League becoming a feeder competition for the NRL. No 
matter how loyal a player is, you can’t blame them for being tempted by the 
environment and bigger salaries in Australia.

“The NRL clubs are also being obligated to prepare players for life beyond 
rugby league and are likely to introduce a minimum wage which is likely to 
entice even more of our younger players.

“So there are serious challenges to our competition and my fear is we don’t 
have the leaders to address the issues. They seem to be more concerned with 
growing the game in France and Canada.”

Koukash’s move is the second challenge in under four years to the authority of 
Nigel Wood, the RFL chief executive. The Wigan chairman, Ian Lenagan, led a 
revolt in the autumn of 2013 which forced the RFL to back down on its radical 
proposals to change the league structure, although Wood eventually got his way 
on the back of a successful World Cup.

Koukash would need the support of another six Super League clubs to call an 
emergency meeting and force a no-confidence motion.
 