
Salford collapsed to a shock home defeat in the Qualifiers and it means they 
cannot finish in the top three that would guarantee a place inSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> next season. The best they can 
hope for is a place in the fourth v fifth Million Pound Game if they win at 
Batley next Sunday.

The Red Devils, who would have been in the Super 8s but for being deducted six 
points for salary cap breaches, have lost to Leigh, Hull KR, Leeds and London 
in an embarrassing run with relegation now looking a distinct possibility.

Salford, 1-250 with one bookmaker pre-match, were hoping to rack up a big win 
to bolster their scoring difference in a bid to pip Hull KR and Huddersfield 
for third spot, but that never looked likely as they put in a dreadful 
performance.

London were leading 10-6 at the break thanks to a long-range interception try 
from William Barthau after 16 minutes and a Scott Leatherbarrow effort with the 
Red Devils replying with a George Griffin touchdown converted by Gareth O’Brien.

Salford were booed off at half-time and the jeers were understandable after a 
mistake-littered 40 minutes.

Soward, who also kicked three goals, grabbed a third London try, with Barthau 
adding a drop goal that extended the lead to three scores with 10 minutes 
remaining.

Salford finally found some inspiration and Josh Griffin scored five minutes 
from time for the Red Devils’ second try. He went over again two minutes later, 
but despite some desperate attacking – and equally desperate defence by the 
Broncos – the comeback was too late.

Ian Watson the Salford coach, said: “It’s embarrassing from us. They 
absolutely underestimated London. It was a disrespect to the opposition. You’d 
think that fighting for Super League survival and playing for contracts would 
be enough motivation for the players.”

With reference to Salford’s owner, Marwan Koukash, who has been quiet in 
recent times and whose future involvement has been subject to much conjecture, 
Watson said: “Marwan’s position doesn’t play a part. It’s black and white, it’s 
your contract that’s on the line.”

Not surprisingly, Andrew Henderson, the London coach, was much happier. “I 
always knew we were capable of making a Super League scalp,” he said. “That was 
our best performance of the season.”
 