
Marwan Koukash has said he will fight the salary cap breaches Salford Red 
Devils were charged with last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/salford-super-league-salary-cap> 
and insists he has been presented with no evidence from the Rugby Football 
League to support the allegations.

The governing body announced last week Salford would be charged with alleged 
breaches of the £1.825m cap relating to contractual arrangements throughout 
2014 and 2015.

Koukash, the Salford owner, in launching a scathing attack on the RFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rfl> in his first public response to the 
matter, said he has seen no evidence of the charges and will refuse to attend 
the tribunal until he has been given time to see it and assemble a legal team.

Salford charged with alleged breaches of Super League salary cap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/salford-super-league-salary-cap> 
“We’re going to fight this and win it together – I don’t want anyone to doubt 
that,” Koukash said. “The RFL have charged us with A, B, C and D but there is 
no evidence yet. I’ve waited for that information to come and even until this 
morning, nothing has arrived.

“What did arrive is a letter a couple of days ago asking me to select a date 
for the hearing. They gave me a list of dates between two and three weeks from 
now but there’s no way on this planet I will agree to a date for the hearing 
before seeing the evidence. Although the RFL want to see us as a small club, 
we’re not: we’re entitled to our rights.

“If they want to charge us, show me what the evidence is and give me time to 
consult with my lawyers and what witnesses I will need. That could take two 
weeks or two months but don’t tell me I have to attend a hearing two or three 
weeks from now without knowing what we’ve been charged with.”

Koukash added that even if Salford lose the tribunal, he will take the matter 
further. He said: “If necessary, I will go to the highest court in the land. I 
have the means to do so in order to protect the interests of my club, its fans 
and our players. If they start deducting points from us, I’ll press the red 
button and go for all-out war.”

In his insistence on fighting the charges, Koukash also said he believes 
Salford have been singled out for unfair treatment by the RFL since he assumed 
control in 2013. “I feel we’re being treated unfairly – the club has been for 
the last three years,” he said. “If we’ve made a mistake then we will pay for 
it – but all I’m asking from the RFL is to have a fair process in dealing with 
this, to stop trying to make an example out of us.”

Koukash also said the governing body cannot control how the salary cap is 
governed. “If the RFL believe they can police the salary cap, they’re kidding 
themselves,” he said. “It’s fully reliant on owners and clubs to cooperate and 
stick to it but one of the main reasons for the cap is to ensure a level 
playing field – so how we can have the same top four year after year?”

The RFL issued a brief response to Koukash’s comments on Thursday, saying: 
“Any club that is charged in relation to breaches of the RFL operational rules 
and salary cap regulations will be presented with the full case file of 
evidence at least 14 days before the hearing takes place.”

Leeds’ Josh Walters has said the Grand Final triumph over Wigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/leeds-wigan-super-league-grand-final-match-report>
 will count for nothing when they meet in a rematch at the DW Stadium on Friday 
night.

The 21-year-old back-row, who scored the match-winning try that secured a 
seventhSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> title for 
the Rhinos, said: “There’s been a lot of casting our minds back to the Grand 
Final but we are under no illusions it’s going to be tough to go there. They’re 
a really strong side. We’ve got to forget about last year, move on, get our 
heads down and concentrate on this game.”
 