
Trent Cotchin and Sam Mitchell are officially the 2012 AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> Brownlow medal winners, receiving their 
medals at an unprecedented Melbourne ceremony. In front of about 150 family, 
friends, dignitaries and media, the Richmond captain and the former Hawthorn 
star were honoured with a simple ceremony.

Ian Stewart, the last Tigers player to win the Brownlow in 1971, presented the 
medal to Cotchin. Then Shane Crawford, Hawthorn’s most recent Brownlow winner 
in 1999, hung the medal around Mitchell’s neck.

Former AFL player Colin Sylvia in stable condition after fall from balcony
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/former-afl-player-colin-sylvia-in-stable-condition-after-fall-from-balcony>
Cotchin and Mitchell paid tribute to the family, friends, and club figures who 
had helped them in their careers. Mitchell joked it felt like a wedding, with 
his group on one side of the room and Cotchin’s on the other.

“It’s obviously different – something no one else has been through,” Mitchell 
said. “Trent and I will share something unique for the rest of our lives. But 
it’s a happy day for us ... you’re bringing joy to all the people closest to 
you, in a way, that you would very rarely get to do.”

The presentation also marks another sign of closure to the long-running 
Essendon supplements debacle. Cotchin and Mitchell originally finished joint 
runners-up to Essendon’s Jobe Watson in 2012 but Watsongave up the medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/watson-afl-brownlow-medal-commission-findings>
 last month in the wake of his doping ban.

He was among 34 current and past Essendon players banned because of the club’s 
disastrous 2012 supplements regime. Asked about Watson, Mitchell replied 
simply: “I’m going to leave that”.

Cotchin referred to the tumultuous circumstances when asked if the ceremony 
felt somewhat surreal. “Obviously there’s a lot of emotion involved with that 
as well,” he said. “You feel for people and it’s been going on for so long, but 
hopefully we can all take a step forward now.”

Cotchin confirmed he had contacted Watson in the wake of being awarded the 
retrospective medal. “I thought that was the right thing to do,” he said.

Cotchin’s wife Brooke and their children Harper and Mackenzie were in the 
front row for the ceremony. Likewise Mitchell’s wife Lyndall, their son 
Mitchell and their twin daughters Scarlett and Emmerson flew over from Perth.

Mitchell is now at West Coast after a stunning trade at the end of this 
season. His ex-Hawthorn team-mates were unable to attend because they are at a 
Queensland training camp. Richmond coach Damien Hardwick was at the ceremony.

While the circumstances were unprecedented, Mitchell said he enjoyed the 
ceremony. “It’s a beautiful way to do it – I mean winning it in front of 1,400 
people, live on TV is one thing, you wouldn’t knock that back,” he said. “But 
having it like this, I certainly appreciate it for what it is.”

Mitchell added that while several of his old Hawks team-mates had contacted 
him on Tuesday morning, Clarkson had not. “I know he’s not too big on the 
individual awards,” he said, while stressing he and Clarkson had parted on good 
terms.

Cotchin noted that while they now have a Brownlow each, Mitchell has won 
premierships and he has not. “As I mentioned on stage, I’m envious of the bloke 
I won it with, because he’s managed to string together four premierships,” 
Cotchin said.
 