
Former Hawthorn star Sam Mitchell won’t say whether Jobe Watson deserved to 
lose his Brownlow Medal. But he and Richmond captain Trent Cotchin never 
considered knocking back the joint award after the AFL officially stripped 
Watson of the 2012 Brownlow for his role in theEssendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> supplements saga.

“In this game I guess you accept the umpire’s call,” Mitchell said during a 
press conference with Cotchin on Thursday. “We’re both very proud to be 
Brownlow Medallists. We’re not going to go into (whether Watson’s sanction was 
appropriate). That’s not for us to decide.”

The pair, who were originally runners-up to Watson for the AFL’s greatest 
individual accolade, will receive their medals in a private ceremony next 
month. Cotchin was holidaying with his family in Noosa when he received a 
nervously-anticipated phone call fromAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>
 chief Gillon McLachlan on Tuesday confirming the league’s decision.

Resigned acceptance over Brownlow medal masks AFL’s policy failings | Craig 
Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/resigned-acceptance-over-brownlow-medal-masks-afls-policy-failings>
“We were waiting for a four o’clock call from Gil and we wondered whether he 
had a watch,” Cotchin joked. “It’s mixed emotions. We’re still playing now and 
it’s been a four-year process but we still have won the most prestigious 
individual award in different circumstances. It’s definitely something we’ll 
reflect on post-career moreso.”

Mitchell was sitting in his backyard with his young son on his lap when he 
learned of the news. “There’s a lot of things that have happened in the past 
that have got very little to do with us,” he said. “But when I’ve got my son 
sitting there and I get a phone call saying ‘you’re a Brownlow Medallist’, I’d 
be lying if I (said) it was not a joyful experience to share that with my 
family right at that point.”

“There’s a lots of awkwardness in the way it’s happened but hopefully from 
this point on we can put that side of it behind us and just take it for what it 
is.”


Neither of the winners have spoken to Watson since Tuesday’s AFL Commission 
decision but Mitchell says he feels a great deal of empathy for the Bombers 
veteran’s father, Essendon great Tim Watson. 

“I don’t know Jobe at all. I don’t have his phone number or anything like 
that,” Mitchell said. “Particularly as a father, I feel for Tim. When I look at 
my son, if he was going through something like Jobe is going through, you’d be 
heartbroken for him. So there’s that aspect but I don’t feel it’s my place to 
reach out.”
 