
"Imagine if it works. Imagine if I hit two goals just like I've dreamed of 
doing since I was a kid. Where's the risk in trying? If I don't fit in, I'll 
toddle back to where I came from and you can say 'see, I told you he wasn't up 
to it.'" That was 30-year-oldCaen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/caen> 
striker Steve Savidan's public plea to Raymond Domenech last week, days before 
the national team manager announced his squad for tonight's home friendly 
against Uruguay. On Sunday Domenech revealed his selection: sensationally, 
Savidan was in.

Four years ago Savidan, who has never represented his country at any level, 
was playing semi-professional football for non-league Angoulême, supplementing 
his modest income with a series of unglitzy jobs, including, as headline 
writers continually remind him, working as a binman. Given that he'd already 
flopped at a gaggle of other non-league clubs, such as Beauvais, where he went 
the entire 2002-03 season without scoring, it seemed the only thing Savidan 
would ever have in common with the likes of Thierry Henry and Nicolas Anelka 
was his age. Yet tonight he could play alongside those stars in a stadium to 
which his only other visit was as a fan during last year's rugby World Cup.

"I am proof that the system doesn't always work," said Savidan recently. "I 
was born at the wrong time. I'm from the same generation as Henry and Anelka 
and when they were coming through you had to be well over six-foot to be picked 
for youth schemes. I'm quite a bit under six-foot." He admits, however, that 
the problem was not only with the system. "Whenever I was given a chance in the 
past I didn't take it. It's possible that I destroyed myself. Very possible, in 
fact. You could almost say I was suicidal. But then I was analysed and helped 
by the right people, specifically a psychiatrist at Angers and a GP at 
Valenciennes."

If Savidan has reached the summit of his profession despite setbacks, it is 
not because Domenech has decided to make another misguided romantic gesture. 
Savidan has truly earned his crack at the big time. Between emptying bins at 
Angoulême, he finally began filling nets, scoring enough goals to earn him a 
full-time contract with Valenciennes, who were struggling to get back into 
league football after plummeting down the ranks in the wake of their
Marseille-sponsored relegation 
<http://au.fourfourtwo.com/features/3750,bung-lovin-criminals.aspx> from the 
top flight in 1993. Savidan fired them to promotion and the next season was top 
scorer in Ligue 2. Then he took Ligue 1 by storm, yet even when he was smashing 
four goals past Fabien Barthez (as Valenciennes trounced Nantes 5-2 in February 
2007), the notion of him getting an international call-up still seemed 
outlandish. True, Franck Ribéry, with whom Savidan has this week been rooming, 
also worked his way up through non-league football rather than an exalted 
academy, but his progress was much quicker and he made his international debut 
at 23 rather than 30.

The last player to begin his career with Les Bleus at the age of 30 was the 
Bordeaux defender Franck Jurietti, who got his summons following a spate of 
injuries in 2005. Hisinternational career 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/archive/germany2006/preliminaries/preliminary=8071/matches/match=36794/report.html>
 lasted 10 seconds. You have to go back to 1992 to find the last time France 
called up a player from humble Caen, the team for whom Savidan left 
Valenciennes last summer despite interest from Marseille, who wouldn't 
guarantee him first-team football. Yet such has been his form since the start 
of a season in which he has so far hit seven goals that OM are reportedly 
planning to make a renewed bid for him in January, as are Atlético Madrid. 
"He's a killer in the box," says Marseille manager Eric Gerets, who also 
admires the fact that Savidan is much more than a mere finisher, his canny 
running, off-the-cuff tricks and clever passing enabling him to create nearly 
as many goals as he scores.

It's never wise to second-guess Domenech but the probability is that Savidan 
will get on the pitch tonight, where he will receive a rapturous welcome both 
from the entire Caen squad, who have travelled down to share in his reflected 
glory, and the fans who see in him a happy remnant of football's pre-superstar 
era. "This is far from a decisive match ... and since he's been interesting us 
for a few years now we might just take this chance to see what he can do at the 
highest level," said Domenech.

It's unlikely Savidan will displace Henry, Anelka or Karim Benzema when 
they're all fit but the fourth striking place in the French squad is up for 
grabs. Bafétimbi Gomis failed to make it his during Euro 2008 and has suffered 
a dip in form since then, and Frédéric Piquionne and Djibril Cissé appear to be 
out of favour. Nimble Rennes youngster Jimmy Briand could turn out to be the 
long-term solution but the short-term could be Savidan's. Mind you, since 
Domenech has shown a willingness to call up golden oldies, he should perhaps 
put his faith in Briand's Rennes team-mate Mikaël Pagis, who has been in 
glorious form this season, showing a wonderfully sharp edge to complement one 
of the most extravagant repertoires of techniques inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football>. Or would giving a first 
cap to a 35-year-old be going just a little too far?
 