
A scheme to open up miles of the river Severn and its major tributary to help 
threatened fish has won almost £20m in funding.

The £19.4m project will reopen the UK’s longest river to fish species, many of 
which vanished from its upper reaches after weirs were installed in the 1800s 
to help river transport during the industrial revolution.

State-of-the-art fish passes, which allow fish to travel past the blockages, 
will be installed at five Severn weirs and two on the river Teme to open up 
more than 150 miles of the rivers and give access to spawning grounds which 
species need.

The scheme will help threatened twaite and allis shad – fish favoured in the 
medieval court of Henry III – and also benefit declining species such as the
salmon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/16/fish-farms-wild-scottish-salmon>
 and theEuropean eel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/world-on-a-plate/2016/feb/09/illegal-eel-black-market-continues-to-taint-europes-eel-fishery>
.

Restoring fish populations would boost the economic benefits of the river 
Severn, which already sees recreational and commercial fishing activities bring 
in more than £15m a year.

The funding will also mean the project can work with local communities and 
schools to reconnect millions of people with the natural, cultural and 
industrial heritage of the rivers, its backers said.

There will be the UK’s first “shad fest”, England’s only fish viewing gallery 
at Diglis weir, Worcestershire, and a major citizen science programme to get 
people involved in preserving shad – once a fish which made up two-thirds of 
the catch in the Severn Estuary but now a lesser known fish.

The Bristol Channel, into which the Severn flows, has the only viable breeding 
population of twaite shad in the UK.

Funding for the five-year project, which will see work start on the first fish 
pass in 2017, includes £10.8m from the Heritage Lottery Fund and £6m from the 
EU Life programme.

Tony Bostock, chief executive officer of the Severn Rivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rivers> Trust, said: “It will deliver 
multiple benefits to fisheries interests, anglers and a great many local 
communities along the Severn and Teme.

“The state-of-the-art fish passes will truly unlock the UK’s longest river and 
together with proposed habitat improvements provide greater resilience to 
climate change and other pressures in the future.”

Tom Tew, Heritage Lottery Fund trustee, said: “Unlocking the Severn is a very 
rare opportunity to right 150 years of wrongs.

“It will save a wonderful, but endangered, migratory fish and hugely benefit 
the river Severn’s wider environmental health.

“The Severn has played a key role in our nation’s industrial development and 
our natural heritage; now is the perfect moment to share that story.”

He said that while complex and costly, the project would help shad run up the 
river in May as they used to in medieval times in their tens of thousands.

The project was developed as part of a three-year long collaborative 
partnership between the Severn Rivers Trust, the Canal & River Trust, the 
Environment Agency and Natural England.
 