
Aaron Taylor-Sinclair headed a late winner as Partick Thistle battled back 
from a goal down behind to beatKilmarnock 2-1 at Rugby Park.

Thistle moved up to 10th place to join Killie on 33 points – one behind 
Hibernian, who have lost five games in a row, and St Mirren – as Ross County 
slipped into the relegation play-off place in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>.

The Jags made the race to avoid a relegation play-off wide open when 
Taylor-Sinclair headed home from six yards following a cross by Kallum 
Higginbotham, whose error had allowed the on-loan Brighton player Vitaljis 
Maksimenko to score his first goal in British football, in the 53rd minute.

The lead lasted just three minutes before Higginbotham made amends with the 
goal from a free-kick that his performance thoroughly merited.

Killie appeared to have scored in their next attack but referee Brian Colvin 
ruled Michael Gardyne's shot had bounced outside the goal after his long-range 
shot struck the crossbar.

Thistle got back on top and their enterprise - and left-back Taylor-Sinclair's 
desire to get forward - was rewarded as they moved level on points with Killie 
in an increasingly tight battle to avoid the play-off, withRoss County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> slipping down.

The St Johnstone manager, Tommy Wright, said that his side's 2-0 Scottish 
Premiership victory againstDundee United would bear no influence on next 
month's Scottish Cup final between the two at Celtic Park.

Wright watched his side beat the Tangerines for the third time this season, 
with goals in either half from Steven Anderson and Stevie May. "What today gets 
us is three points," Wright said. "We're now two points off Inverness and three 
points behindDundee United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited>. 
We still haven't given up hope of finishing fourth.'

Hearts completed a memorable week after second-half goals from Jamie Hamill 
and Dale Carrick wrapped up a 2-0 win with 10 men againstRoss County at 
Tynecastle. Hamill scored from the penalty spot in the 65th minute and 
collected a second booking when the player refused to give the ball back as he 
celebrated and knocked over the County manager, Derek Adams. Carrick wrapped up 
the victory deep into injury time.

In League One, Rangers moved within three matches of recording an unbeaten 
season with securing a comprehensive 4-0 victory at 10-manStenhousemuir. Steven 
Smith and Dean Shiels engineered a two-goal lead for the visitors at half-time.

Robbie Duncan was sent off for the hosts after the break, with Lee McCulloch 
scoring the resulting penalty and Nicky Law cementing the victory with a 
well-executed strike with 12 minutes remaining.
 