
A Scott Vernon penalty was enough to give 10-man Aberdeen their second win in 
a row againstHibernian in a fiery encounter at Pittodrie.

The Dons' winner came after 59 minutes when Peter Pawlett was adjudged to have 
been fouled by Ivan Sproule in the box and Vernon converted from the spot.

The main talking point of the match came after 67 minutes when Pawlett was 
shown a red card for a challenge on Lewis Stevenson, much to the fury of the 
home support. Despite their numerical disadvantage Aberdeen held on for the 
victory that moves them six points clear of the Scottish Premier League bottom 
side,Dunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline>.

Jim Goodwin's long-range strike earned St Mirren a deserved point from an 
entertaining and open game againstMotherwell at Fir Park. The Irish midfielder 
fired into the net from 25 yards on the hour mark just asMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> looked to have gained control.

Michael Higdon had headed Motherwell into the lead three minutes after the 
break after twice being denied by goalmouth clearances in the opening half.

Hearts claimed a second win in eight games since their player-payment troubles 
began with a comfortable 4-0 defeat ofDunfermline.

Stephen Elliott scored from close range after three minutes for Hearts, whose 
players submitted an official complaint to the SPL after a third successive 
month when their wages failed to arrive on time. Mehdi Taouil struck a second 
after 27 minutes, David Templeton added a 71st-minute third and the substitute 
Rudi Skacel a stoppage-time fourth as Hearts lifted at least some of the gloom 
that has descended on Tynecastle in recent weeks. Templeton's neatly curled 
goal, following a solo run, was the forward's first of 2011, his previous 
strike coming last December atSt Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren>.

Dunfermline's Alex Keddie headed over from a corner before Rudi Skacel almost 
added another forHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> but he 
fired wide from fellow substitute Arvydas Novikovas's cross at the other end.

Ryan Stevenson had a shot parried by Paul Gallacher before Skacel headed in 
the rebound in the second minute of stoppage time to complete the rout.

Paul Dixon's injury-time equaliser helped Dundee United to a 1-1 draw at 
Kilmarnock. A sensational strike from James Dayton six minutes into the second 
half gave the hosts the lead but they were unable to hold on as Dixon pounced 
with seconds remaining.
 