
Inverness moved level on points with second-placed Aberdeen in the Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> table 
after a 2-1 win atSt Mirren. The away side dominated for long spells but 
ultimately were made to battle for their three points as St Mirren almost made 
them pay for their lack of a finishing touch in front of goal. Greg Tansey 
scored a third minute opener, with the passing and movement of Inverness 
impressive at times. Ryan Christie scored the second goal just before the hour 
mark, then a Jim Goodwin header dragged St Mirren back into the match with 22 
minutes remaining.

Gary Locke recorded a dramatic 3-2 victory in his first game since being named 
as the caretaker manager ofKilmarnock as they ended Dundee United’s unbeaten 
run of seven games. United opened the scoring with an early penalty from Nadir 
Ciftci before Josh Magennis equalised for the home side. The visitors restored 
their lead when Henri Anier opened his account for the club after 13 minutes, 
but Killie levelled again through Chris Johnston in the second half. It was 
Killie who were celebrating at the end when Sammy Clingan snatched maximum 
points deep into injury time with a stunning free-kick.

Ross County ended a seven-match losing run at home with a thrilling 3-2 
victory against fellow strugglersMotherwell at Victoria Park. County led at 
half-time through a superb Martin Woods strike after 34 minutes, but Conor 
Grant equalised from a free-kick early in the second half. The home side looked 
to have put the game beyond Well, with goals from Paul Quinn and Raffaele De 
Vita, but the visitors made sure of a grandstand finish, with Fraser Kerr 
scoring 11 minutes from the end.

An injury-time winner from Paul McGowan moved Dundee into sixth position in 
the Scottish Premiership asPartick Thistle left Dens Park bitterly disappointed 
with the 1-0 defeat. Paul Hartley’s side leapfrogged Tayside rivals St 
Johnstone in the table thanks to McGowan’s goal.

In the Championship, midfielder Jamie Walker continued his rich vein of form as
Hearts beat 10-man Livingston with a 1-0 win at Tynecastle to extend their lead 
to 20 points. Walker fired home from close range five minutes before half-time 
at the second attempt after his first effort was blocked by a Livi defender for 
his fifth goal in six games. Moments earlier, Walker shot straight at the 
Livingston goalkeeper, Darren Jamieson. James Keatings and Prince Buaben missed 
chances to extend Hearts’ lead before Livingston’s Nejc Praprotnik was sent off 
for a second booking in the 74th minute. Genero Zeefuik and substitute Billy 
King passed up good opportunities towards the end, but it didn’t matter, as
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> – who won 3-2 at 
Livingston last Saturday – had done enough. Callum Fordyce had gone close to 
giving Livi the lead in the 33rd minute, but his header from a corner was 
cleared off the line.
 