
Near identical goals from Adam Rooney and Scott McDonald ensured Aberdeen and 
Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> drew 1-1 in an 
open game between two Premiership sides who desperately wanted to improve on 
recent form.

Rooney was one of four changes made by Derek McInnes as he looked to help his 
side arrest a run that had seen them lose each of their past four games in all 
competitions – but Mark McGhee’s side were not simply going to make up the 
numbers at Pittodrie.

Indeed, it was the visitors who would have the better of the first 45 minutes, 
and there was an early taste of things to come. Just four minutes in another of 
the quartet, Shay Logan, had to be alert in challenging Louis Moult on the edge 
of the six-yard box, after he had been played in by Marvin Johnson.

Johnson was having an excellent game on the right wing, and he was involved 
again when the Motherwell captain, Keith Lasley, the one change from their 
defeat to Celtic last weekend, sent an 18-yard snapshot wide of the target.

Midway through the first half, it was another move down that side that saw 
Logan, tucking in again to cover his centre-backs, time his challenge perfectly 
to deny Wes Fletcher.

But 10 minutes from the interval everything started to come together for 
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen>. A swift 
counter-attack saw Hayes and McGinn exchange passes, before the former sent his 
angled drive high and wide. It was a warning not heeded by the visitors, and 
when Stephen Pearson gave away a soft free-kick after 42 minutes, the home side 
took the lead. Hayes and McGinn stood over the ball, and it was the latter who 
swung over a sweet cross. The defence and goalkeeper hesitated as the ball 
arced in – but Rooney was not hanging around. If the goal was at odds with the 
flow of the play for much of the first half, it would have been cruel had Ryan 
Jack’s effort on the stroke of half-time dipped under the crossbar rather than 
flown over.

Motherwell suffered another blow just eight minutes after the restart as 
Lasley was forced off with an ankle injury, to be replaced by Lionel Ainsworth. 
They could have found themselves further behind just moments later as McGinn 
worked an opening to cross for Rooney – but his header was just over the bar.

Motherwell had another narrow escape just before the hour mark as Hayes and 
Rooney combined, the striker feeding McGinn whose miscue was almost turned in 
by Peter Pawlett, only for the ball to dribble wide of the target.

Aberdeen did have the ball in the net again when Mark Reynolds turned home a 
free-kick from close range, but his effort was ruled out by an offside call 
from the assistant referee, Kylie McMullan.

The home side were dealt an injury blow of their own when Ash Taylor was 
forced off with a back injury he picked up in attempting a clearance. Paul 
Quinn took his place.

Motherwell would find themselves level with 73 minutes gone. Reynolds gave 
away a soft free-kick challenging for an aerial ball, and in what was almost a 
carbon copy of the first half Aberdeen goal, the substitute Scott McDonald 
ghosted in at the back post to head home Ainsworth’s cross. With five minutes 
remaining, Motherwell’s goalkeeper, Connor Ripley, had to be at his best to 
push a Logan header over after excellent work by his fellow full-back, Graeme 
Shinnie, and at the other end Ward performed similar heroics from a Theo 
Robinson effort. Deep into injury time, the on-loan Liverpool keeper Ward made 
a hat-trick of excellent saves, two from Ainsworth, to keep the scoreline level.
 