
Moussa Dembélé scored two goals and Scott Sinclair scored in his sixth 
consecutive league game, as Brendan Rodgers’ rampant side fought back to sweep
Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> away 6-1 in a 
one-sided Premiership encounter.

Souleymane Coulibaly fired Killie ahead against the run of play in the 33rd 
minute with a wondrous 35-yard strike, but two goals in three minutes from 
20-year-old Dembélé saw the home side ahead.

The substitute keeper Craig Gordon replaced an injured Dorus de Vries for the 
second half before goals from James Forrest, Leigh Griffiths, Scott Sinclair – 
with a penalty – and Tom Rogic stretched Celtic’s lead at the top of the table 
over Hearts to five points with a game in hand.

It was a perfect confidence-boost for the home side, who will host Manchester 
City in their second Champions League Group C match on Wednesday, looking to 
make amends after losing 7-0 at Barcelona in their opener.

Rodgers made changes again as De Vries came back in for Gordon with the 
veteran defender Kolo Touré replaced by Erik Sviatchenko. The forward Sinclair 
came back into the side as did the midfielder Nir Bitton, while Griffiths 
started on the bench after missing four games with hamstring and calf injuries.

The Kilmarnock manager, Lee Clark, was without his injured captain, Steven 
Smith, but Greg Taylor returned from suspension to take his place at left-back.

As early as the fifth minute Killie defenders were throwing themselves in 
front ofCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> shots on goal. In 
addition, Dembélé (twice), Sinclair, skipper Scott Brown and Forrest all 
cleared the bar with efforts. Clark’s side could not get out of their own half.

However, just after the half-hour mark Coulibaly drew gasps of shock from the 
home fans and cheers from the travelling support when he took a pass from Gary 
Dicker, turned inside Brown and aimed a missile at the goal which beat De Vries 
and dipped under the bar.

That unlikely lead only lasted a couple of minutes, though, before Dembélé 
swept a Mikael Lustig pass past keeper Jamie MacDonald from 10 yards. The 
former Fulham player then did the same in the 38th minute, this time from a 
Tierney cut-back, to put Celtic ahead. It was no more than the champions 
deserved.

Gordon replaced De Vries for the second half while moments later the 
Kilmarnock substitute Charlie Adams came on for the injured Dean Hawkshaw.

Celtic increased their lead in the 52nd minute when Forrest combined with 
Rogic before stabbing the ball past MacDonald from 12 yards, and Celtic 
threatened to swamp the Ayrshire side.

Griffiths came on for Dembélé in the 65th minute and scored a couple of 
minutes later with a close-range header when Jozo Simunovic helped on a 
Sinclair corner.

Celtic were relentless. When Griffiths was fouled inside the box by Greg 
Taylor in the 72nd minute, the Scotland striker handed Sinclair the ball, 
allowing him to score in a sixth consecutive league game from the start of the 
season, by sending MacDonald the wrong way with the penalty.

Rodgers’ side missed several more chances before MacDonald gifted Rogic the 
sixth when he let the midfielder’s low effort from the edge of the box escape 
over his hands.

It was impressive stuff from the league leaders but Rodgers will know that 
Manchester City will undoubtedly provide a tougher test in midweek. Post-match 
the Kilmarnock manager described the contest as “men versus boys”.
 