
Celtic finished off 2014 in unimpressive style with a goalless draw against 
Ross County at Parkhead. The Premiership leaders bossed a rather uninspiring 
first half but eventually wound up huffing and puffing against a resolute, if 
at times desperate, County rearguard.

Jim McIntyre, whose side were beaten 5-0 by Celtic earlier in the season, was 
delighted with his side’s resilience. “The last time againstCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> we tried to have a go and took a 
hammering so that was in the mindset today,” he said. “We had to be hard to 
beat and break down and they carried that our very well.”

Ronnie Deila’s side have dropped five points in two matches yet have now 
extended their lead by a point to five, asDundee United – their conquerors last 
Sunday – went down 2-1 atSt Johnstone. Calum Butcher put the visitors ahead two 
minutes before half-time, but Saints scored twice in the last 15 minutes to 
take the points. Michael O’Halloran headed in Lee Croft’s cross in the 76th 
minute before the midfielder Chris Millar curled in the winner in the 86th, his 
first goal for nearly four years.

The Defeat for Jackie McNamara’s side not only allowed Celtic to extend their 
lead at the top of the table, but means thatAberdeen, level on points with the 
second-placed Tangerines, will go second if they avoid defeat atInverness on 
Sunday.

Despite their point at Parkhead County dropped to the bottom of the table 
after being leapfrogged bySt Mirren, 3-1 winners over Dundee in Gary Teale’s 
first victory since replacing Tommy Craig as caretaker manager earlier this 
month.

Kenny McLean scored the first after 28 minutes and Stephen Mallan added 
another in the 68th to put the visitors on the road to a surprise win. McLean 
rounded things off with a 78th-minute penalty – theDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> defender Paul McGinn was sent off 
for his role in conceding it – while Gary Irvine hit a late consolation for the 
home team six minutes from time.

Kilmarnock earned their first win in eight league matches thanks to a stunning 
stoppage-time free-kick from Alexei Eremenko, which earned a 1-0 victory over a
Hamilton side that dominated for long periods without ever being able to 
capitalise. “We’ve been a wee bit unfortunate with the recent run of games, 
we’ve deserved a lot more than what we’ve got, so it’s good to finally get a 
wee bit of luck,” said Kilmarnock’s manager, Allan Johnston.Motherwell beat 
Partick Thistle1-0, John Sutton scoring the only goal from the penalty spot in 
the 14th minute.
 