
Murrayfield, rather than Cardiff, will stage next April's Challenge Cup final 
because of the problems with the pitch at the Millennium Stadium.

After taking the 2000 final to Edinburgh and last week's to Twickenham, the 
Rugby Football League were planning to move on to Wales in 2002, and Cardiff 
City Council took out on advert in last Saturday's final programme 'looking 
forward to welcoming rugby league supporters next year'.

But Dave Callaghan, the RFL's Executive Director of Communications, said 
yesterday: 'We are delighted to be going back to Murrayfield.

'We had reached an advanced stage of negotiations with the Millennium Stadium 
in Cardiff but were unable to complete an agreement because of the Football 
Association's restrictions on pitch use 10 days prior to the playing of the FA 
Cup final. There was a real danger that our final would have fallen within that 
period and we could not take any risks.'

The League are now expected to go to Cardiff in 2003 and possibly 2004 with 
the prospects of a new national stadium at Wembley or elsewhere being ready by 
then looking increasingly remote.

They are also considering the venues for three Tests against Australia this 
autumn, although Murrayfield would now appear to be out of the running.

The decision to return to Edinburgh will be a popular one with those 
supporters who travelled north for last year's final between Bradford and 
Leeds. The early signs were not good as the game looked set to be postponed 
following torrential rain and flooding, but the RFL developed a good working 
relationship with the Scottish Rugby Union during the efforts to get the game 
on, and although the game was far from a classic, a good time was had by pretty 
much all.

Greg McCallum, the RFL's director of rugby and president of Scotland Rugby 
League, added: 'Going back to Murrayfield is a real lift for the sport. Our 
fans really enjoyed themselves when we played the 2000 final there and we've 
had requests to take the game back there from many different quarters.'

Meanwhile St Helens, the winners at Twickenham last Saturday, are under 
pressure to get their Super League season back on track following Friday 
night's club record 74-16 drubbing at Leeds.

Saints have arranged home games against Castleford on Wednesday and Halifax 
only two nights later. It is a tough schedule, especially as they now need to 
win both with Friday's defeat leaving them in mid-table with only nine points 
from eight games.

And they will have to do so without their inspirational stand-off Tommy 
Martyn, who has been carrying a groin injury for weeks but will now have 
surgery that will keep him out for at least a month.

Paul Newlove and Paul Wellens also missed the Leeds game and are unlikely to 
be back to face Castleford.

Leeds will go into next Friday night's televised derby against Bradford in 
much better spirits after a fourth consecutive victory under their new coach, 
Daryl Powell.

In the pick of today's games, the London Broncos take a four-match unbeaten 
run to Hull, who are aiming to consolidate their place in the top three.
 