
Roundup

Second-half strikes from Nicky Low and Niall McGinn helped Aberdeen to a 
comfortable victory overPartick Thistle as they recorded their first home 
league win of the season. Low struck the opening goal shortly after the 
half-time interval and McGinn curled a fine shot into the far corner of the net 
after 66 minutes to seal victory.

Hamilton’s fine start to the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> season continued 
as, conversely,Ross County remain without a single point so far, after five 
games. Goals from Martin Canning, Jason Scotland and a double from the penalty 
spot from Mickaël Antoine-Curier secured the 4-0 win for Accies on what was 
another day to forget for Ross County, who ended the contest with 10 men after 
Uros Celcer was sent off midway through the second half. Patrick Kluivert, 
though, has been linked to County’s vacant manager’s post.

The St Johnstone manager, Tommy Wright, hopes Brian Graham will reap the 
benefits of being at a new club after the on-loan striker scored the only goal 
in a 1-0 win atMotherwell. Graham joined Saints from Dundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> in midweek and made an 
immediate impact, heading home four minutes from time.

That made it back-to-back wins for St Johnstone in the Premiership, and Wright 
believes Graham’s contribution was valuable in more ways than one. “He is a 
confident lad and just needs to get games and goals – and I’m sure that goal 
will help his confidence,” said Wright.

Dundee United added to St Mirren’s miserable start to the season by beating 
them 3-0. Second-half goals from Chris Erskine, Radoslaw Fojut and substitute 
Blair Spittal condemned the men in black and white to their fourth straight 
Scottish Premiership defeat, leaving them second-bottom in the table.

In the Championship, Hearts remain top with four wins from four games after 
recording a 4-1 win at home toFalkirk.

Despite having Prince Bauben sent off at 3-0 up, the Tynecastle men were in 
free-flowing form and goals from Jordan McGhee, after 17 minutes with a header, 
two from Billy King before half-time, and one from Osman Sow, a penalty after 
78 minutes, put the Jambos 4-0 ahead. Botti Bia-Bi scored a consolation for the 
Bairns with four minutes remaining.

Marius Zaliukas and Bilel Mohsni made up for a poor defensive display by 
scoring the goals that helpedRangers to twice come from behind to beat Queen of 
the South 4-2 at Ibrox.

Zaliukas cancelled out Gavin Reilly’s opener when he headed home, but his 
mistake allowed Queens to regain the lead through Iain Russell.

David Templeton finished well to level the scores within a minute of coming on 
as a half-time substitute, and Mohsni headedRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> in front in the 64th minute. 
Kenny Miller made sure of Rangers’ third Scottish Championship victory four 
minutes from time, when he notched the first goal of his third spell at Ibrox 
as he mark his comeback from a hamstring injury. Hibs lost 2-1 at Alloa.
 