
The holders, St Johnstone, began their defence of the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> with a hard-earned 2-1 win 
against their Premiership rivalsRoss County in one of 14 fourth-round matches 
in Scotland.

The Perth side were 2-0 up within the first 12 minutes and looked to be 
cruising towards Monday’s fifth‑round draw before County made them stress with 
a second-half revival.

Michael O’Halloran gave the home side the lead in the seventh minute and five 
minutes later the reigning champions already looked comfortable as they went 
two goals up with a stinging drive from James McFadden. However, County pulled 
a goal back just after the hour mark through Jake Jervis and made Saints fight 
all the way.

Keith Watson sent Dundee United into the fifth round following an emphatic 
second-half comeback againstMotherwell. He proved the hero when he headed home 
a cross by his fellow full-back Conor Townsend with eight minutes left to seal 
a 2-1 victory at Fir Park for last season’s runners-up.

Steven Thompson’s return from injury failed to inspire St Mirren to victory in 
their Cup clash withInverness as they were held to a 1-1 draw. Thompson, the 
captain, back after three months on the sidelines with a groin injury, played a 
part in Marc McAusland’s early goal atSt Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> Park.

But the Buddies could not hold on as Caley Thistle set up a fourth-round 
replay on Tuesday with Josh Meekings’ equalising goal 19 minutes into the 
second half.

Annan Athletic and Brechin will also replay after a 1-1 draw at Galabank. Ryan 
Stevenson’s first two goals of the season bookedPartick’s place in the fifth 
round with a deserved 2-0 victory overHamilton at Firhill.

Hibernian had to come from behind to avoid a cup upset and beat Alloa 2-1 at 
Recreation Park. The hosts went ahead after 15 minutes when a long-range effort 
from Daryll Meggatt squirmed underneath the Hibs goalkeeper Mark Oxley. But 
Hibs hit back 13 minutes later through Liam Craig’s powerful free-kick and the 
visitors took the lead before half-time when David Gray headed in a Scott Allan 
cross for what proved to be the winner. Hibs had to play the last three minutes 
with 10 men after Dominique Malonga was dismissed for an off-the-ball incident.

In the other cup ties, a late strike from Jack Beesley gave Lowland League side
Spartans a 2-1 win against Morton, Abroath’s comfortable 5-0 win ended Junior 
sideBo’ness United’s cup dream and Queen of the South beat Brora Rangers 4-1 at 
Palmerston Park.Raith beat Stirling 2-0 to progress but Stranraer and 
Dunfermlineshared a 2-2 draw and will replay.
 