
A Scottish town has broken off its relations with the Faroe Islands in protest 
against this year’s “disgusting” killing of over 400 pilot whales.

Wick, a coastal in the far north of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> closer to the Faroes than to London, 
has been twinned for 20 years with Klaksvík, the second-largest community in 
the Faroes. But the islanders’ traditional whale hunts have sickened civic 
leaders who fear that their association with the remote archipelago could also 
affect their own tourism.

Caithness SNP civic leader councillor Gail Ross and two colleagues have 
written to Jógvan Skorheim, mayor of Klaksvík, to say the traditional whale 
hunts were not something that her town “should be associated with”.

In an email, Ross said: “I and my two ward colleagues make reference to the 
recent slaughter of whales which took place in Bøur and Tórshavn, amongst other 
areas and whilst we note that this is not Klaksvík, I am afraid that the whole 
of the Faroe Islands has been tainted by these events.

“We do not agree that these events and the apparent joy it gave the 
townspeople is in any way or should in any way be linked to tradition. There 
may have been reasons of culling for food in the past but in 2015 it is 
unnecessary and cruel.”

She said that whales had feelings and emotions. “To drive them on to a beach 
and slaughter them in front of their family members is nothing short of 
barbaric,” she said.

Skorheim has now replied to what he describes as the “ultimatum” from Wick. He 
said: “If you’re asking us to choose between being twinned with Wick and our 
Faroese right to conduct sustainable whaling, you should know that this choice 
is not hard for us to make.

“However, it disappoints me to hear, that you are prepared to sever links with 
Klaksvík.”

The move by Wick follows a decision by two German cruise line companies to 
suspend visits to the islands because of the hunts. Hapag-Lloyd and AIDA have 
said they are seeking alternative destinations and have urged the islanders to 
halt the practice.

The Faroese have strongly defended this years’ hunts, saying the traditional 
practice of rounding up pods of pilot whales in the summer months and has been 
carried on for 1,000 years. They argue that the population lives closer to 
nature and that they eat the whales. “If the Faroese did not maintain these 
connections with their own food, much more would have to be imported,” it says 
on a website about the practice.

“Faroese people from all walks of life also keep sheep, hunt birds and 
participate in whale hunts in their spare time. This would also have a 
significant extra impact on the environment, considering the fuel needed for 
transport.”
 