
Hearts were relegated from the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>, despite recording 
their biggest win of the league season overPartick Thistle. St Mirren's victory 
over Motherwell sealed the young Hearts team's fall from the top division, 
despite the 4-2 success at Firhill, which closed them to within 17 points of 
their opponents.

Partick <https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> took the lead in the 
opening stages through Kris Doolan before goals from Dale Carrick and Billy 
King, either side of half-time, put Hearts 2-1 in front. Ryan Stevenson then 
struck two fine goals to seal a deserved victory for the Edinburgh side, 
although Jordan McMillan scored a late consolation for the home side.

St Mirren moved out of the relegation play-off spot after two goals in the 
last five minutes earned them a 3-2 home victory againstMotherwell.

Henri Anier and John Sutton took advantage of St Mirren playing a high line of 
defence to putMotherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> two 
ahead after 27 minutes played.

The visitors were missing the injured centre-back Shaun Hutchinson and, as a 
result,St Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> looked 
dangerous at corners, and Steven Thompson converted one with a volley just 
before the interval to give the Buddies hope for the second 45 minutes.

Although St Mirren attacked the Steelmen at the start of the second half, 
Motherwell had opportunities on the counter attack and appeared to have 
withstood the pressure.

However, the referee Iain Brines awarded the Saints a controversial penalty 
for handball by Stephen McManus in the 86th minute. McManus had blocked 
Thompson's header at close range but Brines, after some contemplation, awarded 
a penalty for deliberate handball, despite the Motherwell player's protests.

Kenny McLean converted from the spot and Thompson completed the comeback when 
he turned and finished from close range, a minute later, for his 16th goal of 
the season.

St Johnstone fought back from an early strike by Kilmarnock's Robbie Muirhead 
to win 2-1 at Rugby Park. Muirhead followed up Kris Boyd's shot, parried by St 
Johnstone's goalkeeper, Alan Mannus, to open the scoring from close range after 
five minutes played. But Frazer Wright restored parity after 31 minutes with a 
header and Steven Anderson's back-heel gave the Perthshire side the lead, and 
ultimately victory, a minute before half-time.
 