
Celtic cemented their place at the top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> with a routine and 
mostly trouble-free 2-0 win over Motherwell.

The Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> forward Scott 
Sinclair steered in the opener after 18 minutes with Moussa Dembélé and Kieran 
Tierney hitting the woodwork before the break. Brendan Rodgers’ side controlled 
the second half as well but had to wait until three minutes remaining to be 
sure of the points with Dembélé scoring from the spot after he had been brought 
down by the Well keeper, Craig Samson.

Celtic remain four points ahead of Aberdeen with a game in hand and now turn 
their attention to the visit of the Bundesliga side Borussia Mönchengladbach in 
the Champions League on Wednesday night.

The Steelmen had conceded 12 goals in their previous two games in the east end 
of Glasgow and will be glad the scoreline was not more damaging although they 
never looked like pulling off a shock win.

Rodgers demonstrated the depth of his squad by bringing in the midfielder Liam 
Henderson for his first start of the season. He was one of three changes with 
the right-back Cristian Gamboa and midfielder Stuart Armstrong also in for the 
injured Mikael Lustig and Nir Bitton with Tom Rogic rested.

The Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> manager, Mark 
McGhee, gave a debut to the 18-year-old left-back Jack McMillan while the 
19-year-old midfielder Ross McLean made his first start in midfield.

Desert fire: the world cup rebels of Kurdistan – video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/oct/14/desert-fire-the-world-cup-rebels-of-kurdistan-video>
Without being relentless, Celtic controlled the first half with early efforts 
from Henderson and Armstrong.

In the 17th minute Samson made a fine save from Dembélé’s curling shot which 
was heading into the top corner and then another from Erik Sviatchenko’s header 
from the resultant corner.

However, the former Killie No1 had no chance moments later when James 
Forrest’s cross from the right was missed altogether by Dembélé 12 yards out 
only for the incoming Sinclair to guide the ball high into the net.

In the 38th minute Dembélé ended a swift and incisive Celtic counterattack – a 
result of a sloppy McMillan pass in midfield – by striking the post with a shot 
from 14 yards.

And with a minute remaining of the first half, the Scotland left-back Tierney 
deserved a goal following his wonderful run which took him past Scott McDonald, 
Richard Tait and Ben Heneghan but his shot from 16 yards crashed off the bar.

Celtic’s grip on the game remained firm after the break. In the 53rd minute 
Samson pulled of a fine double save, first from the captain Scott Brown’s low 
deflected strike and then at the post from Dembélé who was following up.

At the other end the Motherwell striker Louis Moult had a couple of efforts, 
one with his head, one an attempted cross after good work by the impressive 
Chris Cadden, that should have troubled the home side more than it did.

The Parkhead side had several attempts on goal, the closest to another goal 
coming in the 74th minute when Sampson had to make a great save from Sinclair’s 
drive after the Well defence had been cut open.

The slender lead might have led to inevitable Celtic nerves in the final 
stages but in the 87th minute the Well defence switched off and Samson tripped 
Dembélé as he chased a Brown pass, with the French forward firing in from the 
spot for his 13th of the season for Celtic.

It was a perfunctory victory for the home side but they should expect more 
trouble from Borussia Mönchengladbach when their Champions League campaign 
resumes on Wednesday.
 