
Hamilton remain top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> on goal difference 
despiteDundee ending their nine-game unbeaten run in the league at windswept 
Dens Park. Two second-half goals helped Paul Hartley’s side become the first 
team to beat Alex Neil’s league leaders since the opening day of the season 
when they lost at home to Inverness. David Clarkson’s 69th-minute header was 
his fourth goal in four matches and four minutes later Greg Stewart made sure 
of the points with a well-taken goal to clinch a 2-0 win.

The St Johnstone manager, Tommy Wright, was delighted to end his side’s recent 
wretched run of form with a battling 0-0 draw againstPartick Thistle at 
Firhill. The Perth side came into the match after five straight league defeats 
but they averted a sixth straight loss. “It’s a good point, particularly in the 
run that we’ve been on,” he said.

The Ross County manager, Jim McIntyre, claimed it was “crystal clear” that the 
referee, Don Robertson, made the wrong decision after he disallowed a Michael 
Gardyne goal in the 2-2 Scottish Premiership draw withSt Mirren in Paisley. The 
visitors were ahead through a Paul Quinn header after 11 minutes when the 
on-loanDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> United player met a 
Jackson Irvine pass and raced through on goal with time and space. It appeared 
Gardyne had beaten the offside trap as there was no flag or whistle, but both 
came when he slotted the ball through the legs of the goalkeeper, Marian Kello, 
and into the net.

From potentially being two goals up, County found themselves level when Adam 
Drury headed in from close range two minutes from the break. The formerSt Mirren
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> player Graham Carey restored 
the Staggies’ lead in the 58th minute with a well-placed drive, but this time 
County’s lead lasted two minutes before Jeroen Tesselaar equalised with a 
wonderful shot from the edge of the box.

McIntyre believes the decision stopped them taking all three points back to 
the Highlands. “It is not marginal - it is crystal clear.”

In the Championship, Rangers won 3-0 at Dumbarton with goals from Kenny 
Miller, Lee Wallace and Kris Boyd and reduced the deficit on Hearts to six 
points.
 