
Ross County moved up to ninth place in the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> after a fine 2-1 
victory overKilmarnock at Victoria Park.

County capitalised on their dominance as they took the lead in spectacular 
style four minutes from the break when Filip Kiss swept the ball past Craig 
Samson from 20 yards after Jordan Slew and Melvin De Leeuw combined to set him 
up.

Graham Carey also came close with a free-kick that curled past Samson's near 
post at the end of the first half.

Killie tried hard to regain parity in the second half and Ross Barbour played 
the ball through for substitute William Gros but his first touch let him down 
and the opportunity was lost.

It was end-to-end stuff and Manuel Pascali met a free-kick from Sammy Clingan, 
who had just come on as a substitute, but his header flew wide.

County pushed for a second and Carey forced Samson to parry his shot in the 
70th minute. Richard Brittain nudged the rebound back for Slew but the ball was 
intercepted.

The home side doubled their lead six minutes later when Brittain was hauled 
down in the box by Lee Ashcroft and Kevin Clancy pointed to the penalty spot. 
Brittain duly converted the chance for his seventh goal of the season. With 
three minutes remaining Killie pulled a goal back when Kris Boyd headed home a 
cross from Jeroen Tesselaar at the back post.

Aberdeen strengthened their grip on the Scottish Premiership's runners-up 
place to Celtic, despite dropping two points toSt Johnstone in a match strewn 
with defensive errors. Both first-half goals, first for St Johnstone's Stevie 
May and then for Aberdeen's Adam Rooney, came as the result of poor pass-backs.

Rangers collected the Scottish League One trophy following their 3-0 win over 
Stranraer at Ibrox but celebrations were muted following the death of Sandy 
Jardine on Thursday. There was a minute's silence in tribute with the players 
of both sides wearing black armbands. Goals from Fraser Aird, Arnold Peralta 
and Dean Shiels made sure Ally McCoist's side remain unbeaten in the league 
with one game remaining.
 