
Billy McKay’s two goals allowed Inverness to come from behind to win 2-1 at 
Kilmarnock, despite playing with 10 men for half of the game at Rugby Park. 
Caley Thistle were up against it when Alexei Eremenko slotted home a penalty 
two minutes into the second half, after David Raven had been sent off for 
bringing down Josh Magennis. But Magennis soon missed a glaring chance and the 
home side failed to make their numerical advantage count. McKay restored parity 
in the 54th minute after some skill, and converted another impressive goal in 
an 82nd-minute counterattack, to push Inverness up into third place in the
Scottish Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>
.

Dundee ended their long wait for a win with a 4-1 victory over 10-man 
Motherwell at Dens Park. Early goals from Alex Harris and Greg Stewart put the 
home side ahead before John Sutton pulled one back for the visitors – only for 
Gary Irvine to restore the home team’s two-goal advantage. The visitors had 
Henrik Ojamaa sent off for an elbow on Kevin Thomson just before half-time, and 
they conceded a further goal after 71 minutes, when Marc O’Brien turned the 
ball into his own net.

Hearts maintained their 13-point lead at the top of the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> with a convincing 
5-1 win atDumbarton. Hearts took the lead after eight minutes when Sam 
Nicholson’s shot from 30 yards out nestled in the bottom corner of the net. 
They went further ahead when the debutant Genero Zeefuik, signed on loan from 
FC Groningen this week, released Jamie Walker down the right and he cut in 
before firing home. Hearts sealed victory early in the second half, when Walker 
assisted Zeefuik, who tapped in a third goal, and Nicholson added his second as 
he pounced on Callum Paterson’s drilled cross to score. Zeefuik tapped in a 
fifth after more buildup work from Walker. The home side scored a consolation 
through Chris Kane and Zeefuik missed a penalty.

Nicky Law’s 10th goal of the season was enough to finally give Rangers their 
first win overAlloa this season as they held on for a 1-0 victory. Hibs striker 
Jason Cummings scored a first-half hat‑trick to put his side 3-1 up butFalkirk 
fought back to draw 3-3.
 