
When Scotland take to the field in Coventry on Saturday to face England in the 
Four Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> – a sentence that 
would have been barely computable in rugby league circles a few years ago – it 
is not only their winless run in the tournament they are trying to end as the 
sport breaks new ground in the Midlands.

Since the Tri-Nations was extended to a four-team tournament in 2009, five 
teams have taken part alongside the traditional big three of Australia, New 
Zealand and England – but France, Papua New Guinea, Wales, Samoa and the Scots 
have all failed to win a game. Thirteen attempts, no victories. Most of the 
time, the fourth nation has barely been near (although Samoaran England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/25/england-beat-samoa-four-nations> 
andNew Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/01/new-zealand-beat-samoa-four-nations>
 close two years ago).

England’s Wayne Bennett to reshuffle team for Four Nations Scotland match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/wayne-bennett-england-scotland-four-nations>
It is a record that has left some asking whether the tournament has a viable 
future. That the “fourth nation” have yet to win a single game is certainly a 
worry but rather than hinder the opportunities of burgeoning nations at elite 
level, the Rugby League International Federation is instead working behind 
closed doors to ensure tournaments such as these are enhanced in the hope the 
playing field can eventually be levelled.

“We’re always seeking to improve the developing nations, and our focus right 
now is primarily on those ranked between four and eight,” says the RLIF’s chief 
executive, David Collier. “The intent in the future is to play at least two 
more global events in a four-year cycle to help develop funding and player 
pools for those emerging nations.”

But despite more tournaments being planned for the next decade, the Four 
Nations’ future on a revamped international calendar remains unclear. There 
are, as yet, no confirmed plans for the international game beyond next year’s 
World Cup, and the decision about a Four Nations taking place again in the 
future falls to the relevant governing bodies, not the RLIF, although it is 
understood that all parties, including the Rugby Football League, are keen for 
it to continue.

“It’s up to those guys to decide what the best format for the Four Nations is, 
but it’s vital to have a packed, cohesive calendar so we can get used to having 
international rugby league on a regular basis,” Collier says. “The Four Nations 
is great from our point of view because it puts international rugby league in 
the spotlight, and anything that enhances the profile of the game is something 
we openly welcome.”

We take pride from playing in the European Cup but it doesn’t match up to 
having a crack at England in the Four Nations
Steve McCormack 
As for Scotland, their game against England may not command too much attention 
north of the borderon Saturday, but their coach insists that opportunities such 
as this will enable the sport to stand a fighting chance in developing nations 
in the future.

“We get some valuable exposure from this,” says Steve McCormack, the 
Bravehearts coach. “We can increase the player pool off the back of a 
tournament like this and with the World Cup next year too, compete well there 
and then hopefully two straight years of exposure to the world’s best will be a 
major plus for rugby league in Scotland.”

But how does the Four Nations solve its problem of one nation being repeatedly 
cut adrift? Five different sides in as many editions raises the question about 
whether it would be more beneficial to invite the same nation back regularly, 
as with Italy’s addition to rugby union’s Six Nations in 2000. However, Collier 
believes the proposed introduction of regular tournaments – the RLIF will 
confirm its plans for the next cycle leading up to the 2025 World Cup later 
this month – will solve that problem.

“It really helps when nations like Scotland are afforded the opportunity to 
get more experience but traditionally it’s only at World Cups: that’s something 
we need to change,” he says. “Scotland will benefit this year but we need a 
second regular event in the calendar with a number of developing nations 
consistently playing the best sides in the world.”

McCormack adds: “We take pride from playing in the European Cup against fellow 
developing nations but it doesn’t match up to having a crack at England in the 
Four Nations.” With more tournaments and more opportunities to play the world’s 
best yet to materialise, opportunities such as the one Scotland have this year 
are vital. Taking it away from them or any other qualifying nation would wreck 
hopes of a more competitive international field in the future.

Having lost 54-12 to Australia last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/australia-scotland-four-nations-match-report>
, Scotland may well fall short again this Saturday, and that winless record for 
the fourth nation could easily extend to 15 by the end of this tournament. But 
giving up and closing the door seems like a somewhat myopic option for a sport 
that has spent its history fighting so hard to establish itself.
 