
Two goals in the dying minutes of the first half gave Inverness Caley Thistle 
the edge in the first Highland derby of the season at Victoria Park.

Ross County dominated most of the first half, but it was the visitors who went 
ahead in the 42nd minute when Miles Storey swept home a Liam Polworth pass. The 
visitors doubled their advantage before half‑time when James Vincent headed 
home from close range.

The home side scored in stoppage time through Liam Boyce, with a header but 
Inverness held out for a 2-1 victory and the three points.

Managerless Dundee United slumped to bottom spot in the table after a dismal 
display against a rampantPartick side, who leapfrogged them into 11th place in 
the league with a deserved first win of the season.

Goals from David Amoo, Mustapha Dumbuya and Stuart Bannigan secured a 3-0 
victory for the hosts in this early-season relegation encounter, the result of 
which makes the job of restoring United’s fortunes an even bigger task for 
their next manager.

Stephen Craigan suffered defeat in his second match as Motherwell caretaker 
manager asDundee held on for a 2-1 victory at Dens Park.

The game came to life after half‑time and Rory Loy flicked home the opener 
before Kevin Holt fired home a deflected free-kick.

Dundee were cruising towards three points until Stephen Pearson scored with 
seven minutes remaining, butMotherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> could not force another clear 
opportunity.

Conrad Balatoni conceded the first‑half penalty that led to his side going a 
goal down to Jamie Walker’s spot-kick forHearts, before scoring a late 
equaliser forKilmarnock as they drew 1-1 at Tynecastle.

Rangers completed a clean sweep of wins in the first quarter of their 
Championship season with a 3-1 victory overFalkirk at Ibrox.

Dean Shiels opened the scoring from close range in the third minute before 
Bairns midfielder Will Vaulks levelled in the 17th minute with a stunning 
long-range strike.

Peter Houston’s side defended resolutely for most of the match, but with 10 
minutes remaining Gers right‑back James Tavernier curled in a free-kick from 25 
yards out for his ninth goal of the season. Lee Wallace, the captain, then 
scored in injury time to confirm Rangers’ ninth successive league triumph, 
while ending the visitors’ unbeaten run.

Hibernian got back to winning ways in the Championship with a routine 3-0 win 
atQueen of the South. The visitors, whose chase of table-topping Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> was slowed by a 1-1 draw with St 
Mirren last time out, went ahead after only three minutes through Jason 
Cummings’s low finish.

Liam Henderson fired home the second from the centre of the area four minutes 
before the break and Hibs were already home and dry by the time Martin Boyle 
made it three a minute from time. Victory moved Hibs up to third and kept them 
11 points behind the runaway leaders, Rangers, with a game in hand.
 