
Liam Boyce’s equaliser kept Motherwell in relegation danger and maintained 
Ross County’s six-point lead in the race to avoid a play-off.

Boyce scored his fifth goal in four games with four minutes of the first half 
remaining to earn County a 1-1Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> draw at Fir Park. 
Scott McDonald had given Motherwell a 20th-minute lead and the home side were 
looking comfortable but a mistake from centre-back Mark O’Brien – who was in 
for the injured Louis Laing – gifted Boyce his chance, which he took with some 
aplomb.

Second-half goals from Ryan Stevenson, Kris Doolan and Steven Lawless 
confirmed survival forPartick and a 3-0 win at home to St Mirren.

A late header from substitute Brian Graham earned St Johnstone a 1-1 draw to 
10-manInverness at McDiarmid Park. Danny Swanson hit the crossbar early on and 
Michael O’Halloran missed two good chances either side of half-time before 
Aaron Doran gave the visitors a second-half advantage with an excellent strike 
that went in off the bar. Graham’s late goal denied Inverness their first win 
in nine league games and David Raven’s late dismissal for a second yellow card 
meant Caley had to endure an anxious remaining few minutes before leaving with 
a share of the points.

Hamilton came back from a goal behind to win 3-2 at Kilmarnock and drag Killie 
closer to relegation danger.

In the final day of the Championship season, Hibernian collected a 3-0 away 
win against their hoodoo teamFalkirk to cement second place ahead of Rangers 
with goals coming from Martin Boyle, Jason Cummings and Dominique Malonga. They 
had failed to overcome the Bairns in four previous meetings - including a 
Scottish Cup semi-final exit.

Champions Hearts came back from 2-0 down at home to Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> to draw 2-2 courtesy of two 
goals from the second-half substitute Género Zeefuik in the last eight minutes.

Rangers play Queen of the South in the quarter-final of the play-offs at 
Palmerston next Saturday.

At the other end of the table Livingston beat Queen of the South 1-0 with a 
Kyle Jacobs penalty to stay in the Championship and Michael Chopra scored as
Alloa beat Cowdenbeath 3-0 and condemned the Blue Brazil to the First Division. 
Morton beat Peterhead 3-1 to clinch the League One title and promotion to the 
Championship with Stenhousemuir consigned to a relegation play-off after a 3-2 
defeat at Stirling.
 