
Scotland may not be the fourth best national team in world rugby league, but 
they certainly showed that they could be whenthey led England until just before 
half-time on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/england-scotland-four-nations-rugby-league-match-report>
. Being fourth best means operating on a tiny budget in relation to the big 
three. There are players in Scotland’s squad whose annual income from rugby is 
less than their Four Nations opponents receive per Test. Some players have 
taken a month off work – either holiday or unpaid leave – to test themselves 
against the best. It is no wonder the “fourth” nation has never won a game on 
the fiendishly uneven playing fields of the Four Nations.

And yet Scotland must have earned enormous respect in Coventry and beyond. For 
anyone outside the top three, playing Australia, England and New Zealand in 
successive weeks is about as gruelling as sport gets. But the Bravehearts 
scared England sufficiently that coach Steve McCormack suggested that anyone 
questioning their right to be in the Four Nations would no longer do so. 
Moments later,Wayne Bennett referred to his England as “they” and not “we” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/wayne-bennett-england-australia-four-nations>
 throughout his monosyllabic press conference.

Elliott Whitehead revives England in Four Nations after Scotland scare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/england-scotland-four-nations-rugby-league-match-report>
That some in the Scotland camp were frustrated by the final 38-12 scoreline 
says it all. “The score didn’t really reflect the game,” said Matty Russell, 
scorer of that sensationally gymnastic try. “It was tight. We gave them a 
really good game and we had them for about 30 minutes. I wasn’t disappointed.”

Lachlan Coote was. “I’m more filthy than last week,” said the North Queensland 
Cowboys player, using the vernacular of his native New South Wales rather than 
his grandmother’s Glasgow. With Coote among so many outstanding tartan-shorted 
performers on Saturday, Scotland – without the injured Peter Wallace, Keith 
Galloway and Joe Wardle – showed they are a potential semi-final contender at 
the World Cup next autumn.

“It makes you wonder what this group could be capable of if we got together 
more often,” said Russell, who has missed the last two European Championship 
campaigns due to season-ending injuries. “There’s a real bond now. Just 
spending time in the camp, picking up the way players like Lachlan Coote likes 
to play, the passes he likes to pick. The pack are getting closer together, 
too. There are pleasing signs. I reckon that in future we can be a team that 
could be up there with England, New Zealand and Australia.”

Full-back Coote had never been to Scotland before this trip, while Hull-born 
forward Frankie Mariano’s only previous visit was as a young lad working on a 
Glaswegian building site. Mariano, who finally made his debut on Saturday after 
two years of injuries, did not even know he qualified for Scotland until he 
tried to play for the USA at the last World Cup. The birth certificate of his 
mum’s father, an American trawlerman, revealed he was actually born in 
Saltcoats, not the States. Yet he is willing to go into brutal unarmed combat 
with the world’s elite.

Having been in camp last week (as volunteer media officer), I can confirm that 
most of the Bravehearts feel a strong tie to Scotland. Sheldon Powe-Hobbs, the 
pony-tailed North Queenslander from the aptly named Cairns, visited his family 
in Glasgow two years ago. His father has spent the time between games in this 
tournament with relatives north of the border. St George centre Euan Aitken, as 
eloquent off the field as he is tenacious on it, considers representing 
Scotland as “the greatest way to honour the memory” of his late grandfather, 
who left Glasgow for Sydney as a “Ten Pound Pom 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ten_Pound_Poms>” on the Assisted Passage 
Migration Scheme.

They are all proud of their Scottish heritage. So are hard-as-nails Leigh 
hooker Liam Hood, whose mother is from Greenock, and young Australian-born 
debutant Tyler Cassel, who has two grandparents from Stirling, one from Malta, 
and family support at every game. The new recruits joined a committed core: Ben 
Kavanagh and Danny Addy have played in 13 consecutive internationals since 
making their debuts, Danny Brough and Dale Ferguson both playing in 12 of those.

Scotland’s key words in camp are “ruthless”, “honest” and “family”. They 
showed all of that last weekend. Now they have to do it all again against the 
Kiwis on Friday night.

Clubcall: Swinton Lions

Swinton fans will have noticed some familiar faces racing around the Ricoh 
Arena on Saturday. Head coach John Duffy and his assistant, brother Jay Duffy, 
are on the Scotland coaching staff, valuable members of Steve McCormack’s team. 
While John is full-time with the Lions, Jay has taken time off from his roofing 
job to experience theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations> in full. Both have been 
nipping down the M61 from Scotland’s Preston base to oversee the start of 
Swinton’s pre-season.

The Lions use Manchester City’s old Platt Lane training ground and have 
enjoyed a warm welcome by Sale RFC since moving in to Heywood Road. This is a 
good time at Swinton: they marked their 150th anniversary by staying in the 
Championship against all odds and have made some strong-looking signings. Now 
they just need a new stadium. News breaking on that soon, apparently.

Foreign quota

There is potential for next year’s World Cup to be the cast of the NRL divided 
up into 14 different teams, especially if the Australian governing body takes 
up an idea from rugby league writer Steve Mascord. He suggested recently that, 
if the NRL delved into its considerable coffers to pay every first-grader the 
same Test match appearance fee regardless of which nation they represent, the 
quality of the second-tier nations would shoot up. So Lachlan Coote would get 
paid the same for playing for Scotland, Rory Kostjasyn for Ireland, Kevin 
Naiqama for Fiji, and Sam Kasiano for Samoa, as Greg Inglis does for Australia. 
Instead, Parramatta prop James Hasson paid his own way to Europe to help ensure 
Ireland beat Spain en route to RLWC2017.

However, the qualifiers were a triumph for the domestic programmes in Ireland 
and Wales. Both qualified for the World Cup by fielding players developed 
locally. Wales benefitted hugely from full-time pros Lloyd White, Elliot Kear, 
Rhys Williams and Gil Dudson, who all learned league in Wales. Ireland included 
players from Ballynahinch Rabbitohs, Dublin City Exiles, Galway Tribesmen and 
Meath’s Longhorns RL in their team that put 70 points on Russia to seal their 
place in the tournament. That is progress.

Goal-line drop-out

Given they are into their fourth week in camp, the Four Nations squads could 
be forgiven for turning a bit Lord of the Flies. Hence everyone having a couple 
of free days each week to switch off. The British players tend to go home for 
the night, but the Antipodeans don’t have that comfort and have to make their 
own entertainment. The Kiwis have been to watch NFL at Twickenham, while 
several of the Scotland squad, who are based in Preston, went to see North End 
v Newcastle.

Prop Luke Douglas also spent a Sunday in Liverpool, visiting the Beatles 
museum, the Cavern, the revitalised docks and other tourist attractions. On his 
way home he decided to call in at St Helens, which will be his home for the 
next couple of years. “We got off at a station called St Helens Junction. There 
was nothing there. It was deserted. I thought ‘Oh no, what have I done’. We 
walked into a pub and asked for a taxi number. I asked the cab driver to do a 
tour of St Helens. He said ‘I’ll show you the stadium and the training ground’. 
I said ‘How do you know I’m a rugby league player?’ He said ‘You’re Luke 
Douglas, aren’t you?’ I knew then I’d made the right choice! He showed me the 
ground, the town centre, a house I might move into, and dropped me off at the 
main central station. I think I’ll be alright after all!” Panic over.

Fifth and last

The jury is out on the Four Nations’ appeal. A crowd of 5,337 in Hull on a 
Friday night to watch Australia v Scotland was poor but playing on a Sunday 
afternoon would surely have been better. The full house of 24,000 at 
Huddersfield was par for an England v New Zealand fixture and almost as big as 
any crowd to watch the Kiwis outside of London since 1951.

Sam Burgess: ‘The bottom line is that my heart didn’t lie in union’ | Donald 
McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/07/sam-burgess-rugby-union-league-england-world-cup>
The Ricoh Arena’s 32,000 seats were two-thirds full for Saturday’s 
double-header but that felt a little disappointing. Perhaps it shouldn’t, given 
there was little incentive for northerners or southerners to travel when they 
have their own fixtures – and London’s Antipodeans were unlikely to go up there 
for a night game.

There have been allegations that the advertising has been limited to the 
converted. Billboards along the M62 tell us the “world’s best athletes are 
coming” (Isaac Luke and Jonathan Thurston at Junction 32, where a field of 
fenced-off flattened mud will transform into Castleford’s new stadium for 2019 
apparently after another year-long delay) and Sam Burgess adorns the Batley 
turn-off.

At least Cumbrians (and Scottish) league-lovers will pack Workington’s Derwent 
Park on Friday night, leaving fingers crossed at Red Hall and Media City for a 
late surge on Sunday and England miraculously reaching the final.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 