
Derek McInnes praised his Aberdeen players after they secured European 
football next season with a 1-0 victory overDundee United at Pittodrie.

Adam Rooney scored his 27th goal of the season to move within five points of 
Celtic in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>. The striker 
finished off Mark Reynolds’ cross, six minutes before half-time.

McInnes has publicly written off their hopes of winning the title but hailed 
Aberdeen’s qualification for European football as an achievement.

“I don’t think that should be underplayed,” he said. “I know it has been on 
the cards for a few weeks but it’s great work for the players that we can 
secure European football at this stage of the season, with five games still to 
go.

“That result goes a long way to securing second spot as well, but we would 
never take that for granted.

“We lost on the opening day of the season here against Dundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> and, if you had said to me 
that day we would be 22 points clear of them, I would have grabbed it, and that 
shows how good the players have been.”

In the Championship, Rangers’ teenage striker Ryan Hardie marked his first 
senior-team start with two goals, as Stuart McCall’s side fought back to win 
3-1 atDumbarton. The 18-year-old had made four substitute appearances before 
the game at theDumbarton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dumbarton> 
Stadium, but his strikes put Rangers in command after they had gone a goal down 
to Mark Wilson’s second‑minute opener. Haris Vuckic added an impressive third 
after 52 minutes. The Newcastle loanee cut in from the right flank and 
unleashed a fierce left-foot drive into the top corner.

Hearts secured a sixth Championship home victory in a row by defeating Raith 
2-1 in a low-key contest. The champions registered their 15th win from 17 games 
and took their goal tally to 55 at Tynecastle. They needed 33 minutes to take 
the lead, the goal coming when Osman Sow laid the ball off for Sam Nicholson to 
finish with some composure and a low shot.

Hearts’ second goal arrived 11 minutes after half-time, when Soufian El 
Hassnaoui struck from the edge of the penalty box after good approach play by 
Callum Paterson. Raith reduced the arrears through the former Hearts striker 
Calum Elliot, who finished well after being put through on the left. Jamie 
Walker and Gary Oliver both hit the woodwork forHearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts>.
 