
This was some way for Halifax Town to overcome the crippling disappointment of 
relegation. Three weeks after dropping out of the National League Premier due 
to a final-day draw with Macclesfield, Jim Harvey’s team put their frustration 
to good use by beatingGrimsby <https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> 
1-0 to win the FA Trophy on their first visit to Wembley.

Understandably Grimsby had prioritised returning to the Football League after 
a six-year absence by beating Forest Green here in a play-off last week, and 
looked quite lethargic against their fresher opponents. There would be no 
second dose of success in eight days for Paul Hurst’s team as Scott McManus’s 
stunning effort three minutes after half-time looped over the head of James 
McKeown.

McKeown had done well to push away a Richard Peniket cross but Grimsby’s 
defence were slow to react and after failing to clear, McManus arrived to loop 
the ball over the keeper and into the net from 25 yards.

McManus departed with a suspected torn cruciate ligament 20 minutes from the 
end but a Grimsby onslaught never materialised, a couple of corners and a tame 
shot from Nathan Arnold aside.

“That’s a massive result,” Harvey, the Halifax manager, said. “We’re only 
part-time, I’m only here five months and I’ve had to adjust to what they can 
offer me. We’ve had to be rigid with the formation, basically defend and 
counter.”

When Harvey took over at Christmas, Halifax were 10 points from safety. In the 
end they were a point away from staying up. This was the last game of the 
Northern Irishman’s contract; he is expected to learn on Monday if he will be 
offered a new deal.

Grimsby’s dynamic forward pairing, Padraig Amond and Omar Bogle, could find no 
time nor space against Halifax’s five-man defence and with Nicky Wroe 
dominating in midfield, the Shaymen were a tad stronger throughout.

All of Grimsby’s best chances came from set pieces but Amond, in the first 
half, and Shaun Pearson, in the 90th minute, could only direct their headers 
into the arms of Sam Johnson.

Indeed McKeown kept Grimsby in the game for a time, with Wroe and Jordan 
Burrow both going close. Connor Hughes could have put the game beyond doubt in 
added time when played through by Burrow but Aristote Nsiala recovered well to 
block his goalbound effort.

“It was a bit of a learning curve,” Hurst said. “Did one or two enjoy last 
weekend too much? A combination of that and the efforts put in over the last 
two weeks has taken its toll. We didn’t have energy. It was a bit pedestrian 
for me.”

The Grimsby manager also warned that the team to begin League Two in August 
will be significantly different to the promotion-winning side. “I would be 
foolish to rip it up altogether,” Hurst added. “We’ve got to keep some to 
maintain the spirit and togetherness to kickstart next year but at the same 
time we need to add quality. We are moving up a level. We need quite a few 
players in.”
 