
Lionel Ainsworth’s late strike earned 10-man Motherwell their first Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> victory 
of 2015 as the bottom side upsetInverness 2-1 at Fir Park. The substitute 
struck a shot from 20 yards with the assistance of a slight deflection as 
Motherwell rediscovered their fighting spirit following a run of one point in 
eight games.

Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> opened the 
scoring four minutes after the break when Louis Laing headed home, but Caley 
Thistle hit the frame of the goal twice before Edward Ofere headed a debut goal 
in the 76th minute. Simon Ramsden was sent off for the home side three minutes 
from time.

St Mirren finally recorded their first home victory of the season as they 
edged outHamilton 1-0 in a tense affair in Paisley. The Buddies had not tasted 
success on home turf since defeatingRoss County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> by the same scoreline last 
May at the tailend of last season. Steven Thompson scored the all-important 
goal just after the hour and in the end they just about deserved the win over a 
disappointing Hamilton side.

St Johnstone and Kilmarnock played out a dull 0-0 draw at McDiarmid Park. The 
home side came closest to scoring in the first half when Michael O’Halloran and 
Steven MacLean were both kept out in quick succession. Killie thought they had 
won it 10 minutes from time but Nathan Eccleston saw his shot heroically 
blocked by Tam Scobbie in a dramatic goalmouth scramble. Clear chances were few 
and far between for much of the match and the sides remained seventh and eighth 
respectively in the table.

Partick Thistle shocked Dundee United with a well-deserved 2-0 win at 
Tannadice and are now seven points clear of the relegation places. Goals from 
Stephen O’Donnell and an own goal from Jaroslaw Fojut towards the end of the 
first half gave Partick victory.

Ross County recorded three consecutive wins for the first time in two years 
with a deserved 1-0 victory overDundee at Victoria Park. County had three great 
chances to score before they got the vital goal, including an effort from 
Jackson Irvine whichDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> 
goalkeeper Scott Bain touched on to the post. The winner came midway through 
the second half when Liam Boyce and Michael Gardyne combined on the right, and 
when Gardyne swung over the cross to the back post Jamie Reckord was free to 
steer the ball into the empty net.
 