
Denmark’s autonomous Faroe Islands announced on Monday that they had refused 
entry to a ship carrying 21 activists from the militant conservation group Sea 
Shepherd who were trying to disrupt traditional whale hunts.


The territory’s government said in a statement that it had barred the ship, 
the Bob Barker, “with a basis in immigration legislation and in the interests 
of maintaining law and order”.

“In recent weeks, anti-whaling activists representing the animal rights group 
Sea Shepherd have deliberately attempted to disrupt the legal and regulated 
activity of driving and killing pilot whales for food in the Faroe Islands, 
leading to the arrest, prosecution and expulsion from the Faroe Islands of a 
number of these activists,” the statement added.

Tensions have been high between those who defend the traditional whale hunt, 
and animal rights activists who say the practice causes unnecessary bloodshed.

Scottish town cuts twinned link to Faroe Islands over whale killings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/21/scottish-town-cuts-twinned-link-to-faroe-islands-over-whale-killings>
During the hunt, the whales are led to a bay or the mouth of a fjord before 
being killed by hand.

The Faroe Islands say that the number of animals killed is small compared with 
the population. About 800 whales are killed per year out of a population of 
more than 750,000.

Residents have traditionally eaten the whale meat, but more recently health 
authorities have advised to eat it only once a month, and for pregnant women to 
avoid it all together, because of the high concentration of heavy metals and 
dioxins.

On 7 August, five Sea Shepherd activists were found guilty of disrupting the 
hunt.

The court handed down sentences ranging from a fine of 5,000 kroner (€670, 
US$735) or eight days in prison, to 35,000 kroner or 14 days in prison. The Sea 
Shepherd group was also fined 75,000 kroner, and the activists deported.

Contacted by AFP, the government and the police did not give the nationalities 
of the activists on the Bob Barker.

No Sea Shepherd spokesperson was available for comment on Monday. 



 