
Sebastian Coe will defy a summons from parliament to answer further questions 
concerning when he first heard about corruption within the corridors of the 
International Association ofAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations and the extent of 
Russia’s doping problems because he believes he has no fresh information to 
give MPs.

Damian Collins, the chair of the culture, media and sport select committee, 
called onLord Coe <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-coe> to return 
to parliament saying he was “concerned” after hearing testimony from Dave 
Bedford which appeared to contradict when Coe had claimed he had first heard 
about the marathon runner Liliya Shobukhova being extorted for €450,000 by IAAF 
and Russian officials.

IAAF finds no evidence Sebastian Coe knew of alleged Qatar ‘brown envelopes’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/sebastian-coe-iaaf-qatar-brown-envelopes-athletics>
When Coe first appeared before the MPs in December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/02/iaaf-sebastian-coe-athletics-parliamentary-committee-crossroads--diack>
 he told them he “was certainly not aware of the specific allegations that have 
been made around the corruption of anti-doping processes in Russia” until he 
had watched a documentary on the German TV channel ARD in December 2014.

Bedford, the former race director of the London marathon, told MPs he made 
several attempts to tell Coe about the Shobukhova case in August 2014 – 
including a phone call, an email with an attachment detailing what had gone on, 
and text messages. He also told MPs that when he spoke to Coe on 21 November at 
a British Athletics Writers’ Association lunch he “had no inkling from that 
conversation that he was not aware of the subject matter in general terms”.

Bedford explained he had initially contacted Coe when he was walking in the 
mountains with his son. “It was a short conversation,” he told MPs. “I asked 
him whether he was aware of the allegations that had been put forward to theIAAF
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iaaf> ethics committee related to 
Shobukhova. And he said no, and I said: ‘In that case I am going to forward by 
email copies of the documents, because I believe you need to see them.’”

After sending Coe the email on 8 August 2014 and getting no response, Bedford 
followed up with another text message, to which Coe again did not reply.

Coe maintains that while he received an email from Bedford that month he had 
never opened the attachment that outlined how Shobukhova was blackmailed and 
named the senior figures involved in extorting money from her. Instead he says 
he immediately referred it to the IAAF’s independent ethics committee.

Last year the ethics committee banned several of those named in the document – 
including Papa Massata Diack, a former IAAF marketing executive and the son of 
the former president Lamine Diack, Valentin Balakhnichev, the former president 
of the Russian athletics federation and IAAF treasurer, and Alexei Melnikov, 
the former chief coach for Russian endurance athletes – for life. The IAAF’s 
head of anti-doping Gabriel Dolle was banned for five years.

In a statement the IAAF said Bedford’s testimony had “offered nothing new” and 
that “all information, including the emails central to their questioning, were 
sent to their committee chair in June 2016 and acknowledged. Based upon this 
Coe has no further information he can provide to the inquiry.”

Collins disagreed, calling on the IAAF to release the full email exchange 
between Coe and Beloff and warning Coe he needed to explain what he knew and 
when. “He said that he was unaware of the specific allegations until they were 
broadcast in the ARD documentary, but Bedford’s evidence casts some doubt on 
this,” he said.

Collins conceded that because Coe is a member of parliament the committee did 
not have the power to make him attend their summons but he urged him to take 
the opportunity to assuage their doubts. “There are a whole range of questions 
that remain unanswered and he needs to clear the air,” he added. “We are all 
concerned that, given the evidence David Bedford has provided, Lord Coe’s 
statement that he was unaware of allegations relating to doping in Russian 
athletics in particular lacks credibility.”

Earlier Bedford was asked by MPs whether he found it strange that Coe 
forwarded his email to Beloff without opening the attachment. “It is fair to 
say I was very surprised and quite disappointed,” he replied.

Athletics is at a crossroads and I must restore trust, says IAAF’s Coe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/02/iaaf-sebastian-coe-athletics-parliamentary-committee-crossroads--diack>
The SNP MP John Nicolson suggested to Bedford that given Coe had been brought 
in to clean up athletics, his lack of curiosity about corruption was 
“extraordinary”. Bedford told him he accepted that view but suggested Coe may 
have been playing the long game, waiting to see if he could get elected as the 
IAAF president in August 2015 so he could have the authority to make 
significant changes to track and field.

“If you look at what has happened subsequently to him being elected to a 
position of power, there are clear implications that he wants the integrity of 
our sport brought back and he has made significant steps towards that 
happening,” added Bedford. “I think that it might be true that he decided that 
the best way he could help the sport was to make sure that he got elected as 
president, because if it didn’t happen then there was no future for the sport.”
 