 As election meetings go in the carefully-orchestrated world of New Labour, it 
could go down as the most bizarre. Here were two senior politicians, a Cabinet 
minister and a colourful backbencher, putting their case for the leadership of 
Wales to the party faithful in a community centre - one studiously avoiding the 
other.
The Secretary of State for Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> , Ron 
Davies, begins speaking in Wrexham at 7pm, takes questions, and pointedly 
leaves one hour later.

 Rhodri Morgan, MP for Cardiff West, duly arrives within minutes protesting 
that he would love to share a fraternal platform with Ron. 'But sadly he's 
insisted on a cordon sanitaire. Can't understand why.' He speaks for another 
hour, takes more questions, and retires for a pint.

 For two men who insist they are still fairly good friends, the Ron and Rhodri 
battle is rapidly developing an intensity which seems strangely out of step 
with the more sophisticated party machine east of Offa's Dyke.

 Although from different backgrounds, the two men have deep roots in the 
Tribunite soft left, which makes them very traditional Welsh MPs. They share a 
love of the great outdoors, rugby, beer, spicy food and a dream of becoming the 
first secretary of the Welsh national assembly next year, in effect the 
principality's PM. On policy issues there is little to choose between them.

 Yet while other ministers and MPs have been taking a long break, they have 
been slogging it out for much of the summer on the campaign trail. And whatever 
they say to the contrary, the contest - which was never supposed to happen - is 
becoming very personalised, and edgy.

 Rhodri Morgan, former civil servant and Eurocrat, with a dry wit that 
irritates the more serious members of the Welsh party - like Ron Davies - 
accuses the Welsh Secretary of dodging the traditional hustings meetings, 
involving all contenders, that characterised the last campaign for the British 
Labour leadership.

 He entered the fray shortly after the Welsh referendum 11 months' ago, which 
registered a wafer thin endorsement of devolution. At that time Ron Davies had 
not committed himself - indeed Morgan claims the Welsh Secretary encouraged him 
to stand.

 Then, last Easter, the minister decided to run, although he has a plausible 
explanation for his late entry. 'I made what I considered to be a wise 
political judgment not to make any announcement until the (devolution) 
legislation was through the Commons - if I had made a declaration (before) the 
issue wouldn't have been the merits of the bill but Ron Davies' own personal 
intentions.'

 Some in the Morgan camp think this is stretching credibility a wee bit and 
argue that Davies was hedging his bets in anticipation of being offered the 
prospect of another Cabinet job - which he was not.

 'What they're now trying to claim is that there is not a vacancy and I'm 
being some sort of pain in the arse who is challenging Ron for his job and I 
should have allowed him to have an unchallenged passage from being secretary of 
state to leader of the assembly,' protests Rhodri Morgan.

 Other MPs are less charitable. 'There's a feeling that Rhodri might have been 
used as a stalking horse to stop anyone else moving in,' said one. 'Then when 
Ron decided to stand he would have been expected to stand aside.'

 Naturally, all this is denied by the opposing camp. Ron Davies refuses to 
disuss the motives of Morgan, preferring to take the political high ground with 
a style detractors describe as 'presidential'.

 Were they friends? 'No, we still are . . . he's a very colourful character . 
. . very able and capable of making a great contribution.'

 Morgan responds: 'I suppose it's slightly embarrassing. We were good friends. 
I mean, I think we still are . . .'

 But the sting comes in their respective manifestos. These have been sent to 
constituencies and branches before a special Welsh Labour conference next month 
votes on Labour's choice as first secretary in the 60-member national assembly. 
It will have an annual budget of pounds 7 million and run most domestic 
government, from health to agriculture, while funding local authorities. 
Elections take place next May.

 'No one in politics comes close to meeting my record of having done an 'all 
Wales ' job for 16 years,' said Morgan, while pointedly resurrecting Ron 
Davies' opposition to devolution in a 1979 referendum - a move he thought then 
was ahead of its time.

 In his manifesto, the Welsh Secretary lists a string of personal achievements 
in Labour's first year, notably delivering an assembly at long last. 'I have 
the support of the vast majority of Welsh Labour MPs . . . I also enjoy the 
confidence of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet.'

 Before the (private) Wrexham party meeting, with Rhodri Morgan safely in 
another part of town, Ron Davies confessed: 'In the ideal world we wouldn't be 
in this position . . . I'm not going to talk about Rhodri's role. He made clear 
he wanted a contest and we now have to resolve this matter . . . rather than by 
some other way. I don't criticise him for that.'

 Well, not publicly, anyway.
 