
First came denial, then anger, bargaining and depression. Now, at last, 
acceptance:Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> has 
reached the end of an era. No Italian sides reached the quarter-finals of last 
year's Champions League, and there is a strong possibility that one of the 
country's four places in that competition will soon be lost to Germany. More 
troubling still, Serie A's 20 teams now boast a collective debt of close to 
€2bn. More painful still, two of the league's most gifted players – Ricky Kakà 
and Zlatan Ibrahimovic – have left for Spain's La Liga. Three of its most 
iconic – Paolo Maldini, Pavel Nedved and Luis Figo – have retired.

"The Year Zero Championship", is how one Gazzetta dello Sport headline 
described the forthcoming season. The good news is Serie A has not simply had 
the sugar removed and been rebranded to target particularly suggestible young 
males. The bad news? Well, that has mostly been reserved forMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> fans.

In 11 pre-season games, Milan have won just twice. One of those victories was 
on penalties; the other was against Varese, a Lega Pro team, in July. There are 
lies, damned lies and pre-season friendlies, of course, but there is no 
disguising the fact that all is not well at theMilanello. Of the €65m received 
from the sale of Kakà, close to €50m has been retained to service the club's 
debts. The only signing of note has been Klaas-Jan Huntelaar, a talented player 
but not one who addresses Milan's greatest areas of need.

No direct replacement for Kakà has arrived, and it is clear that Milan's owner 
Silvio Berlusconi expects Ronaldinho to become the new focal point of the team. 
Early in pre-season Berlusconi, intent, as always, on addressing the speck in 
others' eyes before the log in his own, ordered the Brazilian to stand on a 
table in front of all his team-mates and promise to act more professionally. 
Little more than a month later Ronaldinho was mobbed and instructed in no 
uncertain terms to go home and go to bed by Milan fans who found him out at 
1.30am during a festival.

Plenty of footballers go out, of course, especially, during the pre-season, 
but Ronaldinho has shown little on the training ground to suggest he has 
regained the athleticism and change of pace that once made him such a threat 
for Barcelona. By insisting on his inclusion, Berlusconi only exacerbates the 
team's existing problems with an ageing and heavy-legged midfield. The concern 
is that Leonardo, as a rookie coach, will lack the tactical nous required to 
work around such a problem.

The attack will be improved by the arrival of Huntelaar and the defence by the 
eligibility at last of the talented Thiago Silva, as well as the return to 
fitness of Alessandro Nesta, but how Leonardo plans to best captalise on those 
strengths remains to be seen. David Beckham has said he plans to return on loan 
at the end of the Major League season, but the fact he looks like such a 
crucial piece of the puzzle right now is troubling. The fans are voting with 
their feet, Milan have sold 15,000 fewer season tickets than at the 
corresponding point last year.

For Serie A as a whole the new era doesn't look too bleak. Samuel Eto'o and 
Diego have arrived to fill the void left by departing stars, and Wesley 
Sneijder may soon follow. Inter, winners of the past fourScudettos, finally 
have a squad capable of making an impact in the Champions League.Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, for the first time since the 
Calciopoli scandal, appear ready to challenge Inter's domestic hegemony.

Besides Eto'o and Sneijder, who has agreed in principle to a move, Inter have 
added the Brazil centre-back Lucio and Genoa's two leading lights from last 
season, Diego Milito and Thiago Motta. Ibrahimovic will, at times, be missed, 
but there is no doubting that Inter are far better balanced than in the past, 
with an embarrassment of riches in defence, two prolific goalscorers and a 
significant injection of creativity in the middle. Defeat toLazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> in the SuperCup, held this year in 
Peking, was an anomaly – Inter were the better side and will not often be so 
profligate.

Jose Mourinho declared himself pleased with that performance, though you might 
not have known it from his post-match press conference. "After the first two 
questions, I know why Chinese football is so rubbish," he hissed after one 
reporter asked why Lazio had dealt better with the heat. He was similarly 
chippy this week when told the Italy manager Marcello Lippi had predicted 
Juventus would win the league.

But Mourinho, as we know, revels in the role of pantomime villain, and it 
remains to be seen whether Juventus truly have the depth to overcome Inter over 
the course of a 38-game season. As well as Diego, theBianconeri have added the 
exceptional combative midfielder Felipe Melo, who demonstrated his talents 
amply during Brazil's Confederations Cup win this summer, and Fabio Cannavaro. 
Momo Sissoko, however, has still not recovered from his foot injury, and his 
absence would be a major blow.

The title will eventually fall to one of those two sides but that has not 
stopped others from talking up their own prospects. Walter Zenga, whose move 
from Catania to Palermo almost sparked a Sicilian civil war back in June, has 
declared outright that he intends to win the title with theRosanero. He won't 
succeed, but the alliance of the always outspoken Zenga with the Palermo 
presidentMaurizio "manager-eater" Zamparini 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2008/sep/15/seriea.weekendreview> will be 
entertaining. His team, and especially 20-year-old Argentinian newboy Javier 
Pastore, signed from Huracán despite reported interest from Manchester United 
and Arsenal, won't be bad either.

Napoli, too, have high expectations. Fabio Quagliarella 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hh2m2Gu0cQA>, star of a million YouTube videos 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6oFaOosU1lc> and a childhood fan of the 
Partenopei, was the marquee signing in a busy summer, but the capture of Luca 
Cigarini from Atalanta may prove more significant. A superb passer of the ball, 
Cigarini was one of the stars of an Italy side that reached the semi-finals of 
the Under-21 European Championships this summer, and if he can stay healthy 
will soon be under consideration for a full Italy call-up.

A number of pundits have tipped Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> for a top-four finish, but their 
prospects should not be overstated. They finished 11th last year, and though a 
number of other new signings – most notably Morgan De Sanctis, Juan Zuniga and 
Hugo Campagnaro – will be inserted straight into the starting line-up, the 
manager Roberto Donadoni has much to prove.

That said, the chase for the Champions League places could be a wide open one. 
Last year's fourth-place finishers,Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>, have so far only re-invested 
a fraction of the £17.6m they received from Juventus for Melo, and were 
unconvincing during a 2-2 draw away to Sporting in Tuesday's qualifier. Genoa, 
who finished fifth, have brought in a number of players with the funds they 
received for Milito and Motta, but it is never easy to replace two such 
influential players.

One team who may capitalise is Roma. Despite Rosella Sensi's failure both to 
sell the club or to make any significant additions after the sale of Alberto 
Aquilani,Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> retain more than 
enough talent within their first XI to secure a top four berth. Much, as 
always, will rest on injuries. Neighbours Lazio, too may fancy their chances, 
though first they must work out what to do with "dissidents" Lorenzo De 
Silvestri, Cristian Ledesma and in particular Goran Pandev, who has now 
threatened to sue the team for freezing him out.

The relegation battle will be similarly keenly contested, with Chievo and 
Bologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> likely to be involved, 
along, potentially, with Siena and the Zenga-less Catania. All three newly 
promoted clubs may also be involved, though Bari's fate may rest heavily on the 
actions of Timothy Barton, the US magnate currently in the process of buying 
the club. Barton is not expected to complete his takeover until after the 
current transfer window closes, but may well be active in January.

Of the other two promoted sides, Parma look to have invested more wisely, 
bringing in the midfielder Daniele Galloppa, who won his first Italy cap in 
May, from Siena and arranging for the striker Alberto Paloschi, co-owned with 
Milan, to stay another year. Paloschi – along with others such as Mario 
Balotelli and Sebastian Giovinco – is just one of a number of young Italian 
prospects whose development will help define this new era.

Somewhere in the middle will be the rest – Udinese, Cagliari, Atalanta and 
Sampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria>, who between them 
played some of the most entertaining football on display anywhere in Italy last 
year. Year zero, might, after all, not be as bleak as some had supposed.
 