
It was supposed to be a relegation six-pointer. In fact, there was no point at 
all. Bologna and Catania were 18th and 19th in Serie A respectively when they 
lined up against one another on Sunday afternoon. By the end of the day they 
had switched spots, the Sicilians beating their hosts and overtaking them in 
the standings. It was an entirely hollow achievement. Victories for the two 
teams immediately above them – Sassuolo and Chievo – ensured that both Catania 
andBologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> will go down anyway.

The sense of anti-climax at the Stadio dell'Ara was overwhelming. With almost 
31,000 in attendance, this was Bologna's biggest home crowd of the season. 
Included in that audience were approximately 2,000Catania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/catania> supporters, many of whom had 
made the 500-mile journey up from Sicily.

Perhaps they should have known better. Catania, after all, began the day four 
points from safety with just two rounds of fixtures left. They had not won an 
away game in more than 14 months. But a startling 4-1 victory overRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> in their previous fixture had 
created hope beyond reason. With Gonzalo Bergessio back in form up front, fans 
were starting to believe that a miracle could yet occur.

For a time, Sunday's game seemed to be bearing them out. Catania took the lead 
through a Fabián Monzón free-kick midway through the first half and, despite 
having Gino Peruzzi sent off soon afterwards, they continued to hold their own. 
Although Bologna eventually equalised through a spectacular volley from 
Archimede Morleo, Bergessio restored Catania's advantage soon afterwards on the 
counter.

It was enough to seal a 2-1 victory, but not to change his team's fate. Chievo 
had won 1-0 away to Cagliari while Sassuolo beat Genoa 4-2. Painfully for 
Catania fans, both games were decided late on. Dario Dainelli scored Chievo's 
winner in the 72nd minute. Sassuolo and Genoa were level at 2-2 until the 86th 
when Sime Vrsaljko's own goal finally swung the tie in the former's favour.

Catania were not alone in cursing those results. Bologna, on another 
afternoon, could still have survived this defeat. Their manager, Davide 
Ballardini, spun a hard-luck story, saying that his team: "did not deserve to 
lose [to Catania]. We did not even deserve to draw".

Bologna had indeed been unfortunate, hitting the woodwork twice and having a 
strong penalty appeal turned down. Morleo, furthermore, appeared to be fouled 
during the build-up to Bergessio's winning goal. But seasons this bad are not 
defined by a single match. Bologna's directors have done far more to undermine 
their chances of survival this year than any referee.

The decision to sell Alessandro Diamanti to Guangzhou Evergrande in February 
looked reckless at the time and now appears utterly disastrous. With the 
European transfer window closed, a team that was already struggling for goals 
had no opportunities to replace its top scorer. Bologna have found the net just 
eight times in 15 games since he was sold.

His departure is understood to have been economically motivated. With a salary 
of €1.5m per year, Diamanti was comfortably the best-paid player oin a club 
that have lost money for too long. Bologna also recouped a roughly €7m transfer 
fee. But neither consideration can outweigh the financial hit the club will 
take now after dropping down a division.

That is not to suggest that they are the only ones guilty of making bad 
personnel decisions. Sassuolo's dismissal of their manager, Eusebio Di 
Francesco, in January had similarly catastrophic consequences, the Neroverdi 
losing all five games they played under his successor, Albeto Malesani. But 
that mistake was at least reversible. Di Francesco was recalled on 3 March and 
has done a brilliant job of steering his team to safety.

Relegation does not have to be a catastrophe. Catania's Sicilian neighbours, 
Palermo, have proved as much this season by rebounding from Serie B at the 
first attempt. It is perfectly likely that we will see this year's demoted 
sides back in the Italian top flight before long.

The same cannot be said for Javier Zanetti. The Internazionale midfielder 
announced his decision to retire last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/07/javier-zanetti-internazionale-argentina-retires>
, bringing down the curtain on 19 remarkable years with the club. On Saturday 
he played his final game at San Siro, going out on top with a 4-1 victory over 
Lazio.

He did not play from the start, a fact that angered many Inter fans. Their 
feathers had already been ruffled by Walter Mazzarri's decision to leave 
Zanetti out of last week's derby against Milan. A banner was unfurled before 
kick-off this Saturday demanding "more respect for the captain".

But the manager's only priority was to make sure his team won this game. Inter 
had not yet secured their Europa League place and could not afford another 
misstep against a direct rival. And rather than trust in a 40-year-old's 
experience, he preferred to construct his starting XI around the enterprise of 
the 20-year-old Mateo Kovacic.

The Croatian midfielder has shown glimpses of promise in his ever more 
frequent appearances this season, but on Saturday he was simply spectacular – 
setting up three of Inter's four goals. Twice in the first half he dissected the
Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> defence with perfectly 
weighted through-balls, inviting first Rodrigo Palacio and then Mauro Icardi to 
stroll through and slot the ball home.

Kovacic was the best player on the pitch, but the day belonged to Zanetti, who 
entered as a 52nd minute substitute. Beneath the '4' on his shirt, the word 
'EVER' had been specially printed. Zanetti also wore a custom armband featuring 
the names of everyone with whom he had played at Inter. "I would've liked to 
put the name of every Inter fan on the armband," he said later. "Not being able 
to do that, I put my team-mates instead."

He did at least get the chance to say a personal goodbye to one Inter 
supporter. In the dying seconds of the game, a fan sprinted out of the crowd 
wearing a No4 shirt. Tackled by a horde of security guards, the man had just 
been lifted to his feet when Zanetti appeared alongside him. The Inter captain 
put his arm around the would-be invader,giving him a hug 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1cgzmntIaLs> as he was being escorted off the 
pitch.

If this was the final act of Zanetti's playing career – and it is possible 
that he might be involved away to Chievo next week – then it felt like a 
fitting one, typical of his good-nature. The club must now decide whether it 
will retire his No4 shirt, something that the owner, Erick Thohir, has said 
they will consider. Either way, Inter's treble-winning captain will leave some 
very large shoes to fill.

Talking points

• Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> broke the Serie A 
points record on Sunday, moving up to 99 with a 1-0 victory over Roma at the 
Stadio Olimpico. Their lone goal, which arrived in the final minute of 
second-half injury time, was scored by Dani Osvaldo – a man who had been jeered 
from the outset by his former supporters. But Antonio Conte was sincere in his 
praise for Roma at the end of the game, saying: "If we have been able to break 
so many records it is certainly to the credit of this Roma team which has 
caused us the right amount of fear and respect … There are not 14 points of 
difference between us."

• The question now is whether Conte will stay around to lead Juventus even 
further. He is due to meet with the club president, Andrea Agnelli, to discuss 
his future in the coming days, but his post-match comments did not leave 
Juventus's supporters with much room for encouragement. Conte suggested that a 
three-year cycle was coming to an end and that a major overhaul would be 
required for this team to go further in Europe. "I am certain that I will win 
the Champions League in my career," said Conte. "I have won it as a player and 
I will win it as a manager. If you ask me today whether it is possible to win 
the Champions League with Juventus, I will tell you: 'no'."

• This was another unedifying week for behaviour in the stands. Roma's 
supporters declined to give any vocal backing to their team for long stretches 
on Sunday, choosing instead to stand in silent protest against the authorities' 
attempts to clamp down on violent and abusive behaviour. A banner was revealed 
and chants sung in support of Daniele De Santis, the Roma Ultra charged with 
shooting at Napoli fans before the Coppa Italia final. Earlier in the day, two 
bananas had been thrown at Milan's Kevin Constant and Nigel De Jong during 
their team's 2-1 defeat to Atalanta. The Dutchman responded later in the day by
posting a picture on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/NDJ_Official/status/465595195258855424> of himself holding 
a banana in front of his face to simulate a grin. "Keep smiling, there are 
worst things in life than racial abuse," he wrote. "People are just 2 ignorant 
these days"

• Inter's victory did secure their Europa League place at last, meaning that 
just one is still up for grabs. Torino and Parma remain in the running after 
drawing 1-1 on Sunday, but so are Milan, Verona and Lazio, despite the fact 
that none of them won this weekend.

• Zanetti was not the only member of Inter's 2010 treble-winning side to play 
his final game at San Siro this weekend. Diego Milito and Walter Samuel are 
expected to move on this summer when their contracts expire. After the game, 
all three went out to bid farewell to supporters from the Curva Nord, who had 
been prevented from attending the game due to a stadium ban.

• Goal of the weekend belongs to ageless Antonio Di Natale. How about that for 
a turn and volley <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hq7NIdFuJCE>?

Results

Atalanta 2-1 Milan, Bologna 1-2 Catania, Cagliari 0-1 Chievo, Inter 4-1 Lazio, 
Livorno 0-1 Fiorentina, Roma 0-1 Juventus, Sampdoria 2-5 Napoli, Sassuolo 4-2 
Genoa, Torino 1-1 Parma, Verona 2-2 Udinese
 