
The service sector appears to be following manufacturing industry into 
recession, according to a survey published yesterday showing firms beginning to 
sack people for the first time in more than two years in order to remain 
profitable.

 Published on the eve of today's interest-rate decision by the Bank of 
England's monetary policy committee, the report increases pressure for a 
further easing of credit conditions.

 Noting the weakness of inflationary pressures, John Monks, general secretary 
of the TUC, called for a 1 per cent reduction in the MPC's benchmark lending 
rate to 5.25 per cent.

 'Bold decisions are needed on interest rate cuts both this week and in the 
months to come to avoid recession and secure the right exchange rate for entry 
to EMU,' he said.

 He spoke as the monthly snapshot of the service sector - accounting for 
two-thirds of the economy's output - by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing 
and Supply showed the second consecutive monthly contraction.

 The survey's overall activity index slipped to 47.4 in December from 47.8. 
The separate employment index fell to 49.8, the first time its has dipped below 
50 since the survey began more than two years ago.

 CIPS director general Peter Thompson said: 'This survey represents a 
depressing start to 1999 and no doubt exerts further pressure on the MPC to cut 
interest rates.' Following interest rate cuts in each of the past three months, 
most City economists expect the committee to take a breather in January.

 They point to evidence of a rebound in consumer spending over the Christmas 
period and argue that the committee's nine members will want to wait for data 
due out over the next few weeks before deciding on their next move.

 These include the fourth quarter's GDP figures, released on January 22, which 
some analysts believe could show the first decline since the spring of 1992.

 However, financial markets interpreted yesterday's CIPS survey as increasing 
the chances of another interest rate cut today.

 Dealers are betting on a 0.25 percentage point reduction to 6 per cent, which 
would take the cost of borrowing back to where it was when Labour won the 
general election in May 1997.
 