
You have to pity Russell Brand. Sure, he's a witty kinda fella, if you're into 
that sort of thing, but it must be absolutely knackering being him. Between the 
TV shows, presenting roles,newspaper columns 
<http://football.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,,2216313,00.html> and more TV 
shows, it's a wonder he has time to manage that sex addiction he so loves 
talking about. Which is why it must come as a huge relief to Brand that he 
longer bares the weight of presenting the Brits on his shoulders, as ahead of 
the 2008 awards the baton has on been passed to... Ozzy and Sharon Osbourne.

Hooray! What an inspired choice. And just when the Brit awards had started 
going live again after a ten-year hiatus. We can't imagine a single f***ing 
thing that could go wrong.

Interestingly, the Sun is not of the same mind and believes this to be a 
potential presenting calamity.

"Swearing Oz and missus host Brits," runs the headline.

Apparently, though, the people behind the awards are prepared for the f***ing 
worst and will be broadcasting the ceremony with a five-second delay, giving 
them time to bleep out any swearing.

As for the missus, she's pretty excited about the whole thing and even managed 
to get through a whole sentence without cursing.

Says Sharon: "Ozzy and I have been asked to host many award shows in the past 
but this is by far the most prestigious and meaningful, especially for Ozzy as 
it's about the music." It's always about the music!

The Sun drags in Brits committee chairman Ged Doherty to really lay it on 
thick: "Rock'n'roll, glamour, humour and a touch of the unexpected, Sharon and 
Ozzy will bring all this to the Brits and more."

Both the Sun and the Mirror's 3am team are keen to draw parallels between the 
Osbournes and the last notoriously shambolic duo to present the awards, Mick 
Fleetwood and Sam Fox. The little and large combo hosted the ceremony in 1989, 
the last time it was to be aired live for nearly a decade, and it was difficult 
to tell which of them looked more lobotomised. At least that problem isn't 
going to manifest itself this time, and we imagine Mr. and Mrs will have enough 
material up their sleeves to keep us f***ing interested, what with them being 
well-versed in the art of the unexpected, thanks to the totally live and 
unrehearsed nature of their reality show The Osbournes. Roll on 2008, we say.

Now, Britney. Is she preggers? As we reported yesterday, the singer herself, 
says absolutely not, but what does she know? In Touch, the US weekly that is in 
touch with slebs and their reproductive habits, has published a series of
photographs on their website <http://intouchweekly.hollywood.com/> which they 
claim show a series of text messages from oneJR Rotem 
<http://manolomen.com/images/Jonathan%20Rotem.jpg>, said father of the phantom 
child.

The first message, sent to Rotem, says: "What's it like having a name that 
sounds like scrotum?"

No, it doesn't. It says: "They are saying Britney's pregnant and you're the 
father..."

The response reads: "It's true."

"OK awesome, do u think Britney will keep it? She's already talking about it 
to people."

To which Rotem responds: "No clue on what she will do. She is unpredictable."

Which is one big, old, grammatically garbled understatement.

Despite the overwhelming desire to trust pictures of a Blackberry that could 
well belong to anyone, displaying text messages that could well have been sent 
by anyone, we at In the News will put this evidence to one side and believe the 
mother of this phantom child when she says the story is "bullshit". For now, 
anyway.

Finally, we'd like to conclude this week's In the News with a huge thank you 
to Gordon Smart. He's not had an easy first week in power, what with Donorgate 
and those pesky Child Benefit disks going missing. Nonetheless, he has stayed 
strong, kept his ring finger obscured and, most importantly, remained committed 
to updating the public on the latest antics of Lee from Blue, Kelly from 
Stereophonics and Dannii Minogue. And now he draws our attention to a video 
featuring West Ham's Anton Ferdinand and Aston Villa's Nigel Reo-Coker doing 
the Soulja Boy dance. You don't know what theSoulja Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/soulja-boy> dance is? Well, it's basically 
just bouncing around, mostly backwards, occasionally sideways. We advocate this 
dance as a form of exercise; it's tremendous fun.

If you don't believe us, just watch "your boy Anton Ferdinand" going for it on 
some pinewood flooringhere <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x9RwpHhBohY>. See? 
Tremendous.
 