
Nigel Clough celebrates a year in charge of Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> with his team in the 
League One play-off positions following a 2-0 victory over Yeovil.

Marc McNulty and Jamie Murphy scored the goals that lifted them into sixth 
position and afterwards Clough spoke about the match as well as his year in 
charge. But there is one question that hung in the air and is not going to go 
away any time soon: the possible return to the club of Ched Evans.

The former Wales international was released from prison last Friday after 
serving half of a five-year sentence for rape. Now he wants to return to 
football and Sheffield United in particular while the club, who paid £3m for 
him in 2009 and saw him score 48 goals in 113 appearances, have yet to make any 
definitive statement bar the fact that they are deliberating.

While they do so, Clough faces the questions and he was the epitome of calm 
after a storm of emotion, argument and debate over the past week. “We are just 
focused on what we are doing. There is no hurry to make any decision either 
way,” the manager said. “Everybody is going to take time to make sure every 
angle is considered. We are just concentrating on the games, it doesn’t affect 
the football side, honestly. We pick the team and get on with that side of 
things.”

Clough knows the Evans question will keep coming. “Ideally we would like to be 
talking about the two last clean sheets we’ve had and a couple of great 
victories and being in the top six now,” he said. “It’s the same answer, I’m 
afraid: when the club makes a decision or has something to say, they’ll say it.”

What Clough has done for Sheffield United cannot be overstated. He became the 
club’s seventh permanent manager in a little under six and a half years and 
inherited a team struggling in 21st place inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>.

And under him the wheels started turning as United finished seventh as well as 
producing a heroic performance before losing 5-3 to Hull in the FA Cup 
semi-final, witnessed by more than 32,000 Blades fans at Wembley. Importantly, 
he has also brought harmony to the club, on the pitch and in the stands. 
However the question of Evans – who has consistently proclaimed his innocence – 
has put the club back into the spotlight.

On Saturday a vocal minority of Blades fans chanted in support of Evans, much 
to the disgust of others. Last night there were murmurs of ‘Super Chedwyn 
Evans’ from the Kop after less than three minutes and they were repeated in the 
first half before a louder burst in the second.

Indeed the loudest moment at Bramall Lane before the arrival of the first goal 
came in the seventh minute with a minute’s applause for two Sheffield children 
who had passed away.

The flag that made an appearance on the Kop had ‘Sheffield’s Red & White’ 
emblazoned upon it rather than a Wales one.

It helped that the team were ahead after less than 15 minutes. Given there 
were 155 Yeovil fans in the crowd of 19,353 there was little room for taunting 
from the opposition fans.

More than 19,000 fans at a League One match on a Tuesday is evidence of a 
loyal and large fan base. While the owners are deliberating it would be worth 
them remembering what went before and how the harmony brought to the club by 
Clough can underpin success.
 