
Sheffield United's Kevin Blackwell gave a good example of how the pressures of 
being at the top or bottom can get to managers – certainly at this stage of the 
season – when he was sent to the stands by the referee for his protest against 
a booking for Matthew Kilgallon againstSwansea at Bramall Lane. However, he was 
in a rather more serene mood following United's 1-0 win, and then the 
Birmingham's defeat at the hands of Preston that gave United fresh hope of 
pipping the Midlands club for the second automatic promotion spot.

In contrast, there was no ray of sunshine behind the gloom that has descended 
onSouthampton's manager Mark Wotte, as his team's bid to get out of the 
Championship's bottom three, and thus avoid having to start theirLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> campaign next season 
10 points behind everyone else, collapsed with a 2-2 home draw againstBurnley. 
It was perhaps typical of Southampton's wretched season that they allowed 
Burnley to come from behind twice for their point. They missed excellent 
chances to increase their initial lead and when it was 2-1 David McGoldrick – 
the scorer of their second goal – had a penalty saved by Brian Jensen.

With third-from-bottom Norwich not in action until tomorrow, at home to 
Reading,Barnsley, Nottingham Forest and Plymouth were able to increase the gap 
between the Canaries and themselves by only one point. For Barnsley, the 
downside of their 1-1 draw againstWolves – a result that secured their 
opponents the title – was that they were ahead. It was the same forNottingham 
Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> in their 1-1 
draw atBlackpool. The irony of those results was that Wolves's goal came from 
Kyel Reid, who spent six months on loan at Barnsley (from West Ham) two seasons 
ago, while Blackpool's scorer was Brett Ormerod, a member of Forest's League 
One promotion-winning team last season, on loan from Preston.

Roy Keane's first match as Ipswich manager brought a 3-0 win at Cardiff. It 
was Cardiff's last regular season match at Ninian Park and if any of their 
players will quickly want to forget the occasion, it is surely their leading 
scorer Ross McCormack. Having failed to convert a penalty in the 6-0 thrashing 
at Preston last Saturday, he went through the experience again when Ipswich 
goalkeeper Richard Wright superbly kept out his spot-kick, with the score at 
1-0. No one will surely have impressed Keane more than Jonathan Stead, whom 
Keane sold from Sunderland toSheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> 16 months ago. Stead, 
who is on loan from United, came on as a substitute and ended up with two 
goal-assists, and his own name on the scoresheet for Ipswich's third.

Peterborough made sure of the second League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> automatic promotion 
spot with their 1-0 win overColchester, while Cheltenham were relegated after 
being held to a 1-1 draw in their bottom-of-the-table encounter with aCarlisle 
team who had two men sent off. After Ian Harte had put Carlisle ahead with a 
tremendous 20-yard free-kick, Evan Horwood was shown a red card for two 
bookings. Michael Bridges experienced the same fate when he was adjudged to 
have handled a Shane Duff header on the goalline, and it was from the resulting 
penalty that Drissa Diallo scored Cheltenham's equaliser. It was Carlisle's 
11th game without a win and means that they must win their final match at home 
to Millwall on Saturday and hope the sides immediately above them – Northampton 
and Brighton – slip up.

While Brentford made sure of promotion from League Two – and the title – with 
their 3-1 win atDarlington, Bournemouth completed a remarkable relegation 
escape with their 2-1 win overGrimsby. Like Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle>, Grimsby – in the 
third-from-bottom position – also had two men sent off. First it was Danny 
Boshell, when his team were 1-0 ahead; then Joe Widdowson after Steve Fletcher 
had scored what proved to be Bournemouth's winner. What a way for 36-year-old 
Fletcher, arguably the biggest cult figure in Bournemouth's history, to reward 
manager Eddie Howe's decision to bring him back to the club. It was his 100th 
goal for the Cherries.

Fortunately for Grimsby <https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby>, Chester
, who drew 2-2 atAldershot, will need a miracle next Saturday to stay up at 
their expense.
 