
Carlos Carvalhal had a dream, according to the Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> fans and, while this 
was by no means a nightmare, the Owls’ manager must wait another season at 
least to fulfil his wishes.

Considering he was largely unheard of before his arrival at Hillsborough last 
summer, it was an achievement in itself to guide a team pieced together by loan 
signings and barely recognised as promotion contenders to within 90 minutes of 
a first season in the Premier League since 2000. But that does not soften the 
pain of falling at the final hurdle in what was said to be the most financially 
lucrative match ever played.

Mohamed Diamé guides Hull to Premier League past Sheffield Wednesday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/hull-city-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-final-match-report>
Instead it was Hull, under the astute management of Steve Bruce (earning his 
fourth promotion to the top flight here), who will return to joust with the 
giants for a third time in eight years.

Yet Wednesday and their brilliant, boisterous supporters can take much solace. 
They will be back next year, stronger and surely well disposed for an attack on 
the automatic promotion places. The key now will be for the owner, Dejphon 
Chansiri, to invest further and build on these solid foundations.

Irrespective of the result, those travelling from Sheffield left a lasting 
impression. One of the great things about the play-offs is the amount of 
tickets given to fans. Minus the desire of the corporate world to muscle in on 
the big day out, almost the entire allocation goes directly to the clubs. 
Therefore it was hard not to be a tad irritated when looking at thousands of 
empty seats in the Hull end, which Wednesday could have filled without issue.

Of course it was not necessarily City’s fault the uptake on Humberside was not 
as great, and as the Football League said before the game: “Throughout the week 
the League,Hull City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> and 
Wembley Stadium have explored all options in order to make some additional 
tickets available to Sheffield Wednesday supporters.”

They got some extras – raffled off in a vastly oversubscribed ballot – but 
that was nowhere near enough to satisfy the desire in the steel city. It 
should, however, be a lesson for the future and there is an obvious resolution: 
make sure the clubs sell their tickets block by block, keeping the seats 
nearest segregation until last.

No matter, the 40,000 in blue and white fortunate to be here – out of a total 
crowd of 70,189 – created a racket to make the hairs on the back of the neck 
spike. That is what happens when one of the most storied sides in the land 
spend a decade and a half in the doldrums, limping from disaster to farce and 
enduring spells in the third tier.

There were moments throughout, even when Hull were carving out opportunity 
after opportunity, where it was difficult to think coherently such was the 
noise. When those in black and amber erupted to celebrate Mo Diamé’s brilliant 
goal, the reaction at the opposite end was to raise the volume again. “Keep 
going. We still believe.”

An equaliser – nor, really, a sniff at one – never materialised and it was 
hard not to consider the one true advantage in Hull’s possession: requisite 
knowhow. While Wednesday were stagnating in recent years, Bruce’s team were 
enjoying success both in being promoted to the Premier League and in winning at 
Wembley (in the FA Cup semi-final two years ago, though defeat would follow in 
the final).

There was also a firm belief among the remaining few players in the Tigers’ 
squad from their automatic promotion three years ago that the class of ’16 are 
a stronger, more skilful group.

And while the dual experience of promotion and recent visits to the national 
stadium may have been beneficial to Bruce’s team, their profligacy kept 
Wednesday in the hunt before Diamé’s magic.

There was precious little to split the teams in the opening half-hour, at 
which point Hull acquired another gear. By the interval they really should have 
been in front, only to be denied by Wednesday’s brilliant goalkeeper, Keiren 
Westwood.

He, along with many of his team-mates, dropped to the ground at full-time, 
inconsolable and pondering what might have been. When Wednesday take time to 
reflect, though, this will have been a season where far more positives than 
negatives can be extracted.

The goalkeeper will link up with the Republic of Ireland on Monday morning 
and, while there have been murmurs over whether he deserves to be in the squad, 
he provided sufficient evidence here to suggest he should actually start 
instead of West Ham’s second-choice Darren Randolph. He produced several 
outstanding stops to deny Abel Hernández, Tom Huddlestone, Ahmed Elmohamady 
and, before the goal, Diamé.

Ultimately it was hard to deny Hull were the better team and full value for 
their Premier League return but, as one more rendition of Carlos had a Dream 
came booming from the Wednesday end, it was hard not to agree, even in defeat, 
with the final line of the chant. They are Sheffield Wednesday and, surely 
sooner rather than later, they are on their way back.
 