
Increased shipping noise is disrupting the foraging behaviour of humpback 
whales in the North Atlantic, according to a new study.


Scientists in the US and UK said their findings could impact upon the numbers 
of humpback whales in the long term.

Many whales are found in coastal areas with high levels of shipping traffic, 
which often results in frequent fatalities from collisions.

The team collected data from 10 whales within the Stellwagen Bank national 
marine sanctuary, which is a popular whale watching site between Cape Cod and 
Cape Ann in the US.

They used archival tags that simultaneously recorded underwater movements and 
the acoustic environment to collect the data.

Scientists in the US and UK found “significant” effects on foraging, including 
slower descent rates and fewer side-roll feeding events per dive with 
increasing ship noise.

During five of 18 ship passages, dives without side-rolls were observed, they 
said.

Previous studies have shown that noise pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/02/ships-noise-is-serious-problem-for-killer-whales-and-dolphins-report-finds>
 can alter acoustic communications, distribution patterns and stress responses 
in a wide range of animals.

The study was carried out by Hannah Blair and Susan Parks, from Syracuse 
University in New York, Ari Friedlaender, from Oregon State University, Nathan 
Merchant, from the Centre for Environment Fisheries and Aquaculture Science in 
Suffolk and David Wiley from the Stellwagen Bank national marine sanctuary.

“These findings indicate that humpback whales on Stellwagen Bank, an area with 
chronically elevated levels of shipping traffic, significantly change foraging 
activity when exposed to high levels of ship noise,” the researchers said.

“This measureable reduction in within-dive foraging effort of individual 
whales could potentially lead to population-level impacts of shipping noise on 
whale foraging success.”

They said there were several potential explanations for the results.

“Whales may modify their diving behaviour in response to a perceived threat 
from ship noise, given that they require surface access to breathe,” they said.

The researchers said they had expected humpback whales to show some 
familiarisation with ship noise because they have been regularly exposed to 
commercial and whale watching vessels for decades.

“Therefore, it is especially interesting that alterations to foraging 
behaviours were detectable in this study, as it suggests that humpbacks are 
unable to completely adjust to this disturbance,” they said.

“These behavioural changes were also observed at night when there are fewer 
ship interactions compared with the day.

“Further research on the impacts of noise on daytime foraging activities and 
variation in the sensitivity to different age and sex classes are needed.”

They added: “These results are among the first to support that ship noise can 
impact humpback whales’ foraging, making this source of disturbance a 
management concern.

“Chronic impacts of even small reductions in foraging efficiency could affect 
individual fitness and translate to population-level effects on humpback whales 
exposed to ship noise in critical foraging areas.”

The paper, Evidence for ship noise impacts on humpback whale foraging 
behaviour, is published in the Royal Society’s journalBiology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/biology> Letters.
 