
The Ben Sherman shirt became notoriously fashionable as the uniform of both 
Mods and Rockers in the sixties. While the two stylish factions thrashed it out 
on the beaches of Brighton, few realised the intervening constabulary shared 
their dress sense: PC Plod charged in wearing the traditional white Sherman.

 The label was reborn in 1993 and its cheeky ad campaigns, along with its new 
women's range, have helped secure it a 33 per cent share of the UK casual 
branded shirt market.

 For 21-year-old Jules Kerr, PA to managing director Miles Gray, a trendy 
wardrobe is a perk of the job.

 After leaving college at 18, Kerr temped for three years, mostly on long-term 
assignments, including one for an international funeral company. 'It was a 
tough corporate environment,' she recalls. 'I was always suited and booted. If 
someone said 'Jump' you'd ask how high. If you chuckled, you'd get a stare. It 
was the kind of office where secretaries were secretaries and bosses were 
bosses.' Posted at Sherman as a temp, Kerr says: 'I was here for a day and they 
didn't want me to go. Miles said he knew it had to be me as soon as I walked 
through the door. I'm always sunny and happy - that's what the guys say, 
anyway.' She has worked at the London office and showroom, off Oxford Street, 
for eight months now and says it is the niche she had been looking for. 'I'd 
never thought of fashion for a job, but now I know it's where I want to build a 
career.' Although she works for the whole team, Kerr's priority is Gray. And as 
he regularly visits the company's head office in Belfast, problems can 
sometimes arise: last summer, political trouble there meant the company changed 
the location of its three-day annual sales conference to Hertfordshire - at 
just a week's notice.

 Sherman is currently expanding in Europe and Kerr is busy organising the 
European sales conference at which, later this month, the autumn/ winter 99 
range will be launched. Kerr will book agents into hotels and arrange meetings 
with Gray, as well as keeping one eye on the 40 Degrees trade show which looms 
in February.

 Routine tasks for Kerr are often office management based. 'I arrange 
interviews for staff and sort out everything from coffee and stationery to 
cleaners,' she explains. As the Sherman range has expanded to include shoes, 
watches and jackets, the showroom often gets crammed with merchandise. 'It's 
all hands on deck in there,' Kerr says. 'Things can go walkies, so we have to 
keep an eye on what's coming in and going out.' Sherman's turnover has grown 
from £11 million in 1994 to £59 million in 1997. At her interview, Kerr was 
told her responsibilities would grow with the company. 'And it's got a hell of 
a lot of growth left in it yet,' she beams.
 