 Stunned by the success of Plaid Cymru in denying it an overall majority, 
Labour in Wales will this weekend begin talks to decide how to work with other 
parties in the new Welsh assembly.
In the immediate aftermath of an extraordinary day that had seen the 
nationalists perform far better than anticipated, the Welsh secretary, Alun 
Michael, refused last night to be drawn on the specifics of any cross-party 
working arrangements.

But he said he was optimistic Labour would be able to work with other parties 
in the 60-member assembly to delivery policies that the people ofWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> want.

'I think we need a period of calm,' he told reporters before leaving the mid 
and west Wales count at the Withybush showground, near Haverford west, 
Pembrokeshire. 'There is time for us to talk through any issues of this sort 
and make sure we get it right.'

Mr Michael, who as leader of the largest single party seems certain to be 
chosen as the £98,000 a year first secretary when assembly members meet in 
Cardiff next week, faced a tense and lengthy wait at the Haverfordwest count 
before learning for certain that he had secured a 'top up' seat in the assembly.

Under the additional member system of proportional representation used to 
choose 20 top up candidates from regional party lists he emerged as the third 
top up candidate in a region where Labour polled 30,000 fewer votes than the 
nationalists.

He said he planned to celebrate the fact that so many Labour candidates had 
won first past the post seats in the ballot of 40 constituencies across Wales. 
But celebrations would be tinged with sadness that so many 'outstanding people' 
had not been elected.

On what politicians of all parties acknowledged as an historic day, it was 
fitting, perhaps, that Caerphilly claimed the honour of being the first 
constituency to complete its count - granting the former Welsh Secretary, Ron 
Davies, a place in history as the first elected member of the new assembly.

But even as the man widely regarded as the architect of Welsh devolution 
called his wife and daughter to join him on the podium for his acceptance 
speech, it became clear that Labour was in for a difficult day.

On a low turn-out of 43% Mr Davies secured a majority of less than 3,000 over 
his Plaid Cymru opponent, reflecting a 24% swing to the nationalists compared 
to the 1977 general election. As the morning wore on the astonishing strength 
of thePlaid Cymru <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/plaid-cymru> 
performance became increasingly obvious. Islwyn, once the parliamentary 
stronghold of the former Labour leader Neil Kinnock, fell to the nationalist 
onslaught, as did Llanelli where Labour enjoyed a 16,000 majority at the 
general election.

The loss of the Rhondda, an other Labour heartland seat, came as a particular 
blow, costing the Welsh

Labour group in the assembly the European expertise of the MEP Wayne David, 
who had been seen by some as a possible safe pair of hands as leader should Mr 
Michael have failed to win a seat.

By late yesterday morning leading Labour figures in Wales were accepting that 
the party would not have an overall majority in the 60 member body.

Labour MEP Glenys Kinnock warned there was a sense of alienation among Labour 
voters who felt the policies they wanted were not being delivered.

Cynog Dafis, the Ceredigion MP, who gained a top up seat for Plaid Cymru in 
the same Mid and West Wales region as Mr Michael, warned it would be a mistake 
for people to think the Plaid Cymru vote was a flash in the pan.

Mr Michael, who arrived for the count shortly before 2pm - an hour after a 
trio of grim-faced minders - faced a near three hour wait before learning his 
fate.

As he arrived, he declined to comment on his own chances ahead of the official 
count. He acknowledged a sense of dis appointment at the losses Labour had 
already suffered during the morning, but said nothing could detract from the 
fact that it was an historic day for Wales.

'I think it is important also to remember that it is a Labour government that 
has given Wales this opportunity and given a voting system which has allowed 
our opponents to have seats in the assembly and a say in the assembly.

I still believe that this will be an assembly that will prove itself in its 
firm term and win the support of the people of Wales.'

The road to power 

¥ 11 May Assembly convenes for the first time at its temporary home in 
Crickhowell House, Cardiff, to allow members to familiarise themselves with the 
building and take the oath of allegiance.

¥ 12 May Proceedings begin with the appointment of the presiding officer and 
deputy presiding officer. The 60-member body will then elect the first 
seceretary, who will name the assembly cabinet.

¥ 26 May Official opening by the Queen. 

¥ 1 July Assembly assumes full responsibility with the transfer of the powers, 
rights and duties currently held by the secretary of state for Wales.

¥ What powers will the Welsh assembly have? 

¥ Responsibility for allocating a budget of £7bn a year. It has no powers to 
make primary legislation or to vary taxes.
 