
His team courageously, stubbornly, managed to hold off the visiting champions 
until a Joshua Kimmich strike in the 88th minute but for Bruno Labbadia, the 
game was up long before. The Hamburger SV coach knew full well that he had been 
cynically cast in the role of the patsy on Saturday afternoon, heaved on to the 
bench by the club manager Dietmar Beiersdorfer in order to fall down a final 
time and thus smooth the passage for the appointment of his successor, Markus 
Gisdol.

Labbadia, a man high on genuine passion and a bit of a cult hero with the 
supporters after he dramatically saved HSV from the drop in June 2015, 
threatened to get his last job wrong, by getting the right result, but Carlo 
Ancelotti’s team spared Beiersdorfer’s blushes with one of these typically 
late, lucky Bayern goals that we’ll see more of this season, as Pep Guardiola’s 
all-conquering, frighteningly reliable possession-machine is being replaced by 
a more haphazard, artisanal production process that relies on the individual 
quality of the workforce.

Bayern Munich and Joshua Kimmich leave it late to sink Hamburg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/hamburg-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
Labbadia, who was once an honest poacher wearing Munich’s colours in the 
droll, bad old days of the early 90s, a million years ago, spoke of his “deep 
sadness” straight after the final whistle on Saturday, in anticipation of the 
inevitable axe. Beiersdorfer called him the next morning to ask for a meeting, 
Labbadia preferred to hear the bad news immediately. It therefore wasn’t the 
club’s fault that the former Kaiserslautern striker had his second stint at the 
club in six years ended on the telephone, but the bungled dismissal still made 
for a fitting finale.Hamburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> are 
once again the “Skandalnudel der Liga” (Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung), a 
flawed, capricious celebrity living off her glorious past and the continued 
ability to produce headlines, even if they are made of rather embarrassing 
stuff.

The northerners’ endless comedy travails – Labbadia was the eighth coach to 
get fired since his first dismissal in 2010 – has kept neutrals entertained and 
neighbours Werder Bremen in good spirits but for German football, it’s been 
nothing short of a tragedy. Based in a big, wealthy city, supported by millions 
and dripping in history, the club of Ernst Happel, Horst Hrubesch, Kevin Keegan 
and Felix Magath were perfectly placed to take advantage of football’s new 
riches – and squandered it all.

A local billionaire, Klaus-Michael Kühne, has been pulling the strings behind 
the scenes, pumping millions into the loss-making enterprise, on the dubious 
advice of motor-mouth Reiner Callmund and other such specialists. 
Beiersdorfers’ mission statement from two years ago reads like pure 
science-fiction. “The sporting aim is to establish the club among the top five 
in theBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> and 
play in international competitions consistently,” the 52-year-old Franconian 
had said upon his return to the HSV board in 2014 after five years in Salzburg 
and St Petersburg. “His resume from two years in charge reads €90m worth of 
transfer spending, four managerial changes, two dismissals of sporting 
directors and 0.0 success,” wrote Kai Schiller inHamburger Abendblatt. “Now 
it’s down to Markus Gisdol to secure his future. If there’s no change of 
fortune, Beiersdorfer’s second term in office will end not long after 
Labbadia’s.”

Borussia Dortmund equal home record run with victory over Freiburg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/match-report-borussia-dortmund-freiburg>
Gisdol, the former Hoffenheim coach, is expected to bring some high-pressing 
and collective graft to a talented team chronically low on cohesion. There had 
been “no discernible progress” under Labbadia, despite a 10th-placed finish in 
2015-16, Beiersdorfer claimed, not unreasonably. Faith in the incumbent had 
started to wane towards to the end of the last campaign, Beiersdorfer admitted 
but they couldn’t fire him then, only now, after one point from five and the 
advent of yet another crisis. “I believe 100% in the team,” the HSV director 
added, leaving no doubt about who was to blame. It’s always the managers’s 
fault at the Volksparkstadion.

Whether Gisdol, who had also been in talks with Werder Bremen last week, can 
buck the trend is questionable. The 47-year-old is a highly-rated tactician but 
has no experience at a big Bundesliga club, with all the madness that goes with 
it. The Swabian will have to become his own man very fast, to withstand the 
meddling from up high and get a grip on the volatile situation. Good luck.

Talking points

• In Gelsenkirchen, the Hamburg of the west, new coach Markus Weinzierl and 
sporting director Christian Heidel were supposed to replace serial 
dysfunctional embarrassment with seriously successful work. The duo’s early 
impact has indeed been transformative, albeit not in the way it was intended. 
The 2-1 disaster at Hoffenheim on Sunday, a fifth defeat in as many games for 
“Schalke 05” (muahaha), has resulted in the Champions League contenders 
proclaiming the beginning of the “relegation battle”, in the words of Heidel. 
Incredibly, the club has remained relatively quiet and patient so far, but for 
much longer? The task of making Schalke less like Schalke is truly a Herculean 
one, and not made easier by a horrific run of results.

• Werder’s story, by contrast, was one of triumph for once. A late 2-1 
comeback with two goals in four minutes (Lennart Thy 86; Theodor Gebre Selassie 
90) at home to Wolfsburg – another big team struggling badly – had interim 
manager Alexander Nouri dancing manically under the Weserstadion floodlights. 
“He’s pushed us and motivated us well,” captain Clemens Fritz said after the 
first win of the season. The club’s bosses, however, are not entirely sure 
whether Nouri has what it takes to be a new André Schubert. Their search for a 
more battle-hardened manager continues.

• Bayern’s win was ever so slightly spoilt by yet another Ribéry incident – 
the Frenchman pinched Nicolai Müller’s (facial) cheek – but kept them top with 
a 100% record. Dortmund, however, proved that they’re currently the best team 
in Germany, at least in pure footballing terms: some of the moves they pulled 
off inthe 3-1 win over Freiburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/match-report-borussia-dortmund-freiburg>
 were simply dreamlike. Real Madrid, beware.

• “It was the perfect hat-trick – one with the left, one with the right, one 
with the head,” said a relieved Javier Hernández in Mainz. The Mexican striker 
saved Bayer Leverkusen from an untimely recurrence of doubts about the 
hard-to-shift phlegm in the dressing room. Roger Schmidt’s team have had a 
mediocre start to the season (seven points from five leaves them in 10th place) 
and are one of the early under-achievers relative to their considerable talent. 
Tuesday’s visit by Monaco in the Champions League offers a chance to pick up a 
bit of momentum.

Results: Borussia Dortmund 3-1 Freiburg, Augsburg 1-0 Darmstadt, Gladbach 2-0 
Ingolstadt, Hamburger SV 0-1 Bayern, Bremen 2-1 Wolfsburg, Eintracht Frankfurt 
3-3 Hertha BSC, Mainz 2-3 Leverkusen, Köln 1-1 RB Leipzig, Hoffenheim 2-1 
Schalke.
 