
Sir Mo Farah has admitted that he found it “weird” that he again missed out on 
a top-three finish in theBBC’s Sports Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2016>
 award in December, despite his glorious double gold medal triumph at the Rio 
Olympics.

Speaking publicly for the first time since finishing fourth in the annual 
award just before Christmas, Farah made it clear that he had hoped to be on the 
podium. “It was a bit weird,” he said. “I just thought: ‘Oh, I might have been 
in the top three.’”

When asked whether he wondered why he was not more popular, given his four 
Olympic and five world championship gold medals on the track, Farah replied: 
“Yeah, you do think a little bit like, what can you do? But racing and winning 
medals for my country is what drives me and no one can take away what I have 
achieved. That means more than anything else, along with putting my GB vest on.”

Farah also expressed his appreciation to the triathlete Alistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/mo-farah-bbc-sports-personality-2016-award-alistair-brownlee>
, who finished in second place behind Andy Murray in the BBC award, for saying 
that he was staggered that Farah had finished in the top three of Spoty only 
once, in 2011.

“Alistair is an amazing athlete – and I have a lot of respect for him to come 
out and say what he needed to say,” he said. “If I had a vote I would have 
voted for him, for sure, because that memory of him picking up his brother 
really touched me.”

Speaking in the buildup to competing in the Great Edinburgh XCountry in 
Holyrood Park on Saturday, Farah also expressed his disdain that one of his 
main rivals, the European cross-country champion, Aras Kaya, recently changed 
nationalities from Kenya to Turkey.

“I don’t agree when you have been competing for one country and you decide to 
switch,” he said. “When you represent your country, you have to represent a 
country that you love and you have been there for a long time. That is your 
country, that is you.”

Another Kenyan, the European cross-country silver medallist Polat Kemboi 
Arikan, also switched to compete for Turkey in 2011. “It’s a different thing if 
you have been there for seven, eight years, that’s fine,” Farah added, “but to 
just switch overnight, that’s difficult. It makes athletics look poor.”

Farah, who will also face the American Garrett Heath, who beat him in this 
race last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/10/mo-farah-cross-country-defeat-barry-fudge>
, admits he is not in top shape but said he was looking forward to the race – 
where he will be introduced as Sir Mo Farah for the first time in competition.

“To be given the title is something I never dreamed of as a kid. Coming to GB 
and not speaking a world of English to having achieved what I have achieved and 
to be recognised for running for my country, which I love running for – to be 
given that title, there is no word to describe it. It’s just an honour.

Mo Farah snub in Spoty award ‘really sad’, says Alistair Brownlee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/mo-farah-bbc-sports-personality-2016-award-alistair-brownlee>
“It’s also amazing for athletics – it gives people hope and shows that if you 
work hard at something you can achieve it. But nothing has changed: everybody 
who knows me as Mo can call me Mo.”

Farah also praised the Scottish athlete Laura Muir, who once again showed her 
staggering talent by breaking Liz McColgan’s 25-year-old British indoor 5,000m 
record by more than 14 seconds during the week – in only her second attempt at 
the event. Muir, who will compete in a mixed 4x1km relay on Saturday afternoon, 
says she will consider doubling up in the 1500m and 5,000m at the world 
championships in London in the summer – and Farah believes she will take on his 
mantle as the top British middle-distance runner when he quits the track at the 
end of this year to concentrate on running marathons.

“It is pretty amazing to see Laura do so well, I’ve seen her the last couple 
of years and been in championships with her and know she’s a fighter,” Farah 
said of the 23-year-old.

“I’ve seen her in Font-Romeu training and she trains like a beast. It is 
possible. She has that dream of becoming that Olympic champion. And she will.”
 