
Electronic personal organisers were supposed to signal the end of the Filofax. 
But, as with most electronic equipment, the first ones out were big, bulky and 
not especially nice to look at. The trusty Filofax lived. Horror stories about 
personal organisers crashing and deleting all their files added to the image 
problems of the electronic organiser. Most of these teething problems have now 
been sorted out - personal organisers still crash, but they have back-up disks 
to their back-up disks - and they have gotten so small they fit easily into any 
handbag or briefcase.

 Of the main products on the market three contrasting versions are the 
Microsoft Rex Pro, Phillips Nino and 3-Com's Palm III. At first glance, they 
all provide similar services, such as memo-writing capacity, address book and 
'to do' lists. However, there are significant differences, which soon become 
apparent. As ever with electrical equipment, size does matter and the rule is 
the smaller the better.

 The latest version of the Rex Pro (£169.99 including VAT) is a credit 
card-sized piece of technology, capable of storing up to 6,000 records. Through 
its neat LCD display, you can access a to-do list, alarm, memos and a world 
clock. A keyboard would not fit on to such a tiny device, so the Rex Pro has a 
data entry button which is used to run through the alphabet to input daily 
tasks or contacts. This is laborious at first, but efficiency and speed should 
come through usage. It comes with a docking station, a small black box similar 
to a mobile phone recharger which you can attach to your PC in order to 
transfer the address book on to it.

 The Rex Pro, though, is little more than an electronic Filofax, so the boss 
will need to be persuaded that it is not just an executive toy.

 This is where the Palm III has the edge. Although more expensive at £279.99 
it is nearly as powerful as a laptop. So called because it can fit into the 
palm of a hand, it has the power of a pocket computer and a neat flip-top lid. 
Applications include an agenda, address book, email facility, expenses tracker 
and memo pad, which are simple and are easy to use. The Palm III also doesn't 
have a keyboard - you write on to the screen. The Palm Desktop software that 
runs on the PC duplicates these applications, and this is where computer 
wizadry steps in.

 With the Palm III resting in its docking cradle, you just press a button and 
the contents of both the Palm and the PC are fully synchronised in seconds. The 
only downside is the enforced use of the stylus, which may not appeal to all 
users. There is a neat infra-red beam function, which allows you to zap 
information to other Palm users.

 The most versatile but also the most expensive organiser is the slimline 
Phillips Nino (£339). Barely the size of a small mobile phone, it resembles a 
pocket computer game.

 For a busy secretary, the most useful feature has to be the reminder facility 
- effectively a mini alarm clock. Easily programmed, the reminder flashes up 
important appointments before they are due to happen. If you are well 
organised, the Palm III can store reminders as far into the future as you like. 
This could signal the end of missed meetings, flights and other mishaps.

 So, can these objects realistically replace the lowly pad, pen and Filofax? 
As we approach the millennium, the image of a secretary scribbling on a pad may 
be rendered obsolete but these gadgets alone can never be a substitute for a 
disorganised brain, and it still takes a PA with nous to ensure that all 
appointments are not only logged correctly, but flagged up accurately, and 
checked for cancellations. In the meantime, prepare for more strange beeping 
noises on packed commuter trains . . .
 