
Walter Smith yesterday conceded that, even with 30 years of coaching 
experience, he may not be able to lift Rangers' players for the Scottish Cup 
final. Today's meeting withQueen of the South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> at Hampden comes less 
than 48 hours after Rangers lost 2-0 at Aberdeen at the same time as Celtic's 
victory over Dundee United ensured a third Premier League title in succession 
for Gordon Strachan's team.

Such a prospect seemed highly unlikely at the start of April when Rangers were 
firmly in the title box seat. Having also been defeated in the Uefa Cup final 
10 days ago,Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> have seen a 
potential quadruple trophy haul disappear amid a late-season collapse.

The Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> may yet 
join the CIS Cup in the Ibrox trophy cabinet but a sense of failure remains 
apparent among Smith's squad. When asked how he could rouse his players for 
this afternoon's encounter the manager replied: "I'm not quite sure, I have got 
to say. I don't think anybody could share the experience with us of having to 
play a cup final after having a match less than 48 hours beforehand. There is 
nothing you can do to take away the disappointment, the feeling of failure. It 
won't be easy."

Smith can barely mask his frustration at Rangers' recent schedule. European 
exploits and a SPL fixture backlog mean this afternoon's game will be their 
ninth since May 1. Queens, by striking comparison, have not played a 
competitive match since April 26.

"I have no doubts that, had we been knocked out of Europe earlier, it would 
have enhanced our chances in the league," Smith said. "The worst thing for the 
team is that they had the opportunity to win the Uefa Cup and the league and, 
if anything, a whole set of circumstances conspired to go against them and make 
it more difficult."

Rangers will be able to call again on the services of Sasa Papac, who has 
missed their past three matches with a thigh strain, but Nacho Novo's reckless 
lunge on Stuart Duff at Pittodrie on Thursday ensures he will be suspended from 
a cup final for the second time this season.

"As a manager I am proud of the players and I think they can be proud as 
well," added Smith. "Hopefully the memory of the huge disappointments can spur 
us on, not just in the final but into next season as well."

As Celtic's players gathered in Glasgow's west end for their title 
celebrations yesterday afternoon, speculation continued regarding the future of 
their manager. After three years at Parkhead it had been suggested Strachan 
might resign, but the early indications are that he will remain in office for 
next season at least. That prospect was welcomed by, among others, the Celtic 
striker Scott McDonald.

"The manager had full belief and confidence in the players and not for one 
minute did that change and that is one of the reasons we won the title," 
McDonald said. "There is no question in my mind that the manager will be here 
next season and I look forward to doing it all over again. The manager has been 
great with the whole team. Behind closed doors we see how strong a character he 
is and we see how much he believed in us. That showed out on the park, because 
we believed in him and he believed in us."

Peter Lawwell, the club's chief executive, said: "We have every confidence 
Gordon will be here to take us into another campaign and the Champions League."
 