
Walter Smith, the Rangers manager, and his assistant, Ally McCoist, were 
delighted that their season finished on a high with their 3-2 victory overQueen 
of the South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> in the 
Scottish Cup final.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were playing their 68th 
game of the season, less than 48 hours after the Premier League title went to 
Celtic, and 10 days after losing the Uefa Cup final.

'It has been an excellent season,' Smith said, 'but it doesn't take away the 
disappointment that you will always feel when you get to a European final [and 
lose].

'We lost the Uefa final then credit to Celtic, they had a great run at the end 
of the season to keep the Championship.

'But it shows a lot of our boys how hard they will have to work to attempt to 
win it next season.'

McCoist added: 'It's been an incredible journey this season. I would have been 
bitterly disappointed if we had not won the cup today. But we have won it and 
I'm thrilled for the players and the fans.'

Former striker McCoist appreciated Boyd's lethal finishing, which made the 
difference between the teams. 'That's what he does best,' McCoist said. 'Put 
the ball in front of him in the box and he'll score goals.'

McCoist hailed the effort by First Division side, who beat Aberdeen 4-3 in the 
semi-finals to reach their firstScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final. 'They've been a 
credit to the First Division and to [manager] Gordon Chisholm,' he said. 
'They've had a great season and it was a remarkable achievement getting to the 
cup final. They did Dumfries proud today.'

The Queen of the South manager blamed his team's long lay-off for a sluggish 
start. 'We didn't have a competitive game for four weeks [after the league 
season finished] and that showed today,' he said. 'The first half was probably 
the worst we have played all season.'

Boyd, who grabbed the winner in the 72nd minute, said: 'I'm just glad we've 
got over the finishing line.I don't think there was much left in us to go to 
extra time.'

Boyd also netted twice as substitute in the CIS Insurance Cup final, and hit 
the winning penalty in the shootout against Dundee United. He insisted 
yesterday's victory topped that achievement. 'The Scottish Cup is the big cup 
in Scotland and we're delighted to get that after the disappointment of 
Thursday night,' he said. 'We'll enjoy the moment and we'll be back fighting 
next year for the league.'

Rangers defender David Weir, who turned 38 a fortnight ago, stressed he has no 
plans to retire after winning his second medal since coming to Ibrox in January 
2007. He vowed to extend his career for 'as long as I can'. Weir added: 'It's a 
great feeling this, it's what makes it all worthwhile. I'll definitely play on.'
 