
Despite their good intentions, many nicotine addicts will already have broken 
their New Year's resolution to quit smoking. Nicotine is the most addictive 
drug known to mankind. But the good news, according to the Health Education 
Authority, is that 1,000 people quit smoking every day - that's 10 million over 
the past 15 years.

Robin Hayley, 36, smoked 60 a day for 12 years. In 1989, he went to see to see 
Allen Carr, a hypnotherapist who promised success or a money-back guarantee. 
More than 10 years later, Hayley is Carr's non-smoking senior administrator, a 
hypnotherapist and the managing director of Carr's Easyway International.

 'I knew when I walked out that I'd never smoke again,' says Hayley of his 
first hypnotherapy session with Carr. In fact, he was so impressed he almost 
offered to work for Carr there and then. Realising he might be regarded as a 
tad impetuous, he refrained.

 For several years, Hayley continually wrote to Carr for work, and eventually, 
in 1991, his persistence paid off. Under Carr's tutelage, and while working as 
his assistant, Hayley began to train as a hypnotherapist.

 Hayley is, without doubt, an opportunist, both sagacious and powerfully 
magnetic. He also has an extremely good nose for business - the company has 40 
clinics in 18 different countries around the world, as well as an array of 
best-selling books, videos and cassettes.

 His daily tasks involve responding to e-mails from the company branches 
across the world, not to mention the 20 to 30 thank-you letters received each 
week, all of which have to be logged to formulate statistics for the company.

 As senior administrator, Hayley also oversees the recruitment and training of 
hypnotherapists. All applications are sent directly to him. Hayley sifts 
through the deluge and meets each potential therapist himself, most of whom 
have quit smoking through the Carr method.

 'They've jumped through so many hoops already, they've self-selected 
themselves really,' says Hayley. 'We are basically looking for someone who is 
reasonably articulate and confident.' He cites acting, law and journalism as 
some of the professions from which Carr therapists have come.

 The company claims a success rate of over 90 per cent. Its clients have 
included Ruby Wax, Julie Christie, Lord and Lady Bonham Carter and Johnny Cash. 
Hayley mentions that he wouldn't mind personally curing Paddy Ashdown who he 
recently discovered to be a chain smoker.

 Hayley says of his boss: 'He is a caring person with no airs and graces. He 
is also one of the most intelligent people I've ever met.' It would be true to 
say that both Hayley's and Carr's lives have been dominated by smoking ever 
since they quit.

 'Yes,' says Hayley, 'but in the nicest possible way.'
 