
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> have accomplished 
many things since joining the Asian Football Confederation in 2006: they have 
twice qualified for the World Cup, won the continent’s top club and country 
prize, and sent players all over the place.

But there is one thing they have yet to do – find a rival in west Asia. There 
is Japan in the east, an obvious candidate ever since that afternoon in 
Kaiserslautern a decade ago. Over in the west, it could have been Iran had the 
two nations met as AFC cousins but that has yet to happen and memories of 1997 
are fading.

Tim Cahill seals World Cup qualifying win for Australia against UAE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/06/tim-cahill-seals-world-cup-qualifying-win-for-australia-against-uae>
The stage was set for the United Arab Emirates to make a dramatic entrance 
into the psyches of Australian football fans. Theconquerors of Japan in Saitama 
last Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/world-cup-japan-uae-shock-loss-reaction>
 – and home to more talented players per head of population than any other 
Asian nation and third-placed at the 2015 Asian Cup – seemed to fit the bill. 
All that was needed to forge a beautiful friendship was a hard-fought match, a 
show of skill from the Whites’ golden generation and no quarter asked or given. 
It did not quite happen – and the Socceroos had much to do with that.

The hosts had done their bit before the game. Abu Dhabi can be a sleepy 
football venue but the city pulled out the stops. It opened the gates,giving 
fans free entry into the Mohammed Bin Zayed Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/free-tickets-offered-for-socceroos-world-cup-qualifier-against-uae>
. In they streamed to be told to scream at the warming-up visiting goalkeepers. 
Prior to kick-off, an impressive tifo spelled out “The Dream of a Nation”. 
Three points really would give the team great confidence of returning to the 
World Cup for the first time since 1990.

Australia were not about to oblige even if the early signs were good for the 
UAE. Mark Milligan seemed to lose his head after suffering an early nutmeg, 
giving the ball away and scything down Omar Abdulrahman. The bushy-haired 
playmaker was constantly looking for the ball behind a high defence and sleepy 
right-back Ryan McGowan offered some early opportunities with Mat Ryan having 
to come to his rescue. Trent Sainsbury and Matthew Spiranovic also chipped in 
with vital interceptions and blocks.

Yet Australia are Asian champions for a reason. The early passing would not 
have pleased coach Ange Postecoglou, his white shirt drenched in sweat long 
before the drinks break that the players enjoyed on the half-hour, yet after 17 
minutes Robbie Kruse had the best chance. The Bayer Leverkusen man forced a 
good save from Khalid Eisa just moments after the goalkeeper had tipped a 
Spiranovic header over the bar.

That’s the way World Cup qualifiers often go, especially in the sweltering 
Middle East. The coach wants fast and attacking football yet conditions say 
otherwise. The Socceroos did however improve as the first half progressed and 
ended fairly comfortable.

Abdulrahman tried to do something about that but even talented strikers such 
as Ahmed Khalil and Ali Mabkhout – far from their best in this game – are not 
always on his wavelength. Still, Abdulrahman’s passing game in the final third 
is as smooth as ever, even if he is rather more reticent when it comes to work 
at the other end of the pitch.

Despite Abdulrahman’s dislike for defending, UAE stayed compact in a 4-4-2 and 
didn’t give their guests much space in the middle. The playmaker was active 
again early in the second half but Australia only looked more and more in 
control and almost took the lead when Aaron Mooy shook the bar with a shot from 
the edge of the area. Seconds later, Mabkhout was shooting over from just 
outside the six-yard box as UAE crafted their best chance.


There was always a hint of danger from the hosts but never any sense of 
pressure being built by UAE. Australia, in contrast, increasingly looked like 
getting the goal that would provide a win that was becoming increasingly 
deserved. It was almost a cliché to say that the game was set up for Tim Cahill 
to come off the bench and find half a yard and a goal. But it was and so he did 
with his first touch of the game, getting on the end of a delicious Brad Smith 
cross. The display was already impressive but combined with the result, it is 
one of Australia’s best World Cup qualification performances since joining Asia.

Socceroos off to winning start with victory over Iraq in World Cup qualifier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/socceroos-off-to-winning-start-with-victory-over-iraq-in-world-cup-qualifier>
The UAE then do share an Australian experience with Japan then – falling prey 
to a winning Cahill cameo from the bench with the mercury high and the punches 
to the corner flag low. On Tuesday night at least, the west Asians did not seem 
ready to knock the impressive Asian champions off their perch and be a major 
barrier to Australia’s fourth successive World Cup appearance. For all their 
undoubted talent, Mahdi Ali’s men just were not able to put the cool visitors 
under enough pressure on a sweltering evening.

Perhaps Saudi Arabia can stop the Socceroos, especially as Al Hilal fans will 
never forget the Asian Champions League final loss at the hands of Western 
Sydney Wanderers in 2014. The Green Falcons came back from a goal down against 
Iraq to win 2-1 with two late penalties to move level top of the group with 
Australia. The Saudis have not been impressive so far but they have been a 
little lucky. The October game in Jeddah will be fascinating.

But when it comes to Asian rivals, maybe the Socceroos will be stuck with 
Japan. The Samurai Blue recovered from their shock home defeat last week to win 
2-0 in Thailand, a victory that was more comfortable than the scoreline 
suggests. Japan are in Australia in November and on this form the Socceroos 
will fancy their chances.
 