
We need to talk about Eddie. A couple of days after some on-air hilarity about 
gathering a posse of male football commentators to submerge journalist Caroline 
Wilson underwater (all in good fun, and all for a good cause, of course), Eddie 
McGuire was heralding Collingwood’s successful bid foran inaugural women’s AFL 
team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/eight-teams-to-make-up-inaugural-womens-afl-competition-in-2017>
 by telling his Carlton counterpart it would give him “two more days of the 
year to hate you blokes”.

The first moment was an all-too-familiar, if particularly ghastly, example of 
the footy boys’ club. Goading each other along on Triple M’s The Rub, seemingly 
oblivious to the implications of what they were saying, McGuire, James 
Brayshaw, Danny Frawley and Wayne Carey sounded like a pack of timid 
schoolboys, desperately eager to impress and outdo each other, to shore up 
their spot in the gang. It was disgraceful. And also kind of pathetic.

AFL writer Caroline Wilson rejects Eddie McGuire's 'banter' excuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/afl-writer-caroline-wilson-rejects-eddie-mcguires-banter-excuse>
The second moment was a dispiriting glimpse of what an AFL-sanctioned, 
AFL-affiliated women’s competition might become. From the “you blokes”, to the 
“hate”, to the tired old backward-looking rivalries: it had everything it would 
be nice to run a women’s footy comp without. Awarding teams toCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> and Carlton may make good 
business sense. After all (as the AFL’s own news story noted) they are the 
league’s “traditional heavyweights”, and the AFL cannot afford this initiative 
to fail. But promoting women’s footy shouldn’t be a matter of blokey boasting 
rights and hate-tinged boosterism.

Yet again, women are left wondering, how do we love this game, when the public 
rhetoric of its most prominent personalities is at best demeaning and at worst 
dangerous? No amount of white ribbons or pink ladies or women’s teams will 
change that.

Ask women why they love playing footy, and they’ll usually start with the same 
two things. Whether first-gamers or longterm players, earnest tryers or 
champions, they tell you about physicality and freedom. About the exhilaration 
of throwing themselves into the fray, the adrenalin, the possibilities. About 
making decisions on the run, taking risks and backing themselves, responding to 
the ball’s wayward bounce, the game’s glorious unpredictability. And then 
they’ll tell you about the community, the camaraderie, the team. When you have 
to fight to be taken seriously, and to keep your team and your competition 
going, you don’t waste energy in faux wars with your rivals.

I started watching women’s footy regularly in the unlikeliest of places: 
Boston. We were living in the US, and my daughter, a sporting all-rounder and 
footy aficionado, had joined the localAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> club, the only Aussie among a small but 
dedicated group of women. That year they played tournaments up and down the 
East Coast, and a national championship in Austin, Texas. The best of the women 
were skilled, sure-footed, daring. The games were often scrappy – there were a 
lot of new players, and many were playing in unfamiliar combines – but always 
enthusiastic and committed. It was a great reminder of what an inclusive sport 
footy can be, with a role for all comers, and so many ways of contributing, 
both on and off the field.

Back in Victoria, we sought out more women’s footy to watch. My local country 
team had just added a youth girls side, girls who’d grown up alongside each 
other, grown up watching football. They’d also grown up playing netball, and 
watching how they moved as a team, seeking each other out, always looking for 
advantage, the slick transference from player to player, I wondered if that 
helped shape their game. Rain drizzled down, and the sky was gloomy, but the 
girls were undeterred. We sure weren’t in Boston anymore. Victory, in a moment 
of collective spontaneity, was celebrated with a dash back to the centre and a 
lot of sliding around in a churned up expanse of mud. There was something so 
joyful about it all.

Professional AFL players often say they stop enjoying the game. I wonder if 
the joy of playing, the camaraderie of struggle, will survive this new era of 
professionalism and media attention, though I’m hopeful. If that’s to happen, 
we need women to speak for their game, to share their experiences, to shape its 
discourse.

In readiness for this new season, I humbly offer a few tips for the blokes on 
watching women’s footy (all in good fun, and all for a good cause, of course).

1. Keep the mansplaining down

That’s when a man takes it upon himself to explain things to a woman that she 
is likely to know more about than he does. Like telling a female footy fan why 
they might enjoy the game. Or informing them that women’s footy has actually 
been around for quite a long time. Or outlining the particular challenges the 
players will have faced in their quest to play Australian rules footy as elite 
professionals. Conversation without condescension might take a little practise, 
but it’ll be worth it. After all, what fan doesn’t love talking about the footy?

2. Keep the perving down

You might not have realised, if you’ve spent most of your time watching male 
sports, but checking out the opposite sex plays very little part in spectating. 
Keeping an eye on the ball, sussing out the options, spotting the off-play 
incidents, matching numbers and new haircuts against the selected names, 
watching the movements on and off the bench, checking the resting players for 
signs of injury or distress: this will keep you busy enough, without trying to 
gaze lustfully upon or otherwise sexually assess the players.

3. Learn about the game

Women’s footy has its own past, its own stars, its own experts. As more 
stories surface and more voices emerge, our appreciation of the game grows 
richer, fresher, more nuanced. Women have played the game for a century, but 
only now are they in the spotlight, and we’re exploring what women’s footy is 
and might be. What a boon for the stats nerds, the history buffs, the footy 
trivia champs among you.

4. Embrace diversity

Recent showcase games have revealed how well women can play an engrossing, at 
times spectacular style of footy. Tayla Harris – she of the sensational marks – 
suggests that the sky’s the limit. Now imagine more girls drawn to the sport, 
more benefitting from quality coaching, competition and mentoring. The 
principle is simple: talent needs opportunity to reveal itself, and 
encouragement to flourish. The game is poorer when we let lazy assumptions or 
active prejudices determine who pulls on the boots. And that applies to 
nationality, race and sexuality as much as to gender.

5. Grow some balls

Admiring, respecting and listening to women isn’t that difficult. But if you 
really can’t cope with informed and engaged critique, then maybe competitive 
sport just isn’t for you.
 