
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/series/dearjeremy> advice column in the 
Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. 
We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.

I am a salaried solicitor in my late 40s employed at a medium-sized firm. I 
was recruited to build and run a department 10 years ago. By 2010, we were a 
team of six. One of the people I recruited, who is younger, indicated he wanted 
a managerial role. Three years later the firm decided to appoint him team 
leader after I indicated I was fed up managing (which involved tedious 
administrative work), and he showed enthusiasm to step in.

In exchange for this I was offered a small performance-related bonus as an 
incentive to generate fees. Three years later, the firm announced this employee 
has been made a salaried partner on the basis of his managerial contribution. I 
now feel overlooked and under-appreciated. Although I no longer have a 
managerial role, I generate twice as much income as the team leader, have been 
in the company twice as long and am much older. It feels more hurtful as I was 
involved in recruiting this person in the first place. I am also more dedicated 
to clients.

I know that I am seen as quiet and compliant by nature, and it is true that I 
tend not to make a fuss. I am not looking for prestige, but I do like to feel 
wanted and appreciated. Instead, I feel humiliated, but it feels petty to 
complain.

Although I like my job and get on well with the rest of my team (including the 
team leader) and the salary is OK, I feel ill at ease because of this issue. 
Should I swallow my pride and soldier on, or raise the issue with the 
management?

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 