
Thomas Sowunmi's first goal for Hibernian, six minutes into the second half, 
took his side into the semi-finals of the Scottish Cup at the expense of aQueen 
of the South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> team who 
had just pulled themselves back into the tie. The winning effort had more than 
a touch of good fortune about it, but makes this an excellent season in the 
knockout competitions for a team already in next month's League Cup final 
against Kilmarnock.

Sowunmi, who signed as a free agent this month, attempted to head home a 
left-wing cross from Abdessalam Benjelloun, three minutes after the home side's 
John O'Neill had cancelled out David Murphy's first-half opener. The Hungary 
forward's connection was unconvincing as the ball appeared to come off his 
shoulder, but it proved enough to earn a hard-fought victory.

Both sides started the match positively. Queen of the South had an early 
opportunity to put Hibs under pressure when Jamie Adams was tripped by Chris 
Hogg 25 yards out. Neil Scally took the resultant free-kick but fired well over 
the crossbar, failing to trouble goalkeeper Simon Brown.Hibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> were then awarded a set piece 
of their own for Scally's tug on Michael Stewart's shirt, but Murphy's effort 
was easily cleared by the home defence.

Willie Gibson fired just over for the home side then forced Brown into a save, 
while a shot by Stewart from the edge of the home side's penalty area was 
deflected a yard wide of target.

There was also plenty to keep the referee busy, the visitors' Guillaume 
Beuzelin and the Doonhamers pair Eric Paton and O'Neill all going into his 
book. The trio of cautions had the desired effect, proving to be the only ones 
of a match that soon had Stuart Dougal writing down the details of three goals 
in six minutes of play.

The breakthrough eventually came on the stroke of half time when Scally stood 
off Murphy, allowing him to unleash a 30-yard drive that nestled just inside 
the right-hand post.

Three minutes after the break, an inch-perfect Jamie McQuilken cross found 
O'Neill in front of goal and he nodded home from eight yards, leaving Brown 
with no chance. But Sowunmi, sent on for Steven Fletcher at the interval, soon 
restored Hibs' advantage.

Murphy came close to putting the tie beyond doubt with a superb curling 
free-kick that was just touched to safety by Jamie MacDonald. However, Queens 
were unwilling to make it easy for Hibs and Brown was called into action to 
block an Andrew Barrowman shot, before Adams sent the rebound flashing across 
the face of goal and wide.

But in the end the home finishing just was not good enough and there was to be 
no cup shock at Palmerston Park, despite a courageous display.
 