
The Spanish league is investigating this season’s final-day match between Real 
Betis andSporting Gijón <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>, 
both of whom have been promoted to La Liga. The league’s president, Javier 
Tebas, said the game was “being looked over” together with another in the 
second division that day, involving Girona and Lugo.

Tebas told the Spanish newspaper AS that “there is no concrete evidence” of 
wrongdoing but that the league keeps an eye on “any game where there could be 
rumours. In this case there have been rumours but there hasn’t been any 
irregularities in betting offices. In any case the only thing we are doing at 
this point is studying the matches.”

Betis went into the final match on 7 June having won the league but Sporting 
Gijón, who were third with 79 points, and the Catalan team Girona, who were 
second with 81 points, were battling to finish second and secure automatic 
promotion.

Betis lost 3-0 at home to Sporting and Girona conceded a last-minute equaliser 
against the Galician side Lugo, who had nothing at stake, meaning that Sporting 
finished in second place and Girona went into the play-offs. Girona take a 3-0 
lead into their play-off semi-final second leg at home to Zaragoza on Sunday.

Tebas reiterated in a separate interview, with the radio station Cope in its 
programme ‘El partido de las 12’, that there were no clear signs of malpractice 
but added: “In social media people have been speaking aboutprimas. There have 
been complaints and the press has highlighted strange circumstances.”

In Spain primas is the name given to bonuses that players receive, usually to 
win a match. Although in 2013 the court of arbitration for sport ruled that it 
was illegal for teams to receive bonuses from third parties, Luis Rubiales, the 
president of the Spanish Footballers’ Association, defended them by saying they 
are like “giving you an incentive to win” and that in no way is it like playing 
to fix a match”.

The Spanish league is also looking into comments by Deportivo La Coruña’s 
defender Alberto Lopo after a 2-2 draw withBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> on the final day of the league 
season on 23 May. Lopo said he asked Barcelona’s Xavi to “relax a bit” because 
“a draw would be good for both sides”, the Catalan club having won the league 
and Deportivo needing to avoid defeat to be certain of avoiding relegation.

Tebas said there was no suspicion of match-fixing but that the league was 
“looking into whether those words are susceptible to sanction. You can’t say 
those things even as a joke. You can’t urge the other team to not play at their 
full level.”
 