 The Tay bridge disaster in 1879, which as the poet William McGonagall 
immortally observed in one of the world's worst poems "Will be remembered for a 
very long time", sent a shock wave through the world of civil engineering and 
changed the science of bridge building for ever.
The engineer who designed it, Thomas Bouch, had taken the best advice 
available on wind force. On the night of December 28 1879, in a howling 
blizzard, the central spans of his year old bridge collapsed into the river, 
taking with them the Dundee express train and its 90 passengers.

The game plan changed from brute strength and spectacle to durability, 
controlled flexibility and above all wind resistance. The result, 130 years 
later, is a new generation of bridges ever longer, lighter and more slender, 
instead of the massive towers and buttresses of the great Victorian spans.

"I think everyone loves bridges because they're so easy to understand," said 
Denis Smith, past president of the Newcomen Society, dedicated to civil 
engineering and industrial archaeology. "Unlike most of civil engineering, 
which can seem very arcane and impenetrable to a layman, anyone can understand 
the principle of a bridge, and the form follows the function, which is one of 
the definitions of beauty."

Dr Smith's obsessive interest in bridges is regarded as slightly over the top 
even by his peers in the Newcomen Society. To him the object of any journey is 
not the destination but the bridges deviated to along the way. He is already 
planning his journey to the Oresund link.

"Just think of all those little stone bridges, built by rule of thumb by some 
medieval stonemason, designed to carry nothing heavier than a horse and cart, 
which now have juggernauts thundering over them every day - they're miracles of 
design."

Bridge building is a rare field in which Britain has led the world. What 
distinguishes British engineers from their peers abroad, he says, is their low 
status in the public mind.

"If I say in France that I am an engineer people expect me, however 
mistakenly, to be a person of culture and learning. Here I could just be the 
chap who comes round to mend the washing machine or the telly."

Here, in tribute to the engineering art, are the facts about 10 splendid 
bridges:

 The Oresund link 

 When it opens next month, it will hold the world title of longest bridge to 
carry both trains and motorway traffic. The road and rail link between Sweden 
and Denmark has taken five years to build, and includes bridges and tunnels. 
The main section is the 7.8km Oresund bridge, carrying cars on one deck and a 
two track railway on the lower deck.

 Clifton suspension bridge 

 A typically audacious design by Isambard Kingdom Brunel to cross a 250ft deep 
gorge, with a main span of 702ft. It was built against the advice of Thomas 
Telford, whose Menai suspension bridge had almost been destroyed by crosswinds. 
The original design of 1836 was modified many times in the financial crises 
which inevitably beset Brunel's big projects. It was completed in 1864, after 
Brunel's death, re-using the chains from another financially disastrous 
project, his Hungerford bridge in London.

 Tower Bridge 

 In 1884 the corporation of London finally resolved to end the reign of the 
notoriously foul mouthed Thames ferrymen, and build the bridge the city 
desperately needed. The design, by Horace Jones and John Barry, hid under its 
charming Gothic exterior the largest and most sophisticated bascule bridge ever 
built. The hydraulically operated bascules - massive counterweights - still 
lift the arms to allow ships through, although since 1976 they have been driven 
by oil and electricity rather than steam. The bridge will close temporarily 
this year for the first major repairs to the bascules.

 Pont de Normandie 

 Completed in 1995, this held the previous world record for longest 
cable-stayed - rather than suspension - bridge. Built at the mouth of the 
Seine, it takes 10 minutes to drive across and has withstood wind gusts of over 
100mph.

 The Brooklyn bridge 

 Crossing the East River in New York, it opened in 1883, 81 years after the 
first petition to build it. The first engineer, John A Roebling, was killed in 
an accident, one of 27 men who died on the site. His son, Washington Roebling, 
took over, became an invalid during the work, and finished supervising 
construction from his bedroom, with his wife relaying instructions to the 
builders and engineers.

 The Charles bridge, Prague 

 It was begun in 1357, a date chosen, according to legend, because it was 
numerologically auspicious. The bridge, an outdoor gallery of baroque 
sculpture, outlasted wars and natural disasters to become the oldest stone 
bridge in central Europe. It is still the city's main meeting place, and now a 
haunt of buskers and traders.

 Sydney Harbour bridge 

 This is the world's widest - though not longest - steel arch bridge. The 
central arch had to soar 134 metres above sea level to leave clearance for 
ships. Many of the steel parts were prefabricated in Middlesbrough, but the 
Australians boast that they made all 6m rivets. It opened in 1932.

 The Golden Gate bridge 

 Stretched across almost a mile of San Franciso Bay, it has been named one of 
the seven wonders of the modern world by the American Society of Civil 
Engineers. It opened in 1937. Its colour is officially called Golden Gate 
Bridge International Orange, and was chosen over conventional silver, black or 
dark blue after passionate argument: the US Navy is said to have wanted yellow 
with black stripes to make it more visible to passing ships.

 The Forth Railway bridge 

 Designed by John Fowler and Benjamin Baker, the bridge was opened by the 
Prince of Wales in 1890 at a party attended by international VIPs including 
Gustav Eiffel. It became famous as the bridge where painting never stopped. 
When it did stop, in a cost saving exercise, there was a public outcry and the 
painting resumed.

 The Bridge of Sighs 

 The Venetian original has been copied in at least half a dozen places, 
including Las Vegas and St John's College Cambridge. It was built in 1600, by 
Antonio Contino, to link the dreaded inquisitor's room in the doge's palace 
with Venice's main prison. Its name came from the prisoners' response to their 
last glimpse of freedom, through the small barred windows looking out towards 
the lagoon.
 