
Ten-man Motherwell stayed hard on the trail of second-placed Rangers in the 
Scottish Premier League with a convincing 3-0 victory overHearts at Fir Park.

Last season's champions have been docked 10 points after going into 
administration.Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> are 
now six points adrift with a game in hand.

Keith Lasley's deflected shot off Andy Webster and a Jamie Murphy header gave 
the Steelmen the advantage at the interval. But the Well skipper Lasley was 
sent off five minutes after the break for picking up a second yellow card, both 
for fouls on Gorgie midfielder Ian Black.

Motherwell shrugged off the numerical disadvantage and the midfielder, Nicky 
Law, finished off a fine move in the 65th minute by driving the ball past Jamie 
MacDonald to seal the win.

Black was replaced by Taouil to the delight of the home fans who watched their 
side play at times as if they had the man advantage.

Tom Hateley fired a free-kick, from wide on the left, inches over the bar in 
the 78th minute as the visitors slowly ran out of steam and belief. In the 86th 
minute, more good work from Henrik Ojamaa on the left ended when he fired the 
ball to the back post.

But the striker, Michael Higdon, allowed it to go under his foot with the goal 
gaping, although the flag might have been raised had he put the ball in the 
net. In the end, it was a comfortable win for the home side, who will have 
Rangers firmly in their sights in the weeks ahead.

Dundee United and St Mirren fought out a goalless draw at Tannadice, the 
visitors' fourth draw in five matches, although neither side showed enough to 
merit a victory. The substitute, Nigel Hasselbaink, could have won the contest 
for Danny Lennon'sSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> in 
the closing stages, but he was unable to guide the ball into the net from a 
cross by Dougie Imrie.

The home side's midfielder, John Rankin, fired in a shot that was deflected 
wide for a corner as the home side tried to break the deadlock.

Hasselbaink could have scored a late winner for the Buddies, but the Dutchman, 
who was sent off when the sides met at Tannadice earlier in the season, was 
unable to turn Imrie's cross past Dusan Pernis in the United goal.

There was still time for Imrie to test Pernis from long distance, but the 
Slovak goalkeeper was equal to the winger's low drive.

Dunfermline missed the chance to move off the bottom of the SPL table after 
being held to a 1-1 draw byInverness at East End Park.

Joe Cardle pounced on a loose ball to score the opener just before half-time, 
but Nick Ross grabbed a deserved equaliser after 75 minutes.

With Hibernian not in action, victory would have lifted Jim McIntyre's 
struggling side above their relegation rivals.

The home side took the lead when Cardle won a free-kick on the edge of the box 
and Martin Hardie's effort crashed off the bar. Caley could not clear the loose 
ball and Cardle reacted quickest to drill home from six yards. After Cardley's 
opener, Shane Sutherland headed over from eight yards out after 65 minutes, as 
Caley chased the equaliser.

The home side were full of confidence and Gary Mason's 20-yard drive rolled 
inches wide.

Inverness kept pressing and the goal finally arrived with 15 minutes left. 
Jonny Hayes was the provider with a low cross that Ross swept in at the back 
post.

Neither side gave much away in the closing stages, but Ryan Esson produced a 
brave save at Liam Buchanan's feet. TheDunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> striker then headed over 
from six yards out and his side's search for a first home victory of the season 
continued .

Hibernian host Celtic at Easter Road on Sunday and are augmented by the return 
of Leigh Griffiths, Paul Hanlon and James McPake from suspensions. Aberdeen 
entertain St Johnstone in the early kick-off, with the Dons having lost only 
one of their past 13 games. 
 