
Lee McCulloch scored his first goal of the season as Rangers fought back from 
a goal behind to win 4-1 and denyDunfermline their first home victory of the 
season in the Scottish Premier League.

McCulloch struck after David Healy cancelled out Andy Kirk's surprise 
16th-minute opener and Sone Aluko and Salim Kerkar then helped themselves to a 
goal each.

Hibernian moved a point clear of the bottom club Dunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> with a goal less draw against
 Aberdeen, but it could have been more for the Edinburgh side at Easter Road. 
Hibs had appeals for a penalty turned down midway through the second half after 
the ball appeared to hit the Dons defender Andrew Considine's arm.

A calamitous pair of own goals from St Johnstone and an incredible three goals 
in the final seven minutes gaveDundee United a stunning 5-1 victory in an 
action-packed Tayside derby.

Saints dominated much of the first half at McDiarmid Park but found themselves 
a goal behind at half-time after Steven Anderson had bundled into his own net 
following a blunder by the keeper Peter Enckelman.

A second own goal on the hour mark, from Callum Davidson, doubled United's 
lead before Anderson made amends for his own goal by pulling one back. However, 
headers from Johnny Russell and Jon Daly ensured that United would finish 
worthy victors.

Enckelman made another mistake in injury-time as his attempted clearance 
struck his team-mate Dave Mackay to allow the substitute Milos Lacny to roll a 
fifth into the unguarded net.

St Mirren and Motherwell had to settle for a share of the spoils in a feisty 
encounter atSt Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> Park. The 
home side had by far the best of the first half and Darren Randolph pulled off 
a wonderful save to deny Gary Teale after sustained pressure.

Third-placed Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> 
found their stride after the break and only an incredible stop from the St 
Mirren keeper Craig Samson prevented the visitors from leaving with three 
points from a bad-tempered clash.

Hearts and Kilmarnock shared a 1-1 draw in a lively match at Rugby Park.

Paul Heffernan bundled home 10 minutes from time to put Killie on course for 
three points but the substitute Suso Santana rose to meet a Paul McGowan cross 
and level at 1-1.

Both sides finished the game with 10 men after Dieter Van Tornhout and Jamie 
Hammill were sent off in the second half.
 