
St Mirren and Aberdeen shared a 1-1 draw in the Scottish Premier League's 
early kick-off.

Nigel Hasselbaink opened the scoring for St Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> after 57th minutes, bringing to 
an end a run of four SPL games without a goal. But the visitors drew level 
almost immediately when Scott Vernon scored Aberdeen's first league goal in 
three matches.

With three minutes remaining the Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> substitutes Rory Fallon and Peter 
Pawlett almost combined for a second goal. But Pawlett shot wide under pressure 
after being played in by his team-mate.

Gary Teale almost won the match in stoppage time but his shot on the run from 
20 yards was held by Jason Brown. It was St Mirren's fourth consecutive league 
draw and Aberdeen's third.

Dundee United extended their unbeaten run to six matches and climbed above 
Heartswith a victory at Tynecastle.

The striker Jon Daly struck with a header from Barry Douglas's free-kick after 
41 minutes and defender Gavin Gunning headed in a second from a Gary 
MacKay-Steven corner after 85 minutes. The win moves United up to fifth place, 
two points behindSt Johnstone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone>
.

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> began the day in fourth 
but now have one win in seven matches – the extra-time defeat of St Johnstone 
in the William Hill Scottish Cup – and sit sixth in the table.

Hearts twice came close to an equaliser in quick succession after 79 minutes. 
Suso Santana threaded a neat ball through to Rudi Skacel, but Dusan Pernis 
snuffed out the shot by swiftly breaking off his line and spreading himself.

The ball came back for Stephen Elliott, but Gunning blocked the shot, with 
Pernis also scrambling to cover.

United responded and were rewarded with a second goal.

St Johnstone maintained their push for a European place with a comfortable 3-1 
win overDunfermline.

Goals from Murray Davidson and Callum Davidson put Steve Lomas's side in 
complete control after a one-sided first half.

The Pars substitute Paul Burns halved the deficit after 73 minutes. Burns's 
curling shot came through a sea of bodies and nestled in the corner.

St Johnstone would not be denied for long and Lee Croft made it 3-1 in 78 
minutes with a precise finish from 12 yards after some great skill.

Croft had hit the upright after 69 minutes and Cillian Sheridan hit the post 
in injury time as St Johnstone cruised to victory.

Hibernian moved three points clear ahead of Dunfermline at the foot of the 
table with a 3-1 victory overKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> at Rugby Park.

The on-loan midfielder Tom Soares opened the scoring in the 17th minute after 
latching on to Leigh Griffiths's through-ball and Roy O'Donovan extended their 
lead with a 30-yard effort, 90 seconds into the second half.

Soares grabbed his second of the match on 65 minutes after he connected with 
Griffiths's cross before Killie gave their fans something to cheer about with 
eight minutes remaining when Dean Shiels's curling free-kick left Graeme Stack 
with no chance.

Paul Heffernan's header was deflected past the post as the home side looked 
for an unlikely comeback and Paul Hanlon then had to be alert to clear Lee 
Johnson's dangerous cross.

Pat Fenlon's team held out during the four minutes of injury-time to claim the 
three points. 
 