
Rangers moved to within a point of Celtic at the top of the Scottish Premier 
League with a convincing 4-0 home victory againstHibernian .

Their top goalscorer, Nikica Jelavic, missed the match at Ibrox through 
illness but the captain, Steven Davis, scored twice and David Healy and Sone 
Aluko scored a goal apiece against a Hibs side who were reduced to 10 men in 
the second half.

With Celtic in Scottish League Cup action on Sunday, the victory allowed 
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> to give their title 
hopes a much-needed boost.

It proved to be a debut to forget for Hibs' James McPake, who was shown a 
second yellow card for a challenge on Maurice Edu after 71 minutes, with the 
American midfielder withdrawn for Lee McCulloch.

The afternoon got worse for the Edinburgh club when Rangers netted their third 
goal from the resultant free-kick three minutes later. Aluko had been 
instrumental in much of the game and was rewarded with a goal of his own when 
he sent a curling effort into the top corner, leaving Mark Brown with no chance.

Davis then put the gloss on the win deep into injury-time when he drove home 
from 10 yards .

Scott Vernon's 10th goal of the season helped Aberdeen move into the top six 
of the SPL with a 1-0 victory overDunfermline.

With Kilmarnock on cup duty and Dundee United without a fixture, the Dons took 
full advantage to move above the pair and into the top half of the table for 
the first time under Craig Brown's tenure.

The Dons striker Vernon capitalised when Dunfermline's goalkeeper, Iain 
Turner, raced from his line to try to collect Mark Reynolds's searching ball 
upfield and headed the ball over the stranded Turner to score the only goal of 
the game after 24 minutes.

Joe Cardle should have earned his side a point two minutes from time when he 
latched on to Rory McArdle's slack backpass, but Brown denied theDunfermline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> substitute to ensure the 
Dons held out for the win.

Henrik Ojamaa struck twice as Motherwell defeated St Johnstone 3-2 in a 
thrilling match.

Ojamaa opened the scoring midway through the first-half before Jody Morris 
levelled for Saints on the stroke of half-time.

The Estonian restored the hosts' lead after 65 minutes. Having regained the 
lead,Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> began to show 
more of an attacking threat and Tom Hateley flashed a shot well wide after good 
build-up play between Omar Daley and Ojamaa.

The hosts doubled their advantage with 15 minutes remaining when Keith Lasley 
ended a swift breakaway with a 25-yard effort that looped over Peter Enckelman.

Murray Davidson blazed over the bar from six yards as Saints attempted to find 
a way back into the game before they were handed an even better chance when the 
referee, Calum Murray, pointed to the spot after Davidson was fouled by Lasley. 
Sandaza converted it to set up an exciting conclusion, butSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> could not find an equaliser.

Inverness's new signing Claude Gnakpa was the star of a goalless draw with St 
Mirren– the first scoreless game in the Highland capital for three years.

The Frenchman – who signed on Saturday – came on with 25 minutes to go and 
came closest to scoring with a low shot that struck the inside of the post. St 
Mirren's Steven Thompson was the visitors' main threat.
 