
Rangers' Scottish Premier League title hopes took another knock as Aberdeen 
held Ally McCoist's side to a 1-1 draw in Glasgow.

The result was not enough for the Dons to end a wait of more than two decades 
for a win at Ibrox but they will have headed back to Pittodrie the happier of 
the two sides with the outcome.

The visitors were ahead after 63 minutes when Chris Clark set up Kari Arnason 
to curl the ball past theRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
goalkeeper Allan McGregor.

The Scottish champions were back on level terms only four minutes later when 
the ball broke for Maurice Edu to strike high into the top corner of the net.

Rangers gained impetus from the equaliser and Edu could have grabbed his 
second goal of the day with less than 10 minutes to go. The American midfielder 
raced on to a great pass from Nikica Jelavic before producing a well-struck 
shot that whistled inches past the post.

Kyle Bartley then directed a header over the crossbar from a Gregg Wylde cross 
and Aluko forced a superb save from Jason Brown but Rangers could not find 
the winner.

A stunning late goal from Francisco Sandaza secured a 3-2 win for St Johnstone 
overHibernian in a breathless encounter at Easter Road.

The on-loan debutant Lee Croft opened the scoring in the first half with a 
fine low finish forSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone>. Their lead was cancelled 
out in the second period, through a Leigh Griffiths penalty.

Sloppy defending allowed Liam Craig to restore the Perth side's lead through a 
composed finish with 19 minutes remaining before Hibs fought back to make it 
2-2 through Callum Booth's neat finish.

The home side failed to defend resolutely enough, though, and the excellent 
Sandaza found the space to fire in an 87th-minute winner to secure three points 
for St Johnstone.

Dunfermline recorded their first win in almost three months as the bottom side 
beatKilmarnock 3-0 at Rugby Park.

Andrew Barrowman opened the scoring with five minutes remaining in the first 
half and Joe Cardle doubled the visitors' lead on the hour mark.

With three minutes remaining Liam Buchanan added a third goal to ensure the 
Pars' first ever SPL victory at Rugby Park.

Shane Sutherland's header secured Inverness a 1-0 win at home to Hearts. The 
attacker pounced from close range in the 49th minute to help the Highlanders 
close the gap on the SPL's top six.

Jamie Hamill came closest for Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> when he hit the crossbar in the 
opening stages and the visitors will be frustrated that they were not awarded a 
late penalty when Josh Meekings appeared to foul David Templeton but the 
referee George Salmond was not convinced.

John Sutton sent a low shot wide in the closing stages but Caley held on for 
the victory.

Michael Higdon's late equaliser gave Motherwell a deserved 1-1 draw at 
Dundee United.

Trailing to a first-half own goal from their captain Stephen Craigan, Stuart 
McCall's side battled back and passed up a string of chances before Higdon 
struck in the 85th minute.

It ends a run of three successive defeats for Motherwell, but they still 
dropped down to fifth place in the SPL after St Johnstone beat Hibernian.Dundee 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> are still searching 
for their first victory of 2012 but the draw moved them back into the top six.
 