
St Johnstone boosted their hopes of European football with a 2-1 win over 
Hearts in the Scottish Premier League.

Steve Lomas's side continued their impressive run of form as Francisco 
Sandaza's spot-kick winner secured victory at McDiarmid Park.

Jason Holt's opener for Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> 
had earlier been cancelled out by a Murray Davidson equaliser.

St Johnstone now sit four points ahead of Hearts and level with Dundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> in the race to finish 
fourth.

There was little between the sides, but St Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> took the lead in the 77th 
minute through Sandaza's penalty. The Spaniard fell under a robust Marius 
Zaliukas challenge and chipped a cool spot-kick down the middle of the goal.

Chris Millar almost added to the home side's lead with a looping header. Andy 
Driver then wasted a good chance to equalise for the visitors in injury-time – 
then Gary Glen struck the post as St Johnstone hung on for victory.

Jim Jefferies had to be happy with a point in his first game as Dunfermline 
manager as the Pars came back from a goal down to draw 1-1 againstSt Mirren at 
East End Park.

The Buddies striker Steven Thompson headed the visitors into the lead from a 
Gary Teale corner.

A half-time team talk from Jefferies worked wonders as Joe Cardle levelled 
within a minute of the restart, but the Fifers could not go on to find a winner 
and are still looking for their first home victory of the season.

As the Buddies reasserted themselves, Nigel Hasselbaink headed a Graham Carey 
cross high over the bar.

Thompson headed a Jim Goodwin free-kick wide of the target before Andy Dowie 
bravely put his head in front of a goalbound drive by Paul McGowan.

Pars fans encouraged their team forward in the final minutes but it was St 
Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> who finished the game on 
top with McGowan angling a shot wide in injury time.

Goals from Johnny Russell and Gary Mackay-Steven increased Dundee United's 
unbeaten league run to eight matches and increasedHibernian's relegation 
worries at Easter Road.

The striker Leigh Griffiths hit the post for Hibs in an even first half before 
United cut through their hosts twice in quick succession, Russell netting after 
65 minutes before putting Mackay-Steven through for the second goal with 17 
minutes remaining.

While United consolidated fourth place in the table, Hibs remain with one SPL 
home win this season and, with seven matches remaining, in desperate need of 
points to aid their fight for survival.

Grégory Tadé's first-half strike gave 10-man Inverness a 1-0 victory over 
Aberdeen at Pittodrie.

The Frenchman had the easiest of finishes after Billy McKay rounded the Dons 
keeper, Jason Brown, before passing the ball to his strike partner.

Caley, who had gone seven matches without a win, were forced to play the 
majority of the second half with 10 men when Josh Meekings was given a second 
booking, but they defended resolutely to secure maximum points despite a late 
onslaught from the Dons.

The pressure from Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> was 
unrelenting with Mohamed Chalali and Scott Vernon both denied by good stops by 
Jonny Tuffey.

The Inverness assistant manager, Maurice Malpas, was sent to the stands by the 
referee, Stephen Finnie, as Caley held on to move two points behind the Dons 
with a game in hand. 
 