
Rangers earned three points against 10-man St Mirren with a 3-1 victory at 
Ibrox.

The win strengthens Rangers' hold on second place in the Scottish Premier 
League in a match that featured four penalties.

Ally McCoist's men enjoyed one of the best possible starts to the game when 
Lee McCulloch met a Steven Davis pass and headed past goalkeeper Craig Samson 
with only 47 seconds played.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> suffered a setback when 
Steven Davis, their captain, was forced out of the action after eight minutes 
and was replaced by the young midfielder Rhys McCabe. But Andy Little doubled 
the advantage before half-time and Kyle Lafferty sealed the victory from the 
penalty spot on the hour.

Paul McGowan's penalty for the Paisley club proved to be scant consolation as 
team-mate Jeroen Tesselaar was sent off, while McCulloch and Sone Aluko both 
missed their own spot-kicks for Rangers.

Following such an action-packed spell, with four goals coming in the first 
hour of the contest, the pace of the match dropped, with opportunities few and 
far between for both sides. Aluko saw an effort deflected wide in injury time, 
before Craig Samson saved well from a powerful McCulloch shot, as Rangers held 
on to at least claim victory on the day they relinquished the SPL crown to 
rivals Celtic.

Aberdeen enjoyed a confidence-boosting 3-1 win over a poor Dundee United ahead 
of next Saturday's Scottish Cup semi-final against Hibernian.

Darren Mackie had given Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> the lead with his first SPL 
goal of the season after eight minutes when he expertly chipped the ball over 
Dusan Pernis before United's captain, Jon Daly, levelled when he volleyed home 
from a corner from Willo Flood just before the half-hour mark for his 21st 
strike of the season.

But Chris Clark pounced upon an error by Pernis to restore the home side's 
advantage after 68 minutes, before Ryan Jack's header 10 minutes later brought 
United's six-game winning run in the league to an abrupt end.

Dunfermline's manager, Jim Jefferies, lost his first game against his old club 
Heartsas his former charges denied the Pars their first win in 11 games with a 
2-1 victory at East End Park.

The defeat leaves the SPL's bottom side seeking their first home league 
victory of the season and six points behind Hibernian with only five games left 
to play – an advantage Hibs could extend with their home encounter against 
Motherwell in the final match before the league split.

Gary Glen and Darren Barr scored within three minutes of each other at the 
start of a disastrous second half for the home side.

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> seemed to be coasting to 
victory before a late Marius Zaliukas own goal ensured a nervy final 10 
minutes, but the visitors managed to hold on.

Dunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> enjoyed the 
better of the attacking play in the opening stages, but paid the price for 
failing to capitalise with their possession and succumbing to pressure 
from Hearts.

St Johnstone moved up to fourth position in the league despite being held to a 
0-0 draw by Inverness.

The visitors were the better team in the first half and Jonny Hayes hit the 
post after a mazy run.

But the Perth side picked up after the break and were unlucky not to win a 
penalty for Roman Golobart's barge on Francisco Sandaza.

Dundee United's defeat at Aberdeen allowed the Saints to leapfrog them in the 
race for a European place next season.
 