
Jon Daly scored two goals as Dundee United cantered to a 3-0 SPL win against 
relegation-threatenedDunfermline in the.

The victory boosted United's hopes of European football next season.

Daly diverted Paul Dixon's cross wide inside 90 seconds as United started the 
contest on top. The home defender Gavin Gunning then stepped out of defence and 
sent a long-range drive just wide of the goal.

United kept pressing and the Pars goalkeeper Chris Smith survived an error 
when his weak punch landed at Dixon in the 14th minute. The full-back's 
first-time shot came through a sea of players and landed just wide.

Less than a minute later, Robbie Neilson should have fired United ahead but he 
blasted over from six yards after being picked out by Gary Mackay-Steven.

The Pars weathered the United storm and finally managed to string some passes 
together. They could even have taken the lead on 32 minutes but Alex Keddie's 
header from Joe Cardle's free-kick soared over.

That seemed to wake United and the Pars keeper Smith saved Mackay-Steven's 
20-yard drive.

United began the second half with renewed enthusiasm and took the lead on 49 
minutes.

Scott Robertson sealed the points for Dundee United after 80 minutes when he 
converted Mackay‑Steven's cross. And Daly rounded off the scoring in the 
closing stages when he pounced on Johnny Russell's pass to convert from 
close range.

Steven Thompson scored twice as St Mirren defeated Kilmarnock 4-2 at St Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> Park.

Dieter van Tornhout opened the scoring for the visitors after 11 minutes 
before Thompson's low effort beat Cammy Bell 13 minutes later.

Steven Thomson headed home Dougie Imrie's cross to give the hosts the lead and 
Nigel Hasselbaink then pounced on Mohamadou Sissoko's mistake five minutes 
later to increase their advantage.

Thompson grabbed his second when he curled a shot beyond Bell with seven 
minutes remaining before Dean Shiels struck a late consolation for Killie.

Rudi Skacel scored twice as Hearts secured their place in the SPL's top six 
with victory over fellow Scottish Cup semi-finalistsAberdeen at Tynecastle.

The defender Ryan McGowan headed in a Danny Grainger corner from close range 
to putHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> in front after 27 
minutes to give the home side a half-time advantage.

The home goalkeeper Jamie MacDonald was merely a spectator for much of the 
opening 45 minutes against a blunt Dons attack and Skacel scored with a 
left-foot strike from 25 yards after 53 minutes to double the lead.

Paulo Sérgio felt comfortable enough with his side's lead to take off Ian 
Black 22 minutes from time. The key midfielder has been nursing a hernia injury 
and was replaced by Suso Santana, who soon had an impact as his run at goal led 
to muted appeals for a Hearts penalty. Russell Anderson came on for the final 
14 minutes, making his first Dons appearance since departing for Sunderland in 
2007.

Scott Vernon shot over on the turn from close range before Hearts netted an 
89th-minute third after the Dons failed to clear and Skacel pounced to seal 
victory. The win ensured sixth-placed Hearts could not be caught byKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock>, whose loss in Paisley 
enabled St Mirren to knock the Dons down to ninth. 
 