
Saturday night in northern Spain brought good news for Arsenal: contrary to 
popular belief, Barcelona do not triumph in every game. A 16-match winning run 
came to an end with a 1-1 draw atSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> that provided clues as to 
how to stop the Catalans. Afterwards Pep Guardiola admitted he does not expect 
the club captain, Carles Puyol, to be fit in time to play at the Emirates on 
Wednesday night.

Puyol was absent through injury and Guardiola replied with a simple "I don't 
think so" when asked whether the defender would be ready to face Arsenal. 
Sergio Busquets, Eric Abidal and Pedro Rodríguez were also absent from the 
starting XI but the bad news forArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> is that their absence was 
designed to ensure that they do play in the Champions League. Yet Leo Messi, 
Xavi and Andrés Iniesta did play, but rarely found their way past a team who 
ceded possession, funnelled the opposition into traffic in the centre, and 
broke with purpose.

Without Puyol, Busquets and Abidal, Barcelona's protection came from Gabriel 
Milito at centre-back and Javier Mascherano in a defensive midfield role. 
Neither performed well and neither was able to prevent Sporting from taking a 
first-half lead. ABarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 
attack broke down on the edge of the Sporting area and a swift counterattack 
saw David Barral dashing in from the left and finishing superbly.

Gijón were worthy of their lead. Barcelona could not find their normal fluency 
in the first half as the home side defended deep, and with aggression and 
organisation. When Barcelona reacted in the second, with Pedro on as a 
substitute, the Sporting keeper, Iván Cuéllar, made a series of vital saves. 
Assisted by Messi, David Villa did eventually equalise with a wonderful chip 11 
minutes from time but Barcelona's record-breaking run is over.

"Sporting managed to do to us what all those other teams have tried to do but 
not been able to do," said Villa. "They smothered us and prevented us from 
playing." Guardiola said: "They played very deep, very well, and stopped us 
finding space. However much people talk about us, we're not invincible." The 
former Barcelona player Alberto Botía, now at Sporting, revealed that his team 
had focused on preventing Barcelona from finding space in the inside channels.
 