
Manolo Preciado played his moustache like it was a harmonica, air racing out 
of his lungs, through the foliage and into the room. "Uuf," he said. "Uuf,joder
."Fuck. Crafty fag extinguished, voice coarse and rough, language even more 
coarse and even more rough, so deep the floor vibrated, he shifted behind a 
giant bottle of Fuensanta, official water ofSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>, and played it again. 
"Uuf," he said, "a month ago we'd have lost 6-1." But this was not a month ago 
and Sporting did not lose 6-1. Instead, on Saturday night they drew 1-1 with FC 
Barcelona. And if draws are the new defeats for the big two, then draws against 
the big two are the new victories for everyone else. "This," Preciado said, "is 
a fantastic prize."

Outside, the fans could not agree more. Along the front, cold Atlantic 
smashing up against the sea walls, illuminated at one end by the Molinón, at 
the other by the church of San Pedro and in the middle by the moon, they were 
still celebrating. "Lo han pasado de puta madre", Preciado said: the fans have 
had a prostitute mother of a time. They had, too. This was a proper match in a 
proper stadium.

Intense and edgy and loud – really, really loud. And with a happy ending. Fans 
roared at the final whistle as players embraced and Preciado leapt about 
punching the air. The red and white card from the pre-game mosaic – what was 
left of it after 90 minutes spent sending paper airplanes heading towards the 
turf – was tossed to the air in glee.

The banner at one end had declared: "Sporting Gijón, giant-killers since 1957."

Killers? Perhaps not, but the giant had eventually pulled up exhausted and 
offered his hand. At the offices of Asturias's oldest newspaper El Comercio 
they were finishing their cover: "And David stopped Goliath." AS were preparing 
a colossal¡COLOSAL!. As for Preciado, he had described Pep Guardiola as "God"; 
now he was playing the iconoclast. Back in 1960-61, Alfredo Di Stéfano's Real 
Madrid won 15 games in a row and travelled to Asturias. The run came to an end 
with a draw against Real Oviedo. Fifty years later,Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> surpassed that record, won 16 
games in a row and travelled to Asturias. Their run came to an end with a draw 
against Sporting Gijón.

Sporting, declared La Nueva España, imagining its panting hero diving for the 
cable as the final seconds ticked away and the planet held its breath, 
"unplugged the machine".

As draws go, this was one hell of a victory. Despite the fact that it could 
have been an actual victory. After all, Sporting led for an hour. Leo Messi 
lost out on the edge of the penalty area and committed a foul. As the stadium 
howled for a free-kick and a card, the referee instead waved play on. David 
Barral sprinted up the left, dashed inside and went past Gerard Piqué with a 
shimmy that doubled up as a warning that the centre-back shouldn't necessarily 
believe everything his missus tells him –hipsdo lie. Easing past Gabi Milito, 
he smashed it into the bottom corner. "I could not have dreamed it better," he 
said. The noise made your ears bleed.

If Sporting were worth their lead, the second half was a different story. 
Eventually, David Villa's clever chip levelled it in the 79th minute. It was 
the fifth time he had scored against Sportingand the fifth time he had refused 
to celebrate <http:// 
www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2009/apr/13/david-villa-sporting-gijon-valencia-sid-lowe>
. It was described as the "cruellest Vaseline" – although frankly you can 
imagine worse – but still Sporting's players said it "tasted like a win". Not 
just because it was against Barcelona but because of what it symbolised for 
Sporting. About both their past and their future.

Getting something out of a Barcelona side without Sergio Busquets and Carles 
Puyol, both of whom were absent the last two times they dropped points in the 
league this season, might have made the task look a little easier. Getting 
something out of Barcelona when they're suffering what the Spanish describe as 
the Fifa virus might have looked even easier yet – they have won just six of 19 
games immediately after an international break. But, still, getting something 
out of the side that had won 16 on the trot looked very nearly impossible. For 
Sporting it looked very really impossible.

Correction: for that Sporting it would have been very really impossible. 
Preciado was right: a month ago Sporting might have lost 6-1. And Preciado 
might have been out of a job. When Diego Castro scored an 89th-minute equaliser 
against Deportivo de La Coruña in week 16, he ran 60 yards to embrace Preciado. 
But if he thought the goal had saved his coach's job, he was wrong. The 
following week, Sporting were beaten 2-1 by Málaga. They had gone 10 weeks 
without a win and were bottom. The first division's longest-serving coach was 
about to get the sack. The president Manuel Vega-Arango called a meeting for 
the Monday morning. "I fully expected to wake up in the morning, look on the 
internet, turn to my girlfriend and say: 'Sweetheart, it's over'," Preciado 
admitted.

It wasn't. Not so much because Preciado, a potty-mouthed, funny, earthy coach 
<http:/ 
/www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/nov/15/la-liga-manola-preciado-jose-mourinho>
, is as popular with most of the players as he is with journalists and other 
coaches in the game – he reckons that the closeness of their relationship was a 
problem, making them even more desperate to win – but because someone reminded 
Vega-Arango of something he had said at the Christmas lunch: "I'll leave this 
club before Preciado does." Prisoner of his own words, Vega-Arango hung fire. 
Preciado told his players he wouldn't die of hunger, even if he was sacked; he 
was in a job that "shouldn't even be called a job and on top of that the pay is 
the bollocks"; he told them that, having lost his career as a doctor because of 
a players' strike, having lost his wife and his son, he would recover.

Again, they rescued him. Against Racing Santander, Diego Castro scored a 
91st-minute equaliser. And then it happened. Sporting started winning.

They beat Hércules 2-0, Atlético 1-0 and Mallorca 4-0. They had gone from 
bottom of the table to 12th, on the verge of the top half. Sure, they then lost 
3-0 to Athletic but now they had only gone and got a draw with Barcelona. 
Twelve points in eight games – more than half their total for the entire 
season. "If it hadn't been for Castro in the 91st minute against Racing and the 
89th minute against Depor, I would have been sacked," Preciado said on Saturday 
night. "And then everything changed. But while we were on a horrendous run, it 
was a half a lie. You lose in the 95th minute to Villarreal and you think,joder
, why is this happening? We haven't changed anything really; there has just 
been a psychological question. Plus the fans: today they carried us to this 
result. And there's been a bit of luck. A month ago we would have lost 6-1 and 
now we have drawn with the best team in the world."

"It is," he said, "pointing at his head, "all in here." Now, that might seem 
like a pretty inadequate excuse but it's also a compelling one. The search for 
a catch-all reason is a fruitless one. Sporting's fans have played their part, 
unity too, but sometimes the explanation appears almost pathetically simple: 
there is no explanation. Against Racing it was a last-minute equaliser; against 
Hércules, Sporting's first goal came with their first shot, after 23 seconds, 
and the second with their second; against Atlético comedy defending gifted them 
the win; against Mallorca they scored four, sure, and collected their first 
away win of the season, but even then they scored with every shot on target. 
And against Barcelona, though it was a hugely impressive, full of fight and 
organisation and effort, it had finished 6-1 in shots on target. To Barcelona.

Still they had become only the third team this season to even collect a point 
from Barcelona."This will give us a real morale boost," Preciado said, "the
putada [the bitch, the bummer] is that it's only one point. They should give us 
more for this." They should but they don't. Three would have taken them to 
12th. With Levante, Racing, Hércules and Deportivo all winning, with even 
Malaga getting a point, one means that climb to 12th has become a slip to 16th, 
a solitary point from the relegation zone.

"I always said that we weren't dead or decomposing back then," Preciado said. 
But they're not entirely safe now, either. And that's not the only tinge of 
regret. The winners from Saturday night weren't just Sporting and Preciado; the 
biggest winners were Real Madrid. For Sporting this was one point, for Madrid 
it was two. They took advantage to climb back to just five points behind 
Barcelona. Earlier in the season, José Mourinho and Manolo Preciado had a very 
public fight after the Madrid manager accused his Sporting counterpart of 
throwing his match at the Camp Nou by playing seven subs in a 1-0 defeat and 
Preciado called him a scumbag;when Madrid travelled to Sporting, it kicked off 
in the car park <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/ 
nov/15/la-liga-manola-preciado-jose-mourinho>.

Preciado recently insisted that all is forgotten and that he would "go for 
beer with Mourinho tomorrow". Yeah, and this time Mourinho is paying.

Week 23 Results and talking points:

• Real Madrid closed the gap on Barcelona after a 1-0 win against Espanyol, 
despite playing virtually the whole game with 10 men. Iker Casillas was sent 
off for a challenge (with a very slight contact) on Jedward after just 81 
seconds. "The whole of Spain thought we wouldn't win when that happened," said 
José Mourinho afterwards. If so, the whole of Spain is pretty silly. Madrid had 
entered into Mourinho territory. Marcelo scored a belter – although someone 
could do with telling Carlos Kameni that you're supposed to dive into the way 
of the ball not out of it – and Madrid should really have had more and killed 
the game sooner with Emmanuel Adebayor wasting a couple of wonderful chances. 
Casillas's sending off has provoked all sorts of debate, but no one seems to be 
asking the obvious question: why didn't José Callejón even try to stay on his 
feet?

• Levante win three in a row. Bloody hell. It won't last, though: they go to 
Real Madrid this weekend coming. It's getting tight down at the bottom with 
everyone getting points. Depor won 1-0 against Villarreal through Lopo – who 
was sporting a proper beard – in a game that led to Villarreal losing third 
place. Hero Farinós scored for Hércules against recently-improved Zaragoza. But 
Málaga can't buy a win. Which is kind of ironic, really.

• Atlético lost again but the fans decided that they weren't going to go for 
Quique Sánchez Flores. Instead they went for the men who were actually (more) 
guilty – Miguel-Angel Gil Marín and Enrique Cerezo. Which seems to have kept 
the coach's job for now – after all, they don't want to remove a potential 
shield or make another unpopular move – but for how long?

• Mental game of the weekend came in Santander where Racing beat Sevilla 3-2 – 
sad, sad Sevilla 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2011/writers/sid_lowe/02/10/sevilla.decline/index.html>
 – with a last-minute winner. And a mental game gave way to a mental reaction 
from the new owner Ali Sayed, who was going absolutely bonkers up in the 
directors' box while José María del Nido sat stony-faced alongside him. It was 
pretty unedifying. But, let's face it, it was also pretty funny. And few are 
feeling sorry for the team where the legendary wind-up merchant Cristobal Soria 
works. Racing were under new management, with Marcelino back at the club after 
Miguel Angel Portugal was sacked. This morning Osasuna have confirmed that 
Portugal's former Real Madrid team-mate has been sacked too. Just two weeks 
after beating Madrid. Is there a warning there for Preciado?

• It was the perfect weekend for Sporting fans. They got a great result 
against the world's best team. No, not Barcelona on Saturday night; local 
rivals Oviedo on Sunday night in the pouring rain at the Tartiere. A dire match 
finished Real Oviedo 0–1 Sporting B and even the sale of the club has fallen 
through. First Division Oviedo remain a Second Division B side. Real Oviedo, 
SOS!

Results: Atlético 1–2 Valencia, Sporting 1–1 Barcelona, Racing 3–2 Sevilla, 
Hércules 2–1 Zaragoza, Málaga 2–2 Getafe, Levante 1–0 Almería, Real Sociedad 
1-0 Osasuna, Deportivo 1–0 Villarreal, Espanyol 0–1 Madrid. Graveyard shift: 
Mallorca-Athletic.

Latest La Liga standings <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=29>
 