Andy Murray has taken over from Novak Djokovic at the top of the ATP rankings. 
Who was the last American to be world No1 (in 2003)?  Jim Courier  Andre Agassi 
 Pete Sampras  Andy Roddick Roddick, who won his only grand slam at the 2003 US 
Open, was world No1 for 13 weeks. Philippe Coutinho scored his 26th goal in the 
Premier League on Sunday against Watford, making him the second most prolific 
Brazilian to have played in the English top flight. Which of his countrymen has 
scored more goals in the Premier League?  Ramires  Juninho What a player.  Oscar
 Gilberto Silva After 111 years and 28 attempts, Ireland have finally beaten 
New Zealand in a game of rugby union. Which of these teams is yet to beat the 
All Blacks?  England  France  Wales  Scotland The All Blacks have won 28 and 
drawn two of their 30 matches against Scotland. Who scored for England in a 9-3 
win over Scotland and then went on to manage the national team?  Bobby Robson 
Robson won 20 caps for England and was their manager for 95 games.  Kevin Keegan
 Glenn Hoddle  Stuart Pearce Fifa has banned England and Scotland players from 
wearing poppies during their match at Wembley. What does former international 
footballer Danny Mills think the players should do to circumvent Fifa's 
decision?  Wear T-shirts emblazoned with poppies below their shirts and then 
lift up their kits when they score to reveal the symbol  Get temporary tattoos 
of poppies on the backs of their hands and hold them over their hearts when the 
national anthems are played'Fifa cannot stop that,' said Mills. 'It’s no 
different than having a normal tattoo.'  Have poppies stitched into their boots 
 Dye their hair red for the night Which of the following athletes did not 
endorse Donald Trump for president?  John Daly  LeBron James LeBron James made 
his position clear before the election without mentioning Trump: ‘If basketball 
has taught me anything, it’s that no one achieves greatness alone and it takes 
everyone working together to create real change. When I look at this year’s 
presidential race, it’s clear which candidate believes the same thing. Only one 
person running truly understands the struggles of an Akron child born into 
poverty. And when I think about the kinds of policies and ideas the kids in my 
foundation need from our government, the choice is clear. That candidate is 
Hillary Clinton.'  Mike Tyson  Dennis Rodman Who responded to the election 
result by saying he 'just could not give a bollocks'?  Colin Kaepernick  Nick 
Kyrgios  Conor McGregor McGregor added: 'The whole thing is just weird to me. 
Whoever wins, I don’t think anything is going to change. The public are just 
brainwashed that something is going to happen with this one. I don’t think 
either of those two contenders have any power in anything, anyway.'  Tiger Woods
Which athlete opened up about rebellion and money after visiting Kanye West’s 
house, saying: ‘Kanye’s outspoken, to say the least. I love that. He’s 
electrifying in everything he does. I wish I could be that outspoken, I really 
do, but I’m signed to all these brands that have an idealistic image they wish 
to be connected with, so I need to be careful’?  Wayne Rooney  Lewis Hamilton 
Hamilton is paid £32m a year by Mercedes – not including the money he makes 
from his various sponsors.  Rory McIlroy  Theo Walcott John Terry is about to 
complete his 19th year at Chelsea, which makes him the longest-serving player 
at a Premier League club by a distance. Which goalkeeper is the second 
longest-serving player in the league, after 12 years and four months at the 
same club?  Eldin Jakupovic  Julian Speroni Speroni has been at Crystal Palace 
since July 2004.  Joe Hart  Ben Foster Who expressed fear about his new career 
move, saying: 'I am bricking myself. I am so nervous and scared of everything. 
This whole thing is so different for me. I have never really put myself out 
there publicly before. Of course my friends will take the mickey and I will be 
getting ripped if I scream'?  Manny Pacquiao  Gareth Southgate  Wayne Bridge 
The former Chelsea and England left-back is off to the jungle for ITV's show 
I'm a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here.  Joey Barton  You got…  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  