
José Mourinho's astonishing nine-year run came to an unexpected end and 
virtually killed off Real Madrid's hopes of winning the Spanish league title.
Sporting Gijón <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon> defeated 
Madrid 1-0 at the Santiago Bernabéu with a Miguel de las Cuevas goal – the 
first home defeat Mourinho had suffered in 150 matches in club football.

That result, allied to Barcelona's 1-0 win at Villarreal, means Madrid trail 
the league leaders by eight points and head‑to‑head goal difference with eight 
games remaining. Asked if they could still win the title, Mourinho replied: 
"Objectively, it is virtually impossible."

It was not the best preparation for the visit of Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> on Tuesday night but 
Mourinho insisted that the Champions League would be different, not least 
because it could be different.

A different format allows for a different approach. So huge are the points 
totals being racked up by the big two in La Liga that draws are the new 
defeats. Two‑legged European ties are another matter and Madrid's coach hinted 
that he might approach the game in a distinctly defensive manner, insisting 
that 0-0 would be a good result in the first leg at the Bernabéu.

After a poor first half, Madrid dominated the chances in the second period, 
racking up a dozen shots on target. With one wonderfully precise move, though, 
Sporting worked their only shot on target in the match, De las Cuevas slotting 
home expertly by Iker Casillas's right‑hand post. Madrid threw men forward and 
threw the ball forward, too. But there was precious little subtlety and, with 
Juan Pablo Colinas making a string of impressive saves, there was no way 
through.

"Without our most creative players, we had to play more direct," Mourinho said.

"It was just a question of whether we would score. They did not attack. They 
just defended, defended, defended. If I had wanted to draw 0-0 I would have 
done."

In the context of Tuesday night, Mourinho presented that as cause for optimism 
in Madrid. Xabi Alonso will return but Madrid may still be without Cristiano 
Ronaldo, Marcelo and Karim Benzema, although the Portuguese manager did suggest 
that he would defy doctors' orders and risk Ronaldo. Nonetheless, Mourinho 
claimed that their absence did not necessarily matter. Against Sporting, Madrid 
had to score; against Spurs, they will not.

"This was a bad result in the league but it would not be a bad result against 
Spurs," he said. "In fact, it would be a good result against Spurs. If we draw 
0-0 with Spurs, it would not be a drama. Nil-nil at home is a good result. Even 
1-1 is not a disaster. Our players will be fit [in 10 days' time for the return 
leg]. If we have to go to White Hart Lane to get a result, that is not a 
problem."
 