
You can still find people, mostly men as it happens, who like to pontificate 
on the imminent end of the secretary. Any day now, they say, voice-recognition 
technology will arrive and secretaries will be redundant.

 It is an excellent theory let down only by the facts: voice-recognition 
technology has been around for ages and some of its most fervent champions are 
secretaries.

 Lynette Bannister, for example, and her colleagues in administration at the 
histopathology department of the Royal Free Hospital, North London, describes 
herself as 'very much in favour'.

 Yes, she says, it would have made her job obsolete if all secretaries did was 
type, but of course they do far more than that. There is administration and 
accounting, as well as processing reports, not to mention the basic office 
management common to every workplace - and there is no machine capable of all 
that.

 Voice recognition merely takes some of the pressure off processing reports in 
the face of an increasing workload.

 The voice-recognition package the department uses is a specialist version of 
IBM's Simply Speaking Gold, which was developed at the Royal Free and is now 
standard in histopathology departments everywhere. Voice-recognition technology 
is highly useful for pathologists because it enables them to dictate into a 
small headset while their hands are occupied. Their findings can then be 
downloaded as text and incorporated straight into a report.

 Some of the consultants at the Royal Free also use the software to dictate 
their correspondence; others still prefer to use audio.

 Despite the constant improvements, voice-recognition technology is still 
awkward to use. While users no longer have to adopt a slow, precise and very 
unnatural manner of speech to make it work, there are still many problems to be 
ironed out.

 The basic difficulty is the enormous variety of human speech, which is very 
confusing for a machine. Voice-recognition packages have to be customised to 
individual users.

 Then there is the problem of vocabulary. Curiously, it is easier to develop a 
package for a discipline such as histopathology than it is to create one for 
general use. The vocabulary of histopathology is highly specialised; it is also 
very limited. It helps that the specialist words are based on Greek and Latin, 
two languages that are spelt phonetically.

 But what about words that aren't phonetic? What is a voice-recognition 
package to make of such words as Clwyd, let alone Cymru? A spokeswoman for 
Philips says that a greater obstacle is the computer power required to operate 
the system. Philips Electronics has been working on voice recognition for 25 
years. So far, much of its research has been irrelevant to most of us because, 
until the arrival of the Pentium processor, it was impossible to load the 
software on to an ordinary computer.

 Last autumn, however, Philips launched FreeSpeech 98, a voice-recognition 
package suitable for the general office and the home market. The package is 
cheap, at less than A100 for the software and the equipment, and adaptable. It 
can be set up and attuned to its user in barely 20 minutes, although Philips 
say an hour's training is a more realistic expectation. So far, however, there 
is a limit to one user per unit, and the software only runs with Microsoft 
Windows.

 Philips assures us this is only the start. I was given access to a 
voice-recognition restaurant guide. A very human-sounding voice asks details of 
where you want to go, what you want to eat and how much you want to spend and 
then gives a list of appropriate restaurants. The computer fielded phrases such 
as Kentish Town with no difficulty. The only problem was that it could not 
recognise expressions such as 'ooh, that sounds nice' as affirmatives. Even so, 
someone who overheard the call was surprised it was mechanical. It sounded, he 
said, a if I was speaking to an 'averagely stupid person'.

 The implications for of this sort of technology for call centres are quite 
astonishing. For the customer, it is certainly an improvement on 'If you have a 
star button, press it now' automation. Whether it is a threat to jobs is 
another matter.

 It may be true that voice recognition has depleted the number of secretarial 
jobs in high-street solicitors' offices. (The law is another specialist area 
that suits the technology.) But this is as much a reflection on the financial 
pressures on this sector as much as anything. In City law firms, secretaries 
are as much in demand as ever.

 And as far as medicine goes, Bannister is looking forward to the time when 
everyone in her department uses voice recognition. 'Meanwhile,' she says, 'if 
you think it's going to get rid of us, bad luck - we're still here.'
 