
The League Leader’s Shield may be beyond St Helens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sthelens> this season, as is a home 
semi-final in the play-offs, barring a mathematical miracle in the final round. 
But history has shown it would be foolish to rule them out of the running for 
Grand Final glory and, with 10 wins from their past 11, 2016 is shaping up as 
no different, even if they must do it the hard way.

Salford suffer embarrassing loss to London Broncos in Qualifiers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/salford-red-devils-london-broncos-match-report-qualifiers>
That they put themselves in a position to qualify for the play-offs with a 
game to spare was a marvellous achievement from Keiron Cunningham’s side. They 
were six points adrift of the top four before a late-season surge that is 
quintessentially St Helens, the past masters of timing the run to Old Trafford.

Without their star full-back, Jonny Lomax, here they found the going tougher 
in attack against a resolute Widnes but defensively this was another indicator 
that Saints are approaching the kind of form required to win a high-pressure 
semi-final, be it against Hull, Warrington or Wigan when the play-offs begin in 
a fortnight’s time.

“If you’d have given us this situation 11 weeks ago, we’d have snapped your 
hands off,” Jamahl Lolesi, the St Helens assistant coach, said. “We came under 
real pressure midway through the year but credit to the players. We’re under no 
illusions, though: the bigger games are in front of us.”

Victory looked a formality for Saints after the opening quarter, when they led 
12-0 after two tries from the wing Adam Swift. By that stage, the visitors were 
well on top and with Lomax’s replacement, Shannon McDonnell, proving an 
influential figure, Widnes did well to not concede any further points in the 
first half.

Twelve-man Wigan’s win at Warrington marred by Ben Flower red card
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/wigan-warrington-ben-flower-red-card>
As the half wore on they shifted the balance of power in their favour when 
Patrick Ah Van dived over three minutes before the break. But Matty Fleming’s 
try 12 minutes after half-time – he had earlier dropped the ball over the line 
in the act of nearly scoring – gave the visitors some much-needed breathing 
space in a half of few clear-cut chances.

Corey Thompson’s try eight minutes from time was mere consolation for Widnes – 
and they finished the game with 11 men after a brawl. The Widnes captain, Kevin 
Brown, was adjudged to have been chief perpetrator, dismissed for a butt on the 
St Helens forward Joe Greenwood, who was shown a yellow card for his 
retaliation to the incident.

Ah Van was also sent off by James Child for his involvement in the brawl and, 
with a man advantage, the Saints had time late on to extend their lead when 
Atelea Vea crossed in the corner in the dying seconds. “It was a frustrating 
game throughout,” Denis Betts, the Widnes coach, said. “The players were 
getting edgy around each other, there was three poor performances out there 
today,” he added, hinting at his displeasure towards Child’s performance.

The Saints’ league campaign finishes with a clash against the eighth-placed 
Wakefield on Friday, and if this run of form yields an 11th win in 12 games, 
third place and a supposed easier semi-final may be possible for Cunningham’s 
side. But whether it is third or fourth, this run of form over the last three 
months has illustrated that there are four very realistic contenders for the
Super League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> crown this year 
when the play-offs get under way.

Widnes Hanbury; Thompson, Dean, Runicman, Ah Van; Mellor, Brown; Burke, White, 
Buchanan, Whitley, Houston, Leuluai.Interchange Chapelhow, Manuokafoa, 
Heremaia, Farrell.

Tries Ah Van, Thompson.

St Helens McDonnell; Owens, Peyroux, Fleming, Swift; Turner, Walsh; Amor, 
Roby, Richards, Wilkin, Greenwood, McCarthy‑Scarsbrook.Interchange Walmsley, 
Vea, Thompson, Knowles.

Tries Swift 2, Fleming, Vea. Goals Walsh 2. Drop goal Walsh.

Referee J Child. Attendance 6,128.
 