
It was always going to take a minor miracle for St Helens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sthelens> to surrender their position in the 
final weeks of the season, but with a play-off spot now secured following a 
ninth win in ten games, a glance at the fixture list offers hope yet that a 
home semi-final in the play-offs and a top-two finish may still not be beyond 
them in 2016.

When they were struggling, midway through this year, Saints fans would have 
been forgiven for being happy just to make the top four and at times, even that 
had looked beyond Keiron Cunningham’s side.

But just as they have done so many times in the past, the Saints are peaking 
at the right time. They have the two supposed weakest teams in the Super 8s in 
Wakefield and Widnes left to play, while the other semi-finalists – Wigan, 
Warrington and Hull FC – all still have to play each other in the final three 
weeks.

Kevin Sinfield turned down playing offers to become RFL’s rugby director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/kevin-sinfield-turned-down-clubs-rfl-rugby-director>
That guarantees there will be points dropped in and around Saints, leaving the 
door ajar for Cunningham’s men to strike: even if they were not at their best 
here. They ran in seven tries and 40 points against an injury-hitCastleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> side with little to play for - 
but you suspect there is still more to come as the intensity rises and the 
play-offs approach. “It’s not a bad spot to be in,” said Cunningham. “We’re not 
talking about the top two or anything yet; there’s a lot of points still to be 
played for and a lot of games to play.”

This has been a long, arduous season for the Tigers – and the fact they may 
yet finish fifth despite suffering so many injuries is a testimony to the 
impressive work done by Daryl Powell. Without a dozen first-team regulars due 
to injury, they put up a commendable effort all night, and they actually led on 
two separate occasions in the first half to forge a 10-6 advantage. But with 
three teenagers on their bench – as well as the winger, Paddy Flynn, who 
actually played in the forwards – the balance of the contest began to turn as 
the interchanges came into play. “I thought in a lot of ways it was an awesome 
effort from us,” said the Castleford coach, Daryl Powell. “We started well but 
maintaining that was tough with everything going on. We could have done with 
one less try against us at half-time really.”

An eight-minute period towards the end of the first half proved to be the 
difference, as tries from Morgan Knowles, Kyle Amor and Luke Thompson - as well 
as Rangi Chase being sent to the sin-bin - completely took the game away from 
Castleford as Saints took control of the game to lead 24-10 at the break.

To their credit, Castleford held out for the opening 20 minutes of the second 
half, but as it wore on and fatigue began to set in again, they were exposed 
once more in defence with three more Saints tries in the final quarter.

Both Louie McCarthy-Scarsbrook and Adam Swift ensured the Saints racked up the 
necessary points to move above Wigan on points difference into third, and 
although the Tigers got a deserved try for their efforts late on when Will 
Maher touched down, the Saints had the final say when Alex Walmsley charged 
over to keep their hopes of a home semi-final very much alive.

St Helens Lomax; Owens, Peyroux, Fleming, Swift; Turner, Walsh; Walmsley, 
Roby, Richards, Wilkin, Greenwood, McCarthy-Scarsbrook.Interchange Amor, Vea, 
Thompson, Knowles.

Tries Fleming, Knowles, Amor, Thompson, McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Swift, Walmsley. 
Goals Walsh 5, Owens.

Castleford Dorn; Hampshire, Crooks, Minikin, Solomona; Chase, Gale; Cook, 
McShane, Patrick, Webster, Moors, Milner.Interchange Maher, Fitzsimons, Flynn, 
Douglas.

Tries Dorn, Hampshire, Maher. Goals Gale 2. Sin-bin Chase (35).

Referee J Smith. Attendance 9,448.
 