
The St Helens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sthelens> coach, Keiron 
Cunningham, has labelled Wayne Bennett’s plans to take the England squad to a 
training camp in Dubai as “abysmal” as Saints faces the prospect of losing 
several key players for a significant part of pre-season training.

St Helens rename Langtree Park ground the ‘Totally Wicked Stadium’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/st-helens-rename-langtree-park-totally-wicked-stadium-rugby-league>
Jonny Lomax and Mark Percival are likely to be among a group of players 
Bennett takes to Dubai for a 12-day camp in January in an effort to increase 
England’s chances of success at the 2017 World Cup. It is understood, however, 
that the Australian coach will only be around for a small part of that as he 
prepares his Brisbane side for the start of the NRL season.

Cunningham expressed frustration at the thinking behind taking the England 
squad to the Gulf, saying that he cannot fathom how it will improve the 
national side’s chances of success.

He said: “The whole system is absolutely abysmal, both what has been put 
forward and what has been accepted by the powers that be.

“We all want a successful World Cup but I can guarantee you 12 days anywhere 
in the world in January isn’t going to make you win a World Cup in October or 
November. That’s not going to happen. ‘These 12 days in Dubai are going to 
change our competition, I believe.’ Those were Wayne Bennett’s words, all 
because they’re taking 18 players away for two weeks in the middle of January.”

Cunningham also claimed that Bennett does not care about the state of Super 
League – and added that if he was a coach for one of its clubs, he would be 
opposed to the Dubai plan himself. Cunningham said: “At the minute it seems 
like he doesn’t care about our competition, that’s how it feels. I’m absolutely 
sure this would not be allowed to happen in the NRL.

“They wouldn’t allow this and Wayne, as an NRL coach, certainly wouldn’t allow 
it to happen. They’re talking about player welfare more and more in Australia 
but here there’s more games and shorter pre-seasons: it’s a mess and this 
doesn’t help – and we’re just accepting it.”

Cunningham was speaking at the announcement that St Helens’ Langtree Park 
stadiumwill be named the Totally Wicked Stadium for 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/st-helens-rename-langtree-park-totally-wicked-stadium-rugby-league>
. Totally Wicked, a north-west-based e-cigarette company, has sponsored the 
club’s north stand since 2013.
 