
Rangers were denied a 10th consecutive win in the Scottish Premier League 
after a late goal earnedSt Mirren a 1-1 draw at Ibrox.

The champions had looked on course to move 12 points clear of Celtic when 
Nikica Jelavic opened the scoring early in the second half, Kyle Lafferty 
working well to retain possession before setting up Jelavic for the shot from 
12 yards.

Jelavic looked certain to claim his second goal from six yards out only to see 
his shot cannon off a defender.

Ally McCoist's side were then stunned when Saints hit back deep in injury 
time. The formerRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> striker 
Steven Thompson equalised from a David van Zanten cross to ensure a share of 
the points.

A superb display from Aberdeen gave them a 3-1 win over Dundee United at 
Pittodrie.

The Icelandic international Kari Arnason opened the scoring when he fired the 
ball into the roof of the net from close range after Rory Fallon's header had 
been kept out by Dusan Pernis.

A Youl Mawéné header six minutes after the break gave the Dons a second, 
before Andrew Considine added another.

The United substitute Lauri Dalla Valle scored a consolation goal for the 
visitors, but the Dons comfortably held on for all three points.

Despite a late spell of United pressure, Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> held on to record back-to-back 
wins for the first time in the SPL this season.

The St Johnstone manager, Derek McInnes, enjoyed a comfortable 2-0 victory in 
what could be his final match in charge of the team as goals in each half saw 
offInverness.

Less than 24 hours after being given permission to speak to Bristol City, 
McInnes saw his side consolidate their top-six position thanks to goals from 
Francisco Sandaza and Dave Mackay.

Sandaza linked brilliantly with Cillian Sheridan to score his seventh goal of 
the season in the early stages and Mackay finished well in the 65th minute 
after Inverness failed to clear a Jody Morris cross.

Caley continued to work hard and sought to attack but they could not carve out 
a chance and Saints held on to their lead comfortably.

Their fans will now hope they can also retain the services of McInnes after 
Saints moved to within one point of Celtic in the SPL.

Jamie Murphy's early header gave Motherwell a deserved win over Hibernian to 
move three points clear of Celtic and into second place in the table.

Murphy headed in a Tom Hateley cross after eight minutes but the visitors 
should have had the victory wrapped up before enduring a nervous finish.

The Well midfielder Keith Lasley headed against the post in the first half 
before the Hibs goalkeeper, Graham Stack, made a brilliant double save to deny 
both Stephen Craigan and Michael Higdon after the break.

David Wotherspoon had a free-kick from 25 yards tipped over the bar by 
Darren Randolph.

Hearts claimed their first away win since February with a comfortable 2-0 
victory overDunfermline at East End Park.

Andy Webster headed home a first-half opener and with 15 minutes remaining 
Hearts grabbed the vital second goal. Patrick Boyle's pass was intercepted by 
David Templeton who bore down on goal and unleashed a stinging effort that was 
well saved by Paul Gallagher but Rudi Skacel was on hand to drill in the 
rebound, much to the delight of the travellingHearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> support.
 