
These standard terms form part of the Terms and Conditions for the Supply of 
Contributions to Guardian News & Media Ltd (aka the Freelance Charter), which 
can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter>. 
Unless otherwise noted, all capitalised terms used in these standard terms 
shall have the meaning given to them in theDefinitions section 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter#Definitions>
 of the Terms and Conditions for the Supply of Contributions to Guardian News & 
Media Ltd.

Commissioned Contributions

You grant to GNM irrevocably and unconditionally the following rights and 
options to use, publish, transmit or license your Commissioned Contribution 
("Licence") during the Term as defined below.

Unless they are expressly identified otherwise, all rights and options granted 
by you in this Licence shall subsist throughout the world in any language(s) on 
an exclusive basis for sixty (60) days following first publication by GNM 
("Exclusivity Period") and thereafter on a non-exclusive basis for the 
remaining period of copyright in your Commissioned Contribution including all 
renewals, reversions, extensions and revivals of such period, the Exclusivity 
Period and remaining period of copyright thereafter together being the "Term".

Our fees are inclusive of rights 1-4 below. The value of these rights is 
reviewed annually.

1. Right to be the first publisher of your Commissioned Contribution in any 
media anywhere in the world in any language(s) in any of our Licensed Products 
at our discretion, and to keep available your Commissioned Contribution in the 
Licensed Products during the Term.

2. Following our first use as described in clause 1 above, the right to reuse, 
republish and retransmit your Commissioned Contribution in any language(s) 
anywhere in the world in any of our Licensed Products at our discretion without 
further payment to you, including but not limited to Guardian Weekly and 
similar publications and in other collections of material published by us in 
paper form and digitally anywhere in the world, and to keep available your 
Commissioned Contribution in the Licensed Products during the Term.

3. Right to use, store, publish or transmit your Commissioned Contribution in 
internal archives and databases ("Archives") in any language(s) including but 
not limited to websites published by us and/or third party database and/or 
archive publishers, and to keep available your Commissioned Contribution in 
such Archives during the Term.

4. Right to authorise the Newspaper Licensing Agency and similar reprographic 
rights organisations in other jurisdictions ("RROs") to distribute or license 
the distribution of your Commissioned Contribution throughout the world in any 
language(s) for RROs' licensed acts and purposes as amended from time to time, 
and to keep available your Commissioned Contribution through such RROs during 
the Term.

5. Right to make Spot Sales of and/or Syndicate your Commissioned Contribution 
subject to payment to you of 50% of all net receipts paid to GNM and 
attributable to your Commissioned Contribution.

For the avoidance of doubt, all rights:
a) pertaining to publication, distribution and licensing of your Commissioned 
Contribution reside exclusively with GNM during the Exclusivity Period. All 
requests from you to re-use your Commissioned Contribution during the 
Exclusivity Period shall be submitted to rights@theguardian.com and any grant 
of rights or amendments to the Exclusivity Period shall be subject to GNM's 
prior written agreement; and
b) of whatever nature (without limitation, copyright) throughout the world 
which you have in your Commissioned Contribution other than those you expressly 
grant to us under this Licence are retained by you; and
c) of whatever nature (without limitation, copyright) throughout the world in 
the column titles and names used in conjunction with your Commissioned 
Contribution shall reside with us.

Your Commissioned Contribution shall be used for editorial purposes as we see 
fit. We may make alterations to your Commissioned Contribution comprising 
standard colour correction or minor cropping. You acknowledge that on occasion 
we may need to modify certain images (in whole or part) for legal reasons or in 
order to comply with industry codes of practice. Except as set out here, we 
shall not make any other alteration to your Commissioned Contribution without 
your permission.

You grant us permission to publish a photograph of you of our choosing in 
association with publication of your Commissioned Contribution and/or in 
relation to any other promotion or publicity of the same throughout the world.

For certain types of Commissioned Contribution - including but not limited to 
by-line pictures, page design features and commercial projects - we shall seek 
an assignment of copyright from you and shall issue appropriate documentation 
to you on such occasions.

Action for Infringement and Further Assurance

In the period preceding GNM's first publication of your Commissioned 
Contribution and during the Exclusivity Period, GNM shall have all the rights 
and remedies in relation to your Commissioned Contribution that are specified in
Section 101 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/48/section/101> of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, including the right to bring an action 
for infringement of copyright in your Commissioned Contribution.

For the duration of the Term that follows the end of the Exclusivity Period 
GNM may bring an action for infringement of copyright in your Commissioned 
Contribution pursuant toSection 101A 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/48/section/101A> of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988.

You shall, and shall procure that any necessary third party shall, at your own 
expense promptly execute and deliver such documents and perform such acts as 
may be required for the purpose of giving full effect to this Licence.

Stock Imagery, images submitted on a speculative basis and other contributions

You grant to GNM irrevocably and unconditionally the following rights to use, 
publish, transmit or license your Contribution ("Licence") during the Term as 
defined below.

Unless they are expressly identified otherwise, all rights granted by you in 
this Licence shall subsist throughout the world in any language(s) on a 
non-exclusive basis for the full period of copyright in your Contribution 
including all renewals, reversions, extensions and revivals of such period 
("Term").

Our fees are inclusive of rights 1-4 below. The value of these rights is 
reviewed annually.

1. Right to use, publish and transmit your Contribution anywhere in the world 
in any language(s) in all editions of a single issue of the relevant Licensed 
Product, and to keep available your Contribution in the Licensed Product during 
the Term.

2. Right after use in the relevant Licensed Product to publish your 
Contribution in Guardian Weekly and similar publications and in other 
collections of material published by us in paper form and digitally anywhere in 
the world in any language(s), and to keep available your Contribution in the 
Licensed Products during the Term.

3. Right to use, store, publish or transmit your Contribution in internal 
archives and databases ("Archives") in any language(s), and to keep available 
your Contribution in such Archives during the Term.

4. Right to authorise the Newspaper Licensing Agency and similar reprographic 
rights organisations in other jurisdictions ("RROs") to distribute or license 
the distribution of your Contribution throughout the world in any language(s) 
for RROs' licensed acts and purposes as amended from time to time, and to keep 
available your Contribution through such RROs during the Term.

For the avoidance of doubt, all rights:
a) of whatever nature (without limitation, copyright) throughout the world 
which you have in your Contribution other than those you expressly grant to us 
under the Licence are retained by you; and
b) of whatever nature (without limitation, copyright) throughout the world in 
the column titles and names used in conjunction with your Contribution shall 
reside with us.

Your Contribution shall be used for editorial purposes as we see fit. We may 
make alterations to your Contribution comprising standard colour correction or 
minor cropping. You acknowledge that on occasion we may need to modify certain 
images (in whole or part) for legal reasons or in order to comply with industry 
codes of practice. Except as set out here, we shall not make any other 
alteration to your Contribution without your permission.

You grant us permission to publish a photograph of you of our choosing in 
association with publication of your Contribution and/or in relation to any 
other promotion or publicity of the same throughout the world.

Action for Infringement and Further Assurance

In the period preceding GNM's first publication of your Contribution and 
during any period of exclusivity, GNM shall have all the rights and remedies in 
relation to your Contribution that are specified inSection 101 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/48/section/101> of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988, including the right to bring an action for 
infringement of copyright in your Contribution.

For the duration of the Term that follows the end of any period of exclusivity 
GNM may bring an action for infringement of copyright in your Contribution 
pursuant toSection 101A 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/48/section/101A> of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988.

You shall, and shall procure that any necessary third party shall, at your own 
expense promptly execute and deliver such documents and perform such acts as 
may be required for the purpose of giving full effect to this Licence.
 