
Celtic’s title prospects “look great” following their 2-0 win over bottom side 
St Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> in Paisley on Friday 
night, according to Stefan Johansen.

The Norway midfielder clinched the points with a 80th minute penalty after the 
wide-man James Forrest had finished off a well-worked Hoops move from close 
range to open the scoring.

It took the Parkhead men eight points clear of Aberdeen at the top of the 
Scottish Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>
 with both clubs having played 29 games albeit the Dons could have reduced the 
deficit but could only manage a goalless draw against Partick Thistle on 
Saturday.

Ronny Deila’s side have only lost one league game this year and take four 
successive victories into the home match against Partick Thistle on Wednesday 
night which encouraged Johansen to say: “It looks great for us now. It’s nine 
games left in the league and it’s going to be difficult to take us now.

“This was another important win and we just need to keep focusing now on every 
game over the next couple of weeks.

“I don’t think we’re unbeatable but you can say there is a huge confidence in 
the team now.

“I think we are starting to look fitter and we have much more of the ball 
because we are playing with a higher tempo and that’s the way the manager wants 
us to play.”

Deila criticised the “terrible” pitches in Scottish football after the game, 
claiming the surface at St Mirren was another that was difficult to master.

The visitors were certainly not at their best but Johansen was glad the 
international break had not upset the Hoops’ rhythm too much.

The Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager said: “Some 
of the guys have had a few days off and some of the guys were away with the 
international teams so it was good to be back together and be prepared for the 
rest of the season.

“St Mirren frustrated us for a while. They played well, especially in the 
first half and credit to them for that.

“But we know that we had the ball so much that they would need to run. It was 
going to be difficult for them over 90 minutes so we knew it would open up.”

Gary Teale is hoping his St Mirren side, who ended the game still four points 
behind Motherwell, are not cut adrift before the split, which comes after they 
play the Steelmen on Tuesday night and third-bottom Ross County the following 
Monday.

He said: “We need to make sure we’re within three points of Ross County or 
Motherwell after the next two games. If we can do that, then that will give us 
a fighting chance.”PA
 