
Controversial sports scientist Stephen Dank “should not be allowed near any 
athlete” after the AFL appeals board dismissed his case,Asada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> chief Ben McDevitt says.

Dank failed to turn up for his hearing last week as he attempted to overturn 
his lifetime ban imposed over theEssendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> supplements saga. The appeals 
board on Monday dismissed his appeal, granting an application by the AFL and 
Asada to have the case thrown out.

Dank cited a family medical emergency for his absence from his hearing but 
failed to provide documents supporting his claim by last Friday’s deadline. In 
a statement on Monday, board members Peter O’Callaghan QC, Murray Kellam AO and 
Geoff Giudice AO cited Dank’s “lack of co-operation and communication” in 
dismissing his appeal. Asada chief McDevitt went a step further, saying Dank 
had treated the board with contempt and describing his appeal as a “farce”.

Essendon snare gun midfielder Andrew McGrath with top AFL draft pick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/essendon-snare-midfielder-mcgrath-draft-pick>
“From the start, Mr Dank has failed to comply with directions from the board, 
failed to ever produce a witness list or evidence, and failed to ever outline 
his case for the appeal, despite requests from the board,” McDevitt said. “This 
has been a total waste of time and money. Mr Dank’s life-long ban from 
involvement in sport is entirely appropriate. This man should not be allowed 
near any athlete, anywhere in the world, ever.”

With Dank’s lifetime ban remaining in place, McDevitt said Asada had withdrawn 
its cross-appeal in the interests of time and resources. Dank last week claimed 
he still intended to face the board despite missing his hearing, adding that 
Jobe Watson would have his surrendered Brownlow Medal back by the time his case 
was resolved.

“My most desired outcome, of course, is for everyone to be cleared,” Dank said 
on FiveAA. “Unfortunately players have served suspensions so that time can’t be 
given back to the players ... but I think by the time we’ve finished this 
hearing Jobe will have his Brownlow back ... I’ve got no problems with that.”

Watson was one of 34 past and present Bombers players banned for the 2016 
season for violations of the anti-doping code arising from the club’s 2012 
supplements program, overseen by Dank. Watson’s returned Brownlow Medal was 
awarded to Richmond’s Trent Cotchin and Sam Mitchell – then with Hawthorn – by 
theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> commission earlier this month.

A key figure in the Essendon supplements saga, Dank was banned for life from 
working in any sport in Australia or overseas after the AFL anti-doping 
tribunal found him guilty of 10 anti-doping code breaches.
 