
Controversial sports scientist Stephen Dank says he intends to front the AFL 
appeals board and believes he can still clear the 34 bannedEssendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> players. Dank did not attend 
Monday’s opening day of his appeal against a lifetime ban for doping offences. 
Instead, he sent a letter to the appeals board through his former lawyers, 
saying he could not attend because of a family medical emergency.

But a defiant Dank vowed late on Monday that he still intends to appear and 
that Jobe Watson would have his Brownlow medal back by the time his hearing is 
over.


“My most desired outcome, of course, is for everyone to be cleared,” Dank said 
on FiveAA. “Unfortunately players have served suspensions so that time can’t be 
given back to the players ... but I think by the time we’ve finished this 
hearing Jobe will have his Brownlow back ... I’ve got no problems with that.”

Sam Mitchell and Trent Cotchin never considered rejecting Brownlow medal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/sam-mitchell-and-trent-cotchin-never-considered-rejecting-brownlow-medal>
Watson was one of 34 past and present Bombers players banned for the 2016 
season for violations of the anti-doping code arising from the club’s 2012 
supplements program, overseen by Dank. Watson’s returned Brownlow medal was
awarded to Richmond’s Trent Cotchin and Sam Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/afl-2012-brownlow-medal-awarded-to-trent-cotchin-and-sam-mitchell>
 – then with Hawthorn – by the AFL commission last week.

Lawyers representing the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> and Asada 
could barely contain their scorn at Dank’s late request to adjourn, saying the 
appeal should be thrown out. After deliberating behind closed doors for half an 
hour, the three-man board said it would adjourn until 1 December.

By 5pm this Friday, Dank also must provide details about the medical emergency 
including the hospital, the date of his relative’s admission and a report from 
the treating doctor.


Dank said he would have no issue producing such documentation but expressed 
disappointment that the reason for his request had been made public. Dank’s 
former lawyers submitted a letter on Sunday morning, explaining he could not 
attend.

“We note it was Mr Dank’s intention to appear in person, lead evidence and 
make oral submissions,” the letter on behalf of Dank said. “Unfortunately Mr 
Dank has contacted the writer ... distraught about the urgent admission of a 
family member into hospital. The condition of this family member is 
life-threatening and requires Mr Dank to be by their side.”

But the AFL and Asada lawyers at the hearing were unimpressed. “There is no 
court in the state that would’ve tolerated the way in which Dank has conducted 
this case and himself throughout this process,” AFL counsel Renee Enbom said in 
her submission.

“I don’t think anyone from this bar table was surprised to receive yesterday’s 
email. I checked my emails ... waiting for the 11th hour request to adjourn 
this appeal again. It arrived on Sunday morning.


Essendon post $9.8m loss in wake of CAS ruling over players' doping bans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/essendon-post-98m-loss-in-wake-of-cas-ruling-over-players-doping-bans>
“I don’t think anyone at this table really expected Mr Dank to prosecute his 
appeal. He’s done just enough every time to keep it alive. It is time to bring 
this process to an end. Everyone involved, including the players, are entitled 
to some finality.”

Enbom also detailed several instances where she said Dank had not complied 
with the appeal process. She added Dank had sent emails with a threatening tone 
to parties involved in the appeal and said he had shown the process little 
respect.

Dank is a key figure in the Essendon supplements saga. He was banned for life 
from working in any sport here or overseas after the AFL anti-doping tribunal 
found him guilty of 10 anti-doping code breaches.
 