
Rising optimism about the British economy sent sterling soaring to a record 
high against the euro on the foreign exchanges yesterday.

Powered by new figures showing the recovery in manufacturing gathering steam, 
the pound hit a high of 63.53p, equivalent to 3.076 marks.

"Sterling is extremely perky. We're heading right to the top of the 
sterling/mark range and what's to stop us?" said David Bloom, currency 
strategist at HSBC Markets in London.

The pound's surge was prompted by official figures showing Britain's trade gap 
with the rest of the world narrowed to £2.2bn in July from £2.6bn in June, 
combined with an upbeat survey of manufacturing by the Confederation of British 
Industry.

Both indicators suggested industry was learning to live with the strong pound, 
which exposes it to cheap competition from abroad and makes UK exports more 
expensive.

City economists said the UK was benefiting from a surprising pick-up in demand 
from Europe and Asia, plus the on-going buoyancy of the US.

Excluding volatile oil and erratic items such as precious stones, export 
volumes rose by an annualised rate of 13.5% in the three months to July 
compared with the previous three months. They were up 0.1% over the year.

John O'Sullivan, economist at Greenwich NatWest, warned that if exports 
continued to rise the Bank of England's monetary policy committee might feel 
less constrained about raising interest rates again to check the pace of 
domestic demand and keep inflation at bay.

But David Walton of Goldman Sachs said he doubted whether the trend towards a 
narrowing trade gap would continue. With domestic demand rebounding more 
strongly than export orders, import growth would soon accelerate, sending the 
deficit further into the red, he said. "Net trade will therefore remain a drag 
on GDP growth in 1999 and 2000."

Strengthening domestic demand was underlined by the CBI's monthly industrial 
trends survey, which showed order books at their best since March last year.

The CBI said 32% of manufacturers reported orders below normal, and 18% said 
they were above normal.

The negative balance of minus 14% compares with minus 22% in August and minus 
47% in November 1998, when fears of a global recession were at their height.

Sudhir Junankar, the CBI's associate director of economics, said: 
"Manufacturing is coming out of the doldrums with orders continuing to improve, 
pointing to a manufacturing recovery."

But he said exports were still weak and trading conditions were tough, with 
strong competition making it impossible to raise prices.

"The latest rise in interest rates will not have helped, and if sterling 
remains strong there is a risk that the manufacturing recovery could take a 
knock. Any further rise in interest and exchange rates this year could 
seriously damage companies' ability to export."
 