
7.26pm GMT 

FULL TIME: Stevenage 0-4 Everton

And that's it! That became a romp for Everton in the second half, but they 
were tested at the back byStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage>, who should really have taken 
an early lead, but turned down the chance. Everton made no mistake in punishing 
them, and their name goes into the FA's wizened leather pouch for the fifth 
round. A Merseyside derby awaits them in the league on Tuesday ... and then 
perhaps the FA Cup?

7.25pm GMT 

90 min +2: The second of three added minutes sees Akins hoicking miles over 
the bar after latching onto a poor headed clearance from Stones. 

7.24pm GMT 

90 min: Another example of Everton's occasional largesse at the back, which 
isn't reflected in the scoreline, but still. Charles romps down the inside 
right and shoots low from a tight angle. The shot squirms under the body of 
Robles. Hibbert and Heitinga somehow combine to hook the ball away, utilising 
some pinball techniques. How did that stay out?!

7.22pm GMT 

89 min: The Merseyside derby on Tuesday should be a decent spectacle again, if 
today's matches hereand at Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/25/bournemouth-v-liverpool-live-fa-cup-report>
 are anything to go by. Two teams who look excellent going forward, but aren't 
exactly the finished article at the back. Another 3-3 draw? Yes please!

7.20pm GMT 

88 min: Not a single shock today, then, unless you count cup holders Wigan, of 
the Championship, knocking out Crystal Palace. And who'll be doing that?

7.18pm GMT 

86 min: Deacon comes on for Zoko.

7.18pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Stevenage 0-4 Everton (Gueye 85)

Osman hangs around, 25 yards from goal, in order to tease a few defenders out. 
He's successful, and then slips a pass down the inside-right channel for Gueye, 
who takes a touch inside, falls over, but swings a leg at the ball anyway to 
send it into the bottom right corner. Not very pretty, but look at that 
scoreline!

7.15pm GMT 

83 min: Naismith is sent clear down the middle by a sliderule pass from Barry. 
He can't quite get the ball out from under his feet, though, and fails to get a 
shot away. Not for the first time in this second half, he's close to that 
hat-trick and yet so far away.

7.13pm GMT 

81 min: Gueye comes on for Mirallas, while Andrade replaces Morais.

7.12pm GMT 

80 min: Someone should probably nip down to the nearest petrol station and buy 
a couple of spares. 

7.10pm GMT 

78 min: They've only got three balls left, apparently! Has anybody got the 
keys to the club shop?

7.09pm GMT 

77 min: Another two balls depart the ground within the space of 30 seconds. 
How many footballs do Stevenage have in their kitbag?

7.07pm GMT 

74 min: Zoko is nearly released down the inside left, but he's flagged 
offside. He's not giving up, though, and soon after wins a corner with a 
determined bustle down the same wing. The corner's fizzed in low. McCarthy 
swings a leg to clear, but only succeeds in slicing it backwards towards the 
bottom-left corner. Robles spares his midfielder's blushes by turning the ball 
out for another corner. McCarthy then does what he should have done first time 
round, whacking that one clear.

7.04pm GMT 

72 min: Parrett replaces Jones.

7.04pm GMT 

70 min: A ball whipped into the Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> area from the left. Zoko chests 
down magnificently, but can't connect with the dropping ball properly. He's 12 
yards out with only Robles to beat, but shins a poor effort wide right. The 
ball rolls round the frame, behind the net, and for a second the crowd wonder 
whether it's gone in. But no consolation for Stevenage. They deserve something, 
if only for their excellent early display.

7.00pm GMT 

68 min: Everton are giving it the full Swansea at the moment, stroking it this 
way and that. Stevenage can't get the ball at all. It's an aesthete's treat. 
Eventually the home side get fed up and Mirallas is clattered. Baines belts a 
free kick into the car park behind the stand. Have Everton posted a man out 
there, with a view to making off with some free training equipment?

6.57pm GMT 

65 min: Freeman embarks on a baroque ramble down the left. His looping cross 
is punched clear by Robles. Everton go up the other end, and Mirallas shoots 
from distance and into the car park behind the stand.

6.56pm GMT 

63 min: Naismith is sent free down the inside-right channel by Osman. He lobs 
Day, but it'll not be his hat-trick goal, because the whistle's gone for 
offside. Instead, he's booked, which rather adds insult to injury as he looked 
onside from the replay.

6.54pm GMT 

62 min: A lot of time to kill here. A sense that everyone involved would just 
like to go home now.

6.53pm GMT 

61 min: Smith is booked for a late hack at the ankles of Mirallas.

6.53pm GMT 

60 min: Heitinga, in the middle of his own half, slices hilariously towards 
the corner flag down the Stevenage right. Zoko and Akins attempt to make 
something of the territorial gift, but it's just not happening for them. 
Broadhall Way was bouncing earlier, but it's only the Everton travellers who 
can be heard now. It's a pretty quiet ground.

6.51pm GMT 

58 min: Everton have slipped up so often in recent seasons against 
lower-division opposition, or in other matches they started as favourites. This 
is a new Everton all right.

6.48pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Stevenage 0-3 Everton (Heitinga 55)

Mirallas cuts in from the left and forces Day into a splendid save, his shot 
aimed towards the top right and tipped round the post. The resulting corner, 
from the right, is sent deep. Mirallas chips up and attempts to bicycle kick 
into the same top-right corner. The spectacularly ambitious effort is going 
wide, but it flies towards Heitinga, six yards out, level with the right-hand 
post. Heitinga heads goalwards, the ball taking a slight deflection off Charles 
past Day and into the right-hand side of the net. Game over.

6.46pm GMT 

53 min: A double save from Robles. Zoko looks to get his head on a right-wing 
cross; the keeper punches clear. Then Akins belts the loose ball goalwards; 
it's straight down the keeper's throat. Stevenage are doing what they can, but 
their earlier pizzazz isn't there.

6.43pm GMT 

51 min: This half has been one long lull so far. Freeman attempts to up 
Stevenage's pace with a dribble down the left. Hibbert is backtracking in 
panic, but Freeman lets him off the hook with a wild swing of the leg, his shot 
from the edge of the area wanging miles left of the target.

6.41pm GMT 

49 min: If they want to worry Everton any, Stevenage will surely need to score 
quickly. They pump a couple of balls down the wings, but can't apply any real 
pressure. It's all a bit scrappy so far, but with Stevenage going nowhere, this 
will suit Everton as much as it does the home side.

6.39pm GMT 

47 min: So there you go, Jagielka was "feeling his hamstring" and has been 
accordingly wrapped in cotton wool and bubble wrap.

6.38pm GMT 

And we're off again! It's no longer raining, but it's very blustery. A second 
change for Everton, Jagielka making way for Heitinga. No idea whether that's an 
injury, or tactical. Chances are, the Everton captain is nursing a tweak, and 
with his side 2-0 up, is being rested with the Merseyside derby coming on 
Tuesday.

6.23pm GMT 

HALF-TIME ADVERTISEMENT: Everton fans aren't going to like Jonathan Wilson's 
new book, The Anatomy of Liverpool 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Anatomy-Liverpool-History-Matches/dp/1409144410>, 
much. But they'll know someone who does, right?

6.22pm GMT 

HALF TIME: Stevenage 0-2 Everton

And that's your lot for the half.  Everton have been very clinical, picking 
off Stevenage twice, and already have a foot in the fifth round. Stevenage had 
their chances, though. Of course the terrible injury to Bryan Oviedo has cast a 
pall over the match. Another 45 minutes to come; don't go flipping.

6.19pm GMT 

45 min +4: Everton are passing it around a lot, without going anywhere fast.

6.18pm GMT 

45 min +2: Osman dances down the left and, upon reaching the byline, fires a 
ball across the face of the Stevenage goal. Charles sticks out a leg to hook 
away. That's a fine defensive clearance, with many a blue shirt lurking.

6.17pm GMT 

45 min +1: There will be six minutes of injury time, a result of the Oviedo 
incident.

6.16pm GMT 

45 min: Freeman jinks and jives down the inside left, but upon reaching the 
edge of the area loses his mind, and blooters a hellish shot miles wide right 
and high. Stevenage have looked decent going forward on occasion, but as the 
game's progressed, they've shed most of their earlier self-belief.

6.15pm GMT 

44 min: Naismith is nearly released again, straight down the middle, but Jones 
just about holds him off. A lot of space in the middle of the park for Everton.

6.14pm GMT 

43 min: McCarthy batters his nose into the back of Heslop's head, as the two 
go up for a ball near the centre circle. He requires a little squeeze of the 
old-fashioned magic sponge.

6.12pm GMT 

41 min: McCarthy slips the ball wide right to Mirallas, who shuttles it on to 
McGeady. The winger can't beat his man this time, but Everton are playing some 
very fluid stuff down that flank. The atmosphere is pretty flat now, like 
Everton care. They're all over this.

6.09pm GMT 

38 min: Not for the first time, Hartley brings down McGeady in the 
agricultural style. His name is popped in the referee's book, and no wonder. 
Everton waste the free kick, but soon enough McGeady's trying to float a chip 
over Day and into the top right from the left of the D. He doesn't get enough 
on the effort, which is easily claimed by the keeper. Everton are in total 
control of this now.

6.08pm GMT 

36 min: Zoko earns Stevenage a corner down the left, but shoulders are 
collectively slumped, and they don't cause the bedlam they were causing before 
the second goal. Everton deal with it with minimum fuss.

6.07pm GMT 

34 min: Everton, having weathered a minor storm before doubling their lead, 
suddenly look the serious proposition they usually are these days. Baines rakes 
a diagonal pass towards Naismith from tight on the left touchline, and so 
nearly releases the striker. Jones does enough to put Naismith off. A quick 
third goal will settle this tie before half time.

Updated at 6.29pm GMT

6.04pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Stevenage 0-2 Everton (Naismith 32)

Out of nothing, a second goal for Everton! Osman flicks a clever pass down the 
inside left. Ashton should deal with it, but he miskicks, allowing Naismith to 
nip away with the ball and slide it under the advancing Day. Do Stevenage 
deserve to be two down? Probably not, but Everton have been extremely clinical 
on the break, and this is where we are.

Updated at 6.29pm GMT

6.02pm GMT 

31 min: The injury to Oviedo has, unsurprisingly, dampened the mood a little. 
Nothing much is happening right now.

6.01pm GMT 

28 min: News on poor Oviedo's injury. He's gone straight to hospital. It's a 
serious, long-term injury, a double fracture. God speed, young Bryan, on the 
road to recovery.

5.57pm GMT 

25 min: Stevenage look pretty lively up front. Freeman dances down the inside 
left, and is scythed down from behind by Barry, who really should be booked. 
This will be another free kick in a dangerous spot. And Morais loops one 
towards the top-left corner. It's going in, but Robles claws it out. Charles 
tries to backheel the rebound into the danger zone from a tight angle. That'll 
be a corner, from which Everton again look all at sea, the ball worked out to 
the right, Charles then getting on the end of a long ball only to guide it 
softly back to Robles.

5.54pm GMT 

23 min: Everton deal with the corner with ease, and flood upfield. Whereupon 
Osman nearly scores with his second touch of the ball but, standing close to 
the left-hand post, volleys McGeady's deep cross from the right hopelessly into 
the stand.

5.53pm GMT 

22 min: And it's a brilliant free kick, a training-ground move which so nearly 
leads to an equaliser! The ball's tapped to the right, then quickly to the 
left, allowing Freeman to whistle a low shot towards the bottom right. Robles 
tips round for a corner.

5.52pm GMT 

21 min: There's a long break in play, as both physios carefully load Oviedo 
onto a stretcher. Osman will come on in his wake.  Play will restart with a 
Stevenage free kick, 25 yards out.

5.50pm GMT 

18 min: Uh-oh. Poor Oviedo has gone down on the greasy turf, while tracking 
back to make a defensive challenge on Heslop. This looks like a serious injury 
- a leg break perhaps, though BT Sport aren't showing the challenge again on 
the grounds of taste - with all the players immediately screaming for a 
stretcher, and medical assistance. A lot of grim faces. 

Updated at 6.25pm GMT

5.47pm GMT 

17 min: Both sets of fans are giving it plenty, with Stevenage's 
support refusing to pipe down, despite that early setback. Old-schoolFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> atmosphere right here! McGeady 
looks to be inspired by it, and jinks to the byline down the right. His clipped 
cross is headed powerfully clear by Charles.

5.46pm GMT 

15 min: McGeady drops a shoulder to nip inside Hartley down the right, and is 
upended for his trouble. Free kick in a very dangerous position, to the right 
of the Stevenage box. But the ball doesn't beat the first man. No matter, 
Everton are coming back at the hosts soon enough, with Oviedo slide-ruling a 
pass down the left channel, and so nearly releasing Naismith into the area. Day 
comes out to smother.

5.44pm GMT 

13 min: The visitors calm things down a bit by passing it hither and yon along 
the back line. Clever Everton. They knock it around in a very pretty manner. No 
wonder they're dreaming of their first trophy in 19 years.

5.41pm GMT 

10 min: Everton don't look particularly comfortable when the ball's pumped 
into their half, it has to be said. Stones, Baines and Barry make an 11-course 
tasting menu of dealing with a long loop down the Stevenage right. Eventually 
Robles hacks into touch, and soon there's more joy for Morais down the right, 
and Hibbert does well to dive at full length to head clear with Smith on his 
shoulder. It's been a bright and exciting start to this game. Everton will be 
happy, of course, but perhaps not 100 percent content.

5.38pm GMT 

7 min: Some start, huh? Roberto Martinez's campaign to become the first 
manager to win consecutive FA Cups with different clubs is on!

5.37pm GMT 

GOAL!!! Stevenage 0-1 Everton (Naismith 5)

How costly that Akins miss? Everton zip up the other end. Mirallas, in space 
down the inside right, hammers a low shot goalwards. It's parried well by Day, 
but the ball squirts out right to McGeady, who fires a low cross into the 
centre, where Naismith adjusts his feet quickly and whips the ball into the 
net. That's what Akins should have done.  That's the difference between League 
One and the Premier League.

5.36pm GMT 

4 min: Freeman goes on a power jog down the left touchline. His cross is too 
deep, but Stevenage are soon coming back at Everton, and really should take the 
lead. The ball's whipped in from the right, and Stones, who has started very 
delicately, nearly chest the ball past his own keeper. Robles should hold, but 
spills the ball as he falls to the ground, under pressure from Zoko. It falls 
to Akins, who should sidefoot home, but hammers the ball straight at the 
unwitting Stones. What a chance spurned!

5.32pm GMT 

2 min: Stones faffs around down the Stevenage right, allowing Morais to tear 
clear down the wing. He's in space and into the area, but Barry comes across to 
block. Corner, which doesn't get past the first man. A decent start by the 
underdogs, mind you.

5.31pm GMT 

And we're off! Everton set the ball rolling, sort of, on a pitch that's heavy 
and damp. It's raining. Broadhall Way is bouncing. Zoko races after a long ball 
down the right, but can't control.

5.27pm GMT 

The teams are out! Stevenage are doing their white-and-red thing, 
while Everton are in their trademark blue, as they should be, no need for 
changing needlessly into ludicrous away kits. No huge shocks in this fourth 
round so far, though Watford tried their level best by going two goals up at 
Manchester City before being turned over in the second half. Can Stevenage add 
to the FA Cup legend? Everton have rested a few big names - Romelu Lukaku is 
only on the bench -  but they're still able to call on the Irish 
Ronaldinho, Aiden McGeady, who makes his first start for his new club. 
 Stevenage's line-up meanwhile includes Jimmy Smith and Filipe Morais, both 
formerly of Chelsea, the pair having clocked up one league appearance for the 
Stamford Bridge giants between them. As for the atmosphere, is it, as Stevenage 
manager Graham Westley promised, "bizarre" and "bewildering"? I have no idea 
what he meant by that, so I can't tell you. It's very loud. Does that count?

4.56pm GMT 

Cast and crew

Stevenage: Day, Ashton, Jones, Morais, Charles, Akins, Zoko, Heslop, Freeman, 
Smith, Hartley.
Subs: Smith, Wedgbury, Burrow, Parrett, Tounkara, Andrade, Deacon. 

Everton: Robles, Hibbert, Baines, Jagielka, McGeady, Oviedo, Mirallas, 
Naismith, McCarthy, Barry, Stones.
Subs: Howard, Heitinga, Lukaku, Gueye, Osman, Vellios, McAleny. 

Referee: Anthony Taylor (Cheshire)

Updated at 5.16pm GMT

1.57pm GMT 

With Stevenage currently rooted to the bottom of the Third Division, and 
Everton chasing a place in next year's European Champion Clubs' Cup, you 
wouldn't put too much money on a shock occurring at Broadhall Way this evening. 
Nope. Until you remember that Stevenage gave Roberto Martinez's side a good run 
for their money in this year's League Cup at Goodison Park, Luke Freeman giving 
the visitors a 36th-minute lead, Gerard Deulofeu equalising to force extra 
time, and the minnows hanging on until the 25th minute of extra time, when 
Marouane Fellaini broke their hearts.

(Whatever happened to Marouane Fellaini? We'd love to know.)

Everton should have more than enough to make it to the fifth round, of course. 
Thanks to some judicious purchases and loan signings, their squad is deep 
enough to withstand injuries to Seamus Coleman, Ross Barkley and the 
aforementioned Deulofeu. And while they'll have half a mind on Tuesday's 
Merseyside derby, this is a robust team now: they've only lost three games all 
season. This is very unlikely to become a fourth.

But you never know. Newcastle United felt the force of Stevenage's rugged 
brilliance back in 1997, Giuliano Grazioli and all that. And Stevenage were a 
non-league outfit at the time, while Newcastle had recently broken the 
world-record transfer fee for Alan Shearer. Meanwhile Everton's record against 
lower-league opposition in the cup in the last few years hasn't been the 
greatest, with losses to Reading, Oldham Athletic, Shrewsbury Town and Tranmere 
Rovers since the turn of the millennium. So yes, you never know. You sort of 
know, but you never know. Either way: it's on!

Kick off: 5.30pm

Updated at 3.41pm GMT
 