
England’s plans for the Four Nations are beginning to fall into place. Wayne 
Bennett’s 24-man squad will be revealed in full on Monday but the selection of 
10 players in a train-on squad is the first indicator of who he may look 
towards for the tournament, which begins on 28 October.

By the time England name their squad, Australia and New Zealand fans will have 
known for almost a week who will be taking on Bennett’s side and it would not 
be England without a surprise or two. The biggest one in the initial group of 
players? The Leeds forward Stevie Ward.

Limited to four games all season due to injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/leeds-stevie-ward-huddersfield-super-league-qualifiers-rugby>
, Ward was undoubtedly the standout name in the players picked by Bennett to 
undergo training and conditioning in Leeds this week. He took his place 
alongside more established names such as Ryan Hall, as well as three other 
Rhinos who are, unusually, not involved in the Grand Final in Brett Ferres Tom 
Briscoe and Kallum Watkins plus Zak Hardaker, who left last year’s Treble 
winners in June to go on loan to Penrith and whose future at Headingley is up 
in the air.

That Ward has had so little game-time, despite being involved in the 34-man 
squad meeting with Bennett earlier this year, has provoked some disquiet, but 
Ward is hopeful it is his lack of action that could earn him the nod when 
Bennett reveals his final squad.

“Hopefully, having not played many games is something that works in my 
favour,” Ward says. “The thing that is often said about players in this country 
is that we play too many games, and going into an international series perhaps 
there might be a danger that some of those lads are tired. However, there’s 
none of those doubts when it comes to me being involved and I’ll throw myself 
straight in there if I’m picked, don’t worry about that.”

Busy rebuilding his career on the field after a knee injury that kept him on 
the sidelines for a year, the call into the train-on squad took him by 
surprise. “It was a real shock,” he says. “I got an email just after the last 
game of the season saying I’d be involved. I was taken aback by it, but then 
thinking back to mid-season and being involved with the meeting, perhaps I 
should have thought I might getting the call just in case.

“I only played four games but they were games I was happy with. I’m delighted 
to be involved and I’m ready for the call telling me one way or the other 
whether I’m in.”

The 24 players selected will know the post-season holidays will be on ice for 
at least another month – maybe longer if England make the final at Anfield on 
20 November.

Having spent his year-long absence from the sport establishing a successful 
business, the plans Ward will be cancelling are strictly work-related but he 
says he will happily rip them up if it means an England debut. “I had some 
business trips planned for my magazine,Mantality, but I can’t say I’m too 
bothered about having to reschedule in these circumstances,” he says. “When the 
email dropped saying I’d be involved and I’d be training on all these dates, I 
put the business stuff on ice as quickly as possible.”

After concluding training with the rest of the group on Thursday, Ward now 
faces the anxious wait to discover whether he has made the cut and he is 
itching to play again as soon as possible after such a long absence. “The work 
ethic has been great this week and it’s been good for me to be involved 
straight away after a lengthy absence,” he says.

“I’ve overcome some demons and some battles to get back on the field playing. 
Getting the nod would be a bonkers end to a crazy year.”

Leeds’ Stevie Ward hopes to exorcise injury demons in Huddersfield return | 
Aaron Bower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/leeds-stevie-ward-huddersfield-super-league-qualifiers-rugby> 