
Steve Borthwick could spend Christmas in limbo as Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> debate whether to seek an 
injunction preventing him from starting work as England’s forwards’ coach.

Borthwick remains on Bristol’s payroll after the club refused to accept the 
resignation he submitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/15/bristol-legal-action-steve-borthwick-england-job>
 on Tuesday, a few hours before the Rugby Football Union issued a statement 
saying he was joining England with immediate effect.

Borthwick has not been at Bristol’s training ground this week preparing for 
the weekend British and Irish Cup match at Bedford. The RFU, while not 
responding to a request for comment on Wednesday, said at a media reception the 
previous evening that the former England captain would be starting work with 
the new national head coach,Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones>, straight away.

Bristol were blamed for the deadlock in the negotiations over Borthwick’s 
release from his contract, with the RFU indicating the club was demanding a 
compensation fee of considerably more than the £375,000 remaining on his 
contract and talking about the potential financial consequences of missing out 
on promotion.

The RFU broke off negotiations and declared Borthwick was working for them 
after he submitted his resignation letter to Bristol having taken legal advice. 
The governing body is reported to be ready to go to court if Bristol take out 
an injunction, confident of winning.

Bristol were on Wednesdaynot going beyond the statement issued on Tuesday 
which talked of “taking all reasonable actions as necessary to protect the 
club’s position”. The legal route is being considered because by walking out on 
the club without the RFU agreeing a compensation package, Borthwick has left 
himself liable for the remaining 18 months on his contract.

Bristol would not comment on whether there was a notice period in Borthwick’s 
contract. The RFU referred to his letter of resignation rather than saying he 
had handed in his notice and the battle between club and country is who 
Borthwick is now working for.

One of the reasons the RFU acted unilaterally this week after negotiations 
with Bristol reached an impasse was that with the naming of the England squad a 
month away, it wants Borthwick to be able to watching Champions Cup and 
European matches immediately, gathering information on players and speaking to 
them.

Should Bristol take out an injunction preventing him from working for the RFU 
while his contractual position is sorted out, Borthwick would be able to do no 
more than watch matches on his television and laptop, paid by Bristol but 
wanting to be working for England. While a compromise is normally found in 
disputes like this, Bristol are angry at the way the union has acted this week 
and at what they see as a dismissive attitude towards the importance of 
promotion to the club seven years after being relegated from the Premiership.

It is the RFU chief executive, Ian Ritchie, whose previous job was at 
Wimbledon, who has the next serve. If Jones is to have Borthwick by his side 
this month, Ritchie needs to reach agreement with Bristol who have already 
started searching for Borthwick’s successor as forwards’ coach . Graham 
Rowntree,released by England this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/eddie-jones-england-backroom-team-paul-gustard>
, and the former Australia hooker Michael Foley, now in charge of Western Force 
but once of Bath, are potential candidates.
 