
Steven Naismith scored two second-half goals to help Rangers bounce back from 
their shock League Cup defeat by Falkirk with a convincing 4-0 win against
Dunfermline in the Scottish Premier League.

Carlos Bocanegra and Maurice Edu each grabbed a goal in the first 20 minutes 
of the first half, as the Scottish champions responded positively to the 
midweek defeat. The victory at East End Park in the early kick-off had the 
additional benefit of enablingRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> to put more pressure on Celtic, 
who kicked off at 3pm.

Substitute Robert McHugh was the Motherwell hero, scoring a solo goal seven 
minutes from time to secure victory at home toAberdeen. He had been on the 
pitch for eight minutes when he latched on to a clearance following an Dons 
corner and slotted past goalkeeper David González.

Chris Humphrey and Tim Clancy hit the crossbar in each half for the hosts, but 
Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> remain without an away 
goal in league action this season. Scott Vernon tried his luck from the edge of 
the area from Richard Foster's pass from the right with 15 minutes to go, but 
Darren Randolph was equal to the rising drive.

Hibernian came back from two goals down to rescue a point from a thrilling 3-3 
encounter againstDundee United at Easter Road. Garry O'Connor gave Hibs the 
lead but United turned the tide in a manic five-minute spell. Jon Daly levelled 
the scores, tapping in from close range after a John Rankin shot. Danny Swanson 
then gave the visitors the lead, coolly firing past Graham Stack.

Daly's stooping, close-range header made it 3-1 after 67 minutes, yet the home 
side showed outstanding character to bounce back through goals from Isaiah 
Osbourne and Junior Agogo to salvage a draw.

Rankin and Victor Palsson each had efforts from distance in the latter stages, 
both of which were saved, to ensure a share of the points.

St Mirren moved up to fifth in the SPL table with a convincing 3-0 home 
victory againstKilmarnock, courtesy of two first-half goals from Paul McGowan 
and another from substitute Nigel Hasselbaink.

The Buddies manager, Danny Lennon, was "absolutely delighted for the 
supporters to see an end product that has been well overdue."
 