
Queen of the South <https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> 
reached the Scottish Cup final almost as spectacularly as Cleopatra entered 
Rome, captivating every neutral inside Hampden Park or watching on television 
with a dazzling performance. Their opponents on 24 May will not be known for 
another week, with Rangers playing their delayed quarter-final with Partick 
Thistle this afternoon and the winners meeting St Johnstone next Sunday.

Gordon Chisholm's astutely-managed First Division side had to lead four times, 
through Steve Tosh, Paul Burns, Sean O'Connor and the outstanding substitute, 
John Stewart, before finally oustingAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen>, who had come back on three 
occasions with two goals from Andrew Considine and one by Barry Nicholson.

So-called mismatches more often than not prove to be as competitive as the 
seemingly well-balanced, especially at this advanced stage of the national cup 
competition. If there was any disparity between the Premier League 
representatives and their opponents from the First Division, it was not 
apparent until the moment Tosh gave the Dumfries side the lead with a composed 
finish that betrayed his long experience, much of it in the upper echelon of 
the game.

That Considine should return the teams to equality 14 minutes later was an 
indicator of their overall closeness, but nothing could have prepared anyone 
for that blizzard of goals early in the second half. Queen of the South 
supporters would have been especially bewildered, since their initial reaction 
to the loss of striker Stephen Dobbie to injury just before half time would be 
dismay, perhaps even apprehension. They could certainly not have anticipated 
the extraordinary contribution made by Stewart, his replacement.

Tosh's 35th birthday falls two weeks from today, but the veteran did not 
require youthful sprightliness to convert the opportunity that presented itself 
when the Aberdeen goalkeeper Derek Soutar - challenged by Sean O'Connor - 
failed to hold Ryan McCann's free-kick from the right and Andy Aitken slid the 
ball out to Tosh.

All he required was the coolness that comes with years in the business to 
side-foot the ball, from about 15 yards' range, over the potential obstructions 
in front of him and into the roof of the net.

If there had been a certain untidiness about Aberdeen's attempt at dealing 
with the set piece, it would be repeated by their opponents, leading to the 
equaliser. This time, it was Sone Aluko's free-kick that was headed out to the 
left of the Queens' goal, where it was met by Scott Severin and headed back 
into the middle. Considine was first into the air, his leap perfectly timed, 
his header from 10 yards beautifully placed, low and far to the left of the 
diving Jamie MacDonald.

Stewart would begin his contribution by bolting down the wing on to a pass 
from Robert Harris at left-back, covering 60 yards before crossing to Burns, 
whose first shot hit Soutar and who followed up by whipping the ball 
left-footed high past the goalkeeper.

Queens had little time to enjoy their advantage before Chris Maguire's cross 
from the left was headed goalwards by Lee Miller, spilled by MacDonald and 
finally driven over the line by the lurking Nicholson.

It was from another astute pass by Stewart out of his own defence that Tosh 
was released on the right, his ball forwards allowing O'Connor to turn inside 
Considine and, from around 12 yards, drill the left-foot drive low to the left 
of Soutar.

The most significant after-effect of the celebration was a drowsiness in the 
Queens defence when Nicholson's centre from the right was headed by Miller to 
Considine, utterly free of a challenge at the back post and able to complete 
his double with a simple, close-range header.

It was within two minutes that Stewart made the most telling of his series of 
interventions, scoring what proved to be the winning goal. McCann's cross from 
the right was knocked on by that other veteran, defender Jim Thomson, and 
Stewart, from just eight yards out, hit a powerful right-foot drive past Soutar.
 