
·Irish Sea: The search for survivors from the Princess Victoria, which sunk 
about five miles off the coast of County Down on Saturday, continued yesterday, 
but in vain.

It was officially stated that 133 passengers and crew had lost their lives. 
Ten of the 44 survivors were members of the crew. All the women and children on 
board were lost, as were Major John Maynard Sinclair, deputy Prime Minister of 
Northern Ireland, and Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Walter Smiles MP. Survivors said 
that, in spite of the pounding by the sea and the lurching of the ship, there 
was no panic.

·East Coast: It is estimated that at least 60 people died in East and 
South-east England during Saturday night, when huge seas tore down coastal 
defences and swept away their homes. Two-thirds of Canvey Island (Essex) was 
flooded, and the population of 13,000 was evacuated. Many were taken by boats 
from their housetops.

A number of well-known resorts were affected, as well as villages inland. From 
Yorkshire to Kent, reports of damage and destruction increased from hour to 
hour.

The evacuation of the 6,000 inhabitants of Mablethorpe and Sutton-on-Sea, 
which have suffered heavily from the flooding, was being considered last night.

·Sheerness: The submarine Sirdar (814 tons) was swamped by floods while in dry 
dock at the naval dockyard at Sheerness, Kent, and later sank. The frigate 
Berkeley Castle, which was in an adjoining dock, capsized, and the force of the 
floodwater displaced the main lock gate.

·York: At York Minster, when the gale reached 100 miles an hour, the top half 
of a pinnacle, weighing a ton, crashed into the roadway.

·Holland: Vast havoc has been done by the flooding of towns and villages. 
Flushing, the Hook, Rotterdam, and Dordrecht are some of the chief sufferers. 
Over 60 people are known to have been drowned. American engineers are being 
sent from Germany to help in repair work.

Damage has also been done by flooding at Ostend, Dunkirk, and other French and 
Belgian ports.

·Kinloss, in the Moray Firth, recorded gust velocities of 113 miles an hour at 
9 o'clock on Saturday morning, and Grimsetter, in the Orkneys, 107 miles an 
hour. By midday, gusts reached a speed of 101 miles an hour at West Freugh, 
near the North Channel between Larne and Stranraer and northerly gales had 
become general throughout the country with the exception of the extreme 
South-east of England. Warnings of north-west to north gales were in operation 
last night.
 