
A stowaway was found dead inside an HGV trailer carrying Christmas catalogues 
in Kent after authorities in France had searched the vehicle, an inquest has 
heard.

The unidentified man was discovered with his legs protruding beneath piles of 
upturned catalogues at the Airport service station in Sellindge, near Ashford.

The man, who was black and looked to be in his late 30s, was pronounced dead 
inside the Hungarian-registered soft-sided trailer on 18 October last year, an 
inquest in Maidstone heard.

DS Simon Johnson of Kent police said the lorry’s driver, Lorinc Guyla, 
reported his discovery of the body to staff at the service station’s cafe.

The inquest heard that before crossing from Calais, Guyla told French 
authorities that a number of people had entered his trailer after its roof had 
been slashed. About 10 Eritrean stowaways were removed.

Johnson was unable to confirm whether the unidentified man who was later found 
dead had evaded being spotted during the Calais search, or had entered the 
insecure trailer later.

The dead man had hepatitis B, and no tattoos or surgical scars. DNA samples 
failed to confirm his identity.

Johnson told the inquest: “The lorry driver stated that he arrived at Calais 
and on the approach road he heard a number of individuals he believed had 
entered the soft-sided trailer. Upon arriving at the port, he notified the 
authorities.”

After the man’s body was found in the UK, two untraceable sim cards were found 
stitched into his clothing, as well as about €550 (£470), Johnson said.

Also found in the trailer were large plastic pipes containing urine, 
indicating someone had been inside for some time. No identity documents were 
found.

Asked by assistant coroner Christopher Morris when the man may have entered 
the trailer, Johnson said: “I would say it’s impossible to tell because the 
vehicle was left insecure [after the search in Calais].

“There is a hypothesis that he was there when the others were, or he could 
have entered in the port area.”

Johnson said there were no suspicious circumstances surrounding the death, 
which was a “tragic accident”.

A postmortem examination found that the man had died due to “traumatic 
compressive asphyxia”.

Recording a conclusion of accidental death, Morris said: “I’m unable to record 
a name for the deceased gentleman – a poignant tragedy given he was probably 
somebody’s brother, son and friend.”
 