
The iconic white cliffs of southern England are eroding 10 times faster than 
they have over the past few thousand years, a new study has revealed.

The cause of the huge acceleration is likely to be human management of the 
coastline, which has stripped some cliffs of their protective beaches, as well 
as changes in storm intensity. Climate change, which is bringing higher sea 
levels and fiercer waves, will make the erosion even worse, say scientists.

Researchers analysed rocks from Beachy Head and Seaford Head in East Sussex 
and discovered that the cliff erosion rate over most of the past 7,000 years 
was just two-six centimetres a year. But the erosion rate over the past 150 
years has been much higher at 22-32cm a year.

“We were very surprised at the stark difference,” said Martin Hurst, at the 
University of Glasgow, who led the new work,published in the Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 
<http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613044113>. “If you have a nice 
thick and wide beach in front of a cliff, that reflects wave energy. But the 
beaches have all but disappeared.”

Coastlines <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coastlines> have often 
been managed to try to protect specific beaches, using groynes or the shifting 
of sand and gravel. But management near Seaford has led to the cliffs to the 
east, including Beachy Head, being starved of sediments. “We need to be aware 
that when we manage the beach in one place, there is a knock-on effect 
somewhere else,” said Hurst.

He said the new information on the long-term rates of erosion will enable 
researchers to make better predictions for the future about how global warming 
will affect coastlines: “We are concerned that increasing sea level rise and 
more storms will drive more erosion.” Almost7,000 homes in England and Wales 
are expected to fall into the sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/28/7000-uk-properties-sacrificed-rising-seas-coastal-erosion>
 in coming decades as coasts erode.

“Humans have significantly altered this coastal system,” said Prof Rob Duck, 
at the University of Dundee, who was not part of the research team.

He said that past gravel extraction was also to blame. “The gravels of the 
beaches of the south coast were much-prized materials for a whole range of 
construction activities and were extracted in massive amounts over long 
periods. This has certainly aggravated the problems of erosion on the south 
coast of England and it will only get worse as relative sea level and 
storminess increase due to climate change.”

The scientists were able to calculate the historic erosion rates by measuring 
the amount of an isotope of beryllium in the rock platform under the cliffs. 
This isotope is formed in the top few metres of rock when it is struck by 
cosmic rays from space and the longer the rock is exposed, the higher the 
concentration. This enables the estimation of the speed of the cliff’s retreat.

Hurst and his colleagues now aim to apply the technique to other parts of the 
UK coastline, including the stretch at Hinkley Point, the site of a large new 
nuclear power station.
 