
Sunderland’s goalkeeper Jordan Pickford may be out for eight weeks after 
damaging a knee at Manchester United although he has not ruptured the anterior 
cruciate ligament, an injury which would have ended his season.

“Jordan has good news and bad news,” said David Moyes, the Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> manager. “The good news is he 
hasn’t ruptured his ACL; the bad news is he’s strained it. We’re looking at six 
to eight weeks. It’s a major disappointment for him and for us because he’s 
been saving us points.”

Sunderland look to be in safe hands with Jordan Pickford between the sticks | 
Louise Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/19/sunderland-jordan-pickford-goalkeeper-england-under21-joe-hart>
Moyes at least has a ready-made deputy with the Italian Vito Mannone, a former 
Arsenal reserve who started the season as Sunderland’s No1 before he suffered 
an elbow injury.

However Pickford, an England Under‑21 international, has made such an impact 
that he was called up to the senior national squad by Gareth Southgate for the 
World Cup qualifier in Slovenia during October, after Burnley’s Tom Heaton 
withdrew, and again last month.

The 22-year-old’s progression is being monitored by a series of clubs, with 
Arsenal among those to have been linked with him, although Sunderland have 
signalled their intention not to allow any of their bigger names to leave in 
January in the midst of yet another relegation fight.

Pickford and the central defender Lamine Koné are perhaps their biggest 
assets, but raising cash alone would not be enough for Moyes. The 53-year-old 
is trying to bolster his squad on limited funds and losing one or more of its 
mainstays would damage their hopes of remaining in the top flight. Sunderland 
currently sit in 18th place, two points adrift of Crystal Palace.

Moyes will also have to do without the Ivory Coast’s Koné, his Tunisia 
counterpart Wahbi Khazri and Gabon’s Didier Ndong for several weeks in January 
after all three were called up for the Africa Cup of Nations.
 