
A club-driven reserves league is nearing a reality for 2016 after the 
Warrington Wolves coach, Tony Smith, confirmed as many as nineSuper League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> teams are interested in taking 
part.

The Guardian revealed in July how Wigan and Warrington were among several 
leading clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/15/wigan-warrington-super-league-reserves-under-19s-rugby-league>
 trying to arrange reserve fixtures after growing disillusionment over the 
current structure, where teams only have an under-19s side below first-team 
level. That means players over 19 currently face the prospect of playing no 
games in the latter part of the year unless they sign for a partner club in the 
lower leagues.

But the initial plan to play several breakaway reserve friendlies has now 
developed into a full competition for 2016, with the Rugby Football League 
giving the concept its backing.

Smith said: “We’ve been having meetings over here for a number of weeks now, 
and we’re at a point where we’re working out the structure of the competition. 
There’s some good things happening behind the scenes.

“I’m big on the development of young players and this has been a thorn in the 
side for clubs because players have had a lack of opportunities to play. It’s a 
club-driven process to get it going but it does have the RFL’s support, and 
there’s about eight or nine clubs looking to get involved.”

Smith added that the cost of setting up a reserve team would be minimal in 
comparison to the overall expenditure clubs spend each year. “It’s less than 
the cost of a cheap overseas player, let me tell you that much. A number of 
clubs are interested but a number on the other side of the Pennines are against 
it because of the cost.

“To put it into perspective, it’s a choice between an overseas import who 
could give you minimal return as opposed to the development of so many young 
players that could be enormous for the future of our game in this country.”

Smith also revealed any more recruitment for 2016 by Warrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> will likely be dependent on 
someone else leaving the club. He said: “For us to do some other things and 
tinkering, we’d probably have to move someone the other way. We’re still 
looking and we’re still tinkering and I reckon in the next little while we 
might do something.

“There’s a lot of players still available and when little things happen it 
does have a chain effect. I think there’ll be some movement for a while yet.”
 