
The wine writer is hostage to many fortunes, and this column has long insisted 
on sensible negotiations. No wine appears without its price, vintage, 
stock-level and distribution pattern being checked, so that readers have as 
much assurance as it is possible to give that wines will be found on the 
specified shelves.

 However, no one can legislate for the branch left bare by early 
Saturday-morning bargain-thirsters, or for the wine shop staffed by a part-time 
assistant whose wits are stale. Today's column, however, is hostaged by two 
further drolleries: it is appearing one week later than originally scheduled, 
because of last Saturday being Boxing Day, so in between the time of its 
compilation and publication there has fallen that tumultuous weekend when no 
retailer knows exactly what is going to happen to sales; and second, I've 
thrown in, at the end, three lovely wines that I feel duty bound to bring to 
your notice, but that are in frustratingly short and confusing supply.

 Let me begin at Marks & Spencer and with Pale Dry Fino Sherry. Tailored 
specifically to M&S's instructions, the bone- dry salinity of classic fino has 
a delicious echo of richness. It rates 16 points and costs £4.99.

 At Majestic, a singular retailer in every respect, except in its insistence 
on case or mixed-case sales only, there is the thirst-slaking Tocornal Chilean 
White 1998. With its handsome, healthy, plastic cork, the fruit is delivered 
fresh and flavoursome: apples, underripe melon and a touch of pineapple. Lovely 
stuff, rating 15.5 points and normally costing £3.49, but if you buy a full 
case of 12 before February 1, you'll get away with a bottle price of £2.99. 
Tocornal Chilean Red 1998, meanwhile, which is on exactly the same price deal, 
at first taste comes across like an old softie in a knitted cardigan, but then 
reveals itself as a hip character in a terrific, soft-leather, 15-point suit. 
Claret Lot 278 1997, also available at a discount before February, has real 
hints of real classic stuff, but in an eminently quaffable, 15-point style; and 
since you can get away with it for £2.99, it must surely be the cheapest claret 
in the land.

 Oddbins, too, has a cheapie: Mariquita 1995, a white from the US, and 
brilliant-value tippling it is: bold and bonny, and full of gluggable fruit, it 
rates 15.5 points and costs £3.49.

 At Thresher shops (all stores except Wine Shops), there is Hartenberg 
'Occasional' Auxerrois 1997. A quirkily rich, chardonnay-style Cape white of 
great style, it rates 16 points and costs £6.49. These figures also apply to 
Hartenberg 'Occasional' Semillon 1997: vigour, vim, veracity, virtue - it 
offers the gamut of princely v-signs and parades them in a flood of controlled, 
well-refined richness.

 Somerfield has Chateau Valoussiere Coteaux du Languedoc 1996, and it performs 
like a minor, herbily undertoned, savoury claret of a great year.

 It rates 16 points and costs £4.49. Somerfield South African Cabernet 
Sauvignon 1997 is tremendous and better value than 10,000 clarets. It has 
superb texture and tenacity, is great with either food or mood, rates 16.5 
points and costs £4.29. Mimosa Maremma Sangiovese 1997, from Italy, is softer 
and fresher, and I love its dark-chocolate edge and hint of earthy cherry.

 It rates 16 points and costs £4.49.

 Last this week, a trio of fugitives. Three tricky-to-find wines of huge 
interest: Warwick Estate Chardonnay 1998 (17.5 points, £6.99), from South 
Africa, which might be found at 30 branches of Waitrose (01344 424680 for 
details); Rothbury Estate Brokenback Chardonnay 1997 (18 points, £8.99), from 
Australia, which Oddbins denies having, though the importer swears blind he's 
sent 50 six-pack cases of it somewhere; never mind, Wine Cellar and Partridges 
of Sloane Street do have some; and Baileys Old Block Shiraz 1996 (18 points, 
£9.99, or £8.99 a bottle if you buy six or more), which might also be found at 
Wine Cellar and Majestic, but Oddbins' allocation won't arrive until the end of 
the month. These wines may be rarities, but they are not hard on the pocket, 
considering that on the palate they are specimens of sublime elegance. The 
drinker who proposed that she might spend a last day on Earth gently quaffing 
her way through the serpentine complexities of one, or indeed each, of these 
might well suppose they'd reached heaven before the fateful moment arrived. 
Welcome to 1999!
 