
Huddersfield turned the Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> table on its head with an 11-0 
victory over leaders Warrington, although their second win of the season was 
not enough to lift them off the bottom after Leeds’ victory over Hull.

The Giants mastered the greasy conditions at the John Smith’s Stadium, largely 
through the boot of an impressive Danny Brough, to halt their five-match losing 
run and condemn Wolves to a second successive defeat.

In a game of few chances, Huddersfield managed a try in each half through 
three-quarters Aaron Murphy and Leroy Cudjoe and defended superbly to keep 
their own line intact.Warrington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington>
, who left out wing Tom Lineham, sorely missed the kicking game of injured 
half-back Chris Sandow and made far too many handling errors to be truly 
competitive.

Brough’s clever tactical kicking in the tricky conditions ensured Huddersfield 
were on the front foot for most of the game and Warrington were forced to 
concede no fewer than six goal-line drop-outs in the first half alone.

The visitors made the first clear break of the match through hooker Daryl 
Clark, but full-back Ryan Brierley proved to be a secure last line of defence 
and they spent most of the first half pinned inside their own half.

As the Giants maintained the pressure, second-row Joe Wardle was held up over 
the line and left wing Murphy would have scored six minutes from half-time had 
Rhys Evans not managed to knock down Brierley’s pass.

The game’s first try came in the same spot, though, with Brough making the 
initial half-break and centre Jake Connor’s one-handed offload getting Murphy 
in at the corner. The try was too far out for Brough to convert, but he made it 
6-0 with a 40-metre penalty five minutes into the second half.

Warrington forced a couple of goal-line drop-outs early in the third quarter, 
but, despite the prompting of Kurt Gidley, generally failed to trouble a 
well-marshalled defence and Huddersfield continued to look the more dangerous 
side.

Giants second-row Oliver Roberts got to the line but was unable to ground the 
ball, while at the other end Evans caught Gidley’s high kick at the corner but 
was ushered over the dead-ball line and with it went Warrington’s last chance 
of victory.

Brough, never far from the action, slotted over a long-range drop goal on 65 
minutes to put his side two scores in front before England centre Cudjoe made 
sure of the victory when he took Wardle’s pass to cross for his side’s second 
try.

Brough was off target once more with the conversion attempt, but he had 
already done enough to clinch the man-of-the-match award.

Wigan bounced back from their shock 62-0 hammering at Wakefield  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/10/wakefield-wigan-super-league-match-report>
last weekend with a hard-fought 26-12 victory overCastleford at the DW Stadium.

The Warriors suffered their heaviest defeat in over a decade in losing at 
Belle Vue last Sunday, although two tries from John Bateman and one apiece for 
Lewis Tierney and Nick Gregson helped them get back to winning ways.

Leeds defied the form book as they edged to a 20-18 victory over Hull in a 
thrilling Super League clash at a rain-soaked Headingley Carnegie.

The defending champions went into the game second from bottom following four 
straight defeats, in stark contrast to Hull’s five wins in a row which had 
taken them third. But the Rhinos dug deep to earn a crucial win which moved 
them back to within eight points of the top four.
 