
Super League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> clubs have been 
urged to capitalise on a new mood of cautious optimism after recent cash 
injections by introducing a salary cap exemption for marquee players from 2015.

Nigel Wood, the chief executive of the Rugby Football League, was able to 
welcome a new title sponsor for the elite competition – First Utility, who have 
stepped into the void left by Stobart's withdrawal midway through 2012 – and an 
extended television deal with Sky worth around £200m when the 19th Super League 
season was officially launched at Manchester's Event City on Monday.

Wood talked of Super League's "world-class clubs", and said: "Our elite teams 
need to be cut loose to be internationally competitive." When asked whether 
that meant a relaxation of the salary cap, which has remained at around £1.7m 
per club for several seasons, he said: "That is entirely a matter for the 
clubs. But the centre [the RFL] has been promoting the introduction of a 
marquee player allowance for a couple of years now.

"One of the central advantages of the [Sky] contract extension is that we can 
move the funding for clubs to salary cap level pretty quickly. That has been a 
long-term aspiration for the sport, and it should be a terrific boost for the 
standard of the competition."

Each of the 14 Super League clubs will receive a £300,000 top-up on their 
£1.2m allocation from the existing Sky deal this season, and from next year the 
12 that survive – with the bottom two being demoted this September, the first 
time there has been automatic relegation from the Super League in seven years – 
will receive more than £1.8m each.

Dr Marwan Koukash, the racehorse owner who has funded a major spending spree 
that he hopes will make Salford genuine challengers this season under the 
former Great Britain coach Brian Noble, has been the loudest advocate for the 
salary cap to be amended or even scrapped.

At the launch he received support from the Leeds chief executive, Gary 
Hetherington, and the Warrington coach, Tony Smith, who have been two of the 
more respected and influential voices on the Super League scene for more than a 
decade.

"I'm keen on anything that's going to raise the quality of our competition, 
and maybe also give us a bit of a wow factor," said Smith. "If a marquee player 
at each club is the best way to do that, great."

Hetherington said: "We proposed this a few years ago and didn't get the 
support of enough clubs. But it's been brought up again by Marwan, and there 
are people at other clubs like Simon Moran at Warrington and Ken Davy at 
Huddersfield who have the private income to spend more than they are currently 
allowed without jeopardising the stability of their clubs.

"That's the important thing, and that's why this TV deal is such a significant 
development for the clubs. What it does first and foremost is make the clubs 
sustainable."

The need for that sustainability was again highlighted over the weekend when 
Bradford Bulls <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradfordbulls> entered 
administration for the second time in as many years. They have re-emerged as a 
new company, subject to the approval of the RFL, but may yet face a points 
deduction – although that is unlikely to be determined before they play their 
first game of the season at home to Castleford on February 16.

Wigan, the 2013 champions, kick off the campaign on Friday night with a home 
game againstHuddersfield Giants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/huddersfieldgiants>, who finished top of the 
table in 2013, before flying out for the World Club Challenge against the 
Sydney Roosters the following week. The Wigan coach, Shaun Wane, hopes that the 
England internationals Josh Charnley and Michael McIlorum will both pass late 
fitness tests.
 