
“Welcome to history.” Lucas Pérez stood before the penalty spot and Bebeto sat 
before the television set. It was late on Saturday night in Spain, 
mid-afternoon in Brazil, and the striker was about to do against Eibar what he 
had done against Barcelona, Sevilla and Las Palmas, Celta de Vigo, Levante and 
Atlético Madrid. His shot beat Asier Riesgo, down at the end near the Atlantic, 
and put Deportivo de La Coruña 1-0 up, on course for a 2-0 win. For the seventh 
consecutive league game, the striker had scored for his club. Only Bebeto had 
ever done this for Depor before, in 1993 – and Bebeto, Lucas said afterwards, 
is a “legend”.

Lucas knows. Just as he knew what Bebeto meant when the public letter 
addressed to him was posted a little later, from Rio to Riazor. 
“Congratulations to Lucas Pérez on scoring for seven consecutive games, 
equalling a record that only I had ever achieved at Deportivo de La Coruña, 
over 20 years ago,” it read. “Welcome to the history of this incredible club. 
To be adeportivista is to be blessed, to be eternal for, and loved by, the 
Riazor Blues, the most beloved fans in the world. To feel them close every day, 
to feel the affection of fans who will never forget you no matter what.”

Real Madrid’s Gareth Bale hits four in 10-2 rout of nine-man Rayo Vallecano
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/real-madrid-rayo-vallecano-la-liga-report-bale-benzema-ronaldo>
Lucas feels it, all right. “Superlucas equals Bebeto,” ran one headline. This 
was the seventh consecutive game in which he had scored; it was also his 12th 
goal of the season. Only Neymar and Luis Suárez have more; only two Spaniards 
have scored in seven consecutive games over the last half-century (Quini at 
Sporting Gijón in 1979-80 and Dani Guiza in 2007-08 at Mallorca); and no 
Galician has scored more than 12 in a season, for any club, in the same period. 
Lucas is there now, with 22 matches left. At Depor, only Bebeto and Pahíño, the 
man who claimed to be “too left-wing” to play for Franco’s Spain, have reached 
this point with records as good.

But it isn’t just the statistics that are significant there, it’s also the 
“Galician”. The place, what it means. Lucas is brilliant; he is also one of 
them.

No one else apart from Bebeto had matched this run, not even Roy Makaay or 
Diego Tristán, not Rivaldo or Walter Pandiani – players Lucas watched, players 
who, as he puts it: “I spent my childhood with.” Born in A Coruña in 1988, 
Lucas first went to Riazor when he was four, the year Bebeto arrived at the 
club. His idol was Fran, the captain who played out his 17-year career at the 
club. When Depor won the league Lucas was at Riazor and when they won the Copa 
del Rey against Real Madrid, at the Bernabéu and on Madrid’s 100th birthday, he 
celebrated at Cuatro Caminos. “Ecstasy,” he called it.

When Lucas scores he kisses the Depor badge. It’s not an empty gesture, but 
one of nostalgia and gratitude: “I’m kissing my home,” he told El País. This is 
his club, it’s just that it has taken him a long time to get here. He may look 
young, he may play like a young player, tearing round the pitch, full of energy 
and ambition, but he is 27. It hasn’t been easier getting here.

Like many kids in Galicia, his father was at sea, somewhere off the Irish 
coast, and he was raised mostly by his grandparents. The kind of kid who took a 
ball everywhere, he says he has kicked a ball on every playground andfútbol sala
 court in the city but he never played for Depor. He knew football was a 
career, so he left for Alavés at 16, but this wasthe Dimitry Piterman era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/feb/20/europeanfootball.sport>, and 
things did not work out. He headed to Atlético in 2007 – where he was a 
team-mate of Koke – and then to Rayo Vallecano. From there he headed to the 
Ukraine, for two and a half years, and then continued on to Greece.

During an interview not long ago, Lucas looked out of the window at the 
seafront beyond the glass. “You don’t get that view in the Ukraine,” he said. 
Away from his family, he had felt alone and mistreated in a place where “80% of 
the people are poor and the other 20% are multimillionaires”. He described the 
last four months at Dynamo Kyiv, who he joined on loan from Karpaty Lviv, as 
the “worst months of his life”. When he departed, he was owed money but he was 
glad just to have escaped. Promises had been routinely broken, including one to 
let him go home because of family problems.

PAOK Salonika was better, and not just because they did eventually let him go. 
“They were gentlemen … the Ukrainians weren’t,” Lucas said. Last season he 
joined Deportivo on loan. Getting out was a battle but it seemed worth it to be 
home and even more worth it when he scored on his debut at Riazor. The trouble 
was he then suffered a knee injury in the next game which kept him out for 
three months. By the end of the season he had scored six times in 21 league 
games. It included an outrageous goal against Barcelona to clinch survival on 
the final day. And this summer, Deportivo signed him properly, for €1.5m.

There were offers then to sell him for a profit and the temptation to do just 
that but he was adamant he was not going anywhere. “I always wanted to be 
here,” he said. He had got home, he was not about to leave again if he could 
help it. “There is nothing bad about A Coruña,” he said, “not one thing.” The 
only thing he was not happy about was that they had had to pay for him.

It was worth it, the best piece of business of the summer in Spain. Lucas has 
scored in seven consecutive games, and against strong teams – a run that 
includes Sevilla, Barcelona, Atlético and the Galician derby compares 
favourably with Bebeto’s goals against Logroñés, Zaragoza, Espanyol, Cádiz, 
Oviedo and Rayo Vallecano. Better still, Bebeto’s initial note and then an open 
letter to Lucas published in La Voz de Galicia wished him luck in making it 
eight to “help Depor win”. It signed off with a “Hasta la victoria!” And that’s 
the key: Deportivo have not lost in that run. A run, remember, that includes 
Barcelona and Atlético, joint leaders of the league.

This is not just one man benefiting, it is a team. “Deportivo are flying along 
the motorway and they’re not prepared to put their indicators on and come off 
at the next exit,” ran one report. In Spain few people are prepared to put 
their indicators on at all but you knew what they meant. Christmas comes with 
the team who survived only on the final day last season, sitting in a European 
place. They have 26 points, twice as many as at this stage last season. They 
need just 13 more to secure survival.

The coach Víctor has built an extremely well organised side who break swiftly 
and defend brilliantly, backed by a midfield where Pedro Mosquera, in 
particular, has been impressive – and he’s a local boy too. No team have faced 
fewer shots this season; at the other end, meanwhile, it is Lucas who makes the 
difference.

“What Lucas is doing is tremendous,” Víctor said. “We have spent a long time 
now reading and listening to people praising him and I would like to join them 
because it is not just goals, it is that he gives us a spectacular [amount of] 
work. He is hammering on the door of the national team. He iscompletísimo and 
we’re delighted to be able to enjoy him.”

He is leading Depor. He has 12 goals this season and they are all sorts of 
different goals, decisive goals spread across games, not just occasional gluts. 
No one else in the team has more than two. But, as Víctor insists, there is 
more to it than that.

“Our club deserves players like this; humble players,” Bebeto said and there’s 
something contagious about the way he approaches games, while his 
identification with the club is also significant: the communion between him and 
the fans is complete, because of theway he plays too. Note that his coach 
didn’t just call him complete, he added the superlative to call himcompletísimo.

“Being happy can be seen on the pitch,” Lucas said. Listening to him talk – 
intelligent, genuine, clear-sighted – it is impossible not to like him. Hearing 
him speak about his journey and his family it is impossible not to be moved; 
watching him play it is impossible not to be moved too. Somehow, the two things 
go together. On the pitch, he is always moving. It looks like it means 
everything to him. Quick, determined, chasing everything, there’s a kind of 
desperation about the way he plays, aneed to win. Yet that does not bring the 
nastiness sometimes associated with such desire. Instead, it’s as if he is 
making up for lost time. Which may be exactly what he is doing.

He is home now, where he says he always wanted to be. Lucas said he would give 
anything for his grandparents still to be around and to watch him at Riazor. 
His parents can. Asked recently about how his family felt about his 
performances so far this season, Lucas replied: “They’re just happy to have me 
around.”

Talking points

• We waited over 600 days and Estadio Deportivo produced a special Star Wars 
cover, complete with Rubén Castro and Kevin Gameiro holding lightsabers – “may 
the derby be with you!” – and filled 46 breathless pages with buildup. Tickets 
had sold out in minutes and everyone got very excited … And all for this?

As usual, the atmosphere was incredible for the Seville derby. The football, 
on the other hand, was mostly dire. There were 43 fouls, 12 yellow cards and no 
goals. There were only two shots on target – both of which Gameiro should have 
scored. The ball went out of play for the first time two seconds into the game 
and it took only 34 seconds for the first crunching tackle, which pretty much 
set the tone, although mostly the fouls weren’t even redeemed by being 
comically crunching. Mostly, they were just flow-breaking. Stop, start, dive, 
foul, complain. And repeat.

Commenting on Canal Plus, Michael Robinson summed it up: “Everything that is 
ugly about professional football came together in this match,” he said.

• Oh, and the Copa del Rey draw means there will be two more of them at the 
start of the new year.

• “We read an article saying we came here with cakes and champagne and that 
annoyed us,” said the Getafe manager, Fran Escribá. So Getafe set about proving 
that they had not come with cakes at all. And nor, in the end, did they crack 
open the champagne, although they were pretty close. It finished 2-2 at 
Mestalla in a crazy and very enjoyable game with three of the four goals 
superb. João Cancelo stood out for Valencia, whose attitude and intensity has 
certainly improved under Gary Neville, but they do look tired and it was Getafe 
who could have won it, with Ángel Lafita getting two chances in the final 10 
minutes. He missed the ball on one and smashed the bar with the other.

• The Atlético captain Gabi could not travel to Málaga with his team-mates on 
Saturday night as he had been called up as a substitute to man a polling 
station in Boadilla del Monte, where he lives, for the general elections on 
Sunday (which no one really knows who won, yet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/20/peoples-party-wins-spanish-election-absolute-majority>
). In the end everyone else turned up so Gabi was able to dash down to Málaga 
on the train but he might have wished he hadn’t bothered. He was sent off for 
two yellow cards – the second for a handball – and Atlético were beaten for the 
first time in 10 weeks, thanks to a goal from Charles that deflected in off 
Diego Godín.

All of which means that they will not be top at Christmas, after all. When 
Barcelona arrive back from Japan,where they won the Club World Cup, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/barcelona-river-plate-luis-suarez-club-world-cup>
 they will still be leaders, with a game in hand at Gijón in February.

• “When they were handing out the brains I got there late, but the day they 
handed out balls, I got the biggest, fattest ones of all,” announced the Rayo 
manager, Paco Jémez, early last week. He was preparing for the game at the 
Bernabéu and as usual the talk was of his unusually bold approach. Jémez 
pointed out his team are not the only ones who have been hammered by the big 
clubs, even if his side’s goals against column at the Bernabéu and the Camp Nou 
does tend to say four, five, six or more. It’s not so long, after all, since 
Granada were beaten 9-1 at the Bernabéu. “If we let in nine, no one will get 
out of Vallecas alive,” he said.

Oh.

On a quite surreal afternoon, it finished 10-2 with four from Gareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/real-madrid-rayo-vallecano-la-liga-report-bale-benzema-ronaldo>
, three from Karim Benzema and two from Cristiano Ronaldo. Rayo went 2-1 up and 
almost 3-1, but then had two men sent off and a penalty given against them. 
(The first red was right but the penalty and second yellow were very dubious). 
Their reaction was … well, not to react at all. They seemed to give up there 
and then, throwing in the towel. Players made gestures that seemed to say: 
“That’s it, it’s over … go on, score then, if it’s going to be like that.” So 
Madrid scored, over and over and over again.

Slowly, the anger that threatened to engulf the stadium when Rayo were leading 
subsided. There had been whistles for players and manager, and chants for the 
president to reign. Now there was a weird, almost still atmosphere. Madrid had 
not scored 10 for 55 years but there was something odd about it, as if it 
didn’t matter that much, and no real joy. It sounds bizarre, and it says much 
about Madrid and the pressure and expectation that swirls around the club, but 
despite scoring 10 in this match, 18 in their last two home games, few thought 
Rafael Benítez came out of it any stronger. “We did what we had to do,” he 
said, almost apologetically.

As for Jémez, he was fuming. (Just for a change, like). “We’ve been 
humiliated, trodden on,” he said. “This does no one any good. They’ll have seen 
this around the world and the image of Spanish football is damaged. There are 
players the size of trucks who have prepared all their lives for moments like 
this that are crying in the dressing room.” Then he got up and said: “Happy 
Christmas to everyone … including the referee.”

• Sunday 6.15, 2-0. All three games played at that time – and it was weird, in 
a league as fragmented as this one where there are normally nine or 10 
different time slots, to have so many games on at the same time – finished with 
the same scoreline. Celta at Granada, Villarreal at Real Sociedad and Athletic 
at home to Levante. Where the biggest cheers were not for the goals but for the 
return of Iker Muniain, eight months later.

• Wishing you all a very Karim Benzema 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aS9VY2aJ1TQ>

Results: Valencia 2-2 Gatafe, Espanyol 1-0 Las Palmas, Betis 0-0 Sevilla, 
Deportivo 2-0 Eibar, Real Madrid 10-2 Rayo Vallecano, Real Sociedad 0-2 
Villarreal, Granada 0-2 Celta, Athletic Bilbao 2-0 Levante, Málaga 1-0 Atlético 
Madrid. Postponed until 17 February: Sporting v Barcelona.
 