
Cheaper borrowing is fuelling a broadly-based economic upswing but cost 
pressures remain firmly under control, according to reports published yesterday 
confirming that the British economy is entering a golden period of accelerating 
growth and low inflation.

The first of the two quarterly surveys, published by the British Chambers of 
Commerce, showed that the manufacturing industry expanded for the first time in 
a year between April and June thanks to a recovery of sales and orders in the 
home market, although the on-going strength of the pound meant that exports 
continued to decline.

Meanwhile, the much larger services sector - which accounts for two-thirds of 
economic output - turned in another robust performance, with both home and 
foreign trade picking up speed.

There were also positive signs on the jobs front, with both sectors planning 
to hire more staff in coming quarter.

Dr Ian Peters, deputy director general of the BCC, said he saw no evidence 
that strengthening economic activity was feeding through into inflationary 
pressure, however.

"Inflationary pressures remain negligible with tough competition keeping 
prices in check," Dr Peters said. "The Bank of England should maintain interest 
rates at their current level and allow time for manufacturers to get a firm 
grip on recovery."

Having steered the economy off the rocks of recession by cutting interest 
rates seven times since October, some economists believe the next move in rates 
will be up.

But most think it is premature to rule out further reductions in borrowing 
costs given the extreme weakness of upward price pressures. Even if they are 
not reduced further , rates, currently pegged at 5%, will stay on hold for 
several months while there remains a danger that inflation will significantly 
undershoot the government's 2.5% target.

According to the BCC, the number of firms intending to raise prices over the 
next three months was at its lowest for two years in the second quarter.

There is little need for firms, especially in the manufacturing sector, to 
pass on higher wage costs, according to a separate survey published by the 
Engineering Employers' Federation which showed that pay settlements have fallen 
to their lowest level since April 1994.

The EEF's monthly Pay Bulletin showed that deals averaged 2.5% in the three 
months to the end of June, down from 2.7% in the previous three months. Over 
the same period, nearly one in five firms reported pay freezes. David Yeandle, 
head of employment affairs, said: "These figures show that engineering 
companies are continuing to manage their controllable costs responsibly in the 
face of intense competitive pressures." Analysts now await the Confederation of 
British Industry's quarterly industrial trends surveys on July 27 which will 
give a more detailed picture of the state of manufacturing.
 