
Kings and Queen

(153 mins, 15)

Directed by Arnaud Desplechin; starring Emmanuelle Devos, Mathieu Amalric, 
Catherine Deneuve, Hippolyte Girardot

There are no exact English equivalents to French movies like Agnès Jaoui's 
Look at Me and Armand Desplechin's My Sex Life about the lives and loves, 
deceptions and betrayals of intellectuals and intelligent professionals. The 
nearest we have in the English-speaking world are Woody Allen's comedies of 
neurotic New York life and Richard Curtis's smooth, carefully orchestrated 
movies of interlocking London social circles. Desplechin has expressed 
admiration for the work of both, but his pictures have a genuine 
intellectuality that Allen's lack and are more deeply felt and less neatly 
patterned than Curtis's.

His lengthy new film, Kings and Queen, brings together again the bright young 
stars of the sprawling 1996 My Sex Life, Mathieu Amalric and Emmanuelle Devos. 
In the earlier film, they played respectively a brilliant, erratic junior 
lecturer in philosophy at Nanterre who can't complete his dissertation and the 
neurotic girlfriend of long standing whom he's two-timing. Now they figure in 
what initially appear to be parallel -stories, but which are, in fact, closely 
related.

The beautiful, statuesque Devos plays Nora, a successful Parisian gallery 
owner dealing in prints and drawings. She's about to take a new husband who, in 
contrast to her first two, is coarse, rich and confident. Her ageing widowed 
father, a classical scholar and author of refined novels and collections of 
pensées, lives in Grenoble and takes care of the 10-year-old Elias, only child 
of Nora's first marriage.

She's much taken with an 18th-century drawing of Leda and the Swan which she 
takes to Grenoble as a birthday present for her father. This myth appears to 
have some special meaning for her. Shortly after her arrival, however, he is 
whisked into hospital, diagnosed with terminal cancer and given just a few days 
to live. The beautiful landscape suddenly turns into a place of menace, the 
surrounding mountains casting dark shadows on the city in the foothills.

Meanwhile, we have been introduced to Ismaël, played by the short, attractive, 
edgy Mathieu Amalric. A viola player in a string quartet, he's a witty, 
effusively articulate bipolar recluse who's gone through a period of dangerous 
instability. He passes dud cheques, misses engagements and is in dire trouble 
with the tax people, for whom he's left an insulting message on his answering 
machine.

On the instructions of a doctor and his exasperated sister, men in white coats 
take the violently struggling Mathieu away to a mental home, where he enters 
into philosophical debates with the institution's shrink (Catherine Deneuve). 
By special dispensation, he's provided with an ambulance to drive him to his 
regular analyst, a formidably large black woman, Dr Devereux (Elsa Wolliaston), 
the very mention of whose name creates fear in the heart of the hospital staff.

It transpires that Ismaël was Nora's second husband and she wants him to adopt 
her son because he's attached to Ismaël and hates his prospective stepfather.

Nora seems liberated but is, in fact, trapped; Ismaël is incarcerated but 
mentally free. This is reflected in their names. The central character of My 
Sex Life has the surname Daedalus and here we're invited to think of Nora 
Helmer, heroine of A Doll's House (there's a portrait of Ibsen on her father's 
wall) and Ishmael, the son of Abraham exiled to the desert. The picture of Leda 
and the Swan introduces a succession of images from classical mythology that 
adorn the wall of virtually every room in the picture, as well as the coffee 
mug used by Ismaël's neurotic lawyer. The final scene, in which Ismaël delivers 
a beautiful speech on character and relationships to young Elias, is set in a 
museum of antiquities.

Whereas Nora hails from Grenoble and has a haughty intellectual father, who 
turns out, in a laceratingly painful scene, to hate his daughter, Ismaël comes 
from flat, industrial Roubaix in the far north west. His father is the 
seemingly simple owner of a small general store. But though no intellectual, 
he's kindly, courageous, wise, and loves Apollinaire. In fact, there is a good 
deal of verse quoted in the movie, everything from Yeats to Emily Dickinson, 
evoked by people to whom poetry matters. And like good poetry, this rich and 
suggestive film is about people trying to cope with their lives and attempting 
to grasp and articulate what seems beyond expression.

Superbly acted, sprawling and very funny, Kings and Queen constantly surprises 
us both by its emotional revelations and quite unexpected scenes like a visit 
by a ghost, a suicide, a hip hop performance in a group therapy session and a 
sudden, violent robbery.
 