
Kell Brook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kell-brook> is tired of being 
British boxing's coming man – now he just wants to be the man. After boxing 
only once in the past year, and watching a world title shot against Devon 
Alexander fall through three times because of injuries, he says he has been 
spurred on by taunts from keyboard warriors.

On Saturday night Brook, who is unbeaten in a nine-year career, faces Ricky 
Hatton's conqueror Vyacheslav Senchenko in Sheffield. Victory will lead to a 
world title shot, with a gold-plated carrot that the fight, most likely against 
Alexander, could be on pay-per-view in the spring.

Following a frustrating 12 months since stopping Hector Saldivia in a final 
eliminator for the IBF title, during which he fractured his foot and briefly 
lost his motivation, Brook insists he is stronger than ever.

"When I fractured my foot I felt helpless," Brook said. "It was awful. I 
didn't know what to do with myself. I've boxed all my life, it's the only thing 
I know what to do.

"I also heard people saying that I didn't want it against Alexander, or I was 
scared, or I had bottled it. When you hear that it gets to you. They don't know 
what it's like: being away from my family over Christmas, missing my daughter, 
and I think it's really ignited me. Those haters have drove me on. You are 
going to see great things on Saturday night."

Senchenko is a tough Ukrainian who proved his mettle by withstanding Hatton's 
bombs in the opening rounds before knocking him out late on. He is a former 
world champion, and his 34-1 record is superficially impressive. The manner of 
his solitary defeat, against the light-hitting Paulie Malignaggi – who turned 
his eye every colour of the rainbow with his jab before the referee stopped the 
fight – suggests that he will struggle against Brook's accuracy and power.

Not that the Sheffield fighter is taking anything for granted. He has been 
training away from his family and young daughter, three times a day. "It's only 
a short window," he says. "It's a young man's game and I want to get in there 
and prove I can mix it with the best in the world."

And while Brook wants to fight Alexander "with a passion", he also has Amir 
Khan and the slick WBA welterweight champion Adrien Broner in his sights. 
"Broner's a loudmouth and I'd love to give a beating to him. He's got 
tremendous talent but no champion who is unbeaten on 30-0, like I am, thinks 
they are going to lose. It would be a very good fight but I'm big and strong 
and I've got everything needed to take him out."

Brook's trainer Dominic Ingle believes his fighter's dedication will be 
rewarded with a late stoppage. "His weight is good, he's looking in tremendous 
shape and he knows he's just a breath away from a big fight. People have been 
talking about a world title fight for three or four years. It's well behind 
time but we know Kell's ready."
 