
In a recent article for this section, Faiza Shaheen described 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/gig-economy-recruitment-agencies-employment-rights>
 recruitment agencies as “arbiters of capitalism and the mass exploitation of 
workers”. As someone who has owned a recruitment agency in London for 30 years, 
I would endorse her view.

The recruitment industry is growing at an annual rate of 9% 
<https://www.rec.uk.com/news-and-policy/press-releases/uk-recruitment-market-set-to-surpass-pre-recession-peak-by-the-end-of-201314-rec>
: an astonishing speed for a mature industry thatnow exceeds £35 
<http://rec.uk.com/>bn in annual turnover – larger than the food and drink 
industries – and within which 1.2 million people find work. Much of this growth 
is, however, easily explained. In combining aggressive tax avoidance with 
systematic worker exploitation, recruitment agencies are able to supply labour 
at prices far below the cost of direct employment by labour users. Within the 
industry, the culprits are widely known and, usually, highly successful.

Tax avoidance <https://www.theguardian.com/business/taxavoidance> has always 
been a staple of the agency world. Until April, the most widely used and 
profitable angle was the use of travel and subsistence schemes, which allowed 
agencies to claim weekly tax rebates on behalf of their temporary workers. 
Having done so, the agencies would then snaffle most, or all, of those rebates. 
These schemes enabled the most ruthless operators to accrue huge profits. Their 
temporary workers would then lose year-end rebates to which they would 
otherwise have been entitled.

HMRC inactivity has been the main facilitator of the recruitment industry’s 
care-free tax avoidance

HMRC inactivity has been the main facilitator of the recruitment industry’s 
care-free tax avoidance. Time and again,HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> has issued statements condemning 
sharp practices; time and again the perpetrators have ignored them and 
continued to prosper. Indeed, every time recruitment industry tax avoidance is 
highlighted in the media, copycat schemes flourish.

No one in the recruitment industry believes that HMRC has the will to take it 
to task. A senior HMRC inspector told me five years ago that over £1bn per year 
was being siphoned from Revenue and Customs into the hands of agency bosses 
through travel scheme abuse alone – yet, with the exception of a £158m tax bill 
imposed on Reed Employment, the industry’s manipulation of the tax system has 
hardly been disturbed.

The Guardian recently exposed payroll “products” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
 that have become more widespread since travel and subsistence schemes were 
banned, enabling agencies to effectively opt out of employers’ national 
insurance contributions. These are by no means the only options being used. My 
inbox is constantly assaulted by “payroll solutions” being offered by umbrella 
companies, few of which offer more than crude tax avoidance. Typically, these 
“solutions” arrive from newly formed companies with no track record, and whose 
activities often cease before they need to file annual accounts.

In order to succeed in the race to the bottom that characterises the agency 
world, however, it is not enough merely to game the tax system. Workers are 
likely to face greater exploitation as agencies offer ever tighter prices to 
their customers. Holiday pay is reduced, withheld, or denied altogether. 
Worthless personal accident insurance policies are peddled at vastly inflated 
prices. Rights to equal pay with permanent counterparts after 12 weeks are 
easily dodged by deft drafting of contracts. Self-employment is forced upon 
people who fulfil none of the criteria and have no knowledge of what it 
entails. Workforces are juggled to minimise employers’ NI contributions. 
Workers frequently have no idea who they are actually working for, with 
labyrinthine networks of companies established to evade any chance of 
prosecution.

Recruitment agencies are not solely responsible for these practices. Users of 
labour are usually complicit, and often instrumental in insisting on labour 
prices that cannot mathematically be achieved without denying rights and 
avoiding tax. As one leading lawyer who specialises in the recruitment industry 
told me: “I used to think companies used agencies because they added expertise 
and value. I now realise they use them because they’re cheap.”

While successive governments have increased workers’ rights in theory, they 
have not policed those rights, nor ensured that they cannot be easily dodged. 
There is no regulatory body that actively enforces agency workers’ rights, 
other than the Gangmasters’ Licensing Authority. By common consent, this body 
works well, and its remit is set to expand in 2017. However, a budget of £4.5m 
a year is hopelessly inadequate to fight corruption within such a large 
industry.

Revealed: temp agencies' avoidance scheme costs taxpayers 'hundreds of 
millions'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
Trade bodies representing the recruitment industry live in denial of their 
members’ behaviour. The press office of the industry’s largest trade 
organisation, the Recruitment and Employment Confederation, failed to 
acknowledge the recent front page Guardian expose, or address the calls of 
various MPs for government to urgently look into the industry. Instead, its 
next website article was headlined “Why the recruitment industry needs to talk 
itself up”. Despite growing adverse publicity, the silence from industry 
stakeholders is deafening.

There are many ways in which recruitment agencies can make a positive 
contribution. Temporary work is likely to increase as society evolves. Agencies 
that provide a real service in recruiting, organising and administering 
workforces perform a key function in an increasingly reactive world. There are 
plenty of organisations using agency labour who realise that a workforce that 
is well-treated and properly paid will be more reliable and productive than one 
that is systematically exploited. Where such organisations dovetail with 
agencies holding similar views, real benefits can accrue to industry and 
workers alike.

Theresa May’s government has claimed that it will represent those who struggle 
to get by; it has also targeted tax avoidance. In turning its attention to the 
recruitment industry, it could address both aims and provide a significant 
boost to workers, tax receipts and those recruitment companies who are appalled 
by the direction the industry has taken. What is certain is that the 
recruitment industry will not reform itself. If government does not take firm 
and sustained action, the industry will continue to grow at breakneck speed, 
with the most grateful beneficiaries being those whose snouts remain most 
deeply in the trough.
 