
In relation to the following tax compliance rules, we would draw your 
attention to the express terms of your agreement to supply services to GNM 
regarding the indemnity you provide to GNM in respect of any claims from any 
taxing authorities relating to monies paid or payable to you by GNM. You should 
regard these tax compliance rules as incorporated into your agreement.

Due to the requirements set forth by the United States (“US”) Internal Revenue 
Service (“IRS”) regulations, GNM must obtain certain tax-related information 
and documentation from you if you are US-based or earn US-sourced income. 
Failure to provide appropriate and complete documentation may cause a delay in 
your payments. The information provided here is informational only and we 
recommend that you seek independent tax advice as necessary.

Accordingly, you must provide an appropriate IRS form (Form W-8BEN, W-8ECI, 
W-8EXP, W-8IMY, 8233 or W-9) based on your residency and tax classification for 
US tax purposes. The charthere 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2012/09/06/charter.pdf> 
highlights key items you may want to consider in determining the appropriate 
form to provide. The type of documentation will differ depending on whether you 
are a US or non-US person and your US tax classification (i.e. individual, 
corporation or partnership). This documentation must be provided before a 
payment for services is rendered to you. The appropriate form must be provided 
with original signature (copies or facsimiles will not be accepted), except 
Form W-9.

If you are a US person, you must provide a US taxpayer identification number 
(TIN) to GNM Accounts Payable in order that GNM may make a payment to you. A 
TIN may be a social security number (individuals only), employer identification 
number, or an individual taxpayer identification number. You may provide this 
information on Form W-9 or by any means specified by GNM Accounts Payable on 
request (such as by email or letter). GNM Accounts Payable will defer payment 
until such time that this information is provided.

If you are a non-US person, and are performing services in the US, you must 
provide an appropriate IRS form (Form W-8BEN, W-8ECI, W-8EXP, W-8IMY or 8233) 
to GNM Accounts Payable as soon as possible upon confirmation of your 
assignment, together with a statement indicating the proportion (or amount) of 
the payment due to you that is attributable to services performed in the US.

Prompt attention to any request from GNM Accounts Payable will not only ensure 
that you and GNM are in compliance with US tax requirements but will also 
prevent unnecessary delays in processing your payments.

Additional Explanations and Frequently Asked Questions

US and non-US persons: A “US person” generally includes an individual who is a 
US citizen or resident of the US (a person that is not a US citizen but meets 
either the green card test or substantial presence test). A US person also 
includes a partnership or corporation created or organized in the US or under 
the laws of the US.

A non-US person is any person that is not a US person. Non-US persons must 
certify their foreign status on a Form W-8 series or, if applicable, Form 8233. 
For more information about the appropriate tax forms to complete based on your 
status, please contact your tax advisor.

Agents: For contributors represented by an agent, where the contributor is the 
beneficial owner and the agent is acting as an intermediary or flow-through, 
GNM must obtain the tax related information and documentation with respect to 
the contributor. For more information, we recommend that you seek independent 
advice from your tax advisor, as necessary.

IRS documentation and tax IDs: You must provide GNM with appropriate 
documentation as shownhere 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2012/09/06/charter.pdf>. 
If you are resident in a country that has an income tax treaty with the US and 
you want to claim an income tax treaty benefit, you will need to provide a US 
employer identification number (EIN) or Individual Taxpayer Identification 
Number (ITIN) on the documentation you provide. If you are engaged in a US 
trade or business and provide us with a Form W-8ECI, you will need to include 
your US EIN or ITIN on the form.

If you are a non-US person who does not have an EIN or ITIN, a number can be 
obtained by filing with the IRS a Form SS-4 (for businesses) or Form W-7 (for 
individuals).

Frequently Asked Questions Regarding IRS Forms

Permanent residence address: Do not use a P.O. Box or “In Care of Address” as 
a permanent residence address.

US addresses require additional support: If you provide a US address to GNM 
Accounts Payable, either on an IRS Form W-8 or otherwise, you will need to 
supply additional information to demonstrate that you are not a US person. (If 
you are providing a US address, please refer to the instructions for the 
relevant form for more information or contact your tax advisor.) This does not 
apply to Form W-9.

Include your tax residence country on the relevant form line for treaty 
benefit claims: Please make sure that you provide your country of tax residence 
in Part II of Form W-8BEN if you are claiming an income tax treaty benefit. You 
should write your tax residence country in the space on Line 9a, as well as on 
Line 4. Please be sure to read Part II carefully as other boxes may be 
applicable to you. Consult your tax advisor for further guidance.

Limitations on benefits (non-individuals only): Contributors that are entities 
that claim treaty benefits must certify on Part II of Form W-8 BEN, Line 9c 
that they satisfy the limitation on benefits clause of the relevant treaty. 
Please consult a tax advisor to determine if you qualify.

Who should sign?: You, or someone authorized by you, must sign and date the 
form. If you sign a Form W-8 BEN on behalf of the beneficial owner, you must 
state your capacity on the line “Capacity in which acting.” For instance, a 
corporate officer who signs a Form W-8BEN on behalf of a corporation should 
state his or her title. Outside attorneys, accountants, and other persons who 
are authorized by the beneficial owner to sign the form should attach to the 
form a power of attorney or other document granting them the authority to sign.

Changes in your information: If any of the information on the form becomes 
outdated, especially your country of residence, please notify us within 30 days.

Invalid forms: Forms that are not completed correctly cannot be accepted and 
will be returned for correction. You may wish to consult your tax advisor for 
further information regarding US withholding and information reporting 
guidelines and the appropriate documentation for your account.

To obtain IRS forms and instructions referred to in the Freelance Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter> and the
chart 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2012/09/06/charter.pdf> 
of IRS forms, please call (800) 829-3676, or visit theIRS <http://www.irs.gov> 
website.
 