
Team GB’s Tokyo 2020 hopefuls may have to win their places in the team in a 
televised, multi-sport trials event a month before the start of the Games.

Tokyo breaks ground on £1.2bn national stadium for 2020 Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/tokyo-breaks-ground-national-stadium-2020-olympic-games>
The GB Olympic trials concept, first floated this year, is now the subject of 
advanced talks involving theBritish Olympic Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-olympic-association> (BOA), the 
government funding-agency UK Sport and several leading national governing 
bodies.

The BOA has even started preliminary negotiations with the USA Olympic 
committee about introducing a trans-Atlantic, Ryder Cup-style element to the 
competition.

The BOA’s chief executive, Bill Sweeney, said: “There are a number of good 
conversations going on at the moment and the idea is that it will take place in 
June 2020. It’s an idea backed by UK Sport and we’ve seen it work very 
successfully in the US. It would be a slightly different model [to the USOC 
trials] – it wouldn’t be as brutal with their first-past-the-line idea, which 
might be because they’ve got more athletes to choose from.”

The US Olympic trials are notoriously difficult, with competition for places 
in some athletics and swimming events almost as fierce as the Olympics 
themselves. This leads to good broadcast ratings – essential in a media 
landscape that largely ignores Olympic sport outside the Games – but also 
several selection controversies. It has also been suggested that it causes some 
athletes to peak too early.

This is why the BOA’s plan has met with resistance in the past, particularly 
from sports such as boxing and cycling, which like to leave selection up to the 
discretion of their coaches, but Sweeney has been working hard to persuade a 
“critical mass” of governing bodies that the GB Olympic trials could still 
provide drama while retaining some “subjectivity” for the selectors.

Sweeney knows only too well how an overly competitive trials process can 
backfire because he worked for Reebok when the then world decathlon champion 
Dan O’Brien failed to register a pole vault score and missed out on the 1992 
Games. The sportswear firm had based its Olympic advertising campaign around 
O’Brien’s rivalry with a US compatriot, Dave Johnson.

The BOA cheif executive pointed to British Swimming’s Olympic trials in 
Glasgow as an example of an event that already uses, to a degree, the US model, 
and said gymnastics, rowing, taekwondo and triathlon were “very keen” on the 
new, larger event, and several broadcasters were interested, too.

Sweeney also said that the USOC was very keen on a UK v USA trials and it 
could be done if “five or six sports on both sides of the Atlantic” could get 
their “calendars to work out”.

He said: “It would be good for us to get close to the current number ones [in 
Olympic sport] and I’m sure it would be relatively easy in terms of commercial 
partners and broadcasters.”
 