
James Tedesco has continued his undeniable claim for a State of Origin debut 
with a starring role in the Wests Tigers’ 34-26NRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> win over Penrith.


Just two days out from Blues coach Laurie Daley naming his team for game three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/origin-punching-bags-nsw-should-consider-bringing-back-jarryd-hayne>
, the Tigers’ star claimed a points decision on Origin rival Matt Moylan in a 
high-scoring affair.


Moylan struck first with involvements in Penrith’s opening two tries of the 
match, but Tedesco responded by twice burning fellow Blues hopeful Bryce 
Cartwright to set up tries either side of halftime.


Warriors wear down injury-hit Titans in Auckland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/warriors-wear-down-injury-hit-titans-in-auckland>
Compounding the loss for the Panthers is a suspected season-ending knee injury 
to prop Sam McKendry, who was folded by a Jesse Sue tackle early in the first 
half and was taken from the field on a stretcher.


Tedesco was assisted by strong outings from Mitchell Moses and Sue, while 
Cartwright made up for his defensive deficiencies with 10 offloads for the 
visitors.


The win lifts the Tigers to within two points of the eighth-placed Panthers.


In front of a crowd of 10,582 on Saturday evening at ANZ Stadium, the Panthers 
led 14-2 at the 24-minute mark when the Tigers poured on four tries in 15 
minutes to take a shock eight-point lead into halftime.


Jordan Rankin finished off a Tedesco break early in the second half to 
increase the advantage for the home side, who turned away numerous Panthers 
raids midway through the second half.


Veteran hooker Robbie Farah then sealed the win when he backed up a Sue break 
in the 63rd minute, before Trent Merrin and Isaah Yeo grabbed consolation tries 
late in the match.


Earlier, Penrith winger Josh Mansour opened the scoring with an acrobatic 
putdown, which was followed by James Fisher-Harris finishing a Tyrone Peachey 
tap-back just three minutes later.


However, the tide turned quickly afterwards, Ava Seumanufagai backing up a 
clean Chris Lawrence break in the 32nd minute which was sandwiched between twin 
Tim Simona efforts.


Tedesco set up his first before he intercepted a Moylan pass and ran 60 metres 
for his second, and then David Nofoaluma gave his team an unlikely lead on the 
halftime siren.


Penrith’s mid-season recruit Zak Hardaker also made his NRL debut with a 
lively 30-minute cameo in the second half.
 