
Two teenage girls have been detained for more than three years each for 
kidnapping a child from a Primark store after luring her away from her mother 
with sweets.


Sentencing the girls, Mr Justice Globe said that although the two-year-old was 
returned to her mother unharmed, she was at risk of physical and sexual 
violence; evidence had been presented suggesting that at least one of the 
kidnappers had been conducting internet searches of a sexually violent nature.

The girls, aged 13 and 14, took the toddler from Primark on Newcastle’s main 
shopping street on 13 April. They took her on the city’s Metro system to the 
nearby suburb of Gosforth but were soon found, and the child was returned to 
her mother.

After the teenagers were arrested, the online search evidence was found on the 
younger kidnapper’s tablet device. “[It] shows hundreds of searches in relation 
to pornographic topics which include children having sex, rape, slavery and 
abduction,” Globe, sitting at Newcastle crown court, said on Monday.

The kidnappers and the victim cannot be named for legal reasons.

The court heard that the toddler’s mother was so distressed when she realised 
her daughter was missing that she banged her head against a wall. She has 
suffered extensive psychological harm as a result of the incident, the judge 
said.

It also emerged in court that the younger of the kidnappers had been sexually 
exploited online herself. She had sent pictures of herself and her fellow 
defendant to a man at his behest, the court heard.

Despite the kidnappers’ claims that they carried out the crime under pressure 
from a third party, no evidence was presented of involvement by anyone else, 
including the man who exploited the younger kidnapper.

The older defendant claimed a man called “Nazzer” told them to take a child 
and was with them on the day of the kidnapping. CCTV evidence showed that to be 
a lie, the court heard, and police were convinced the teenagers acted alone.

The two kidnappers had been playing with their victim under her mother’s 
supervision prior to snatching her, in a display the mother thought was “sweet”.

The prosecutor, Sarah Barlow, said: “They offered her sweets. That’s 
indicative of the level of planning: they had taken with them things likely to 
attract a child to them.

“They were playing with her. [The toddler] was running to and from the girls. 
Her mother was not suspicious, she simply thought the girls were playing with 
her daughter and were being quite sweet. This went on for some 15 minutes.”

The girls then took the toddler into a lift and out of the store, before 
heading away from the city centre. Barlow said CCTV from the lift in Primark 
showed the girls looking anxious, indicating “they knew at that stage what they 
were doing was wrong”.


On the Metro, witnesses saw them giving the girl sweets and offering her a 
drink. One of the kidnappers was overheard saying: “Don’t worry, we will get 
you to your mummy.”

Once they arrived in Gosforth, they tried to take her to a soft play area but 
were not allowed in, then went to a Sainsbury’s, where they stole a bottle and 
milk in an attempt to keep the toddler quiet. They then took her to the swings 
in a park.

Barlow said the little girl was located “mercifully, relatively swiftly” after 
a description was circulated, and CCTV was examined.

Julie Clemitson, defending the younger girl, said her client had been sexually 
exploited and was “a damaged, vulnerable young girl”. Andrew Walker, for the 
older defendant, said she had displayed maternal instincts through her life and 
had never harmed a child. Each was to be detained for three years and three 
months.


 