
Your Blog <> | Uploading Content <> | Rights and Licence To Use <> | Revenues 
and Payments <> | Warranties and Liabilities <> | Status of Contributors and 
Suppliers as Independent Contractors <> | Term and Termination <> | 
Confidentiality <> | General <> |

These terms and conditions for blog networks, incorporating where stipulated 
theFreelance Charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter> (“
Freelance Charter”) and any revisions thereto, and any other documents 
expressly referred to herein including any revisions thereto, set out the terms 
under which you (“You”) agree to make available Your Blog to Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM”, “We”, “Us”). They should be read in conjunction with the 
Term Sheet issued to You by GNM and together these form Your Agreement with Us.

Please read these terms carefully. You shall be legally bound by these terms 
when GNM sends You a countersigned Term Sheet. You are advised to print off and 
keep a paper copy of these terms.

1. Your Blog

1.1. GNM shall provide You with a remote logon and training on GNM’s 
production tools (“Tools”). You agree that You shall keep confidential Your 
logon and the Tools and shall not share them with any third party. GNM shall 
provide You with assistance with regard to technical problems that arise.

1.2. On completion of Your training on the Tools, You shall make available 
Your Blog to GNM in the manner instructed which GNM shall host and promote on a 
page (“Blog Page”) on the Guardian Digital Network (“GDN”) as defined in Clause 
3 hereof.

1.3. You shall regularly maintain Your Blog and shall determine its content. 
You shall launch Your own posts which shall not be sub-edited by GNM. GNM 
occasionally might raise topics of interest with You suitable for Your Blog but 
You shall be under no obligation to include or cover such topics.

1.4. In the right-hand column on your Blog Page, GNM shall supply a blog roll 
with Your links, a Twitter component to display Your latest posts, and a 
component that displays the most read blog content on the GDN. Following launch 
GNM may, on request, supply a blogosphere component, sourced from Your list of 
favourite blogs. As new widgets and functionality become available on the GDN, 
they shall become available to You provided Your use thereof is in accordance 
with Your use of the Tools.

1.5. You shall not have, and shall not hold Yourself out as having, any 
authority to incur any expenditure in GNM’s name or otherwise enter into 
arrangements that would be binding on GNM.

1.6. You may use another person, firm or company to perform any administrative 
or other functions which are reasonably incidental to the performance of Your 
obligations under this Agreement, such as guest bloggers, provided that GNM 
shall not be liable to bear the cost of such unless agreed in advance in 
writing. The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to all content on the 
Blog regardless of the author and You shall remain liable for the Blog and its 
contents.

1.7. You hereby grant to GNM the right to publish a photograph of You of its 
choosing in association with publication of Your Blog and/or in relation to any 
other promotion or publicity of the same throughout the world. GNM shall 
incorporate Your photograph into a Guardian-style badge that shall appear on 
your Blog Page.

1.8. You may only use GNM’s logos or brands with GNM’s prior consent and in 
accordance with any instructions GNM issues.

2. Uploading Content

2.1. When uploading content, You shall:

2.1.1. Only use the Tools in ways that have been demonstrated to You and for 
which You have been given permission; and

2.1.2. Not take content down once it has been published unless by the prior 
written authorisation of the Managing Editor; and

2.1.3. Not use any third party material, including but not limited to 
pictures, without appropriate consents and permissions; and

2.1.4. Only embed videos and pictures pursuant to GNM’s guidelines about 
linking and crediting at 
https://sites.google.com/a/theguardian.com/socialmedia/; and

2.1.5. Correct content only in accordance with GNM’s corrections policy.

2.2. GNM shall moderate the comment threads on Your Blog in accordance with our
guidelines <https://www.theguardian.com/community-standards>.

2.3. Should You come to believe that any part of Your Blog (including content 
to which You are linking) might attract legal concerns, You shall contact GNM’s 
lawyers on legal@theguardian.com for advice prior to posting the respective 
content and shall provide such assistance as they require.

2.4. GNM may on occasion be obliged to remove content from Your Blog for legal 
reasons. GNM shall attempt to contact You prior to doing so but reserves the 
right to remove content from the Blog without prior consultation with You.

3. Rights and Licence To Use

3.1. The definitions, and copyright terms for Commissioned Contributions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/standard-terms-for-written-contributions>, as 
set out in theTerms and Conditions for the Supply of Contributions to Guardian 
News & Media Ltd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter> are 
incorporated into this Agreement and shall apply to Your Blog.

3.2. You grant GNM for the period of copyright (and all extensions, revivals, 
reversions and renewals thereof) the exclusive and worldwide right:

3.2.1 to commission from You and publish a book (in any language and in any 
format including but not limited to printed, electronic and audio books) and/or 
dedicated app (and/or similar and/or related technology) on the subject matter 
of Your Blog for publication by Guardian, Observer or Guardian/Faber imprints 
or any affiliate or successor or licensed imprints; and

3.2.2 to publish a collection of posts to Your Blog where You are the sole 
author in book form (in any language and in any format including but not 
limited to printed, electronic and audio books) and/or as a dedicated app 
(and/or similar and/or related technology) for publication by Guardian, 
Observer or Guardian/Faber imprints or any affiliate or successor or licensed 
imprints

PROVIDED THAT:

3.2.3 such publication(s) shall be subject to a publishing agreement between 
the parties hereto and as issued by GNM; and

3.2.4 in the event that suitable commercial terms cannot be agreed between the 
parties hereto You, or Your representatives, may, with the prior written 
consent of GNM, seek terms with another publisher in relation to the same on 
the condition that any resulting agreement with a third party a) shall be based 
on no lesser terms than those offered by GNM; and b) shall require You and GNM 
to agree commercial terms whose purpose shall be the sale to You of the 
exclusive rights granted to Us under this Agreement; and

3.2.5 save for acknowledgement to GNM such as “First published in the 
Guardian/Observer” no such licence from GNM as contemplated under Clause 3.2.4 
shall be required in the event GNM declines to respond to an invitation from 
You or Your nominees to offer terms as the case may be in respect of either a) 
a book or app (or similar or related technology) on the subject matter of Your 
Blog; or b) any book or app (or similar or related technology) collection of 
posts to Your Blog where you are the sole author.

3.3. You grant GNM first option during the Term to publish or serialise in the 
UK subject to the parties hereto negotiating in good faith mutually acceptable 
commercial terms extracts from any books that You produce or that are planned 
for publication during the Term. Nothing in this Agreement shall bind GNM to 
publish any extracts or serialisation.

3.4. Readers of the Blog shall be subject to our Terms of Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/terms-of-service>.

3.5. GNM reserves all rights in the Tools, Your logon and all other material, 
widgets and functionality and any logos provided to You under this Agreement (“
GNM Material”). Any rights granted to You to use GNM Material shall cease on 
termination of this Agreement.

3.6. “Guardian Digital Network” shall mean GNM’s digital network accessed via 
browsers and/or apps or any other means on any device or equipment including 
but not limited to desktop computers, PDAs, mobile phones and tablet devices, 
and incorporating theguardian.com or guardiannews.com or any affiliate or 
successor websites (“Website”), digital/IPTV television, RSS feeds, GNM social 
media presences, and any other website, network or channel bearing GNM’s 
trademarks or brands.

3.7. Your Blog is subject to the Moral Rights provisions of the UK Copyright 
Designs and Patents Act 1988 as amended from time to time. By way of example, 
these provisions grant to GNM the absolute right to edit and amend Your Blog 
including associated material such as headlines and other page furniture. 
Notwithstanding these provisions, GNM endeavours to assert on behalf of its 
contributors their right to be identified as the author of their work. GNM 
further endeavours to consult with You regarding alterations and amendments to 
Your Blog subject to Your acceptance that in the event of any disagreement on 
editorial matters relating to Your Blog after such consultation then the 
decision of GNM shall prevail.

4. Revenues and Payments

4.1. In consideration of the rights You grant to GNM under Clause 3, GNM shall 
pay You the Fees as defined in the Term Sheet. Where a share of net advertising 
revenues (“SONAR”) is agreed, the SONAR shall be based on:

4.1.1. the page impressions that Your Blog Page receives on the Website;

4.1.2. the net revenues received by GNM at the prevailing CPM rate for the 
respective month of the Term where

4.1.2.1. “CPM” means the cost to advertisers of GNM serving 1,000 ad 
impressions; and

4.1.2.2. “Net Revenues” means revenues from advertisers throughout the world 
in relation to advertisements that are received by GNM, less advertiser/agency 
discounts, ad serving costs and any applicable duties or taxes.

4.2. On a monthly basis in arrears over the Term GNM shall provide to You 
reports on page impressions on the Website, unique users on the Website and Net 
Revenues for Your Blog Page. GNM shall pay You Your SONAR within 30 days of the 
end of each calendar month of the Term unless the SONAR owing is less than GBP 
20.00 in which event the SONAR shall be carried over to the following month(s) 
until such time as the SONAR reaches GBP 20.00 in aggregate.

4.3. In addition to Your Fees, in the event that GNM block sells Your Blog 
Page, for example by means of advertising roadblocks or page sponsorship, GNM 
shall pay You 50.00% of Net Revenues within 30 days of the first anniversary 
and any subsequent anniversary of the relevant commercial arrangement.

4.4. GNM shall be responsible for selling advertising on the Blog Page. No 
SONAR shall be payable in respect of:

4.4.1. house advertisements which may be published on occasion; and

4.4.2. cancelled or rejected advertisements, regardless of the time and method 
of rejection or cancellation.

4.5. GNM reserves the right to grant any discounts to advertisers for network 
advertisements and for setting the rates for any other advertisements.

4.6. GNM’s policies on payment as set out here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2012/oct/01/payments-content-suppliers> are 
incorporated into this Agreement and shall apply to all payments pertaining to 
this Agreement.

5. Warranties and Liabilities

5.1. You hereby represent, warrant and undertake that:

5.1.1. You shall not at any time do anything to bring GNM’s brands, trademarks 
or reputation into disrepute; and

5.1.2. You are entitled to enter into this Agreement and You are not bound by 
any third party restriction not to do so, including, but not limited to, the 
right and authority to license the intellectual property rights in and the use 
of Your Blog on the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement; and

5.1.3. Your Blog shall be original and not copied wholly or substantially from 
any other source, nor contain defamatory statements nor otherwise breach the 
privacy, confidentiality or other statutory or common law rights of any 
third-party; and

5.1.4. You shall observe the highest ethical standards in providing Your Blog 
under this Agreement as part of which You shall be expected:

5.1.4.1. to abide by the Press Complaints Commission’s Editor’s Code of 
Practice <http://www.pcc.org.uk/>; and

5.1.4.2. have full regard for GNM’s own Editorial Code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code>; and

5.1.4.3. to notify GNM immediately in the event that You receive a complaint 
regarding Your Blog and to work with GNM, its lawyers, the Readers Editor and 
internal ombudsman, and the Press Complaints Commission as necessary to resolve 
such complaints.

5.2. You hereby acknowledge that the above representations, warranties and 
undertakings are express conditions of this Agreement and that in the event 
that You are in breach of any of them, GNM shall have the right to terminate 
the Agreement forthwith without any liability to You whatsoever. You agree to 
notify GNM of any facts or circumstances that may affect the accuracy of the 
statements set out in this Clause 5 as soon as such facts or circumstances 
arise.

5.3. GNM accepts no liability regarding any unauthorised use of Your Blog.

6. Status of Contributors and Suppliers as Independent Contractors

6.1. You undertake to provide Your Blog as an independent contractor and on 
this basis a) Your Agreement to provide Your Blog to GNM shall not be 
interpreted or construed to create an association, agency, joint venture, 
partnership or employer-employee relationship between You and GNM or to impose 
any liability attributable to such a relationship upon either party, including 
but not limited to GNM’s Sickness Policy and paid leave; and b) You agree that 
subject to the provision by GNM of the Tools You shall work from Your own 
premises in providing Your Blog to GNM and shall provide all the necessary 
equipment and materials to enable You to fulfil the terms of Your Agreement.

6.2. For the avoidance of doubt, You are not a “worker” as defined under the 
Working Time Regulations 1998 (as amended from time to time), and therefore You 
acknowledge that the provisions in those regulations relating to hours of work, 
rest breaks and annual leave do not apply to You.

6.3. You confirm for the purposes of the Taxes Acts, or such other appropriate 
legislation, that You are a self-employed person in business in Your own right 
and You shall be responsible for all tax liabilities arising in respect of Your 
Blog, and shall Yourself account to the appropriate authorities for all tax, 
National Insurance or similar contributions payable in respect of the provision 
of Your Blog to GNM under this Agreement. You undertake to advise GNM 
immediately in writing in the event that Your self-employed status is 
challenged by HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority during the 
Term.

6.4. In the event that GNM or any of its holding, subsidiary, associated or 
group companies (“Group”) becomes liable to account to HM Revenue & Customs or 
any other taxing authority anywhere in the world for any income tax, employee 
national insurance or any other deduction or withholding required to be made by 
law (including any interest and/or penalties thereon) arising in respect of 
payments made or to be made to You, You undertake and agree to indemnify and 
hold harmless GNM and/or the Group against such tax and national insurance and 
shall, at the written request of GNM, immediately pay GNM an amount equal to 
any tax and national insurance paid or payable by GNM or any other company in 
the Group to HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority. GNM shall be 
entitled to set off an amount equal to any tax and national insurance or any 
other deduction or withholding paid by GNM or another Group company to HM 
Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority against any monies otherwise 
payable to You.

6.5. For the purpose of this Clause 6, “independent contractor” shall be 
interpreted (as appropriate) to include all engagements made with GNM via a 
company or limited company. In such event, the rights of indemnity and 
disclosure equally shall apply.

7. Term and Termination

7.1. The Agreement shall remain in full force for the Term unless terminated 
earlier in accordance with its provisions.

7.2. Without prejudice to any of its other rights or remedies, either party 
shall have the right to terminate this Agreement with immediate effect at any 
time by giving notice in writing to the other party if:

7.2.1. the other party commits a material breach of any of its obligations 
under this Agreement which is not capable of remedy; or

7.2.2. the other party has committed a material breach of any of its 
obligations under this Agreement which is capable of remedy but which has not 
been remedied within a period of thirty (30) days following receipt of written 
notice to do so.

7.3. The Agreement may be terminated by either party, on giving the other 
party written notice to terminate to expire on expiry of the Notice Period.

7.4. The termination of this Agreement, for whatever reason, shall not affect 
the provisions of Clauses 5, 6 and 8, which shall continue beyond such 
termination in perpetuity unless otherwise stated.

8. Confidentiality

8.1. Each party shall maintain the confidentiality of the other party’s 
confidential information and shall not, without the prior written consent of 
the other, use, disclose, copy or modify the other party’s confidential 
information (or permit others to do so) other than as necessary for the 
performance of its rights and obligations under this Agreement.

9. General

9.1. Any notice given under this Agreement shall be in writing to such contact 
as the parties may notify from time to time and may be hand delivered to the 
other party or sent by pre-paid post or email (with a hard copy sent by post) 
to the address of that party specified in this Agreement or such other address 
as may be notified under this Agreement by that party from time to time for 
this purpose.

9.2. The parties do not intend for any third party to have any rights under 
this Agreement by virtue of the Contracts (Rights or Third Parties) Act 1999 or 
otherwise.

9.3. You shall not assign or transfer Your rights or obligations under this 
Agreement.

9.4. This Agreement, together with any documents referred to in it, 
constitutes the entire agreement and understanding between You and GNM, and 
supersedes any previous agreement whether written or oral between the parties 
in respect of Your Blog.

9.5. Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to create a partnership or 
joint venture between the parties. No party shall have the authority to bind 
the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the 
other party in any way for any purpose. No failure or delay by any party in 
exercising its rights under this Agreement shall operate as a waiver of that 
right nor shall any single or partial exercise by either party of any right 
preclude any further exercise of any other right.

9.6. Each party shall comply with all applicable law including, without 
limitation, the provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998.

9.7. If any provision of this Agreement (or part of any provision) is found by 
any court or other authority of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, 
unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain unaffected and in 
force.

9.8. This Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance with 
the laws of England. Each party irrevocably submits to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts of England over any claim or matter arising under or 
in connection with this Agreement.
 