
Variation of terms <> | Commissions <> | Rejection of Commissioned 
Contributions <> | Fees <> | Payment <> | Expenses <> | Copyright terms <> | 
Joint contributions <> | Moral rights and author credits <> | Definitions <> | 
Delivery of contributions <> | Insurance <> | Safety <> | Confidentiality <> | 
Warranties <> | Indemnity <> | Status of Contributors and Suppliers as 
Independent Contractors <> | Charitable donations <> | Disputes <> | New 
contributors <> | Release forms <> | Revision history <>

These Terms and Conditions for the Supply of Contributions to Guardian News & 
Media (aka the Freelance Charter), including any documents herein referred to 
(together “Agreement”), shall:

a) apply to all freelance Contributions provided by you to Guardian News and 
Media Ltd (“GNM”, “we”, “us”), which party for the purposes of this Agreement 
shall include authorised commissioning agents acting for and on behalf of GNM 
(“agents”), for use, publication and transmission in the Licensed Products; and

b) shall prevail over any other terms and conditions, whether written or oral, 
unless otherwise agreed in writing between you and GNM.

Please read these terms carefully. You shall be legally bound by these terms 
when you agree to supply to GNM content that is covered within their scope. You 
are advised to print off and keep a paper copy of these terms.

Some types of contributions, such as book extracts and user-generated content, 
have specific terms and conditions and these can be viewedhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/contributing-to-the-guardian-and-observer>. 

Variation of terms

We accept that the standard terms we seek in freelance Contributions may not 
always be appropriate, for example, if a Contribution has been previously 
published elsewhere or you have syndication arrangements that potentially 
conflict with our own. For the purposes of clarity to both parties, any 
variation of our terms must be agreed prior to publication and shall be subject 
to the approval of the Managing Editor or his/her nominees.

Please note there is no obligation for freelances to accept our standard terms 
and conditions nor for us to accept Contributions other than on our standard 
terms and conditions.

If you wish to discuss a variation of the terms and conditions or you have any 
other queries, please contact our Rights Department (rights@theguardian.com 
<mailto:rights@theguardian.com>; tel. 0203 353 4575). For commissions agreed 
with agents, please speak in the first instance to the agent.

Commissions

At the time of commissioning or ordering in your Contribution, you and the 
relevant editor should agree terms, including the fee to be paid (it is 
acknowledged that not all content suppliers shall seek a fee for 
Contributions), allowable expenses, the deadline and the rights acquired. You 
should also agree on the main points to be covered in your Contribution, and 
any special requirements.

A verbal agreement to commission or deliver content is sufficient in itself. 
We will confirm the terms in writing either by email or by letter. Our written 
confirmation will contain a unique reference number or project code which you 
should include with your Contribution (seeDelivery of contributions <> below) 
and on all correspondence and invoices (where these are required – seePayment 
below <>).

Rejection of Commissioned Contributions

If a Commissioned Contribution is rejected you should be told quickly: within 
two weeks for features, or the same day for news items. If you don’t hear 
anything, feel free to ask. Editors should not delay unreasonably or deny you 
the chance to offer an unwanted Commissioned Contribution elsewhere.

Where a fee was agreed, we shall pay this in full for a Commissioned 
Contribution that is not used, except where it fails substantially to meet the 
requirements agreed at the time it was commissioned. The spike fee for a 
Commissioned Contribution we reject usually will be not less than 50% of the 
agreed commission fee.

Please note that unless otherwise agreed we reserve all of the rights set out 
in our standardCopyright terms below <> in spiked Commissioned Contributions.

Fees

Please note that fees: (a) are quoted in GBP; (b) shall apply to all Licensed 
Products unless you were commissioned on a no-fee basis; and (c) are subject to 
variations that may be applied by our editorial offices in your local territory.

Commissioned written Contributions
Wordage rate: 310.68 per 1,000 words and pro-rated thereafter

Regional news agencies
Click here 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1394031673532/RegionalNewsAgenciesRates.pdf> for 
rates for written Contributions from regional news agencies.

Blog posts
Commissioned or “Pick of the day”: 90.00

Commissioned pictures
Day rates: 190.00 (0-4 hours); 275.00 (4 hrs +)

Speculative pictures
News and sport images submitted on a speculative basis and reproduced the same 
day:
80.00 per image reproduced to a size of 5.00 sq ins
150.00 per image reproduced to a size greater than 5.00 sq ins

Stock Imagery
Reproduction fees for Licensed Products (based on the largest published size 
of the image in square inches taking into account all editions of one single 
issue of the relevant Licensed Product).

000.00 - 005.00: 61.89
005.01 - 020.00: 71.18
020.01 - 030.00: 81.85
030.01 - 050.00: 94.12
050.01 - 080.00: 108.24
080.01 - 108.00: 124.49
108.01 - 216.00: 161.83
216.01 - 432.00: 210.39
Eyewitness, The Big Picture: Negotiable
Galleries & Sideshows*: 100.00
Flash fee (use of image in video: 30.00

* The fee of GBP 100.00 is an inclusive fee for all images in galleries or 
slideshows from a single supplier. Where images are sourced from multiple 
suppliers, the applicable reproduction fee above shall be payable on each image 
to a maximum of GBP 100.00 per supplier, i.e. if a supplier provides more than 
one image in a multi-sourced gallery or slideshow then a total fee of GBP 
100.00 shall be payable to that supplier.

Commissioned illustrations and artwork
Rates apply to black & white or colour illustrations and artwork

Guardian Letters page: 151.00
Guardian Comment & Debate: 312.00
Guardian Leader cartoon: 450.00
Guardian Sport illustration: 232.00
Observer quarter page: 258.00
Observer section cover: 374.00

Multimedia
For details of multimedia rates click here 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1389026043476/MultimediaContributorRates2.pdf>.

Crosswords
Genius: 209.00
Prize: 177.00
Cryptic: 167.00
Quiptic: 167.00
Quick: 35.00

Payment

Click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2012/oct/01/payments-content-suppliers> for 
details of GNM terms of payment to contributors and content suppliers.

For the avoidance of doubt, unless otherwise agreed payment shall be made 
within 30 days of publication of your Contribution.

Expenses

Unless otherwise agreed, you will be reimbursed for reasonable expenses wholly 
and necessarily incurred in the preparation and delivery of Contributions we or 
our agents have commissioned or you are contracted to provide. If your 
Contribution has not been commissioned by us or our agents but is offered to us 
for publication, any expenses you have incurred in relation to it will be 
payable at the discretion of the editor who accepts your Contribution for 
publication.

All expense claims are subject to vetting and approval. Settlement of claims 
shall be conditional upon:

a) submission of a properly itemised claim with copies of all receipts 
attached; and

b) receipt of claims by GNM or our agents no later than one calendar month 
following the date on which the expenses were incurred; and

c) attachment of your reference number or project code to all expense claims.

Where a car mileage payment is agreed this is paid at the staff mileage rate, 
or a proportion where an assignment is shared with other publishers.

Expenses for Contributions directly commissioned by GNM should be sent to your 
commissioning editor, either by email or by post to Guardian News & Media Ltd, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

For all payment of expenses in respect of Contributions commissioned by our 
agents, please follow instructions provided by the relevant agent.

Copyright terms

Standard terms for written Contributions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/standard-terms-for-written-contributions>

Standard terms for picture, illustration and artwork Contributions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/standard-terms-pictures-illustrations-artwork>

Standard terms for audio, video and audiovisual Contributions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/standard-terms-audio-video-audiovisual-contributions>

Joint Contributions

Subject to any agreement to the contrary, the copyright status of 
Contributions created, produced and/or undertaken jointly by staff employed by 
us and freelance(s) and/or news and picture agencies engaged by us shall be 
deemed a joint work between us and the respective freelance(s) and/or said 
agencies, for example jointly written articles. The copyright terms of the 
non-staff element shall be subject to the aboveCopyright terms <>.

Moral rights and author credits

All Contributions are subject to the Moral Rights provisions of the UK 
Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1988/48/part/I/chapter/IV> as amended from 
time to time.

Notwithstanding these provisions, GNM endeavours to assert on behalf of its 
contributors their right to be identified as the author of their Contribution.

Pictures

Click here 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1411832160498/PictureBylinePolicy_201409.pdf> for 
our picture crediting policy.

Video
Unless otherwise agreed, contributors shall be credited in the credits section 
of the relevant video page.

Definitions

“Commissioned Contribution” means material created by you on the basis of a 
commission from us for transmission, publication or licensing by us. For the 
avoidance of doubt, in relation to pictures and video “Commissioned 
Contribution” includes the whole shoot and all negatives, transparencies, 
digital pictures, unused footage and other original material produced by the 
contributor during and/or as a result of the shoot.

“Contribution” means material contributed to us - whether as a Commissioned 
Contribution or otherwise ordered in by or offered to us for publication, 
transmission or licensing by us. Contributions may appear in whole or in part 
in any size in any part of the Licensed Products in all sections, magazines and 
programmes thereof and supplements thereto including special or sponsored 
supplements without limitation on inside pages, front pages and covers, section 
covers and supplement covers, in galleries, individually or in sequence, in 
colour or in black and white.

An “edition” means any print, electronic, audiovisual or digital version or 
any regional, national or international variation of a single issue of a 
Licensed Product and a “single issue” means each day’s, week’s, month’s or 
year’s (as applicable) new version of each Licensed Product.

“External Archives” means both subscription and publicly available databases 
such as Lexis-Nexis and the Houses of Parliament. These institutions offer 
access for research purposes to material from many sources including print 
publications. They are usually accessible on-line but also via platforms such 
as CD-ROM.

“Guardian Digital Network” means our digital network accessed via browsers 
and/or apps or any other means on any device or equipment including but not 
limited to desktop computers, PDAs, mobile phones and tablet devices and any 
other connected devices, and incorporatingwww.theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> or any affiliate or successor 
websites, digital/IPTV television, RSS feeds, GNM social media presences, and 
any other website, app, digital product, network or channel bearing our 
trademarks or brands.

“Licensed Products” means the following publications and products in their 
various languages made available by us on a free-to-consumer or charged for 
basis: all formats and editions (including but not limited to print, 
electronic, audio, audiovisual and digital products) of the Guardian, the 
Guardian International, the Observer, the Observer International, the Guardian 
Weekly, the Guardian Digital Network, Guardian Professional products and 
services, all editions (including printed, electronic and audio editions) of 
Guardian & Observer books, and all other publications and products made 
available by us or licensed by us anywhere in the world.

In the case of Contributions commissioned or ordered in by GNM or their 
appointed agents for the purposes of commercial editorial products, including 
but not limited to sponsored supplements and advertorials, Licensed Products 
shall include all media wholly-owned by or bearing the trademarks or brands of 
GNM’s commercial client and/or its official social media presences.

“Newspaper Licensing Agency” (aka the NLA) is a limited company whose 
shareholders consist of eight national newspaper publishers. It was set up in 
1996 to offer anyone - sole traders, companies, educational institutions and 
any other body - a one-stop shop for a licence to photocopy, digitally copy or 
transmit cuttings of the UK’s national news media and many regional and foreign 
titles, too. It has reciprocal relationships with reprographic rights 
organisations overseas.

“Syndication” means the direct or indirect re-licensing to third parties in 
English and other languages of material we have acquired for such purpose 
and/or published or broadcast in the Licensed Products and “syndicate” shall be 
construed accordingly. Under our syndication agreements, clients are permitted 
to integrate our content into their own platforms and products for agreed 
purposes which may include commercial, non-editorial purposes. Our clients are 
worldwide and include by way of example the Sydney Morning Herald, the South 
China Morning Post, MSN and users of the Guardian Open Platform. Revenues can 
be but are not limited to subscription fees and advertising share and where 
they can be attributed to individual items of content contributors shall 
receive a share of such revenues on a net basis.

“Spot Sales” means the sale or licence to third parties in English and other 
languages of individual items of content we have acquired for such purpose 
and/or published or broadcast in the Licensed Products. We usually negotiate a 
licence fee for such reproduction, the licence being for agreed purposes which 
may include commercial, non-editorial purposes, and contributors normally 
receive a share of net receipts.

“Stock Imagery” means pictures, illustrations and artwork that are (i) 
submitted to us on or after 1 September 2009 and are not Commissioned 
Contributions of pictures; or (ii) retrieved from existing internal or external 
collections and archives, and may have been used, published or transmitted, 
either by us or by another publisher, on occasions prior to the relevant use in 
our Licensed Products.

Delivery of contributions

All Contributions should be filed electronically. Delivery instructions are 
set out below and in our confirmations. If electronic delivery is likely to be 
impractical, you should mention this to your commissioning editor.

Written Contributions <https://www.theguardian.com/info/written-contributions>

Picture Contributions <https://www.theguardian.com/info/submitting-pictures>

Illustration and artwork Contributions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/submitting-illustrations-and-artwork>

Audiovisual contributions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/dec/08/technical-requirements-for-submitting-video-contributions-to-gmn>

For all Contributions commissioned by our agents, please follow instructions 
provided by the relevant agent.

Insurance

Details of our insurance cover for freelances working abroad on commissioned 
assignments are available on request from the Company Secretary in our 
Manchester office. The Company Secretary must be informed if you are travelling 
to a war zone (or other high-risk assignment) on our behalf. Your commissioning 
editor should normally do this for you.

Safety

It is not our intention to expose freelances to dangerous assignments without 
appropriate safety training and insurance cover. If you have any concerns in 
this area you should consult the Managing Editor or his/her nominees before 
starting the assignment.

Confidentiality

You undertake:

a) to treat confidentially all documents and all technical, commercial, 
financial and other information which is obtained from GNM in connection with 
this Agreement or with the negotiations leading up to it; and

b) not to disclose to any person, without the previous written consent of GNM, 
the existence of any term of this Agreement (other than terms already set out 
in the public domain by GNM), or the existence of any information about any 
dispute or disagreement between the parties; and

c) to disclose such documents and information to third parties only so far as 
it is necessary:

i) for the performance of this Agreement; and/or

ii) to your professional advisers; and/or

iii) as required by law.

The obligations of confidentiality set out above shall not apply to any 
documents or information which you can show:

a) at the time of their acquisition were in, or at a later date have come 
into, the public domain, other than following a breach of this clause; or

b) you knew prior to first disclosure to you by GNM; or

c) you received independently from a third party with the full right to 
disclose.

Warranties

You hereby represent, warrant and undertake that:

a) You shall not at any time do anything to bring GNM’s brands, trademarks or 
reputation into disrepute; and

b) You are entitled to enter into this Agreement and you are not bound by any 
third party restriction not to do so, including, but not limited to, the right 
and authority to license the intellectual property rights in and the use of 
your Contribution on the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement; and

c) Your Contribution shall be original and not copied wholly or materially 
from any other source, nor contain defamatory statements nor otherwise breach 
the privacy, confidentiality or other statutory or common law rights of any 
third-party; and

d) You shall observe the highest ethical standards in providing your 
Contribution under this Agreement as part of which you shall be expected: i) to 
abide by the Press Complaints Commission’sEditor’s Code of Practice 
<http://www.pcc.org.uk/>; and ii) have full regard for GNM’s own Editorial Code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code>; and iii) to 
co-operate fully in the event of a complaint about your Contribution to the 
Press Complaints Commission or GNM’s internal ombudsman; and iv) to inform GNM 
immediately of any actual or potential conflict of interest arising from any 
engagement or contribution or service You undertake for GNM.

Indemnity

GNM shall indemnify you against any claims of or liability to any third party 
in respect of defamation on the same basis as staff journalists PROVIDED THAT:

a. no gross misconduct or negligence can be attributed to you relating to the 
relevant material; and
b. you co-operate fully with GNM in its response to the claim; and
c. you do not engage in discussions with a complainant without GNM’s prior 
agreement.

Status of Contributors and Suppliers as Independent Contractors

You undertake any and all engagements under this Agreement as an independent 
contractor and on this basis a) your agreement to provide Contributions to GNM 
shall not be interpreted or construed to create an association, agency, joint 
venture, partnership or employer-employee relationship between you and us or to 
impose any liability attributable to such a relationship upon either party, 
including but not limited to GNM’s Sickness Policy and paid leave; and b) you 
agree that you shall work from your own premises in providing services to GNM 
and shall provide all the necessary equipment and materials to enable you to 
fulfil the terms of your engagement.

For the avoidance of doubt, you are not a “worker” as defined under the 
Working Time Regulations 1998 (as amended from time to time), and therefore you 
acknowledge that the provisions in those regulations relating to hours of work, 
rest breaks and annual leave do not apply to you.

You confirm for the purposes of the Taxes Acts, or such other appropriate 
legislation, that you are a self-employed person in business in your own right 
and you shall be responsible for all tax liabilities arising in respect of your 
engagement under this Agreement, and shall yourself account to the appropriate 
authorities for all tax, National Insurance or similar contributions payable in 
respect of the provision of your services to GNM under this Agreement. You 
undertake to advise GNM immediately in writing in the event that your 
self-employed status is challenged by HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing 
authority.

In the event that GNM or any of its holding, subsidiary, associated or group 
companies (“Group”) becomes liable to account to HM Revenue & Customs or any 
other taxing authority anywhere in the world for any income tax, employee 
national insurance or any other deduction or withholding required to be made by 
law (including any interest and/or penalties thereon) arising in respect of 
payments made or to be made to you, you undertake and agree to indemnify and 
hold harmless GNM and/or the Group against such tax and national insurance and 
shall, at the written request of GNM, immediately pay GNM an amount equal to 
any tax and national insurance paid or payable by GNM or any other company in 
the Group to HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority. GNM shall be 
entitled to set off an amount equal to any tax and national insurance or any 
other deduction or withholding paid by GNM or another Group company to HM 
Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority against any monies otherwise 
payable to you.

For the purpose of these clauses, “independent contractor” shall be 
interpreted (as appropriate) to include all engagements made with GNM via a 
company or limited company. In such event, the rights of indemnity and 
disclosure equally shall apply.

Charitable donations

In order to comply with HMRC regulations, GNM’s policy regarding charitable 
donations of contributor fees is as follows:

a) contributors may receive fees themselves and make their own direct donation 
to a charity of their choice; or

b) contributors may request GNM to make a donation on their behalf to GNM’s 
nominated charity, currently the Gumbi Education Fund. Other charities may be 
added in the future.

Disputes

In the event of a dispute between an individual freelance and us, a joint 
panel, comprising where appropriate either the NUJ General Secretary or another 
and the Managing Editor (or their nominees), will attempt to resolve the matter 
amicably.

New contributors

If you want to offer us a Contribution you should consider which section of 
the newspapers or websites is most likely to be interested. Contact the 
commissioning editor for this section - ideally by phone or email - and briefly 
outline your idea.

The commissioning editor may offer to “take a look” at your proposed 
Contribution. This means that you are invited to submit it speculatively and 
you will be paid only if your Contribution is published.

Unless you are already an established contributor, it is most unlikely that 
the editor will “order” or commission a Contribution from you.

Please do not send pictures or artwork unless we request them. We do not 
accept responsibility for loss of unsolicited prints, transparencies, etc.

Contributions should be sent to us electronically. Other methods are possible 
- but only in exceptional circumstances.

We publish Contributions from all freelances on our standard copyright terms 
and payment is at our normal rates, unless agreed otherwise before publication. 
Please note that the copyright and payment terms are different for Commissioned 
Contributions.

Release forms

Click here 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2011/11/04/ReleaseFormNov11.pdf>
 for GNM’s release form containing our terms and conditions for restricted 
material.

This form may only be used with the authority of GNM’s Rights Department which 
can be contacted atrights@theguardian.com <mailto:rights@theguardian.com> or on 
020 7713 4575.

Revision history

The copyright terms of the original Freelance Charter were agreed at a 
Committee of Inquiry attended by Guardian News & Media Ltd, the National Union 
of Journalists and other interested parties in February 1999 and pertained to 
written contributions.

The Freelance Charter, subject to any other agreement to the contrary, was 
incorporated into GNM’s freelance contracts and commissions for written 
contributions effective 01 April 1999. Copyright terms for other content 
formats have been added since this date.

Click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2011/oct/03/gnm-freelance-charter-revision-history>
 to view all revision history relating to the Freelance Charter.
 