
These terms and conditions for book extracts & serialisations ("Terms and 
Conditions") set out the terms under which you ("You") agree to grant to 
Guardian News & Media Limited ("GNM", "We", "Us") permission to publish the 
Extract(s) from the Publication. These Terms and Conditions should be read in 
conjunction with the Term Sheet issued to You by GNM and together these form 
Your Agreement with Us. Any terms not defined in these Terms and Conditions 
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Term Sheet.

Please read these terms carefully. You shall be legally bound by these terms 
when GNM sends You a countersigned Term Sheet. You are advised to print off and 
keep a paper copy of these terms.

Rights <> | Term <> | Fees <> | Editorial <> | Warranties <> | Indemnity <> | 
Interview <> | Confidentiality <> | Status of Contributors and Suppliers as 
Independent Contractors <> | Sole Agreement <> | Governing Law <> |

1. Rights

1.1. You grant to GNM the following rights to use, publish, transmit or 
license the Extract(s) during the Term in the Language and in the Territory 
(including any photographs and/or illustrations in the Publication to the 
extent that You have such rights to grant to GNM):

1.1.1. Right to publish the Extract(s) on the Rights Basis in the GNM 
Publication(s) and on the Guardian Digital Network on one (1) occasion on the 
GNM Publication Date(s) or on such other date(s) as are agreed in writing 
between You and GNM, where"Guardian Digital Network" means GNM's digital 
network accessed via browsers and/or apps or any other means on any device or 
equipment including but not limited to desktop computers, PDAs, mobile phones 
and tablet devices and any other connected devices, and incorporating
www.theguardian.com <https://www.theguardian.com/international> or any 
affiliate or successor websites, digital/IPTV television, RSS feeds, GNM social 
media presences, and any other website, app, digital product, network or 
channel bearing GNM's trademarks or brands; and

1.1.2. Following use by GNM as described in Clause 1.1.1. above, the 
non-exclusive right to reuse, republish and retransmit the Extract(s) without 
further payment to You in other collections of material published by Us in 
paper form and digitally, including but not limited to Guardian Weekly and 
similar publications; and

1.1.3. Non-exclusive right to use, store, publish or transmit the Extract(s) 
in internal and external archives and databases published and distributed by 
GNM or authorised third parties; and

1.1.4. Non-exclusive right to authorise the Newspaper Licensing Agency and 
similar reprographic rights organisations in other jurisdictions ("RROs") to 
distribute or license the distribution of the Extract(s) for the RRO's licensed 
acts and purposes as amended from time to time; and

1.1.5. a) Non-exclusive right to quote from the Extract(s) in any media solely 
for the purposes of advertising and promoting GNM's publication of the 
Extract(s); and b) non-exclusive right to authorise third parties to copy, 
display and/or broadcast (as appropriate) such promotional material solely for 
the purposes of enabling GNM to undertake the right granted by You to GNM 
pursuant to Clause 1.1.5.a).

1.2. For the avoidance of doubt, You grant GNM an irrevocable and permanent 
licence to:

1.2.1. store the published Extract(s) in internal and external archives; and

1.2.2. keep the published Extract(s) available on the Guardian Digital Network 
and through RROs

after the Term only in the same form and context, and to the extent, that such 
Extract(s) have been reproduced during the Term in accordance with this 
Agreement.

1.3. All other rights, including but not limited to syndication rights, other 
than those expressly granted to GNM under this Agreement are reserved by You.

1.4. GNM confirms and represents that the intended market for the Extract(s) 
is the Territory, however both parties a) acknowledge that certain rights by 
their nature are exercised on a worldwide basis, including by way of example on 
the Guardian Digital Network, external archives and RROs; and b) agree that 
such exercise shall not be a breach of this Agreement. For the avoidance of 
doubt, all rights shall be exercised by GNM outside of the Territory on a 
non-exclusive basis only unless otherwise agreed in writing between the 
parties. It is further agreed that You shall not be liable in any way for any 
third party claims received by GNM caused by its publication of the Extract(s) 
outside the Territory.

2. Term

2.1. The Term of this Agreement is as stated in the Term Sheet, following 
which this Agreement shall terminate without prejudice to any monies due to You 
under the terms of this Agreement.

2.2. All such clauses of this Agreement as are necessary to the determination 
of the rights and liabilities of the parties after termination shall survive 
such termination. For the avoidance of doubt, Clauses 1 (save any exclusivity 
granted therein), 5 and 6 shall survive in perpetuity.

3. Fees

3.1. In consideration of the rights granted to GNM in this Agreement, GNM 
shall pay You the Fees in accordance with its terms forPayments to Content 
Suppliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2012/oct/01/payments-content-suppliers> 
provided always that if for any legal reason or other cause beyond its 
reasonable control, including but not limited to breach of this Agreement by 
You, publication of the Extract(s) cannot take place GNM shall have no 
liability in respect of any payment due under this Agreement and You shall 
refund those amounts of the Fees paid by GNM.

3.2. In the event that any of the monies due to You are not paid in accordance 
with the provisions of Clause 3.1 of this Agreement or GNM is otherwise in 
breach of its obligations under this Agreement, all rights granted herein shall 
immediately revert to You.

3.3. Should You and GNM agree that no Fees shall be payable by GNM in respect 
of GNM's publication of the Extract(s), then in consideration of the rights 
granted to GNM in this Agreement, GNM shall fulfil its obligations as set under 
Clauses 4.3 and 4.4 below.

4. Editorial

4.1. At Your own cost You shall supply to GNM the full text of the Publication 
in .doc format, or subject to written agreement with GNM in .txt or .pdf 
format, and any photographs and/or illustrations requested by GNM for the 
purposes of the Extract(s), no fewer than twenty-eight (28) days prior to the 
(first of the) GNM Publication Date(s) for the attention of the Purchasing 
Editor either by email to the Copy Email Address or by post to Guardian News & 
Media Ltd, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

4.2. You accept (and license accordingly) that the Extract(s) may be by way of 
an adaptation as well as by way of extracts and that GNM shall be entitled to 
introduce, select and link extracts from the Publication. Notwithstanding the 
afore-going, the Extract(s) as a whole shall be a true and accurate reflection 
of the Publication, not only as to factual content but also as to the general 
character, feel and atmosphere of the writing, and the Extract(s) as published 
by GNM shall retain the integrity of the Publication and the Publication shall 
not be subjected to derogatory treatment. For the purpose of this Clause, 
adaptation of itself does not amount to derogatory treatment. GNM shall not 
make any adaptations to the text which alter its sense or amend any facts 
contained in the text without Your prior written consent, such consent not to 
be unreasonably withheld or delayed.

4.3. GNM shall print in all formats with reasonable prominence at the end of 
(each of) the Extract(s) the Publication Credit as explicitly set out in the 
Term Sheet.

4.4. Subject to availability, GNM shall publish a Guardian Bookshop offer for 
the Publication at the end of (each of) the Extract(s).

5. Warranties

5.1. You warrant and undertake that:

5.1.1. the Publication is an original work and that You have the power, right 
and authority to grant to GNM the rights as stated in this Agreement;

5.1.2. no element of the Publication can be construed as defamatory, indecent 
or blasphemous or constitutes contempt of court or infringes the copyright or 
confidence or any other rights of any third party; and

5.1.3. prior to the delivery to GNM of the final draft of the Publication, 
Your lawyers shall have fully investigated every defamatory allegation in the 
Publication and shall have satisfied themselves that each and every such 
allegation is true and can be justified; and, that every defamatory comment 
contained in the Publication is based on true facts stated in the Publication. 
You shall supply copies of such legal opinions to GNM no fewer than fourteen 
(14) working days prior to the (first of the) GNM Publication Date(s).

6. Indemnity

6.1. You agree to indemnify and hold GNM harmless against any direct loss or 
cost (including, but not limited to, reasonable legal fees and costs of 
investigation) it incurs arising out of any breach of this Agreement by You, 
and any claim by a third party relating to or arising out of GNM's use of the 
Extract(s), including but not limited to defamation, breach of copyright and/or 
breach of confidence.

6.2. GNM shall notify You promptly in writing on receipt of any claim which if 
substantiated would constitute a breach of the warranties in Clause 5. GNM 
shall not compromise or settle any such claim without Your consent, such 
consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed.

7. Interview

7.1. In the event that it has been agreed that an interview by GNM shall take 
place with the Author(s), You shall procure that the Author(s) shall undertake 
an exclusive interview or profile with GNM ("Interview") to be published by GNM 
by, on or before the (first of the) GNM Publication Date(s). You shall further 
procure that the Author(s) shall provide all reasonable co-operation in 
connection with the Interview and to make themselves available for interview by 
GNM on a date agreed between the parties but in any case no fewer than 28 days 
in advance of the (first of the) GNM Publication Date(s). You shall ensure that 
the Author(s) shall not co-operate with any third party in respect of a profile 
or interview scheduled to appear in the Territory prior to the (first of the) 
GNM Publication Date(s). You shall further ensure that any profile or interview 
scheduled to appear outside of the Territory shall not be syndicated into the 
Territory on or before the (first of the) GNM Publication Date(s).

7.2. In the event that other than through the fault of GNM GNM's Interview 
with the Author(s) does not take place and/or an interview with or profile of 
the Author(s) related to the Publication appears in the Territory before the 
(first of the) GNM Publication Date(s) then GNM reserves the right to terminate 
this Agreement. Should the Agreement be terminated under such circumstances 
then GNM shall have no liability in respect of any Fees due under the Agreement 
and You shall refund those amounts of the Fees paid by GNM. Should GNM publish 
the Extract(s) under such circumstances, then the Fees shall be subject to 
renegotiation between the parties in good faith on the basis that the relevant 
material no longer has the value attributable by the Fees.

7.3. For the avoidance of doubt, You agree that all rights (including 
copyright) in and to the Interview are expressly reserved by GNM, including but 
not limited to the right to syndicate the Interview in the United Kingdom and 
overseas in any form or authorise its publication in any media.

8. Confidentiality

8.1. Each party warrants that it will take all necessary and proper 
precautions to protect the confidentiality of the Publication and the 
information contained in the Publication until the day after the (last of the) 
GNM Publication Date(s). You shall procure that any third party to whom prior 
to publication it is necessary that the Publication or the contents of the 
Publication are made available, including but not limited to the printer of the 
Publication, is bound by the terms of this Agreement as to confidentiality and 
that such third party binds its employees, agents and sub-contractors in the 
same, or substantially similar, terms.

8.2. You undertake that You shall not:

8.2.1. license any extract from or previously unpublished information 
contained in the Publication to any other newspaper, magazine, website or 
periodical, or to any other media outlet including radio or television for 
publication or broadcast within the Territory on or before the (last of the) 
GNM Publication Date(s) or before the publication date of the Publication, 
whichever is the earlier; and

8.2.2. save under strict embargo issue any copy of the Publication or extracts 
thereof to any third party for review or any other purposes until the date of 
publication of the Publication or the day after the (last of the) GNM 
Publication Date(s), whichever is the earlier.

8.3. In the event that other than through the fault of GNM the Publication i) 
appears in the public domain, in whole or material form; or ii) is reviewed by 
any other newspaper, magazine, website or periodical; or iii) is broadcast 
through any other media outlet including radio or television within the 
Territory prior to the date of publication of the Publication or before or on 
the (first of the) GNM Publication Date(s), whichever is the earlier, then GNM 
reserves the right to terminate this Agreement. Should the Agreement be 
terminated under such circumstances then GNM shall have no liability in respect 
of any payments due under the Agreement and You shall refund those amounts of 
the Fees paid by GNM. Should GNM publish the Extract(s) under such 
circumstances, then the Fees set out in this Agreement shall be subject to 
renegotiation between the parties in good faith on the basis that the relevant 
material no longer has the value attributable by the Fees.

8.4. The provisions of this Clause 8 shall not apply i) in the event that the 
Rights Basis is Non-Exclusive Extract Rights; and ii) to material which on the 
relevant GNM Publication Date(s) is already in the public domain provided that 
the source of such material was not bound by or subject to a non-disclosure 
agreement with You or GNM or bound by fiduciary or other similar duties of 
confidentiality owed to You in respect thereof.

9. Status of Contributors and Suppliers as Independent Contractors

9.1 You undertake to supply the Extracts as an independent contractor and on 
this basis Your Agreement to provide the Extracts to GNM shall not be 
interpreted or construed to create an association, agency, joint venture, 
partnership or employer-employee relationship between You and Us or to impose 
any liability attributable to such a relationship upon either party, including 
but not limited to GNM's Sickness Policy and paid leave.

9.2 You confirm for the purposes of the Taxes Acts, or such other appropriate 
legislation, that You are a self-employed person in business in Your own right 
and You shall be responsible for all tax liabilities arising in respect of Your 
Agreement, and shall Yourself account to the appropriate authorities for all 
tax, National Insurance or similar contributions payable in respect of the 
provision of Your services to GNM under this Agreement. You undertake to advise 
GNM immediately in writing in the event that Your self-employed status is 
challenged by HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority.

9.3 In the event that GNM or any of its holding, subsidiary, associated or 
group companies ("Group") becomes liable to account to HM Revenue & Customs or 
any other taxing authority anywhere in the world for any income tax, employee 
national insurance or any other deduction or withholding required to be made by 
law (including any interest and/or penalties thereon) arising in respect of 
payments made or to be made to You, You undertake and agree to indemnify and 
hold harmless GNM and/or the Group against such tax and national insurance and 
shall, at the written request of GNM, immediately pay GNM an amount equal to 
any tax and national insurance paid or payable by GNM or any other company in 
the Group to HM Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority. GNM shall be 
entitled to set off an amount equal to any tax and national insurance or any 
other deduction or withholding paid by GNM or another Group company to HM 
Revenue & Customs or any other taxing authority against any monies otherwise 
payable to you.

9.4 For the purpose of this Clause 9, "independent contractor" shall be 
interpreted (as appropriate) to include all agreements made with GNM via a 
company or limited company. In such event, the rights of indemnity and 
disclosure equally shall apply.

10. Sole Agreement

10.1. This Agreement, together with any documents referred to in it, 
constitutes the entire and sole agreement between the parties with respect to 
its subject matter and supersedes any and all previous agreements and 
understandings in respect thereof, whether written or oral.

11. Governing Law

11.1. This Agreement shall bind You and GNM and their respective successors in 
business and assigns and cannot be changed altered modified or cancelled save 
by written agreement between the parties hereto and shall be governed and 
interpreted in accordance with the laws of England and the High Court of 
Justice in England shall be the exclusive Court of Jurisdiction.
 