
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> 
battled to preserve her old women-only Oxford college from European Community 
equality laws requiring it to take in men, Downing Street files reveal.

The then prime minister, who read chemistry at Somerville between 1943 and 
1947, dismissed the proposals as “absurd”, saying they would “prevent women’s 
colleges from continuing as women’s colleges with women fellows”.

Her interest in the workings of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 were disclosed 
in documents released to theNational Archives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nationalarchives> in Kew on Friday.

Section 51 of the act exempted Oxford and Cambridge colleges from the general 
sweep of equality rules but an EC directive pushed for its repeal a decade 
later.

Thatcher was warned in June 1986 of the impending change in a letter from the 
then principal of Somerville, Daphne Park, a former MI6 officer.


 “Dear Prime Minister ... the Oxford and Cambridge Act 1923, under which our 
statutes were enacted, continues to protect our status and enables us to 
lawfully to advertise [teaching fellows’] posts for women only,” Park wrote.

“I am not asking you, busy as you are with affairs of state, to do anything; 
but I thought you might wish to learn what is happening from us and to know 
what we are doing about it.”

The letter added: “I hold no brief for resisting change when the time is ripe 
but I hope the college will be able to choose its course when the right time 
comes rather than to have the decision made for us for reasons which are not 
germane to the issue.”

Senior Downing Street advisers, ministers and British negotiators in Brussels 
were mobilised to safeguard the status of Oxford and Cambridge’s women-only 
colleges. Thatcher personally raised the issue with Jacques Delors, the then 
president of the European commission, receiving assurances that “common sense 
would prevail”, according to a No 10 memo.

On one note Thatcher wrote: “I take it that no decision has been taken about 
section 51. I should resist its repeal most strenuously. Please keep me 
informed. I will chair any (or every meeting) on this subject.”

In a further memo on 28 August 1987, the prime minister said she would 
“vigorously” support attempts to use legal powers to preserve the status of 
all-women colleges.

The changes would have affected the status of the four remaining all-women 
colleges – Somerville and St Hilda’s at Oxford and Newnham and Lucy Cavendish 
at Cambridge.


Somerville accepted men for the first time in 1994 and St Hilda’s, the last 
remaining single-sex college in Oxford, became mixed in 2008.
 