
Getting out of the EU without precipitating a constitutional crisis is going 
to be a severe test of the UK’s politicians and the political arrangements in 
which they operate. It will require tact, diplomacy, patience, and a 
willingness to try to reach a consensus. So far, there is little evidence of 
any of these qualities. Most of the blame for that must fall on the prime 
minister, since although all the participants – the leaders of the devolved 
assemblies and the UK parliament – have a role in this unprecedented process, 
she sets the tone: so far, it has been confrontational. She has little 
alternative but to accept the result, and to play for time while Whitehall 
works out what needs doing and in what order. But she has sounded high-handed 
on a hard Brexit, on engaging with parliament and now on the role of the 
devolved administrations that could lead, all too easily,to the break-up of the 
United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/theresa-may-constitutional-crisis-brexit-deal-institute-for-government>
.

Today’s meeting of the joint ministerial committee of the leaders of Scotland, 
Wales and Northern Ireland with Theresa May and her ministers – not only the 
first since the referendum, but the first for nearly two years – was an 
indication of how quickly it could all go wrong. After a morning of “robust” 
discussion, the first ministers emerged complaining about the government’s lack 
of transparency and its failure to make any concessions on their key demand of 
continuing access to the single market. While much of this is predictable and 
not entirely unrelated to domestic considerations, it underlines the importance 
– as a newreport from the Institute for Government 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/publications/four-nation-brexit> 
explains in detail – of reaching common positions as a basis for future 
negotiations with Brussels, through teamwork between Whitehall officials and 
the devolved administrations. London too should be part of this process; the 
absence of a specifically English regional voice is a weakness. A negotiation 
that goes as far as possible to reach a position that leavers and remainers can 
both accept is essential.

Behind the bold simplicities of freedom of movement, the single market and 
free trade lurk a thousand variables that have different effects on different 
parts of the UK. Trade in particular, which once merely meant tangible goods, 
is now a huge and complex area that embraces intellectual property, public 
service procurement, financial and other services. The continuing crisis over 
Ceta,the Canadian trade deal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/belgium-eu-ultimatum-canada-trade-deal-ceta-wallonia>
with the EU that was a decade in the making, is a reminder of how easily it can 
all go wrong. The power that two of Belgium’s regional bodies exploited last 
week to veto the deal because of concerns over the impact of globalisation on 
jobs and the power that it gives to corporations to sue nation states, was only 
conceded by Brussels in order to try to ensure democratic legitimacy. It is 
easy to imagine a similar revolt against a Brexit deal: that is, after all, 
what the leavers’ slogan of taking back control implies.

There is another reason why Mrs May must make a priority of working for 
consensus – certainly much more than she has so far – between the four nations. 
If she does not, she will collide with the complications of a series of 
overlapping mandates that arise from the failure to include a “dual majority” 
clause in the EU referendum act. That would have required all four nations of 
the UK to have majorities in order to overturn the status quo; it would have 
avoided the situation faced now where Scotland andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, each with their own electoral 
legitimacy, demand that the terms of the negotiation recognise that they are 
faced with seriously damaging consequences from a decision that their voters 
rejected.

Mrs May’s response so far is to insist that her government alone controls the 
process. Technically, she is right both about negotiating withdrawal from the 
EU, and about the established relations with the devolved assemblies: neither 
trade nor international relations are devolved matters. However, typically of 
Britain’s constitutional arrangements, the relationship between devolved and 
non-devolved matters often turns out to be a matter of negotiation. And the 
politics of it are likely to privilege the devolved bodies, not least because 
much of the detail of the Brexit negotiations – on fisheries, food, farming and 
the environment, for example – are of intense concern to them.

Pressed again on her negotiating strategy and the role of parliament in its 
formulation, Mrs May repeated in the Commons this afternoon that there would be 
no running commentary. This is a recipe for confrontation that could lead to a 
constitutional crisis. It will take a policy of transparency and a search for 
consensus to avert it.
 