
Walk in a nutshell 
If you don't mind being accompanied, occasionally, by the A27, this is a 
lovely walk on the muscular slopes of the Sussex Downs, taking you from the 
village of Upper Beeding right along the line of the Downs to Devil's Dyke just 
above Brighton.

Why it's special 
The peculiar shape of this part of the Downs, with a long indentation coming 
into the main body from the north, really does look artificially made; when you 
are down in the trench itself there's a weirdly cut-off feeling to the place. 
The legend of the Devil's Dyke has it that Satan was trying to dig through the 
Downs so that he could flood all the churches on the Weald; an old lady spotted 
what he was up to and persuaded the cockerels to crow, tricking him into 
thinking it was morning and giving up halfway through. Sussex was the last 
county in England to accept Christianity; devils still make plenty of 
appearances around here, while nearby Lewes is famous for its high proportion 
of witches and its paganistic bonfire celebrations.

Keep your eyes peeled for 
Model aircraft flying around you near the summit of Devil's Dyke. You'll often 
spot paragliders here too - there are clubs in the area.

But bear in mind 
For some bizarre cartographic reason at waymark 23 you pass East Hill on your 
way north to West Hill. Don't let it put you off.

Recover afterwards
Near the end of your walk, Tottington Manor is a very plush, gorgeous place 
for a meal; there is a bar menu and a full restaurant, with gardens that look 
straight over the Downs. The Bridge Inn in Upper Beeding has a reputation for 
good Guinness and fine Sunday roasts.
tottingtonmanor.co.uk <http://www.tottingtonmanor.co.uk>
Bridge Inn 01903 812773

If it's tipping down 
You're not too far from the seafront at Worthing; go and pour your hard-earned 
money into those slot machines.

How to get there

By car 
From the A27 turn north when you reach Shoreham up the A283. Turn right on to 
the A2037 through Upper Beeding and then turn right and right again up the 
minor road to Beeding Hill to find the car park.

By public transport 
The nearest train station is Shoreham; buses run to Upper Beeding from here 
but check on times.

Step by step

1. Park up at the kink in the minor road running north up to Beeding Hill. 

2. The route starts off heading south-east, following the fenceline across the 
downs along the Monarch's Way. Keep going under the power lines.

3. At the brow of the hill you get a view of Thunders Barrow to the south-east.

4. The path descends then rises just past a silage clamp to meet the 
Thundersbarrow Hill path where you turn right at the windswept tree.

5. As you approach the far summit of Thundersbarrow Hill bear to the left of 
the thicket. Cross through the fence and continue along the path.

6. Enter access land, passing a trig point on your right.

7. Keep going along the top here. 

8. Eventually the path swings to the right at Southwick Hill, just as you 
leave access land signs. Beneath your feet is the A27 dual carriageway tunnel. 
Then there's a good track hard-left dropping towards Mile Oak.

9. Turn right off this downhill track just as you pass by the pylon and climb 
the stile into the neighbouring field ...

10. ... and follow the path down to the collection of buildings at the foot of 
the A27 embankment. There's a clearly visible stile over the fence on to the 
road.

11. Turn left very briefly along the tarmac and immediately right into the 
farm. Ahead of you at the barn doors the farm road dog-legs left, then zigzags 
right-left, bringing you past the buildings ...

12. ... to face a track heading uphill at 330° towards the Sussex border path. 
Ignore this because you'll be turning right through the metal gate just ahead.

13. The path right and climbs back towards the A27 embankment, keeping right 
of the reservoir.

14 Follow the fence rising to the skyline, along the boundary fence between 
you and the main road. After the dip ahead, you are joined by a path coming 
from a footpath tunnel under the road.

15. As the road sweeps right, stick to the field edge straight ahead and 
climbing to the skyline ...

16. ... where you'll meet a good track. Turn right back towards, yes, the A27.

17. As you meet the crash barriers and bridge over the dual carriageway, turn 
left down towards the horsey industry of New Barn. You can see your path now 
for miles across the open ground climbing back over the downs along the 
Monarch's Way.

18. At the top of the first rise, at a plethora of paths and gates into 
fields, bear right to the north-east, across the old railway line, towards the 
golf clubhouse on the horizon.

19. Don't take the left-hand tarmac path leading directly away from the 
clubhouse, bearing slightly left of north. Instead continue north-east towards 
Devil's Dyke road.

20. Cross the road and go over the stile into the field. Follow the path which 
goes ahead and then swings to the right.

21. Find the stile at the far side of this field to reach the way across the 
valley along the chalky track to the left of the woods.

22. Turn left along the road for 200m or so, then turn right up the chalk farm 
track. This is the longest section of ascent all day but you'll only gain 110m 
over almost 2km. West Hill is the next target. The path is clear all the way, 
bearing very slightly left as you ascend.

23. Pass over the crossing where you meet the Sussex border path and almost at 
the top the path forks. Keep left, entering the hedged path through the gate.

24. Just before the very peak of West Hill, you'll reach a crossing with a 
Newtimber Hill sign. Go through the gate and turn left downhill towards 
Saddlescombe.

25. Ahead of you (right) across the valley is the mouth of Devil's Dyke.

26. Drop down into the cluster of cottages and farm buildings, perhaps 
investigating the signposted 'donkey mill' on your left, and leftwards among 
the outhouses ...

27. ... to the duck-pond. Go past this, along to the road ...

28. ... and turn left, crossing on to the main track beyond the gate. This 
will take you up Summer Down, the left-hand (southerly) high-level path above 
Devil's Dyke.

29. This track winds upwards past another reservoir and on to the wooded, 
cattle-grazed path ahead. The minor road and your footpath almost coincide from 
time to time.

30. As you cross the Dyke-top road, you can see the wireless masts in the 
distance on Truleigh Hill, not far from where you started. Cross into the field 
along the South Downs Way and head straight on westwards.

31. Cross the next fence into access land and look back towards the head of 
the Devil's Dyke, the north-facing escarpment of the downs, a fort - and the 
pub.

32. It's now plain sailing for 3-4km right along the top of the downs. 

33. Beyond the youth hostel at Tottington Barn, you'll reach tarmac again. 
Keep going for another 1km back to the start.
 Map of Beeding Hill walk Photograph: Guardian  