

Not everyone was delighted that we voted to read Penelope Fitzgerald’s final 
novel on the Reading group this month.

“I think it’s a mistake to begin with The Blue Flower,” said contributor 
Michaelmack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2017/jan/03/reading-group-the-blue-flower-by-penelope-fitzgerald-is-januarys-choice#comment-90448062>
. “It’s very much a writer’s book, as witnessed by how many of them went 
apeshit crazy banana over it in 1995. So specific too.”

Others also expressed disquiet that we should plunge straight into 
Fitzgerald’s strange story of the early life ofthe German romantic poet Novalis 
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Novalis>and his love for the young and sickly 
Sophie von Kuhn <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sophie_von_K%C3%BChn>. I can 
understand the concern: it’s an unusual book. One that is hard to explain – and 
especially tricky to write about.

Part of the challenge is to convey The Blue Flower’s excellence without 
glooping into adjectival slurry. Here, I take comfort from knowing that I’m not 
alone. In her excellent introduction to the recent 4th Estate edition of the 
novel, Candia McWilliam describes finding herself – along with many others – 
burdening this book “with words as inexact and lumpy as ‘masterpiece’ and 
‘genius’”.

The other problem is that now I’ve reached the end of the book, I feel as if 
I’ve never been further away from understanding it. As I was reading, I had a 
tantalising sense of meaning and certainty, just a few steps ahead of me, a 
page further on, not quite in my grasp. Yet when I closed it, I found myself 
clawing at empty air. Did I know what the blue flower was? What this novel was 
telling me?

Reading group: The Blue Flower by Penelope Fitzgerald is January's choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2017/jan/03/reading-group-the-blue-flower-by-penelope-fitzgerald-is-januarys-choice>
But here again, I can console myself with the thought that not-quite-knowing 
is inherent in the novel. When writing about the real-life Novalis, for 
instance, Jeremy Adler said: “Mystical, fragmentary, allusive, paradoxical, 
abstruse, Novalis represents the first wave of German Romanticism at its most 
intractable.” This quote (taken from the Times Literary Supplement, by way of 
Hermione Lee’s biography of Fitzgerald) might as well be a description of The 
Blue Flower. Its prose is every bit as elusive as its subject.

The title already gives a sense of this intangibility. Fitzgerald took the 
idea of the blue flower direct from Novalis. In his unfinished novelHeinrich 
von Oftterdingen <https://www.britannica.com/biography/Novalis#ref180430>, the 
flower is something unattainable and unreachable. The blue flower “can never be 
found, it can only be sought”, says Hermione Lee. And so it is that 
Fitzgerald’s characters, like her readers, are left flailing.

The structure of the book also adds to the sense of the unobtainable. Its 55 
short chapters reflect bright clear images from Novalis’ life, but as if we’re 
seeing them in the fragments of a smashed mirror. Many these scenes are also 
left incomplete and open-ended. The chapters often break off before we expect, 
leaving the blank spaces between them freighted with meaning, but obscure.

Sometimes the elisions are straightforward teases. There is a marvellous 
description of a student duel and its aftermath, where Novalis (called Fritz 
for most of the book) attempts to rescue two hacked-off fingers by putting them 
in his mouth and rushing them, along with the luckless swordsman, to an anatomy 
theatre in search of “needles and gut”. But we are never told whether the 
fingers are successfully reattached.

Sometimes, there are just tremendous, gaping silences. The novel finishes in 
what may be the middle of a bit of dialogue, or may be Fritz’s brother Erasmus 
lapsing into wordlessness, unable to find anything to say to Fritz except the 
last elliptical line of the book: “Best of brothers — .”

What is he trying to say? Perhaps we should save that. I don’t want to say 
more about the end of the novel because I don’t want to spoil a remarkable 
reading experience. An experience so good that I worry that I’ve been 
overstating its difficulties: The Blue Flower raises hard questions, but it is 
no slog. It is vivid and moving, sharp and funny. I started laughing long 
before I started feeling confused.

The story begins hilariously, amid flurries of underwear and bedsheets on 
washday at Fritz’s family home. The scene is amusing thanks to the inherent 
oddness of writing about the intimate, grubby and absurd domestic details of a 
German Romantic poet famous for declaring “the world must be romanticised” (a 
joke that stays amusing throughout the book) – and because of the beautiful 
comic timing of Fitzgerald’s prose.

I’m wading into adjective soup again. The best thing I can do to get you to 
understand why that opening is so good is to urge you to read it – and then 
keep on reading. You won’t regret it. Meanwhile, if you already have an idea of 
the meaning of that blue flower, do please let us know below the line.

 