
This week, after a long fight, the government was finally defeated in a battle 
over a few pounds a week. Since the bedroom tax came into effect in 2013, it 
has fought a losing battle both to sell the policy as just, and quell the tide 
of anger and protest from those affected.

Now the supreme court has come down in favour of Paul Rutherford’s family and 
Jacqueline and Jayson Carmichael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/09/families-win-supreme-court-appeals-over-unfair-bedroom-tax-jacqueline-carmichael>
, agreeing that they, and households in their position, should not be subject 
to the tax. Both the Carmichaels and the Rutherfords will be exempt from the 
tax, and those involved in the case predicted that a few thousand households 
will be in the same position.




The bedroom tax supreme court rulings: what happened and what does it mean?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/09/the-bedroom-tax-supreme-court-rulings-what-happened-and-what-does-it-mean>
This is a big defeat for the government, and many will ask why it chose to 
fight such a battle for so long – and at such cost. But alongside the two wins 
were five defeats, one of which involved the rights of women fleeing domestic 
violence.

The government continues to argue that the policy isn’t flawed, unworkable, or 
treats family life as homogenous rather than diverse and states that those 
struggling can apply for DiscretionaryHousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Payments (DHPs). In practice, 
everyone I have met who has been hit by the tax has applied for DHPs. But 
they’ve been told over and over again that they are designed for short-term use 
only, and the well will run dry.

With the lowered benefit cap, even more people are expected to apply for help 
to cover the shortfall in housing costs. The cash is finite, and council 
coffers are noticeably bare after years of cuts. The continuation of the 
bedroom tax, plus the added burden of the benefit cap, will stretch both local 
authorities and afflicted households to breaking point.

The key unfairness of the bedroom tax lies in two points. First, the vast 
majority of people hit by the tax cannot move elsewhere: they are in larger 
homes due to the need for adaptations for disabilities, or because there just 
aren’t many small homes in vast swathes of the UK, especially in 
post-industrial south Wales and the north where homes were built for families 
and people put down roots for life.

Second, the tax misdiagnoses a problem and fails to provide a solution: the 
problem, if you deem it so, is that there should be more smaller homes 
available. While this might be true in London or the south east, in many parts 
of the country there is no issue with housing supply, so forcing people to pay 
for “extra” rooms is deliberately cruel: there is no local problem, they aren’t 
to blame, and yet their housing benefit is cut by 11% or 25% a week regardless. 
In most of the towns I’ve visited to meet victims of the tax, there are empty 
homes, often empty streets.

Last weekend I was in Liverpool, a city with 3,000 empty homes, meeting a 
young family that was struggling because the boxroom they couldn’t fit a bed in 
was described as “spare”, when their two daughters shared a slightly larger 
room. Leaving their home and walking back to the city centre, I passed three 
whole streets of empty terraced homes, no sign of life bar a pigeon – but the 
young family was punished for apparently “blocking” other people from a home.

I then went to Scotland, where the bedroom tax has been banished altogether, 
as well as right to buy. Scottish politicians decided the misery was unfair and 
too much for families to endure, so they stopped it.


Now families like the Rutherfords and Carmichaels will be freed from their 
nightmare too. Hopefully these fights will continue, and public support will 
grow: with resistance, the bedroom tax can go the way of the poll tax. It’s a 
slower fight, but no less important – and slowly, slowly, it is being won, 
through the tremendous bravery of Paul and Susan Rutherford and Jacqueline and 
Jayson Carmichael.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 