
On her way to hospice my patient had one last thing to take care of. She has 
had a difficult time for the past several years culminating in such an 
aggressive and visually distressing recurrence that even she says she had had 
enough and just wants to die. She remains at home for as long as she can, 
receiving visitors and cherishing her grandchildren, until it’s just too hard. 
Then, graciously and calmly, she submits to hospice, and along with it, the 
truth that these are the very final days of her life.

Sometimes, she reminds me of the feted neurologist, Oliver Sacks, and the 
grace with which he faced the end of his life – except she would laugh at the 
comparison, calling herself an ordinary woman who had worked hard, reared two 
wonderful children, and just as she felt she had acquitted her roles, lost the 
lottery to cancer.

My Christmas shift showed me the human connection behind medicine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/19/christmas-shift-human-connection-behind-medicine>
The last time we met, she was breathless, uncomfortable and fatigued. But her 
face shone with a rare dignity. She told me that while she wasn’t afraid to 
die, she grieved for her son who was disabled and depended on her for care. I 
understood immediately that her greatest worry was his welfare upon her 
impending death. Her daughter sat next to her, outwardly calm, but her 
expression reflecting private horror at the prospect of losing her mother and 
becoming the sole guardian of her brother, while fulfilling the usual 
responsibilities of work and motherhood. Even in a clinic where sadness reigns, 
their story moved me greatly and I wanted desperately to help.

“I feel as if there’s nothing I can do for you personally but I’m going to see 
about your son,” I said, unable to keep the defeat from my voice. I promised 
nothing and she expected nothing but by luck, a phone call explaining the 
urgency and pathos of the situation helped decisions that would have happened 
anyway. But it meant that in the final days of her life, a mother knew that her 
child would be safe.

“Fragile”, declares the sign on the box resting on the floor as I enter my 
office. Curiosity takes second place as I gently move it out of the way so it’s 
not a tripping hazard. The intervening hours are taken up by ill patients and 
it’s not until a receptionist reminds me that I think to open it.

Behind layers of beautiful wrapping there lies an exquisite edible tree. 
Luscious strawberries hang on branches, coated in delectable chocolate. A 
star-shaped piece of pineapple sits atop the tree. I stand still, catching my 
breath at the work of art. A small card nestles at the base of the tree. I 
detach it, careful not to disturb the branches of the tree. The card reads 
simply, “Thank you for looking after our son and brother.” My throat catches. 
Having underestimated her panic, I had clearly also underestimated her 
subsequent relief.

I call her at the hospice. The nurse, initially sceptical, puts me through. 
She speaks slowly, breathlessly but that she is thrilled at my pleasure is 
apparent. I don’t know how to say that I am particularly moved to be in her 
thoughts at the end of her life, when typically, the oncologist is thought to 
have failed, but she fills in the silence with a firm instruction: “Listen, 
take this gift home. I want your children to know what you do and just how much 
you are appreciated.”

Upon hearing this, I am suffused by a type of survivor’s guilt. All this for 
doing my job? For moving a small piece of a giant puzzle? I can’t even say I 
will see her next week or next month. Instead, I reassure her that she is in 
good hands. And I drive home slowly, taking care to not topple my gift.

If I were to name one attribute that trumps fear in a cancer clinic, it’s 
generosity.

The philosopher Seneca remarked, “What need is there to weep over parts of 
life? The whole of it calls for tears.” A career in medicine can feel like 
that, amid the pressures and politics. Each day is a scramble – the healthiest 
patients protest; the sickest suffer quietly; the neediest don’t even recognise 
their need.

The funding is never sufficient and the bureaucracy is never efficient. Just 
like in other aspects of modern life, it has become customary to be at the 
mercy of the cynical message that says medicine has become entirely 
transactional, that doctors don’t care for patients like they used to and 
patients don’t respect doctors like they used to. But just as this cynicism 
threatens to vanquish you, you realise that the beauty and wonder of the 
doctor-patient relationship is actually alive and well, manifest in the most 
unexpected encounters.

It’s fairly common to hear stories of doctors who go beyond the call of duty 
to help their patients but if I have learnt anything from being a doctor, it’s 
the way in which patients impel doctors to realise the better angels of our 
nature.

Chemo, clinical trials and a couple of ill-advised cocktails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/18/my-cancer-diary-steve-hewlett-chemo-clinical-trials-cocktails>
If I were to name one attribute that trumps fear in a cancer clinic, it’s 
generosity. Just as you thought there couldn’t possibly be room in a patient’s 
heart for anything other than the most urgent of needs, there arrives a card in 
the mail, the photo of a longed-for baby, a letter of appreciation, or 
sometimes an edible tree that says thank you for looking after me, thank you 
for accompanying me on my journey of terror, thank you for being you.

Mostly you’re floored, knowing full well that much of a patient’s outcome, 
excellent or awful, depends on biology, environment and a whole lot of factors 
beyond the control of your prescribing finger, but you can’t help admiring the 
character of people who, even when they are dying, spare a thought for someone 
else. It’s not that these acknowledgements make us feel more important than 
that they remind us of universal experiences and shared humanity. They speak to 
us of empathy, compassion, and humility, not as the exclusive domain of the 
doctor but indeed, flowing in equal measuretowards the doctor.

My edible tree comes home and is greeted with gasps of wonder and squeals of 
delight that must surely be audible to my patient. Read the card at least, I 
say, but my children are too busy. The strawberries are picked and the 
chocolate licked. The pineapple star is evenly divided. For a long while there 
is only the sound of contentment until someone finally says, “It must be hard 
work to earn these chocolates, well done!”

I think to myself that somewhere in her sleep my patient must be smiling, 
knowing that her wish had been fulfilled.
 