
Merthyr, Tuesday. With great gratification, I am able to assure you that this 
terrible strike, which has done as much injury to the people and trade of this 
district as a civil war, is practically over.

Yesterday work was resumed in all the Monmouthshire ironworks and collieries, 
except at Rhymney and Pontypool; and this morning the better part of the 
Dowlais Iron Company's colliers returned to their old employment.

The weather had more to do with the cause of this sudden resolution than you 
may at first believe. Around Merthyr are 30,000 men, with women and children 
dependent upon them, without a morsel of coal, or wood or fuel of any kind, or 
money to buy it, however inclement the day, or thin - and Heaven knows it is 
thin - the clothing frail women and under-fed children wear.

The tips of refuse at every pitmouth have been despoiled of every "nob" of 
combustible material; even the eulm or lignite has been gathered and treasured 
as precious stone. The men, driven to desperation, have sunk shafts in defiance 
of prudence. Three have lost their lives from "falls of top" by burrowing in 
unsafe places.

The settlement was very quietly arranged. On the cold and cheerless Sabbath, a 
few older workmen made up their minds that it would be suicidal to extend their 
struggle. They found but a single feeling, a craving for food and fuel and for 
work in order to obtain these requisites.

The success the mediators met with was so great that they waited yesterday 
afternoon upon Mr. Menelaus, the manager of Dowlais works, and asked him if he 
would alter his former proposal.

Mr. Menelaus did so, thus withdrawing his former condition that the men should 
trust to the honour of the masters in favour of the plan urged by the colliers 
that at the expiration of a week they should be returned to the old rate of 
wages. This favourable answer - in itself a considerable concession to the 
workmen - was stated to a meeting called at Gwernllwyn Chapel. The gathering 
resolved at once to return to work this morning.

The workmen have gained a point in diminishing the period of the reduced scale 
to a week, but at what a cost and with what dreadful suffering will never be 
truly known. In wages alone, I may safely say that the men have in the eleven 
weeks of the deadlock lost three quarters of a million of money.

But now the war is over. The fact that the settlement is a concession is a 
guarantee that it will be accepted at the other works.
 