
NEYMAR V MESSI

And you thought England v Scotland was this week’s big grudge match. The 
giants of South America meet in Belo Horizonte on Thursday night in akey World 
Cup qualifierwith Barcelona team-mates Neymar and Lionel Messi carrying the 
weight of their respective nations. Brazil lead the 10-team table with 21 
points after 10 games. The top four go through and fifth-place face a play-off. 
Worryingly for Argentina they currently sit sixth, but it is tightly packed 
with six games to go and a win over their old rivals could take them into 
third. Defeat, though, would be very problematic indeed.

GATHERING IN LONDON

The draw for the ATP World Tour Finals, the big-money season closer, at the O2 
is made in London this week before the action kicks off next Sunday. New No1 
seed Andy Murray, Novak Djokovic, Stan Wawrinka, Milos Raonic (if he is fit), 
Kei Nishikori, Gael Monfils, Marin Cilic and Dominic Thiem have qualified to 
compete for a prize pot worth $7m (£5.6m). The draw will form two groups of 
four, from which the top two will qualify for the semi-finals.

KINGS OF THE OCHE

Expect tributes to the broadcaster Dave Lanning, who passed away last week, as 
32 of the world’s best players gather in Wolverhampton for the 10th staging of 
theGrand Slam of Darts. Twenty-four of the PDC’s arrow slingers will be joined 
by eight of the BDO’s tungsten chuckers and it would be a surprise if any of 
those from the latter reached the final. Michael van Gerwen, the reigning 
champion, is the one to watch again but Phil Taylor will be there, too. He has 
won six of the previous nine outings.

BAIZE BONANZA

In a similar vein, Coventry’s Ricoh Arena plays host to snooker’s Champion of 
Championsfrom Monday, where 16 players will battle it out for the £100,000 
winner’s pot. Neil Robertson is the reigning champion having overcome Mark 
Allen’s challenge 12 months ago. The unmissable Ronnie O’Sullivan withdrew 
then, but he has qualified this time as No3 seed, beginning with a tie against 
Finland’s Robin Hull in a quickfire best of seven shootout.

CHECK MATE

Another round of Checkatrade Trophy awkwardness – the reformatted, rebranded 
Johnstone’s Paint Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/new-efl-trophy-premier-league-academy-teams-fans>
, now featuring the glamour and credibility of top-flight U23 sides, and 
widespread fan boycotts. Among the ties: Everton’s U23s at home to Blackpool, 
Chelsea U23s v Oxford, and Wolves U23s v Accrington. Last month Accrington 
tweeted after their 4-1 win at Chesterfield: “Reports of an away following of 2 
at Chesterfield last night are untrue. We counted at least 6.”

LOOK OUT FOR … A CRICKET SCORE

We’re on cricket this week? No, World Cup football – but it could feature a 
cricket score on Friday. As in a mauling, a thrashing, a romp, a trouncing. 
It’s San Marino versus the world champions.

Could be messy. It’s a proper mismatch. Germany are the toughest opponents 
Europe’s most-loved minnows have faced for a while and the two times they’ve 
met before, a decade ago, ended 6-0 and 13-0. On the other hand, San Marino are 
on a high of their own after a landmark moment last month.

They won? No, but they scored an away goal in a qualifier against Norway. They 
still lost 4-1, but it was a special moment for the 201st-ranked side – Mattia 
Stefanelli equalised, sparking wild celebrations, and provoking an instant 
viral clip of the reaction in the Norwegian broadcaster’s studio. It was San 
Marino’s first away goal in World Cup qualifying in 15 years. The icing on the 
cake: Stefanelli won CNN’s goal of the week competition.

Isn’t all this a bit patronising? Yes, but the team and the fans rise above it 
and they boast one of the most entertaining unofficial official Twitter feeds 
in international football. @Soccersanmarino reacted to their goal in Norway 
with: “WE [EFFING] SCORED AN AWAY GOAL. STEFANELLI YOU [EFFING] LEGEND!” – a 
message that retweeted more than 37,000 times. The writer later reflected: “I 
have more retweets on this tweet than there are inhabitants in San Marino. 
Madness.”

But even with all that positivity, Friday will be a cakewalk for the visitors? 
Surely. Then again, England thought the same when they went there in 1993, and 
they conceded after 8.3 seconds. It made for a classic piece of high-pitched 
breathless commentary from Jonathan Pearce, who was covering it for London’s 
Capital Gold radio: “Welcome to Bologna on Capital Gold Sport for England 
versus San Marino with Tennent’s Pilsner brewed with Czechoslovakian yeast for 
that extra Pilsner taste and England are one down.”

Germany would never let that happen… Seems unlikely. They’re at their slickest 
right now: top of Group C and lifted by having newly retired record-scorer 
Miroslav Klose on Joachim Löw’s coaching team. Löw, meanwhile, plans to 
celebrate his recent contract extension by taking his squad to meet the pope 
before they play Italy on the 15th. “It does not matter which religious 
ideologies you have,” Löw says. “This will be great day.”
 