
It is rare to see a Rolls-Royce Phantom Drophead Coupe. Only 253 were sold 
worldwide in the first year that it came on to the market andwhen David Beckham 
bought one while he was playing for LA Galaxy 
<http://www.dubmagazine.com/stars/athletes/450-david-beckhams-rolls-royce-phantom-drophead>
 it caused quite a stir, so there is something rather surreal about the sight 
of a handmade convertible costing £350,000 parked outside a non-league football 
club in south Wales.

The vehicle's owner is Les Scadding, who drove petrol tankers for 27 years 
before taking over as Newport County's chairman last August. In between timeshe 
won £45.5m on the EuroMillions lottery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/nov/10/euromillions-lottery-winner-les-scadding>
. "The only reason I brought that car today is because it's been in the garage 
for seven or eight weeks and I haven't took her out. On a day like this I 
thought I'd give her a run," says Scadding, looking out across the sun-drenched 
pitch at Rodney Parade, whereNewport beat Grimsby last Sunday 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/sport/football/football-match-reports/newport-county-1---0-3185491>
 to secure a place in Sunday's Conference play-off final against Wrexham.

It must have been tricky deciding which car keys to pick up. At his £1.5m home 
in Usk, Scadding also has a Range Rover Autobiography and an Aston Martin DBS 
Volante. The 62-year-old has no idea what happened to the Citroën he used to 
own when he lived in a three-bed semi in Caerleon– before he spent more than 
£2m on a property in Barbados where Wayne Rooney, Gary Lineker and Joe Calzaghe 
became his new neighbours – although he insists, with a straight face, that it 
was a nice car to drive.

While some may view Scadding's wealth as a little grotesque, there is 
absolutely nothing to dislike about the man himself. Friendly and down to 
earth, Scadding tells some wonderful stories, nearly all of them accompanied by 
laughter and a genuine sense of disbelief at the way his life has changed 
beyond all recognition.

It still tickles him, for instance, that when he was pictured drinking 
champagne with his feet up on a yacht in Cardiff Bay, on the day he was 
presented with a giant cheque for £45,570,835.50 in November 2009, there was a 
hole in the sole of one of his shoes. "I'd just grabbed a pair out of the 
wardrobe and threw them in the bag," Scadding says, chuckling. "I remember I 
went shopping later that day and spent about a grand on clothes. I hadn't spent 
that on clothes in more than five years!"

For all the talk about flashy cars and palatial homes, the one moment when 
Scadding's eyes light up is when the conversation turns to Sunday's all-Welsh 
play-off final against Wrexham. Scadding never misses a Newport game, home or 
away, and admits he gets "a big buzz" from watching them win. This match, 
though, is special. Newport, who were wound up with debts of £330,000 in 
February 1989 and jettisoned from the Conference without fulfilling their 
fixtures, are 90 minutes away from returning to theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> for the first time in 
quarter of a century.

It has been a remarkable journey to get to this far, especially for those who 
have loyally followed the club from its rebirth in June 1989, when Newport, who 
had been evicted from Somerton Park, were forced to start at the bottom of the 
football pyramid and play their home matches 85 miles away, at 
Moreton-in-Marsh, in Gloucestershire. "Every game was an away game, that's 
where the nickname The Exiles came from," says Scadding, who has read up on his 
history.

Scadding is keen to play down his own impact at the club, preferring to pay 
tribute to the manager, Justin Edinburgh, whom he predicts will go right to the 
top, and his fellow board members and staff, but others at Newport recognise 
the Bristolian's huge impact. "People keep reminding me that the club wouldn't 
be where it is now without that little bit of help from myself," he says.

"We went out after the game on Sunday and for me it was a massive eye-opener. 
We went to a little pub around the corner called The Dodger. It was absolutely 
heaving in there, guys were coming over, grabbing hold of me, kissing me on the 
head and telling me they loved me. And when a whole pub starts singing your 
name … to me that's special.

"If I can do something here and it needs to be done, and I'm in that position 
where I can do it, I will. But I'm not a sugar daddy and I never will be. I 
want this club to be able to open the gates on a Saturday afternoon and get 
3,500-4,000 people in here because we're in the league, and that [attendance] 
pays the wages. Then, if the odd player comes along for £50,000-£60,000 and 
maybe we don't have it in the bank, we'll bring him in. But I'm not here to do 
£100,000 a month."

Scadding first became involved with Newport a couple of years ago, when the 
club's former chairman Chris Blight encouraged him to come along to a few 
games. As someone who "always had the football bug", he enjoyed being on the 
inside and his interest quickly grew. When Blight resigned last July, Scadding 
was the natural choice to take over.

"I get the mickey taken out of me because I'm a Bristol boy born and bred. 
People say: 'Why a Welsh club?' But I've lived here now for 14 years. I would 
never forget my roots but I look on this as my home now. I like to support 
where I live and I was in a fantastic position to do that."

In the end everything comes back to that lottery win. Scadding laughs as he 
remembers how he cleaned his house from top to bottom on the morning after the 
EuroMillions draw was made, oblivious to the fact that he was worth more than 
Jamie Oliver and Sir Michael Caine. He recalls how the till assistant at Tesco, 
where he took his two Lucky Dip tickets to be checked that evening, told him 
that "the machine was probably broken" when it printed out a pink slip she had 
not seen before. "Please contact Camelot" read the message on the slip.

Scadding, as he discovered when he got home, had become the UK's biggest 
lottery winner at the time. "The main feeling is disbelief," he says. "It's as 
though you know something has happened but you keep thinking: 'Is it actually 
happening?' The following morning we had guys from Coutts, the private bank, 
come around. They came in with a suitcase with about £15,000. They said: 
'You're going to need some cash.' I was thinking: 'Oh my God, what is going on?'

"I honestly don't think winning the lottery has changed me as a person, but if 
anyone says it hasn't changed their life, they're talking out of their 
backsides. I've got a lovely house, I've got cars, everything is paid for, I 
owe nobody anything. How many people can say that? Before this happened there 
wasn't enough in the bank for me to draw a tenner out."

Newport know what it feels like to be in that financial position but those 
dark days in the late 1980s, when they auctioned everything from the club kit 
to black armbands, will be a distant memory if the result goes their way at 
Wembley. Scadding is full of optimism. "I really do feel that it's our day. I 
just think we're going to be too good for Wrexham," he says. "I'm hoping our 
boys are lifting the trophy come the end and taking it around to show the 
crowd. After that I'd just like to hold it up once, say thank you to the fans 
and put a photo of that up in my snooker room. That's my dream."
 