
Your report on the consequences of a leave vote (Guerilla campaign mooted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/pro-eu-mps-could-mount-guerrilla-campaign-to-reverse-brexit-decision>
, 7 June) quotes a pro-European MP saying “We would have to respect the mandate 
of the referendum”. But it is quite unclear what that mandate might be, as the 
referendum question does not specify the range of alternatives to full EU 
membership should the UK vote to leave. Until parliament has determined 
whether, for example, it wishes the UK to remain in the European Economic Area, 
it would be inappropriate for David Cameron to formally notify the EU of the 
UK’s intention to withdraw from the EU. A leave vote would therefore need to be 
followed by an emergency debate in parliament from Monday 27 June onwards about 
the UK’s withdrawal options, where the most likely outcome, as you indicate, 
would be overwhelming support for the UK to remain in EEA, which would of 
course outrage hard-line Brexiters in the Conservative party.

At the same time another more fundamental problem might arise in the wake of a 
UK referendum leave vote. What ifNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, Scotland and Wales vote 
remain, their MPs propose an amendment to parliament’s EEA motion in support of 
the UK’s continued membership of the EU, and pro-EU English MPs vote with them 
to pass their amendment? The UK would be plunged into a full-blown 
constitutional crisis concerning the very sovereignty of parliament.
Professor Steve Giles
University of Nottingham

• With the polls indicating that the possibility of a vote to leave the EU is 
looming larger, it is natural that thoughts should turn to the issue of how we 
would cope with the changes that would ensue. The post-Brexit changes to laws, 
government spending, taxes, prices, jobs, etc would be significant and would 
affect everyone in the UK, many of them for the worse. I believe therefore that 
we would need a coalition government for a few years during the Brexit process 
until things have settled down. This coalition should include all the major UK 
political parties. It would be quite wrong if the important decisions about 
post-Brexit changes are made by one political group, especially the relatively 
rightwing faction who are driving the leave campaign.
Rod Logan
Walton-on-Thames, Surrey

• Jim Lynch (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/labours-strategy-and-a-vote-for-brexit>
, 3 June) speculates that a vote for Brexit could be followed by an early 
general election, and that a possible Labour government would have to respect 
the referendum result and lead the subsequent negotiations.

Any general election held before mid-2018 would take place while the UK was 
still a member of the EU. By that time the “economic shock” which nobody denies 
would happen, and the likely long-drawn-out negotiations, may well have caused 
many leave voters to regret their decision. It would be open to any party, or 
any combination of party groupings, to campaign on a promise to abandon the 
process of leaving, whether with or without a referendum (and MPs are currently 
more than 2-1 in favour of remain). If a new parliament resulted in a majority 
committed to such a pledge, the principle of the sovereignty of the 
UK parliament, which Brexiters are so fond of emphasising, would have to 
supersede any previous decision.

What is clear is that a vote for Brexit would lead to a prolonged period of 
economic and political uncertainty, which would inevitably detract from 
tackling the domestic issues that most concern the public.
Alan Pavelin
Chislehurst, Kent

• Jane Ghosh (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/dubious-claims-about-the-eu-and-workers-rights>
, 7 June) makes a good point, and it is interesting to take it a step further. 
What if, after narrowly losing to the Brexiters, David Cameron resigns, calls 
an election, Labour wins by a narrow majority, and the new government is called 
upon to take us out of Europe which it patently doesn’t want to do.

Which takes priority? The referendum vote to exit Europe or the democratically 
elected government’s decision to remain? Or do we have another referendum? Or 
another election? Would it not be better to leave things to the government we 
have elected? If the prime minister cannot deal with his party, that is for him 
to solve or give up his position, not involve the whole country in deciding “in 
or out”. In any case it will not solve the problems in the Conservative party, 
for if the answer is to stay, the Brexiters will not rest until they have 
called for yet another referendum.
Hilda Hayden
Newland, Worcestershire

• Polly Toynbee is right (There is still time for hope – Brexiters can be 
persuaded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/brexiters-leave-remain-labour>
, 7 June). Brexiters can be persuaded if they realise what British politics 
could be like after a vote to leave. Here’s a realistic scenario.

On 24 June Brexit begins. Cameron resigns. Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> becomes prime minister, Michael 
Gove becomes chancellor. With Ukip’s role over, Nigel Farage and company join 
the Tory party. Scotland leaves Britain. The rump gets a new name (as it can’t 
be called the UK) – KEWNI – and a new flag.

Anti-democratic developments begun under the pre-Brexit government are 
extended. The Tories form KEWNI’s governments for decades to come. The post-EU 
economic shock is compounded by the structural problems derived from KEWNI’s 
dysfunctional capitalism (low productivity, weak innovation etc) and its 
semi-feudal state. Excluded from the European single market, KEWNI is forced 
closer to the US and China. Having no choice, it accepts a version of the TTIP 
with the US. Having shunned the EU’s collective sovereignty, it has no power to 
insist on safeguards. US companies begin to take over the NHS; Chinese 
companies, manufacturing and real estate.

Accelerated economic decline inevitably follows. The Johnson/Gove response is 
even more austerity. The xenophobia currently directed at EU migrants becomes 
directed inward – against people of colour. Inequality and poverty escalate and 
dispossessed KEWNIs mobilise in struggle. The government response is 
repression, both covert and overt. Gradually, KEWNI becomes dominated by an 
ultra-rightwing nationalism: a version of fascism with “gentlemanly” English 
characteristics.

Is this what Brexiters seek for our country?
Jeffrey Henderson
Professor of international development, University of Bristol

• The British, egged on by politicians and the press, are being pretty 
parochial about their decision whether or not to leave the EU. Yet there are 
several hundred million people on the other side of what we choose to call the 
English Channel for whom our decision is at least as important as it is for the 
British. If the decision is to leave, for instance, while some might be 
heartily relieved to be shot of the whingeing Brits, there are some who will be 
concerned about the weakening effect it will have on the rest of the union; 
some countries might be tempted to follow suit and quit. It is not 
inconceivable that the EU could collapse altogether, with profound effects not 
only for the UK and Europe itself but for the rest of the world. So please 
could the UK raise its game, look beyond its shores and start thinking about 
how its decision could affect other people.
John Ireland
Ipswich, Suffolk 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 