
General knowledge paper 2014-2015, sat by the pupils of King William’s 
College, Isle of Man

“Scire ubi aliquid invenire possis, ea demum maxima pars eruditionis est”

1. During 1914:

1 for whom was Potiorek’s invitation disastrous?

2 where did Harry make it six, a record still standing?

3 in whose composition were they called in from the glen?

4 which composition brought some colour to the state of Missouri?

5 who was brutally attacked as she lay naked in her boudoir eight years after 
her move from the north-east?

6 who (fortuitously) evaded Sydney and led his men from Tikus on an epic 
journey which would last 195 days?

7 where did the commander and officers of the Third Cavalry Brigade threaten 
“mutiny”?

8 what, despite her name, lost her way off the Berwickshire coast?

9 who deprived a leading French newspaper of its editor?

10 how did monkey hangers gain an unenviable first?

 

2. 


1 What agent eradicated the Candorians?

2 What tragedy is enacted in Hilljoy Square?

3 What did Vincent develop from Gunga Din?

4 Who was the daughter of Keikobad, king of the spirits?

5 Where did Dan sham death before sending Nora packing with the Tramp?

6 In mourning her lost son, what have the power to shake Margaret as they pass?

7 What is life, apart from being a strutting and fretting poor player?

8 What is play’d in a box whose candle is the sun?

9 What includes some echoes from the hills?

10 What was hidden beneath Rite of Man?

 

3.


1 Who died following mutual insults at Madame Larina’s ball?

2 Who killed a gentleman of the bedchamber to King James near Bergen op Zoom?

3 Who was saved by a large button in a duel following a performance of his 
opponent’s Cleopatra?

4 Who killed a French baron for calling his king “the arrantest coward in the 
world” at a dinner party?

5 Which duellists fought unknowingly with unloaded pistols, following an 
accusation of cheating at the Lamb Inn?

6 Following victory in a duel in Bengal, which ship’s surgeon operated on 
himself to remove a bullet from his chest?

7 Which future president shot and killed his opponent following a suggestion 
that his wife was a bigamist?

8 Which antagonists both missed their target when duelling on the golf course 
beyond Juan les Pins?

9 Who fought in the Forêt de Saint-Germain following a contretemps in the Café 
Guerbois?

10 Which two ladies fought, first with pistols and then with swords, in Hyde 
Park?

 

4. 

1 Which particular ear listens to everything?

2 Which books did Luther compare unfavourably to Aesop?

3 Who eviscerated himself and then shook his intestines at the onlookers?

4 Who likened a bird-scarer among gourds to a thorn much-favoured by birds?

5 Who stabbed the royal pachyderm from below and perished when the dead animal 
fell on him?

6 The theft of food set out for which idol was revealed through clerical 
footsteps in the prepared ashes?

7 Which scribe inspired the creation of the Gudger, Ricketts and Woods 
families?

8 Which bathing beauty owed her vindication to conflicting descriptions of a 
tree?

9 Whose scimitar required two strokes to divide his cervical vertebrae?

10 Who was blinded by passerine droppings as he slept?

5.

1 What game was depicted by Morland?

2 Who were the victims of a triple caudectomy?

3 The restoration of whose sight was depicted by the Greek?

4 Who wondered whether a matchbox would hold his clothes?

5 Which blind man’s dictation to his three daughters was depicted by the 
alleged bastard son of Talleyrand?

6 Following the escape of the lugger from the Hole, who expressed gladness at 
having trodden on which blind man’s corns?

7 What blind musician’s noble title recalls his appreciation of a Palacio Real?

8 How do the visually impaired benefit from a golden duck?

9 Deafer than the blue-eyed cat and thrice as blind as what?

10 Who blinded the cannibal son of Thoosa?

 

6. What dual enterprise:

1 produced 693?

2 has come to manage without corporal liberation?

3 started with the well-heeled clientele of Eastbourne?

4 moved to magnificent premises next to Marylebone Lane?

5 combined one of Queen Anne’s footmen and a Somerset House porter?

6 began when two pharmacists were inspired by a gourmet’s Bengali experience?

7 confusingly operates under the sign of the coffee-grinder?

8 after 86 years brought Aquila chrysaetos to the Borders?

9 had its foundation in a Bolognese’s pursuit of a diva?

10 was a favourite West End meeting place?

 

7.

1 Who played hide and seek on Crete?

2 On what type of craft did Murad Reis lose his head?

3 What strange gas was identified by Ramsay and Travers?

4 Who described the retreat from Mesopotamia to Trebizond?

5 Where was there a place of pleasure associated with a sacred subterranean 
river?

6 Who won a famous land battle, but was defeated at sea and failed to conquer 
Greece?

7 What palpebral disfigurement may signify a susceptibility to 
arteriosclerosis?

8 With whom did the son of the late Antonio compare Kate?

9 To what pigment does the fall owe much of its beauty?

10 What represented the fossils in a popular carnival?

 

8. 

1 Where did Mac and Gin defy Cruz?

2 Who wrote of the impartiality of the rain forest?

3 Whose failure to “Mind the gap” sadly cost him his life?

4 Which industry developed from the initiative of a Charentais entrepreneur?

5 Which home-grown war hero was awarded an OBE which was later rescinded?

6 What mountain retreat was established following an episcopal search for a 
missing person?

7 For what did the company agree to an annual rent of 6,000 Spanish dollars?

8 Which administrator was fatally speared during his riverside ablutions?

9 What was swapped for a penal settlement in Sumatra?

10 Who left footprints when he was over 90?

9. 

1 Where is French cricket played?

2 What did Jake find good company at the Marinas?

3 What, confusingly, depicts the premises of a neighbour?

4 What was depicted by two dancing clowns made of gold and pearls?

5 What was the cherished bottle that wine-buff Miles drank in solitude?

6 What was considered to have “a good and most particular taste” at the Royall 
Oak Tavern?

7 For whom did Kandinsky succeed Chagall, who had succeeded Mir?

8 What did Vesper and James share on the train to Montenegro?

9 What did Pettigrew-Robinson try out on his Lordship?

10 What was presented to Bertrand by Berald?

 

10. 

1 Who led the great exodus to Persia?

2 Which great patriot was lauded by Keats, Hunt and Coleridge?

3 Which celebrated concert pianist signed the Treaty of Versailles?

4 Who shot the president at an art exhibition five days after his election?

5 Whose work on pitchblende probably led to death from leukaemia more than 35 
years later?

6 Who was imprisoned in a Tyrolean castle by the Holy Roman Emperor on her way 
to join her fiance in Rome?

7 Which polymath canon of a northern cathedral challenged the opinion of 
Ptolemy?

8 Whose martyrdom was recalled 900 years later at whose promotion?

9 Who holidayed on Majorca with Aurore and created a Raindrop?

10 Who is commemorated in the Upper Galleries of the Rock?

 

11. 

1 Which volcano was explored by Dante?

2 Which eruption brought the Olympiad to London?

3 What was named after the commander of HMS Monarch?

4 Where did the activities of Queen Mary necessitate a rescue operation by RIL?

5 Having entered via Snæfell, where did the professor’s party make its 
explosive exit?

6 Which princess and warrior are joined by a saddle named after a stout 
conquistador?

7 Which volcano was depicted in the death of a sexagenarian philosopher by 
Rosa?

8 Which explosion is estimated to have generated around 180 decibels?

9 Which eruption was probably witnessed by Columbus?

10 What volcanic glow was a magnet to Resolution?

 

12. 

1 What was renamed after Mr Pusey’s boss?

2 Who rose to a great height following her marriage?

3 Which Gypsy wore an old red blanket and a chip hat?

4 Whose death in a Norwegian outpost precipitated a constitutional crisis?

5 Which widow allegedly poisoned her husband with powdered glass in his coffee?

6 Who joined in stabbing the heir to the throne, perhaps fictitiously, atop a 
mole-hill?

7 Who supported the proclamation of her apparent nephew as King Richard IV?

8 Who looked to Basingstoke for the restoration of sanity?

9 Who might be regarded as the last Queen of Mann?

10 Who, “in death, was not divided” from her brother?

 

13.

1 Who reflected?

2 Whose murder was intended to save 100,000?

3 Who unwisely suggested that starving people should eat grass?

4 Where were clerics executed en masse in a novel and breathtaking manner?

5 Whose grand-nephew lent him his cloak, enabling his escape, and was executed 
in his stead?

6 Where did the Frogs put the portable guillotine to good use while the 
Lobsters guarded the ford nearby?

7 Who, disguised as Benjamin Rosenbaum, led his adversary to Père Blanchard’s 
hut?

8 Who were the two deputies flung into the river at Savigné-l’Evêque?

9 Who succeeded the novice duellist as deputy for Ancenis?

10 Justify deux cent quatre-vingts.

 

14.

1 What is “cut up wi’ ready slicht”?

2 What recipe was created at Twomey’s?

3 For what innovation did Roth use a Mirror?

4 What North African creation includes rice, liver and heart?

5 What is described as picante or dulce depending on the paprika?

6 To what are chitterlings put to good, if malodorous, use in Aube?

7 What sanguineous rye mixture is enjoyed with puolukkahillo?

8 What beauty is smoked over juniper in tuyés?

9 What can be found at Schützenstrasse 70?

10 For what is sage the main additive?

 

15. Where is or was:



1 a guineafowl worth ½?

2 a partridge worth 1?

3 a magpie robin worth 2?

4 a heron worth 3?

5 a hornbill worth 5?

6 a capercaillie worth 10?

7 a bee-eater worth 25

8 a woodcock worth 50?

9 a nightingale worth 100?

10 a spectacled owl worth 25,000?

 

16.

1 Who knocked out Jake at the Café Suizo?

2 Whose cuffs were decorated with buttons of dental origin?

3 Who reported the exchange of a treasured turquoise for a monkey?

4 Whose cadaver was swapped for that of a pauper and dissected at St Luke’s?

5 Who persuaded Wilfred to fight on behalf of his daughter, who was accused of 
witchcraft?

6 Who presented his colleague with a contracted Dupuytren hand, preserved in 
spirit of wine, in Gibraltar?

7 Who sent his daughter to a nunnery before feeding all the nuns with poisoned 
porridge?

8 Who sang the Kol Nidre at the expense of the opening night on Broadway?

9 Who worked at St Mary Axe, then settled with a troglodyte?

10 Who responded to an SOS from his arachnophobe ex?

 

17.

1 Who let Olafsson have the Sudreys?

2 Where was Don Nicolás’s Galician invasion crushed?

3 Which monarch was killed by which Mormaer near Elgin?

4 By what treaty was independence secured for the next 275 years?

5 Who released the Kirk from English supremacy, placing it under direct Roman 
jurisdiction?

6 Who aimed to see Scotland seated at the United Nations in her appropriate 
alphabetical position?

7 Whose longevity was compared to that of Solomon at his funeral service?

8 Whence did the general flee from his nest like an ill scar’d bird?

9 What regal title was assumed by the Bishop of Frascati?

10 Who killed Badenoch in Greyfriars Kirk?

 

18. During 2014:

1 whatever happened to the lats?

2 and whatever happened to Pom Pom?

3 who has finally capsized, while his cat lives on?

4 who have rekindled memories of Holmes and Sutcliffe?

5 how did coughing in Bali leave two German doctors exposed?

6 how have we had a final reminder of the labial requirements of whistling?

7 with what overseas challenge was the IWBKA confronted?

8 what was the singular achievement of Connor Hobson?

9 where did Gorillas and Rhinos go top by 575m?

10 which gatekeeper has lost his place?

• The answers will appear next term.
 