
During my maternity leave I had a conversation with a guy at a party, where he 
regretfully told me that as long as men couldn’t give birth, equality would 
never be a reality. Perhaps women just aren’t meant to work, he concluded. 
Maybe not! I replied brightly, later deciding not to tell him he was trailing 
toilet paper from his shoe.

I felt really lucky a couple of months later, to return to a job that I care 
about where they agreed to let me work from home one day a week. Especially as 
I saw so many friends of friends made redundant weeks after having their 
babies, or encouraged to leave just before in a flurry of meetings in which 
they were chastised for not having replied to emails with the correct greeting 
or for taking the full hour for lunch. Even the wealthy aren’t immune.Keira 
Knightley <https://www.theguardian.com/film/keiraknightley>, upon returning to 
work this week after having a baby, talked about Britain’s “archaic” maternity 
laws. “You need to be a family unit, not just have the guy there for two weeks 
and then go back to work and the mother is left desperately trying to figure it 
out,” she said of paternity leave, the new rules on which will only have an 
effect if businesses actively encourage fathers to take the time off, and if 
colleagues don’t quietly roll their eyes.

You need to be a family unit, not just have the guy there for two weeks and 
then go back to work
Keira Knightley 
More than three-quarters of pregnant women and new mothers – the equivalent of 
390,000 of us – experience what they call “negative and potentially 
discriminatory treatment” and what my friends call “fuckery” at work each year. 
A newreport from the Equality and Human Rights Commission 
<https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/managing-pregnancy-and-maternity-workplace/pregnancy-and-maternity-discrimination-research-findings>
 confirms the stories I heard in those long mornings pushing buggies round 
parks with NCT survivors, that 11% of women are pushed out of their jobs 
following maternity leave – around 54,000 a year. And because of this, British 
businesses are losing £280m in hiring, training, payouts and lost productivity 
every year. All to avoid a bit of change.

And, as if the arrogance and unfairness of this wasn’t enough, then, THEN you 
realise one of the side-effects of all these pregnant redundancies was the 
invention of the “mumpreneur”. I can’t help but imagine the 54,000 newly 
unemployed mothers as a wounded army, stranded after the war ends, looking out 
at the sea with a mixture of hope and fear. Inevitably, some will deal with 
this by launching a linen baby-sling company. Perhaps a business selling 
personalised suede nappy bags, or organic cot bedding, or £200 mittens. I know 
I’m being a patronising dick, but do put that aside for a second, stick it over 
by the WaterWipes, and ask whether these women would have launched their 
unnecessary businesses if they weren’t themselves feeling superfluous. If they 
hadn’t had their careers cut off at the elbow as soon as they felt their first 
child kick. If the companies they worked for had taken the time to reshape 
around their female staff, and adapt to new schedules rather than just 
shrugging, “Can’t.”

I feel similarly about the weight of mummy blogs that threatens to sink the 
internet. For everyMumsnet <http://www.mumsnet.com/> there are a thousand 
Mumsnots, either reports on how many times its author has cried that day, the 
comments a circle-jerk of struggle, or else a filtered reverie of a perfect 
life, necessary to wangle free yogurt. As time goes on, I’m starting to find 
one as fantastical as the other. Even in the honesty blogs, it’s not possible 
to be truly honest. Because to do that would surely mean saying: “I want real 
people to talk to. This is not enough.” Again, I’m being dickish, but between 
the lines you so often see a woman who wants to be recognised, who wants to be 
around people and produce something that people need, who has found themselves 
blunted, without a point.

It is possible to run a small business and have children. It should also be 
possible to run a big business and have children, and to be an employee, and to 
invent something unrelated to your child’s bathtime. Starting a business is 
isolating, it’s low-paid, it’s difficult to plan a future – it’s often a last 
resort. The modern view of a self-employed mum officing at her kitchen table 
says more about crippling childcare costs and inhospitable workplace cultures 
than it does a utopian future where we can have it all. Maternity 
discrimination birthed the mumpreneur. If that doesn’t get you angry enough to 
encourage change, nothing will.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 