
Imagine a world where doctors and nurses glance at their watch to see patient 
updates, where virtual reality headsets are used to consult on medical 
procedures, or where patients could interact with their doctor through their 
television or media console.

All of this, and a great deal more, is achievable with the technology we have 
today, but both theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and its 
technology suppliers are yet to embrace what’s possible and make these 
scenarios happen.

The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, has called for an “NHS for the smartphone 
age” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/nhs-one-website-appointments-prescriptions-advice>
, but mobile and digital means and offers healthcare so much more; something 
technology consumers are very aware of.


Large touchscreen devices, smart watches, other wearables, smart TVs, virtual 
reality displays and even games consoles are just a few of the digital devices 
available to consumers. But mobile health (mHealth), both in the UK and many 
other parts of the world, still largely falls far short of embracing the 
potential range of devices.

How digital technology will make people powered health a reality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/07/digital-technology-people-powered-health>
 Meanwhile, clinical staff qualifying today in their 20s and 30s have grown up 
with mobile technology. They have smartphones, consoles, tablets and wearables. 
They use FitBits, health apps and messaging platforms.

A lot of frustration can be found among those professionals who want to use 
this technology in their working environments to improve care.


But chat platforms like WhatsApp have been known to cause challenges to IT 
teams. Information governance rules do not allow the use of many consumer apps 
in the NHS, in an attempt to avoid the potential for sensitive patient data to 
move to servers beyond the UK, and the subsequent loss of an audit trail.


But, while trusts cannot permit the use of WhatsApp by staff, the convenience 
of these messaging platforms still presents the risk of the technology being 
used under the radar, with people finding ways round traditional IT management 
policies. NHS technology leads are searching for ways to overcome the challenge 
– of addressing the demands of professionals while also safeguarding patient 
data.

Chat apps could be used to book an appointment at the doctors’ surgery or the 
hospital

A demand has emerged from staff to be able communicate instantaneously and 
share real-time information with colleagues through secure chat. But do mobile 
chat apps have the potential to transform NHS interaction for patients too?

In customer-service settings across other industries, bots, which pull 
information from applications and services, allow questions to be answered 
through natural language in a similar manner to the voice interaction on iPhone 
and Android devices. The same chat style interfaces, with which people are 
increasingly comfortable, could make a major difference to how patients 
interact with the NHS.

Chat apps could be used to book an appointment at the doctor’s surgery or the 
hospital. A patient can simply ask for an appointment next week and, in turn, 
the app speaks to tell them: “I have an appointment next Wednesday.”

Can a digital revolution save the NHS?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/03/can-digital-revolution-save-nhs>
When even augmented reality technologies like Pokemon Go have been recognised 
for theirpotential health and wellbeing benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/27/pokemon-go-improve-health-walking>
, consumer expectations about technology and the NHS is growing bolder. There 
are some promising signs that healthcare is starting to think differently, and 
it is reassuring to see an increasing number of media reports on new mobile 
innovations.

A greater focus on using technology for patient monitoring has been seen in 
the last 12–18 months. More local authorities are looking at patient 
information apps to prevent hospital admissions. And new mobile innovation 
tenders suggest a recognition that investment in mobile solutions is now 
needed. But all this barely scratches the surface of what can be done.

NHS providers, and the wider care community, now have a huge opportunity to 
really push the boundaries of what mobile technology can deliver and take 
advantage of both emerging and widely used technologies. If they take this 
opportunity, they could dramatically enhance their offering to patients and to 
the staff responsible for their care.


You could create fully interactive NHS apps for Apple TV. Console devices such 
as the Microsoft Xbox One Kinect could be used to assess a person’s posture and 
fitness, and provide suggestions for improvement. Wearable devices such as 
smartwatches could contribute to the government’s preventative medicine agenda.


It isn’t easy. Healthcare organisations can become bogged down in the day to 
day, and need to focus their finite IT resource on delivering large clinical 
systems or a new electronic patient record. To make this brave, new mHealth 
vision a reality the NHS cannot carry the responsibility alone. Tech suppliers 
need to think about their users, and think beyond mobile.


How long will it be before a doctor or nurse can use an app on their watch to 
access patient information? How long before a patient can book their clinical 
appointments via their Xbox, or record their own vital signs through tablet 
applications? It’s clear we need to do this now.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 