
The elan and enthusiasm with which the birth of the euro has been greeted on 
the Continent and in the financial markets evidently isn't shared by the 
British public. The Guardian's ICM poll shows opinion across the nation 
hardening against the euro, particularly among women. Readers of the tabloids 
hate the idea of abandoning the pound.

 If, then, Tony Blair really cared about what the Sun reader thinks then the 
United Kingdom would never become part of euroland. Sun readers, the paper 
intoned on January 4, the first trading day 'like the rest of the country are 
overwhelmingly opposed to giving up the pound'.

The further one moves away from the City of London - where euro trading means 
good business and profits - the more one is likely to encounter a visceral 
opposition to the new single currency and a warm affection for the pound, even 
among the professional classes.

British Airways and Marks and Spencer may be willing to take it but otherwise 
the new currency does not appear to have generated that much excitement. This 
may well be a response to the fact that it is plastic/electronic/ cheque 
currency and there are not as yet bundles of crisp notes in the wallet.

 But there's more to it. Somehow the pound - sterling - has imprinted itself 
on the national psyche as a symbol of our sovereignty. It is as if the pound, 
adorned with the Queen's head, were suddenly to vanish from British life it 
would be accompanied by financial rule from Frankfurt, political control from 
Brussels and Strasbourg and the fatal compromise of Britain's ability to set 
its own taxes. This, even though the sovereign's head has only been on Bank of 
England notes since 1946.

 So wary has the Blair Government become of the euro myths - many of them 
fomented by the unrelenting Europhobe press - that Britain refuses even the 
slightest tilt towards the euro.

 Whereas on January 1 two other 'out' countries - Denmark and Greece - decided 
to move into the ante-room by rejoining the Exchange Rate Mechanism, Britain 
remains as steadfastly outside as it has been since Black Wednesday in 
September 1992 when George Soros turned his guns on the pound and helped to 
eject it from the ERM.

 Chancellor Gordon Brown seems simply to have adopted the Tory position that 
Britain 'has no intention of rejoining' the ERM. The official view is that 
Britain can achieve its economic objectives by pursuing long-term monetary and 
fiscal policies aimed at stability, without the need to rejoin the ERM as a 
preliminary to becoming part of the single currency.

 But stability and the pound have not been historically compatible. Far from 
being the 'store of value' - which the currency is meant to be - or even as 
'good as the Deutschmark,' as John Major once famously promised, the pound has 
been a dead loss. Instead of being a symbol of Britain's greatness, as the 
keep-the-pound lobby would have it, sterling has been at the core of almost 
every political crisis this century. Winston Churchill's vainglorious decision 
to peg the pound to gold at the parity of $4.86 in 1925 was typical. An 
overvalued currency led to a calamitous decline in exports and a brutal attack 
on the policy by John Maynard Keynes in his pamphlet The Economic Consequences 
Of Churchill. The pound's unrealistic value was almost certainly a factor in 
the severity of the Great Depression in Britain.

 If there is a single thread which connects the economic and political 
troubles of Britain since the end of the second world war, it's the sterling 
exchange rate. At times too high (in the immediate post-war period) and more 
recently during Gordon Brown's stewardship at the Treasury the secular trend in 
its value has been downwards. Anyone holding sterling would have been better 
off owning marks, US dollars or Swiss francs. The pound has been a symbol of 
decline and an endless cause of difficulty for our rulers.

 The easiest way to track sterling's decline is against the US dollar. For 
much of the postwar period the North Atlantic was Britain's most important 
trading and investment zone and there has been a tendency for sterling to move 
in tandem with the American currency, rather than the trading blocs which 
developed around the mark (now at the core of the euro) and the Japanese yen. 
But despite being an appendage to the American economic machine, sterling has 
seldom managed to keep pace with the dollar.

 The economic consequences of Churchill were quickly forgotten. Britain made 
precisely the same error of pegging sterling at too high a level in 1945. This 
time around there was a new international financial architecture in the 
International Monetary Fund, set by the Allied powers at Bretton Woods in New 
Hampshire in 1944.

 Victorious Britain claimed a high exchange rate at $4.03 to the pound - one 
which reflected its expectation of post-war advantage relative to the destroyed 
economies of Germany and Japan. The British position was complicated by the 
'sterling balances' - assets held in pounds by foreigners - which may have led 
Britain to believe that it had a moral obligation to maintain a strong pound so 
as not to write-down the value of these investments(1).

 The strains caused by convertibility, which allowed foreign holders to switch 
out of sterling in 1947, together with the deterioration in Britain's balance 
of payments - as exports fell and imports soared - led the Attlee government 
into a decisive devaluation on September 18, 1949, when the value of sterling 
was cut by 30 per cent to $2.60. Devaluation against the currencies of all 
Britain's trading partners was a less severe 9 per cent.

 The 1949 devaluation proved to be a defining political moment. For much of 
the next five decades a falling pound came to be regarded by politicians as a 
symbol of economic and political failure. Successive governments fought 
rearguard actions in an effort to maintain sterling's parity, rather than 
recognising that its weakness was a reflection of a changing world economy: the 
reappearance of Germany and Japan as industrial powers following Marshall aid; 
the rise of the European Union and more latterly the rise of east Asia and 
Latin America as economic challengers to the West.

 As Philip Stephens noted in his authoritative study of the politics of the 
pound: 'Bretton Woods had another weakness as far as British governments were 
concerned - it hardened the equation between devaluation and political 
humiliation. Clement Attlee's Labour government never fully recovered from the 
devaluation of 1949'(2).

 IN the mind of the politicians a weak pound was an acknowledgement of 
economic mismanagement, rather than shifting trends in global trade and output. 
Britain's second post-war Labour prime minister came to office determined that 
his administration - unlike Attlee's before it - should not be remembered for 
devaluation.

 But like its predecessor the battle was lost against the 'gnomes of Zurich', 
the speculators who had realised that the pound was wrongly valued. In November 
1967 the pound's value was adjusted downwards from $2.80 to $2.40 and Wilson 
promised the people that the pound in their pocket had not been devalued. As 
prices in the shops soared and inflation climbed the pound failed to represent 
the core British values which its current adherents would like to impute.

 It was felt that once the Bretton Woods system of fixed but adjustable 
exchange rates came to an end after 1973 - when exchange rates floated - the 
severe crises for sterling which had been a feature of the era would come to an 
end. But not a bit of it. In 1976 the pound again came under enormous pressure, 
triggering an application to the IMF for loans to support the currency and the 
imposition of financial terms by the Washington bureaucrats.

This effectively opened the door to a new monetarist approach to policymaking, 
which was eventually adopted by Mrs Thatcher.

 Her early experience was not much better. At the time of her election on May 
3, 1979, sterling was still below its point before the 1976 IMF credits. But 
soon after the election, as the Government removed exchange controls, raised 
taxes and tightened monetary discipline over the economy, the pound soared. By 
the end of January 1981 it was some 20 per cent higher than on election day and 
by some measures was as much as 50 per cent higher. The pound was temporarily a 
source of pride; at the Treasury the loss of competitiveness - which would 
eventually contribute to higher unemployment - was a serious cause of 
concern(3).

 During the past two decades alone, the pound has lost half its value against 
the mark. Since the war it has been associated with instability and failure. 
However correct government policies have appeared in domestic terms, the 
foreign exchange markets have regularly driven them off course. Moreover, all 
markets tend to overshoot.

The pound has had its particular problems. The legacy of the sterling balances 
was an overhang in the 1960s and 1970s which put Britain's international 
obligations in conflict with its domestic priorities. The inordinate amount of 
government time spent dealing with the problems of the pound, whether too high 
or too low, was a distraction from recognising the British economy's lack of 
competitiveness and the need to cultivate those sectors of the economy where 
Britain excels, from finance (in the City of London) to pharmaceuticals and 
software technologies.

 Commercial neglect and uncompetitiveness, recognised belatedly by the Tories 
when Michael Heseltine was trade secretary, and more recently taken up by Peter 
Mandelson during his brief sojourn at the DTI are at the centre of Britain's 
economic difficulties. Over the decades, the pound has distracted policy makers 
from this focus. It has also been a disappointing investment. Sterling assets 
held in government stock or cash have gone down and down in value for the last 
79 years(4). Only by holding shares have investors, either individuals or 
pension funds, been able to insulate themselves from the ravages of bad 
economic management and the long-term decline in the pound. There should be no 
sentimentality about a currency which has kept the economy on a roller-coaster 
for much of this century. Opposing the euro on rational economic grounds is 
fair enough. But to suggest that the new currency will be inferior to the pound 
would be a failure to heed the lessons of Britain's past.

 Sources: (1) B.W.E. Alford, Britain in the World Economy since 1880, Longman 
1995; (2) Politics and the Pound, Macmillan 1996; (3) Nigel Lawson, The View 
From Number 11, Corgi 1993; (4) Equity-Gilt Study, Barclays Capital January 
1998.

 Research: Matthew Keating.

 Alex Brummer is the Guardian's financial editor.
 