
General knowledge paper 2015-16, No 111, sat by the pupils of King William’s 
College, Isle of Man <http://www.kwc.im/general-knowledge-quiz>

“Scire ubi aliquid invenire possis ea demum maxima pars eruditionis est”

1 During 1915:


1 who developed an innovative equine?

2 what oversized delivery brought joy to Dolly and Marty?

3 whose work was also recognised by Barnard and Matteucci?

4 which two spies in the cigar business faced the firing squad on the same 
morning?

5 whose determination to have no hatred or bitterness for anyone would be 
later set in stone?

6 which eponymous vessel met its Waterloo at the hands of an adversary, which 
had been an ally 100 years earlier?

7 where did the British deployment of Red Star backfire owing to inclement 
weather?

8 what yarn revealed the murderous activities of the Black Stone?

9 which former MO to the Pennywell Colliery passed away?

10 from what disaster did PL 11 rescue the first survivors?

2


1 Who took prizes with canaries?

2 Who was the victim of a cactus booby-trap?

3 Who provided details of cadaveric rigidity from his copy of Dixon Mann?

4 Which product of the Royal Free was thought to have administered air emboli?

5 Who lost his gold pince-nez in a stranger’s astrakhan collar during the 
rush-hour at Victoria?

6 Who was one of the most exclusive hairdressers in the West End who produced 
an ivory-handled razor that travelled via Stamford?

7 Which air pilot, carrying vital evidence from New York, came down near 
Whitehaven?

8 Which Crimean war veteran died from digitalin poisoning on 10 November?

9 Who died as a result of acoustic bombardment by Batty Thomas et al?

10 Who was saved by a dog-collar?

3


1 Who was returned for Condaford in the general election?

2 In what election were 45 green umbrellas used to influence voters?

3 In which constituency was Mr Browborough’s election reversed due to bribery?

4 In which West Indian constituency was the election “sweetness done and 
turning sour”?

5 Which crusader’s ultimate election was so prolonged that electors were 
threatened with starvation?

6 Who won the election, having engineered the demise of the four favourites, 
and then chose self-cremation?

7 Which MP for Aylesbury was expelled, but later headed the poll when he stood 
for Middlesex?

8 Who spoke in support of the Liberal candidate in Brattleburn, a Tory 
stronghold?

9 Whose supposedly forged red letter led to the government’s electoral defeat?

10 Whose election was declared by Albert Theophylus Despard-Smith?

4


1 Where was the Tide Waiter based?

2 Where was £53m inappropriately acquired?

3 Where did the blinded Gloucester attempt suicide?

4 Where did Simpkinson lose his fiddle-patterned table spoons?

5 Where is the circulation of blood nominally remembered in a hospital setting?

6 Where, according to Lucy’s elder cousin and chaperone, were we all 
hopelessly behind the times?

7 Where does a 20 second cycle operate from an octagonal tower?

8 Where does the bell-tower resemble a three-tiered tepee?

9 What did Bradshaw liken to the victim of Vesuvius?

10 Where is the home of the episcopal digit?

5


1 What was built as a wayfarers’ chapel on the Via Devana?

2 What has occupied a site in Sheep Street for over 900 years?

3 Which concert venue originally housed a turntable of the LNWR?

4 Where does a circular tour reveal numerous examples of Jurassic geology?

5 Which building is based on the plans of Mario Asprucci, commissioned by the 
Bishop of Derry?

6 Which edifice, formerly housing a Science Library, owed its building to an 
Old Savilian physician’s bequest?

7 Where did midwifery give way, through a Gate, to a diplomatic film venue?

8 In which little village did the Knights of St John build their church?

9 Where did Campbell create a copy of the Villa Almerico Capra?

10 Where did Rienzi initiate an annual festival 120 years ago?

6


1 Which line is left where for buns?

2 Where did the express train draw up unwontedly?

3 On what railroad do livestock pass free through the toll gate?

4 To what do the words “Jamme, jamme, ’ncoppa, jamme jà” apply?

5 Where did the convict and the boy with violin go on till the train came in?

6 Whence the goods, delaying the eight o’clock excursion train for an hour (or 
more)?

7 What station was the Catalan surrealist’s “Centre of the Universe”?

8 Where, in reality, did Celia and Trevor enjoy a short relationship?

9 Where was the Normandy train’s arrival depicted?

10 Where did Nordens Strauss locate his gallop?

7


1 What is St Antony’s sister?

2 Where might Beetle Drives be particularly popular?

3 What enquiry elicited the reply “I am George, I am”?

4 What has an almost unique tolerance of a diterpene-rich diet?

5 Which named canid may be observed by the congregation at Kirk Andreas?

6 Who confronted Lungri at the cave mouth, claiming possession of the man’s 
cub?

7 Who described a silent nocturnal interment on a Galician rampart?

8 What was, in 1972, uniquely surmounted by a helipad?

9 The death of which hero is remembered in Matlock?

10 Which establishmecvnt dominates the Mittelhaardt?

8


1 Who named his daughter after Great Aunt Betsey?

2 Who was called the Tee’d Ball by the young advocates?

3 Where were Middle Eastern differences settled “with one accord”?

4 Which “King” lost his life in the battle across the river from San Antonio?

5 Whose cardiectomy remnant was interred beneath an example of Chlorophora 
excelsa?

6 Which leading Covenanter was hung, drawn and quartered for complicity in an 
archiepiscopal murder?

7 Who witnessed the suicide of the kaffir king and Christian minister in the 
Rooirand cave?

8 Which hairy little man with pink lips and a wall eye came out of the sun?

9 Who received an apparently well-deserved caprine nickname?

10 Who underwent a nocturnal mammary transformation?

9


1 What was the undoing of Sir Claude Amory?

2 What is appropriately marketed in pellet form?

3 What crimson infusion has hypotensive properties?

4 What beverage’s infallibility bore a papal comparison?

5 What did the Rocky Mountain fur-trapper consider to be superior to whisky?

6 What was brought to the incarcerated Bufo following the bubble-and-squeak?

7 With what did his mother dose Peter on his escape from the garden?

8 What is the choice of the precious Gaborone detective?

9 What citrous concoction recalls a great reformer?

10 What spots characterise von Recklinghausen?

10


1 What was partnered on bended knee?

2 Which two protagonists share a liking for Allie?

3 How was Miss Languish’s strong will described by her aunt?

4 What name was given by Disney to Barrie’s anonymous reptile?

5 Who maintained that he who trusts a woman will walk on duckweed in a pool?

6 Who displayed his distinctive motif when winning for the second time at West 
Side?

7 What suffered solar destruction following pachydermal confrontation?

8 Who enjoyed a fusion initially with Horus, and later with Ra?

9 Who changed hands while crossing the Irish Sea?

10 Which island trio has reptilian etymology?

11


1 What were the pipe-cleaners stolen from Uncle Jim?

2 Why might the jay wrongly be seen as more precious than the lark?

3 What characterised the little men apart from coloured jacket and cap?

4 What was the crest of Blind John, adopted by the victorious leader after the 
battle in 1346?

5 What, developed by Rex and Cromie, owed its name to Harold, and brought 
immediate success for Geoff?

6 What, in addition to the Yellow Jacket did the British commander receive 
after victory at Changzhou Fu?

7 In what tale does David, living with his parents at Firetown, receive a 
rifle for his 14th birthday?

8 In what tale did Joseppi stumble out the Musoline Overture on a zither in 
Wadi Halfa?

9 Which scarecrow was created by a pipe-smoking New England witch?

10 Which clandestine group saved Ran on the edge of Exmoor?

12 Which code name was given to the agent who:


1 thwarted Weitsprung?

2 faked the demolition of the Mosquito factory?

3 warned the High Command of the threat from FUSAG?

4 threatened revelation following the death of her beloved dog?

5 successfully misled Rommel and employed his notional girlfriend Misanthrope?

6 photographed Sir Hughe’s secret papers and was rewarded with counterfeit 
sterling?

7 began by proving himself to the Abwehr with a report on Pierre Laval?

8 nearly blew it when he mistakenly confused Glass and Sand?

9 was known as Leonhard by his German paymasters?

10 later dug up artefacts in Corsica?

13


1 What does the Bard credit with subtlety?

2 Where does Kitchener have an Elephantine companion?

3 Where did pigeon-shooting lead to inappropriate British reprisals?

4 Where did Mrs Doyle narrowly escape death from a falling boulder?

5 Where was the P&O liner Mongolia expected at 11am on Wednesday 9 October?

6 Where did the French lieutenant find the trilingual text which provided the 
key to understanding the ancient scripts?

7 For what was Rigoletto substituted for the opening of the Opera House?

8 Which heir presumptive drowned when his train fell into the river?

9 Where did Wüstenfuchs’s substitute suffer a fatal heart attack?

10 Where did Giocante stand on the burning deck?

14 The etymology of which country’s name:


1 rules out mendacity?

2 describes littoral wealth?

3 suggests sacred insularity?

4 recalls the Dude’s favourite cocktail?

5 shows the long reach of a Basque windmill?

6 misrenders the name of an East India Company captain?

7 derives from pachydermal slaughter?

8 derives from crustacean abundance?

9 warns of shallow waters?

10 has lunar connections?

15


1 What Viennese dance celebrated 26 July?

2 Who responded to news of the lugger in Kitt’s Hole?

3 What reckless delight is enhanced by an abundance of Xeres?

4 In what did the snail decline the whiting’s invitation to take part?

5 In which morbid exercise does a xylophone represent an osseous rattle?

6 What famous dance sequence precedes Grimaldo’s attempt on the life of 
Badoero?

7 Who “waltzed” in happy anticipation of a rendezvous with Marianne?

8 In what did two geriatrics rekindle their love in West Yorkshire?

9 In what pas de deux does Pertussis seem to participate?

10 What was sung from the shade of a Coolibah?

16 What:


1 day shares with Bridget?

2 did Ramsay combine with Turtle Soup?

3 was named after Margaretha, Märtha and Astrid?

4 was inspired through an invitation to see Elsa of Brabant?

5 was Tom’s intended fate prior to his rescue from beneath the attic?

6 according to the Captain, always ate better if it did not scald your gullet?

7 is a sweetened combination of egg yolk and a Sicilian wine?

8 creation formerly had the sobriquet “solognotte”?

9 do Margrethe’s subjects use as a shibboleth?

10 moistens the lip and brightens the eye?

17


1 On what was Smiler fed?

2 Where is the vanelline source of ferruginous waters?

3 Whose scholarly woodpecker was a wooden bookend?

4 Where, according to Bede, was Adda’s brother the Abbot?

5 What was given its name by Lamancha owing to the execrable food and wine?

6 Where was she heard singing about her laddie’s blue bonnet and dimpled chin?

7 To which establishment was the frisky prentice hauled with fanfares?

8 Where in 1940 were tables for two laid as tables for four?

9 What was earned by William and discarded by Tony?

10 Whence the Cholmeleians?

18 During 2015:


1 which popular character fell to a Minnesota toxophilite?

2 whose crown-scarred skull has found a final resting place?

3 where has a polychrome hybrid of Galanthus been relaunched?

4 which archiepiscopal foundation has closed its doors after 432 years?

5 for which sleuth has his luscinial escapade now turned out to be his swan 
song?

6 which anthem, played in error, was equally erroneously attributed to 
Kazakhstan?

7 which six-times winner did his final lap almost 65 years after his first 
victory?

8 how has Suffragette militancy progressed to Suffragen achievement?

9 how did a redesigned garden contribute to gold in China?

10 how has Bellerophon returned at the expense of Aquila?

• The answers will appear in January

• This article was amended on 8 January 2016. In an earlier version, question 
8 in section 2 of the quiz referred incorrectly to the Boer war and arsenic 
poisoning.
 