
Ryan Lochte

Shortly before the Rio Olympics Lochte gave an interview to GQ in which he 
said: “Now that I’m more mature, it’s time to focus on the swimming part [of 
his life] and less on the outside part.” Sadly it turned out he wasn’t more 
mature after all. He won one relay gold, but also caught the eye when his 
freshly bleached hair reacted to the chlorine in the Olympic pool by turning a 
fetching shade of mint green.

If that was a let-down involving his hair, worse was to follow when he let his 
hair down. After a night out he told an interviewer – NBC’s Billy Bush, later 
to find himself at the centre of another controversy when a recording of some 
“locker-room banter” with Donald Trump was leaked – that he had been robbed at 
gunpoint on a night out in Brazil – “the guy pulled out his gun, he cocked it, 
put it to my forehead and he said: ‘Get down.’” – when in fact he had got drunk 
and urinated on and then vandalised a petrol station before fleeing first the 
scene and then the country.

Emotional Ryan Lochte sorry for 'stupid mistake' and 'shenanigans' at gas 
station
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/ryan-lochte-rio-robbery-gas-station-apology-olympics>
In the ensuing controversy he was painted not just as a somewhat juvenile 
young man who got drunk once after four years of total dedication and made a 
few regrettable decisions – though that was certainly true – but as the epitome 
of white privilege, which probably had some elements of truth about it as well. 
“I was highly intoxicated,” he later said, “and I made some immature 
accusations. If I had not done that, none of this would have happened.”

Still, Lochte’s year has had some redeeming features, such as having a go at 
Dancing With the Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/13/ryan-lochte-dancing-with-the-stars-interrupted-protester>
 (he wasn’t very good) and his engagement to the former Playboy model Kayla Rae 
Reid, who he met on Tinder in January, wooed by taking her as a first date to a 
Justin Bieber concert, and who steadfastly remained by his side throughout the 
fallout of heistgate.

“You kind of felt violated, in a way,” she said of the furore. “Yes, he did 
let down a lot of Americans, and Brazilians as well, but at the same time, it 
felt like it was a murder case or something. It was just something completely, 
I don’t know, catastrophic.”

Samir Carruthers et al

We tried very hard (quite hard) to find a miscreant to represent the sport of 
racing on the list but it seems the most badly behaved people at a racecourse 
this year were also footballers. At the Cheltenham Festival in March a group in 
the hospitality area were seen – and videoed – relieving themselves into pint 
glasses while standing on a balcony, and pouring their urine on to the grass 
below.

MK Dons’ Samir Carruthers and James Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/16/samir-carruthers-apology-urinate-pint-glass-cheltenham-festival-mk-dons>
, now of Crawley but then on loan at Northampton from Shrewsbury, were later 
fined two weeks’ wages by their clubs and banned from all British racecourses, 
as were Katie Salmon and Jessica Hayes, two former contestants in the ITV2 
reality show Love Island, who were photographed exposing their breasts at the 
same meeting.

Gloucestershire police described the footballers’ behaviour as “disgusting and 
thoughtless”, while the racecourse said it was “unacceptable”. Collins admitted 
his behaviour had “only emphasised the negative stereotype of the modern 
footballer”, while Carruthers said he had “let down the whole team, my 
team-mates, everyone”. “I’m really sorry to Cheltenham as well because they let 
me in and stuff,” he added. “I’ve let the community down and I’ve let Milton 
Keynes down and I have to take the criticism that comes with it. I don’t want 
to be known as the idiot that urinated in a pint glass.”

Aurélie Tourte

Another urination-related entry, sadly. Aurélie Tourte, the French tennis 
umpire, lives in Plaisir, the town near Paris whose name translates as 
“pleasure”. Not, to be sure, the emotion she always arouses in the players 
whose matches she officiates. At the 2015 US Open Victoria Azarenka, unhappy 
with her decision-making, asked her if she had ever played any tennis herself. 
“You did?” she continued, after Tourte responded. “You probably weren’t very 
good.”

We’ve got no doubt that Tourte is an extremely competent chair umpire, but she 
earns her spot here because of her role in the unhappy conclusion to a doubles 
match at Wimbledon in July when, with the score delicately poised at 6-3, 4-6, 
6-4, 3-6, 8-9, one of the participants, the UruguayanPablo Cuevas, asked for a 
toilet break and Tourte refused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/pablo-cuevas-pee-controversy-wimbledon-doubles-marcel-granollers-jonny-marray-adil-shamasdin>
, on the grounds that the maximum two breaks had already been taken and you’re 
not allowed any more no matter how long your match is. The ensuing discussion 
became heated and ended with the player receiving a code violation and one 
eyewitness insisting that Cuevas had relieved himself into a ball can – a 
Wimbledon official later reassured concerned reporters that “no urination was 
involved”.

Not long later, with the score 12-13, 0-30 in the final set, either Cuevas or 
his partner, Marcel Granollers of Spain, slammed a ball out of the court in 
frustration and received a second code violation, resulting in a point penalty 
and thus three break and indeed match points, and also a sit-down protest 
lasting more than 10 minutes and another argument, this time with a tournament 
supervisor.

Eventually, with one of their opponents, Adil Shamasdin, reporting that he now 
also needed the bathroom and with the threat of forfeiture now hanging over 
them, the pair resumed and, two points later, lost. “You’ve got to respect the 
officials, regardless of what’s gone on in the match,” said the victorious 
Jonny Marray, “but I don’t think the chair umpire handled it correctly either. 
She tried to tell them to carry on but they wouldn’t do it. I think you should 
be allowed an extra toilet break if it goes to five sets.”

Aaron Smith

Even allowing for the fact they actually lost a match, against Ireland in 
Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
, the second half of2016 has been particularly ugly for New Zealand rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/11/new-zealand-rugby-year-of-sex-violence>
. There was the case of Losi Filipo, initially backed by NZR despite being 
charged by police for four counts of assault, including two against women and 
one that involved him allegedly stamping on the head of an unconscious man, 
described by a judge as “a chilling act of violence” but eventually sacked by 
his club, Wellington.

And there was the alleged assault on a stripper hired by Waikato Chiefs for 
their end-of-season celebrations, about which there is nothing remotely 
humorous except the repercussions for one of the players: “I am well trained in 
martial arts and I kicked his head into the ground, put his head into a choke 
hold, kicked him in the genitals and said: ‘You don’t touch me there please,’” 
that ended with the stripper getting sacked by her agency and the players 
getting cleared by their club following an inquiry.

Then a family waiting to use a disabled toilet at Christchurch airport while 
the All Blacks were preparing to leave for a tour of South Africa were 
surprised when a young woman pushed in front of them, and even more surprised
when All Black Aaron Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/aaron-smith-all-blacks-sent-home-toilet-disabled-encounter>
 followed her into the toilet 30 seconds later. “The pair were inside the 
bathroom for about 10 minutes and from the noises coming out of the bathroom 
there was absolutely no question what they were doing in there,” an eyewitness 
reported. “I myself did not have a problem with this … my wife, however, is 
protesting that this is disgusting.”

In the aftermath the New Zealand coach, Steve Hansen, said the player’s 
behaviour was “not of All Blacks standard”, the country’s prime minister, John 
Key, declared that Smith “has let himself down, and frankly he’s embarrassed 
himself a bit” and Smith admitted to “a huge mistake, a huge error in judgment” 
before he headed home prematurely for “breaching team standards regarding 
behaviour”.

Amateur International Boxing Association

Rio 2016: Olympic boxing tournament hit by corruption allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/rio-2016-olympics-boxing-corruption-allegations>
Even before the Olympics began there was talk in the boxing community that 
corruption of officials was likely, if not inevitable. Then the odd results 
started: Russia’s Evgeny Tishchenko was booed by an incredulous crowd when he 
was awarded gold,America’s Gary Antuanne Russell was “robbed” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/gary-antuanne-russell-boxing-fixing-allegations-rio-olympics>
 against Uzbekistan’s Fazliddin Gaibnazarov, andMichael Conlan pledged never to 
box under the Amateur International Boxing Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/michael-conlan-accuses-boxings-ruling-body-after-being-cheated-in-defeat>
 again following his defeat on a unanimous points decision against Vladimir 
Nikitin, another Russian.

The Irishman insisted he was “in first gear and I was boxing the ears off 
him”, while an Aiba spokesman sniffed this was “his personal judgment”, 
ignoring the personal judgments of everyone else in the arena. At the end of 
the Olympics an Aiba review concluded that “less than a handful of the 
decisions were not at the level expected” and Tom Virgets of Aiba blamed 
Conlan’s fury on ignorant journalists: “I can understand that frustration is 
heightened when there is a significant amount of media who also believe that he 
should have won,” he said. “We will continue to evaluate where the media is 
educated, the coaches are educated as to the criteria better.”

But in October, as they initiated a belated investigation into the handling of 
the tournament,all 36 of the referees and judges from Rio were suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/aiba-sideline-all-referee-and-judges-used-at-rio-olympics-pending-an-investigation-boxing>
. Nearly three months later, the investigation continues.

Louis Smith

On the plus side, and it really is a significant plus, Smith won a pommel 
horse silver at the Rio Games. On the down side,he missed the big Olympic 
celebrations in London in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/19/louis-smith-misses-olympics-celebrations-video-mocking-islam>
 and spent the day learning about the British Muslim community instead after he 
and the former gymnast Luke Carson appeared to mock the religion in a video 
widely shared on social media. He described his actions, for whichhe received a 
two-month ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/louis-smith-banned-british-gymnastics-video-mocking-islam>
 from British Gymnastics, as “incredibly offensive and very ignorant”.

The 27-year-old also claimed that one key reason for his juvenile behaviour 
was that “I haven’t had the chance to act like an idiot before as I’ve been so 
busy”, but eventually became genuinely apologetic. “I’ve worked my whole career 
to make people proud of me and I’m ashamed to have let everyone down,” he said, 
adding: “I spoke to my mum for two minutes and said sorry to her as well.” 
That’s right, two minutes. That’s the kind of dedication that takes you to 
Olympic glory.

Gabriel Agbonlahor

The Aston Villa striker and former club captain gave us perhaps the least 
distinguished season in the history of Premier League football as his team 
slumped out of it, and has failed to redeem himself since. So far in this 
calendar year he has started six games, scored one goal, been stripped of the 
captaincy, been booked once, and been the subject of one club inquiry after he 
was photographed smoking from a shisha pipe during a holiday in Dubai, and 
almost immediately another after photographs emerged of him, hours after 
Villa’s relegation was confirmed, apparently downing shots of alcohol in a 
London hotel room strewn with used vials of laughing gas.

Then in April he was placed on a two-week fitness regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/gabriel-agbonlahor-fitness-programme-aston-villa>
 after reporting a stone overweight, and by October there had been so little 
improvement in his condition that he was put into a six-week fitness regime. 
Since then there appears to have been something of a transformation, with 
Agbonlahor losing over six kilos in those six weeks and returning at least to 
the fringes of the Villa team. “He’s desperate to go and prove that he’s got 
something to offer,” says Steve Bruce. It’ll take a lot more hard work for his 
reputation to recover from the horrors of 2016.

Fifa

It’s been a relatively good year for Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>, who brought the Sepp Blatter era 
to a definitive close when they elected a new president in Gianni Infantino in 
February. The new man at the big desk has proved a fairly steady pair of hands, 
though his predilection for private aeronautics did land him in hot water. “I 
came with easyJet today because it was the best option,” he said on arriving in 
Cardiff via Bristol airport for the International Football Association Board 
AGM in March. “I always take the easiest and best option.”

Gianni Infantino and Fifa seem to have a new plan: to kill the World Cup | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/19/gianni-infantino-fifa-world-cup-48-teams>
It turned out that the easiest and best option when he looked into getting 
home from the Champions League final was to fly with his wife and mother on his 
own plane to Rome for a meeting with the Pope and then take the jet back to 
Geneva again.Fifa’s ethics committee investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/gianni-infantino-cleared-ethics-violations-fifa>
 and were happy enough to absolve him of blame.

Enough of the bad news, though. On the positive side, Infantino has proposed 
expanding the World Cup to 48 teams, very nearly a quarter of their total 
membership of 211 nations and another happy step on the way to complete 
inclusivity (Anti-Spoty proposes a single two-leg play-off to bring the number 
down to a more manageable 210, followed by a final tournament consisting of 42 
five-team groups, from which the winners and the 22 best runners-up progress to 
the first of six knock-out rounds, for a broadcaster-friendly total of 484 
fixtures including the third-place play-off).

But Fifa’s very finest achievement of 2016 was to finally cure racism, 
allowing them to disband its anti-racism task force on the grounds that it had 
“completely fulfilled its mission”. Which was nice.

Dani Osvaldo

Since signing for Southampton for £12.8m in 2013 nothing has quite gone as 
planned for the controversy-courting Argentinian striker, whose spell at St 
Mary’s lasted 166 days,until he head-butted his captain, José Fonte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/29/southampton-dani-osvaldo-mauricio-pochettino>
, in training and was told to leave again. For all that, nothing quite prepared 
the world for what was to come this year, particularly given that it started 
with him returning to Argentina to sign for Boca Juniors, the club of his 
juvenile dreams and where he had spent an often eventful but not unsuccessful 
(seven goals in 16 games) loan spell last year.

Having learned from experience – last year he turned up at the airport 
sporting a River Plate-baiting T-shirt – he demonstrated what the Argentinian 
newspaper La Nación referred to as “a commitment to good behaviour” by avoiding 
public statements on his return, but this commitment was not to last long. 
Among the things he did not avoid were arguments with his long-term on-off 
partner, the singer and actress Jimena Barón, who accused him of verbal abuse, 
and the taking and sending of a couple of nude selfies which ended up on 
Twitter.

In May, having just returned from two months out with a foot injury, he 
travelled to Uruguay for the first leg of a Copa Libertadores quarter-final 
against Nacional, was given only a place on the bench, spent much of the game 
arguing with his coaches, and when he finally came on with six minutes to go 
and the teams tied at 1-1 failed to make a significant impact. At the final 
whistle he disappeared straight down the tunnel, ignoring both team-mates and 
supporters, and when the rest of the squad returned to the dressing room they 
found him smoking a cigarette in the toilet. When his coach, Guillermo Barros 
Schelotto, told him to put it out, he suggested a creative and impolite method 
of doing so, and was promptly sacked.

His second spell at the club featured 322 minutes of action and no goals. He 
has since turned his back on football altogether – only a minor downgrading of 
his commitment to sporting excellence, really – and dedicated himself to music. 
“I loved playing football, and I was lucky enough to do it with Boca Juniors, 
the club of my heart,” he said. “Now I’m realising this dream, and I’m happy.”
 