
A Room of One’s Own is both a landmark in feminist thought and a rhetorical 
masterpiece, which started life as lectures to the literary societies of 
Newnham and Girton Colleges, Cambridge, in October 1928. It was then published 
by the Hogarth Press in 1929 in a revised and expanded edition that has never 
been out of print.

Barely 40,000 words long, addressed to audiences of female students in the 
hothouse atmosphere of interwar creativity, this became an unforgettable and 
passionate assertion of women’s creative originality by one of the great 
writers of the 20th century. Ironically, she herself never favoured the term 
“feminist”.

Virginia Woolf, no question, transformed the English literary landscape. But 
how, exactly? Was it through modernist innovation (Mrs Dalloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/01/100-best-novels-mrs-dalloway-virginia-woolf-robert-mccrum>
;To the Lighthouse)? Or flirting outrageously with historical fiction (Orlando
)? Or in the provocative argument – in part a response to EM Forster’sAspects 
of the Novel – of a book like A Room of One’s Own?

Well, all of the above. As many critics have noted, Woolf’s writings – from 
letters and diaries to novels, essays and lectures – are of a piece. Open any 
one of her books and it’s as though you have just stepped inside, and possibly 
interrupted, a fierce internal monologue about the world of literature.

Woolf herself assists this response. “But, you may say, we asked you to 
speak…” is the opening line toA Room of One’s Own that backs its author into 
the limelight of an initially rambling, but finally urgent, polemic. “England 
is under the rule of a patriarchy,” she declares on about page 30, and then 
proceeds to lay bare the structure of male privilege and female exclusion – 
from independence, income and education.

At first, she masks the narrator of her argument in the guise of several 
fictional Marys: Mary Beton, Mary Seton or Mary Carmichael, an allusion to a 
16th-century ballad about a woman hanged for rejecting marriage and motherhood. 
This “Mary” narrator identifies female writers such as herself as outsiders 
committed to jeopardy.

Quite soon, however, Woolf seems to abandon this contrivance. Now she is on 
fire, writing in her own voice:

“One might go even further and say that women have burnt like beacons in all 
the works of all the poets from the beginning of time – Clytemnestra, Antigone, 
Cleopatra, Lady Macbeth, Phèdre, Cressida, Rosalind, Desdemona, the Duchess of 
Malfi, among the dramatists; then among the prose writers: Millamant, Clarissa, 
Becky Sharp, Anna Karenina, Emma Bovary, Madame de Guermantes – the names flock 
to mind, nor do they recall women ‘lacking in personality and character’. 
Indeed, if woman had no existence save in the fiction written by men, one would 
imagine her a person of the utmost importance; very various; heroic and mean; 
splendid and sordid; infinitely beautiful and hideous in the extreme; as great 
as a man, some think even greater. But this is woman in fiction. In fact … she 
was locked up, beaten and flung about the room.

“A very queer, composite being thus emerges. Imaginatively she is of the 
highest importance; practically she is completely insignificant. She pervades 
poetry from cover to cover; she is all but absent from history. She dominates 
the lives of kings and conquerors in fiction; in fact she was the slave of any 
boy whose parents forced a ring upon her finger. Some of the most inspired 
words, some of the most profound thoughts in literature fall from her lips; in 
real life she could hardly read, could scarcely spell, and was the property of 
her husband.”

Typically, Woolf takes herself to task as well, for her complacency: “What I 
find deplorable … is that nothing is known about women before the 18th century. 
I have no model in my mind to turn about this way and that. Here am I asking 
why women did not write poetry in the Elizabethan age, and I am not sure how 
they were educated…”

Some of A Room of One’s Own, while written in a white heat, is also very 
funny: “I thought of that old gentleman … who declared that it was impossible 
for any woman, past, present, or to come, to have the genius of Shakespeare. He 
wrote to the papers about it … Women cannot write the plays of William 
Shakespeare.”

Finally, Woolf breaks free from feminist argument and makes a larger claim for 
the true literary imagination

From this point forward, “Judith Shakespeare” becomes another polemical 
fiction who, like Woolf, had to stay at home, watch her brother go off to 
school, and become imprisoned in domesticity: “She was as adventurous, as 
imaginative, as agog to see the world as he was. But she was not sent to 
school.” Eventually, Judith is shamed into a marriage of convenience by her 
family. Her brother makes his way in the world, while Judith is trapped at 
home, her genius unfulfilled.

Once Woolf has invented Judith Shakespeare, the poet’s sister who eventually 
kills herself, she can embark on a review of the creative lives of her great 
predecessors – Jane Austen, George Eliot, and the Brontë sisters, of whom she 
wrote, that Charlotte Brontë, burnt by rage, died “at war with her lot… young, 
cramped and thwarted”. En passant, Woolf reviews the lives and careers of 
female writers such as Aphra Behn: “All women together ought to let flowers 
fall upon the tomb of Aphra Behn … for it was she who earned them the right to 
speak their minds. It is she – shady and amorous as she was – who makes it not 
quite fantastic to say to you tonight: Earn five hundred a year by your wits.”

It’s at this juncture in her argument that Woolf proposes her now celebrated 
idea about the key to a woman’s creative liberation: a room, plus some 
independent means. To a resident of Bloomsbury this, no doubt, seemed a 
feasible goal, the guarantee of two essential gifts – privacy and freedom, or 
time and solitude. In retrospect, a private room plus “five hundred a year” 
seems impossibly middle-class. And yet, at current prices, it’s a sum that 
roughly translates into the figure that theBailey’s prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/baileys-womens-prize-for-fiction-2016> 
(formerly the Orange prize) for women’s fiction (£30,000) awards to its annual 
winner. So perhaps Woolf’s dream has been at least partly fulfilled.

So much of A Room of One’s Own is so light and glancing that it’s easy to 
overlook the urgency of Woolf’s analysis. But she could be transgressive, and 
even mischievous, too. In another passage, describing the work of a fictional 
woman, Mary Carmichael, Woolf alludes to lesbian love in the novel, a passage 
almost certainly inspired by her relationship during the 1920s with Vita 
Sackville-West: “Then I may tell you that the very next words I read were these 
– ‘Chloe liked Olivia…’ Do not start. Do not blush. Let us admit in the privacy 
of our own society that these things sometimes happen. Sometimes women do like 
women.”

Finally, Woolf breaks free from the feminist arguments of her essay, morphs 
towards her preferred androgyny, and makes a larger claim for the true literary 
imagination (as she sees it): “It is fatal for anyone who writes to think of 
their sex … one must be woman-manly or man-womanly … Some collaboration has to 
take place in the mind between the woman and the man before the art of creation 
can be accomplished. Some marriage of opposites has to be consummated. The 
whole of the mind must lie wide open … There must be freedom and there must be 
peace. Not a wheel must grate, not a light glimmer. The curtain must be close 
drawn.”

And then, in a few valedictory pages – replete with more powerful arguments 
about the importance of university education for women – she is done, closing 
with an appeal to the essential spirit of risk and originality, “ the habit of 
freedom and the courage to write exactly what we think”.

A signature sentence 

“For my belief is that if we live another century or so – I am talking of the 
common life which is the real life and not of the little separate lives which 
we live as individuals – and have five hundred a year each of us and rooms of 
our own; if we have the habit of freedom and the courage to write exactly what 
we think; if we escape a little from the common siting-room and see human 
beings not always in their relation to each other but in relation to reality; 
and the sky, too, and the trees or whatever it may be in themselves; if we look 
past Milton’s bogey, for no human being should shut out the view; if we face 
the fact, for it is a fact, that there is no arm to cling to, but that we go 
alone and that our relation is to the world of reality and not only to the 
world of men and women, then the opportunity will come and the dead poet who 
was Shakespeare’s sister will put on the body which she has so often laid down.”

Three to compare 

Beatrice Webb <http://www.webbmemorialtrust.org.uk/beatrice-webb/>: My 
Apprenticeship (1926)
EM Forster: Aspects of the Novel 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/19152> (1927)
Germaine Greer: The Madwoman’s Underclothes 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v08/n21/carolyn-steedman/wonderwoman> (1986)

A Room of One’s Own is available in Penguin Modern Classics (£5.99). To order 
a copy for £4.79 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/room-of-one-s-own-5.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 