
The Flaming Lips, On tour

As befits a band with a cosmic mindset, the career of the Flaming Lips has 
proceeded in something like lunar phases: a waxing and waning in their 
fortunes, with some observable cycles. After a few years as the house band of 
the so-called "50-quid bloke", the band are again entering an experimental 
phase: in the last few years they have embraced oceanic electric jazz and a 
24-hour song. It might be a while before another major breakthrough, but their 
avant garde showmanship remains a delight to behold. 

Usher Hall, Edinburgh, Mon; O2 Apollo, Manchester, Tue; O2 Academy, Brixton, 
SW9, Wed; Rock City, Nottingham, Thu; touring to 31 May

JR

Dot To Dot, Nottingham & Bristol

Dot To Dot is the event that takes a whole multi-venue festival on tour. A 
sensible grouping of new bands down the bill, the chief attraction at the top 
is the presence of three solid acts. There's Peace, a major-label indie band 
who are amusingly apologetic about the fact; and Drenge, the wonderfully 
unhinged playing of two brothers. The biggest draw, however, might be the 
gentle intricacies of Real Estate. Martin Courtney's touching songs for their 
three albums have nostalgically hymned untroubled, even innocent, days and set 
them to mesmeric indie rock. Their sound is reminiscent of classic 80s guitar 
music from the Smiths to Felt; the spirit, though, is quite their own.

Various venues, Bristol (Sat) & Nottingham (Sun)

JR

Hamilton Leithauser, London

Once the singer of the Walkmen, a group who managed to be both too early and 
too late for the rush of interest in New York guitar bands in 2000, it probably 
stands to reason that Hamilton Leithauser's signature vocal mode is angry 
disappointment. A powerful singer of emotional songs, it's Leithauser you'll 
have heard all over The Rat, the band's 2004 hit, which – fittingly again – 
seemed to herald a breakthrough that never arrived. With the Walkmen now 
disbanded, it's no surprise that Leithauser has, for the moment, had enough of 
bands. His debut solo album, entitled Black Hours, finds him solo by name and 
solo by nature. Embracing the heartbroken persona of Frank Sinatra or Nilsson's 
darkest moments, his new songs are beautifully arranged missives from the 
slough of despond. It's about as lonely as you can sound with a string section 
on hand.

Bush Hall, W12, Tue

JR

Supersonic, Birmingham

Birmingham's alternative festival goes bespoke this year with a "limited 
edition" event, a smaller two-dayer with a capacity of just a few hundred, and 
a stellar lineup. On the bill are synth jams from Karen Gwyer; power 
electronics by Pharmakon; the excellently named noise project Sly & The Family 
Drone; a piece for massed guitars and drums by Ex-Easter Island Head; plus 
Felix Kubin and Sleaford Mods – and that's just for starters. Headline slots 
come from Sweden's lyrically fierce Jenny Hval; psychic operators Matmos; the 
ear-bleedingly loud Swans; and noise-rock stalwarts Wolf Eyes. Outside of the 
music are kids' events, a film programme curated by deluxe soundtrack reissue 
label Death Waltz, and The Duke Mitchell Film Club; plus an If Wet salon, where 
you can expect a show-and-tell of home-made instruments and sonic explorations 
from a number of guests.

Custard Factory, Fri to 31 May

JA

Jan Garbarek And The Hilliard Ensemble, Bath & Salisbury

When the ethereal Norwegian saxophonist Jan Garbarek and British early music 
vocal quartet the Hilliards got together for 1994's Officium, it seemed 
astonishing that a label as eclectic as ECM hadn't put the pair together 
sooner. Once the world heard Garbarek's haunting sighs, shy warbles and 
Coltrane-esque figures mingling with the Hilliards' soaring counter-tenor lines 
and sonorous low chants, the album flew off the shelves. Garbarek the 
improviser is both more relaxed and more forceful now than when the Officium 
venture began, and there's more spontaneity in this partnership than it first 
seems.

Bath Abbey, Mon; Salisbury Cathedral, Tue

JF

Moses Und Aron, Cardiff

When Schoenberg died in 1951, two of the three acts of his biblical epic Moses 
Und Aron had been finished for almost 20 years but he had been unable to find a 
way to compose the third. The score is now performed as a torso, but hasn't 
been seen here for almost half a century, since Georg Solti conducted the UK 
premiere at Covent Garden in 1965, in a production by Peter Hall that caused a 
scandal with its orgiastic dance round the golden calf in the second act. 
There's no orgy in their updating of the story to the present-day Middle East, 
but this production does have John Tomlinson as the patriarch and Rainer Trost 
as his brother; Lothar Koenigs conducts.

Wales Millennium Centre, Sat, 30 May & 7 Jun; touring to 26 Jul

AC
 