
Michelle Sampson spends her working day in an environment that would make many 
harassed commuters reach for their passports to join her. As Learning Centre 
Assistant at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, her 
office is in an elegant, leafy district in Paris, and within walking distance 
of the Eiffel Tower.

 Working for the Head of the Learning Centre, Sampson, 31, and two other 
assistants share the duties of organising training courses for the 1,850 
permanent Secretariat staff and a constantly changing population of 
professional consultants - economists, scientists, lawyers - engaged in 
gathering and analysing data that will be later be used by the world's senior 
decision-makers.

 The OECD develops economic and social policy in such areas as finance and 
investment, employment (and, excitingly, countering money laundering and 
corruption). Sometimes described as a think-tank for the richest countries of 
the world, it provides a forum for ambassadors from its 29 member countries to 
discuss issues of global concern.

 Sampson enjoys the variety and pace of the job. On a typical day she arrives 
at the office before 9am to prepare the training room. This involves setting up 
the video camera, TV and overhead projector, getting the trainer and checking 
the list of participants. Other courses may be taking place on the same day in 
OECD offices scattered throughout Paris, and these will have to be checked in 
person or by telephone.

Monitoring the training is just part of the job. 'Between class visits, I'll 
be taking telephone inquiries from staff who want more information about this 
or that course. There are also bills to be paid and I have to update the 
training budget.' Most of the internal and external communication takes place 
by E-mail. One of the most popular courses on offer is assertiveness training. 
As well as learning the verbal strategies, staff practise some more covert 
techniques, learning how to perceive and use assertive body language.

 'I've taken this course myself and it's terrifying,' confesses Sampson. 'You 
really learn to think about just how you are perceived by other people. Some of 
the secretarial assistants feel intimidated if they are required to make 
presentations or have to attend an interview and they find this course 
invaluable.'

She also organises the extensive language programme. The working languages of 
the organisation are English and French, and applicants for the job of 
secretarial assistant (this title covers secretarial support at all levels) are 
required to have a good working knowledge of their second language. Staff are 
given the opportunity to attend a language course once or twice a week: it's no 
hardship in Paris.

 Sampson was recruited by the OECD five years ago while working in Paris for 
an international law firm. As a secretarial assistant in the Directorate for 
Financial, Fiscal and Enterprise Affairs, her job was to support training 
courses for non-member countries.

 She travelled to Copenhagen, Vienna, Ankara and Moscow to assist in the 
programme for tax officials from east European countries who wanted to develop 
their revenue-raising systems. 'This is where I fell into the training role and 
found that I liked it'.

 After three years she moved to her present job and hopes to stay in it 
indefinitely. 'We work on three-yearly contracts, and I love the French way of 
life, food, restaurants and the wonderful transport system. And the OECD is 
full of so many interesting people from all over the world.' But above all, she 
finds that her job is rewarding, in itself and for the many people who use her 
skills.

 'At the end of a learning programme people often send messages to thank you 
for such a good course. This makes me feel that I have done something 
worthwhile'.
 