
The sea ice covering the most northerly part of our planet shrank last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/arctic-sea-ice-shrinks-to-second-lowest-level-ever-recorded>
 to its second lowest level on record. Once stable at around 7.5m sq km in 
summer, the Arctic ice cap has been dwindling for several decades and dropped 
to an area of 4.1m sq km a few days ago, a victim of the rising fossil-fuel 
emissions and increasing temperatures that now beset the Earth. At the same 
time, the US space agency Nasa announced that August 2016 had tied with July 
2016 as thehottest month globally ever recorded 
<http://phys.org/news/2016-09-august-equals-july-hottest-month.html>. Our world 
is heating up dramatically.

As winter returns to the far north, its ice cover will slowly return, of 
course, though it will certainly not be restored to its former glory. The 
overall trend of summer Arctic sea-ice cover has been a steadily downwards one 
for the past 30 years, an inexorable decline that has deeply worrying 
implications for the region, and for the rest of the planet, as we report 
today. An Arctic that is regularly free of sea ice in summer – a real prospect 
for the middle of the century – will open up that fragile, pristine wilderness 
to all sorts of potential woes: overfishing; pollution related to oil drilling 
and mineral extraction; the eradication of indigenous species; and the 
destruction of native communities. In addition, with little or no ice left to 
reflect solar radiation back into space, and its dark waters absorbing more and 
more of that radiation, the Arctic will heat up even further, enhancing the 
global warming that has already taken a grip on the planet. As Professor Gail 
Whiteman, of Lancaster University,remarked last week 
<http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/lums/news/forget-the-ftse-500-the-arctic-is-the-real-barometer-of-global-risk/>
: “Forget the FTSE: Arctic sea ice is the real barometer of global risk.”

Urgent action is clearly needed, a point that is not lost on international 
climate negotiators. In a few weeks, they are scheduled toassemble in Marrakech 
<http://www.cop22.ma/en> in order to discuss the ratification of the Paris 
agreement, which was hammered out late last year and which seeks to limit the 
burning of fossil fuels in order to restrict carbon dioxide emissions and so 
limit global temperature rises to around 2C since pre-industrial times. To 
date, a total of 27 nations – including Brazil, China and the United States – 
have formally backed the plan, and a further 20 countries are expected to add 
their names in the next few days. Crucially, the United Kingdom hasmade no 
commitment to back the Paris accord 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-37272671>. Yet the agreement 
needs the formal support of 55 nations before it can come into force.

The fact that the Britain still refuses to put its name to the treaty is 
therefore deeply worrying. The government claims that it is committed, 
ultimately, to backing the agreement but the longer it delays, the more it is 
likely to lose the leadership it once commanded when it came to climate change 
issues. Even if Britain misses the legislative deadline set for the Marrakech 
meeting, an announcement now that it is committed to the Paris agreement would 
send a much-needed message to the world. It would let them know that the 
current UK government still realises the urgency of the situation and the 
perils that face the planet.

The problem is not one that should be viewed as being vague and global, 
however. It is a precise danger and it is a local one as well. As the planet 
heats up, so the United Kingdom is also becoming warmer and wetter. Our eight 
warmest years on record have occurred from 2000 onwards, and during that time 
we have also experienced six of our seven wettest years. The atmosphere, as it 
heats up, is holding on to more and more water which it then releases as bursts 
of intense rainfall. This point was emphasised by theNational Flood Resilience 
Review 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/news/2016/national-flood-resilience-review>
, published earlier this month, which admitted that we are now facing a greater 
threat of flooding due to heaver rainfall and rising sea levels than ever 
before. Monthly rainfall totals in winter could be up to 30% higher than recent 
past extremes, it stated.

Last December’s record flooding – which saw 341mm of rain fall in 24 hours at 
Honister Pass in the Lake District, for example – is certainly likely to be 
surpassed in the next few years. Yet the government is so far committed to 
making only the most rudimentary of infrastructure improvements in order to 
combat the problem, and has pledged a mere £12m of extra cash for anti-flooding 
measures. That level of response is simply insufficient.

There is a real need now for the government to assure the public that it 
understands the risks we face from climate change and commit itself fully to 
this urgent and pressing issue.

CLIMATE CHANGE
 