
General knowledge paper 2012-2013, sat by the pupils of King William's 
College, Isle of Man

"Scire ubi aliquid invenire possis, ea demum maxima pars eruditionis est"

1.

1 What are diamonded with panes of quaint device?

2 What tale began with serious problems for a scorpion?

3 What made Diamond's eyes lustrous with desire in the Lodi Gardens?

4 What stolen Crown diamond was retrieved during a rendering of the Hoffman 
Barcarolle?

5 Who, in a way emulated Gibbon, but substituted a Third Chimpanzee for the 
Roman Empire?

6 What title embraced studies, amongst others, of a walking talking killing 
machine, a hell fighter, the time-warp tough guy and an honourable man?

7 What was queried as an alternative to suffocation with cassia or a fatal 
shooting with pearls?

8 What diamond was kept by the knight to the disadvantage of the rogue?

9 What blink like dull diamonds in the smog of Eastern Megalolopolis?

10 What was the eye in Aurangzeb's peacock throne?

2.

1 Who was known as the Queen of the Blues?

2 Who went from Hastings to Holland, and then to Cornwall?

3 Who retained the embalmed "capital" remnant of her executed husband?

4 Which corpulent lady was affectionately known by her family as Betty Humbug?

5 How is Tolhuys's creation bearing the inscriptions Victoria, Libertas and 
Scalda popularly known?

6 Which legendary serial gynaecocide was consigned to immurement, while her 
accomplices were burned at the stake?

7 Where is Whitehead's equine memorial to more than two and a half years of 
deadly conflict?

8 Who felt quickening at six months on receiving her cousin's good news?

9 Who lisped her threat to repeatedly scream to the point of vomiting?

10 Which relative called "Cusha! Cusha! Cusha!"?

3. In what work:



1 does the clown inadvertently commit filicide?

2 is the two-timing stout knight emptied from a laundry basket into the river?

3 does a half-caste Peruvian gentleman twice change his name and become a monk?

4 does conflict between patricians and plebeians lead to poisoning of the 
chief magistrate?

5 does a nobleman unknowingly order the beheading of his brother, supposing 
that he was the son of a gypsy?

6 does the heathen King, like his real daughter, convert to Judaism, following 
a meteorologically induced period of insanity?

7 does jealousy over a military promotion lead to a contrived 'affair', 
followed by uxoricide and then suicide?

8 is the King assassinated at a festive occasion, following a prediction by a 
fortune-teller?

9 is a regicide conspiracy overheard in the great tomb in the Cathedral of 
Aachen?

10 does the love affair of a phthisical courtesan end in her premature death?

4. Who:

1 held exclusive dinner parties at Veere?

2 is remembered in Northland's most westerly point?

3 built an insular wooden cabin by a sea which took his name?

4 is famed for his chained fringillid and died in the devastating Thunderclap?

5 was a student of Brahe and later made diagrammatic representations for VOC?

6 was the father-in-law of a great painter and the guest of a quiet leader on 
the day of his fatal shooting?

7 was the ethical philosopher with an interest in optics who received a cherem?

8 stayed in Queens' and was Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity?

9 developed his own apparatus to study animalcules?

10 removed Royal Charles from Chatham?

5. Who:

1 put Fairfax on the map?

2 wrote of guinea pigs and moles?

3 supposedly came from Tappington?

4 won on a Rainbow (and also Florrie)?

5 modelled for The Pitcher Goes to the Well?

6 recognised his 20th-century Armageddon when elevated to the Lords?

7 was credited with the invention of IC?

8 shared with Eleanor at Plas Newydd?

9 was neither gossip nor breadbate?

10 surveyed Itseqqortoormiit?

6.

1 Whose first pseudonym was adopted from Billy Powell?

2 Who wrote morbidly of the dead stretched at the cross roads?

3 Who was successfully sued by Howe for patent infringement?

4 Who enjoyed cigale rôti with sauce à la coccinelle at Chez Pêcheur?

5 Whose contemplative discourse was prefaced with a quote from St John 21:3?

6 Who took unified joys from a multitude of tongues from words derived from a 
Patmos vision?

7 Who wrote about the wisdom of Acheson, Harriman and four others?

8 Who led the successful prosecution in a famous fly-paper case?

9 Who held a governorship and two bishoprics simultaneously?

10 Which member for Harwich, chose to sit for Youghal?

7. Where: 

1 in reality, was Snowfield?

2 are the branchy trees white with rime?

3 may Robin Hood's lieutenant have been buried?

4 appropriately, did Vigar and Smith provide a final two ton twist?

5 might the splendour of St John the Baptist earn the village city status?

6 does the heroine who illuminated Üsküdar look down on London Road?

7 did an error with the eggs and almonds spawn a famous dessert?

8 does Lent kick off with a historic two day match?

9 does St Ann provide free drinks 24/7?

10 is the gate free from blame?

8.

 1 Of what fishes was who declared the Triton?

2 Who likened the haberdasher's offering to a bivalve?

3 Who was likened to which dried clupeid without his roe?

4 Who reminded Goodfellow of hearing a mermaid on whose back?

5 Who suggested that land might be purchased as cheap as what malodorous fish?

6 Who intoned about whose jaws, mixed with a poisonous root and a lupine tooth?

7 Who, in alluding to age, refers to what creature progressing in reverse?

8 Who chose to play the fool and alluded to a small bait-fish?

9 Whose face had pimples, described as what gastropods?

10 Who found that what soused fish caused flatulence?

9. Who:

1 inspired Stravinsky?

2 described a raptor's daily meal of liver?

3 inspired the forester's son from Erasbach?

4 described a chaste form of mutual appreciation?

5 was acknowledged specifically by the binomial pioneer?

6 described by one writer as an "equine irritant", was the victim of Conium?

7 wrote about 10,000 involved in a fraternal conflict?

8 wrote of warring amphibians and rodents?

9 received a pattered mention by Stanley?

10 inspired a titled Austrian composer?

10. Where:

1 is there always snow?

2 did the hirsute hunter board the train?

3 is rail traffic enabled by a vertical descent of 41 m?

4 could you have chowder for breakfast, dinner and supper?

5 do Alvares and Rivera interchange with Abraham and Jacob?

6 did the finding of wild grapes prompt the explorer to name the island after 
his daughter?

7 does a 20th-century Stump also include features of St Giles?

8 did an ocular phenomenon exploit low temperatures?

9 were the cogs first motivated by Hero?

10 did two Starks idle down?

11.

1 Who shot Geoff Hammond?

2 Who, on his death bed, quoted from Goldsmith's Elegy?

3 To which firm of accountants was the club-footed orphan articled?

4 Whose seaside suicide was greeted by six slim splashing struggling sharks?

5 Who succumbed to uncontrollable diaphragmatic spasms in the Arabian Sea?

6 Which Russian libertine was lost in the Borneo jungle in pursuit of the 
Assistant Curator?

7 For what, in Mrs Hodges' own private opinion, was hoak preferable to helm?

8 Who, having left one painter for another, ended her life with Oxalic Acid?

9 Which diamond merchant spent £260 on a sable cape and muff?

10 Whose final ante-mortem word was "England"?

12. In 1912

1 who put phonetics on the stage?

2 who was promoted to glory at Hadley Wood?

3 who wrote finally "For God's sake look after our people"?

4 what truth was officially revealed on the anniversary of Marx's birth?

5 what Barkham Manor "discovery" was revealed in Burlington House?

6 which silver medallist was exonerated at inquiry, following an accusation of 
bribery?

7 in what were Austria, Bohemia and Luxembourg guilty of "no show"?

8 whose range of manual contact was reduced from 50-65 to 18?

9 what May Day gift was secretly erected overnight?

10 what addition followed Oklahoma?

13.

1 Who created a Circus with Dame Laura?

2 Whose work in Chelsea "never can happen again"?

3 What factory mark represents the Sound and two Belts?

4 Which Bohemian produced cabbage roses for whom in the Kingdom?

5 Who first placed designs in silver on green pottery for which company?

6 The Saxon Hercules was instrumental in the establishment of what factory?

7 Who famously painted great white birds in flight for which company?

8 Which Salopian firm illustrated bird-assisted Chinese fishing?

9 What French product is identifiable by a hunting horn?

10 Which Magyar product is literally eosinophilic?

14.

1 What is likened to a round goblet?

2 What does the Farmer carry in his boots?

3 Of what are Poetry and Religion a product?

4 What would Steffi weep to see, burst like a cave?

5 Which organ of the tobacconist is rotted, and which is spotted?

6 What might be excited by a bashful young potato or a not-too-French French 
bean?

7 What did the Robson brothers settle for the large Bostonian?

8 Where did my mother's life make me a man?

9 What is a smoky yellow like old vellum?

10 Wherein does Hope spring eternal?

15.



1 Who was the Bishop of Bishops?

2 Whose exploits at Estourmel earned him an award for valour?

3 Who likened Harry to an urtically sheltered ripening strawberry?

4 What disguise did Mazzini adopt when confronting the Rev Lord Henry?

5 Who might have included preaching to beefeaters and taking care of religious 
documents in his CV?

6 Who, following decapitation, picked up his head and carried it for 10 km, 
delivering a sermon as he walked?

7 Who was killed, together with his wife, by a collapsing chimney during the 
Great Storm?

8 Who was murdered in East Africa 16 months after his ordination?

9 Which Nordic Bishop was beheaded for opposing Lutheranism?

10 Which mounted warrior was recreated by Bissen?

16. 

1 To whom were all places alike?

2 Who was rescued by Reino and revived by Helvi?

3 Which curious character would claim a preference for grouse?

4 Who pilfered and pillaged, and snitched and stole all over town?

5 What thought experiment questioned the Copenhagen interpretation?

6 Who was revived with rum and milk after rescue from flotsam off the Dutch 
coast?

7 Who was an impudent fraud that never had any financial backing?

8 Who learned, terminally, that "one false step is ne'er retrieved"?

9 Who was Mrs Ribston's cousin (who did not give credit)?

10 Whose pupils were lunar responsive?

17. Which spirited concoction of which House:

1 is an amaryllid?

2 is papaveraceous?

3 recalls pink-tipped pale hands?

4 recalls a Piedmontese foundation?

5 might have been named Jolly Roger?

6 shares its name with a Breton music festival?

7 might be translated as inconsistency?

8 might be derived from Taro root?

9 suggests a raptor's grasp?

10 is a riding-habit?

18.

 During 2012:

1 justify 29-17-19-65.

2 which unifying Messiah has waned irreversibly?

3 whose passing recalled the development of an earlier 911?

4 what revealed Dunearnin', Indisarray, Inveruin and Rum deal?

5 what, among many others, might have reawakened the Cumbrian burghers?

6 what event has recalled one small step for man and one giant leap for 
mankind?

7 whose bigger and bigger and bigger creations have merited a bigger award?

8 how is sadness over Erithacus bringing happiness to Rebecca?

9 how did Rothesay deliver cold, wet and windy weather?

10 where was a flame seen on Saturn?

Answers will appear in the new year
 