A detail from a work of art that celebrated the 2012 London Olympics. Who 
created it?  Tracey Emin  Martin Creed  Chris Ofili  Rachel Whiteread  Anish 
Kapoor and Cecil Balmond A detail from a work of art that celebrated the 2012 
London Olympics. Who created it?  Tracey Emin  Martin Creed  Chris Ofili  
Rachel Whiteread  Anish Kapoor and Cecil Balmond A detail from a work of art 
that celebrated the 2012 London Olympics. Who created it?  Tracey Emin  Martin 
Creed  Chris Ofili  Rachel Whiteread  Anish Kapoor and Cecil Balmond A detail 
from a work of art that celebrated the 2012 London Olympics. Who created it?  
Tracey Emin  Martin Creed  Chris Ofili  Rachel Whiteread  Anish Kapoor and 
Cecil Balmond A detail from a work of art that celebrated the 2012 London 
Olympics. Who created it?  Tracey Emin  Martin Creed  Chris Ofili  Rachel 
Whiteread  Anish Kapoor and Cecil Balmond Who showed this medieval carving on 
screen in 2012?  Waldemar Januszczak  Simon Schama  Elizabeth Price  Peter 
Jackson Guitar legend Eric Clapton sold a modern masterpiece from his 
collection for £21.3 million. Who painted it?  Damien Hirst  Gerhard Richter  
David Hockney  Lucian Freud Titian's Venus and Adonis featured in which of 
these 2012 exhibitions:  Peter Lely: A Lyrical Vision at the Courtauld Gallery  
Tracey Emin: She Lay Down Deep Beneath the Sea at Turner Contemporary, Margate  
Shakespeare: Staging the World at the British Museum  Titian’s First 
Masterpiece at the National Gallery Who created this?  James Turrell  Late 
Neolithic people in about 2000 BC  Jeremy Deller  Aliens The Dandy comic was in 
the news this year because:  It was appropriated by Spartacus Chetwynd for her 
Turner Prize performance The Shameful Secrets of Desperate Dan  Damien Hirst 
said it inspired him to become an artist  It stopped printing  Damien Hirst was 
accused of stealing an idea from it for his installation Cow Pie The art critic 
Robert Hughes, who died in 2012, once wrote a less-than-eulogistic essay on the 
passing of the painter Jean-Michel Basquiat. Was it called:  So Long, Dickhead  
Good Riddance to Bad Basquiat  Elegy for a Non-Entity  Requiem for a 
Featherweight  You got…  Clearly you have a lifelong membership of the Tate  
Very good effort – but don't pick an argument with Brian Sewell  Maybe words 
are more your thing  Challenge your friends Submit answers  