
Abdurzak Hadi has worked as a minicab driver for 10 years, and as an Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> driver in London for nearly 
three. He came to the UK as a child refugee from Somalia in 1992 and now has a 
young family but is struggling to support them.


Uber is treating its drivers as sweated labour, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/09/uber-drivers-report-sweated-labour-minimum-wage>
His low pay is, like that of many Uber drivers, topped up by the state with 
working tax credits. His 10-year-old son has been receiving treatment for 
leukaemia and he hoped that being an Uber driver would allow him the 
flexibility to arrange his work around hospital appointments and collecting his 
other children from school, sharing the caring with his wife, but he says the 
reality has been very different.

Hadi regularly works about 40 hours a week for Uber. He says most of the 
drivers he knows work much longer hours to make ends meet but his children’s 
needs prevent him from doing so. Last week, after paying Uber 20% commission, 
he earned £557 before costs for a full working week; some weeks it has been 
much less. Newer drivers have 25% deducted.

He estimates that the costs for hiring his vehicle, paying public hire vehicle 
insurance, fuel, his licence fees, car cleaning and phone hire are about £285 a 
week, so his hourly earnings fell below the statutory “national living wage” of 
£7.20 an hour, if it applied.

In his previous job he could ask the operator to give him local jobs when he 
needed to come to the end of a shift, but he says he is unable to do that with 
Uber because he is penalised by being logged out if he turns down jobs that are 
too far away. “If I am self-employed I ought to be able to take jobs I want or 
not, but you don’t even know where the passenger is going.”

Hadi is one of 19 drivers who took Uber to an employment tribunal, which ruled 
that they were not self-employed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
, but workers entitled to basic rights, including the national living wage. 
Uber is appealing against the decision.

Although he has worked for different operators in the past, he says they have 
been undercut by Uber so are no longer recruiting, and he has nowhere else to 
go.

 “At the beginning the money was really good because fares were higher but now 
they have cut them and flooded the market. Sometimes I have to wait well over 
an hour for a job. It’s taxpayers like you who are funding Uber at the moment 
because we are not earning enough and having to go to the government to ask for 
benefits.”
 