
On a recent snowy Saturday, Jim Estill went knocking on his neighbours’ doors, 
offering to shovel snow from walkways and driveways for cash.

Behind him stood a handful of Syrian refugees, newly arrived to the Canadian 
city of Guelph, in south-western Ontario. Estill, the CEO of 
multimillion-dollar appliance company Danby, was acting as the group’s 
salesman, and helped the refugees land 50 snow-clearing jobs.

It was a glimpse into the deep relationship that has been forged since the 
mild-mannered executive decided just over a year ago to spend C$1.5m (£904,000) 
to bring 200 Syrian refugees toCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>
.

In the summer of 2015, moved by the headlines emerging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> from what he called one of the “the 
greatest humanitarian crises of our lifetime”, Estill began working out how 
many families he could help under Canada’s private sponsorship programme, which 
waslaunched 35 years ago after the Vietnam war 
<http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/ref-sponsor/> and has 
brought more than 275,000 refugees to Canada. It allows private citizens to 
welcome and settle refugees as long as they commit to covering the expenses for 
the first year or so and helping the newcomers ease into their new lives.

The 59-year-old estimated that it would cost C$30,000 to support a family of 
five in Guelph, a small city some 60 miles (96km) west of Toronto, and that he 
could support about 50 families.

“I didn’t think that was a big deal,” Estill said in an interview with the 
Guardian. “Guelph is 120,000 in population, and 50 families is maybe 250 or 300 
people. That’s a blip, that’s nothing.”

He called a meeting with several of the city’s religious and aid organisations 
in September, all of whom signed up to his ambitious plan.

That was the easy bit. What followed, Estill said, was the worst part: how to 
choose who would come to Canada, amid the millions who have been displaced. 
“Basically you’re playing God,” he said. “You’re choosing who lives and who 
dies and who comes and who doesn’t.”

Estill decided that his scheme’s success could be measured by refugees 
eventually working, paying taxes and having some degree of integration into 
Canadian society. With that goal in mind, he favoured those who had relatives 
in the area, as well as families. “The part that was bad is that we wouldn’t 
take a single mother with eight kids, because we thought, ‘Your life is not 
going to be that good and how are you going to settle successfully?’ So that’s 
the way we chose,” he said. “It’s terrible, but what can you do?”

He selected 58 families, but wants to continue to bring in refugees in waves 
of 50 families at a time, ensuring each wave is settled before launching into 
the paperwork to bring in the next group.

So far 47 families have arrived in Guelph, with another 11 expected in the 
coming months. Helping the newcomers – who will eventually number about 225 in 
total – adjust to their new lives has become a city-wide effort, with more than 
800 residents volunteering to help navigate challenges that range from finding 
rental housing in a city where the vacancy rate hovers around 0.6%, to 
introducing the newcomers to the frigid, snowy Canadian winters.

The result is a full-scale operation – staffed by volunteers and bolstered by 
a deluge of donations – that offers the refugees everything from job training 
to English-language classes. Each family is paired with Arabic- and 
English-speaking mentors, who aid them in tasks that range from riding the city 
bus to setting up a bank account.

“It’s been quite amazing,” said Sara Sayyed, who along with her husband, 
Muhammed Sayyed, of the Muslim Society of Guelph, have helped Estill oversee 
the settlement of the families. “Everybody has gotten involved, from the 
municipal government to all the different organisations that are out there. 
We’ve got people from all walks of life, volunteering everything from their 
time to their services to donating things.”

Estill, however, has been the backbone of the effort. He and his wife have 
billeted a steady stream of newly arrived families in their home, and he often 
spends evenings visiting the homes of newcomers. New rental housing has been 
financed and an office building converted into residences as he works to 
increase the city’s supply of rental homes. At Danby, he established a 
programme that offers the refugees three months of work experience to get them 
on their feet, allowing them a flexible schedule to accommodate job interviews 
and the twice-weekly in-house English-language classes.

In one downtown shopping centre, renovations are under way for a two-storey 
establishment that will host a dollar store, backed by Estill and run by a 
31-year-old former car salesman from Damascus.

“I still don’t believe it,” said the refugee, who asked to be identified as 
Youssef in order to protect his family in Syria. After he expressed an interest 
in running the store, Estill opened a line of credit for him and told him he 
could own the small business. “He brought me here to this country and he didn’t 
just stop there.”

Youssef fled Syria when the war began, ending up in Cairo. He had been trying 
to work up the courage to smuggle himself into Europe, but fear always held him 
back. After hearing about Estill’s project from a cousin in Canada, he filled 
out the applications, knowing it was a longshot but wondering whether Canada 
might hold the destiny that he had failed to reach in Europe.

He was shocked to find out he had been chosen. “I immediately Googled his 
name. I mean, who is this person who is going to pay $1.5m to sponsor strangers 
that he has never met?”

When he arrived in Canada in July, he made a point of seeking out Estill. “I 
thanked him for his generosity – I told him that no one has been as generous to 
me as Jim Estill, besides my parents.”

Deep gratitude colours Youssef’s description of Estill. “He drives a small 
car, he is extremely humble,” said Youssef, pointing to Estill’s Toyota Prius. 
With a laugh he added, “If I were a millionaire like Jim, I would never, ever 
drive his car. All of this money he has, he only cares about humanitarian 
efforts.”

For Estill, the payback on his investment has been in watching the families 
settle into life in Canada. “There’s nothing more satisfying than seeing that,” 
he said. More than half of the families who have arrived so far have found jobs 
and are paying their own rent, taking delight in purchases such as their first 
television.

He is quick to brush aside any praise for what he has done. “I still don’t see 
what the big deal is. And I’m surprised more people don’t step up and do it,” 
he said. “I didn’t want to grow old and say I stood by and did nothing. So I 
decided to do my small part.”
 