
I resigned from Girl Scouts more than 20 years ago, but yesterday I realized 
that the people who told me I’d always be a scout at heart were right: thenews 
<http://www.wbrc.com/story/34269447/the-latest-inaugural-committee-releases-parade-detail>
 that the Girl Scouts are sending a contingent to participate in Donald Trump’s 
inauguration filled me with real rage. How can an organization that promises to 
build “girls of courage, confidence, and character, who make the world a better 
place” send them to celebrate the ascent of a leader who would likely consider 
them fair game for sexual assault if they grow up to be “beautiful”?

Girl Scouts is important to many girls. It was for me: a kid from a 
two-nationality, two-religion family, growing up in a small city in upstate New 
York in the mid-80s and 90s. There weren’t too many public spaces where I felt 
like I belonged – my family did not practice any faith. There was no community 
center for people like us. But my Girl Scout troops filled that gap: our weekly 
meetings were an all-female space where empowering girls was central.

Enrolling was inexpensive, which meant that my fellow troop members came from 
across the economic spectrum in our conservative suburb, and it was 
overwhelmingly open, which meant that everyone joined: girls who were, like me, 
the kids of immigrants. Girls of color. Girls with disabilities, from 
non-traditional families. Girls who had a tough time fitting in elsewhere. 
Girls from groups thatDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and his most vocal supporters 
disparage, demean and threaten.

Yes, we made some dumb crafts, and I still have questions about the Girl Scout 
cookie industry, but what I gained from Girl Scouts was a sense of what it was 
to feel duty to the community. It gave me my first exposure to volunteer work, 
to environmental activism, to the realities of life for people beyond my 
suburban elementary-school experience. I also learned some important lessons in 
patriotism. When I saw my mother, a British citizen, and the mother of my best 
friend in Girl Scouts, a woman from Iran, were allowed not to put their hands 
over their hearts to say the pledge of allegiance at a mother-daughter potluck 
dinner, I was shocked, and then I learned that it was OK to live in America and 
not be a card-carrying American. I learned about the first amendment and the 
separation of church of state.

Since my days as a Girl Scout, the organization has modernized and become even 
more open: their national anti-discrimination policy specifies that they “do 
not discriminate or recruit on the basis of race, religion, ethnicity, sexual 
orientation, socioeconomic status, national origin, or physical or 
developmental disability.” Unlike the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts 
also welcome transgender girls: “if the child is recognized by the family and 
school/community as a girl and lives culturally as a girl, then Girl Scouts is 
an organization that can serve her in a setting that is both emotionally and 
physically safe.”

But what would be emotionally and physically safe for a girl about watching 
the swearing-in of Mike Pence as Vice President, a man who’s sworn to overturn 
the laws that allow them to use the bathrooms where they feel safe? What of 
Muslim Girl Scouts, who’ve been told that their names will be put on a list, or 
undocumented girls, who are also welcome to join Girl Scouts? Should they 
march, or should only the girls who Donald Trump might one day rate “a 10” be 
encouraged to participate?

The tenets of the Girl Scout Law are slightly different from when I was a kid. 
“I will do my best,” the girls pledge, in the first verse, “to be honest and 
fair, friendly and helpful, considerate and caring, courageous and strong, and 
responsible for what I say and do.” The second verse requires them, among other 
things, “to respect authority.” But when the “authority” is so far from 
responsible for what he says and does – someone we’ve been told to judge by 
“what’s in his heart” rather than “what comes out of his mouth” – then why 
should Girl Scouts respect him?

Yes, it’s a tradition: they’ve marched at inauguration for decades. But does 
tradition justify collaboration with an administration that promises to oppress 
the young women it’s supposed to serve? As shown byJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/16/john-lewis-clash-with-donald-trump-sends-the-civil-rights-heros-book-to-no-1>
 and the other members of Congress who are choosing to skip the inauguration, 
sometimes human rights are more important than protocol. The Girl Scouts is an 
organization that has stood up for the human rights of girls and women for many 
years. Why quit now?
 