
Kathy Duva is no stranger to disappointment. The veteran promoter behind 
Sergey Kovalev has been on the wrong end of more than a few controversial 
decisions in her nearly three decades in the sport. Call it an occupational 
hazard.

But that experience doesn’t assuage the sting of Kovalev’s disputed 
unanimous-decision loss to Andre Ward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andre-ward-sergey-kovalev-boxing-points-decision-title-fight>
 on Saturday night in Las Vegas, a verdict that stripped the Russian champion 
of his light heavyweight titles and saddled him with the first loss of his 
professional career.

“I’m pissed off like I was the night that Whitaker fought Chavez, and the 
night Rocky Lockridge fought Wilfredo Gomez, and the night that Holyfield 
fought Lewis,” said Duva, as arena workers cleared the floor and broke down the 
ring at the T-Mobile Arena. “It’s a shame. Two guys fought their hearts out and 
I feel Sergey was the better man.”

Andre Ward scores controversial points victory over Sergey Kovalev
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andre-ward-sergey-kovalev-boxing-points-decision-title-fight>
She’s not alone. 

The Guardian scored it 115-112 to Kovalev, as did the Los Angeles Times and 
ESPN.com. The Associated Press, Fox Sports and HBO’s Harold Lederman each had 
it 116-111, while The Ring magazine saw it 117-110 for the champion.

The vehement cries of robbery on social media 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2016/11/people-are-furious-after-andre-wards-robbery-win-over-sergey-kovalev>
 were immediate and not entirely without merit. Yes, it’s a profoundly bad look 
that an Olympic hero from the United States fighting a Russian on home soil is 
the beneficiary of a close verdict handed down by three American judges.

But lousy decisions can be attributed to either corruption or incompetence. 
This was neither. This was a close, competitive fight that could have gone 
either way.

Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> matches are scored on a 
round-by-round system. The basic idea is to evaluate what happens over the 
course of an entire fight without putting too much emphasis on one or two key 
events that may loom larger in the mind’s eye. A razor-thin fight could 
theoretically be scored a 120-108 shutout if the judge, who is charged with 
scoring each round as an independent event, tips each round to the same fighter.

Four of the rounds on my 115-112 scorecard could have gone either way: the 
third (which I scored to Kovalev), the fifth (Ward), the 10th (Kovalev) and the 
12th (Ward). It doesn’t take much to get to 114-113 for Ward from there. Then 
consider the ringside judges are seated on different sides of the ring without 
the benefits of monitors or instant replay, their views of critical punches 
sometimes obstructed.

Then you have a case like Saturday night when Kovalev won his rounds on a 
mandate, while Ward nicked his with body work, precision punching and ring 
generalship as his opponent’s power and accuracy began to wane.

Ward deserves credit for coming back after an extremely precarious opening 
four rounds against perhaps the biggest puncher in the sport, making the 
necessary adjustments to make it a contest, then showing the finishing kick of 
a champion.

So while it might not be ideal to have the perception of controversy hanging 
over boxing’s fight of the year (especially when the sport’s reputationhas 
taken a battering of late 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/24/heavyweight-pantomime-wladimir-klitschko-tyson-fury-anthony-joshua>
), the fact that a showdown between two top-drawer operators in their primes 
was too close to call – instead of the one-sided showcases we’ve seen more and 
more in pay-per-view events in recent years – is not a bad thing.

Minutes after the decision came down, Duva said that Kovalev would be 
exercising a clause in ithe fight contract that calls for an immediate rematch 
unless both parties agree to forgo it. While Michael Yormark of Roc Nation 
Sports, which promotes Ward, declined to acknowledge the rematch clause, the 
lack of an immediately attractive alternative for either fighter augurs well 
for a a second installment next year.

That means another big payday for both fighters and, more importantly, an even 
bigger audience given the buzz about Saturday’s bout.

So Kovalev’s loss is boxing’s gain – and it won’t be so bad for his bottom 
line either.
 