
The Red Cross described the NHS as being in a state of “humanitarian crisis” (
Humanitarian crisis in NHS, says Red Cross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
, 7 January). Last Thursday, 5 January, all consultants at Salisbury District 
Hospital received a message stating, among other things: “Every bed in the 
hospital is full … ED [emergency department] majors is full with no more 
physical spaces to see patients, ambulances are queuing outside … All other 
local hospitals in a similar situation.” We were asked to do all we could to 
alleviate this dire situation.

It is not the fault of the health professionals, or of the hospital managers. 
This winter crisis was entirely predictable, as a direct result of cuts to 
health services and to social care. Government actively decided to do nothing 
to relieve the inevitable pressure even though ministers knew this would 
happen, not just in Salisbury but throughout the country. There are powerful 
voices close to government who want to see theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> fail because they are ideologically 
opposed to publicly provided healthcare. There are no more “efficiencies” to be 
made, and no slack in the system. The only solution is increased central 
funding.
Dr Robert Scott-Jupp
Consultant paediatrician, Salisbury, Wiltshire

• In 2010 the NHS had record high satisfaction rates, the lowest waiting 
lists, spending was 8.8% of GDP, and there was no “winter crisis”. It was not 
even an issue at the general election.

Now in 2017 the Red Cross announces a humanitarian crisis. Patients are 
suffering. Waiting lists greatly lengthening. Targets not met. Spending per 
patient has fallen for first time in its history, to 6.6% of GDP – much lower 
than the EU average.

Two men have been in charge: Andrew Lansley and Jeremy Hunt. One is rewarded 
with a peerage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/27/party-donors-advisers-former-mps-peers-dissolution-honours>
 andwork from private healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/tory-peer-andrew-lansley-accused-of-trying-to-stall-lobbying-bill>
, the other is held in contempt by NHS staff. Their bosses? David Cameron and 
Theresa May supported by Nick Clegg. None of these characters think the crisis 
is anything to do with them.

Their answer? More damaging re-disorganisation (sustainability and 
transformation plans), reduce beds further, shut more hospitals, continue with 
the worst financial squeeze in NHS history and force an ideological, wasteful, 
inefficient, evidence-free marketisation and privatisation policy.

Brexit still dominates the media, but fortunately not many of our fellow 
citizens will die from EU withdrawal. People are suffering as a direct result 
of a desire to replace the NHS with a US–style healthcare system. Deaths and 
suffering will escalate further once they have achieved their aim.

Commentators claim the vote to leave the EU was the gravest decision by the 
British people in decades. I believe the destruction of the NHS will have more 
profound consequences for the average citizen.

It’s time to stop this nonsense. Imaginative measures may be necessary to wake 
the public up to how serious this is.
Dr Paul J Hobday
Co-leader of the National Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Action Party, Horsmonden, Kent

• Your article about a “humanitarian crisis” in the NHS gives a stark and well 
informed warning. I have recently been an inpatient at the Worcestershire Royal 
Hospital, the focus of much current concern, and it’s clear to me that the 
problems are not inevitable, but down to political and management choices.

I experienced highly dedicated staff doing their best to provide excellent 
care, and working tirelessly despite obvious exhaustion. But ideologically 
driven policy is breaking the system, and the staff.

First, it needs proper funding; it’s clear this is what society wants.

Second, there are opportunities for savings that are ignored by the current 
regime. Costs for agency staff are a phenomenal drain. Outsourcing to private 
agencies is costly, and also poses risks. I learnt in hospital that some 
private cleaning agencies used in hospitals do not offer sick pay to their 
staff. This leaves the very people who work in an environment where there is a 
higher risk of sickness faced with the dilemma of either losing the little wage 
they earn when they themselves are ill, or potentially infecting seriously ill 
patients.

We need to support NHS staff, not break them. 
Philip King
Great Malvern, Worcestershire

• On Friday 9 December my daughter developed an acute appendicitis. She was 
seen at a minor injuries unit in Kidderminster where the diagnosis was 
confirmed. She was swiftly transferred by ambulance to Worcester Royal 
Hospital. There she was treated compassionately and expertly in A&E, in a 
cubicle not a corridor. This included support to enable her to maintain breast 
feeding for her six-month-old baby. In the evening her inflamed appendix was 
removed. I was able to visit the next day with her baby. The staff on the 
surgical ward were competent and helpful. She was well enough to return home 
later that day.

A little balance in your reporting of the problems at Worcester Royal Hospital 
in the Guardian of 7 January would be appreciated.
Dr Angela Bishop
Chesham, Buckinghamshire

• As a previous donor to the Red Cross I am dismayed at the use of the term 
“humanitarian crisis” to describe the current status of the NHS. The support 
Red Cross volunteers provide to the NHS is invaluable and may be more in 
demand, but this does not mean users of the NHS are facing a humanitarian 
crisis of starvation, lack of shelter, security and sanitation. To use the term 
in the way the Red Cross has used it today diminishes its power in describing 
real humanitarian crises in areas impacted by civil war, natural disasters and 
other calamitous events. What term is left for the Red Cross to use to describe 
the needs of people in these situations in the future?
Jenny Sergeant
Pontefract, West Yorkshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 