
The Railway Children will always be remembered for that scene at Oakworth 
station, the one where Roberta's father emerges through the steam of a 
departing train. "Daddy, my Daddy!" Plenty of people will admit to weeping when 
the youngJenny Agutter <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jenny-agutter> is 
reunited with her father. But watching it now, 40 years after it was first 
released, I find myself welling up long before then: at the birdsong, the 
music, the Yorkshire countryside, the lost Edwardian world.

Why does it make me cry? "Because you're an old sentimentalist," says Bernard 
Cribbins, who played Perks, the station porter, and is now an astonishingly 
frisky 81. "Which would apply to most of the audience who watch The Railway 
Children." Does Agutter cry? "No, she's hard as nails," says Cribbins. "You 
have to be an extraordinary person if you don't have a bit of a gulp."

Since it was first published (in serial form) in 1905, Edith Nesbit's tale of 
a family forced into penury after the mysterious arrest of their father has 
never been out of print, and has spawned three television series, two films and 
several plays. The definitive version, the 1970 film directed by Lionel 
Jeffries, has now been digitally restored; the memories are still fresh for 
Agutter, Cribbins and Sally Thomsett, who played Roberta's younger sister, 
Phyllis.

"People still go to me, 'Railway Child!'" says Agutter. She was cycling in 
London recently and a bus driver swore at her. "These two guys coming towards 
me said, 'What's his problem? Didn't he realise you're a Railway Child?'" 
She thinks about the way Jeffries put the "Daddy, my Daddy" scene together. 
"The sound goes, so that your reality is suspended. He uses this beautiful 
music and when the mist is going you just hear this 'ping', this tiny sound, 
and there's this character coming out of the mist. And you see her running 
towards him and then you see her feet go off the ground. All those images are 
just heartbreaking."

The three "children" had an unusual bond on set because they were guarding a 
secret: while 17-year-old Agutter was close to Roberta's age, Thomsett, playing 
11-year-old Phyllis, was already 20. The producers ordered her not to reveal 
her age to anyone. "It was in my contract: I wasn't allowed to do anything that 
anybody over 16 could do," says Thomsett. "I couldn't have a cigarette, I 
couldn't go out with my boyfriend and I couldn't drive my car. I had a fabulous 
new red Lotus that I just loved. I was sworn to secrecy."

One night, a frustrated Thomsett fled with Agutter to a nightclub in Leeds 
where a bikini-clad woman danced inside a cage. "We sat down, ordered a drink 
and a couple of boys came over to ask us to dance," says Thomsett. "The next 
thing I knew, Lionel Jeffries and our producer were standing there. We were 
caught red-handed."

Agutter, who had already filmed Walkabout, thinks that working at such a young 
age probably arrested her development. "You are put among people who are no 
longer your peers, so you are not trying things out at the same time – the 
experimental nature of adolescence goes by-the-by. I hadn't really been through 
any great emotional changes. When I went to America in my 20s there was a 
delayed adolescence, which Hollywood supports in an awful lot of people."

She eventually returned to Britain, married and became a mother. In 2000, she 
played Roberta's mother in the TV adaptation of The Railway Children. Which 
production does she prefer? "Er, you can't ask me that. One is attached to my 
childhood and one is attached to my being a mother. That's why it worked for 
me. I would come across people [who] were quite cross. They felt playing the 
mother was a betrayal of having been Roberta."

The day after we meet, there is the sad news that Lionel Jeffries has died. 
Agutter, in particular, has very fond memories: "I see him vividly with his red 
scarf around his neck, larger than life, being in command." He was only two 
years older than Cribbins, but she fears his later years were tough; despite 
his talents, he did not always get work.

Over the years, Agutter has become something of a Railway Children scholar and 
hopes to make a movie about Nesbit's unconventional life: a radical socialist, 
she lived in a chaotic ménage a trois with a serially unfaithful husband and an 
unhappy son, who later committed suicide. "She's this wonderful children's 
writer, but actually she was a mess."

We cry when we watch The Railway Children, Agutter says, because we are 
mourning our own lost innocence. "You cry because of your sense of yearning. 
That is what is in her book and that is what Lionel so cleverly gives people. 
People cry at their own sense of loss, that they don't have that magic they had 
when they were little. You suddenly become that child again, believing in 
something that you feel you've lost."

The Railway Children is screened at the National Media Museum, Bradford, on 28 
March as part of the Bradford film festival (nationalmediamuseum.org.uk 
<http://www.nationalmediamuseum.org.uk>), and is at selected cinemas from 2 
April.
 