
That Gordon Brown is drawing up proposals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/mar/28/government-plan-football-clubs-fans>
 to give fans a share in football clubs should come as no surprise. With the 
connections formed by trade unionism, church or social club having fallen away, 
support for a football club is one of the few ways left of showing 
communitarian endeavour and a willingness to belong.

If Brown did not own shares in Raith Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2000/aug/06/newsstory.sport20>, then any 
spin doctor worth his or her salt would quickly provide them. All modern 
politicians need a football club: the homily Ed Balls gives about his love of 
Norwich City establishes him – he thinks – as down to earth, a man of the 
people, and endearingly quixotic.

Alastair Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> 
plays the same card. Yes, he paved the way for the invasion of Iraq, but did 
you know, he is an avid Burnley supporter? (It's very difficult to avoid 
knowing, actually.) Before long barristers making pleas of mitigation will be 
saying things like: "And, your honour, the defendant is a passionate supporter 
of Derby County, and a lifelong season-ticket holder."

When not used to ingratiate, the identity of fan with team is poignant. 
Callers to 5 Live phone-ins will say "We showed our quality today", when what 
he really means is "I sat on my bottom and watched other people show their 
quality". When the conflation is taken further, and the presenter congratulates 
a caller ("Well done Derek, you played really well today" – though it is 
unlikely Derek is capable of running a hundred yards let alone playing 
professional football), this is because he has sacrificed much of his life to 
the sedentary pursuit of watching football.

He has entered a virtual or shadow world, and I feel that many of the fans who 
want to take over their clubs have done the same. Let's say they get 25% stakes 
... what then? In the case of the bigger teams there'll still be 11 
millionaires on the pitch, most – like the manager – foreign, with little 
connection to the town. While the grip of some creepy plutocrat might have been 
lessened, the town – if it is typically provincial – will remain a bleak, 
demoralised place in hock to the shareholder value of global conglomerates; 
where the life of the centre has been leeched away by hideous superstores; 
where investment in industry has given way to the supply of Americanised 
coffee, call centres, or some other activity lending no identity.

The centre of world iron-making was once on the banks of the Tees in 
Middlesbrough. Today there's a great expanse of ashy nothing, with just one new 
enterprise in place of the old: the Riverside football stadium, which for most 
of the week stands silent and isolated like an upturned and abandoned ship, 
because, despite the efforts of Rupert Murdoch, the game can't be played around 
the clock. (It can be talked about around the clock, of course – provided you 
repeat yourself every 10 minutes, as Sky and 5 Live do).

When James Alexander Gordon reads the results at 5 o'clock on Saturday, the 
former identity of the town or city flares briefly in my mind. When he says 
"Nottingham", I think lace; "Stoke", potteries, and so on. But then I'm 47 and 
with a retrospective frame of mind. Before long, the names of many of our 
provincial cities will evoke nothing but the team, and this is the problem, not 
the solution. I urge all those energetic, engaged people who want to take 
charge of their clubs to look beyond the touchline and take charge of their 
towns: stand for the council, fight the corporations, campaign for co-operation 
in the workplace, blog about how the Anglo-Saxon model of capitalism has all 
but killed provincial Britain, and become an active member of the party you 
think most likely to reverse the trend.

Red Knights? They're red herrings if you ask me.
 