



About the app

What devices does the app work on?

The Guardian app works on all Apple devices running iOS 9 and above.

Is the app available in all countries?

Yes, the app is available in every country through the App Store. For more 
tailored content, you can choose the Australian, International, UK and US 
editions of our content in the settings area.

Why can’t I see sudoku, quizzes or polls? 

We’re working hard to bring every piece of Guardian content to the apps. 
Currently there is a very small amount of content that does not work on mobile 
devices. We hope to change this in the future.

Making your app more personal




How do I add content to my homescreen?

You can add any section, topic or contributor to your homescreen. Simply tap 
the home button next to the content you want. You can find the button at top of 
any section you’re in, on a contributor’s profile page, or on the right hand 
side of search results. This will add the section, topic or contributor 
directly under the top stories on your homepage.

How can I rearrange the content on my homescreen?

First, open the ‘personalisation’ screen. You can do this by tapping on the 
menu icon in the top left-hand corner of the screen and then tapping on the cog 
icon and then under ‘Manage’ select ‘Home’. Then, use the small drag-handles on 
the left of each section to order them in a way that suits you.

How can I remove content from my homescreen?

Tap on the menu icon in the top left-hand corner of the screen, tap on the cog 
icon and then under ‘Manage’ select ‘Home’. You can then remove sections by 
tapping on the blue and white house icons.

Do you offer a condensed layout?

We offer a condensed layout for iPhones and the iPod Touch. In the app, tap on 
the settings icon in the top left-hand corner of the screen, tap on the cog 
icon and then select ‘Advanced settings’. Switch on ‘Condensed Layout’.

How can I choose which notifications I get?

As well as breaking news, you can choose to get notifications from your 
favourite contributors, liveblogs, series, and football (soccer) teams and 
matches. To do this, just tap the notifications button.

• For contributors, open an article and tap on the contributor’s name. The 
‘follow’ option is at the top of the page. This will send you a notification 
when that person publishes a new article


• Following a football team will automatically send you goal alerts when they 
score. Search for your team or tap on their crest on a football page. The 
‘follow team’ option is at the top of the page

• Following a liveblog will send you a notification when a key event happens 
in that story. To enable this, tap the ‘Get alerts on this story’ option near 
the top of any liveblog


How can I manage or stop the notifications I receive?

 * You can manage your alerts from the settings area. Here, you can choose the 
alerts you no longer wish to receive or unsubscribe from all of them.

 * Tap on the menu button in top left-hand corner of the app

 * Tap on the settings icon at the bottom of the screen (the button looks like 
a cogwheel)

 * Select ‘Alerts’

 * Then adjust your settings accordingly 
How can I change the font-size of articles?

In any article, tap on the AA icon towards the top right-hand corner, and then 
use the control to change the text. This will change the size of the text in 
the main portion or the article. Your choice will be remembered for every 
article you then visit.

Subscriptions and Membership

What do I get with premium tier access?

• Access to the daily crosswords (cryptic, everyman, prize, speedy,quick, 
quiptic) - available to play offline whenever you want
• Extra content hand-picked from our 200-year-old archive
• An advert-free experience

How much does a subscription cost? 

If you subscribe via iTunes, the cost for a premium tier subscription is £2.49 
a month for new subscribers and £11.99 for six months. Because of exchange 
rates, the exact amount a subscription costs varies from country to country. 
Please note that an iTunes subscription does not include Guardian membership.

If you want a subscription that includes access to the premium tier on Android 
and iOS devices and also to the Guardian and Observer Daily Edition app on 
Android, Kindle Fire and iPads, you may want to become a Digital pack 
subscriber. You can find more informationhere 
<https://subscribe.theguardian.com/uk/digital>.

If you only want to access the premium tier on Android and iOS, becoming a 
Guardian Supporter includes access to the premium tier on both compatible 
Android and iOS devices. Further information about becoming a Supporter can be 
foundhere <https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter>.

I also own an Android device. Can I use my iTunes subscription on that device?

It is not possible to transfer an iTunes subscription to an Android device, 
but Guardian Supporter membership includes ad-free access to the Guardian app 
on both compatible Android and iOS devices. If you were to become a Supporter 
you would need to cancel your iTunes subscription. If you would like to become 
a Supporter, you can by goinghere <https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter>
.

I have an iTunes/Google Play subscription to the Guardian and Observer Daily 
Edition app. Does it include access to the premium tier of the Guardian app?

If you subscribed via iTunes, your subscription can only be used to access the 
Guardian and Observer Daily Edition on compatible iPads and if you subscribed 
via Google Play your subscription can only be used to access the Guardian and 
Observer Daily Edition on compatible Android devices.

Whereas a Guardian Direct Pack subscription includes access to both the 
Guardian and Observer Daily Edition for Android, Kindle Fire and iPads and the 
premium tier of the Guardian app on Android and iOS devices. If you were to 
subscribe to the Digital Pack you would need to cancel your iTunes 
subscription. Further information about the Digital Pack can be foundhere 
<https://subscribe.theguardian.com/digital>.





I subscribed to the premium tier via iTunes. Can I use the subscription on 
more than one device?

Yes, your subscription should work on each compatible iPhone, iPod Touch, or 
iPad you’ve signed-in on using your Apple ID. You just need to open the 
Guardian app on your new device and retrieve the subscription as follows:

 * From the app’s home screen, tap the menu button (the circle with three 
horizontal lines in the top left corner), then tap the settings button (the cog 
button in the bottom left)

 * Tap “Become a Member for just £5/m”

 * Tap “Subscriber £2.49/Month” tab on right

 * Scroll down and tap “Already subscribed?”

 * A message should pop up saying ‘Recovery Complete’ and your subscription 
will be recovered




I became a Guardian Supporter/Partner or Patron. Am I entitled to access the 
premium tier in the Guardian app?

Yes, you just need to sign into the latest version of the Guardian app with 
your email address and password as follows:

 * In the Guardian app, tap on the menu icon in the top left-hand corner of 
the screen (the icon looks like three horizontal lines).

 * Tap on the cog icon in the navigation bar. Then select ‘Sign in/Register’.

 * Enter your email address and password and press ‘sign in’. 
 * You should then have ad-free access. 
I have a print+digital, or Guardian Digital Pack subscription. Can I use it to 
get access to the premium tier?

Yes, you just need to follow these instructions:

 * From the app’s home screen, app the menu button (the circle with three 
horizontal lines in the top left corner), then tap the settings button (the cog 
button in the bottom left)

 * Tap “Subscriber £2.49/Month” tab on right

 * Scroll down and tap “I am a Guardian subscriber”

 * Enter your subscriber ID and postcode. If you do not have a postcode, enter 
your surname into the postcode box 
I have a Guardian Weekly print subscription. Can I get ad-free access to the 
Guardian app?


A Guardian Weekly print subscription does not include access to the Guardian 
and Observer Daily editions or the premium tier of Guardian App for Android or 
iPhone, but you can access the Guardian Weekly Digital Edition by going to
Guardian Weekly Digital Edition 
<http://subscriber.pagesuite-professional.co.uk/custompages/9cc33fb9-de8c-4e90-b6ba-545475feb862/subscribe.aspx>

If you’ve not previously registered, you will need your subscriber number. If 
you have forgotten your subscriber number or require further assistance with 
accessing the Guardian Weekly Digital edition, please email:
guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com <mailto:guardian.subs@quadrantsubs.com>




I have forgotten my subscriber ID. How can I find it?

Your subscriber ID can be found underneath your name on each voucher or, for 
home delivery subscribers or digital pack subscribers, your ID will be found on 
your confirmation email. If you have any problems please email the following 
relevant department:

Guardian Direct Pack subscribers: email digitalpack@theguardian.com. Phone: 
+44 (0) 330 333 6767. Lines are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm BST/GMT. 
Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm BST/GMT. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 
numbers from landlines or mobiles.

Home delivery subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 
6767. We are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-5.30pm or Saturday & Sunday 
8.30am-12.30pm, or you can email us atcustomerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk 
<mailto:customerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk>.

Voucher subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 6767. We 
are open 9am-5pm, Monday to Friday, or you can email us at 
gnmsubs@quadrantsubs.com.

Please note that subscriptions taken out via iTunes do not include a 
subscriber ID. The subscription can be recovered to up to ten compatible iOS 
devices.




I subscribed via iTunes, but now I require a refund.

As the payment is taken by iTunes the subscriptions are fulfilled by Apple. 
You do not pay the Guardian directly. We cannot directly offer refunds. They 
need to be requested via Apple. Go tohttps://support.apple.com/ 
<https://support.apple.com/>, select ‘iTunes, scroll down to the end of the 
page and click on ‘Get support’.




How do I cancel my iTunes subscription?

You can cancel your subscription via the settings menu on your iPhone or iPad 
as follows:

 * On your device access the App Store 
 * Click on ‘Featured’ 
 * Scroll down to the bottom of the page and tap on your Apple ID. Tap ‘View 
Apple ID’ 
 * From the main account page, scroll down to Subscriptions and choose Manage 
(if you don’t have app subscriptions this button will not be displayed) 
 * From the Subscriptions page, tap Guardian. From here it is possible to 
disable auto-renewal 
 * You will continue to have access to the premium tier until the end of the 
subscription period




How do I cancel my Guardian voucher or home delivery subscription?

Your initial subscription term will normally be for 12 months. If you then 
wish to cancel then please follow the below instructions.

For voucher subscriptions you should telephone us at least 6 weeks before the 
date printed on the last voucher in your voucher book. The number to call is 
0330 333 6767 (9am-5pm, Monday to Friday, option 2 then option 2 for voucher 
subscriptions).

For home delivery subscriptions please call at least 4 weeks before your 
intended cancellation date. The number to call is 0330 333 6767 (Monday-Friday 
8.00am-5.30pm. Saturday & Sunday 8.30am-12.30pm, option 2 then option 1 for 
home delivery subscriptions).You can read our refunds and cancellations policy 
in fullhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/subscriber-direct/subscription-terms-and-conditions>
.




How do I cancel my Guardian Direct Pack subscription?

If for any reason you wish to cancel your subscription, please call our 
customer services team on +44 (0)330 333 6765. Lines open Monday - Friday 8am - 
8pm, Saturday and Sunday, including bank holidays, 8am - 6pm.
You can read our refunds and cancellation policy (including your legal right 
to cancel)here <http://gu.com/p/4vgfy>.

How do I cancel my Guardian supporter/partner/patron membership?

You can cancel your membership by following the instructions on this page 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/tier/cancel>. Your membership will run 
until the end of your current payment term.

Offline reading and data

What content is available to read offline?

Once loaded content will remain available offline for some time. If you can 
see a link to a piece of content on the homepage or a section page, you should 
be able to read it offline. So simply open the app or visit a section to 
automatically cache all of the most recent content to read wherever you are.




How can I get the app to load new content to read?

On the homepage or any section or topic page, scroll up to the very top, then 
continue to pull down to refresh the content. You will then see the the loading 
animation while the app gets new content. All the content will then be 
available so you can read it offline.




Can I limit how much data is used on mobile networks?

We understand that some people have data constraints when on mobile networks. 
So we will automatically provide lower resolution images when you’re on a 
mobile network. You can change this option in the ‘Advanced settings’ area - 
found in the settings menu.




Can I save content to read later?

On an article, tap on the bookmark icon and the article will be added to your 
saved for later collection. To access your saved articles, from the app 
homescreen tap on the menu icon in the top left-hand corner of the screen and 
then tap on the bookmark icon in the bottom left-hand corner of the screen.

Getting in touch 

Guardian Digital Pack subscribers: email – digitalpack@theguardian.com. Phone: 
+44 (0) 330 333 6767. Lines are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm BST/GMT. 
Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm BST/GMT. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 
numbers from landlines or mobiles.

Home delivery subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 
6767. We are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-5.30pm or Saturday & Sunday 
8.30am-12.30pm, or you can email us at customerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk 
with any changes to your personal details.

Guardian Membership (Supporter, Partner, Patron): email 
membershipsupport@theguardian.com with your question. We will do our best to 
get back to you within 24 hours. Alternatively, you can call the Guardian 
Members customer services team on +44 (0)330 333 6898 from 8am to 8pm Monday to 
Friday and 8am to 6pm at weekends.

Voucher subscribers: contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 6767. We 
are open 9am-5pm, Monday to Friday, or you can email us at
gnmsubs@quadrantsubs.com <mailto:gnmsubs@quadrantsubs.com>. 


If you are not a Guardian Member or subscriber or you pay via iTunes email 
userhelp@theguardian.com. We are open 10am-6pm Monday to Friday BST/GMT.




Feedback

If you have any suggestions on how we can improve our apps, email 
userhelp@theguardian.com. You can also follow @guardianmobile 
<https://twitter.com/guardianmobile> on Twitter to get news from the Guardian 
mobile team including details of updates.



 