
There is no getting away from the fact that the overwhelming majority of 
secretaries are women. Some say about 15 per cent of of administration workers 
are men but this figure is highly suspect. Most research shows that the 
percentage of men working in the secretarial field is so small as to be barely 
measurable.

 It's different as far as managers are concerned of course. And over the past 
10 years the increase of women in managerial roles has led to the question of 
whether there are male and female styles of management. Do women bring a 
touchy-feely atmosphere into the office or must they adopt masculine traits to 
make it into business? Last year Office Angels raised the temperature of the 
debate with a survey that revealed that the few male secretaries that could be 
found invariably worked for female bosses.

 Dr Tuvia Melamed, a psychologist with management consultants Capita RAS Ltd, 
has carried out a four-year project to find out if there is any truth in the 
claims that women and men really do manage people differently.

 Melamed examined 1,243 personality tests of British managers and found that 
there are no male managers or female managers but a management personality 
common to both men and women.

 So what makes a manager? Well they tend to 'score higher on traits associated 
with intelligence, independence and extroversion and lower on traits associated 
with anxiety and tough-mindedness.' Tough-mindedness is still an important 
factor of their personalities. Melamed hesitates to describe this quality as 
either aggression or assertiveness (both words loaded with gender associations) 
but however it is defined, neither sex has a monopoly.

 So are gender differences a red-herring as far as managerial roles are 
concerned? 'What we need are male managers who can think like females and 
female managers who can think like males,' says Liz Cook, equal opportunities 
manager with the Industrial Society. An admirable sentiment but it seems 
managers are most likely to think like managers. Some of us are from Mars and 
some of us are from Venus but managers live on another planet entirely. Perhaps 
you already suspected as much.
 