
Behold, another American monster is upon us, this one a novel of extravagant 
appetite that chows down a mighty spread of political history, social mores, 
media blague, online addiction, childhood grief, military misadventure, 
academic entitlement, and manages to make, if not light work of it, then 
something compulsive and crazily entertaining. One might tapNathan Hill 
<https://nathanhill.net/abouttheauthor/>’s shoulders with the double-edged 
sword of “Dickensian”, given that his debut novel is stuffed with good jokes, 
family secrets and incidental pathos; it’s also windy with circumlocution and 
occasionally too intricate for its own good.

The story is kickstarted by a righteous convulsion of fury. While strolling in 
a Chicago park, Governor Sheldon Packer – authoritarian demagogue and 
presidential candidate – is abused and pelted with gravel by a middle-aged 
woman. The incident, caught on a video clip, goes viral, the TV coverage goes 
nuts and very soon the assailant is dubbed “the Packer Attacker”. Everyone is 
talking about it – everyone but Samuel Andresen-Anderson, a 30-ish literature 
professor too stressed with work and preoccupied by an online game (World of 
Elfscape) to notice what’s happening in the real world. So it’s quite a shock 
when a lawyer contacts him with the news that the Packer Attacker is in fact 
his mother, Faye, whom he hasn’t seen since she walked out of the family home 
over 20 years ago.

The lawyer wants him as a character witness, but Samuel’s publisher sniffs a 
commercial opportunity. Instead of suing him for non-delivery of a novel 
commissioned 10 years before, the publisher suggests he write a savage tell-all 
takedown of his long-lost mum and thus give the public a chance to indulge 
their sanctimony: “less empathy, more carnage” is his advice. So Samuel begins 
investigating his mother’s life in the years before she fled the family, during 
her own troubled youth in Iowa and then as a student in Chicago circa 1968. He 
particularly recalls his mother’s warning him about “the Nix”, a spirit of 
Norwegian legend that will usually appear as a person, for good and ill: “The 
things you loved the most will one day hurt you the worst,” she says. This 
seems to relate directly to the mysterious friends of Samuel’s boyhood, a 
bewitching concert violinist named Bethany, and her twin brother, Bishop, whose 
eventual fate as a soldier in Iraq is one of the novel’s most traumatic 
episodes. But the Nix may also be the very person who left Samuel to survive “a 
motherless childhood”.

Hill has an instinct for loneliness and an eye for the repulsive excesses of 
American consumerism

Hill, hopscotching back and forth through a 50-year span, swaps the masks of 
comedy and tragedy so deftly you can’t always be sure which is which. He is 
very funny, for instance, about the way the modern American consciousness 
insulates itself from reality. Samuel’s nemesis is a student, Laura Pottsdam, 
whose plagiarism and cheating he has finally called time on. Yet instead of 
being cowed, Laura counterattacks her professor for triggering “negative 
feelings of stress and vulnerability”. In her world of self-pity and egomania 
all that matters is her “iFeel app”, by which she can broadcast her emotional 
weather at any given moment to her “vast network of friends”. Her short-term 
ambition will be satisfied by getting a degree without having to open a book or 
write an essay.

The novel’s other serious fugitive from real life is a gamer even more 
obsessive than Samuel about World of Elfscape. Hill has an instinct for 
loneliness and an eye for the repulsive excesses of American consumerism. At 
one point, a TV shows a man famous for eating grotesque quantities of food, his 
face puffy “in the way of someone who, all over his body, had a quarter-inch of 
extra muchness”.

That’s rather like The Nix. It has, on almost every page, a quarter-inch of 
extra muchness. No sooner has the reader’s sympathy settled on one character 
than Hill flicks a switch and another subplot assumes the spotlight. In the 
case of that lonely gamer it climaxes in a 10-page unbroken paragraph on the 
horrifying mental and physical decline of a man who simply can’t cope with “the 
wearying details of his life”. You may be reminded here of David Foster 
Wallace’s minute notation of things falling apart in his towering epic of 
dysfunctionInfinite Jest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/26/infinite-jest-david-foster-wallace-20th-anniversary-20-things-need-know>
 (1996). Both novels make a feature of extended comic riffs whose larkiness 
suggests that the writer is having much more fun than the reader. Even the big 
set-piece climax at the 1968 Democratic national convention in Chicago, 
complete with cameos fromAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/07/my-hero-allen-ginsberg-steve-silberman>
,Walter Cronkite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/18/walter-cronkite-dies-aged-92> 
and Hubert Humphrey, feels like something that could have benefited from a trim.

There is no denying the inventive wit and energy on display; but a writer 
needs to take an occasional step back to consider the reader, who may have a 
life of their own to be getting on with. Hill, to his credit, understands the 
risks of long-windedness. Samuel’s publisher tells him that his projected 
600-page novel will most likely have about 10 readers. I would bet onThe Nix 
having many, many more.

• The Nix by Nathan Hill is published by Picador (£16.99). To order a copy for 
£13.50 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nix.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99
 