
It’s the great deal no one seems to know about. The government is running a 
scheme whereby older people can buy extra state pension on what experts say are 
“very favourable” terms – but the take-up so far has been shockingly low.

The official prediction was that 265,000 people would take advantage of the 
chance to boost their retirement income by making an upfront payment. But 
figures published this week show that fewer than 4,000 signed up in the first 
six months. Here we explain how the scheme works, why you should do it, and 
things to watch out for.

So what’s the deal? 
This is called “state pension top-up <https://www.gov.uk/statepensiontopup>”. 
Basically, you hand over some cash and in return get an extra slice of state 
pension. You can get between £1 and £25 more a week, and it’s guaranteed extra 
income for life. It’s protected against inflation, and the top-ups can usually 
be inherited by your spouse or civil partner.

Women caught in pension age trap ‘are £40,000 out of pocket’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/09/women-pension-age-trap-40000-out-of-pocket>
You are eligible if you are entitled to a UK state pension and reached your 
state pension age before 6 April 2016. This includes men born before 6 April 
1951 (ie, age 65-plus now) and women born before 6 April 1953 (ie, 63-plus).

In technical terms, the government has created a new class of voluntary 
national insurance contributions, Class 3A, and those eligible are being 
invited to top up their “additional state pension” (the extra amount you get 
with your basic state pension that is made up of the state second pension and 
its predecessor, Serps) via this new class of contributions.

How long is this scheme running for? 
It went live last autumn and is available until 5 April 2017.

How much will it cost me? 
As little as £127 and as much as £23,350, depending on how much extra pension 
you want, up to £25 a week. However, the cost falls as your age increases, so 
it may make sense to wait until your next birthday before making the payment.

Because the deal is the same for males and females, it’s likely to be 
particularly attractive to women, who typically live longer.

As an example, an extra £1 of pension a week (£52 a year) for life will cost a 
65-year-old £890, while an extra £5 a week (£260 a year) will cost £4,450. To 
get the maximum extra £25 a week (£1,300 a year) of state pension, someone aged 
65 would need to hand over £22,250. For a 75-year-old looking to buy an extra 
£1, £5 or £25 of pension a week, the lump sum payments required would be a fair 
bit lower: £674, £3,370 and £16,850 respectively.

How do I find out how much I could get? 
A calculator is available online which allows people to input their date of 
birth and how much they would like to receive, and find out what that would 
cost them. Go togov.uk/state-pension-topup 
<https://www.gov.uk/state-pension-topup>

Because the deal is the same for males and females, it’s likely to be 
attractive to women because they live longer

Is this a good deal? 
The longer you live, the better value it represents. In basic terms, someone 
aged 65 who pays £890 now to receive an extra £52 a year would need to live for 
more than 17 years – beyond 82 – for the deal to work in their favour. On the 
face of it, that’s not a bad deal. According to the Office for National 
Statistics, the average life expectancy for a man currently aged 65 is 86, and 
for a 65-year-old woman it’s 89; some will reach 100-plus. To find out your 
life expectancy, go tovisual.ons.gov.uk/how-long-will-my-pension-need-to-last/ 
<http://visual.ons.gov.uk/how-long-will-my-pension-need-to-last/>

One big advantage of this scheme is that it provides an index-linked return – 
what you get will increase in line with the consumer price index. Also, in most 
cases your spouse or civil partner can receive between 50% and 100% of the 
extra pension after your death.

What do the experts think? 
Pensions and investment firm Old Mutual Wealth says the rates on offer are 
“attractive”. It adds that the inflation protection and the fact the top-ups 
can be inherited means the deal is “comparable with an index-linked, joint-life 
annuity available on the private market, but at better rates”. Jon Greer, a 
pensions expert at the firm, suggests that many of those who bought an annuity 
during the past few months would have been better-off going down the top-up 
route.

So why the low take-up? 
The scheme was unveiled in the December 2013 autumn statement and received 
quite a bit of publicity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/05/state-pension-top-ups-should-you>
. But data provided by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) in response 
to a freedom of information request by Old Mutual Wealth shows that just 3,848 
people took advantage of the scheme during its first six months. The average 
amount of extra pension bought was £21 per week at a typical cost of £16,500.

Greer says relatively few people seem to be aware of this option, perhaps 
because of the “confusing” Class 3A label, or because pensioner bonds and the 
“pension freedom” reforms grabbed all the headlines last year. The more prosaic 
answer is that many older people do not have a sizeable lump sum they can use 
to buy extra state pension. Some may feel that spending hundreds of pounds now 
to get, say, an extra £1 of pension a week isn’t worth the hassle.

Younger generation in UK face overwhelming pensions bill, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/14/uk-younger-generation-pensions-bill-report>
A DWP spokesman says: “We have been clear that many people stand to benefit 
from topping up their state pension, and those who do will receive guaranteed 
payments for life, which in many cases can be inherited by spouses or civil 
partners. Anyone considering the top-up scheme should consider whether it’s 
right for their individual circumstances.”

Any downsides? 
State pension top-up is taxable as income, so check how much you would receive 
after tax. For some, a product such as an Isa may be a better bet. It may also 
affect any income-related benefits you receive now or in future. If you have 
gaps in your national insurance record it may be more cost-effective tomake 
voluntary NI contributions 
<https://www.gov.uk/pay-voluntary-class-3-national-insurance> first. Another 
option isdeferring your state pension 
<https://www.gov.uk/deferring-state-pension>.

How do I make a payment? 
You can apply online at gov.uk/statepensiontopup 
<https://www.gov.uk/statepensiontopup>, or by phone (0345 600 4270). You will 
then receive a form explaining how to pay. Once you have coughed up, your 
higher pension amount will be payable from that date. There is a cooling-off 
period, so you can get a refund if you change your mind.
 