
In the heat of the EU referendum argument, too little attention was paid to 
the consequences of Brexit for the relationship betweenEngland, Scotland, Wales 
and Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/29/scotland-remain-eu-brexit-european-union-scots-england-wales>
. In the aftermath of the vote, most minds have been focused on Britain’s 
relations with Europe and turmoil in British domestic politics. Once again, the 
impact of Brexit on our shared union of nations has been forced to play a 
distant and sometimes scarcely audible second fiddle.

In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, unsurprisingly, there is more 
awareness than in England of the impact that Brexit may have on the union. This 
might take the shape of a second independence referendum in Scotland. There 
might be new border arrangements betweenNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Republic of Ireland. 
But it is perhaps now beginning to dawn on the English too that Brexit 
threatens to unbalance and reshape a Britain out of the EU.

The union, in short, is in danger of breaking apart in a fit of absence of 
mind. Of course, challenges to the constitutional and political cohesion of the 
United Kingdom long predate the vote on Europe. Devolution has been an issue in
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and Wales for more than 40 
years. Britain as a whole might have voted to leave the EU, but the different 
results in the different nations again underline, as the 2015 election also 
did, that the Britishness of politics may be a thing of the past. Ours is 
becoming more than ever a disunited kingdom.

The way that these issues now play out will depend on the imagination and good 
faith that the public realm in all four parts of the UK can bring to bear on 
them. If past experience is a guide, the process will otherwise largely be both 
ad hoc and uneven. The strongest national and regional voices will demand most 
and get most from the UK government, while the least assertive will get least. 
If real care is not taken, Scotland, in particular, could decide that the time 
has come to become an independent nation, with huge implications for the whole 
of Britain.

Brexit vote paves way for federal union to save UK, says all-party group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/10/brexit-vote-paves-way-for-federal-union-says-all-party-group>
It does not have to be this way. An all-party group of present and former 
members of the House of Lords and others have recently been workingon a 
different approach 
<http://www.constitutionreformgroup.co.uk/download/towards-a-new-act-of-union-pdf/>
. Under the aegis of theConstitution Reform Group 
<http://www.constitutionreformgroup.co.uk/> and convened by the former 
Conservative minister Lord Salisbury, this group, which includes crossbench as 
well as political peers, has drawn up a new draft Act of Union, in the form of 
a parliamentary bill, which will be published this week.

The fundamental rethink at the bill’s heart is that the peoples of the four 
nations should decide to pool their sovereignty in a new United Kingdom for a 
set of specified purposes, while retaining the power to decide for themselves 
on all other issues. The shared purposes might include, subject to agreement, 
the constitutional monarch as head of state, national security, foreign 
affairs, defence, human rights, immigration, the supreme court, the currency, a 
central bank, some taxation powers, and the civil service. Options, including a 
separate parliament or a more evolutionary city and regional approach, are 
proposed for England. The current House of Lords might be replaced in various 
ways. But the relationship would be explicitly federal.

This bill is far from the last word on the best way to reshape the UK. It is 
one of several initiatives seeking to give the different parts of the country 
as much power as they jointly choose, while pooling sovereignty in a new and 
freely created federal-style union. It is bottom-up, rather than the top-down 
approach that has created much of the current imbalance and constitutional 
stress. It is potentially a stronger and more consensual model than the 
existing one. It is a possible basis for a much-needed shared discussion across 
the UK about a more appropriate and modern form of union based on popular 
sovereignty. The Guardian has championed these issues for long years. Now their 
time has come.
 