
Heading into the new season, there is a palpable sense of anticipation among 
us players, but also a feeling of great responsibility. As stakeholders in the 
game, it’s up to us to continue the momentum that has built during the 
off-season and justify the fanfare which is heralding this new campaign.

Women’s football finds itself well positioned in the Australian sporting 
landscape on the eve of the 2016-17 season.The new pay deal struck by 
Professional Footballers Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/unpaid-w-league-players-earn-deal-in-small-step-towards-professionalism>
 feels like a real breakthrough moment – every player needs to be recognised as 
a professional and needs to get paid. It’s a small step but, significantly, one 
in the right direction.

W-League 2016-17 preview: overseas armada sees women’s game rise to new level 
| Richard Parkin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/w-league-2016-17-preview-overseas-armada-new-level>
We have to develop our game, not only as footballers but also as women’s 
footballers. The coming years are crucial and we need to really push on from 
where we are now. It’s pointless if we fight for all this, only then to ease 
off the accelerator.

As a senior player, I do feel a responsibility to advance our cause and as 
someone who’s been in the game for a number of years, I’m in a good position to 
do so. A lot of the girls enjoy strong relationships, so it’s quite easy to 
talk to them and get them on the same page. We’re seeing right now quite a 
number of girls getting involved with PFA to try to help build the game.

It’s exciting to see the advances made with the new AFL league coming along, 
and the success of netball and cricket leagues, but I still see football as the 
No1 women’s sport in Australia. Maybe I’m biased, but I believe it’s is at the 
forefront of the women’s sport push, even though every sport has a part to play 
in keeping the others on their toes and constantly pushing their competitors to 
raise the bar.

You don’t need to look much beyond my new club, Melbourne City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-city> to see how far we’ve 
come. City really are the standard bearers at the moment and the benchmark 
others should aspire to – both on and off the pitch.

I’ve only arrived at the club three weeks ago but immediately I was struck by 
the level of professionalism here. We all heard what the club was like last 
year, but being here now I can see it for myself. The facilities are in line 
with the men’s team – we have our own changeroom, lockers, physio and medical 
space. We share a gym with the men and we have access to the training fields 
they have – everything they have access to, we do too.

Even my move here was handled impeccably. My room in the house was ready as 
soon as I arrived from overseas, all my stuff was already there, team outfits, 
everything. The transition from one team to another – from one country to 
another – has been incredibly smooth and the club have made it easy for me to 
settle in.

It’s testament to how the club is run, their operation in general, how much 
they want to develop the women’s game, and how far it has come in a relatively 
short space of time.

Yet I’m still not satisfied with what we’ve achieved so far and want to see 
even more progress being made over the next couple of years. The next big step 
is for theW-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/w-league> to go fully 
professional, with more games and a longer season. I’d also love to see the 
Matildas playing more frequently and getting to a stage where we’re selling out 
stadiums.

The media has a crucial role to play in making that a reality. At the moment, 
coverage in mainstream media is OK, even great during big events such as the 
World Cup and the Olympics, but the domestic game is filled with rich stories 
that currently aren’t being told. Every player has a history, and would be a 
shame not to share – and celebrate – that.

It’s all part of what I see as the number one priority this season: ensuring 
we ride the crest of this wave and keep the hype alive.
 