
Anyone who has written a CV has probably had to overcome a number of 
challenges – whether they be lack of work experience, gaps in employment or 
explaining a short stint that didn’t work out.

Facing these issues when writing your CV does not mean you’re not a worthy 
employee, it just means that you must find ways to explain areas that may 
appear negative to recruiters. If you’re struggling to explain discrepancies on 
your CV, the following examples will show how you can reflect your experience 
more positively.

I have gaps on my CV

Mind the gap: don't let missing work history damage your CV and interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/minimising-problems-on-a-cv> 
Many people go through periods of unemployment, it’s perfectly natural. But 
leaving unexplained gaps on your CV will arouse suspicion with recruiters, so 
you need to meet the issue head-on and explain it. Whether you have taken time 
out to travel, taken on a personal project or cared for a loved one – you need 
to include this information and put a positive spin on it. These activities 
still involve core workplace skills such as planning, organisation and 
communication, which can be included on your CV. If you have taken time out for 
illness, there’s no need to be ashamed about it; mention it on your CV and show 
that you’re ready to take on the rigours of work again.

My CV is too long

If your CV is three pages or more, you need to cut it down to hold the 
attention of hiring managers. Two pages is ideal to sell yourself without 
boring people. Take a look at some of your older roles and see if you can 
condense them. Recruiters don’t need to know about a role from 10 years ago in 
great detail, so a short summary will suffice, leaving you more space to 
explain your most recent work, which is more important. Also, check your 
formatting and make sure you are not wasting space with large margins and 
poorly structured contact details.

I lack direct work experience

How to write a CV when you lack direct work experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/how-to-write-cv-without-work-experience>
If you are an inexperienced candidate such as a recent school leaver, you may 
lack the work experience your target employers are looking for. To get around 
this, you need to draw out transferable skills from other areas of your 
experience and highlight them. For instance, you could use experience from your 
studies, voluntary work, personal projects or anything else that relates to the 
jobs you are applying for. If your current role isn’t relevant, then reduce the 
amount of detail and only include skills that could be used in your new field.

I have done lots of short roles

Nowadays it’s common to have short roles on your CV but it can still be a 
turn-off for employers if not properly explained. Some recruiters may assume 
you have been fired or lack commitment. To avoid appearing unreliable or a 
job-hopper, explain the purpose of each role and what you achieved before 
moving on. This will show you added value and fulfilled an important purpose 
for the organisation. If you have done lots of temping or contract roles make 
that clear so readers do not simply think that you haven’t lasted long in 
permanent posts.

I want to change career

When you are looking to make a career change, it can be difficult to craft a 
CV that appeals to your target employers, as often you won’t have the 
experience they are looking for. With the right preparation and adjustments, 
however, you can create a CV that sparks interest.

An essential step is to make some form of commitment to your new field and 
highlight it at the top. This could be enrolling on a vocational course, doing 
voluntary work or even freelancing. Make it prominent on your CV to show 
employers that you are serious about your new career aspirations. You will also 
find that many of the skills used in your current line of work could probably 
be transferable to your new profession, so ensure you use your existing work 
experience to sell your cross-industry skills.

Andrew Fennell is a recruiter and founder of CV writing service StandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/>.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice.
 