 'Absalom, if you won't be quieter, I'll have to take you down to Daddy while I 
try on bras. Is that what you want?' 'No-o-o-o!!!' wailed Absalom. This I 
overheard in the fitting rooms of Selfridges lingerie department, which had 
been surrendered wholly to pre-Xmas lingerie madness. Touching men wandered 
through the aisles fingering items, wondering about sizes and obviously unsure 
that their desires could ever be reconciled with what their partners might be 
willing to wear or even think about. Women, meanwhile, were circumventing the 
whole Xmas-lingerie-gift cliche by buying their own, practically running from 
one stand to the next and buying whatever happened to fall off the hooks as 
they passed. We were all nearing mass hysteria, just from thinking fixedly 
about bums and breasts and how they might be most interestingly covered up.
 The fitting-room girl's face fell as I approached, lugging my 25 or so 
articles of underclothing. 'Only five at a time,' she sullenly warned me. Any 
fascination this girl might ever have felt for underwear had evaporated at some 
point in December - the only kind of support she was now interested in was that 
provided by the chair she seemed stitched into; in fact, her only chance of 
survival was if all of London decided to abjure undies, and soon.

 And thus began my self-inflicted, sado-masochistic torment of trying on yet 
more underwear, five at a time. I'd been trying on stuff all day. I no longer 
knew if I was getting better or worse at finding things; I knew only that I was 
by now fully conversant with the entire underwear industry.

 'I'm sorry it takes so long to find the right bra, Absalom.' Absalom was by 
now playing happily outside his mother's cubicle, mimicking her and the sale 
ladies: 'This one will fit you. Oh, that's nice . . .' Other conversations were 
going on elsewhere in the mysterious wastes of the fitting rooms. To the east, 
someone was telling a woman there was no way of knowing how big her breasts 
would get during pregnancy; all that was certain was that they'd grow. A lot. 
To the north, a woman was being advised to try a size 34I, the 34H apparently 
being to small.

 Underwear is the only thing you still get routinely measured and fitted for. 
Every now and then, a lingerie saleswoman accosts you with a tape measure and 
convinces you to buy some ugly sensible bra of her choice. The whole process 
speaks of the Fifties, of hair-curlers, huge-winged cars, deportment; a time 
when undies were still a serious business and you were forced to concern 
yourself with whalebone, gussets, girdles, gristle. Now, you can buy bras that 
bear no resemblance to bras, have almost even forgotten they are bras; things 
made of snaking strands of silk and sinew, bras that imitate outdoor wear, 
business suits, tapestry; bras that cushion you as well as anything you might 
bump into, bras designed to receive and show off the most hi-tech silicone 
falsies you can buy, bras with flashing lights and music! But breasts are still 
old-fashioned, and basically as unwieldy as ever. Sales ladies pretend to have 
a grasp on breast geometrics, but the more bras I tried on, the less easy it 
was to rope mine in.

 I'm glad we don't have to get underwired buttock bras (yet). In the end, all 
I bought were some very expensive knickers that very few people will ever see, 
and left Selfridges believing myself sane and still more or less in control of 
things.

 Not far away is a shop called Transformations. The windows are blacked out, 
and enticingly emblazoned with the words 'Videos', 'Wigs' and 'Waist 
Clinchers'. Go in, and it's like any other little clothing store - except that 
there's a woman on the phone talking loudly to someone about hormone treatment 
for breast growth: 'You don't have to worry, because if you want to stop ever, 
you just stop taking the pills and your chest will go back to normal.' It 
turned out to be a shop for cross-dressers. This was why all the great frilly 
knickers, fur-tipped camisoles, and red-vinyl, thigh-length stiletto boots (and 
diapers) were so huge.

 It just isn't fair! Drag queens really know how to be female, and they get 
all the best stuff! They take being female really seriously. Vinyl 
mini-dresses! Corsetry of all sorts. Fur. Fluff . . . There were also the 
weirdest, flesh-coloured rubber body suits that seemed to offer you a choice of 
genitals to wear, complete with fake pubic hair. I wanted to get a better look, 
but the sales lady was coming up to me and I felt we both knew I wasn't going 
to buy any genitalia suits that day. Anyway, all the genitals looked oddly 
collapsed, which didn't appeal.

 If you ever fancied having three nipples, this is the place for you. You can 
buy packs of stick-on nipples and put them wherever you like (on your 
envelopes, perhaps). There was also a wall of porn pamphlets, ranging from 
treatises on slavery (of the voluntary kind) to sex-change operations carried 
out in Thailand. So you can read porn while you stick stuff on! They even give 
you a coffee.

 I was jealous. All this personal treatment, luxurious quiet (compare and 
contrast with Selfridges), every corny and horny accoutrement you might desire 
. . . and none of it for us (the nearest outlet for truly female fantasy wear, 
I was told, is in Brighton). Not fair.

 Men's underwear is in a rut, too. Of course, it's a trickier field: there's a 
limit to how much you can adorn balls without making them too hot for fertility 
purposes. It's surprising how unprotected, how unsupported male genitalia 
usually are - a simple layer of cotton or silk, and Bob's your uncle. The peak 
of male knicker design always seems to be something you can't pee in (so it 
never catches on).

 Things have got to change in 1999. There's no underestimating the importance 
of getting this, the last year of the century, of the millennium, right, and I 
think underwear is the area we really need to look at. Closely. We must all be 
equal in the underwear department - equally risque, equally sophisticated, 
equally lacy. Underwear must be changed. (Daily.)

 Julie Burchill returns next week.
 