
EUROPEAN DREAM

Dundalk became the first Irish club to take a point in the Europa League group 
stage when they drew at AZ Alkmaar, so it follows that they fancy being the 
first to record a win when Maccabi Tel Aviv visit on Thursday. They must host 
the tie at Tallaght Stadium in Dublin, 50 miles from home, and victory could 
put them top of Group D.

LONG HAUL

England’s cricketers fly to Bangladesh on Thursday, eight days before their 
series of three one-dayers and two Tests begins. Eoin Morgan and Alex Hales 
will not be checking in due to security concerns – England are the first side 
to visit the country since July’s fatal siege in Dhaka.

DATE WITH MANCHESTER

After 30 Super League games it is finally down to the last four standing to 
decide who goes to Old Trafford for the Grand Final on 8 October. Warrington, 
who kicked off the season on 4 February with a 12-10 win at Leeds, host St 
Helens on Thursday, having lost two of their three meetings this season. Thanks 
to Hull FC's late collapse after their Challenge Cup final win – another reason 
to move the venerable Wembley occasion to earlier in the season? – Wigan 
finished second and will be at home to the Airlie Birds as they seek a fourth 
consecutive appearance at the Grand Final.

BATTLE OF BRITAIN

Celtic did not exactly cover themselves with glory in losing 7-0 at Barcelona 
in their first Champions League outing of this season. The sight of ex-Barça 
coach Pep Guardiola might therefore bode ill when he takes to the Celtic Park 
technical area, as might the peerless football hisManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> team is playing. Will 
there be “no embarrassment”, as Brendan Rodgers termed that Camp Nou defeat, 
this time?

AMERICANA BINGE

Regent Street becomes an all-singing, all-dancing jamboree whenever NFL 
returns to London, so if that’s your bag then head down there next Saturday as 
London’s shopping mecca becomes a traffic-free “All-American Football Zone” for 
the Jacksonville Jaguars’ meeting with the Indianapolis Colts at Wembley the 
following day.

MEETING OF OLD FRIENDS

When Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink left Burton, for QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> last December it seemed a fair 
enough upgrade even if the Brewers sat atop League One. Perhaps things are not 
quite as cut and dried nine months on; the teams within sight of one another in 
the Championship table after inconsistent starts to the season but Hasselbaink 
should get a good reception when he brings his current team to the Pirelli 
Stadium for the first time on Tuesday evening.
 