
It was an upstairs room of Arsenal’s training ground, October 2009, and I 
imagine I am not the only person in this profession who has sat opposite 
Nicklas Bendtner, listening to him setting out his master plan and wondered if 
he might be in danger of running out of breath, such was the energy he put into 
blowing his own trumpet.

There is nothing wrong with a touch of ego, of course, in professional sport, 
but it was still slightly startling to hear a player of 21 so dedicated to the 
idea that nothing could possibly stop him becoming one of the greats of his 
sport. “In my opinion I don’t know why anyone would question me,” he said. 
“Trust me, it will happen. I look around at other players, I see my own ability 
and I can’t see anything that tells me it won’t happen. I’m sure people will 
think: ‘What is he talking about?’ But as I have done before, and will do 
again, I will laugh at those people when it is all done.”

This wasn’t an act, either. Jacques Crevoisier, Arsenal’s psychologist, once 
gave an interview to the Swedish magazineOffside that neatly sums up the way 
Bendtner is wired differently to the rest of us. Crevoisier used to give the 
players a series of multiple-choice questions to test their intelligence and 
personality. “One of the categories is called ‘Self-perceived competence’ – ie 
how good the player himself thinks he is,” he explained. “On a scale of up to 
nine, Bendtner got a 10. We had never seen that before. When Bendtner misses a 
chance, he is always genuinely convinced it isn’t his fault. You might say 
that’s a problem, and to a certain degree it can be. But you can also view it 
as this guy has a remarkable ability to come back after setbacks.”

The ego is formidable and it always strikes me as somewhat strange that the 
Scandinavian countries, not necessarily the first place you would imagine 
finding this kind of braggadocio, have produced so many of the sport’s more 
prolific show‑offs. Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s levels of self-adoration hardly fit in 
with PJ O’Rourke’s rather cruel description of Swedes as “tedious, clean-living 
Boy Scout types” and anyone who has interviewed John Guidetti can probably 
vouch that is an interesting experience, too. Guidetti once told me, while on 
loan at Stoke City, of his own ambitions to become the greatest footballer on 
Earth and that he might open a florist one day, call it Flowers for Doubters 
and send bouquets to all the people who had doubted him. He has scored a few 
goals for Celta Vigo but it is difficult to shake the suspicion, much like 
Bendtner, that sometimes it is the people in the thickest fog who blow their 
horn the loudest.

Unfortunately for Bendtner, anyone this cocksure probably has to understand 
there might not be too much public sympathy when everything unravels and the 
boasts look incredibly empty. Bendtner certainly set himself up for a fall. It 
has been a long way down and his reputation has been damaged to a point where 
he cannot be too surprised if many of the people who have followed the 
trajectory of his career suspect his return to English football might follow 
the same direction. One poll inBT, the Danish newspaper, has 57% predicting he 
will continue to slide atNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> and Allan Olsen, sports 
editor ofEkstra Bladet, did not sound too hopeful, either. “Let us wait to see 
if Bendtner realises this is his last chance to get rid of his joker aura,” he 
wrote. “Hopefully he will take his new surroundings and his own talent 
seriously. For where do you go after you’ve failed in the Championship?”

Aston Villa and Nottingham Forest looking upwards from the Championship | Nick 
Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/10/aston-villa-nottingham-forest-championship-brian-little>
The same place, presumably, where Bendtner has been for the last few months – 
out of work. Bendtner has already been ostracised by the Danish national team. 
He was moved out of Wolfsburg because, in the words of the sporting director, 
Klaus Allofs, he was “a menace to the club” and there have been so many lost 
nights and misdemeanours it suggests Bendtner did not receive the memo that 
modern‑day footballers do not get to the very top unless they are absolutely 
dedicated to their profession.

For a player with such immense self-regard, the fact is Bendtner turns 29 in 
January and has made a total of 77 top-flight starts, almost a third of which 
came during a loan arrangement at Sunderland in 2011-12. There has been only 
one occasion, on loan to Birmingham City, when he has scored more than 10 goals 
in a season, and he was a teenager at the time. That was 10 years ago and if he 
cannot take this latest chance, arguably the last he will get, he is in danger 
of becoming the internet’s mandatory pick for one of the centre-forward 
positions in a Slapstick XI. “Social media, and the way the internet works, you 
see a lot of funny things,” Bendtner said at his introductory press conference. 
Maybe he was referring to the time Emmanuel Frimpong, his former Arsenal 
team‑mate, superimposed Bendtner’s head on a photograph of Lionel Messi winning 
the Ballon d’Or. Otherwise it hasn’t really been that funny. It isn’t difficult 
to find the compilation videos online –Lord Bendtner’s Funny Moments 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WLmsJG8ApWc> and so on – and for the most part 
they are laughing at him, rather than with him.

Dean Saunders and Brian Clough – a story that went viral but doesn’t finish 
there | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/brian-clough-dean-saunders-nottingham-forest>
All that said, we are still talking about a striker who might surprise a few 
people if – and this, perhaps, is the most pertinent question – he can realign 
his priorities and has the intelligence and professional pride to realise he is 
in danger of turning a once-promising career into a permanent source of regret. 
Does it hurt that he has made 72 appearances for his country and is joint 
seventh in their all-time list of scorers, yet when Denmark failed to qualify 
for Euro 2016 he was unwanted? Does he realise there is nothing quite so 
demoralising for followers of sport than watching someone fritter away their 
gifts? And if he were to take Crevoisier’s test now, would he recognise that it 
is not everybody else’s fault, after all?

If the answer is yes to all those questions that at least is a reasonable 
place to start. Bendtner will never be as good as he thought he would be but, 
if we are looking for clues about how determined he is to put it right, there 
is a glimmer of hope from the fact he has spent his time out of the game 
training with FC Copenhagen to keep in shape.

Bendtner has the potential to score goals and remind us why he has played in 
the Champions League in seven out of the last nine seasons, why Arsène Wenger 
kept faith in him for so long at Arsenal and why Antonio Conte once signed him 
for Juventus.

The best policy for now, however, is probably to keep an open mind and 
remember that “potentia’”, as Sir Alex Ferguson once said, can be a dangerous 
word in football. “I kept hearing about the potential of this guy when I first 
came to United,” Ferguson once said of Peter Barnes. “Everyone was telling me 
he had such great potential. Jesus Christ, he was 30 years old.”

At last some cough it up for Kick It Out

A while ago, I wrote that it was no use complaining about Kick It Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/12/kick-it-out-football-racism-tv-millions>
 not being the organisation it should be unless we looked at the principal 
reasons stopping it from expansion.

At the time, the Premier League paid £125,000 every year to keep the sport’s 
most prominent anti-racism group ticking over. The Football Association and the 
Professional Footballers’ Association chipped in the same – and the Football 
League, having not put in a penny for many seasons, was finally persuaded to 
start contributing a few years ago.

In total, that meant core funding of £500,000 a year, from which Kick It Out 
had to budget for everything, including the salaries of the 13 members of staff 
working from an unpretentious fourth-floor office above a pizza restaurant in 
Clerkenwell. Nobody should have been surprised, with that as the starting 
point, that an operation this small has had to be bailed out financially more 
than once.

Good news, anyway. The Premier League, I’m reliably informed, has now bumped 
up its core funding to £279,000 this season, £269,000 next year and £259,000 
the one after that. It still could be more, coming in at around 0.003% of the 
new television deal, but it will make a difference, especially when the FA has 
offered to increase its own contribution with another £40,000 a year for 
project costs.

It is a pity, though, that the Football League has not followed the trend when 
all of its 72 clubs will benefit. As for the PFA, Gordon Taylor and his chums 
have also decided against increasing their contribution – though, in fairness, 
they have other priorities, presumably, with their impending move into swanky 
new offices in London’s insurance district (cost £5.2m).

Comfort turns to cruelty for lions

Without wishing to bring up too many bad memories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
, did you realise that England’s cuddly and much-missed lions – Kit, Cee and 
Leo, if you would rather be on first‑name terms – were given their own seats 
when Roy Hodgson’s squad boarded their plane to fly out to Euro 2016?

It actually gets worse. England’s fluffy mascots also had their own inflatable 
headrests to ensure a comfy flight, blissfully unaware at that point that they 
would be stuffed into a metal crate when the squad flew back to Luton airport a 
few weeks later, minus a manager, to a welcoming committee comprising of 
several photographers and one tabloid journalist (on a mission, apparently, to 
hand the players some stuffed donkeys wrapped in Iceland carrier bags).

No doubt you have your own memories. You might remember the television 
pictures of the players disembarking their plane, on the day after losing to 
Iceland, and the small army of women in fluorescent jackets rushing to their 
sides, umbrellas open, in case Jamie Vardy, Joe Hart and all the other 
returning heroes were assaulted by a few droplets of rain.

A personal one was the little scene, back in Chantilly, where a clean-up 
operation was under way at the hotel England’s players had just vacated. 
Everything was being loaded in the back of a van and someone asked why the 
vehicle did not have any Football Association branding. The driver wanted it 
that way, we were told, to spare his embarrassment on the long drive home.

It is against this kind of backdrop that the FA, permanently bewildered by the 
accusations of arrogance in English football, keeps a clock at St George’s Park 
ticking down to the day England win the 2022 World Cup. “That clock’s daft,” 
Greg Clarke, the FA’s new chairman, volunteered on his first public engagement 
in the role this past week. And, finally, someone in authority had dared say 
it. In one short sentence, Clarke has made a fine start.
 