
The government’s refusal to find any new money for social care will inflict 
significant and lasting damage on theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and the lives of its patients.

The local government finance settlement announced by the communities 
secretary, Sajid Javid, this week did virtually nothing to alleviate the 
growing social care crisis. He simply allowed local authorities to bring 
forward council tax increases and shifted £240m from housing.

Compare that with Local Government Association figures showing adult social 
care funding fell from £14.7bn in 2012-13 to £14.1bn in 2015-16, while demand 
continues to rise.

The government’s refusal to provide any meaningful relief for social services 
is a blow to the NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens. Ministers have 
been unshakeable in their insistence that they have given the NHS more than it 
asked for to fund the Five Year Forward View transformation plan, a position 
that Stevens hasdirectly challenged in parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/nhs-head-disputes-theresa-may-claims-over-health-funding>
. With no likelihood of the health service getting more money directly, Stevens 
had been pushing hard to get additional cash into health and care through 
social services. That has now failed.

Safe occupancy levels are now breached routinely, increasing the risk of 
hospital-acquired infections

The health and care system is now in a stand-off with the government. Downing 
Street sees constant calls for more money as no more than routine 
shroud-waving, and suspects that the Sustainability and Transformation Plan 
initiative will provide more of the same. Javid and the health secretary, 
Jeremy Hunt, are locked into this position, whatever their private views.

For many trusts, the social care crisis is pulling them further underwater. 
Managers tell of the equivalent of several wards of patients stuck in their 
hospital for want of social services. Some trusts are beginning to invest in 
stepdown care themselves to alleviate the pressure.

The Nuffield Trust, in its analysis of hospital bed occupancy 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/blog/winter-insight-beds-pressures>, points 
out that delays in discharging medically fit patients from hospital are at a 
10-year high. Keeping people waiting in A&E for a few minutes longer than four 
hours can be headline news, but the scandal of thousands of people being 
stranded in hospital for days receives far too little political and public 
attention.

Safe occupancy levels are now breached routinely, increasing the risk of 
hospital-acquired infections and causing patients discomfort and distress as 
they are shunted from ward to ward. Although high bed occupancy has a number of 
causes, delayed discharges through shortfalls in social care are a substantial 
factor.

Dangerously high bed occupancy breeds a sense of crisis in a hospital, with 
temporary beds being set up, staff being redeployed, and the daily, unwinnable 
battle to get people in and out of a ward distracting nurses from patient care. 
For A&E staff, the difficulty of getting patients on to wards creates yet more 
stress.

But ultimately the issue is not budgets or bed occupancy rates, it is the 
human rights and welfare of thousands of mainly elderly people forced to stay 
in hospital against their will. Delayed discharge is not merely an 
inconvenience; it can be life-changing.

How can social care and healthcare integrate together?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/30/how-can-social-care-and-healthcare-integrate-together>
Each day in hospital can chip away at a person’s confidence in their ability 
to return home and live independently. Continence management in hospitals is 
often poor, causing people to acquire another – and particularly distressing – 
condition even as they are being treated for a different one. Disorientation 
increases the longer people are away from their own homes, particularly if they 
have dementia.

So, too often, the inability of the health and care system to get people out 
of hospital as soon as they are ready, and get them back in their own homes 
with the right support, means a substantial reduction in their quality of life. 
Too often this includes a move to a care home that should never have happened.

Elderly patients stuck in hospital are the unwitting hostages in the battle 
for money between the government, the NHS and local authorities. The prime 
minister and chancellor’s unbending approach to health and care funding is 
being played out in the deterioration in the quality of life of thousands of 
mainly elderly people.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 