
I saw Deliverance when I was in my late teens and its impact has been 
never-ending. It gave me a sense of what sexual bullying must feel like deep in 
my gut – it felt visceral and real.

Four city guys go hunting on the Cahulawassee river and do their 
out-on-the-frontier man thing. They attract the wrath of the locals – the 
hunters become the hunted – and it culminates in Ned Beatty's character being 
raped. I don't think I'd ever imagined what being a sexual victim might be like 
until I saw it. I remember feeling sickened by his disempowerment; he can't 
escape or talk his way out.

The film is full of contrasts. It's elegantly shot, yet has this brutal plot. 
And for something as vile as rape to be set against wild, outdoor beauty and 
overlaid with a lulling soundtrack is disorientating for the viewer. 
Particularly as a young man, it upset me to the core.

I think it's in recreating the primal nature of a complex world that director 
John Boorman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-boorman> excels. I've been 
fortunate enough to have worked with him since and the way he manages to depict 
the cruelty of life is extraordinary. In Boorman's film, things are rarely as 
they seem. He captures the underlying motivations and illogical decisions of 
his characters. It's to these sorts of roles that I'm drawn as an actor. People 
are layered and those are the parts I've always sought to play.

The main reason I've not really returned to theatre, where I started out, is 
that film has such scope for reflecting the complexity of the world in this 
way. It allows viewers to get close to characters and look deep into their 
eyes, with real potential for mixed messages and for suggesting things outside 
the spoken word. I love its subtlety.

I once heard Ned Beatty say that Deliverance did, in a way, really damage him. 
People shouted the film's famous "squeal like a pig" line at him forever after. 
I don't revisit the film very often, but I've never been able to forget it.

The Guard, starring Brendan Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brendan-gleeson>, is out on DVD soon
 