
BOILING MAGIC

Emirates-branded first-round magic as the FA Cup proper gets going, with 
minnows battling to get within one tie of a third-round giantkilling. Among the 
sides to watch areWestfields – the Midland League Premier Division side from 
Hereford who have nothing to do with shopping centres and are the lowest ranked 
team still standing. They beat Leiston 2-1 to get this far and face 
Ashton-under-Lyne’s Curzon Ashton on Saturday. The official@Westfieldsfc1 feed 
has been getting itself all worked up with tweets including: “Let the magic 
boil in your veins! Let the atoms collide and cause an inferno” and “We are 
Division Nine, but we have League One teams in our sniper range. Tremble to 
your new Gods fo Steam and Fire!! TSSSSHHHHSSSS!!!”

PACQUIAO IS BACK

Seven months after what many believed to be his swansong, Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao> is back in welterweight 
action. Following what appeared to be his final bout against Timothy Bradley in 
April, the Filipino now faces Jessie Vargas for the WBO welterweight title in 
Las Vegas on Saturday. After losing his too-long-postponed fight with Floyd 
Mayweather in 2015, the 37-year-old Pacquiao is bidding to reclaim his place at 
the top of the division.

SPURS AT WEMBLEY, TAKE TWO

A crowd of more than 85,000 watched Tottenham’s first home game at the 
national stadium but Monaco left with three Champions League points and a 2-1 
victory. A win at CSKA and a draw at Bayer Leverkusen got things back on track 
but Mauricio Pochettino could do with a win against the German side on 
Wednesday to help prevent Spurs repeating Arsenal’s fate at the old Wembley: 
they failed to get out of their group in 1998-99 then again a year later. 
Optimistic Spurs fans should know some more tickets have just gone on sale.

MELBOURNE MANIA 

If you are unable to sleep tomorrow night, Australia’s “race that stops a 
nation” is back. The Melbourne Cup means Tuesday is a public holiday in 
Victoria’s capital, with Australians all over stopping to watch the race, along 
with millions more worldwide. In the UK, tune in on At The Races to see how 
this year’s favourite, Hartnell, fares against 23 other world-class horses.

BAIZE BONANZA

As snooker tries to spread its spell abroad, China is especially obsessed with 
the game and the country’s fourth world tour event starts next week. The 
inaugural China Championship offers a top prize of £200,000 – the biggest for a 
tournament outside the UK. Mark Selby and Judd Trump are among those up against 
China’s own Ding Junhui.

LOOK OUT FOR … FLYING PIGS

They’re back? 

Could be. A couple of weeks after pink plastic pigs rained down on The Valley 
during the joint anti-owners protest by Charlton and Coventry fans, Coventry 
are playing Chesterfield at home on Tuesday. Expect more dissent.

In what form?

Maybe nothing quite so colourful, but home fans – the ones who aren’t now 
boycotting games – will make their feelings known again. Their last home match, 
against Rochdale, featured a pre-game march to the Ricoh Arena, led by the 
freshly branded “The Jimmy Hill Way” protest group – as in #
fightingthejimmyhillway. Their slogan: “You know what Jimmy would have done. 
What will you do to save our club?”

What are the complaints?

So many, but a potted history tells the club’s story. Thirty years ago Keith 
Houchen won them theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. Seven 
years ago they were bought by a hedge fund. Now they’re at the wrong end of 
League One, averaging crowds of around 6,500 via a one-year exile in 
Northampton, they’re still managerless, they’re facing homelessness for their 
academy, and they’re on the brink of having nowhere to play home matches 
either. A deal to stay at the council-owned and Wasps Rugby Club controlled 
Ricoh expires at the end of next season. In short, it’s a mess. Fans are well 
used to decline – but this time they fear it’s terminal.

What’s the way out?

It’s unclear – but the fans’ message to the hedge fund, Sisu, is 
straightforward enough. Nearly 19,000 have signed aCoventry Telegraph “Sell up 
and go” petition tagged: “Nine disastrous years, one relegation, seven 
managers, a season in exile, no progress on the stadium, academy in crisis, 
bottom of league one…”

So are Sisu getting the message? 

They’re holding firm, and reportedly rebuffed a fan-led takeover inquiry this 
month. Chairman Tim Fisher has tried to reassure fans that they won’t take the 
club outside the city again – although: “We will do what we have to do to 
preserve CCFC.”

So who breaks the deadlock?

Sports minister Tracey Crouch has said formal mediation could play a part. In 
the meantime, though, it’s left to fans, and club legends, to keep up the 
pressure. “The club today doesn’t compare to the club I was at,” Dion Dublin 
said last week. “Can anyone can give me a reason at the moment why fans should 
pay to watch? There isn’t one. That comes down to the owners. They should give 
the fans their club back.”
 