
The New Year got off to a gloomy start last week with Manpower's depressing 
survey on job prospects. For the past 30 years, the employment agency (itself 
one of the country's largest employers) has been asking organisations whether 
they expect staff levels to rise or fall on a quarterly basis. The results for 
the coming quarter are the worst for five years.

 The survey is the only one to look ahead as opposed to digesting what has 
already happened. It also plays a part in shaping the future, because it is one 
of the tools the Bank of England uses to set interest rates.

 This quarter's results show the downturn spreading from manufacturing to the 
service sector - a finding that fits pretty well with everybody's expectations 
of how recessions work. Manufacturing is thought to be the mainspring of the 
economy. If factories lay people off, they stop buying things, which leads to 
the shops laying people off, and so on.

 But the question remains: is the manufacturing sector that influential? These 
days, call centres employ more people than the coal, steel and car industries 
combined. And the Manpower survey shows that the telecommunications sector is 
the most confident of expansion over the next three months, although not as 
confident as it was this time last year. The insurance industry is also buoyant 
and the private health sector shows a marginal leap in confidence. While the 
retail sector is gloomy, the balance of opinion is moving back towards optimism.

 And all this is about what people think they will do; they haven't done it 
yet. Manpower publishes a graph of how expectations have matched results over 
the past decade. While the match is impressive, there are a few entertaining 
discrepancies. The soaring confidence of 1989 in the teeth of the actual 
evidence is quite amusing. A similar defiance of reality occurred in 1992.

 General elections seem to cheer everyone up. Confidence soared in 1997, 
though with some justification - the real job market had taken off a couple 
months previously. Pessimism can be unwarranted, too. Confidence often lags a 
quarter or so behind recovery. Meanwhile, as Manpower's managing director, Ian 
Herbertson, points out, skill shortages still influence the job market: 
"Companies should not take this as an indication to curtail their training and 
development expenditure."
 