
The American century began in 1917 when President Wilson declared war on 
Germany and shipped more than a million troops to France. Two years later, a 
pugnacious columnist from Baltimore, who was obsessed with language, boldly 
made the decisive assertion of linguistic independence that had been implicit 
in American life and letters since 1776.

HL Mencken’s The American Language is a creature of its time, a flexing of 
American cultural muscle, but it also signalled an important new chapter in 
English language prose. After Mencken, in the words of the critic Edmund 
Wilson, “American writers were finally able to take flight from the old tree 
and to trust for the first time their own dialect”.

Mencken’s nationalist pride was single-minded. The American Language has only 
a handful of references to Australia

The writer who made this crucial break with tradition was an inveterate 
controversialist and patriot, a witty master of American prose. The martini, he 
once declared, was the only American invention “as perfect as the sonnet”. In 
his day, Mencken was as influential in the US as George Bernard Shaw in 
Britain. A lifelong contributor to theBaltimore Sun, a scourge of 
office-holders and frauds, Mencken would anatomise and dissect just about 
anything that took his fancy, from “the average man 
<http://www.wisdomquotes.com/quote/h-l-mencken-10.html>” to “the immortality of 
the soul” – two pieces chosen at random from his own selection, Chrestomathy, a 
word (he claimed) that means “a collection of choice passages from an author or 
authors”.

That word was a typical Mencken discovery. He was fascinated by the dynamic 
interplay of American society and the English language and wrote prodigiously 
about it. Once, reflecting on the American frontier, he wrote that the wild 
west marked “the gothic age of American drinking as of American word-making”. 
Alistair Cooke, in an interview I had with him in the 1980s, recalled Mencken 
proudly advising him about the English equivalents for American cuts of meat: 
rump for sirloin and best end for rib chops. Such examples, he had said at the 
beginning ofThe American Language, refuted the “absurd efforts” made to prove 
“that no such thing as an American variety of English existed – that the 
differences I constantly encountered in English, and that my English friends 
encountered in American, were chiefly imaginary”.

Mencken’s inquiries into “the common tongue”, in many editions of The American 
Language, consumed much of his professional life. His view of language was a 
professional’s – dynamic, partisan and pragmatic: “A living language,” he once 
wrote, “is like a man suffering incessantly from small haemorrhages and what it 
needs above all else is constant transactions of new blood from other tongues. 
The day the gates go up, that day it begins to die.”

As he writes in The American Language: “American shows its character in a 
constant experimentation, a wide hospitality to novelty, a steady reaching out 
for new and vivid forms. No other tongue of modern times admits foreign words 
and phrases more readily; none is more careless of precedents; none shows a 
greater fecundity and originality of fancy. It is producing new words every day 
by trope, by agglutination, by the shedding of inflections, by the merging of 
parts of speech and by sheer brilliance of imagination.”

In this formulation, Mencken was articulating a vision of American language 
and society as progressive, innovative and ceaselessly modern. How one longs to 
read him on Donald Trump, for Mencken was always the classic American liberal: 
polyvalent, provocative and often delightfully perverse. His argument about 
language was as combative as his title.

Canada – a linguistic battleground between the US and Britain | Mind your 
language
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2010/jun/09/canada-us-britain-linguistic-battleground>
In the first edition, echoing Noah Webster, he declared that British English 
and American English were on divergent paths. In the fourth edition, after many 
modifications, he was still beating the drum for linguistic independence. 
Mencken had always loathed “marshmallow gentility”:

“The American of today is much more honestly English, in any sense that 
Shakespeare would have understood, than the so-called standard English of 
England. It still shows all the characteristics that marked the common tongue 
in the days of Elizabeth I, and it [American English] continues to resist 
stoutly the policing that ironed out standard English in the 17th and 18th 
centuries.”

Mencken’s nationalist pride was also singleminded. He paid almost no attention 
to the other independent varieties of English that were coming to maturity 
after the first world war. The index to my edition ofThe American Language, for 
instance, has only a handful of references to Australia and none to New 
Zealand. As an early 20th-century snapshot of American prose – the teeming 
variety of spoken American inevitably defeated even Mencken, as he freely 
admitted –The American Language remains a masterpiece of advocacy and 
entertainment. Much has changed in the last 100 years, but Mencken’s conclusion 
to his closing chapter, “the future of the language”, remains as resonant as 
ever:

“In all human beings, if only understanding be brought to the business, 
dignity will be found, and that dignity cannot fail to reveal itself, soon or 
late, in the words and phrases with which they make known their high hopes and 
aspirations and cry out against the intolerable meaninglessness of life.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
A signature sentence

“The characters chiefly noted in American speech by all who have discussed it 
are, first, its general uniformity throughout the country, so that dialects, 
properly speaking, are confined to recent immigrants, to the native whites of a 
few isolated areas and to the negroes of the south; and, secondly, its 
impatient disregard of rule and precedent, and hence its large capacity 
(distinctly greater than that of the English of England) for taking in new 
words and phrases and for manufacturing new locutions out of its own materials.”

Three to compare

Noah Webster: American Dictionary of the English Language 
<http://webstersdictionary1828.com/> (1828)
HW Fowler: The King’s English (1908)
AC Baugh and Thomas Cable: A History of the English Language (1935)
 