
As Start Me Up pumped through the sound system, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> danced out of the shadows 
hellbent on making some grown men cry. This was her Year Zero. Everything that 
had happened in the past six years had been nothing to do with her. She had 
hated every last minute. She had been home secretary only in name. She had been 
a prisoner in her own department. Any pro-EU sentiments she might once have 
voiced had been implanted in her head by metropolitan liberal elite aliens. And 
now a change was gonna come. Sam Cooke would have felt far queasier about 
having his song lyrics hijacked than the Rolling Stones.

“I’d like to pay thanks to the man who made the party change,” she said. It 
sounded very much as if she was going to give a shout out to Nigel Farage, but 
the man she had in mind was David Cameron. The former prime minister had 
changed things a lot in the past six years. For the worse. So it was up to her, 
Theresa, to change everything all over again. Dave was a stain on the country 
and his legacy needed to be erased. Theresa had just made her first grown man 
cry.

A change was gonna come. The country had spoken and she was listening. She had 
made no great efforts to pay attention to the feelings of those who had been 
left behind during the referendum campaign, but she was now. Brexit must mean 
Brexit, and she could guarantee she would get the best deal for Britain. She 
didn’t say how because she wasn’t going to give a running commentary, but the 
rest of the world would inevitably bow to the might of British sovereignty. The 
Labour party might be heading back to the 1970s, but this was an unashamed 
retreat to the 1870s.

A change was gonna come. To think an unBrexit thought was to show a lack of 
respect to the rest of the country. Theresa knew this and had understood it. 
She had no doubt that Brexit was the path of righteousness. To have voted to 
remain in the EU would have been to abdicate any claims of patriotism. “Those 
who still believe Britain has made a mistake in leaving the EU are just 
patronising members of a liberal metropolitan elite,” she said, happily 
patronising 48% of the country. Almost overnight the liberal metropolitan elite 
had grown to more than 16 million people. Quite some elite.

A change was gonna come. Theresa also insisted she wanted a more equal 
country, but was rather hazy on the details of how she was going to achieve 
this, veering from one moment sounding like an old-fashioned Labour leader by 
advocating more state intervention to somewhere to the right of Farage with her 
anti-immigrant rhetoric. Anything to hoover up the middle ground vacated by 
Labour’s lurch to the left. “If you believe you are a citizen of the world, you 
are a citizen of nowhere,” she said gnomically. But don’t worry. Theresa 
understands you.

A change was gonna come. Theresa was gonna build hundreds of thousands of new 
homes. Huge swaths of green belt would be concreted over. She didn’t know how 
she was going to pay for any of her promises, but that wasn’t the point. She 
just had to hope that no one noticed her policies were as brittle as her 
performance. It would take a while for her to acquire the easy rubberiness of 
her predecessor. Still, she had to say something about money so she threatened 
to clamp down on tax-dodgers, but none of the millionaire Tory donors in the 
hall batted an eyelid. They knew no change was gonna come. Their cash was safe. 
Politicians always say they are going to tighten up tax loopholes, but they 
never do.

A change was gonna come. The vision Theresa wanted to leave us with was of a 
Britain where the Brownlees were an example to us all. One brother stopping to 
help the other across the finishing line. Back in hospital, a second grown man 
cried. George Osborne rubbed his chest. He still had the bruises from where 
Theresa had kicked him unconscious before taking the tape alone. Do as I say, 
not as I do.

A change was gonna come. The prime minister tried to convince the conference 
that she alone cared for the working-classes and that it was Labour who were 
now the nasty party. Some of the more gullible even believed it and gave her a 
standing ovation. She lapped it up, as well she might. A change was gonna come. 
It was just as well no one had bothered to enquire if the change would be for 
the worse.
 