
It's getting rather embarrassing. Amid a torrent of data showing economic 
growth slowing rapidly, highly-paid City economists have been confidently 
predicting a sharp rise in unemployment every month for the past half dozen. 
Yet each time the Government's labour market bulletin is published they are 
forced to scrape egg from their faces as the dole queue gets shorter. Last 
month, there were 1,305,300 out of work and claiming benefit, the lowest level 
since June 1980(1). Meanwhile, the number in work keeps rising by more than the 
fall in unemployment as previously inactive members of the labour force, not 
counted as unemployed, search for and find work. Between October and December 
last year, the employment level rose to 27,286,000, the highest figure on 
record.

 Unable to reconcile the apparent health of the labour market with gloomy 
output, trade and consumer spending figures, pundits and ministers have, for 
different reasons, begun to attach growing importance to the role of the New 
Deal, the Government's flagship scheme to get dole claimants off welfare and in 
to work.

 Rolled out nationwide last April, the New Deal was first targeted at 18 to 
24-year-olds. It's now being extended albeit scaled down to the long-term adult 
unemployed. It offers extensive careers advice and guidance during a 'gateway' 
period of up to four months followed by one of four options lasting six months 
- ranging from a subsidised job with training to a place on an environmental 
taskforce.

 To its detractors in the City, the New Deal, like the Tories' discredited 
employment schemes, is merely masking a rising trend in the jobless figures. 
Supporters, however, say it is already beginning to have a positive impact on 
the labour market. That's both direct, by reducing long-term youth 
unemployment, down by 35 per cent since January 1998, and indirect, by 
generating optimism in the work force. Encouraged by the Government's active 
approach to joblessness and social exclusion, people who had given up hope are 
flooding back into the labour force, say ministers, thereby boosting the supply 
of labour and helping to keep wage pressures at bay.

 Disentangling the full impact of the New Deal and related welfare to work 
measures on the labour market from other influences is virtually impossible 
since there is no way of knowing what would have happened in the absence of the 
scheme. The TUC points out that unemployment among those eligible for the 
scheme has been falling quite rapidly since it was introduced while it has been 
edging up for those who do not qualify, suggesting that the New Deal does 
appear to be having an impact in reducing claimant unemployment(2). However, it 
cautions against reading too much into this since not all of those in the 
eligible groups will actually have been participating in the New Deal.

 'This is especially relevant in the case of the over-25s eligible for the New 
Deal - this programme only began at the end of June but this group of claimants 
fell in number throughout 1998. This suggests that the buoyant labour market 
was the main factor behind this trend,' says the TUC.

 The direct effects of the New Deal on the labour market are difficult to 
measure, which makes the Government's upbeat assessment of its indirect impact 
on the psychology of the work force is even more disputable. The first of many 
Government-commissioned independent evaluations of the New Deal, by the 
Institute of Employment Studies said last month that most participants had a 
positive attitude towards it and what it is trying to do(3). 'Individuals have 
been positively seeking entry to the programme before the timing of their claim 
required this of them.' The Department for Education and Employment says 
volunteers account for 8 per cent of total entrants, double the proportion 
expected.

 This is obviously better than people being coerced into joining, but there is 
no hard evidence to suggest that these positive attitudes towards the New Deal 
are spreading through the entire labour force, however much is spent on slick 
television advertising, and spurring otherwise discouraged workers to enter the 
jobs market. Despite falling economic inactivity, the 'pool' of inactive labour 
is large at 7.6 million. These are people of working age, 2.12 million of whom 
want, but have not looked for, a job

 So what's the explanation for these falls in youth and long term adult 
unemployment? The New Deal has only been up and running for less than a year, 
so for the real hero of the rising employment story we need to look elsewhere. 
It's more likely to be the buoyancy of the economy which in turn points to the 
reasonably skillful handling of macro economic policy, first by Ken Clarke and 
later by Gordon Brown and the Bank of England's monetary policy committee 
(MPC), since Britain was ejected from the Exchange Rate Mechanism in September 
1992.

 But, silver clouds having dark linings, it's also possible to put a negative 
interpretation on the fall in economic inactivity. Some statisticians are 
speculating that it is fear of recession which is expanding the active labour 
force. With tens of thousands of jobs being lost in manufacturing, the sector 
most exposed to the strength of the pound and turbulent world markets, the new 
jobs being created in recent months have been part-time and in the service 
sector. They tend to be low paid. Perhaps the partners of factory workers, 
predominantly men, are taking jobs out of desperation to make ends meet - this 
isn't an instance of renewed faith in the labour market.

 None of this is to detract from the New Deal, an altogether more 
comprehensive and well-funded employment scheme than anything which has gone 
before it, but it does highlight the need to be careful about proclaiming its 
success prematurely.

 The New Deal was never intended to be a short-term means of keeping the dole 
queue down during a cyclical downswing of the type the British economy is now 
experiencing. As the IES report points out, it was not meant to create jobs 
directly, but to improve the employment potential of target groups in the 
longer term. 'For this reason, the key factors which are more likely to 
underpin the success of the New Deal are (1) the improvement which it hopes to 
produce in young people's job-seeking ability and efforts and (2) the 
improvement in their productivity through the training and work experience 
which the programme provides.' Together, these factors ought to produce an 
effective increase in the labour supply without a corresponding rise in 
inflationary pressure, and so allow for an increase in the level of employment.

 'At present, it is simply not clear how far, or whether, either of these will 
be achieved, although the evidence on job and education outcomes from the 
Gateway would suggest that there is a good chance for both,' the IES said. In 
other words, we will have to wait in order to assess the full impact of the New 
Deal. It's not unreasonable to suggest that it will take a complete economic - 
and political - cycle until a sensible judgement can be delivered on its 
success or failure. Only then will it be possible to distinguish short-term 
cyclical influences from the long-term, structural ones and compare the trough 
in unemployment in this cycle with the same point in the next one.

 Till then,  the New Deal faces a severe test. There have been small monthly 
reductions in the claimant count in recent months and the unemployment rate has 
held steady at 4.6 per cent since August. That's positive. But forward-looking 
business surveys point to job shedding in both the manufacturing and service 
sectors, indicating that the labour market is at a turning point. The fact that 
the count of those claiming out-of-work benefits has not yet risen on a 
sustained basis is probably due to the lag between changes in economic activity 
and employment.

 Next week in his Budget peroration Chancellor Gordon Brown will lay out his 
hope that the slow-down in economic growth will be short and shallow then there 
will be a rapid acceleration towards the end of the year. If firms believe him, 
they may decide to continue hoarding their staff to avoid the extra cost of 
recruiting new people in six months time.

 Then, the New Deal may help to further reduce the level at which the economy 
is able to operate without igniting inflationary pressures. This level (the 
fabled NAIRU, the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment) appears to 
have fallen thanks to a range of factors, some short-term and some long, all of 
which pre-date and are much more powerful than the Government's employment 
scheme.

 They include the collapse of the Asian economies which has depressed 
commodity prices and created spare capacity in the global economy, the fact 
that labour-saving technology is cutting a swathe through the world of work, 
the decline of the power of trade unions and the rise of that exercised by 
consumers.

 But if the slowdown becomes a recession all bets will be off and the New Deal 
may have to be deemed a failure. The Government's laudable efforts to help the 
long-term unemployed back to work by improving their employability and 
self-esteem will count for little at a time of mass firings. In such 
circumstances, no amount of government subsidies and ministerial cajoling is 
going to persuade hard-pressed firms to take on extra staff. Rather than 
welfare to work, it could be work to welfare over which the which the 
Government presides in the run up to the next election. Red-faced City 
economists may yet have the last laugh.

Sources:(1) Labour Market Statistics, February 1999, Office for National 
Statistics;(2) Labour Market Briefing, February 1999,Trades Union Congress;(3) 
The New deal for Young Unemployed People: A summary of Progress. by J. 
Atkinson. Institute for Employment Studies. University of Sussex.
 Graphic sources: New Deal for young people and long-term unemployed aged 25+: 
Statistics, February 1999, DfEE; ONS.
Graphics: Michael Agar 
Research: Matthew Keating Mark Atkinson is the Guardian's economics 
correspondent.

The correct website for the Commission for Racial Equality (Analysis, March 2) 
is www.cre.gov.uk
 