
It was May 1999, and Thomas Tuchel's dream was over. SSV Ulm, the amateur team 
he had played for four years, had just secured their second consecutive, 
sensational promotion. The Ralf Rangnick-coached club from the south-west were 
about to embark on their first ever season in the top-flight, but without 
Tuchel: the 24-year-old defender's semi-professional career had prematurely 
come to an end a year earlier, following a serious knee injury. He was working 
as a bartender inStuttgart's Radiobar 
<http://gallery.psbase.com/v/Germany/Stuttgart/0000-00-00+Stuttgart+City/Stuttgart+-+Radio+Bar.jpg.html>
 now, in order to pay for economics studies he didn't enjoy at all. He was, for 
want of a better, less brutal word, defeated.

"I was angry with my fate. That was the day I decided to stop working in the 
bar," he remembered. Tuchel finished his degree to prove to himself he could 
see something through – earlier attempts to read Sport and English while he was 
playing had proved too ambitious. Then he tried to force a comeback. Rangnick, 
who had on moved on to manage VfB Stuttgart in the meantime, took him on. 
Tuchel's knee couldn't cope.

Two months later, he hung up his boots for good. Rangnick then offered him a 
different kind of opportunity. The young maverick who spent hours dissecting 
the zonal marking system of Milan's Arrigo Sacchi and introduced "four at the 
back" to the libero-infested backwaters of theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> saw something in 
Tuchel, one of the more difficult, demanding players he had coached. "He 
allowed me to shadow him as an intern and then I became manager of the 
Under-14s. That's how things started."

Tuchel worked his way up, believing that becoming a "trainer" should be 
approached like any other profession: "It's something you need to learn and 
understand, not a thing you do because there's nothing else left or because it 
seems like the logical next step after 400 professional matches." He won the 
Under-19s Bundesliga with Stuttgart in 2005, got his pro badge in 2007, won the 
U19 title with 1 FSVMainz 05 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mainz-05> in 
August 2009 and then found himself promoted to the seniors' bench a couple of 
weeks into last season. The newly promoted side surprised the league with a 
high-tempo pressing game that yielded plenty of wins and a fantastic 
ninth-place finish.

The notoriously difficult "second season" beckoned this year, but the 
self-professed "carnival club" has simply refused to stop partying. Mainz beat 
1 FC Köln 2-0 on Tuesday night to notch their fifth consecutive win of the 
campaign and stay top of the table. The delirious players carried an oversized 
"1" on to the pitch after the final whistle, perhaps in lieu of the real Number 
One, "The One" who makes it all happen but doesn't like to hog the limelight: 
Tuchel, 37, is the new superstar of German football.

Mainz have good players, obviously. There's Germany's Under-21 captain Lewis 
Holtby, on loan from Schalke, an attacking midfielder who scored both goals on 
Tuesday and harbours a not-so-secret ambition to switch allegiance to England, 
the country of his father. André Schürrle, 19, is one of the league's most 
talented forwards and on his way to a €8m move to Leverkusen. The club's smart 
strategy to establish themselves as the natural destination for 18- to 
23-year-old prodigies is clearly paying off, both on and off the pitch.

But the fact that Tuchel was able to rotate his players and bring in five new 
ones on Tuesday without diminishing the overall quality of the performance 
points to his devastatingly good work, above all. Mainz are created in his 
image – they're full of young, eager players happy to learn new things in every 
training session. For Tuchel doesn't really think "from game to game" as the 
cliche demands, but from "practice session to practice session". He breaks 
football down into the smallest possible parts and has his charges practise 
until they've internalised them all.

Tuchel is non-dogmatic on formations, chopping and changing in order to hurt 
the specific opposition most. The constants in Mainz's game are plenty of 
running, intense pressing and the fastest possible switch from defence to 
attack and vice versa. "The way we pressed and the quality of our runs would 
have made it possible for us to play in the Premier League tonight. This was 
the best game since I came here," said a beaming Tuchel after the win. No one 
wanted to argue with him. "Mainz play the way romantics still perceive English 
football," wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung.

Side-parting aficionado Tuchel is into modernist furniture design and used to 
drive a bulky Saab 900. There's nothing retro about his management style, 
however. To his players, he comes across like an idealised version of an older 
brother. "He combines absolute authority with humanity," said Holtby. "Leading 
a Bundesliga team is 100% about human relations," said the manager. "My idea of 
leadership is all about respect and appreciation."

There are plenty of rules to that effect, from a total ban on the use of 
second names to the requirement to look into the other person's eyes when one 
says "good morning". Tuchel stresses good manners, punctuality, personal 
development. Tactically, he's also willing to put in the extra work. He spent 
the World Cup recording specific things he admired in the various teams, from 
Germany's 4-2-3-1 to Chile's 3-3-3-1 and Mexico's ball circulation. His 
favourite side are Barcelona, naturally, but the reason he gives is a little 
different and very telling. "Their outstanding quality is their devotion and 
passion when it comes to winning the ball back in the opposition's half once 
they lose it," he said. "That's only possible with a huge amount of humility. 
It's not a given that stars at this high level are collectively committed to an 
idea and that no one takes the liberty of doing a little less of the hard work."

How long and far can they keep it going this season? "We don't live beyond our 
means, these are our means," insists Tuchel, but he refuses to set a new target 
or entertain thoughts of Europe. On Saturday, the man who walked out of a bar 
takes on Bayern Munich in the Allianz Arena. You can't help but wonder what new 
punchline fate will have in store for him.

Talking points ...

• Bayern had 87% possession midway through the first half but less than zero 
to show for it. They were trailing Vedad Ibisevic's 36-second strike and 
couldn't open up the resolute Hoffenheim defence. It took Franck Ribéry's sole 
successful solo run to get the visitors back into the game: Thomas Müller was 
on hand in the 62nd minute to pounce on the rebound after Daniel Haas had 
parried the Frenchman's shot. Ribéry sadly ruptured ligaments in his right 
ankle in the process and will miss the next four weeks. The entertaining game 
was deep into "Bayern-Dusel" (Bayern luck) time when human Wandschrank 
<http://www.mobello.de/wohnzimmermoebel/vitrinen/vitrine_eiche/vitrine_schrank_eiche_massiv_antik_finish>
 Daniel van Buyten shanked in a winner from a marginally offside position. 
"Bayern is back," wrote Der Spiegel about Louis van Gaal's men typically 
galling/impressive (delete as appropriate) triumph.

• It has been widely noted that the design of Bremen's new shirt was well 
chosen. It resembles a particularly volatile share price graph, and Thomas 
Schaaf's side are either flying high or crashing down. This week, consistency 
did come, albeit in the most unwanted of graph shapes, a big "L" as they lost 
their second game in a row, this time 4-1 away to Hannover. "Some players take 
themselves too seriously here," grumbled captain Torsten Frings, "they don't 
put the team first." Schaaf bemoaned that his men got the order of the day 
completely wrong. "They wanted to play football first and run later," he said. 
Hold tight for the inevitable 3-0, super-attacking football backlash when they 
take on their fierce local rivals Hamburger SV (slightly unlucky 3-1 losers at 
home to Steve McClaren's Wolves) next.

• Another excellent performance from Borussia Dortmund (5-0 over the 
defensively indeed diabolical Red Devils from Kaiserslautern) put the
Schwarzgelben within touching distance of their first No1 spot since 2002. "I 
saw the fun in my boys' eyes," said manager Jürgen Klopp, whose somewhat 
disturbing,Bruce & Bongo-inspired 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=03FnBFscMVM&feature=related> rhetoric can't 
hide the fact he must be very good manager.

Results: Mainz 2–0 Köln 2-0, Hoffenheim 1–2 Bayern, Hannover 4–1 Bremen, 
Dortmund 5–0 Kaiserslautern, Nürnberg 2–1 Stuttgart, Leverkusen 2–1 Frankfurt, 
Hamburg 1–3 Wolfsburg, Freiburg 1-2 Schalke, Gladbach 1–2 St Pauli.

Latest Bundesliga table <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 