
Borussia Mönchengladbach’s unbelievable self-destruction away to Schalke on 
Friday night aside (“an epic battle that looked like the gods were having fun 
up on Mount Olympus,” Süddeutsche Zeitung wrote after the Royal Blues’ 
grotesquely fortunate 2-1 win),Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> matchday 27 was 
rather low on unexpected results and sensational matches. And no, Hamburger SV 
losing 3-1 at home to TSG Hoffenheim doesn’t really count either, I’m afraid. 
But plenty of beauty and wonder could be found in the ordinary, too.

Take Dortmund’s 3-1 win at Augsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg>, for example. Coming at the end 
of their sixth consecutiveEnglische Woche (a week with midweek fixtures), their 
trip to Bavaria had all the hallmarks of a tired 1-1 draw. The Black and 
Yellows were even lucky to go in level at half-time, after Augsburg’s Icelandic 
striker Alfred Finnbogason had given the relegation-threatened home side an 
early lead. Thomas Tuchel’s men looked sluggish: “we appeared like a side that 
had carried a heavy load, physically and mentally, in the recent past” admitted 
the BVB coach, “there were many small mistakes, no pace. It was difficult to 
cover the spaces, to pass into spaces, to be aggressive and tight in the
Gegenpressing.” One of their very few decent moves in the first half, a 
combination between Marco Reus, Nuri Sahin and Henrikh Mkhitaryan, resulted in 
the latter squeezing in a deflected equaliser seconds before the break.

Pep Guardiola targeting Bayern’s Thiago Alcântara for Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/21/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-thiago-alcantara>
Dortmund came back stronger, calmer, more focused, and in the end, their 
movement overwhelmed the hard-working home side. Gonzalo Castro and striker 
Adrian Ramos, deputising for Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, who was on 
compassionate leave, secured all three points for the second-best team in 
Germany. It was Dortmund’s 13th win in 15 games since the winter break, only 
the mighty Hertha (0-0) and Pep Guardiola’s Bayern (0-0) have managed to hold 
them in 2016.

Dortmund’s outrageous consistency in all three competitions has banished all 
talk about the Europa League’s alleged negative effect but it was interesting 
to hear Mats Hummels suggest that they might have been even closer to Bayern – 
who are still ahead by five points – if it weren’t for the Thursday-Sunday 
rhythm that has had them playing catch-up throughout the season. “We would love 
them to be in a situation where we win our game [first] and then maybe see them 
feel a bit of pressure,” said Dortmund’s captain. “But you have say they’re 
playing with incredible dominance. But if they stutter, we’ll be there, on 
their coat tails. Let’s see how long this will carry on.”

The result at Augsburg might have been regulation, but the performance was 
still exemplary. Hummels praised his side’s maturity while Tuchel said “they 
showed extraordinary attitude and willingness to win.”. The ascetic, 
mostly-vegan 42-year-old has toned down the volume and the rhetoric after 
Jürgen Klopp’s departure, his sentences carry fewer exclamations marks and his 
team’s buildup play is more measured. But the team’s relentless drive is 
reminiscent of Klopp’s title-winning years, where winning had also become a 
habit and the team is completely at ease with their hard-working ways. “We have 
to enjoy overcoming resistance,” Tuchel had vowed with typical, monk-like 
devotion. His former president at Mainz, Harald Strutz, once said that he was 
afraid to greet the coach in the morning during training camps, for fear of 
breaking his concentration. It’s become patently clear that his combination of 
an improved dietary regime (no wheat, no sugar) and tactical and mental 
fine-tuning of the players have taken this side to a new level. Tuchel has 
looked at their sleeping habits and prescribed books to read. Mkhitaryan, one 
of Europe’s most gifted technicians but also fragile soul, has learned to stop 
worrying after reading Timothy Gallwey’s “The Inner Game of Tennis.” “It’s like 
it was written especially for me,” said the Armenian midfielder. “I used to 
make all the mistakes mentioned there. I’m really grateful that the coach has 
changed the way I think.”

At White Hart Lane on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/tottenham-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-match-report>
, Tuchel said the team’s professional, positive attitude was “the glue” that 
held everything together. He’s been a stickler for politeness and humility 
since his arrival in Westphalia, and there’s no question that his 
ultra-dedicated yet modest ways have rubbed off on his squad. Back in December, 
local paperRuhrnachrichten reported that upon his return from the training camp 
in Dubai, Julian Weigl found a note in his letterbox from a young boy living 
next door; they both shared the same first name and the lad had written to his 
idol. Weigl, Dortmund’s 20-year-old shooting star, a midfielder generating 
interest all over Europe, decided to pay him a visit with his girlfriend Sarah. 
The two of them end up staying for two hours at their neighbour’s house and at 
the end of that afternoon, Sarah offered to babysit for young Julian in the 
future. It’s a story that seems barely credible. But it’s true.

In a pure sporting sense, their rapid return to greatness is all the more 
remarkable if you consider that they lost the iconic Klopp after seven years in 
May and have had to fend off bids – both dreamt up by interested parties and 
real – for many of their star performers on a daily basis. Players’ wages come 
in at €130m per season, roughly half of Chelsea’s outlay, which just goes to 
show that their elite-level football doesn’t have to command elite-level 
pay-checks and transfer fees. It’s a minor miracle in this day and age, and 
should be appreciated as such, even if Tuchel’s brilliantly re-engineered 
Dortmund machine has made winning all the time look almost ordinary.

Talking Points

Michael Henke, the man best known for high-fiving Ottmar Hitzfeld on the 
touchline at Dortmund and Bayern, revealed a shocking conspiracy at the heart 
of the German game on Saturday. “You get totally robbed here,” the Ingolstadt 
assistant coach thundered from beneath his tin foil hat after the Bavarian 
club’s 2-1 defeat at Hertha, “it’s all because German capital has to play in 
the Champions League.” It’s one explanation for Pal Dardai’s men doing so well 
but leaves one, very troubling question: does Angela Merkel know how the Uefa 
coefficient works?

Germany’s Joachim Löw drops Max Kruse from squad over bad behaviour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/21/germany-joachim-low-max-kruse-dumps>
Hertha, incidentally, are looking for a new ground as it’s tricky to fill the 
old Olympic stadium. “We need to start the discussion (about building our 
own),” said sporting director Michael Preetz. Berlin-based Max Kruse, who 
occasionally turns out for reasonably nearby VfL Wolfsburg in between poker 
competitions, might soon be looking for new home, too. The 28-year-old forward 
wassuspended from Joachim Löw’s Germany squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/21/germany-joachim-low-max-kruse-dumps>
, with the club’s backing, after getting into an argument with a woman who had 
taken photos of him in a nightclub on Saturday night (Kruse had taken her phone 
and deleted the offending pics). “It was time to send a signal,” said VfL 
sporting director Klaus Allofs, who hinted that Kruse’sbon vivant ways had been 
a problem in the past as well. After losing €75,000 (£59,000) in a Berlin cab 
recently, Kruse was also ticked off for eating too much Nutella by his manager 
Dieter Hecking last week. He is, in other words, most unlikely to receive an 
offer from Thomas Tuchel’s Dortmund any time soon.

Results: Schalke 2-1 Borussia Mönchengladbach, Wolfsburg 1-1 Darmstadt, HSV 
1-3 Hoffenheim, Werder Bremen 1-1 Mainz, Köln 0-1 Bayern Munich, Hertha Berlin 
2-1 Ingolstadt, Eintracht Frankfurt 1-0 Hannover, Stuttgart 0-2 Leverkusen, 
Augsburg 1-3Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>.
 