
About three in four labour wards do not have on-site overnight cover from 
consultants, figures suggest.

A survey of 165 maternity units found that in 2014-15 about 27% of labour 
wards had consultants physically present overnight on weekdays, falling to 15% 
at the weekend.

The census by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) 
also found the number of consultants may have reduced since figures were first 
recorded in 2013 and some recommendations on early pregnancy care had not been 
implemented.

Edward Morris, the vice-president of clinical quality at the body, said: “The 
RCOG recommends that trusts should ensure the adequate provision of consultant 
cover to deliver high quality, safe care to women. It is important to highlight 
that all consultant-led maternity units currently have 24-hour access to 
consultant obstetricians on call, some with resident working where needed.

“Ultimately, local trusts need to look carefully at the mix of their patient 
load, risk profile and staffing to decide whether their particular unit needs 
more frequent consultant presence.”

The RCOG said slightly fewer units had provided responses to the latest 
census, so the data had to be interpreted with caution.

The number of consultants had reduced since the survey was first carried out. 
However, the body said this was likely to be a reflection of a fall in the 
number of responses.

However, it found recommendations to increase the low number of weekend early 
pregnancy services had not been put into effect. “It is not clear why this 
remains the case as in the interest of patient care this would be considered 
one of the first services that could be provided seven days a week,” the RCOG 
said.

Some studies have suggested that round-the-clock cover by consultants is only 
necessary on the busiest labour wards.

An NHS England spokeswoman said: “Having a baby is now safer than it has ever 
been and the vast majority of mothers report that they get greatNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> maternity care.

“Researchers at Oxford University have shown that overnight consultant 
obstetrician presence isn’t proven to improve care, and a national diktat to 
that effect would mean the closure of many smaller units, which is another 
reason why it wouldn’t necessarily be a good idea.”
 