
What is the significance and role of counselling skills in current social work 
practice? A recent course inthese skills on my journey to retrain as a 
counsellor has left me ponderingthe question.

Counselling and social work are often thought of as synonymous, perhaps due to 
the many overlapping roles in social work – advocate, assessor, agent of 
control, adviser, mentor. Many social workers enter the profession believing it 
more aligned with counselling than perhaps it is. I am sure, when asked at 
interview “why do you want to become a social worker?”, I uttered those 
ubiquitous words “I want to help people”.

My social care career began with using counselling skills on a mental health 
helpline. Through this training I learned to listen, be present and 
non-judgmental. My focus was solely on the person at the end of the phone. I 
then trained as a social worker, yet after almost two decades in the job I 
realised my attention had shifted to policies, procedures, assessment deadlines 
and time-managed practice (with fluctuating risk-averse political agendas 
thrown in along the way).

Taking the time and space to retrain in counselling has led me to reflect on 
how counselling skills are used in social work, and question whether we are 
using them at all in the current climate.

Day in the life of ... an online counsellor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/may/16/day-in-life-online-counsellor>
The differences of emphasis feels most apparent with assessment work. I now 
ask myself if, as a social worker, I replaced listening with analysing, 
acceptance with judgment, and person-centred practice with meeting 
organisational targets, instead of balancing all the above.

As a counsellor in training I listen, reflect and paraphrase, helping the 
client to make their own decisions. As a social worker I questioned, extracted 
information and analysed, to inform a decision about how this information 
affects someone’s life – with the addition of an ever-pervasive safeguarding 
mindset which, at best, baffles my counselling colleagues.

But if counselling and social work are frequently thought of as synonymous, 
where are the similarities? These, I believe, are to be found in our abilities 
to develop and sustain relationships with people, often in times of extreme 
need, distress or upheaval in their lives. We are part of someone’s life, 
whether through choice or compulsion, and seek to make a difference. Building 
relationships is therefore at the heart of both counselling and social work, 
requiring common skills in empathy, listening and acceptance.

There are also similarities with reflective practice. Counselling has helped 
me to be more aware of my own feelings and behaviours, especially my reactions 
and responses to those of others. As social workers we are encouraged to 
reflect and explore our feelings, particularly when we need to take action and 
make a judgment or a life-changing decision, such as to protect a child.

Social care careers: an interactive guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/ng-interactive/2014/aug/26/social-care-careers-an-interactive-guide>
If we are aware of our emotions, thoughts, responses and behaviours we can 
better empathise with those whose lives we pass through. As a social worker I 
had many roles in my day-to-day practice (not forgetting tea maker, chauffeur 
and IT expert – turn it off and on again!), but as a counsellor I have only one 
role: to be present and listen.

Both counselling and social work are founded on a combination of values, 
ethics and boundaries. We must recognise a person’s self-worth and capacity for 
change, and help them to achieve this with dignity and respect.

So amid the political agendas, organisational constraints and assessment 
deadlines, counselling skills are significant in social work practice. They 
help us with self-awareness, enable us to look after ourselves and remind us to 
value the reason we became a social worker in the first place: “To help people”.

The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write for 
the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> 
with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views. 
 