
Before any rash decisions are made on increasing retirement ages (Be ready to 
work into your 70s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/01/state-pension-age-could-rise-faster-than-expected-say-experts>
, 2 March) I urge people to look at the evidence ofthe national review of 
health inequalities by Michael Marmot and his excellent colleagues 
<http://www.instituteofhealthequity.org/>. In clear, stark slides this shows 
the evidence of how and why less advantaged people will not be well enough to 
work even to current retirement ages, let alone longer, without significant 
shifts in their wellbeing.

Couple that with growing international evidence that, in some countries 
including the UK, life expectancy gains may be reaching a plateau for most 
people given higher rates of chronic diseases, we have strong indications of 
the individual and societal risks of putting the pension cart before the 
wellbeing horse. There are far superior alternatives: invest early in health 
promotion and disease prevention before unsustainable sickness treatments, and 
tackle the real social, economic and environmental factors that cause such ill 
health. People of all ages should demand no less from those who determine their 
futures.
Clive Needle
Rowhedge, Essex

• It was interesting to hear Iain Duncan Smith stating in parliament that 
other advanced economies were also raising their retirement ages. He cited 
Germany and his assertion went unchallenged. True, in 2013 Germany introduced 
a plan to raise the retirement age to 67. This, however, was altered in 2014 
when the electorate forced Angela Merkel’s Christian Democrats into coalition 
with the Social Democratic Party. In the interests of fairness and with an 
overwhelming parliamentary majority (almost 400) in the Bundestag, the planned 
retirement age was reduced for many who would otherwise have been unfairly 
penalised from 67 to 63. A negotiated solution unlikely to happen in Britain’s 
“democracy”.
Andy Hollis
Todmorden, West Yorkshire

• Working past the age of 70 sounds pretty good if you are sitting on a bench 
in either of the two Houses of Parliament, or maybe working at a job you enjoy. 
If you’re standing behind a counter, walking the aisle of a distribution 
warehouse, or are in some form of manual work it doesn’t sound so good. Any 
extension to the age of retirement should take into consideration what age the 
person started to work. Those who left school aged 16 or 17 are already putting 
in some cases five or six years more labour than those who went to university. 
Taking this into consideration, shouldn’t they gain some benefit from these 
extra years by being able to retire earlier?
Charles Cronin
London

• Recent reports on raising the retirement age have focused on the 
understandable anxieties of those aged 50-plus and most directly affected. 
But the government’s carefully worded phrase “fuller working lives” disguises 
the broader impact of these changes: a significant increase in the UK workforce.

Over the next five years, the working population will increase by 2.5 million 
university and college leavers, 1.5 million economic migrants and 2 million 
“non-retirees”. Where is the economic plan to provide secure, well-paid (even 
fulfilling) careers for these 6 million workers?
Dr Mark Ellis
Huddersfield, West Yorkshire

• I remember as a new college lecturer in the early 1980s having to prepare 
and deliver “early retirement courses”. The reasoning then was that we were all 
going to be retiring in our 50s, we were all going to have much more leisure 
time, and all the research said that was good, healthy and the mark of a 
civilised country – a demonstration that there was more to life than working.

Over the years it has become “not good, unhealthy and unaffordable”. If this 
government has its way, anyone nearing working age today has 60 years of work 
to look forward to at which stage, if they have any decency, they’ll die to 
save the country expense and it takes the likes of Owen Jones to ask why and 
proffer an alternative.
Gary Dimmock
Huddersfield, West Yorkshire

• Owen Jones (Retiring at 77? Surely we should strive to work less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/03/retirement-retiring-age-77-strive-work-less-progress-challenge-bleak-prospect>
, 3 March) is right up to a point, which is that the work for people with 
delayed state pensions simply will not exist. For many people, it does not 
already and this situation will increase – see The Future of Work (Osborne & 
Frey 2013). For us computer boffins, dreaming in the late 1960s, this was a 
desirable aim: to automate away most tedious jobs. What we did not realise was 
that the financial benefits would all be scoffed up by the rich. This has to 
change or there will be big trouble.
Ken Baldry 
London

• Many of our services and facilities are propped up by an army of volunteers. 
Increasingly the state looks to these volunteers to actually take over services 
previously run by local councils. Many – maybe most – of these volunteers are 
retirees. Who is going to take on these duties when the current generation will 
have to literally work till they drop?
Gill Young
Houghton, Hampshire

• Have I missed something? I thought our lifestyle choices were so bad – 
obese, not enough exercise, drinking too much etc – that we were destined to 
die young. So why are we worried that the pension pot will not be big enough? 
Clearly a lack of joined-up thinking here.
Maureen Panton
Malvern, Worcestershire

• The “problem” of rising life expectancy is being dealt with by this 
government not only by increasing the state pension age but also by gradually 
dismantling the welfare state and NHS which gave rise to increasing 
life expectancy.
Ted Watson
Brighton

• Yet more talk of an ever higher retirement age underlines the reality that a 
system of market capitalism really does not work for the “many”. It is one 
thing allowing people to work on if they want to. Quite another making them do 
it because they have no financial choice. Do we really want police officers in 
their late 60s patrolling streets or train drivers of a similar age? And what 
of the job opportunities for younger people who would previously have come on 
to replace them? A better social and economic model is required, not yet more 
tinkering with the pension age.
Keith Flett
London 

• Given that many of the jobs we do now are rapidly being automated, what jobs 
will the late retirees in 40 years’ time actually do? Perhaps they could be 
paid to look after themselves. I know, let’s call it a pension.
Andy Sharp
Scarborough, North Yorkshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 