
Let's get it straight: the butt end of 2013‑14 came with fewer twists and 
turns than a dead dew-worm. The season in Germany had been over for so long (at 
the top at least) that an unremarkable finish was probably to be expected. But 
who could have known that it would refuse to finish at all?

For all the beer-showers in Munich, where Pep Guardiola got soaked and dropped 
the trophy, and the warm fuzzy feeling at Dortmund, who ended up in second 
place and with more points than last year (despite all the talk of a crisis and
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> falling out of 
love with Westphalian heavy metal), 10 months of Bundesliga action somehow 
became little more than a very elaborate prelude to the DFB-Pokal final between 
the top two in Berlin on Saturday.

Dortmund, just like in 2012 (when they beat Bayern 5-2), have little to lose 
while a defeat for the champions would see the bad vibes and ideological 
debates about Guardiola's style linger well into the summer. The outcome of the 
final will define their season as a whole. "If we win, it'll be a very, very 
good campaign," said the club's CEO, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge. If they don't, it's 
a medium-sized disaster, but with a change of the letterhead thrown in.

At the other end of the scale, the most listless relegation fight in living 
memory signed off in fitting style. All three bottom teams lost, for the fifth 
time on the trot. Nürnberg rolled over at Schalke (4-1); Braunschweig ran and 
ran at Hoffenheim only to arrive at the conclusion that their ineptitude was 
final. TSG won 3-1.

And thus, it came to pass that Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg>, who showed at least a bit of 
life in the shape of the returning striker Pierre-Michel Lasogga in the 3-2 
defeat at Mainz, held on to 16th spot with 27 measly points. Their season now 
goes on as well, and the eternal clock that shows their time in the top flight 
will be allowed to run at least until 10pm on Monday 19 May before it'll have 
to be dismantled and shipped off to the new German football museum in Dortmund.

In case they were to survive the playoff against Greuther Fürth (first game on 
Thursday night), Mirko Slomka's team would by far be the worst non-relegated 
side since the three-points rule was introduced in 1995–96. The way they've 
been going you wouldn't bet against their incredible luck to hold against the 
Franconians.

It would be a triumph in spite of themselves, on a level with Barcelona 
pipping Atlético Madrid to the La Liga title. Or an even more shameful fall 
from grace. HSV (and to a lesser extent their local rivals Werder) have become 
the (reverse) poster boys for the mobility afforded by the German version of 
financial fair play that has been in place for a few decades. Rather than 
affording safety for the elite, as the much-parroted theory goes, the system 
has in fact made the top division – and the top places – more accessible for 
traditional no-hopers.

Freiburg, Augsburg, Mainz, Greuther Fürth (relegated in 2013) and newly 
promoted SC Paderborn (who?) are all veritable minnows in comparison to the 
European Cup winners of 1983, yet there is a very good chance they will all be 
a class above them come August 2014.

Talking of Mainz, their finish in seventh place should be considered the 
outstanding achievement of the campaign, although eighth-placed Augsburg may 
beg to differ. Everybody else – your Leverkusens, Wolfsburgs and Gladbachs – 
either performed in line with expectations or worse (Bremen, Stuttgart. And did 
we mention HSV?)

Unfortunately, 05's excellent season had its shine somewhat taken off by the 
news that Thomas Tuchel would be leaving the club after the Hamburg game. A few 
minutes before kick-off somebody tipped off the media and the resulting 90 
minutes were played in the shadow of feverish speculation, not just in Mainz. 
Was he going to Stuttgart? No, the Swabians have already signed up Frankfurt's 
Armin Veh.

Schalke 04's sporting director, Horst Heldt, indignantly denied that Tuchel 
was taking over from Jens Keller but then admitted on Monday that talks with 
the 40-year-old had been held in winter. They apparently didn't come to 
fruition because Mainz refused to release the coach from his contract. That did 
not stop Leverkusen inquiring for his services, though. This time, Tuchel 
pulled the plug on negotiations.

"This decision that this would be my last season in Mainz was for me 
personally a necessary step," Tuchel said in a written statement. He had no 
longer felt able to inspire the team sufficiently, he insinuated, and revealed 
that the decision had been made at the start of the second half of the season. 
Mainz, though, have promised to hold him to his contract (due to expire in 
2015), which will probably mean gardening leave and holding out for some sort 
of transfer fee. Maybe he will follow the lead of Guardiola and spend a few 
months learning English in New York? It would not do his job prospects any harm.

As the most in-demand young German coach to emerge on the scene since a 
certain Klopp tore up the league with his stubble and knackered jeans, Tuchel 
will be in a position to walk into a variety of high-profile jobs. Every 
manager from the top-two down will have to fight off this phantom menace next 
season. And some believe he's ready for an even more exalted position. "If 
Tuchel takes some time off he will automatically become a candidate for the 
succession of Joachim Löw," Harald Stenger, the former press officer of the 
German FA, wrote on his Twitter page on Monday afternoon. Löw's contract 
actually runs until 2016 but even he will be under a bit more pressure to 
perform in Brazil, now that a credible alternative is at available at last.

Results: Schalke - Nürnberg 4-1; Bayern - Stuttgart 1-0; Mainz - Hamburg 3-2; 
Leverkusen - Bremen 2-1; Wolfsburg - Gladbach 3-1; Hoffenheim - Braunschweig 
3-1; Augsburg - Frankfurt 2-1; Hertha - Dortmund 0-4.
 