
Today, a number of platforms, publishers and digital partners unveiled the 
developer release of a new publishing technology for the mobile web: AMP.

This is a project we at the Guardian have been involved with since its 
inception. It was borne of the Digital News Initiative - launched between the 
Guardian and seven other leading European publishers with Google - and has 
since gone global and gained pace as more and more platforms develop compelling 
technologies for mobile content.


The central objective of the DNI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/28/publishers-should-give-google-a-chance-as-it-tries-to-make-peace>
 is to create a more sustainable digital ecosystem for news and quality 
journalism, one which engages citizens everywhere with important and 
entertaining content and provides journalism organisations of all kind with 
continued economic incentives to invest in great content. At the Guardian we 
recognise that our users engage with our content across all platforms, not just 
our own. Our open philosophy actively embraces the participation of readers in 
our journalism, whether commenting, sharing, adapting, uploading and more. 
Mobile by definition gives more meaning to this vision.


Yet the mobile web is somewhat in flux. Users want more great content than 
ever but they also expect greater speed, personalisation and continued respect 
for their data and privacy. Publishers need to respond by delivering different 
content, in different ways and working with advertisers to ensure that this 
extends to brand experiences too. Platforms, publishers and advertisers need to 
collaborate to ensure that we can all tackle the consequences of when these 
expectations are not met, contributing for example to the recent growth in ad 
blocking.


The Guardian’s award winning platform provides the best experience of our 
journalism, therefore we will always want readers to engage with our content on 
our products. But we also want to ensure that the millions of our readers who 
engage with our content elsewhere - from Apple News to Facebook’s Instant 
Articles - have the best possible mobile experience. Naturally, we don’t have 
the autonomy and flexibility we would always like on these digital platforms: 
they set the rules for everything from design to user participation to 
monetisation. But we are committed to developing the best possible experience 
of the Guardian that’s native to each platform, working with them to ensure 
that the partnerships provide us with editorial control and the commercial 
opportunity to sustain our journalism.


AMP <https://www.ampproject.org/> is a different means to achieve the same 
ends. It seeks simultaneously to create a great user experience, to give more 
autonomy to publishers to deliver that and to develop effective advertising for 
the mobile web. It is intended to be an open standard and one that can traverse 
the mobile web rather than existing on one platform alone. It hopes to allow 
publishers to build pages flexibly and to their own spec within a more 
appropriate framework for mobile. Our site is one of the fastest news sites in 
the world but it can get better and all publishers have a common interest in 
responding to the challenges of mobile.


To succeed in its ambition, the AMP project will need to more deeply engage 
platforms, publishers and advertisers in moving from today’s developer release 
to a full public release. The burden of developing content for multiple 
different standards and platforms could soon become prohibitively complex and 
expensive for even the largest publishers, let alone new entrants. The critical 
technical enablers of personalisation and monetisation that publishers need to 
sustain their journalism and power a web that is filled with great content and 
engaging advertising, must be clearly established. And above all, we must be 
guided by users, who rightly set high expectations for experience quality and 
integrity in their relationship with us.


We hope that AMP can succeed and our digital teams are working with Google and 
others to shape its evolution. The great potential of the web is surely greater 
still on mobile devices. But its economic viability, integrity and universality 
are not guaranteed. The same is true of journalism. Its role in fostering 
greater democracy, enjoyment and enlightenment has never been more vital. These 
are great causes to work on together.


Tony Danker is chief strategy officer at Guardian News & Media.
 