
Todd Carney is willing to accept any conditions in order to have one last 
crack in theNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl>.

Carney, who fights another former NRL star Chris Sandow in a charity boxing 
match at Sydney’s Hordern Pavilion on Friday, is in dispute with Cronulla.

He sued the Sharks for wrongful dismissal after he was sacked in 2014 for 
posting a lewd photograph on social media.

Related: Cronulla confirm Ben Barba is wanted back at club following stint in 
rehab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/cronulla-confirm-ben-barba-is-wanted-back-at-club-following-stint-in-rehab>

Carney went on to play in France but hankers for a return to the NRL.

Sandow’s league career is also in limbo after he recently walked out on 
English club Warrington for family reasons.

Carney was hopeful of an imminent resolution to his dispute with the Sharks 
and said he would decide over Christmas if he would continue playing rugby 
league.

“If the NRL turns around and says I have to do ‘X,Y, Z’, I’m happy to accept 
whatever they want me to do to pull on another NRL jumper and give it that one 
last crack,” Carney said on Thursday.

“If a club is willing to sign me and put regulations or whatever the NRL wants 
to put forward, I’ll put my hand up and say ‘yes’. And if it’s a strict policy 
I’m fine with that.”

Both Carney and Sandow will contest a boxing bout for the first time.

Carney said he would only look at boxing again for another charity bout.

However, Sandow would consider making a career of boxing if another rugby 
league opportunity didn’t eventuate.

“I’m enjoying boxing and that’s another option,” Sandow said.

He made it clear he disagreed with Warrington coach Tony Smith’s assertion he 
was unreliable.

“No, I’ve done my job, everyone could see I was putting in, I love to win,” 
Sandow said.

He didn’t anticipate any prospective rugby league suitor would be scared off 
by Smith’s comment.

Carney couldn’t recall throwing a punch in a rugby league game while Sandow 
remembered throwing two or three at Michael Ennis.

“Gordon Tallis used to tell me ‘get the first three or four in and you’ve got 
to make it your best ones because all the boys will come running in and break 
it up,’” Sandow said.
 