
Tom Rogic scored a last-minute screamer to keep Celtic top of the Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> after a 
largely frustrating 90 minutes for the defending champions at Rugby Park.

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> looked all set to hand 
Aberdeen the chance to move top at Motherwell later in the afternoon as they 
laboured against the second-bottom team.

Celtic struggled to create clear chances, the best two falling to centre-back 
Erik Sviatchenko following corners, asKilmarnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> harassed their visitors into 
mistakes, held their shape well and threatened to snatch a victory during an 
improved second-half show.

But the substitute Rogic fired into the top corner from 25 yards to earn 
Celtic a 1-0 win, their first victory over Killie this season.

Celtic brought in Colin Kazim-Richards on the left after Gary Mackay-Steven 
failed to shake off an ankle knock while Kilmarnock were without Steven Smith 
and Josh Magennis, who watched the game in a protective boot.

Kris Commons had a decent shot on target inside 60 seconds but Killie also had 
an early chance when Craig Gordon stopped a Kris Boyd volley.

When Aberdeen ruled Scottish football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/mar/09/aberdeen-scottish-football-alex-ferguson>
Celtic created a steady stream of chances in the opening 20 minutes. A heavily 
deflected Nir Bitton strike spun just wide, Leigh Griffiths had a header saved 
and Sviatchenko missed a good headed chance.

But Kilmarnock increasingly frustrated Celtic as the half progressed and 
Celtic struggled to get in behind.

When they did stretch their hosts, Celtic failed to make the most of it. 
Callum McGregor elected to turn inside instead of shooting first time and 
Commons shot weakly with his left foot when the right was the more natural 
option.

Killie were rarely going forward and Kallum Higginbotham shot over after being 
presented with a difficult chance to catch Gordon off his line on the 
counter-attack.

Celtic made a change just before the break when Kieran Tierney went off after 
picking up an ankle injury earlier in the game, Dedryck Boyata coming on as 
Charlie Mulgrew moved to left-back

Ronny Deila then made a tactical switch at half-time. The winger Patrick 
Roberts replaced Commons and Kazim-Richards went up front in a 4-4-2.

Kilmarnock left-back Lee Hodson came close with a curling effort early in the 
second half but the game soon settled into a familiar pattern of Kilmarnock 
defending deeper but breaking more effectively than the first half.

Celtic were struggling to break through but Sviatchenko had another good 
chance from a corner only for Julien Faubert to clear his header off the line. 
Kilmarnock increased in confidence in possession though and substitute Aaron 
Splaine made space to shoot from 25 yards but hit his effort straight at Gordon.

Griffiths curled just wide from 22 yards before Splaine had a better chance 
but scooped his shot wide.

But Rogic sparked wild celebrations with an unstoppable effort as Celtic went 
four points clear ahead. Sky Sports had to apologise after their microphones 
caught the manager swearing as he performed his traditional post-match 
celebration, which has been absent for several months.

“It’s good to celebrate victories,” Deila said. “That’s why you do this. The 
fans were so good and there was so much emotion for me and all the others. You 
can’t control your words in those situations but I don’t think I’m the only one 
in Britain who has been caught using those words on television.”

Deila, who once described a last-minute winner at Aberdeen as “orgasmic”, 
added: “It was a very important goal at an important stage in the league. It 
was a glimpse of magic, when you win like that you will remember it for the 
rest of your life.

“I don’t want to use that word again but it was a very, very good feeling.”
 