
Tomer Hemed’s first hat-trick in English football helped Brighton climb into 
the second automatic promotion spot in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> with a crushing 5-0 home 
victory over Fulham.

The Israeli striker scored twice in the first half, once from the penalty 
spot, while skipper Bruno hit the Seagulls’ third goal shortly after the break. 
Hemed completed his treble 10 minutes from time with French winger Anthony 
Knockaert completing Albion’s biggest win of the season.

Brighton, now assured of a place in the play-offs with four games remaining, 
are one point behind leaders Middlesbrough, who they visit on the final day.

Albion came through a rocky start with Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> beginning confidently. Ross 
McCormack tried his luck in the ninth minute with a low shot, which was held by 
their former goalkeeper David Stockdale.

Former England midfielder Scott Parker, who scored his first goal in two years 
in Fulham’s 2-1 win against Cardiff, was off target when breaking forward three 
minutes later.

Fulham keeper Marcus Bettinelli was nearly caught out when Israel 
international Beram Kayal delivered a deep cross to the far post and he seemed 
slow to react before pushing the ball over the bar.

Albion centre-back Connor Goldson came to his side’s rescue midway through the 
half with a clearing header after former Tottenham midfielder Jamie O’Hara sent 
a teasing cross to the near post.

The Seagulls, unbeaten at the Amex Stadium since New Year’s Day, went ahead on 
the half-hour mark when Hemed scored his 14th goal of the season thanks to a 
hotly-disputed penalty.

Manchester United loanee James Wilson, restored to the side along with 
Knockaert, had got the better of defender Richard Stearman and, although there 
was contact, appeared to go down easily in front of Fulham’s 2,000 travelling 
fans.

Hemed stepped up to send Bettinelli the wrong way and four minutes later was 
on target again to double Albion’s lead by heading in a free-kick from 
Knockaert from 10 yards.

Fulham, yet to keep a clean sheet away from home since head coach Slavisa 
Jokanovic took over in December, came under further pressure when centre-back 
Lewis Dunk forced Bettinelli to save, and the keeper later came out bravely to 
deny the onrushing Wilson.

Albion have not lost a Championship game this season after scoring the opening 
goal and effectively made this match safe nine minutes after the break when 
skipper Bruno scored his first of the season from close range. Bettinelli was 
slow to come out when Czech Republic international Jiri Skalak delivered a 
corner to the far post, and Bruno reacted quickly to fire a low left-footed 
shot into the net.

Stockdale kept himself on track for a 16th clean sheet of the season against 
his former club by palming away a goal-bound effort from substitute Lasse Vigen 
Christensen midway through the second half.

Hemed was initially denied his hat-trick when Wilson cleverly played him in 
only for Bettinelli to spread himself to make a save with his thigh. Fulham 
threatened again when midfielder Emerson Hyndman shot from the edge of the box 
and Stockdale tipped the ball over the bar.

But Hemed would complete his treble 10 minutes from time when he steered the 
ball home from 10 yards after Dale Stephens fired a shot into the area. Winger 
Knockaert completed the rout three minutes from time following a pass by Kayal.
 