
The WBC world cruiserweight champion, Tony Bellew, is ready to “throw the 
kitchen sink” at BJ Flores on Saturday at the Echo Arena.

A native of Liverpool, Bellew (27-2-1, 17 KOs) secured his maiden world title 
with a knockout against Ilunga Makabu at Goodison Park  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/tony-bellew-wbc-world-cruiserweight-title-win-goodison-park>
in May.

The 33-year-old has set his sights on delivering a similar victory in front of 
another home crowd when he makes his first defence of the belt against the 
American Flores.

Bellew said: “I have to win and win in good fashion, so that probably does 
mean a knockout. I don’t know how far he is willing to go, how much he is 
willing to take. But I know I’m willing to throw the kitchen sink, the whole 
lot, at him.”

Flores (32-2-1, 20 KOs) is more than happy for Bellew to go in search of 
another knockout. The 37‑year‑old, who will be a world champion for the first 
time if he wins, said: “I have a game plan to execute and I’m actually looking 
forward to the fact that he is going to try to be the first to knock me out. I 
like that he is going to be looking for the knockout rather than just looking 
to win the fight.

Tyson Fury’s licence suspended by British Boxing Board of Control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/tyson-fury-licence-suspended-british-boxing>
“People have to remember you win a fight one round at a time. You shouldn’t go 
into it looking for a knockout to win. So I think that could definitely play to 
my advantage – plus the fact I think he is kind of overlooking me.

“He is going to have to find out the answers, the key to the puzzle to try to 
defeat me, and he thinks he knows how to do it – he says he can knock me out.

“He always says things like this before the fight and it will be interesting 
to see this time if he is actually able to do it. And if he is able to, then 
give this guy a big pat on the back, because it has never happened before. If 
he can do that I’ll buy him a beer and shake his hand.”

Bellew was certainly the more animated of the pair at the weigh-in on Friday.

The two men could be seen exchanging words on stage as they went face to face, 
with Bellew then shouting obscenities at his opponent’s camp as Flores walked 
off the platform.

Bellew weighed in 14 stone, three pounds and four ounces, an ounce heavier 
than Flores. The event on Saturday also sees Hull’s Olympic gold medallist Luke 
Campbell fight Liverpool-born Derry Mathews in a lightweight contest.
 