
It’s the new year and we’re all turning over a new leaf, so now is the perfect 
time to reassess whether the work we do is as meaningful as we want it to be. 
And if not, how can you go about changing that? One way is to consider a career 
in the voluntary sector.

There are more than 200,000 charities registered across the UK, with many more 
smaller ones unregistered. The third sector is notoriously competitive and 
funding pressures exacerbate the strain, but it is also a very diverse sector, 
with roles from fundraising and volunteering to management and media 
communications, which leaves plenty of scope for opportunity.

Here are some tips for getting a job in a charity, whether you’re considering 
a career change or starting from scratch.

Volunteering is a valuable investment

Charity work is almost unique as a primarily values-led career, which means 
demonstrating your commitment, as well as relevant skills and experience, can 
often be more valuable than simply possessing qualifications.

The sector has come under fire for its dependence on unpaid internships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/oct/30/unpaid-interns-charity-sector>, 
which are increasingly a prerequisite for graduates, but there are other 
options.

Some charities, such as the Wellcome Trust and People & Planet, offer paid 
internships, while others such as Tearfund have developed a part-time scheme 
that enables interns to work alongside the placement. Needless to say, these 
are as a result some of the most competitive avenues, alongside those offered 
by large household names such as the National Trust, Oxfam, Red Cross, 
Macmillan, Age UK and others, which can offer to reimburse expenses and travel 
costs.

Smaller organisations offer less formal volunteering opportunities but with 
the added benefit of practical hands-on experience across a breadth of roles.

Websites such as Do It <https://do-it.org/>, vInspired <https://vinspired.com/>
 for 16 to 25-year-olds, andReach <http://www.reachskills.org.uk/>, which 
places professional volunteers, list advertised opportunities, but small 
charities are more likely to be receptive to speculative applications and 
requests for work shadowing.

Taking your career overseas: how to get a charity job abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/05/taking-career-overseas-charity-job-abroad>
Overseas volunteering projects look glamorous but can be expensive; 
residential voluntary work, however, provides accommodation, food and travel 
expenses.

Networking really works

Volunteering is one of the best ways to build relationships within the sector 
and you should exploit any connections you make mercilessly: ask for further 
introductions from people you know.

Get a feel for individual charities you are interested in by talking to reps 
at fundraising events, and consult websites and social media to find out who 
might be useful to get in contact with.

When initiating contact, however, don’t jump straight in and ask for a job – 
ask for information. What kind of people work for the organisation, what skills 
and experience did they have before getting a job, what would their advice be 
for someone starting out.

Be specific about why you are contacting them, and what you admire about their 
work – emails that have clearly been copied and pasted are much less likely to 
get a response. Some people won’t reply, but if for every 100 requests you 
receive one nugget of insight, it can be worth it.

Keep a sharp eye on what’s happening

Permanent positions are usually advertised formally but organisations will 
also recruit for contract positions on a more informal basis. At the very 
least, being tuned in to the sector as a whole might lead to unexpected 
opportunities.

Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> often recruit extra 
staff if they receive increased government funding, for example, so find out 
which areas are being prioritised by the government (such as homelessness, or 
social care) and pursue contacts in those fields.

Are there any training course or qualifications I can complete to boost my 
chances?

The short answer is, it depends on the job. For some, such as volunteer 
management or fundraising, qualifications are not as important as skills, 
experience and passion for the cause. Although the Institute of Fundraising 
offers a variety of courses and other areas such as marketing, sales or finance 
typically require business-related degrees. The Directory of Social Change 
offers training in areas such as campaigning and lobbying, both of which could 
help you to stand out from a crowd of other applicants. International 
development is the notoriously competitive exception, where often applicants 
for even entry-level positions have postgraduate qualifications – but there are 
still courses such as those offered byRedR 
<http://www.redr.org.uk/en/Training-and-more/>, which offer formal training in 
requisite skills.

Do I need to live in London?

The majority of charities are based in London, so you will have more options 
to choose from if you live in the capital or a commutable distance away.

There are, however, many opportunities to be had beyond the big smoke: 
Sightsavers for instance, is based in Haywards Heath, RNLI in Poole, Barnardo’s 
in Essex and World Vision UK in Milton Keynes, to name just a few.

 High-profile charities tend to locate their head office in London, but there 
are even more opportunities if you look beyond the big names. And while it may 
be smaller charities outside London, there are also fewer candidates applying 
for those jobs.

Be flexible

The sector is vast, but while it’s usual to prioritise charities to which you 
feel a personal connection, don’t expect to find the perfect job first time 
around. Think more laterally about whether you are looking for a hands-on role 
or one more focused on support and management. What size charity do you want to 
work for? Small organisations tend to prefer people who are more flexible, 
while larger organisations will prefer specialists. ation.

 International development is the most sought-after sub-sector and therefore 
the most challenging to break into, even graduates with a related degree can 
struggle, so is there something else you’d be willing to experiment with first 
to gain experience?

Prepare for a pay cut

Entry level jobs in the third sector have lower than average salaries, and 
even at executive level will peak far below market rates – but this is the 
reality of making the move into a sector not primarily motivated by money. 
Accepting a pay cut may be necessary to get a strategic foot in the door. And 
as a trade-off, charities are renowned for generous flexible working policies.

How to write a successful CV for your dream charity job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/15/write-a-successful-cv-dream-charity-job>
Persevere

Charity funding is being squeezed from all sides and the employment market is 
competitive. Some charities now interview for volunteer positions.

Make sure you fully think through the implications of embarking on such an 
arduous application process and ensure you have the endurance to see it through 
– if it’s something you are truly committed to, it’s going to require a 
significant investment of time and a lot of tenacity.


Work in the voluntary sector? If you have suggestions for new joiners, leave 
them in the comment thread below.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 