
Dunvegan Castle and Gardens

Clinging to a rocky outcrop, Dunvegan Castle has been the MacLeod stronghold 
for eight centuries. Visitors over the years include Sir Walter Scott and Dr 
Johnson, who, according to his travelling companion James Boswell, "most 
strangely slept without a nightcap." Lucky then, that the chief's daughter made 
him one to improve his slumber. Along with the famous Fairy Flag, the castle 
collection includes impressive paintings, Jacobite relics and a wealth of clan 
history. The gardens have been restored over the last 30 years and should not 
be missed. Nor should the seal boat rides, which are every bit as enchanting 
for adults as they are for children. Viewing these creatures at such close 
quarters, it's easy to believe in selkies.
• 01470 521206, dunvegancastle.com 
<http://www.dunvegancastle.com/content/default.asp>. Open daily, end 
March-October, 10am-5.30 (last admission 5pm)castle and Gardens: adults £9.50, 
children (5-15 years) £5, families (two adults and three children) £27, 
concessions/groups £7; gardens only: adults £7.50, children £4, 
concessions/groups £6; seal boat trips: adults £6, children £4, 
concessions/groups £5

Clan Donald Skye: Museum of the Isles and Armadale Castle
 The ruined shell of Armadale castle, Clan Donald Skye. Photograph: Alamy 
Skye's often bloody history is dominated by two clans, the MacDonalds and the 
MacLeods. At Clan Donald Skye, the excellent Museum of the Isles illuminates 
1,500 years of Highland history and culture through the exploits of the Clan 
Donald. Its six permanent galleries explore different themes, including clan 
warfare, the Jacobite uprisings and the Highland Clearances: a seventh gallery 
hosts a changing exhibition. In addition to the museum, visitors to Clan Donald 
Skye can wander the gardens and nature trails in the grounds surrounding the 
now-ruined Armadale Castle (pictured), and there is an adventure playground for 
children.
• 01471 844305, clandonald.com <http://www.clandonald.com/>. End 
March-October, open daily 9.30-5.30 (last admission 5pm), adults £7.50, 
children (5-16) £6, families £25, concessions/groups £6

An Aird peninsula
 An Aird peninsula, offering a view past Raasay and Scalpay. Photograph: Alamy 
Pack a picnic and spend the day at the An Aird peninsula. There are two 
beaches (either side of the isthmus) and the peninsula, where you'll find the 
remains of an ancient fort, Dunan an Aisilidh, as well as cliffs, natural 
bridges, caves, a sea stack and even a blow hole. Take the left-hand turn for 
Balmeanach off the Braes road and look out for the parking spot. The path down 
to the shore starts near the post box. It crosses a flat boggy area and then 
descends steeply to the shore where you will find a pebbly beach; the far end 
is sandy. Enjoy spectacular views towards Ben Tianavaig and across the Sound of 
Raasay and keep an eye out for seals, shags nesting on the cliffs and other 
wildlife as you explore.

The Fairy Pools
 Wild swimming in Fairy Pools. Photograph: Alamy 
No visit to Skye would be complete without a brush with Fairyland, and where 
better to meet a fairy than at the Fairy Pools? In the shadow of the Black 
Cuillins, the icy water of Allt Coir a'Mhadaidh spills down a series of 
waterfalls and pools. Even on a cold day, it's difficult to resist slipping 
into the brilliant, clear blue water. In one of the pools, there's an arch, 
which you can swim under. And those with a limited sense of their own mortality 
might enjoy leaping from the rocks into some of the deeper pools. Just be wary 
of handsome strangers; they could be kelpies.

Raasay House
 Coasteering on Raasay island, Scotland 
The island of Raasay is a 25-minute ferry ride from Skye and well worth the 
excursion if you're seeking thrills. Raasay House offers an array of courses to 
satisfy energetic holidaymakers. These include half and full day activities 
such as coasteering, a mixture of rock-climbing, swimming and cliff-jumping 
(wet suits, crash helmets and buoyancy aids provided); climbing and abseiling 
on the cliffs below the ruins of Brochel Castle; and sea-kayaking courses 
exploring Raasay's coastline and the neighbouring islands. There are one-hour 
taster courses on offer too: try your hand at archery, or learn some bush craft 
skills. Less hair-raising activities include bird and deer watching.
• 01478 660300, raasay-house.co.uk <http://www.raasay-house.co.uk/>. Courses 
from £25 for adults and £15 for under-16s; one-hour taster courses £15

The Skye Museum of Island Life
 The Skye Museum of Island Life. Photograph: Alamy 
First opened in 1965, the Museum of Island Life at Kilmuir offers visitors a 
fascinating insight into life in a crofting township at the end of the 19th 
century. The museum comprises a series of thatched buildings, each representing 
a different aspect of island life. The largest building, the Croft House, shows 
how most islanders lived. The kitchen was the main room in the house, an open 
peat fire kept burning at all times. The Weaver's Cottage displays an array of 
instruments and tools associated with wool working, while in the Barn, visitors 
can learn about the crofting system. Visitors will also see a smithy and a 
ceilidh house.
• 01470 552206, skyemuseum.co.uk <http://www.skyemuseum.co.uk/>. Open from 
Easter to October, Monday-Saturday, 9.30am-4.30pm; adults £2.50, children £50p, 
concessions/groups £2

Sea Eagles, Portree
 Houses in Portree. Photograph: Portree Boat Trips 
In 1975, the Nature Conservancy Council (now Scottish National Heritage) began 
its successful scheme to reintroduce sea eagles to Scotland. In 2010, SNH 
recorded 52 breeding pairs across the western Highlands and the Hebrides. 
Visitors to Portree can learn about these majestic creatures at the Aros 
Centre, and, if they are lucky, see them in the wild by taking a wildlife boat 
trip from Portree harbour. The RSPB's Sea Eagle Exhibition at Aros features 
live and recorded footage of sea eagles and includes information about the 
birds and their reintroduction. From Portree harbour, various operators 
(including Brigadoon and MV Stardust) run wildlife boat trips for visitors 
hoping to glimpse sea eagles and other sea birds, as well as otters, seals, 
porpoises and other wildlife.
• Aros: 01478 613649, aros.co.uk 
<http://www.aros.co.uk/whats-on/skye-the-island>; the sea eagle exhibition runs 
from April-October, adults £4.75, under-12s free, children over 
12/concessions/groups £3.50, RSPB members £2.50, family ticket £15. Brigadoon's 
(01478 612 641,portree-boat-trips.co.uk <http:>) two-hour wildlife-spotting 
trip: adults £18, children £10, family £50, concessions £16. MV Stardust's 
(07798 743858,skyeboat-trips.co.uk <http://www.skyeboat-trips.co.uk/>) 1½-hour 
white-tailed sea eagle trip costs £12

Talisker Distillery, Carbost
 Talisker Distillery 
On the shore of Loch Harport, visitors will find the home of the "king o' 
drinks" at the Talisker Distillery. Robert Louis Stevenson actually named three 
kings in The Scotsman's Return from Abroad, his 1880 poem – Talisker, Islay and 
Glenlivet. Distillery tours take place daily throughout the year (less 
frequently in winter). They detail the history of the distillery and reveal 
(bar a few trade secrets of course) how Talisker is made. The distillery is in 
Carbost; but do combine a trip here with a visit to the nearby Talisker Bay 
where you will find a stunning sandy beach.
• 01478 614308, malts.com/taliskerwhisky/index.html 
<http://www.malts.com/taliskerwhisky/index.html>. Open all year, adults £7, 
children (aged 8-17) £3, under-8s are not permitted to visit

Bearreraig Bay, Flodigarry and An Corran
 The old man of Storr, above Bearreraig Bay. Photograph: Alamy 
Embrace your inner archaeologist and explore Skye's Jurassic past along the 
Trotternish peninsula. Start your exploring at Bearreraig Bay, where, if you 
are lucky, you may find belemnites, ammonites and bivalves. Or, if you prefer 
to avoid the steep climb down to the shore here, begin your explorations at 
Flodigarry instead. Next, head to the beach at An Corran, Staffin. At low tide, 
you can sometimes see the footprints of dinosaurs that roamed here 165 million 
years ago. They are usually visible after a storm, when sand and seaweed have 
been swept away. If your appetite for archaeology is still not sated, visit the 
Staffin Museum at Ellishadder, where you will find numerous fossil remains and 
more dinosaur footprints. 
• Map: Trotternish & The Storr, OS Explorer 408. Staffin Museum: 01470 562321, 
borve.net/staffin-museum.co.uk <http://borve.net/staffin-museum.co.uk/>. 
Opening times vary, call for details; further information atskyeecomuseum.co.uk 
<http://www.skyecomuseum.co.uk/>,

Dun Beag, Struan
 Dun Beag, one of Skye's best-preserved brochs. Photograph: Alamy 
Dun Beag, near Struan, is one of Skye's best-preserved brochs. The Countess 
Vincent Baillet de Latour excavated the Iron Age structure between 1914 and 
1920. Interestingly, coins found at the site featuring Henry II, Edward I, 
James VI (and I), George II and George III suggest that the broch was occupied 
until the 18th century. Dun Beag is easily reached by bicycle from Portree. On 
a fine day, the 10-mile cycle is a lovely excursion, affording beautiful views 
of the Cuillins and Loch Bracadale. If you are not too tired from the cycle, 
the larger, though more ruinous, Dun Mor can be found about 500 yards north of 
Dun Beag. Bicycles can be hired from Island Cycles in Portree.
• Map: Portree & Bracadale, OS Explorer 410. Island Cycles in Portree (01478 
613121, islandcycles-skye.co.uk <http://www.islandcycles-skye.co.uk/>) hire 
bikes for £15 for 24 hours or £8.50 for five hours
 