
The Rugby Football League has confirmed that a Canadian side will be 
introduced into English rugby league from next season. Toronto Wolfpack will 
enter League One – the sport’s third tier – and will play home and away 
fixtures in blocks of four or five, staying in Yorkshire while playing away and 
training in Bradford.

The Wolfpack will play their home games at Toronto’s Lamport Stadium, home of 
the Canada national side, and have already confirmed an impressive off-field 
team to head up the organisation. The former Great Britain coach Brian Noble 
will join as director of rugby with the former Leigh coach Paul Rowley working 
as head coach. “It’s brand new – I’ve done a lot of things in the game but to 
be involved in this and to take something from nowhere is exciting,” Noble said.

The state of Super League after 20 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2016/apr/07/super-league-20-years-1996-nigel-wood-interview>
The Guardian revealed last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/07/toronto-rugby-league-team-talks-join-england-league-1-canada>
 that talks were taking place about the RFL admitting a side from across the 
Atlantic, and the Wolfpack will fund the expenses of the other 15 League One 
sides, 12 of which are part-time, when they travel to Toronto.

“Toronto is a city ready to embrace the first transatlantic sports team, and 
we’re proud to be behind it,” said Eric Perez, the club’s CEO. “We have a 
consortium of very successful businessmen and we’ve set up platforms of 
exposure for sponsorship that will ensure the team is well-backed and 
well-funded.”

With the infrastructure and launch of the club confirmed, attention will now 
turn to recruiting the players for the inaugural season in 2017. Rowley and 
Noble both confirmed that they will conduct a wide search for talent, but the 
former insisted it is vital there is a Canadian presence in the squad – an area 
of the world in which rugby league is relatively unknown at the moment.

“It’s important to have homegrown flavour,” Noble said. “The immediate goal is 
winning but we’ll be spending a month here to ensure we find the top athletes 
this country is producing: there will be north American roots.”

Noble also said he sees no reason why the club cannot aim for the highest 
level in the shortest space of time. “If you have a dream you’ve got to dream 
as big as you can,” he said. “If you speak to everyone involved their goal is
Super League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> – and once you’re 
in there, you’ve a chance of winning it. We want to be right up there.”
 